JERUBBAAL. OR, A Vindication of the Sober Testimony against Sinful Compliance,
from the Exceptions of Mr. Tombs, in Answer to his THEODULIA.

Wherein the unlawfulness of hearing the present Ministers, is more largely
discussed, and proved. The Arguments produced in the Sober Testimony,
reinforced: The Vanity of Mr. Tombs his Reply thereunto, evinced: His forty
Arguments for Hearing, fully answered. The Inconsistency of Mr. T. his present
Principles and Practices, with passages in his former Writings, remarked; and
manifested, in an Appendix hereunto annexed.

Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him
be put to death, whilst it is yet morning: If he be a God let him plead for
himself, because one has cast down his Altar. Judge. 6. 31. (...). Gal. 2. 18.
Nulla potest lingua satis exprimere, quantum malum, quantum peri^ulum, quantum
confusionem, sacrae Scripturae contemp^us quae p^ocul dubio sufficiens est, pro
Ecclesiae gubernatione, alias Christus imperfectus Legislator esset) Et
humanorum inventorum affectatio, in Ecclesiam invexit. Ad hujus rei evidentiam,
consideretur clari status, cui sapientia coelestis, desponsari debuit: sua cum
me etrice ilia, sapientia humana adulteriam commiserunt illi: si ut status
Ecclesiae mere bestialis, and monstrosus evase^it: infra coelum, supra vero
terra, subest Spiritus, dominatur caro, etc. non erubescunt tamen quidam dicere
humanis inventionibus melius Ecclesiam gubernari, quam Lege Divina, and Lege
Evangelii Christi quae assertio blasphema est, etc, Johannes Gerson, Se^. in
die Circumcis. p. 3. consider. 1. London, Printed in the Year, 1668.

An ANSWER to the Epistolary Preface of Mr. Tombs his Theodulia.
To the Christian Readers, especially those who by reason of use, have their
senses exercised to discern both good and evil.
Dearly Beloved,
It Is now some five years since, (...) little Treatise, called A Sober Testimony
against Sinful Compliance, was for my own (and some few Christians of my
intimate acquaintance) use and further information in the grand Controversy of
the Time (viz. the Hearing of the present Ministers of England) compiled, and
about two years after, upon the earnest request of some Friends (whom I could
not deny) published; for the satisfaction, and further establishment of others
also. What the success, by the blessing of the Lord, of that undertaking was,
with the acceptance it had with many truly fearing God, I list not now to
declare. Not long after its publication, (without any enquiry of mine) I had
frequent intimations of an Answer, by some one or other thereunto (which by
several it seems was deemed necessary.) I confess, being in my own spirit
assured, I had pleaded for nothing but what (in the substance of it) would be
found to be the Truth of Christ; I was not over-solicitous into whose hands
that undertaking would be committed. When I heard (not long after) that the
party (whose Exceptions thereunto, we have in the ensuing Treatise considered)
had undertaken the refutation thereof, I was not a little well-pleased, (since
an opposition thereunto was deemed necessary) that it fell into such a hand.
For although I had frequent intimations of that sad frame of spirit he has of
late been under (and from some Tractulates lately published by him, had some
ground to believe it:) yet was I unwilling to entertain any evil surmise
concerning him (which I knew to be a fruit of the flesh) or to give way
(without most evident proof) to the belief of the suggestion intimated. Two
things I did assure my self of; 1. That he would deal like a Scholar, in the
management of the present Controversy, heartily and fairly, for the
bolting-out of Truth (as he phraseologiseth p. 1.) Nor could it enter into my
mind, that a person of such Learning as Mr. Tombs would be accounted to be, in
stead of a fair and sober Answer, should have turned aside by Cobweb-like and
unnecessary distinctions, like the obs and sols of the Schoolmen, of which it
may be said, as one Prudent. Apothe. of some of the Ancient Philosophers.
of old-spake of others, Statum lacessunt omnipotentis Dei,
Calumniosis litibus.
Fidem minutis dissecant ambagibus,
Ut quisque est lingua nequior.
Solvant, ligantque quaestionum vincula,
Per Syllogismos plectiles.
to the clouding and obscuring, of what was plain and obvious to the
understanding of the meanest capacity, and the perverting the intendment of his
Antagonist, nakedly represented to a meaning never intended by him: as not once
(that he might seem to say somewhat) he has done; setting up a man of straw of
his own fo^ming, to spend the heat of his misg^ided zeal upon. 2dly, I supposed
also, that a man of that repute in days past, for Sobriety (to which he is
still no mean pretender) and Holiness as Mr. T. would never have defiled
himself with the vomit and shameful spewing of passionate and most unchristian
expressions (worse than which, had he been disputing with the Devil, if he
would have taken a measure of modesty from the Archangel, he could not have
made use of) he is frequently venting and disgorging against his Adversa^y. The
review whereof, I am assured, will not be over-pleasing to him, if his heart be
but in the least fixed upon that frame of spirit in which our services for God
(of which he deems his present undertaking to be a part) should be managed. He
has sure read (and I wish he would lay it to his very heart) Jam. 1. 20. that
the wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God; and 2 Timothy 2. 24. (...),
(which Lud. de Dieu and others interpret de verborum, as well as verberum
pugna, of tongue-strifes, and contentions, and is by some rendered to scold) as
also Tit. 1. 7. from the guilt whereof I know not how he will acquit himself.
He talks indeed of Billings-gate Rhetoric, used by others, p. 16. and expects,
he says in his Epistle to the then Lord Chancellor, no other event than
Obloquy from persons of the mind of this Author. For my part I am not conscious
to my self of giving the least occasion of such expressions from this
Animadverter, not remembering what one sentence throughout the whole Treatise,
does justly deserve such a castigation; and am resolved not to return him the
same measure he is pleased to mete out, not liking the Copy so well as to write
after it. So that whatever he meets with from others, I assure him, how
grateful soever it may be unto him, upon some accounts (which may make him
expect it as he speaks) he shall miss of the returnal of Obloquy; for Obloquy
and those wrathful and passionate expressions he is frequently venting in the
Papers under consideration. Through Grace we have otherwise learned Christ, and
can say touching this Animadverter, as Calvin touching Luther, Though Luther
call me Dog, etc. yet I will say of him, he is (I hope) the Servant of Jesus
Christ. Though I must crave leave to add, that these Animadversions of his will
be no joy of heart to him in the day of the Lord, when all our works shall be
tried by fire of what sort they are, because they will be found hay and stubble
in that day; It Is an Argument Mr. T. is an utter stranger to the Author of S.
T. else he would never have expected such a returnal from him. In sect. 1. of
this Preface he inveighs against Prefaces and expressions which tend to create
prejudice, and partial propensity to one part more than to another, which he
would have prohibited and restrained severely. In which that I am not in the
least concerned, I must profess my self to be wholly a stranger not being
conscious to my self of any such Preface, or expression used by me, and do
heartily wish that all such might be forborne that have a tendency to forestall
the judgment of any; being desirous that what I write, may be impartially and
heartily weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, where if it be not found
weight, I desire it may be rejected, not having (as I know of) espoused any
private opinion, nor embraced what, upon Scriptural evidence to the contrary, I
cannot more cheerfully lay down, than ever I assumed it: And am so far from
such a temper of spirit, as to return any that shall labor to convince me of
my mistakes (for I am a man, and subject to them) obloquie for their love and
pains, that I shall thankfully acknowledge both, in such a Christian
undertaking, and profess my self their debtor. With what severity, or under
what penalty Mr. T. would have such procedures interdicted and restrained, and
who shall be constituted of the Committee of Tryers touching expressions and
prefaces of such a tendency, because he has not expressed himself, I cannot
divine: I hope he is not sanguinary in this dictate, and desire! There are (I
presume he thinks) Laws enough, by penalties sufficiently severe, interdicting
the writing and preaching of the men of his seeming indignation, and he has
more pity to persons under heavy strokes and burdens, than to have them
increased. If it be (as he intimates toward the close of this his Epistolary
Preface) the Epistle to the Reader, prefixed to the S. T. he thus inveighs
against, as guilty of the wretched design mentioned, he knows there is nothing
therein new, nothing but what is usually done by persons writing lesser
Tractates; nothing to forestall the judgment of any is thereby intended. And
some think that this Animadverter is in this matter (...), doing more in a few
lines to ballast the Reader to his persuasion, th^n the Author of the S. T.
has done in his whole Epistle.

Qui alterum incusat probri ipfum se intueri oportet. Toward the end of sect.
1. he intimates, and sect. 2. plainly expresses, that some personal exceptions
have been entertained against him, and such aversness to his later Writings
found in the spirits of a great number of those that seem to be inquisitive
after Truth, that they have not found such reception as such Arguments were
deemed to require, which he attributes to his writing about a point that few
can concoct. That this is the ground of their prejudice (many of them) who are
persons of the complexion intimated, is a mistake of the Animadverter, which a
little enquiry might easily deliver him from. My small acquainrance amongst
such, as do not only seem (as Mr. Tombs out of the abundance of that charity,
which he frequently condemns ^is Antagonist for the want of, speaks) but are
really inquisitive into Truth, gives me ground to say, That not those (for the
most part) who cannot, but such as have well concocted the point he mentions,
which, if I mistake not, is the Baptism of Believers, upon a manifestation and
declaration of Faith received, are the persons (chiefly) of the prejudices
intimated. And 'twere well if the non-reception of his late Writings, amongst
persons of such a denomination as he speaks of, did put him upon a review of
them, the frame of spirit in which he writ them, together with the temper of
his spirit and actions in days past, that he may see from whence he has
fallen, and repent. I am very apt to think that the present undertaking of the
Animadverter, is not like to meet with better entertainment, than the
forementioned, amongst persons inquisitive into Truth: Especially considering,
how opposite to former sayings of his, this undertaking of his is. The Tables
are easily to be consulted with; where, in legible characters, the mind of Mr.
Tombs (in his Book entitled, Fermentum Pharisaeorum, being a Sermon preached
at Lemster in Herefordshire November. 24. 1641. on Mat. 15. 19. ordered by the
Committee of the House of Commons, April 19. 1643. to be printed, when
Reformation began to be countenanced) is to be read, contrary to what now he
seems to plead for. Hear him speak. Having in page 17, 18. in his third use of
his Doctrine raised from the words, viz. That however they think of their
actions, they in vain worship God who teach for doctrines Man's precepts. P. 2.
S. 2. He takes occasion to admonish Ministers to avoid the way of those
Pharisees who taught for Doctrine man's Precepts, and pithily expostulates the
case with them, Sect. 14. And P. 18. Sect. 15. he says, 4ly. From hence we may
take occasion to admonish the people, to take heed of such Pharisaical
Teachers, as teach for Doctrine the Commandments of men. Our Savior Christ
having manifested the hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees in this thing,
bids his Disciples let them alone, telling them that they were blind leaders of
the blind; and if the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch, Mat. 15.
14. And elsewhere, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy;
Lake 12. 1. And surely people have need to take heed of such Teachers, since
Superstition, as it is a pernicious evil, so it easily insinuates into peoples
minds, and sticks fast in them under show of Antiquity, Decency and Gravity. I
know this will be interpreted as if it were a heinous thing, to persuade people
to withdraw themselves from the Ministers of their Parish, though never so
negligent or corrupt. But let Bishop Bilson answer for me. Primo populus ipse
deficiente Magistratu Christiano deserere falsos, et improbos pastores jure
divino potest, coercere vero minime. Declinare, et derelinquere eos possunt,
cogere, aut pnnire non possunt. Vis and vindicta gladio alligatae, extra
privatorum sortem, ac caetum collocata sunt. Unde Paulus, Romans 16. observate
eos qui dissidia, and scandala contra doctrinam quam edocti estis, faciunt, and
declinare ab iis. Oves meae, inquit Dominus noster, vocem meam audiunt, and
sequuntur me. Alienum autem nequaquam sequentur, sed fugient ab eo. Idem
Cyprianus and reliqui Episcopi consulti rescripserunt Epistl. 1. ep. 4.
Soperemini inquit Dominus a taberuaculis hominum istorum durissimorum, and
nolite tangere ea, qua ad eos pertinent, ne simul pereat is in peccatis eorum.
Propter quod plebs obsequens praeceptis Domini, and Deum meturus, a peccato
praepofito seperare se debet, nec se ad Sacrilegi Sacerdotis Sacrificia misare
quando ipsa (defectu sidelis Magistratus) maxim habeat potestatem, vel
eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel recusandi indignos. Thus far he in open
defiance of his present undertaking. But to proceed in Sect. 2. and afterward,
we have an account, notwithstanding his late discouragement in writing, why he
still follows that employment, and in particular, of his engaging in the
confutation of the Treatise under consideration, which may be reduced to these
heads.

1. The expectation of h^^ giving account of the Talents, committed to him by
h^s lord and Master, which being restrained from public preaching, he thinks
he ought to make use of this way.

Answ. That a strict account must be given to the Lord for the improvement of
Talents received, is undeniable. The Parable, Mat. 25. 14 to 31. ev^nceth as
much. The consideration whereof should quicken us to our duty: the most exact
and diligent performance of it imaginable, that we have not at the last the
most direful judgment of the wicked and slothful Servant, ver. 26, 28, 30. past
upon us. But every use of our Talent is not a faithful improvement of it for
God: Wisdom, parts, etc. are Talents given by him: many have used them against
him; and smitten him (if I may so say) with his own weapons; nor had they been
in a capacity of doing so much against him* had they not received so much from
him. Whether Mr. T. has in his present undertaking been improving his Talent
according to the mind of Christ, I humbly beg him in his more retired thoughts
to consider. That none can so improve their Talents without the blessed
supplies of the Spirit of Christ, this Animadverter will not deny: It Is
impossible any duty or service should be accepted of God, without these. It Is
one end for which he is sent from the Father and the Son, to in-dwell in the
hearts of Believers to enable them hereunto, Romans 8. 26. How little of the
Spirit of the Lord in those Magisterial and Dictator-like expressions,
(manifesting too much of a spirit of pride and self-ful^ess, with an horrible
contempt of what is opposite to the mind of this Animadv.) together with those
reproachful, biting, passionate words, that without any just cause given, do
ever and anon drop from him, he will upon a review be able to discern, I am not
able to foresee? We are ^oo apt to judge partially in our own causes, and of
our own actions; but the day will declare it. Should I muster up the many
expressions of this nature, scattered almost from the one end of this Book to
^he other, and represent them at once, possibly it might somewhat startle this
Animadverter of his being rest^ained from public preaching; I have nothing to
say but only this, That if Mr. Tombs supposes himself to be called forth by
the Lord to the work of preaching the Gospel, I see not now (at least whilst
not under corporal restraint) he can answer the obligation is upon him, by such
a call, by a total neglect of that duty, either publicly or privately,
notwithstanding the interdiction of any. Our retreat in such cases to the old
Apostolical Maxim, Act. 5. 29. Whether it be lawful to obey God or man, judge
ye? being suitable and warrantable. Nor is it I believe justifiable, to improve
Talents given in one work or duty with the neglect of another, to which we are
as equally obliged by the reception of them. He adds, as a second Reason of
this undertaking, his meeting with the Book under consideration, and another,
entitled, Prelatical Preachers none of Christ's Teachers, which manifesting
that the seeds of most rigid Separation were sown, and spread themselves
amongst many, out of the greatness of his love, and design to do them good, and
for the public peace of the Nation he conceived himself bound to pluck up such
roots of bitterness; and the rather, because some that had known him to be for
Believers Baptism, have been ready to think him for Separation also. Answ. That
he met with the Book under consideration I readily yield him, being informed
that in some heat of spirit, about two years before the publishing his
Theodulia, he threatened the Refutation thereof. But that the seeds of
Separation are roots of bitterness, is as warmly said as weakly proved, in his
following Treatise. The word (though it sounds ill in the ears of the world) is
of a middle signification, denoting neither that which is evil nor good in it
self (as Mr. T. well knows) A twofold Separation we read of in the Scripture.
1. A wicked and unlawful Separation, which is a causless departure from the
People and Appointments of Christ, as not able to bear their spirituality,
strictness, purity, and glory, in contempt of Christ's Institution, and merely
for the satisfying their lusts, Jude 19. This is the Separation that is
condemned in the Scripture. Do either of the Tracts mentioned, undertake the
defense or vindication of it? Are there not Principles laid down, and asserted
therein, wholly opposite hereunto? 2dly. A warrantable lawful Separation
enjoined by Jesus Christ, which is a peaceable departure from a Church (or
People) not rightly constituted according to the mind of Christ, the pattern
exhibited by him, or degenerated therefrom, beyond a possibility of recovering
their first state, purely for the enjoyment of the Ordinances of God in power
and purity. This is the Separation (no other) pleaded for in the Papers
mentioned. Which ^^ch poor worms as we are apt to think there is ground enough
in the Scriptures for. 1. It Is of old prophesied of, Number. 23. 9. Isa. 52. 11,
12. and 62. 10. 2dly. Commanded by the Lord, Prove. 4. 14. and 9. 6. and 14. 7.
Ephesians. 5. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Act. 2. 39. Psa. 45. 10. 2 Timothy 3. 5. Rev. 18. 4.
3dly. Practiced by the Saints (not to mention them of old, Genesis 4. 26.) Exodus
19. 5. Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 33. 28. Numb. 33. 52. Exodus 24. 12, 15. John 15. 19.
Rev. 19. 7, 8, 9. which the Epistles of the Apostles to the Churches justify,
who writ to them as Saints separated from the World, and the Worship thereof.
What the Animadverter has done, in order to the plucking up the seeds of this
Separation, is afterward considered. He that is successful in such an
undertaking (o^ desires to be so), had need do more than ^ent his passion in
some biting satirical expressions, against the men of his contest, or dictate
to them as if Wisdom only rested with him, and all others were to hang on his
lips for Indoctrination: whose (...) without control were to be submitted* But
Christ's School knows no such Rabbi besides himself. If a man seriously intend
to pluck up the roots of this Separation he must (I humbly conceive) do these
five things. 1. Manifest that the terminus a quo, or that from which any
separate, i^ of the Institution of Christ: because to separate from that which
is not so, is nowhere (that I know of) in the Scripture condemned as sinful,
but enjoined us as our duty. To pursue us with outcryes, that we are
Separatists and Schismatics, because we have separated from the Church of
England, without any tender of proof that it was ever rightly constituted
according to the mind of Christ, is but (in my poor judgment) to do as he, --
Caput altum in praelia tollit,
Ostendit que humeros latos, alternaque jactat,
Brachia, protendens and verberat ict. bus auras,
but beat the Air. 2dly, That the Church (on People separated from, if ever of
the Institution of Christ, are not so degenerated and apostatized from what it
was at first, that it is now qui^^ another thing, retaining little, besides the
name and shadow, o^ a church; so dreadfully corrupted and fallen, that the ends
of Gospel-communion cannot be attained, nor enjoyed in it; nor is it in ^n
utter impossibil^ty of recovering to its pristine state of Gospel Order and
purity. A departure from such a collapsed Church, being abundantly warranted in
Scripture, enjoined to Saints as their duty. The Church of Rome was once a pure
Church, of the Institution of Christ; whilst it abode so, it was (ordinarily)
the duty of its Members to continue in the communion thereof; but when once it
apostatized, and so irrecoverably fell, as that there remained no probability
or possibility of its recovery and healing, it became the duty of the Saints
concerned in its Communion, to separate from her, according to Rev. 18. 4.
3dly, That those against whom this Charge is laid, be proved once regularly to
belong to that Church, (which, whatsoever is pretended by this Animadverter,
none can do but by their voluntary consent) from which they are supposed to
separate. For sure it will not be pleaded, that a man is (...) a Separatist
from that Church, true or false, to which he had no union or relation, as a
visible Member thereof. For any one to have joined to the Church of Sardis,
could not (as I conceive) be adjudged separation from the Church of Ephesus,
supposing he never was by his own free consent a member of the Ephesins.
Church. Now this is the case of most of the Members of the Congregated
Churches; they were never by their own voluntary consent, Members of the Church
of England, and therefore cannot justly be charged with sinful separation from
it. 4thly. That the means or way of Separation, Secession, or departure be
unwarrantable. I conceive the Animadverter is of that opinion, that it is
lawful, under some circumstances, to depart from the visible Communion of a
true Church of Christ, without being guilty of such rigid Separation. If he
judge the Church of England to be a true Church; and the Parish-Churches
thereof as such; it is possible to leave the outward Communion of the one, and
the other, without being guilty of sinful Separation: otherwise Mr. T. will
make more Separatists than he is aware of; every one removing out of one Parish
to dwell in another, and joining with the same numerical Ordinances there; that
goes out of the Nation and joins with the Church, suppose in France or Bohemia
being so. 5thly, He had need also prove that their Separation be not for this
end, to enjoy the Ordinances of God in power and purity, but merely for the
satisfying their lusts; no other Separation being condemned in the Scripture.
Till this be done, the discharging of many vollies of hard and lofty
expressions, of gathering Churches out of Churches, being Schismatics,
Separatists, etc. will be very insignificant to the Judicious: however they may
affright the the weak from closing with that way (though of God) which is with
much obloquy declaimed against by persons of Mr. T. his learning and sobriety.
But he has not yet done, he thinks himself obliged to pluck up these roots of
bitterness, out of his great respect to the public peace. An unhandsome
insinuation, to say no more; secretly accusing those, that are for the
principles in the aforesaid Tracts (which he cannot but know many truly fearing
God in the Nation are) as the disturbers of the Peace of the Nation, thereby
rendering them odious to the Rulers thereof; and himself lovely,

Gallinae Filius albae. But Sir, what are the Seeds sown in those Treatises
that do endanger the disturbance of the peace of the Nations? If he conceive
that an Uniformity of Worship is necessary for the preservation of the Nations
peace; and somewhat opposite to this Uniformity, being asserted in them, they
are destructive thereof, he knows he has more Antagonists than one in that
Assertion: and who they are that have asserted, and proved, that the ground of
the late Confusions, and Garments rolled in Blood, was not discrepamy in
Worship, but the rigid pressing of Conformity. Nor is he a stranger to this,
That the peace of the Nations abroad is preserved, where Uniformity is not
pressed, and has been at home in the days of the greatest Toleration, and
therefore no reason but it may be here again. If he mean that the spirits of
his Antagonists, and such like, are against the Peace of the Nation, he deals
injuriously, none being more for Peace upon the most righteous and lasting
foundations, than they; which will be (and not till then) whatever the
contrivements and attempts of men are, when the Interest of Nations is laid in
a subserviency to the true Interest and Kingdom of Christ, which we are praying
for, that the time ^ay come in which those Prophecies shall have their full
accomplishment, Isa. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3, 4. In the mean while we are not a little
comforted, that thus persecuted they the Prophets; Elijah was the troubler of
Israel, so was Jeremy: Christ, he was an enemy to Caesar, likely enough to
assume the Government; and he is no friend to Caesar that goes about to
preserve his life: the Apostles, who were men that turned the world up side
down. This smiting his fellow servants, will one day be no joy of heart to him
to think of.

He tells us, thirdly, He was hereunto provoked by the direful imputation of
serving the Image of the Beast, which the Title charge upon the hearing the
present Ministers.

Answ. But, 1. why should this provoke him, when he tells us page 7. that the
Book, so far as he can learn, has been dispersed (chiefly if not only) amongst
persons, who were not able to examine what is said by Fathers, Councils,
Schoolmen, who, it is more than probable, thought that the English Title was all
that was signified by the Greek one, till Mr. T. explained it to them. 2dly,
What I mean by the Image of the Beast, I intimate, p. 53. of S. T. where are
these words, They make an Image to the Beast, Rev. 13. 14, 15. i. e. erect an
Ecclesiastical state of Government, in a proportionableness to, and resemblance
of the Civil State. This Ecclesiastical state of Government, I assert to be the
Image of the Beast; by worshipping it, I mean no more, than subjecting, bowing
down to, or owning of this Ecclesiastical-State, which is no such direful
expression, amounting only to thus much, A Christian Testimony against such as
own, subject to, are partakers with, the Ecclesiastical State, and Government
of the Church of England. That there are some that do so, Mr. T. will not deny;
nor can he, that the Government of the Church is laid in a proportionableness
to, and resemblance of the Civil-State: which I apprehending to be an evil,
it is much to me a man of Mr. T. his sobriety should be offended at my bearing a
Christian Testimony against it, or interpret so sober a Title to be a direful
imputation, etc. I think not what he pleads for in the Treatise under
consideration, to be Theodulia, or the Worship of God, but am not provoked he
so styles his Book, because he thinks it is so; yet have I as just cause to be
offended thereat, as he has by the Title of the S. T. given him to be provoked.

Another stone of Offense in Mr. T. his way is, That there are direful
Predictions in the Epistle against hearing the present Ministers of England, as
if likely to meet with the same Judgments in the day of Gods wrath with the
Antichristian Beast, and seeming commiseration of such as join in Communion
with the public Church Assemblies.

Answ. And I am sorry these things are provoking to him: Can he not hear sin
condemned, and the warning of God against sinners given forth in Scriptural
expressions from the Prophecies thereof, but his spirit must rise against them?
He will one day know that another frame of spirit had better become him, and
would have conduced more to his true peace, comfort and interest, than that
which was upon him under the reading those Scriptural Predictions; for such are
those mentioned in the Epistle, though, as Mr. T. speaks, one would rather
think them to be some Enthusiastical dreams, than the Warnings of the Lord in
the Scriptures, sounded forth by an unworthy dust. Commiseration he also
discerns in those lines, but understanding the hearts of the Children of men,
he can roundly pronounce of it, Audacter satis, that I say not blaspheme, that
it is but seeming commiseration; at the best this is an evil surmise, a fruit
of the flesh, to be bemoaned and mourned over. I can assure Mr. T. that they
are not seeming, but real Commiserations; and that my soul is sorely afflicted
within me because of the Wrath of the Lord that is like to be poured forth, for
the transgression and sinful compliance with the corrupt and superstitious
Worship of the Nation, (after God has from Heaven witnessed against it, and so
many of the precious Children of God have sealed a Testimony with their dearest
Blood against it) of the professing People of God in England upon them; and I
cannot but once more cry aloud to them, and to this Animadverter, to hasten
their escape from the Tents of these false Shepherds and Assemblies, lest being
complicated and twisted together with them, they share of the judgment is like
to be poured forth upon them. God is a jealous God, and will in his jealousy
plead with those, that teach for Doctrines the Commandments of men, and worshi^
according to their Precepts: And what I said then, I say again now, who knows
(not intimating, as Mr. T. falsely suggests, that it would be, but my own
darkness as touching the extent of the long-suffering of the Lord to such as
continue disobedient to his voice) but this may be the last Warning you may
have from God. For his Throne is like the fiery flame, and his Wheels as
burning fire, a fiery stream issues, and comes for^h from before him, Dan. 7.
9, 10. He seems to be risen up against an hypo^ritical people, and a speedy
riddance will he make in the earth. However these things may seem to Mr. T. to
be brutum fulmen, like a great thunderclap without any thunderbolt in it, (as
he speaks) which makes my very soul pity him, especially they being (as I said)
the Prophecies of the Lord levelled against the very persons against whom I
level them. My prayers to God for him shall be, that they may prove words of
awakening and humbling, and not of destruction and further ^ddition of misery
in the day of the Lord, which without faith and repentance come between, if for
nothing but for that slight contemptuous frame of spirit upon him in the
reading of them they are too like to be. He adds, that I judge such Compliance
a damnable sin. If he mean a sin that in its own nature deserves damnation, I
do so indeed, nor can ^ do otherwise, not having embraced that novel
distinction of the Papists between damnable (or deadly) and venial sins: as if
the merit (or wages) of all sin were not death, judging it (as I do) to be a
sin. But if by damnable he mean irremissible, like that of Blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost, which he intimates as if I judged and suggested the sin of
Compliance in some to be, I must crave leave to tell him, That I detest and
abhor the least thought of any such thing. It Is true, in the event it may be
irremissible, like the sin against the Holy Ghost, and so may the least vain
word; but that I judge it is so in its own nature, is an Assertion of that
nature that nothing is more false and unt^ue. And I cannot but wonder with what
forehead this Animadverter could impute it to me. Nor can I guess at his design
in so doing, not the occasion administered by me. I have read the Epistle over,
and find not the least prints or marks of such an Assertion. If any words may
be wrested to such an intendment, I do here solemnly disclaim and ^isavow it,
professing from my very heart that I believe quite otherwise. Our God is a God
ready to pardon, to multiply pardons: though you have turned aside from him, he
will heal backslidings, and love freely; therefore poor hearts be not deterred
from looking to him. But he goes on, which must needs produce these woeful
effects. 1. An irr^concileable enmity betwixt the Sep^^^tists, and such as hold
communion with the present Churches and their Pastors. Answ. But what will
produce this effect? will judging their sin to be irremissible? This is a
Calumny. I know none that does so. Will the pleading for separation from that
which God calls aloud to separate from? I hope better. And wish this
Animadverter takes not a measure of others spirits by his own. God forbid that
any should be returning enmity for love. The Lord knows out of greatned bowels
of compassion I write what I write; and after all if I meet with such a
returnal as that intimated, I hope never to live (through the rich grace of the
Lord) to see that day in which I should be repaying any that may be possessed
with enmity against me in their own kind, or cease to love, pity, and pray for
them. Can we not differ in opinion, and tell each other in plainness, of the
guilt and evil we discern on each other, but this direful effect of
irreconcilable enmity must be produced? I hope not enmity, much less
irreconcilable enmity. And am persuaded that this Animadv. cannot justly charge
any of the Separatists (as he in scorn calls them) with any such thing. And
believe that God will help poor dusts to such a measure of a Gospel Spirit,
that there shall not be the least of the frame mentioned, budding, or putting
forth upon them. And because I conceive it may be needful, I shall mind Mr.
Tombs of what he has sometimes read in the Preface to the Harmony of
Confessions, published in the name of the French and Belgic Reformed Churches,
Praeclare quodam loco dicit Ambrosius, inter servos Christi contentio non debet
esse, sed colla^io; qnum enim sit ea mentis humanae hebetudo, in rebus
praesertim divinis, ut res alioqui maxim claras, saepe perspicere non
possimus, quin ex mutua (...), and amica fraternaque disceptatione plurimum
lucis assequamur negari nullo modo potest -- Contendere, vero, rixari and
ferociter ac proterve digladiari tantum abest, ut deceat a Deo institutos
homines, ut ne modestis, aut humanis quidem conveniat -- Equidem Sancta Sancte
ac Religiose sunt tractanda in timore Divini Numinis, et Charitate proximi,
which I wish him to make his Copy when he next writes Controversies. 2dly. The
ruin of many thousands in their Liberties, Estates, Lives, if the Law should
not be mitigated, is the next doleful effect mentioned* Answ. That the
preservation of these, so far as honestly we may, is a moral duty I grant.
These effects are not the issue of embracing the opinions and principles
pleaded for in that Treatise, but of those grievous and unrighteous Decrees (by
which the Child of this man's tuition, has ever, even from its swadling-clou^s;
I mean the Common Prayer Book Worship, been fostred and sustained. The effects
mentioned are no other than has been the usual attendment of embracing the
Gospel: which our Lord tells us we must expect, if we will be his Disciples.
Nor are they, as this Animadverter calls them, woeful effects, but blessed and
glorious, being brought upon us for Christ's, for the Gospelssake; in which he
would have us to rejoice with leaping joy, Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12. And many of the
Children of the Lord have taken them joyfully, Heb. 10. 34. Nor is this any
better reason for the Animadverter's advance against the Treatise under
consideration, than was that of Lycurgus, who would have the Vines destroyed
because the fruit of them made men drunk, (nor yet indeed is it so good) ^or
any other than what he might frequently have had to engage him to write against
the reception of the Gospel; and at this day in many places against the
Doctrine of the Reformed Protestants; The embracing that Doctrine producing
such a woeful effect (if it must be so called) An Apology for Christians that
could not in conscience submit to the Cere^onies of the Church of England, to
the Rulers thereof (as Justin Martyr and others in their day) for the repealing
or mitigating the g^ievous Decrees established, had been a more proper and
Christian employment, than by such invectives as are frequently, and false
charges given forth in these Animadversions, for the further incensing persons
in authority against them. As touching what is added from Dr. Burgess, I assent
to it, but add, it is most impertinently and scandalously applied to the men of
his present contest. God forbid we should call light darkness, or darkness
light; Christ Antichrist, or Antichrist Christ: We desire the pulling down of
nothing but what has the lineaments of Antichrist (as lively deciphered by the
Spirit) upon it. And that God will pull down whether we speak one word against
it or not. The last account he gives us of his present undertaking, is second
to none in his Epistolary Preface, viz. 1. The relation he has met with of the
endless brawls, prodigious errors, that have been the issue of Separation in
former and latter times. Answ. And he knows, 1. That the same might have been
objected against the preaching of the Gospel at the very first; (As it was by
the Heathens (who boasted that no such things were the offspring of their way)
as witness Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromat. l. 7. and Aug. L. de Ovibus, chap.
15. what brawls and contentions? what prodigious errors, denying the
Resurrection, were there amongst the members of the Church of Corinth; even
when they met together for the solemnization of the same Ordinances, the
carrying on the same Worship in Paul's time, and afterward, as appears from
the Epistle of Clemens (or the Church of Rome) to them. 2dly. That the same
things were objected against Luther, and the great work of Reformation he was
in the hand of the Lord carrying-on at that day; who was so far from being
startled hereat, that he professes, Nisi tumultus hos vidissem, Evangelium
esse in mundo non crederem, he should not have believed the Gospel had been
preached in the world, if he had not seen these brawls and tumults. Nor, 3dly,
is Mr. T. a stranger to what of late has been charged upon Protestants, with a
design to persuade to a returnal to the Church of Rome, upon the account of the
schisms, divisions, brawls that have ensued separation from thence; And with as
good reason as this Animadverter charge these upon the Separatists, out of a
design to allure to Conformity. Sir, these things are to be charged upon the
corruptions of men's hearts, the malice and wrath of Satan against Truth, which
the more it displayes its Banner, and breaks forth as the Sun out of the dark
and thick clouds of Ignorance and Antichristian confusion, shining gloriously
in its native brightness, the more mad is he against it, and industrious to
raise prejudices in the minds of men against its reception. In which work I am
sorry to find this Animadverter a coadjutor. Though, blessed be the Lord, as to
all the Congregations of the Separatists in England, I know not one of whom it
may not be said, that the things here spoken by Mr. T. are false, a mere
calumny; and yet they are not a few I am acquainted with. The truth is, these
things may more truly be charged upon the members of the Church of England,
than on the Separatists (as he calls them.) As for any brawls that may be
amongst any of them, it is hoped touching them Mr. T. will be found a false
Prophet, and that they will not prove endless. God can heal the Waters, and
through wonderful Grace has given down much of a spirit of love and mutual
forbearance amongst the Nonconforming Separatists, though in some small matters
of different apprehensions. And I hope that such carriage, as this Adimadverter
uses toward them, will engage us to press more than ever after it, that this
stone of offense may be rolled out of the way, and the mouth of absurd and
unreasonable men may be muzled, that they may have nothing justly to object
against us, while they behold our Love, as the Disciples of Christ, to one
another, and to all the Saints, and our godly conversation accompanied with
fear. As for the promiscuous prophesying mentioned, though we dare not quench
the Spirit in any Believer, nor despise its operation and breathings, yet I
know not any that are in the Animadverter's sense for it: Gifts and abilities
for that work with the consent and approbation of the Church (which is before
satisfied in their personal holiness, and soundness in the Faith, is ^equired
in those to whom a constant libe^ty of prop^esying is granted. As for the vain
fancies and opinions destructive of true Religion, I must crave leave to
profess I know not any such vented amongst the Congregations of mine
acquain^ance: And if they were, they could not rationally be charged upon the
Congregational way, (more than that horrible Ignorance, Atheism, those wretched
Oaths, Blasphemies, Adulteries, horrid Abominations (not to be named amongst
the Saints) daily, hourly committed by the members of the Church of England,
are to be charged upon it) or any principles owned by such as walk therein,
which are, as they have manifested to the world, directly and ^iametrically
opposite thereunto. That the practices of the Separatists have caused a
disturbance of Ecclesiastical and Civil peace in those places where they have
had any considerable duration, is another crimination. And it brings to my mind
that passage, Acts 17. 6. These that have turned the world upside down, are
come hither also. I shall crave leave to add, that there is a wicked false
peace, a very conjuration and conspiracy against Christ and Truth; where the
Gospel comes in power, it breaks and dissolves this peace There is an
Ecclesiastical peace that is the result of such a confederacy, and Mr. T. knows
who pleads this on the behalf of the most Idolatrous Church, (so called) in the
world. And am sorry to find him writing after so sorry a copy, on the behalf of
one of her daughters. There was an Ecclesiastical peace amongst the Heathens
when the Gospel was first promulgared, as it was received in power: this peace
was broken and dissipated, without any just reflection o^ disparagement to the
Gospel, or the way thereof; being rather its glory, manifestly discovering it
self hereby to be the power of God. When the Animadverter proves that any
Ecclesiastical peace of the appointment of Christ is broken, and disturbed by
the persons he inveighs against, we shall conceive our selves concerned; till
then these words are but scar-crows, vain and t^ivial. As touching the
distu^bance of the Civil peace, we have already spoken some what, we shall only
add, That it was not Elijah, but the whoredoms of Jezebel, that was the
troubler of Israel, though he (good man) must ^ear the blame of all. And Mr. T.
knows, that if any trouble or evil had befallen the Empire, the voice was,
Christianos ad Leones, they are presently charged and dealt with as the only
occasions and causers of it. Nor can he be ignorant, that not the Separatists
(but some others) have been the disturbers of the Nations peace. I suppose a so
that he is no stranger to a Treatise written by Mr. Pryn, displaying the
Treasons committed against the peace of Kings and Kingdoms by the Prelatical
party, and I should be sorry if he can produce one parallel instance among the
Congregational Churches. These are the reasons the Animadverter is pleased to
give of his present undertaking, which I thought it my duty to examine. I shall
detain thee, Christian Reader, no longer in this Epistolary Preface, but desire
from my very soul, that thou would impartially wei^h what is offered on each
side in this Controversy, and beg of God for his good Spirit to lead thee and
guide thee, that thou may judge righteous judgment, and walk in the good old
paths, that thou may find ^est to thy soul. And if we differ in opinion (as
to the whole, or part, of any thing herein controverted) let us keep up Love,
and a Spirit of Christianity; be laboring to reduce each other into the way of
Truth. Which is the earnest request of him, who is, in truth,

Thy souls friend, and servant, for Christ's sake; C. A.

JERUBBAAL: OR, A Review of the Sober Testimony: The Vindication of the Preface
thereof, from the Exceptions of Mr. Tombs.
CHAP. 1.
Sect. 1:
A twofold Worship of God. Natural Worship what it is. What the Law of Nature
teaches with respect to Worship. That God is to be worshipped. Of Atheism. The
sayings of Cicero and Seneca touching the Opinions of the Nations with respect
to a Deity. That God is to be worshipped in a Community: that he is to be
worshipped according to his own will. The pretenses of Zaleucus, Lycurgus,
Minos, Numa, the most famous Lawgivers amongst the Gentiles: and their
imposition of Laws. The famous saying of Socrates in Plato touching the (...),
or manner of Worship prescribed by the Godds. That the Voice of God is to be
hearkened unto, when, and in what manner he shall be pleased to speak. The
Gentiles owned but one chief Deity. The custom of the Nations in their (...),
Diabolical Oracles leading them thereunto; which they supposing to be the voice
of the Godds, obeyed. Instituted or Ceremonial Worship wherein it consists.
Hearing the Word, such a Worship. Mr. T. declines the matter in controversy.
Men do not worship God in Hearing when they hear. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. opened, and
explained.

HAving already answered what Mr. T. was pleased to premise in his Epistolary
Preface to the Reader, so far as we are (or can be supposed to be) concerned,
we are now ready to attend his further motion toward the discussion (as he
phraseth it) of the Book it self; which is (as he says) distinguished into a
Preface and ten Chapters. How suitable the method is, or comprehensive in his
judgment, I am little concerned: it seemed to me to answer my aim and
intendment, which was solely the clearing Truth, and satisfying the Scruples of
tender Consciences in the matters we were enquiring after.

The first thing Mr. T. is pleased to take notice of, is an Assertion of mine
in the Preface to the ensuing Discourse; wherein I affirm that the matter we
were to treat of, is one part of the instituted Worship of Christ under the
Gospel: from whence he takes occasion in his first Section to run forth into a
discourse touching the derivation of the word Worship, and very learnedly tells
us, that it is a contract of the word Worthy-ship, and notes singular respect
-- by reason of some worth in the thing worshipped, conceived in the heart, and
expressed by some sign, which he gathers from the use of the word Worshipful,
and your Worship, given to Superiors, -- and gives us several distinctions
about Worship, which as they are trite and obsolete, so what the intendment of
the Animadverter should be in producing them, excep^ to show his reading, or
amuse the Reader with a multiplicity of words and distinctions, and thereby
render him the more unfit to examine what is offered in the Controversy to
consideration, I cannot divine. As the quibling upon every particular word in a
Dispute, is much like that which the Apostle condemns, 1 Timothy 6. 4. 2 Timothy 2.
14. so I know not of what use it can be to the Reader, nor that it serves to
any thing, save to render the Controversy more arduous and difficult, when the
meaning of each other is obvious to any considerate understanding without it.
There is (as I know of) no more than a twofold Worship of God; 1. That which is
natural, original, or moral: which I call natural, because in the principle of
it it was concreated with man; and moral, because it is invariable and always
the same; and is comprehensive of our says, affiance and trust in God, our
subjection to him, as the God, sovereign Lord and King, and Lawgiver to all.
That Worship which the Law of Nature, or the Law written and engraven upon the
hearts of the children of men, teaches, is that I call the natural Worship of
God. Four things this Law teaches with respect to Worship. First, that God is
to be worshipped. Whether there were ever any so guilty of Atheism as to deny a
Deity, is not much to our present purpose to enquire. Cicero says, Nullam
unquam fuisse Gentem, etc. That there was never any Nation so barbarous, which
knew not that there was a God. And to the same purpose Seneca, Epist. 3.
Veritatis Argumentum est, omnibus aliquid videri tanquam Deos esse, quod
omnibus de Diis opinio in sita sit, neque ulla gens usquam est adeo extra
Leges, moresque posita, ut non aliquos Deos credat. Nor is there any thing,
Psalm. 14. 1. opposite thereunto, which the Chaldee Paraphrast renders, No power
or dominion of God in the Earth. But this (as was said) is not of our present
disquisition. Upon the acknowledgment of a Deity, the principles of Nature
dictate that he is to be worshipped. 2dly, That as God is to be worshipped, so
is he (not only severally, each one by himself, but) by persons in particular
bodies and societies to be worshipped and served, is another dictate of Nature.
The erection of Temples for Worship, with the forms of public Service, and
Priests for the managery thereof, to be found amongst the most ignorant and
dark corners of the World, both before and since the Gospel Dispensation,
sufficiently evince the truth of the suggestion. Yea,

3dly. That God is to be worshipped according to that Revelation ^^ Himself he
is pleased to exhibit to the children of men, not according to their wills one
or other of them. Hence when any had a design of imposing Laws upon others of
their own devising, they presented them unto them, not as their own inventions;
upon which foot of account they knew they would meet with little respect from
persons attending the dictates of Nature, but as received from the Godds. Thus
did Zaleucus, Lycurgus, Minos, Numa, the most famous Lawgivers amongst the
Gentiles. Famous is the saying of Socrates in Plato to this purpose, That every
God will be worshipped, (...), in that way which pleases best his own mind.
Contrary to which, as if those (...), enstamped upon the hearts of men, as men,
were totally obliterated. Some assume the confidence to plead, that the (...),
or manner of Worship, is not from divine direction and prescription; but only
the (...) or Worship it self.

4thly. That the Voice of God when he should be pleased, or in what manner
soever, to speak to them, was to be hearkened and attended to, the same Law of
Nature did indoct^inate them in; I say the Voice of God: for however unto some
of them there were Godds many and Lords many, yet the wisest and most learned
amongst them, did acknowledge but one chief Deity or God, at whose beck and
ordinance all the rest were, whom therefore they contemned as things of naught.
Hence Plautus in Casina, Act. 2.

Unus Tibi hic dum sit propitius Jupiter,
Tuistos minutos cave Deos flocci feceris.
Hence Satan easily abused them to an attendance upon his dictates as the
Oracles of God, though never so cruel and sanguinary. That it was usual amongst
the Gentile Nations to offer up Men and Women in Sacrifice to the Godds, is
known. Tacitus tells us of the Germans, that they were wont to sacrifice Men to
Mercury; Tacit. de morib. German. Tertullian assures us that the people of
Africa sacrificed their Children to Saturn, and that openly, even to the time
of the Proconfulship of Tiberius; Apol. c. 8. And when the Carthaginians were
overcome by Agathocles the Sicilian Tyrant, judging the Godds to be greatly
angry with them, they at once sacrificed two hundred Noblemens Sons to Saturn,
as Pescenninus Festus witness. The same Abomination was rife among the Romans,
which seems to have continued amongst them to the time of the Consulship of
Cornelius Lentulus, and Publius Licinius Crassus, as witnesses Pliny, Nature.
Hist. l. 3. c. 1. the French (as Cicero, Orat per Fontei.) the Britans (as
Tacitus, Annal. 14.) (of whom says Horace, Visam Britannos hospitibus feros)
were led captive to the like ferosity to their own flesh.

That they received this Abomination from their diabolical Oracles (which they
mistook for the voice of the Gods to them) is more than probable. That the
destruction of Menecaeus and Iphigenia is to be fixed here, is known. Nor had
the manner of the Lacedaemonians, wounding themselves in the worship of their
Gods, any other spring, as witnesses Apollonius, apud Philostrat. l. 6. c. 10.
(...), etc. i. e. in the honor of Diana it was their custom to wound
themselves, according (as men say) to the Commandment of the Oracles. And
Pausanias Baeotic. (...): The Oracle of Delphos enjoins that a beauteous Child
be offered in Sacrifice to Bacchus. This was the state and condition of the
Gentile World, whilst God was known only in Jewry, the times of which ignorance
he winked at, and suffered each Nation to do what was good in their own eyes
under the regiment of Satan, perpetrating the most horrible abomination, being
fearfully cruel to their own flesh. The review of which may fill us with pity
and bowels toward the poor dark corners of the World, w^ere this gross
darkness is still residing, and the same or greater wickednesses are committed;
and increase groans to the Lord in us, to cause the light of his glorious
Gospel to arise and shine upon them; as also stir us up to thankfulness for the
light of the Gospel he has sent amongst us: and whilst we have it to walk in
it, not loving darkness more than light. But thus far will the light of Nature,
engraven upon the heart, lead us with respect to the right Worship of God, and
I humbly conceive ne plus ultra, not a step farther.

2dly. As there is a natural or moral Worship of God, so is there that which is
ceremonial or instituted; which depends upon Divine Revelation, and is nothing
but the expression of the moral and internal Worship of God, our love, faith,
fear, subjection of, and to him in those external ways that are of his own
revelation, wherein he has said he will have us manifest and express them;
and, as a great encouragement thereunto, has promised in our so doing to meet
with us, and bless us. This is that which is most usually in Scripture called
the Worship of God and Christ. And this is that Worship whereunto I refer
hearing the Word as it is a Gospel-Institution to be practiced by the Saints:
which was so plainly asserted in the Sober Testimony, that there was no
occasion for Mr. T. to trouble himself or the Reader with his guessing at the
meaning of the Author, did he not delight to multiply words: but to have owned
it, if true; or otherwise to have addressed himself to the confutation thereof.
That which I asserted was; that Hearing (by the Saints under the dispensation
of the Gospel, for of them and their duty is the question proposed, page 13.)
is part of Instituted Worship. Which when Mr. T. endeavors the confutation of,
I may be supposed to be concerned in his discourses; but till then, the most
partially addicted Reader will acquit me from any bounden service or attendance
on them. It Is an easy way of answering Books (though not much to edification)
to desert the main point to be impugned, and divertise ones self and Reader
with discourses that are but at best collateral thereunto, and scarce speak a
word to that which is the alone thing to be spoken to, as Mr. T. in this matter
has done. So that in what he says, not speaking to the thing in question in
these two first Sections, I am little concerned, yet can I not but take notice
of one thing, (...), as we pass on, which I cannot close with him in; viz. That
we worship God in hearing when we hear; which he pretends to prove from 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. which as thus crudely proposed, I humbly conceive is very remote
from truth. There is more to be done than so. I am apt to think that those who
worship God in hearing, must first come to it as to an Institution of Christ.
Which if a man does nor, he worships not God at all therein. For persons to
come to hear a Sermon out of custom, curiosity, lothness to undergo the
penalties of the Land, censures of others, for company, or the like; not
heeding it, or coming to it as an Institution of Christ, will hardly be
accounted by the Lord as worshipping him, being indeed not at all so. 2dly,
That they set themselves to hear what is spoken as the Word of the eternal God,
receive it in meekness, faith, love, giving up themselves to its authority and
conduct; which except we do, we worship not God. Jehoiakim in Jeremiah heard
the Roll read, but he takes his Penknife, cuts it in pieces, and throws it into
the fire. The Pharisees hear Christ preach, Luke 16. 14. (...), they blew their
noses at him in scorn and derision. Act. 7. you have Stephen preaching to the
Jews, who for a great while hear him with silence and attention, b^t v. 54.
(...), they were vexed so as if they had been cut with a Saw, (...); they
showed their teeth, and grind them like mad dogs against him. To which many
more instances might be added of such as heard the Word of God under such
abominable passions. Will Mr. T. say, that such as these worship God in
hearing? what more absurd? And yet if he deny it, his Assertion falls to the
ground, That men worship God in hearing when they hear. It Is one device of
Satan to undo souls (and no mean one) by miscalling things, and appropriating
those names and titles to them, that do not belong to them, to cause them to
think that they have and do, what they neither have nor do. Some transient
checks of conscience, slight and superficial sorrow for sin, assent to
propositions of truth, escaping the pollutions of the world, saying their
prayers, going to hear, he calls (and would make poor hearts believe they are
so) the saving convictions of the Spirit, Gospel-humiliation, precious,
unfeigned Faith, Evangelical Sanctication and Holiness, worshipping God, etc.
which if they do, they have only this advantage, that they go down with more
pomp and state to Hell, than those that know nothing of these semblances of
Grace and Holiness. It Is a fond conceit that poor blind ignorant creatures
flatter themselves with, that their going to Church (as they call it) and
joining with the Preacher in the outward acts of praying and preaching,
(supposing it to be according to the Institution of Christ) is worshipping God;
and I am sorry to find Mr. T. by such expressions hardening them in this
dangerous conceit. Alas, ye cannot thus worship God, for he is a jealous God;
he is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. Precious Mr.
Buroughs in his Treatise of Gospel Worship, speaks excellently to this matter,
page 93. Though I do kneel down in prayer, and present my body to hear the Word
-- this is no^ to worship God as a Spirit (and yet he that worships him not as
a Spirit, worships him not at all:) And p. 109. Many people think it a very
easy matter to worship God (and so it were, if Mr. T. his Assertion were true)
If it were nothing else to worship God but to come and hear a Sermon, then it
were the easiest matter in the world to worship God, but there is more required
in the duty of God's Worship than thou have been acquainted with, there is a
power of Godliness in it. And citing Josh. 24. 19. he adds, q. d. You think it
is nothing to serve the Lord -- alas, you cannot serve the Lord, for he is a
holy God, and a jealous God -- you must have other manner of hearts than yet
you have -- you must understand his Worship in another manner than yet you do:
until you understand God, his Ways and Worship, you cannot serve the Lord, i.
e. you do not, cannot worship him. Nor does the Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
prove his Assertion, but rather the contrary. The words are, For this cause
thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the Word of God which ye
heard of us, ye received it not as the word of man, but as it is in truth the
Word of God, which effectually works also in you that believe. Not to
multiply words, the Apostle (with Silvanus and Timotheus, chap. 1. 1.)
acquaints them in this verse, 1. of the returns they were on their behalf
making to God, for the Grace was bestowed on them; We thank God without
ceasing. 2. Particularly declares the ground and reason of this their
thanksgiving; which was their reception of, obedience to, the Gospel, which he
calls (...), the Word of God; which because they ministerially brought to them,
he calls also (...), the word of hearing speech, or report from them. This he
says they did (...), they tried, proved, considered, weighed in their spirits
what was offered to them by the Apostles (as learned Beza tells us the word
signifies, whereby it is says he distinguished from the word (...)) An
entertainment that the Gospel did not everywhere meet with, being many times
cried out against, run upon, and violently opposed, as were the Publishers of
it) without so much as soberly considering whether things be so or no: nor here
but by a very few, the Rabble in an hurly-burly, furiously assaulting the house
of Jason, Act. 17. 5. (whither 'twas like the Disciples were wont to repair)
And (...) having upon trial found it to be of worth and weight, they received,
embraced it (as Beza, Zanchy, etc. on the place, say the word signifies) and
that as the Word of God; with reverence giving up themselves to his conduct.
How this came to pass he also asserteth, it was from the effectual energy of
the Lord upon their hearts by his mighty Power ((...)) which they were not able
to resist. As learned Cameron in Myroth. Evang. ad Phil. 2. And Praelect. and
holy Bains on Ephesians. 1. 11. say. And they being thus powerfully and effectually
wrought upon to the embracing the Doctrine of the Gospel as the Word of God,
they become followers of the Churches of God; which in Judaea were in Christ
Jesus, i. e. as they had before done who were in Christ before them, so do they
gather together into a distinct Body, or particular Congregation, for the
celebrating the Ordinances of God together, and worshipping him according to
his will. Therefore we worship God in hearing when we hear; of which the
Apostle speaks, ne gry quidem, as Mr. T. well knows. Yet is this the only
Scripture produced for the confirmation of his Assertion. They were so far from
worshipping God in their bare hearing, that had they done no more, they had not
worshipped him at all; no more than the rest of them of Thessalonica with the
Jews, who although they heard the Apostles, consorted not with them, but
afterward persecuted and opposed them, Act. 17. 4, 5. who it is to be thought
Mr. T. will not say, worshipped him at all. He need never fear miscarrying in
any cause he thinks meet to undertake: if he can but beforehand assure himself
he shall meet with such partially addicted Readers as will take such proofs as
these to be cogent and convincing, but

Parvas habet spes Troja si tales habet, Strong and confident Assertions,
without more clear and evident proof, are not likely to lead the understanding
of persons, soberly inquisitive after Truth, into obedience of them.

Sect. 2.
Of Instituted Worship. Mat. 17. 5. explained. What ever is to be practiced by
N. T. Saints in respect of Worship, is solely to be bottomed upon the authority
of Christ. Luke 10. 16. considered. O. T. Precepts with respect to Hearing, how
obliging. Luke 16. 29. explained. The intendment of Christ in the Parable,
evinced. 2 Pet. 1. 19. opened. Whom we are prohibited from hearing in the N.
T. Mat. 15. 4. explained. 2 Timothy 3. 5. considered and opened. Of the scattered
Disciples, Acts 8. 1, 4. touching whom Mr. T. egregiously trifles, and abuses
his Reader. No hearing the present Ministers as gifted Brethren. Whether
hearing of Preachers be a moral and perpetual Worship common to all times.

MR. T. his first Section being spent in the consideration of the word Worship;
and some distinctions about the Worship of God, the second is designed to the
consideration of the word Instituted. And having learnedly told us that the
Instituted Worship of Christ is such as is by Christ's Institution; i. e. the
Instituted Worship of Christ is the Instituted Worship of Christ. He further
acquaints ^s what a Civil Lawyer says of Institutions, viz. That they are
preceptions by which men are instructed and taught: which after some
exe^plification by particular instances, he applies to the Worship of Christ
under the Gospel, and tells us that it is such that is by Christ's preceptions
taught, directed or appointed in the time thereof, which may be meant (he
says) of the Natural Worship which belongs to God or Christ, such as Prayer to
God, giving Thanks to him, Hearing, which yet in respect of some peculiarities,
are to be divolved upon the Scriptures of the New Testament, yet not excluding
the Old, or the Light of Nature, so far as the Worship is perpetual and general
to all people and times, as being either natural or moral. Answ. Very good!
Hearing it seems then, as a Gospel-duty to be performed by the Saints in the
time thereof, is part of Natural Worship; for hereof must he speak, or he
speaks impertinently, the question being about the duty of these, Sober Testim.
page 13. which not attempting the least proof of, we are bound to take no
further notice thereof than to avouch the contrary. If the Animadverter thinks,
that because some things are consonant to the dictates of right Reason, the
Light and Law of Nature; therefore, as to be performed by Saints under the
Gospel, they are not merely of the institution of Christ, and to be performed
solely upon the account of his Authority and Command, he shall not have me for
his Rival. Nor will any sober Christian, tender of the honor and glory of his
Lord and Master Christ, swallow down such an Assertion without better proof.
About this matter a worthy and learned person has spoken excellently in a
Catechize lately published, called A brief Instruction in the Worship of God,
where in page 84. Q. 18. are these words; Whereas sundry of these things,
(viz. Prayer, Preaching, etc. of which he had spoken before, as principal
Institutions of the Gospel) are founded in the Light and Law of Nature, as
requisite unto all solemn Worship, and are moreover commanded in the Moral Law,
and explications of it in the Old Testament, how do you look upon them as
Evangelical Institutions to be observed principally on the Authority of Jesus
Christ? Answ. Neither their general suitableness unto the principles of right
Reason, and the dictates of the Light and Law of Nature, nor the practice of
them in the Worship of God under the Old Testament do at all hinder them from
depending on the mere Institution of Jesus Christ, as to those especial ends of
the glory of God, in and by himself, and the edification of his Church in the
Faith which is in him, whereunto he has appointed them: nor as unto the
special manner of their performance, which he requires; in which respects they
are to be observed on the account of his Authority and Command only, Mat. 17.
5. and 28. 20. John 16. 23, 24. Heb. 3. 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 1. 22. and 2. 20, 21, 22.
Heb. 12. 25. In the explication whereof he speaks after this wise: The
principal thing we are to aim at in the whole Worship of God, is the discharge
of that duty which we owe to Jesus Christ the King and Head of the Church, Heb.
3. 6. 1 Timothy 3. 15. This we cannot do unless we consider his Authority as the
formal reason and cause of our observance of all that we do therein. If we
perform any thing in the Worship of God on any other account, it is no part of
our obedience unto him, and so we can neither expect his Grace to assist us;
nor have we his Promise to accept us therein; for that he has annexed unto our
doing, and observing what ever he has commanded, and that because he has
commanded us, Matthew. 28. 20. This promised Presence respects only the
observance of his Commands. Some men are apt to look on this Authority of
Christ as that which has the least influence into what they do. If in any of
his Institutions they find any thing that is suited or agreeable to the Light
of Nature, as Ecclesiastical Societies, the Government of the Church, and the
like, they say are; they suppose and contend that that is the ground on which
they are to be attended unto, and so are to be regulated accordingly. The
interposition of his Authority they will allow only in the Sacraments, which
have no light in Reason or Nature, so desirous are some to have as little to do
with Christ as they can, even in the things that concern the Worship of God.
But it would be somewhat strange, that if what the Lord Christ has appointed
i^ his Church to be observed in particular in an especial manner, for special
ends of his own, has in the general nature of it an agreement with what in
like cases the Light of Nature seems to direct unto, that therefore his
Authority is not to be considered as the sole immediate reason of our
performance of it. But it is evident,

First, that our Lord Jesus Christ, being the King and Head of his Church, the
Lord over the House of God, nothing is to be done therein but with respect unto
his Authority, Mat. 17. 5. Ephesians. 4. 15. and 2. 20, 21. Secondly, and that
therefore the suitableness of any thing to right Reason, or the Light of
Nature, is no ground for a Church-observation of it, unless it be also
appointed and commanded in especial by Jesus Christ. Thirdly, That being so
appointed and commanded, it becomes an especial Institution of his, and as such
is to be observed; so that in all things that are done or to be done, with
respect unto the Worship of God in the Church, the Authority of Christ is always
principally to be considered, and every thing to be observed is commanded by
him, without which consideration it has no place in the Worship of God. Thus
far he with convincing brightness and evidence.

It Is true, Mr. T. tells us there are some particularities which God has tied
us to in the New Testament in hearing: But of what nature they are he expressly
tells us not: Whether such as do constitute it New-Testament-Worship, without
which it is not, or cannot be accounted to be so. The Scriptures cited by him
are not wholly strangers to such a thing. First, Mat. 17. 5. fairly intimates
that what ever is to be done in the New-Testament-Worship, is to be done solely
upon the Authority of Christ. In v. 2. we have an account of Christ's
transfiguration before Peter, James, and John. Verse. 3. Moses and Elias appear
talking with him. Moses was the great Lawgiver to the Old-Testament-Church,
Deuteronomy. 33. 21. (i. e. in the portion or inheritance which Moses the Lawgiver
according to the Command God had given to the Gadites) Elias was the great
Reformer of the Church in the days of Jezebels Apostasy from God: men of great
renown in their day. Peter (and the rest of them being amazed) cries out, It is
good for us to be here; let us make three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for
Moses, and one for Elias; Whereby he seems to equalize them with Christ, each
of them a tabernacle, v. 4. What says the voice of God? v. 6. While he yet
spoke, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them; and behold a voice out of the
cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye
him. And Mark tells us, chap. 9. 9. That suddenly when they looked about, they
saw none but Jesus: Moses and Elias were vanished and gone. The intendment of
the whole seems to be this; That though betwixt Christ, Moses and Elias there
was a sweet coalescency and agreement (they talked together) yet in the Worship
of God under the Gospel, not Moses nor Elias, but only Christ is to be hearkened
and attended unto. Therefore but a reasonable postulatum, that the whole of the
Worship of Christ, in the times of the Gospel, be divolved upon the Scriptures
of the New Testament, He being appointed and deputed by the Father, solely to
be attended unto for Laws and Directions touching it; for which also he came
from the bosom of the Father, John 1. 18. By whom he has spoken to us in
these last days, Heb. 1. 2. To whom fullness of Power and Authority is
delegated by the Father, Mat. 28. 18. From whence the Commission to the
Apostles for preaching the Gospel (v. 20.) does originally spring; and
consequently our hearing or attending upon Preachers in that work, is to take
its measure from the Laws and Statutes, which, as Lord of the Family, he has
given forth, thereabout, for his Household to observe and do. Nor, 2dly, does
Luke 10. 16. cited in the second place by this Animadverter, serve to any other
purpose but to cut the throat of the cause he has at present undertaken the
management of. They are the words of Christ unto the Seventy, whom he sent two
and two before his face, v. 1. and prove thus much, That hearing those that are
sent out by Christ, is a positive Institution of his, and such an Institution,
that therein we hear him: which proves not the lawfulness of attending upon the
Ministry of such as act not by virtue of any Authority received from him, but
the contrary. If the Argument Christ here uses be valid, That he who hears
them whom he sends in his Name, hears him, and he that hears (or receives,
Mat. 10. 40.) him, hears (or receives) him that sent him, (viz. the Father)
as most certain it is: I do not see that this can be accused of weakness and
invalidity; though such an one as Mr. T. cares not (it may be) to hear of, viz.
that he who hears the Parish-Ministers, hears the Bishops; and he who
hears the Bishops, hears the Pope, from whom they originally received and
derive their power and authority. And yet it may be this may not be so
distastful to this Animadverter as I had thought, whom I already find, page
344. pleading it lawful to hear the Jesuits; a fair advance toward the
personal hearing of his Holiness.

Thus insuccesful is Mr. T. in producing Testimonies, every one of them
speaking otherwise than he would have them, and much to the disadvantage of the
cause he undertakes the management of. Nor do we say, that the many Precepts in
the Old Testament about Hearing, are vacated, we rather establish them, whilst
we make it part of instituted Worship. God was of old to be attended, in his
speaking in and by his Servants and Prophets, whom he instituted and inspired,
to whom the Word of God came to communicate it to his People. They that indeed
came in his Name were to be heeded and hearkened unto, and that by obligation
from positive Law and Institution: So are those that now come in the Name of
Christ, the alone Lord, L^wgiver, and King over his House; to whom all Power is
given and entrusted by the Father; who has appointed his Stewards in his
absence over his Household, to give them their portion of meat in due season,
Luke 12. 42. Nor will those of the Household be ever able to acquit or justify
themselves before the Lord when he comes, if a thief or stranger break-in upon
them (and eject the Stewards appointed by him) in their attendance upon him, to
say the meat he feeds us with is our Lord's meat, which it is true they should
be ready to receive, but from the hands destined and appointed to give it them.

2dly. Mr. T. supposes that what is spoken of the Law and the Prophets, Luke
16. 29. is spoken as obliging to New-Testament-Saints, but without the least
attempt of proof. If his own Ipse dixit will not carry the cause, and persons
will not suffer themselves to be guided by a worse (if possible) than the
Popish phanatique C^edo, or implicit Faith, there is not much danger of his
captivating any to his [at present] espoused opinion: This being most usually
the whole of what is tendered by way of evidence of what he is pleased
confidently to aver from one end of his Theodulia to the other. The contrary is
evident.

1. It Is spoken to the Pharisees, v. 14, 15. 2dly, One part of the aim and
intendment of our Lord in the Parable, seems to be to exalt the Institutions of
God, above whatever may be fixed upon by the children of men (one or other of
them) as more probable to effect what they are instituted and appointed by the
Lord for. The rich man supposed that if one rose from the dead, and testified
to his Brethren, they would repent, v. 28. 30. No, says Abraham, (i. e.
Christ) If they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one arose from the dead. Hereby testifying the unalterable
obligations that lie upon persons (what ever specious pretenses of edification,
profit, or the like, may be urged by the sons of men) to an attendment upon
Divine Institutions: Not as if the Lord would have his New Testament Saints
attend upon Moses's Appointments, or go to Mount Sinai for the pattern of his
Gospel Worship. 3dly. v. 16. he expressly tells us that the Law and the Prophets
were but until John, and since that time the Kingdom of God, or
Gospel-Church-state (frequently so called in Scripture) is preached. But
suppose Mr. T. had evinced (or should ever be able to do so) that the words of
Christ did respect New-Testament-Believers (any otherwise than has already
been intimated by us) he had need do one thing more before they will stand him
in any stead, viz. manifest that they are spoken by Christ with relation to
Worship; that therein New-Testament-Believers are to be regulated by Moses and
the Prophets, (for if they respect only the Doctrine taught by the peculiar
Types of that day, and the Truths dropped by them touching Christ the Messiah,
they make nothing at all to his purpose) which when he has done,

Erit mihi magnus Apollo. Nor does 2 Pet. 1. 19. the other place cited by him,
contribute the least mite of assistance to his dying cause. The Apostle
understanding by Divine Revelation (as it is thought) that he must shortly dye,
v. 14. As he was resolved whilst he lived not to cease to call upon them, and
stir them up (as v. 12, 13.) so he was willing to leave this Epistle with them,
to put them in remembrance of the great things he had taught and communicated
to them, v. 15. which he tells them, v. 16. were not cunningly devised fables,
so artificially interwoven as though they seemed to be true, they were most
false: store of which had been in those days invented by Jews and Poets. Oh
no! had they been so, he could have had no comfort in the review of them now he
was going off the stage of the world, which he had, not having followed these
when he made known unto them the power and coming (or the powerful coming, or
coming in the power of our Lord Jesus Christ (manifested to be so in the
efficacy of his Doctrine, working Miracles, his Resurrection from the dead)
they were, he tells them, eyewitnesses of his Majesty. The honor and glory
whereof he proves by a double Argument; 1. The testimony and witness the Father
bare of Christ, the honor and glory put upon him when that Voice came from
Heaven, when he was on the Mount transfigured before them (viz. Peter, James
and John.) 2dly, From the word of Prophecy: lest they should think the former
Apparition was a fiction of his own, he acquaints them that the Prophets have
testified of his coming and glory. Of which Word of Prophecy he asserts, 1.
That it is of no private ^nterpretation (i. e. the holy men to whom it came,
gave it forth as they received it from God, without putting any of their own
glosses, meanings, private interpretations to it.) 2dly, That to this they do
well to take heed, ((...), to which taking heed ye do excellently, worthily,
and as becomes Saints) as unto a light that shine^h in a dark place. Yet,
3dly, with this limitation, as to the time of their so doing, (...), until the
day dawn, and the day star arise in their hearts. Which if we should interpret
of the day of the Gospel, and the more clear revelation of the administrations
thereof, which some learned and judicious men do, as the Assembly in their
Annotations on the place (and indeed as by shadows we are sometimes to
understand the Jewish administration of affairs under the old paedagogy; so by
day, the time of the dispersion of those Shadows, and the introduction of the
Gospel-Churc^-state, Cant. 2. 17. and 4. 6.) The whole of what Mr. T. would
infer from this place would not only be enervated, but a Sword ready furbished
put into the hands of his Antagonist to put an end to his expiring cause. Nor
will it at all avail him to say, that the Gospel-administration was already
introduced and brought in: for although that was afoot some while before, yet
many Jewish Ceremonies were yet winked at, and practiced by the believing Jews,
of whom the charge was committed unto Peter, Gal. 2. 7, 8, 9. to whom he writes
these Epistles, who were much in practice of their old Ordinances (some of
them) till the time of the ruin and devastation of their Temple by Titus
Vespasian, when some think 2 Pet. 3. 7, 9, 10. of the burning and consuming of
the then Heavens and Earth (viz. the Jewish Paedagogy and old Administration of
affairs) had its accomplishment, and the new Heavens or Gospel-Church-state was
fully introduced. Though we need not assert any thing of this nature. The
Apostle, as was said, is treating not of the Worship, but Doctrine of the
Messiah, in particular of his Glory, Power and Coming, which the Prophets he
tells them had abundantly bore witness to, and to their Testimony it was their
duty (is ours) to attend. That hence such a conclusion as this, is or can be
logically inferred; that therefore the Precepts and Directions of the
Old Testament are to be heeded and learned in respect of the matter therein
contained, and the persons that reveal it (with respect to Worship, of which he
must speak or he says nothing to the matter in hand) is the firstborn of
absurdities, and needs the abilities of one transcending the degree of a B. D.
to make good. But this Mr. T. thought not of. No wonder his late Writings, as
he complains, find so little acceptance amongst persons inquisitive after
Truth, if there be such chasma's betwixt the head and heels of his Arguments,
that it is impossible the Reader should find mediums enough to fill up and
render them in the least conclusive. But he goes on, and tells us, that he
meets with no prohibition to hear any but false Prophets, Mat. 7. 15.
Deceivers, Tit. 1. 10. That teach other Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 3. 2 John 10.
Another Gospel, Gal. 1. 8, 9. Answ. 1. Christ's institution of Officers of his
own for the administration of the affairs of his House, had there been no
express interdiction, had been interdiction sufficient to hear a Ministry not
of his appointment. The Lord having caused Fire to come down from Heaven, and
giving a charge that it should be kept alive continually upon his Altar, was
such an interdiction of offering Sacrifice with strange Fire, that Nadab and
Abihu not observing it (though no express command against offering strange
fire) die by the immediate hand of the Lord, as a punishment for their
transgression. But, 2dly, we read of other prohibitions in the Scripture,
though Mr. T. is not pleased [now] to take notice of them; as Mat. 15. 14.
which about twenty five years ago he seems to suppose to be an injunction of
Christ not to hear the Scribes and Pharisees (and indeed the word there used
plainly imports as much, (...), which signifies to remove from, forsaken so as
never to come at them more, which Beza says is the proper signification of the
word; and the learned Grotias (...) ut and remittere proprie, et primigenio
significatu est, a se amovere atque ita sumitur, Mat. 4. 20. et alibi saepe
unde sumpta metaphora significat and deserere, and dimittere, and permittere,
frequentissime autem rationem alicujus rei* non habere, quod Latini simili
locutione dicunt missum aliquid facere: ita sumi ha^c vo^em apparet, Mat. 15.
14. G^ot. de sa^is. Christi.
says little less) and in them a prohibition to hear such as should act like
them, viz. teach for doctrines the traditions of men. Nor is the Animadverter a
stranger to that solemn Injunction of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 5. (...), from
such turn away. [The word signifies devocare and avocare, says Aretius;
whence, says he, we may understand that it is our duty to shun them, that we be
not made like them.] That there is a dispensation granted to abide with
Ministers of such a complexion, I never yet read. 3dly, Were there no more
prohibitions than those instanced by Mr. T. these were enough to prove it the
duty of Saints to separate from the present Ministers of England. That they are
false Prophets, Mat. 7. 15. we have evinced, ch 6. of S. Test. (which is
vindicated from Mr. T. his Exceptions, chap. 7th of this Treatise) and Sect.
10. of this chapter. That they are Deceivers, according to Tit. 1. 10. the
second place instanced in by him were easy to demonstrate. That they teach
other Doctrine, according to 1 Timothy 1. 5. the third place he is pleased to
introduce, he that thinks it any part of his concern to examine what they do,
cannot be ignorant. Is not Canonical obedience, compulsion in matters of
Religion and Faith, convenience at least of Surplice, Organs, Cross in Baptism,
Regeneration thereby, with many more that might be instanced in, as a National
Church in the time of the Gospel, Communion with persons visibly wicked and
profane (Subjection to which they have a Law to compel men to) the necessity
of Godfa^hers and Godmothers, another Doctrine? Did they learn these things
from Christ and his Apostles, or from the Cabal at Rome? Nor will it avail this
Animadverter to say, that these cannot be called another Doctrine, because some
of them not expressly forbidden, nor directly contrary to what is taught by
them. For what is more than they taught, is another Doctrine, though not
directly contrary thereunto. Hear what the Assembly in their Annotations upon
the place say, Teach no other doctrine] the chief Pastors of the Church, who
were endued with Apostolical Authority, as was Timothy, were to forbid any to
preach, not only doctrine that was contrary, but that which was beside that
which the Faithful have received from the Apostles. And indeed the word is
plainly so, (...), e. i. says Piscator, (...), that they teach not things
diverse, viz. from the Doctrine of the Apostles. So Beza. And Hyperius is very
full, that they teach no other Doctrine, either for matter or manner, for
substance or circumstance. As to what he adds, that Christ more especially tied
his Disciples, to hear his Apostles and such as were sent by them to them, yet
when all the Church at Jerusalem, except the Apostles, were scattered abroad by
persecution, and went every where preaching the Gospel, Acts 8. 1, 4. it was no
sin to hear them, they were not the strangers meant, John 10. 5, etc.

I must crave leave to inform him, of what he cannot be ignorant, that he
trifles and abuses his Reader egregiously. 1. Christ did not only chiefly, but
solely enjoin his Disciples to hear his Apostles, and those that afterward
were sent by his appointment in his Name, as acting in the ministration of the
Gospel by virtue of an Office-power. The instance of the scattered Brethren,
Act. 8. 1, 4. is not at all to his purpose; they were indeed to be heard, but
not as Ministers of the Gospel acting by Office-power in the promulgation
thereof (which they were not, nor pretended to be) but as gifted Brethren or
private Christians, receiving abilities from the Lord for that work and duty
they were now providentially called unto. 2dly, Mr. T. knows that the Author of
S. Test. is for the liberty of Prophesying, though he seems to suggest the
contrary in these expressions. Nor did I ever think (nor any man in the world
in his wits) that those scattered Brethren, Acts 8. 1, 4. were the strangers
mentioned John 10. but some others, as is proved in the Treatise under his
consideration. Those in Acts 8. were to be heard (as was said) as gifted
Brethren, not as Officers of Christ, which they were not. What this makes to
proving the lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers, to which good service
it seems transiently designed, is not easy to understand, who preach not so,
whom we cannot hear as such, except we would put out our eyes and renounce our
understanding, when they avouch they preach as Ministers, and we see them daily
in the exercise of that, which suppose an Office-power, as Baptism and breaking
Bread, for the doing of it. (...); these things must he speak to, who considers
Mr. T. his Papers, for want of what is more material. But perhaps Sect. 3. does
the business, where he flourishes on the head of it, as if he were resolved to
come up close to the matter in hand, and demonstrate by irrefragable Arguments,
that Hearing, as a duty incumbent upon the Saints in the time of the Gospel in
the way appointed by Christ, is not a mere positive or ceremonial Worship: But
perhaps (says he) the Author means by instituted Worship, such as is merely
Positive, or, as we use to speak, Ceremonial, such as Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, etc. In which he has almost hit the white of the Author's intendment
and meaning, as plainly expressed as he knew how: which is this, That however
Hearing may put on the endument and property of Moral Worship, yet as practiced
under the New Testament, it solely appertains to Positive Worship, or the
Institution of Christ: and whoever performs it not as such, I am apt to
conceive worships not Christ at all therein. What says the Animadverter to
this? Why, this Author seems to me very inconsiderate. But seriously, Sir, I
was well aware, knew, and well considered of what I writ in this matter. He
seems to me very inconsiderate, is a pitiful Argument to evert the Assertion
impleaded by Mr. T. it being not much to the purpose what seems to him, or me,
to be considerate or otherwise. These matters will be judged by others whether
we will or no. As for what he adds, it is of no more weight than what went
before, That hearing of Preachers is a moral and perpetual Worship, common to
all times and persons. He must 1. except Adam, to whom at first it was no duty
so to do, except he make God the Preacher, and then he altars the state of the
question: and afterward it is more than probable he preached to his Family, not
they to him. 2. Except the time of ignorance God winked at, when he sent no
Preachers to the Gentile world, but suffered them to walk in their own ways.
3. He had need to qualify his Assertion a little better, else it will not be
found weight. I am apt to think that hearing all Preachers (and an indefinite
Proposition (as Mr. T. his is) is equipollent to an universal, is neither part
of moral, nor instituted Worship. The Romans had their Flamins and
Arch-Flamins, (from whence the pattern of Bishops and Archbishops;) Baal had
his Chemarims; our forefathers in England, the Druides (who in their solemn
acts of Worship were clad in a white-garment, you may call it a Surplice, from
whence it is probable that rag had its original) all Preachers; yet the hearing
of them no part (I hope) of moral Worship. Yea, the Devil was once a Preacher,
and of the Gospel too, till Christ silenced him, Luke 4. 41. yet I very much
question whether should he do so again, as it is not impossible, our
Animadverter would assert it lawful to hear him. There were also Preachers of
the Circumcision; whom Paul thought it no part of the Worship of God to hear;
the duty of Saints lying in the direct contrary part by virtue of the
Apostolical Injunction, Phil. 3. 2. So that it is evidently a mistake of Mr. T.
to say that hearing of Preachers is a moral and perpetual Worship, common to
all times and persons. Whereas, 4. the very truth is, Though hearing the Word
of God, whenever and however it shall please him to dispense it, be a moral and
perpetual Worship; yet hearing these or those Preachers appointed by him to
dispense it, is purely of Sovereign Institution. It being free to the Lord to
have sent his Word always by the hands of his Angels (as sometimes he did to his
Children) as well as otherwise; which had he done, it had been so far from
being our duty to attend upon Men-Preachers, that it had been our sin to have
heeded any other than these Angelical ones. I must desire the Animadverter by
the way to correct one passage of his, it being a gross mistake, wherein he
seems to intimate, that I make the hearing the present Ministers, such an
instituted Worship of Christ, as is merely positive; and adds, that herein I
seem to be very inconsiderate; Which I confess I should be if I did so. Mr. T.
knows I am so far from making it such an Instituted Worship of Christ, that I
say it is no Worship of Christ at all, either moral or instituted, to hear them;
and, exprofesso, prove, as well as I can, the contrary: which that it is not
satisfactory to Mr. T. I cannot help. Some men will be satisfied with little
except what has the countenance of Authority on its side. However I never said
that hearing the present Ministers is any part of the instituted Worship of
Christ; which had I believed to be so, I had done very wickedly to have opposed
it. He adds, that should it be granted me that the whole of Gospel-Institutions
were to be devolved upon the Scriptures of the New Testament, yet would it be
to the disadvantage of my self and the rest of the Separatists, who use many
places of the Old Testament about the Sabbath, Baptism, Lord's Supper, etc. and
I do so in this dispute. Answ. Egregie dictum, excellently said indeed! as if
because we affirm, that whatever is to be practiced in Instituted Worship in
the time of the Gospel, is to be wholly bottomed, as to the Law and Precept
instituting it upon some Commandment of Christ in the New Testament, therefore
we assert that no use may be made of the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
treating thereabout by way of prophecy or otherwise; which is a Consequence
this learned Animadverter will never be able to make good. It Is true, many
learned men do make use of some places of the Old Testament to prove the
morality of one day in seven, or the seventh part of time, not as I remember,
except Psa. 118. 24) which some conceive, by way of prophecy, speaks of the
Lord's honoring the first day) for the confirmation of the observation of the
first day; which they conceive Christ's resurrection on that day, the practice
of the Primitive-Church meeting together for the solemn Worship of God, 1 Cor.
16. 2. Acts 20. 7. the appellation [the Lord's Day] which they judge is given
to it, etc. is a sufficient warrant for their observation thereof in
Gospel Times. They plead not for Baptism or the Lord's Supper upon any other
bottom than Gospel-Institution, or their preception by Christ in the
New Testament: Though it is true, as touching the subjects of the one and the
other, they judge they may by way of analogy argue somewhat from
Old-Testament-Scriptures; from which apprehension they see nothing so weighty
in what is tendered by Mr. T. (notwithstanding his brag and immodest Assertion,
page 18. Sect. 14. that such a way of arguing is irrational; as if wisdom
rested with him, and he had the measure of it, and a man could not differ from
him but he must be a block or bruit) to influence their departure. That because
the granting the Assertion would be disadvantagious to the Author and the
Separatists; therefore it should be in Mr. T. his opinion an unreasonable
postulatum, to devolve the question upon the Scriptures of the New Testament, I
understand not. He takes not a measure (I presume) of the reasonableness or
unreasonableness of requests from their advantagiousness or disadvantagiousness
to such contemptible creatures as we, and should he do so he were much to
blame, as to infer from hence; therefore I see no reasonableness in his
Postulatum, which is introduced not as the natural issue of any thing premised
which he knows it is not, but merely for pomp and show.

Sect. 3.
The judgments of the Ancients no sufficient substratum to build my practice
upon in the Worship of God. The opinion of the Ancients themselves in this
matter. None but the Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures can satisfy the
consciences of any dissatisfied in matters relating to Worship. Our Faith not
to be resolved into the Testimony of men: which is a principle decryed by the
Ancients and Protestant Churches. The consciences of none can be satisfied in
what is written by the Ancients, before they are assured, 1. that what they
read as, or are told is theirs, be indeed so, and not counterfeited nor
adulterated. 2. That in their Writings they were, as the Apostles and Prophets,
guided by an unerring Spirit. The true use of the Testimony of the Ancients.
Congregational-Principles owned by them. Of Councils and Schoolmen.

THe fourth Section is fronted with this, The judgment of the Ancients not
useless in this Controversy, as if the Author of the Sober-Testimony had
asserted it to be so; which Mr. T. knows he no where does: This indeed the
words of the Author, not perplexing our selves nor the consciences of any with
the judgments of men in generations past, wherein they cannot acquiesce fairly,
intimate, 1. That the judgment of none of the children of men, though never so
famous in their generation, since the Apostles fell asleep, is a sufficient
Substratum to build my faith and practice upon in the Worship of my God. In
which we have the concurrence of the Ancients themselves. Basil tells us, that
it is necessary and consonant to Reason, that every man learn that which is
needful out of the Scriptures, both for the fullness of Godliness, and lest they
be inured to humane traditions; Regul. contract. 95. p. 902. And Austin (Epist.
112. ad Paulin.) says, If a matter be grounded on the clear authority of the
holy Scriptures, it is to be believed without all doubt; but as for other
witnesses and testimonies, upon whose credit any thing may be urged unto us to
believe it, it is lawful for thee either to credit or not to credit them;
according as thou shall perceive them of weight to deserve or not to deserve
credit. Origin says (Homil. 1. in Hierem.) We must of necessity call the
Scriptures to witness; for our senses and interpretations without them are of
no credit. Famous is the saying of Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem (Catech. 4. p.
15.) We must not deliver any thing, though never so small, without the holy
Scriptures; neither may we be led away with probabilities and shows of words;
neither yet believe me barely saying these things unto you, unless you also
believe the demonstration thereof from the Scriptures; for the security of our
faith arises from the demonstration of the holy Scripture.

2dly. That not the sayings or judgment of the Ancients, but the clear
Testimony of the Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures, is sufficient and
efficacious for the satisfying persons that are dissatisfied in any thing
relating to Faith or Worship. Come to a poor soul under real scruples of spirit
with respect to these, and tell him, this Father is of this opinion and that
Father of that, you do but oleum and operam perdere; when you have said all, he
remains as he was, dissatisfied, and so will do, without evidence from
Scripture. More than these two things the Animadverter cannot righteously infer
from the expression he discants on. What says he to these? not a word more or
less. And I am apt to believe of Mr. T. that he is a man of greater modesty
than to oppose them. He tells us indeed that it may be of good use to satisfy
men's consciences, that no such separation as now is from the present Ministers
of the Church of England was allowed of by the first Fathers and Writers (what
truth there is in this suggestion shall by and by be manifested) He will not
say surely of what good use he supposes it to be, that the faith of any is to
be resolved into their testimony, which it must be if what they say satisfy
the scrupling conscience, i. e. I must believe what they say is true, because
they say it, else that they say it, will never tend to my satisfaction; which
yet is an homage and duty that we owe to none but the Lord. A principle decryed
and abhorred by the Ancients themselves. The saying of Austin (Epist. 48.) is
known, Audi dicit Dominus non dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus aut Vincentius, a^t
Hilarious, aut Ambrosius, aut Augustinus, sed dicit Dominus. And, Epist. 112. I
will not have you follow mine authority, to think it necessary that you believe
any thing therefore because I say it. And generally abhorred by the Reformed
Churches. The Helvetian Confession speaks roundly and fully to this matter;
Quapropter non patimur nos, etc. Wherefore we suffer not our selves in
controversies of Religion, or matters of Faith, to be imposed upon with the
bare opinions of the Fathers, or determinations of Councils, much less by
received customs, or the multitude of persons thinking the same things, or by
prescription of long time. We admit no other Judge of Faith than God himself,
pronouncing by the holy Scriptures what is true, what false; what is to be
embraced, what not. We rest in the judgments of none but such as are spiritual,
taken from the Word of God. Harmon. Conf. cap. 2. Certainly Jeremiah and the
rest of the Prophets grievously condemned the Councils of the Priests
instituted against the Law of God; and diligently admonished that we hearken
not to Fathers, or go in their ways, who walking in their own inventions
decline from the Law of God. Before the consciences of any can be satisfied in
the judgment and practice of the Fathers and primitive Writers, two things they
had need be assured of; 1. That what is handed out to them be indeed their
sayings and practices whose they are pretended to be. For suppose my conscience
ought to be satisfied in what they say or do, yet I had need be assured, that
what I read or hear of their sayings or practices, be indeed theirs, and not
the interpolations or impostures of others, fraudulently mixed in their
Writings and imouted to them; which this Animadverter knows to be no easy
matter to assure any body of: The most of them have unquestionably been exposed
to corruption and adulteration by them into whose hands they have fallen; from
whom we have received them. Particular instances whereof lie near at hand to be
produced, were it needful. Of Ignatius his Epistles some talk much; that they
are (at least) wondrously corrupted, if not wholly forged and counterfeit, were
easy to demonstrate. To mention only what you have, Epist. 2. Fear and
reverence your Bishop, as Christ; for so the holy Apostles commanded you. He
that obeys the Bishop and Presbyters, is within the Altar and abides pure:
but he who does any thing without the Bishops and Presbyters, is without the
Altar, defiled in his conscience, and more miserable than an Infidel. For what
is a Bishop but one endued with the power of Christ, who is God, whose
prescript as man he follows, and obtains Authority more sublime than all Empire
and Principality? And what is the Presbytery but an holy Council, the
Counselors and Assessors of the Bishop. And Epist. 7. speaking of the same
persons, Amongst all men I will not say none are more excellent, but none can
be found so like to God, etc. Expressions that the simplicity of that Age was
wholly ignorant of, and could not entertain without a blush, nor think of but
with great abhorrency of spirit. The like may be said of other of the Ancients.
Ambrose is made to speak after this rate, The Episcopal honor and dignity can
be by no comparisons adaequated; if you compare it to the fulgor of Kings, and
diadem of Princes: this would ^e as much beneath it, as if thou should
compare Lead to the brightness of Gold. For thou may see the necks of Kings
and Princes bowed down to the knees of Priests, etc. De Dignitat. Sacerd. cap.
2. And cap. 3. There is nothing in this World to be found more excellent than
Priests, nothing more sublime than Bishops. Which those who have in the least
enquired into the state of affairs in that Age, will be constrained to
acknowledge to be counterfeit and spurious. The like may be manifested of the
rest, and of these in other points; but that design would require a Treatise by
i^ self, larger than we intend this to be. But, 2ly, suppose things with
respect to them, were otherwise than we have manifested them to be; and we
could be ascertained that thus they said and writ, thus they did and practiced;
we had need, ere our consciences could be satisfied, be ascertained of one
thing more, viz. That in their Writings they were, as the Prophets and
Apostles, guided by an unerring Spirit, that in their practice they were to be
our examples: for if I am not assured that what they write is infallibly true,
I am not to believe it; for sure it will not be pleaded that there is any
obligation lies upon me to embrace what any man says, right or wrong, because
he says it; and yet except I believe it, conscience will not, cannot be
satisfied in their indoctrination. Now this is infallibly false Mr. T. knows,
who writ retractations of a great deal he had writ before; and had he lived
longer, we might have see more Books of retractations. And this they themselves
acknowledge. So Austine; I cannot deny but there are many things in my Works, as
there are in the Writings of my Ancestors, which justly and with good
discretion may be blamed. D. 9. Negat. And Anselme writes, that in their Books
which the Church reads, many times are found things corrupt and heretical.
Comment. in 2 Cor. Let the wise Reader peruse their Books, and he shall find
this true that I say. The same may be said of the practice of the Fathers. Of
what they did we have uncertain rumors; wherein they acted exorbitantly and
not according to rule, they are not to be heeded. So that not what the Fathers
said and did is sufficient to satisfy my conscience in any point, but only
what Jehovah speaks in the Scripture. All which I say, not to detract from the
true worth of the Worthies of old, but to manifest the weakness of Mr. T. his
Assertion, That it will not conduce much, or be of good use to satisfy men's
consciences, etc. wherein truly it is of no use at all, not being appointed by
the Lord for such an end; though I deny not but to other* ends and purposes it
may be useful, as for stopping the mouths of Adversaries, who glory in the
Fathers and primitive Writers as if they were all for them; To remove
prejudices out of the minds of people against Truth upon account of its seeming
novelty, etc. as I said in S. T. Nor shall I at any time refuse for the
manifestation of the vain brag of persons, that they have all Antiquity on
their side, though I cannot admit of what they say into my Creed because they
say it (the only foundation of Faith being the infallible speakings of God in
the Scriptures) to debate from thence the matters in controversy with Mr. T.
And doubt not but it may be made manifestly to appear, that things are far
otherwise with respect to the Testimony of the Fathers, than is by him
intimated; and that the footsteps not of the Episcopal Hierarchy,
Common-Prayer-Book-service, Church of England, etc. but of the way of the
Congregational-Churches, are to be found in and amongst them. And such
principles laid down by them that will abundantly justify persons separating
from such a Ministry as that of the Chapter of Engl. Cyprian (l. 1. epist. 4.)
tells plainly, Nor let the people flatter themselves, as if they were free from
the contagion of sin when they communicate with a wicked Priest, yea that they
ought to separate from them: wherefore the people that obey the Laws of God and
fear him, ought to separate themselves from a wicked shepherd, and not be
present at the sacrifices of a sacrilegious Priest: directly contrary to what
this Animadverter affirms, Sect. 9. Evil persons may be heard as true
Ministers. And Epist. 6. He may by no mean^ have or keep a Church, who is not
ordained in the Church (viz.) to which he is related as Minister; which the
Ministers of England are not. 'Twe^e easy to fill many pages with citations to
this purpose. Mr. T. speaks of Councils and Schoolmen, and of some that are not
able to examine what is said by them. As for the latter of these, it had been
well for the Church of God if they had never been: And the former, for the most
of them, it might have been well without. Nazienzen, who it is thought knew as
much of them as many other men, says, If I must write the truth, I am much
inclined to flee from all the Councils of Bishops; because I never saw a joyful
and happy end of any Council; nor was there by them any suppression of evils,
but rather an addition and increase of them; Greg. Naz. ep. ad Procul. And
Luther affirms of the very best of them, I understand not that the holy Spirit
is in this Council: All these Articles are hay, stubble, wood, etc. And learned
Beza tells us, that such was the folly, ignorance, ambition, wickedness of many
Bishops in the best times, that you would suppose the Devil to be President in
their Assemblies. (Praef. ad N. Test.) Which if so, that which Mr. T. intends
as a disparagement, will be found to be clean contrary. No matter how little we
have to do with them: had they been studied less than they are, and the
Scriptures of the Lord more, we had ('it is more than probable) been at a nearer
agreement in more controversies than one at this day. Had the Lebian Rule of
Reformation been laid aside, and this Ezratical Golden one been solely made use
of in measuring the Temple and them that dwell therein, Reformation had been
carried on with more celerity, and another Gospel-Church-state introduced than
many are aware of.

Sect. 4.
Some beams of Light may be communicated by a retrospection into the estate of
affairs in the time of the old Law into the present enquiry, though the whole
thereof be devolved in our present disquisition upon the Scriptures of the
New Testament. Genesis 4. 26. considered. The Reformation of the then Church by
segregation and aggregation. The issue hereof was the continuation of their
Church State for about a thousand years after. The lawfulness of separation
from the Church of England, proved by Ainsworth, Cotton, Bartlet, etc. No more
pollution to be found among those, Genesis 4. 26. from whom the Saints then
separated, than is to be found upon the Church of England. The Animadverter
begs the question in supposing the Church of England, to be a true, and rightly
constituted Church. The end of Separation of calling upon the Name of God.
Those from whom they separated, Genesis 4. in what sense they called upon the Name
of God. Of the Noachical Separation, Genesis 6. The spring of the Apostasy of
those from whom they separated. Of the old Iron Age. The wickedness of the
Church of England. The duties we owe to persons from whom we separate.

IN his fifth Section this Animadverter takes notice of some expressions in S.
T. to this purpose, That since some beams of Light may be communicated into the
present enquiry by a retrospection into the state of things under the Law, we
are willing to take a little notice of the administration of affairs in the
House of God then; which after a bare mentioning of what was done by the
Faithful in the days of Seth, Genesis 4. 26. We begin to consider from the time
of the giving forth of the Law upon Mount Sinai, when we say the People of
Israel had a standard set up for them to repair unto, and they became as a City
on an Hill, conspicuous unto all. What says Mr. T. to this? Why, 1. It will
not be easy to discern how some beams of Light may be communicated from a
retrospection into the state of affairs of old unto the present enquiry, if the
whole thereof be devolved on the Scriptures of the New Testament: which being a
mere slight and scoff put upon the words of his Antagonist, might be passed
over in silence. That Saints may not receive some beams of Light with respect
to their deportment toward the Appointments of Christ now, by a view of what
was of old instituted, and carriage of the Saints then toward those
Institutions, because the present Institutions (in the practice whereof the
Saints now are concerned) are bottomed singly upon the Scriptures of the
New Testament, had the Animadverter by one Argument labored to have evinced,
we should (though notwithstanding Mr. T. thinks to the contrary, it is in it
self evident they may) have further considered it. When I find the Lord giving
forth Laws to his People of old to walk by, and strictly enjoining them to
conform to those Laws, without adding any thing of their own thereunto, I had
thought that the Lord having given forth Laws under the New Testament for the
ordering the affairs of his House now, some beams of Light might from hence be
communicated touching my deportment toward these Laws from what was done of
old; and rejecting all mixtures of humane inventions with them, which the Soul
of the Lord in days past manifested his indignation against, with relation to
his then Institutions. The like may be said of the other observations, and Laws
enjoined upon that People, we have briefly remarked. But 2dly, he grants he
tells us, that Dr. Owon has in his Latin Book of the nature, study, and
progress of true Theology, showed diverse corruptions in the Ages before and
after the Flood in the pure Worship of God unto Moses his time, and that the
restitution of true Theology was sometimes by a separation from the Wicked,
when there was a general Apostasy from the true ways of God unto a prophanity
of his Name (as some conceive, Genesis 4. 26. is meant either by Blasphemy, or
setting up of Idol-worship) as it was before Abraham's separation, Josh. 24.
15. Answ. It Is very true, that learned person has done so in that excellent
Treatise, and manifested, that not the profaning the Name of God by the ways
mentioned by the Animadverter (which they did not); but the Reformation of the
Church is by those expressions, Genesis 4. 26. held forth. Two things he tells us
the words import. 1. That the Saints set up distinct or separated Assemblies
for the solemn performance of the Worship of God, separating themselves from
the Wicked of the day (which they had not done before, nor had they any need so
to do, whilst a Reformation might be accomplished without it, which it might
whilst the Church was contained within the limits of one family, viz. by the
ejection of the Contumacious.) 2^ly. That being thus separated they took upon
them the peculiar name of the Worshippers; or Sons of God (which they retained
to the next horrible defection from the ways of God about one thousand years
after) both which our Interpreters approve, who in the Text read, then began
men to call upon the Name of the Lord, and in the margent add, to call
themselves by the Name of the Lord. That from this act of the Church of God
some beams of Light may be communicated to Saints now, under the same
circumstances they were then touching the duty of segregation and aggregation,
though bottomed on New-Testament-Precepts, we are apt to conceive: but Mr. T.
knows better. Yea, but 2dly, this Animadverter thinks that neither by him nor
any other is it showed, that a separation was approved from Preachers that
teach no worse doctrine than that is held forth by the Articles, Homilies, etc.
of the Church of England, or from a Church no more polluted by Idolatry or
other corruptions in Worship, than are charged upon the Public enjoined
Worship of the Church of England.

Answ. 1. That such a separation as that from the Church of England has not
been proved lawful, Mr. T. does but think. The works of Ainsworth, Cotton,
Bartlet, etc. manifest the contrary. 2dly, If he mean that it has not been
proved by that learned Author, nor any others, that those from whom they
separated were not more guilty of pollution by Idolatry or other corruptions,
than the Church of England, he is not a little mistaken. Dr. Owen in the
foresaid place manifests (as far as a matter of so long standing can be
supposed to be capable of evidence) that they were not guilty of Idolatry, in
the sense that the word is taken by this Animadverter, the Worship of the only
true God continuing, as says Josephus, even to the 7th Age, (with whom R.
Eliezer accords, and most of the Ancient Christians, as Cyril, Epiphanius,
etc.) But 3dly. Mr. T. pitifully begs the question, whilst he talks of
separation from a Church, no more polluted than the Church of England. which
should we grant him was never proved lawful (nor could be), yet would it
advantage him nothing; except he prove, that the Church (so called) of Engl.
was ever a rightly constituted Church of Christ, which he knows we deny; and
though he frequently beg it of us, in these Animadversions, yet shall we never
(upon those terms) grant him that it is so, being abundantly assured of the
contrary. What pollution and Idolatry the Church of Engl. may be charged with,
and whether these are sufficient to justify our separation from her, must
afterward be reviewed. He adds, If Genesis 4. 26. be meant of a Reformation by
setting up separate Congregations, as Dr. Owen conceives, S. 2. cap. 3. it was
that therein they might call on the Name of the Lord, which shows it was from
them that did not call on the Name of the Lord, not from them that did, as in
the Worship of the Church of Engl.

Answ. 1. Others beside that learned man, judge the words import a Reformation
by setting up Separate Congregations. So does Dr. Willet (who I dare say Mr. T.
will acquit of the guilt of Separation) who having rejected other
interpretations of the words, fixes upon this, asserted by him; But now (says
he) when as the Worship of God began to be corrupted and profaned, in the
wicked posterity of Cain, then Adam, Seth, and other of the Righteous Seed,
began publicly to exercise Religion, and to have their holy Meetings and
Assemblies for the Service of God. And afterward more fully (from Mercerus.)
Wherefore the true meaning is, as before expressed, that now the Church of God
being increased to a full number, did make a public Separation in their
Worship, from the generation of the Wicked, and began apart, in a solemn
manner, to worship God. But 2dly. That they separated to call on the Name of
the Lord, is true; The end of their Separation was to worship God, as a people
alone, from the wicked of the world, amongst whom they lived, according to his
own Appointments: nor can a Separation from any, for any other ends be
justified. But this evidenceth that those they separated from, did not call on
the Name of the Lord. Ans. Not at all. They did call upon his Name. That there
was no Worship amongst them, will not be asserted: No Nation under the thickest
darkness that ever overspred the World, but had some worship of the Godds
amongst them. The worship of Idols (properly so called) was not yet invented
(as was said from Josephus, etc.) nor introduced: so that it is evident they did
call upon the Name of the Lord, i. e. they had not rejected the true God, nor
all Worship of him. This indeed follows, that they had much degenerated in
their Worship of him: This we prove of the Church of England, which would
justify our Separation from it, as it did theirs from them, could no more be
said therein. As for what he says of Noah's Separation, that it was from men
that had filled the earth with violence; It Is true, they had done so, and that
with other things mentioned, chap. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11. was the ground of
Noah's Separation from them, and God's sweeping destruction upon them. Their
apostasy from the pure Ways of God (that began in their toleration of the
Wicked upon carnal respects in their societies) arose at length to that height,
that the whole Earth was corrupt (i. e. all the inhabitants of the World)
except Noah and his Family, had depraved God's pure Worship, (as precious
Ainsworth expounds it, and the word frequently signifies, Exodus 32. 7. Deuteronomy.
32. 5. Judge. 2. 19. 2 Chronicles. 27. 2. with 2 King. 15. 35.) and filled with
Violence, or Injustice, and cruel dealings to men. The usual pair we find
walking hand in hand all along the Scripture, Degeneracy in respect of Worship
in the Ecclesiastical, Violence and Oppression in the Civil state. And now the
Animadverter will yield it necessary to separate, which is as much as we need
to justify our Separation. Degeneracy of Worshop we prove the Church of
England guilty of, and Violence and Oppression, open Unrighteousness and
Injustice we every where meet with; As if the Iron-Age had again took place in
the world, of which the Poet

-- Erupit Venae pejoris in aevum
Omne nefas: fugere pudor, verumque fidesque.
In quorum subiere locum, fraudesque delique
Insidiaeque and Vis, and amor sceleratus habendi.
Vivitur ex rapto, non hospes ab hospite tutus,
Nec socer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia raraest.
But this says Mr. T. is not the cause of the Separation avowed by this
Author. Answ. It Is not indeed the alone cause, but one amongst the rest; So
that in the judgment of this Animadverter, the Separation pleaded-for, is
necessary. For whom he intends what he puts in a parenthesis [though it appears
not, but Noah continued to preach to them, and live among them] I know not. As
rigid as the Separation pleaded-for, is, It Is not so rigid, but we do, and can
do both and more than so too. We look upon it as our duty, to follow the
Callings and Employments the Lord-hath placed us in in the World, to have civil
converse amongst the men thereof, 1 Cor. 5. 10. to fill up all the duties of
the relation we stand in, to the worst amongst them; to do any office of love
we can for them; nor do we cease to pour forth our souls (though they are some
of them desirous to pour out our blood) to the Lord on their behalf, that they
may be turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God: And are
(as we have opportunity) preaching to them, though we run the hazard of the
loss of our Liberties, if not Life it self: thereby we know Christ's bowels and
pity to poor sinners is great; we have found it to be so, who have obtained
grace from God, and we cannot (knowing also the terrors of the Lord) but warn
and beseech them to flee from the wrath that is to come. What follows in this
Section, not at all relating to the matter in controversy, being only a
captions exception against an expression made use of by me, my intendment
wherein is obvious to any ordinary understanding, might be passed over in
silence. I say not as Mr. T. falsely represents my words, that he might take
occasion to talk of Job and other holy men, who (he thinks) were not bound to
repair to the people of Israel, except they would become Prose^ytes, which the
avoiding the Idolatry of the Gentiles might require of them; not such
corruptions only as are in the Church of Engl. that a Standard was set up for
the people to repair unto, i. e. as he seems to intimate, the people of the
Gentile world, at least those that feared the Lord amongst them, but them, viz.
the People of the Jews. So that his discourse about Job and such like is
impertinent and frivolous. Job lived about the year of the World 2100, several
years after the giving the Land. He with the rest, he tells us, were not bound
to repair to them, except they would become Proselytes, which the avoiding the
Idolatry of the Gentiles might require; i. e. they were bound to repair to
them, which indeed they could not do; or if they did, they would no^ nor could
they be accepted, except they turned Proselytes. But the corruptions that were
amongst the Gentiles, were not only such as are in the Church of England, (i.
e. they were somewhat more, and greater) and God forbid they should: Lesser
abominations in a once rightly constituted Church, are warrant sufficient for
separation from it, than what were at that day to be found amongst the
Gentiles. But these things are not at all to the business in hand.

Sect. 5.
The People of the Jews indispensibly bound to the Statutes and Ordinances
Jehovah gave forth to them, with respect to Ecclesiasticals and Civils, without
addition or detraction. The case of the Disciples plucking the ears of Corn,
and David 's eating the Shewbread, considered. Hos. 6. 6. explained. God's
dispensing with his own Law no argument that the Jews might add to or diminish
therefrom. Of the seven other days kept by the Assembly, 2 Chronicles. 30. 23. Of
David's Ordinance, 1 Samuel 30. 20, 25.

MR. T. in his 6th Section repeats what I affirmed page 8. of S. T. touching
the people of the Jews, the sum where of is, That God gave them Statutes and
Ordinances, both with relation to Civils and Ecclesiastics, which they were,
without adding to, or detracting from, indispensibly bound to conform to. To
this the Animadverter replies,

1. By way of concession, They were (he says) bound to conform to them, and so
much the Texts alleged do prove. 2dly, By way of negation, That they were
bound indispensibly, without adding to or detracting therefrom, to conform
hereunto, not one of the Scriptures prove. This is to be considered.

The first Scripture instanced in, is Exodus 21. 1. Now these are the Judgments
thou shall set before them, (the Judgments, i. e. the Judicial Laws or Civil
Sanctions, as by Statutes or Decrees the Ordinances relating to Worship are
usually understood) which he particularly does in the following verses. (To
what purpose he is charged to set them before them is easy to be conjectured,
viz. that they might conform to them; and not solely to do so, had been a
contempt and disvaluation of the wisdom and love of God who gave them forth);
and charge them, chap. 23. 13. that with respect unto them they be
circumspect, (i. e. that they heed them, and them only.) Lev. 18. 4. (the
second place instanced) speaks after this wise, Ye shall do my Judgments, (i.
e.) mine only; as, him thou shall serve, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. is expounded by Christ,
Mat. 4. 10. him only shall thou serve. Nor is there any thing more frequent in
the Hebrew language (which is short and concise) as is known, than such a
manner of speech.) The same line of interpretation is to be stretched over,
Lev. 19. 37. and 20. 22. and 25. 18. But how egregiously does Mr. T. mistake in
affirming, that not one of the Scriptures instanced in, says, that they were
indispensibly bound, without adding or detracting, to conform to these Statutes
and Judgments, when Deuteronomy. 4. 2. the 7th Scripture instanced in, expressly
asserts it? Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the Statutes and Judgments
which I teach you, for to do them; Ye shall not add unto the Word which I
command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that you may keep the
Commandments of the Lord you God which I command you. Bound they were by this
Scripture to conform to the Statutes and Judgments, without addition to them
[thou shall not adde] or detraction from them [neither shall thou diminish.]
And if bound they were indispensibly so: For no man has power (though the
Papists blasphemously assert their Pope has) to dispense with the breach of
Jehovah's Law; what he himself may do is not of our present disquisition: which
is enough to evince the falsity of Mr. T. his Assertion. This one Scripture (if
there had been no more) as it is a sufficient proof of what we asserted, so it
gives us light into the intendment of the Spirit of the Lord in the rest
instanced, according to the measure whereof they are to be interpreted. Nor can
it be otherwise, the holy and wise God having given forth Laws for his People
to walk by, they must needs be perfect and complete: To accuse them of
Imperfection, as to the end for which they were given forth (and they were
given forth for a Law and Rule to walk by) is to accuse and charge the
infinitely holy and blessed God with Imperfection. That a People having a
perfect Law revealed to them to conform to, should not be indispensibly bound
so to do, is the firstborn of improbabilities and absurdities. But Mr. T. will
prove the contrary: we attend his dict^tes. He tells us, 1. Our Lord has
determined the contrary. Answ. But this is nothing to the purpose: We say not
that they were so bound to the observation of these Laws, that God could not
dispense with them (that he sometimes did, and at last, at the least as to one
part of them that emi^ently related to instituted Worship, he has wholly
removed and taken out of the way) but so bound, that it was not lawful for any
of the sons of men to add to or de^^act from them. The case of the Disciples
plucking the ears of Corn, and David's eating the Shewbread, is not at all to
the business: Christ who was present with the Disciples, wa^r^nting the action,
who is Lord of the Sabbath; and might have done so, had they on that day done
some greater work than the plucking the ears of corn. And this he asserts as
one part of the plea he makes for them, Matthew. 12. 8. The Animadverter will
never be able to make good this consequence. Christ, the Lord of the Sabbath,
dispensed with his Disciples when they brake a Law of the Sabbath (though
indeed the plucking the ears of Corn, was no breach of any Law of the Sabbath,
but of the Tradition of the Elders, who by their corrupt glosses had
nefariously added to the Law) granting for Argument-sake that they had done so.
Therefore the people of the Jews were not bound to conform to the Laws given to
them by the Lord, for the management of their Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs,
without addition or diminution. And as for the matter of Shewbread, and David's
eating it: it was, 1. A case of necessity, an extraordinary case, which the
Lawgiver might dispense with, under such a circumstance, and yet the people of
the Jews bound to conform to his Statues and Judgments, without addition or
diminution. 2dly, It Is evident that David did nothing but what the Law of God
permitted him to do. It Is true, Christ says, Mat. 12. 4. that it was not
lawful for him to eat; But that is to be interpreted, that out of the case of
necessity (as David's case at present was) it was not lawful for him so to do:
or that by the Ceremonial Law, or Law of the Priesthood (which by the Law of
God ought to give place to works of mercy and necessity) it was not lawful. But
that it was not absolutely forbidden him, is evident. 1. The Priest when he
comes to him makes little or no scruple of his taking the Bread, so be the
young men that were with him were legally clean, 1 Samuel 21. 4. 2dly, David
tells him (as the case stood) the Bread was in a manner common, v. 5. for
Ceremonies ought to give place to Charity, by the Law of the same Lawgiver that
instituted them. Yea, 3dly, Our dear Lord in the place mentioned by Mr. T.
Matthew. 12. 5. tells us, that the practice both of his Disciples and David, was
according to the Warrant and Law of God; v. 7. But if ye had known what that
means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the
guiltless. Which is a citation out of the Prophet, Hos. 6. 6. The meaning seems
to be, that in cases of real necessity some Ceremonial Institutions should give
place to Moral Duties. Now how weakly does Mr. T. argue! God did in the Law in
some cases dispense with the violation of some particular branches of the
Ceremonial Law, therefore the People of the Jews were not indispensibly bound
to the observation of it. The question not being, what God did or could
dispense with, who was the absolute and supreme Lawgiver, but what the duty of
the sons of men was, with respect to the Law, where there was no such
dispensation; and whether they were not bound without additions and diminutions
of their own, solely to conform to it? So that Mr. T. his Argument is no better
than A Baculo ad Angulum; and altogether inconclusive of what he would prove
thereby.

But it may be what follows is more to his purpose? Let that be considered. He
tells us, that as for additions to Laws Ecclesiastical, the Assemblies keeping
other seven days besides those prescribed in the Law of the Passover, 2 Chronicles.
30. 23. and to Civils, the Ordinance of David, 1 Samuel 30. 20, 25. show that in
both some additions might be by the Prince, etc.

Ans. It Is true indeed, the Assembly in Hezekiah's time did over and above the
seven days prescribed by the Law of the Passover, keep also other seven days:
and it is as true that this Animadv. openly prevaricates in the cause he is
pleading. For, 1. This was an extraordinary case, not to be reduced to ordinary
practice, nor of force to enervate a general Rule. 2dly, This was no
Institution or positive Law, nor was there any Injunction laid upon the People
for the observation of those Laws, but the People might if they would (or
otherwise) observe them: and therefore cannot properly be said to be an
addition to the Laws Ecclesiastical; (it being no more than any agreement of
men amongst themselves to keep a day or days of Thanksgiving or Humiliation)
which had there been, it had been abominable wickedness. Mr. T. himself says,
in his third part of the full review of the Dispute concering Infant Baptism,
etc. That Jeroboams Sacrifice and keeping a Feast at another time than God
appointed -- is condemned as Will Worship, p. 3, 4. The Ordinance of David, 1 Samuel 30. 20. is to as little purpose instanced in by this Animadverter. 1. It
was a Military Ordinance, made by David when in a wandering state driven out of
the borders of Israel. 2dly, Some refer the words, v. 25. to David, as if he
alleged an old Law and Custom, as if it were written, It is both now and has
been ever. So Vatablus who renders the words, that was observed from that day
and above, i. e. from the beginning of the World to that day. Some say it was a
Statute from Abraham's time, (so Grotius acquaints us) who asserts, that Eschol
and Mamre. Genesis 14. 24. abode by the Carriages, yet Abraham will have them
receive a part of the spoil. 3dly, This Ordinance is no more than a particular
exemplification of what Christ tells us is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7.
12. (i. e. what is required in the doctrine of the Law and the Prophets) and is
the sum of what they teach concerning the duties of man to man, viz. That
whatsoever we would that men should do to us, we should do to them. But, 4thly,
This Ordinance is expressly established by the Lord, Numb. 31. 26, 27. Take the
sum of the Prey that was taken -- and divid^ the Prey into two parts: between
them that took the War upon them, who went out to Battle, and between all the
Congregation. And Jos. 22. 8. And he spoke unto them saying, Return with much
Riches unto your Tents, and with very much Cattle -- divide the spoil of your
enemies with your Brethren. So that this Ordinance of David is no addition to
the Civil-Laws of Israel. What Mr. T. has further to add touching this matter,
chap. 1. shall there be considered.

Sect. 6.
The Election or Ordination of Levites not asserted by the Author of the Sober
Testimony, to be a Rule for the Ordination and Election of Ministers now. Mr.
Tombs his mistake, and injurious dealing therein, manifested. Mr. T. grants as
much as we assert in this matter. The ground of giving the firstborn to God.
The Levites given to him by the Congregation in the room of the firstborn. The
People set apart the Levites to the Ministry. Exodus 22. 29. Numb. 8. 16, 17,
18. explained. The reason of the Peoples laying on of hands. Aaron and his sons
Levites. In what sense the Levites are called Priests: their office and work.

THe seventh Section is by this Animadverter fronted with this, The Election
and Ordination of the Levites is no Rule for Election and Ordination of
Ministers now: which if with an intendment to insinuate into the mind of the
Reader, as the Assertion of the Author of the S. T. he egregiously abuses both
the one and the other; There being not the least word, syllable or tittle
throughout the whole Treatise, that gives him the least ground to surmise any
such thing, but rather the contrary. The Election and Ordination of Ministers
is a positive Institution of Christ, to be managed according to Rules given
forth by him in the New Testament. This I prove as well as I can, chap. 4. page
33. So that what Mr. T. closes this Section with, that if it were true, that
in this act of imposing their hands there were Election and Ordination, this
was not a successive Election and Ordination, as is when one dies and another
is chosen and ordained in his room, as often as there is such a vacancy, when one
Minister dies and another comes in his stead. For this Election and Ordination
(if it may be so called) was but once, and of the whole company together; and
so is no pattern for Election or Ordination of Elders successively, by a
particular Congregation successively, or the major part of them, is not at all
to the purpose. I no where intimate that it is a pattern of such an Election;
Though I know as wise men as this Animadverter that do: as Cyprian Epist. lib.
1. ep. 4. and others. Yet I see no reason but that we may review what was by
the appointment of the Lord practiced amongst his people, that bears some
analogy and resemblance to what is commanded under the Gospel for our further
enlightening therein. (Mr. T. himself in his Apology, or Plea for the two
Treatises, grants, p. 141. that we may use an Analogy to enforce a Duty,
before proved) And this is the whole of what I profess to be my aim in this
Review of Ancient Institutions; in the Prologue thereunto, in these words, Yet
inasmuch as some beams of light may be communicated unto the present enquiry,
by a retrospection into the state of things in the time of the old Law, it
shall not be grievous to us, briefly to remark the state and management of
affairs under that Economy: which was so plainly asserted to be my sole aim
therein, that I cannot but wonder Mr. T. should have the confidence to impose
upon me, as if from thence I would deduce a pattern for
New-Testament-Institutions, which he knows I do not. But I say, that persons
were appointed by the Lord to be chosen by the Congregation, for the public
administration of Ordinances and Worship. Thus were the Levites, Exodus 13. 2,
12, 13. and 22. 29. Number. 3. 12. Answ. I do so indeed: what has this
Animadverter to say against it? It Is true, he grants they were given to God
from among the Children of Israel to do the service of the Congregation; but it
is not true that they-were appointed by the Lord to be chosen by the
Congregation. Answ. This must be a little further considered. Upon the account
of his sparing the firstborn of the children of Israel, when he slew the
firstborn of the Egyptians, does the Lord challenge them to be his, Exodus 13.
14, 15. These were the Congregation of Israel to set apart unto the Lord, v.
12. Thou (the People or Congregation of Israel, v. 3.) shall set apart unto the
Lord, all that opens the matrix, (or, as the Serventy renders it, thou shall
put them apart unto the Lord.) This is called, chap. 22. 29. the giving of the
first born of their sons to God, viz. to his work and service. In the stead of
these he afterward appoints the Levites, Numb. 8. 16, 18. For they (the
Levits) are wholly given unto me from among the children of Israel, in stead of
such as open every womb, even instead of all the firstborn of the children of
Israel. Concerning whom these few things are considerable: 1. That the Levites
are said to be given, wholly given unto God, and that in the stead or room of
the firstborn, v. 16, 17, 18. (who they were that set apart the firstborn to
God was before showed) 2dly, That by the^r being given unto God, is intended
their donation for his work and service, is evident, v. 11. for an offering of
the children of Israel, that they (the Levites) may execute the service of the
Lord. Whether the people had any hand in setting them apart to this work and
service, is the question to which the Spirit speaks fully, ver. 9, 10. 1. The
Levites were to be brought before the Tabernacle of the Congregation. 2. The
whole Assembly of the children of Israel is to be gathered together, v. 9.
which had been needless had they not been concerned in their approbation,
(which is all I intended by the word chosen, which the Animadverter afterward
carps at, or can be supposed to do, having before asserted that they were
appointed by the Lord, a word frequently used in that sense as he knows.)
Precious Ainsworth says as much upon the place: The whole, or all the
Congregation (says he) because the thing concerned them all to know and
approve, the Levites being now taken instead of the firstborn. 3dly, Whether
this were testified by the peoples imposition of hands, let the Scripture
determine, v. 10. And the children of Israel (i. e. some of the chief amongst
them in the name of the whole, as say our Annotators) shall put their hands
upon the Levites, by which sign (says Ainsworth) they put the charge and
service of the Church upon them, and consecrated them to God in their name
(wherein they figured the Church of Christ, called the General Assembly of the
Firstborn) from whence in the very next verse, they are called the Offering,
or Wave-Offering of the children of Israel, (which Aaron is said to offer or
wave for them, v. 11.) and are said, v. 14. to be thus separated from amongst
the children of Israel (i. e. according to the Rites beforementioned) in
allusion to which some think the same word is used, Acts 13. 2. and Paul, Romans
1. 1. says of himself, that he was (...), separated to the Gospel of God. If
it be objected, that it is said ver. 14. Thus shall thou separate, as if it
were Moses his act alone: the whole context confutes that vanity, in which
there is an apparent distinction betwixt the act of Moses, Aaron, and the
People. But here he is said to separate them, because the whole of this affair
was managed according to the directions given by him from the Lord to them. And
verse. 16. to be wholly given to the Lord, viz. by the People. Given of the sons
of Israel unto God, i. e. for his Service, faith Chazkum. After all which they
enter upon the work of the Lord to which they were thus solemnly deputed and
set apart, v. 11, 15. This Animadverter says indeed, that the reason of the
laying on of the hands of the children of Israel upon the Levites, was to
signify their obedient yielding them in their stead to God, etc. If he mean,
that it was one reason whereof, it is granted, no act of worship which we
perform, but we thereby signify our subjection and obedience to God. If the
formal and only reason, his Assertion is void of truth; it being, as was
showed, to set them apart to the office of Ministry or Service of God, that
they laid their hands on them: nor is there the least print in v. 19 (the only
proof of this Assertion) of any such thing. It Is true the choice (i. e. the
first-choice or appointment of them to this Ministry) was God's; the
presentment of them to the Congregation Moses his act; the yielding of them, or
rather the solemn deputation of them to the work of the Lord, not the act of
the firstborn merely, but of the Congregation who were called together for this
purpose. The Assembly in their Annotations speak clearly hereunto, Numb. 8. 10.
The Children] meaning some of the chief among them in the name of the whole.
Their hands] the imposition of hands was used in Benedictions and Ordinations,
not only in the Old Testament as Genesis 48. 17, 20. Numb. 27. 23. but in the New,
See Acts 6. 6. and 13. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 2 Timothy 1. 6. The Peoples putting
their hands upon the Levites, was partly to testify that they gave up all
carnal and worldly respects, and interests in them, and bequeathed them wholly
to God, and that they did approve of their office in the behalf of themselves,
in whose stead they stood in the performance of many of their ministrations.
But Mr. T. has found out a grievous mistake, which he again takes notice of
Sect. 8. which if true, enervates all that we have asserted; and that is, that
these were not Priests, they were distinct from the Levites, viz. Aaron and his
sons, who were called of God, Heb. 5. 4. without the Peoples laying on of
hands. But 1. Aaron and his sons were Levites, Exodus 4. 14, 16, 18, 20. 2dly,
Calling of God, and Consent and Ordination of the People are not (...); so that
though. Aaron was called of God, he might also be set apart by the People unto
that work, who were not altogether therein unconcerned, as is evident Exo. 29.
4. Lev. 8. 2, 3, 4. This Animadverter is not ignorant of the saying of Cyprian
upon that action of Moses, Number. 20. 26. Sic^t in Numeris, etc. As in the book
of Numbers God commanded Moses, saying, Take Aaron thy brother, and Eleazer his
son, and set them before all the Synagogue -- God commands him to be
constituted Priest before all the Synagogue; whereby he instructs and
shows, that Sacerdotal Ordinations ought not to be managed without the
knowledge of the People, who are to assist therein, etc. And Piscator upon Heb.
5. 4. says, Ministerio Ecclesiae, etc. i. e. None ought to exercise the
Ministerial Function, except he who is thereunto called of God. Now this
vocation is either immediate or mediate. The Prophets, Apostles, and Christ the
Prince of them, were immediately called. Mediately were the PRIESTS of old, and
Evangelists called; as are at this day Pastors, Teachers, Governors and
Deacons, each of whose vocation is by the Church. And Josephus tells us
plainly, Lib. 3. cap. 9. that all the People approved the election of Aaron to
the Priesthood, which God had made. And l. 4. c. 2. introduces Moses speaking
to the People upon the occasion of Korah's Rebellion, thus, Although by the
loss of that honor (viz. of the Priesthood) which he (Aaron) has received
from your own election. And it is most certain that a long time after Zadok was
anointed to the office of High Priest by the People, 1 Chronicles. 29. 22. But the
Levites were not Priests.

Answ. 1. That they were not such Priests as Aaron and his sons, is granted;
Priests to offer Sacrifice or burn Incense they were not: nor do I any where
assert them so to be. Priests and Levites are sometimes in Scripture
distinguished I also grant: but then Priests are taken for the
Sacrificing-Priests, viz. Aaron and his sons, to whose assistance in their
ministry and service they were appointed by the Lord.

Yet 2dly, That the word Priests is of various acceptions in the Scripture Mr.
T. cannot deny. 1. The People of Israel (all of them) are called a Kingdom of
Priests, Exodus 19. 6. 2dly, Persons of note, eminency, power and authority,
Genesis 41. 45. Exodus 2. 16. pass under the same denomination. 3dly. The
firstborn of the male-children, Exodus 19. 22. with 13. 2. are (say some) so
called. As ^s (4thly) Christ, Heb. 7. 17. 5thly, The Saints, 1 Pet. 2. 5. The
word is (6thly) usually taken for Church Officers that were solemnly set apart
as Ministers of the Sanctuary for the solemn management of the public Worship
and Service of God. And of these, with the leave of Mr. T. I would take the
confidence to assert, that (amongst others) there were of these three sorts. 1.
The Chief, or High Priest, who (alone) might once in the year enter into the
most Holy, but not without Blood, Heb. 9. 7. 2dly. The inferior and ordinary
Priests, who approached to the Altar of Burnt-Incense, offered Sacrifices, etc.
3. The Levites, who were a more inferior order of Ministers, given for the
help of the Priests to them in the work of the Sanctuary, and solemn service of
God; Who are called Priests, Psalm. 132. 9. and are said to have a Priesthood,
Josh. 18. 7. upon the account of their destination unto the service of the
Tabernacle and work of the Ministry, to distinguish them from the Congregation
or Body of the People of Israel, they are so called. They were indeed (as was
said) an inferior order to Aaron and his sons, but draw nigh to God they did,
in the Service of God they were employed on the behalf of the Congregation, and
are called Priests, and said to have a Priesthood; and hereupon one would think
one might assume the boldness to call them so. Mr. T. tells us indeed, it was
the Priests office to do that work in which was the Worship of God, viz. to
offer the Sacrifices, sprinkle the Blood, and such other duties; the Levites
were employed to do other services, as the bearing of the utensils, and such
like. Wherein how truly and heartily he speaks, is to be considered. 1. It Is
true it was the Priests office (Aaron and his sons) to do that work in which
was the Worship of God, (i. e. the work they did when they drew nigh to God, or
worshipped him, was the Worship of God, which by office they were bound to do);
But that it was their office exclusively to the Levites to do that work in
which was the Worship of God (as he must be interpreted if we suppose him to
speak pertinently) is false. They ministered, and by office (whereunto they were
set apart) in the Service and Worship of God, as was before proved. Their
bearing the utensils was as much the Worship of God, being commanded by him, as
sacrificing or sprinkling the Blood of the Sacrifices upon the unclean. And
this Animadverter, if I may assume the boldness to say so, writes indiscreetly
and fallaciously to oppose these. 2dly. It Is true, that to Aaron and his sons
it did by office, and exclusively to the Levites, appertain to offer Sacrifice,
and sprinkle the Blood; but that the Levites were only employed in bearing the
uten^^ls and the like, is not so. They were, as well as the Priests, the son^
of Aaron; 1. To teach the people, and instruct them in the Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9. 80 30. 22. and 31. 4. and 35. 3. Ezra 7. 10, 11. Nehem. 8.
7, 8. and 9. 4, 5. 2dly. They were solemnly to praise God, 1 Chronicles. 16. 4. and
23. 30. 2 Chronicles. 8. 14. and 20. 19. and 30. 21. and 31. 2. Ezr. 3. 10. Neh. 9.
9. and 12. 24. 3dly. To bless in his Name, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. 4thly. The Judgment of
things sacred appertained to them, as touching Leprosy, Deuteronomy. 24. 8. 2 Chronicles.
19. 8, 10, 11. works in which the Worship of God was as eminently as Sacrifice,
etc. upon the account of their designation whereunto they may be called
Priests, and are so in the Scripture. Yet 3dly. I no where use the name
Priests, to denote the Levites only (in distinction from Aaron and his sons)
but make use of that term, to denote the Officers or Ministers amongst the
Jews, designed and separated for the Worship of God, and the management of holy
things for and to them, whether Priests or Levites; who being so called by the
Spirit of the Lord, I thought I might warrantably use that appellation without
distasting any one; and as yet see no just ground for the change of my thoughts
in that matter.

Sect. 7.
Persons invested into the office of Priesthood, not left to the liberty of
their own wills, or the wills of any: the whole of their Worship, with respect
to the matter and manner thereof, of divine Institution. Of the Candlestick
made by Moses. The matter of it. His obligation to the pattern in making it.
What it typed out. The ground of the acceptance of Worship. Several places of
Scripture revised and considered.

THat persons invested into the office of Priesthood were not left to the
liberty of their own wills, or the wills of any of the sons of men, that the
whole of their Worship, with respect to the matter and manner thereof, was
purely of divine Institution, is a third Assertion of mine touching the state
of things under the old Law, which Mr. T. takes notice of Sect. 8. which he
grants to be thus far true; that what was of the Institution of the Lord, both
as to matter and manner, they were not in their office left to their own wills,
or the wills of any others; and so much he says the Scriptures produced prove.

Sed dabitur ignis tamen etsi ab inimicis petam. We will not thank him for his
grant, and doubt not but to manifest somewhat more, viz. That nothing was to be
intermixed with what the Lord had instituted, nothing of man to be super-added
thereunto, whether you respect the matter or manner of the Worship. And this
the Scriptures instanced do prove. Exodus 25. 9, 40. According to all that I
show thee, after the pattern of the Tabernacle, and the pattern of all the
Instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it -- And look that ye make them
after their pattern which was showed thee in the Mount. And this Dr. Willet
upon the place plainly asserts, It is hence gathered (says he) the form of the
Tabernacle is not left to the will of man, no not to the judgment of Moses; to
teach us that God will not be served with will worship, according to the
devices and inventions of men, but as he himself has prescribed. Prelarg.
Piscat. So our blessed Savior alleges in the Gospel out of the Prophet.
Mark. 7. 7. Number. 8. 4. According to the pattern which the Lord had showed
Moses, so he made the Candlestick. The Candlestick was a figure of the Church,
said to be but one here, because the Church at this day was National (as also
Zech. 4. 1.) But Rev. 1. 20. we read of seven Candlesticks, which are expressly
said to be the seven Churches of Asia, i. e. they signified the seven Churches
of Asia; they were represented by the seven Candlesticks said here, and there
to be made of Gold, beaten Gold; to point forth the matter constituting them to
be visible Saints, and to be made according to the pattern (of which Exodus 25.
31.) to type forth that no other ground or form of Doctrine, or of the Church,
is to be brought in, than that which is showed of God, 2 Timothy 1. 13. 1 Timothy 1.
3, 4. and 3. 15. Mat. 28. 20. To this Pattern Moses was so strictly bound, that
it was utterly unlawful for him to have added the least of his own invention;
which to have done had been not only great unfaithfulness in him, but an
impeachment of the Wisdom of God, and his Love to his People. Heb. 8. 5. Who
serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished
of God when he was about to make the Tabernacle: For see (says he) that thou
make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the Mount; i. e. To
the type and example set before him to imitate, to which he was not to add the
least pin of his own, 1 Chr. 28. 11. (The pattern of the Porch, i. e. of the
Temple (says Vatablus) which David received either by revelation, or by the
hand of the Prophet, 1 Chr. 28. 12, 19. Exodus 8. 27. and 39. 1, 5, 7, 21, 26,
31, 43. (other places instanced in the S. T. preach forth the same thing) These
were types of the heavenly Ordinances in the Church of Christ, Heb. 8. 5. And
type out that nothing of man is to be superadded thereto, but all things to be
done according to Divine Commandment.) To the same thing does the Spirit of the
Lord bear witness, Exodus 40. 23, 25, 29. Number. 8. 3. Exodus 35. 10, 29. and 36.
1, 5. Isa. 29. 13. To which may be further added, Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 2, 40. Now
therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the Statutes and Judgments which I teach you,
for to do them -- Ye shall not add to the Word which I command you, neither
shall you diminish ought from it, that you may keep the Commandments of the
Lord your God -- Thou shall keep therefore his Statutes and Commandments which
I command thee this day --. All which prove not only the obligation that lay
upon them to conform to what was of the Institution of the Lord, but the utter
unlawfulness to add thereto, or introduce any thing of their own in his
service; (The ground of the acceptance of any Worship or Service offered to
him, being his Command and Institution) and that with such evidence and
brightness, that it seems Mr. T. durst not look them in the face, lest they
should have so reproved him as to have hindered his further advance in that good
work and cause, he was resolved (having undertaken its defense) to prosecute.
He only takes notice of two of these many places instanced in, viz. Lev. 8.
throughout, which he grants speak of the investure of the Priests into their
Office, according to the Rites set down; but whether any other might to these
have been added to the sons of men, he tells us not: which yet he should have
proved, if he would have demolished and thrown down what it was his good
pleasure to set himself against. And he does wisely not to approach too near
this Scripture, which stands with a two-edged Sword in its hand to defend the
Truth opposed by this Animadverter. No less than ten times, viz. v. 4, 5, 9,
13, 17, 21, 29, 34, 35, 36. The Commandment of the Lord is laid as the
foundation of the whole of that procedure, clearly importing that matters of
this nature, (viz. things relating to his Worship) are solely to be bottomed on
Divine Precepts; and condemning and interdicting whatever of the like nature is
offered to him on any other bottom. Which Aaron's sons afterward attempting to
do, Lev. 10. 1. perish in the flames of God's jealousy and wrath. R. Menachem
on Lev. 8. 36. has these words, In every other place it is said, as the Lord
commanded Moses; but here, because they added unto the Commandment, he says
not so, for they did not as the Lord had commanded; and added moreover unto
them strange Fire which he had not commanded them, Lev. 10. 1. And Josephus b.
3. c. 9. says th^s, Nadab and Abihu bringing Sacrifices unto the Altar, not
such as were appointed by Moses, but of that sort they were accustomed to offer
aforetimes, were burned by the violent flame that issued from the Altar, that
at length they died. The other place he takes notice of is Isa. 29. 13. which
he refers to be discussed to the first chapter: All the other places (as was
said) are passed over in silence: which manner of dealing is a great abuse both
to the Truth and Reader. To the Truth, by waving the consideration of what is
offered as the substratum upon which it is built: To the Reader, by pretending
to answer to what is asserted by his Antagonist, for the confirmation of Truth,
without advancing one step forward toward its confutation. But perhaps he
means not, that where God has given direction about any part of Worship it is
lawful to add any thing thereunto, but only wherein God has not spoken and
determined as touching the management of his Worship, there the will of some of
the children of men takes place, and they may determine. But if so. 1. This is
a most pitiful Petitio principii or begging the thing in question, viz. That
God has not determined the whole of his Worship and Service, but has left
somewhat to the wills of men relating to Worship, as such, to be determined by
them, which is the (...), or the thing in question, and will never be granted
him upon those terms. 2dly. Contrary to that fundamental principle placed in
the nature of man, and employed and fairly intimated in each Scripture before
instanced in, that nothing in his Worship and Service is acceptable to him but
what is of his own prescription. 3dly. Diametrically opposite to Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 2.
(these additions let them be of what nature, or in what case they will, are
additions to the Word of Jehovah) Isa. 29. 13. with Mark 7. 7. (being evidently
doctrines and institutions of men, which the Spirit there tells us must have no
place in the Worship of God) That the Jews had their Service more fully
particularized in all things pertaining to it than we have, (if he mean things
relating to Service, or Worship, as such) is spoken after the rate that a great
many other things in this Treatise are, viz. with confidence enough, but
without proof. There being nothing relating to Gospel Worship, as such, but is
determined by Christ, and appointed in the Scripture. When he sends forth his
Apostles, Mat. 28. they were to teach what he had commanded them, nothing more
or less. And he being Lord and Master of his House (whose House are we, Heb. 3.
6.) who dares be so bold as to intermeddle with the affairs thereof, without
his appointment, or can do so without an incroachment upon his Sovereignty? He
was faithful as Moses, who received and revealed the Ordinances of the then
House of God, that he left nothing relating to the Worship thereof, as such, to
the wills of men. But of this more hereafter.

Sect. 8.
Of the apostasy of the Jews from Divine Institutions. The aim of the Author
in remarking it. Its application to the Church of England. Whose Investions are
expressly forbidden. Of things in themselves out of the cas^ of Worship
indifferent. It Is not in the power of the Church to make that which is left
indifferent by the Lord, a necessary Worship. The judgment of the Protestant
Writers. Of the decency and order is in the Ceremonies of the Church of
England. Of their being imposed by Public Authority. How they draw from God.
Of their rise from the customs and manner of the Nations, directly contrary to
many precepts. The introduction of men's Inventions into the Worship of God
idolatrous. Will Worship Idolatry. The judgment of the Ancients and others
thereabout. A departure from the Institutions of God, to the Customs of the
Nations, called in Scripture a forsaking of God. Several Scriptures reviewed.
Of the Jews worshipping other Godds. How these things are applicable to the
Church of England.

IN Sect. 9. This Animadverter examines, what was asserted in S. T. touching
the Apostasy of the Church of the Jews from the pure Institutions of the Lord,
mingling therewith the Inventions of Men, and Customs of the Nations, of which
God sorely complains, and for it severely punishes them; the Contests of God
from first to last being bottomed upon this foot of account; which as it
relates to the People of the Jews, he acknowledges the truth of. But to apply
these things (with the threatenings and punishments in the places mentioned) to
the imposing or using of such Ceremonies as are retained in the Church of
England, is a gross abuse. Answ. 1. But who applied them hereunto? The utmost
of the Athors intention in this assertion, was only to manifest, That a Church
might be wonderfully gathered and separated by the Lord out of the World, taken
near to himself for his People, yet soon apostatize and depart from him, which
the Jews did: From whence I thought it had been lawful to conclude, That
another Church, or Churches (except some special Privilege or grant to the
contrary, given to them of the Lord, could be produced) might likewise
apostatize from God; which when applied to the Church of England (as ^e calls
it) only amounts to thus much, that supposing it once was a true Church, it is
possible (if it has not already) it may apostatize and depart from God; which
Mr. T. will not deny. And that this was the utmost of my intendment in this
matter is evident, from Q. 7. P. 11. Where are these words, Whether any Church
in the world (we speak of a visible instituted Church) has greater security
against Apostasy from God, and that sore Judgment of having its Candlestick
removed (and being unchurched) than the People of the Jews had? If not, Then
whether, supposing a National Church of the Institution of Christ, it may not
so come to pass, that it may be so overspread with corruptions, that it may
lose the essence of a Church, and justly be disrobed of that appellation. Yet
upon second thoughts, I see not that there is such a vast discrepancy betwixt
the Inventions of men, charged upon the Jews, for which they were threatened and
punished, and the Inventions are to be found in the Church of England, as this
Animadverter would compel us to the belief of. He tells us, 1. That their
Inventions were expressly forbidden; And are not the Ceremonies of the Church of
England? Inventions of Men he grants at least some of them to be. Now all the
Inventions of man in the Worship of God, relating to it as such, were then and
now expressly forbidden; (whilst he supposes the contrary he does but beg the
Question) by the second Commandment, and elsewhere, as has been showed. The
learned Dr. Willet in his Coment* on the 2d. Com. tells us, That the true
Worship of God, which according to his nature, must be spiritual, is commanded
in this 2d. Precept, and that he will be worshipped according to his Will
revealed in his Word; to which it is not lawful to add to, or take any thing
therefrom, as the Lord said to Moses, Exodus 25. 9. He further acquaints us,
That all other kinds of superstitious Worship, devised by man, which the
Apostle calls (...), Will Worship, Col. 2. 23. (for we must (says he) be
contented with Rites and Ceremonies prescribed of God himself) and the
application of things of themselves indifferent, so unto the Service of God, as
to make them a necessary part thereof, is condemned by this Precept: 2dly. Mr.
T. asserts, That the Ceremonies of the Church of England, are confessed out of
the Case of Worship, in themselves to be things indifferent. Answ. 1. And were
there no Ceremonies amongst the Jews, confessed out of the case of Worship to
be so? This Animadverter knows the contrary. 2. By what authority does any of
the children of men make that necessary in case of Worship, that is confessedly
not so out of it; i. e. make it a part of Worship; for if necessary in case of
Worship, it is evidently made a part thereof, without which it cannot
acceptablly be performed. I confess (Dr. Foen. in Comitiis Oxon. An. 1605.) one
of their own Poets sings.

In Domini cultu, si quid medium esse videtur
Quod populti dubio, stat, cadit arbitrio.
Hoc Sacro-sancta parens Ecclesia si modo sanxit,
Inque sacris cultum hunc si velit esse ratum.
Non erit hic cultus medius, cogetur ad illum
Quisque necessarius, hic quoque cultus erit.
Wherein he tells us, That if any thing be indifferent in the Worship of God,
and Holy-Mother-Church shall establish and confirm it, it cease to be
indifferent, and becomes necessary Worship, which every one is to be compelled
to. In which he speaks, shall I say, like a true Son of the Church of England,
or of Rome? But he forgets to tell us upon what Scripture he bottoms these two
Assertions. First, That there is any thing relating to the Worship of God, as
such, of an indifferent nature. Secondly, That it is in the power of the Church
to make that which is left indifferent by the Lord, a necessary Worship; nor
can he produce any, but the unwritten Word or Law communicated to the Pope or
his Conclave, I know not when, and kept I know not where; which will prove no
better (at best) than the proof the Jews bring for their Fopperies, since their
Apostasy and scattering abroad, out of their Talmudical Writers; or the Turks
from their Alcoran, i. e. frivolous and ridiculous. This is generally decried
and exploded by Protestant Writers. Peter Martyr (In Epist. ad Hoop. Episcop.
Glocest.) affirms of the English Ceremonies, That, Quoad aliter facere non
liceat, i. e. in their imposition, as necessary parts of Worship, they were
grievous and burdensome. Certain Princes of Germany, to please Charles the
Emperor, Imposed the Surplice, and other Rites, upon the Ministers of their
several Territories, and are all condemned ( Supplicat. Teolog. German. A.
1561.) for this, That they caused to sigh the Spirit of God, and the hearts of
good men. It is Blasphemy to think that any outward thing may be made a Sign in
the Church of any thing that is spiritual (as the Cross in Baptism is) unless
it be expressly ordained in the Word, and Commanded by God himself to be used to
that end, says Lambert. Danaeus (Cont. Bellar. de Cult. Sanct. Lib. 3. Cap.
7.) Contrary whereto is the Doctrine of none of the Reformed Churches, besides
the Church of England, but of the Church of Rome; the Basis upon which her
pompous Worship is built, which being removed would fall to the ground, and
perish with its own weight. Yea, but Thirdly, The Ceremonies of the Church of
England are for Decency and Order. To which I shall only say what one said of
the like speech of the Monks of Bordeaux, when they affirmed, That the Signs
added to Baptism, were an Ornament to it: We Reply, says he to them, Number
igitur sunt, etc. Are they wiser than Christ Jesus, who has ordained his
Sacrament in so great Purity, and simplicity, and who knows better than all
the men in the world, what Ornament was sit for it. If it be but the
Covenant of a man, when it is confirmed, no man abrogateth it, or adds any
thing to it; What arrogance is it then to add to the Institution of Christ?
What the Animadverters private thoughts of the Ceremonies of the Church of
England are, with respect to their Decency and O^der, I know not; as wise men
as he think the contrary. The Ceremonies which have been abused to Superstition
(as the Ceremonies of the Church of England have been) can never serve for
Order or Comeliness; say the Divines of Germany, who stood against the
Ceremonies then enforced. And for the Surplice, one calls it, A Player-like
apparel (Gualt. in Hos. 2.) and (Calv. Instit. Lib. 4. Cap. 10. Sect. 29.) A
vain Vizard. Another (Baleus in Declar. of Bon. Arti. p. 100.) A pretty Toy.
And (Dr. Tailor Act. and Mon. p. 1659.) An Apish Toy. Another (Baecon. p. 1.
Cathe. p. 486.) Histrionical, Scenical, and Scorner-like. As for their being,
4thly, Imposed by Public Authority, So were the Jewish Inventions. Jeroboam
imposes them upon the People, who are so far from being excused upon that
account, that they are condemned for their fearful and slavish subjection to
him, Hos. 5. 11. and elsewhere. But Fifthly, Their Inventions were such as drew
them to serve other Godds, and forsake the Lord. Answ. If he means that they
were by these immediately influenced to the rejecting the true God, that made
the Heavens and the Earth, he talks like himself, confidently, and without
proof. This indeed they did draw them to, a rejection of Divine Appointments,
and casting off that Obedience and Subjection they owed to God* and so do the
Inventions and Ceremonies of the Church of England. No Innovation in Worship
but is a stealing from God, that Obedience and Service that is alone due to
him, and giving it to another (viz. the Innovator.) In time also God gives them
up in a judicial way, as a punishment of this their departure from Divine
Institutions, to the Inventions of man, to blindness of mind, and strong
delusions. Thus he dealt with Israel, Isa. 6. 9, 10. and 29. 10, 13. So that
they at last grew so sottish, as to fall down before the stump of a Tree, yet
without the utter rejection or denial of the true God, whom they worshipped
through that false Medium. They swear by the Lord (i. e. Worshipped him) when
they swear by Malcham. Unto what blindness of mind God has given up many of
the Pleaders for, and Conformers to the present Inventions and Ceremonies, I
had rather leave to the silent thoughts of the Reader, than express. And what
in time, as a punishment for mingling the Worship of God with the Inventions of
men, and departure from Divine Institutions, befell the Synagogue of Rome in
respect of their Icolatria, or Image Worship; and the Church of England in
days past, (and now in their falling down before the Sacrament, of which in
its proper place we must speak) is known to all. And I heartily wish that the
review thereof might make us to tremble to provoke the Lord to jealousy by the
works of ourhands. But he adds, None of the Inventions of men mentioned in the
places cited, are such as can be charged upon the Church of England, (for that
I take to be his meaning;) nor are any threatened by the Lord, or did he contest
with the Jews upon the account of any Customs of the Nations, but such as were
Idolatrous; and of this he says, Let all the Texts alleged be viewed. Answer.
And we are contented they be reviewed, only we crave leave to premise; 1. That
this Animadverter does not deny, that the Ceremonies of the Church of England,
(at least some of them) are derived from the Customs of the Nations, nor indeed
that mediately (through the Church of Rome, from whom we immediately received
them) they are so, can be denied. The Surplice, Durandus indeed thinks
(Rational. Lib. 3. Cap. 1.) was borrowed from the Jews. It was rather (as we
said) from the Heathen Priests, who were clad in white in their Ministration.
The Ri^g in Marriage, the Cross in Baptism, the distinction of the Priests
(from the Roman Heathen Flamins, and Arch-Flamins;) and many of their Feasts,
as Eostar, or Easter, Epiphany, etc. smell of the same Forge; which is directly
contrary to many Precepts of the Lord in the Scripture, Lev. 20. 23. Deuteronomy. 12.
30. (So will I do, i. e. not unto Idols, but unto the Lord, a^ the next verse
manifests.) Hereupon the Hebrews say, Thou may not enquire or ask concerning
the way of the service of an Idol, how it is, although thou serve it not; for
this thing occasions to turn after it, and to do as they do. Maimon Tract. of
Idol. Cap. 2. Sect. 2. Not only the Worship of false Godds, but false or
Idolatrous Worship of the true God is here forbidden, and all imitation of
Idolaters is condemned, 2 Kings 17. 15. Jer. 10. 2. Psalm. 106. 35. 2dly. That
this Animadverter supposes, That the Introduction of the Inventions of Men
into the Worship of God, is not Idolatry; That such Ceremonies are not
Idolatrous: which we cannot yield him, it being the making an Image to our
selves, contrary to the second Commandment. Nor am I singular in this opinion.
August. de Consens. Evang. Lib. 2. Cap. 18. Vasq. de Adorat. Lib. 2. Disput. 1.
Cap. 3. Dr. Bills. against Apolog. p. 4. p. 344. assert, That all Will Worship
is flat Idolatry. And Mr. T. will yield, That what is Praeter mandatum, beside
the Commandment, is Will Worship. 3dly. That a departure from one or more of
the Institutions of God, to the embracement of the Customs of the Nations, is
in Scripture called, a forsaking of God, 2 Kings 17. 15* Deuteronomy. 28. 20, with 15.
Isa. 1. 4. which cannot be interpreted of their casting off the whole Worship
of God, which they did not; for they continued to sacrifice to him, to tread
his Courts, and made many Prayers, they observed the New Mons, Sabbaths, etc.
verse. 11, 12, 13, so that totally they had not rejected him and his service,
but turning aside to the Inventions of men, and mixing them with the Worship of
God, he says, They had forsaken him: which that the present Ministers and
Church of England have done, we have evinced in Chap. 4, and 5, of S. T. And
now let the judicious Reader consider the places produced, Deuteronomy. 32. 18. Jer.
23. 27. and 9. 13, 14. and 15. 6. Ezr. 9. 10. Jer. 16. 11, 12. and 19. 4, 5.
and I doubt not but he will say, that they are not grossly abused (as Mr. T.
speaks) when applied (though we did not do so) to the imposition or use of the
Ceremonies in the Church of England. It Is true the Jews are, in some of the
places mentioned, accused with worshipping of Idols, but the great thing that
is charged upon them is their departing from the Appointments of the Lord;
which had they not done, they had never worshipped those false Godds; who yet,
so far as I am able to discern, were not strictly the Object of their Worship,
but false Mediums, through which they worshipped and went to the true God; as
others do through the Common-Prayer-Book-Service, as great an Idol as ever was
in the World, and as much the invention of man as the Calf in the Wilderness,
or the Calves at Dan and Bethel.

Sect. 9.
Of the confidence of the People of the Jews under their Apostasy, that they
were the People of God. Their Persecution, even to death, of such as testified
against their Innovations. The Church and Ministers of England guilty of such
Innovations, as the Prophets, Christ, etc. condemned the Jews for. Our bearing
Testimony against these has no tendency to the infringment of the Peace of the
Nation. The way of ridged Conformity no Basis sufficient to support the Nations
Peace. The saying of Cyril. The unjust Accusations of Mr. T. against us

WHat I remark in the fifth place touching the People of the Jews, that
notwithstanding their Apostasy they remained confident that they were the
People of God, and persecuted, and put to death the Prophets and Servants of
the Lord, that bore their Testimony against their Innovations, Mr. T. grants to
be true, Sect. 10. But intimates 1. That the People and Teachers of England are
not guilty of such Innovations, as the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles
charged upon the Jews: Whether they are or no, let the judicious Reader judge
from what is offered in the foregoing Section. To which we shall only add, that
Mal. 1. 6, 7. may most truly be spoken of them. They call God indeed Father,
and Master, but they fear and reverence others as such, whose Canons and
Constitutions they are bound to yield Canonical obedience unto. They despise
his Name by offering polluted bread upon his Altar; a service not commanded by
him, that has been polluted, defiled by Antichrist. Nor can they be cleared
from that imputation of Christ, Mat. 15. 9. Teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men. Which that they do, Mr. T. himself in his Fermentum
Pharisaeorum, yet speaks, and every one knows. So that by this Animadverters
confession we do well to bear our Testimony against them. 2dly, That our
witnessing against them tends to infringe the public Peace. Answ. This was an
accusation managed in every day against the witnesses of Christ. The Prophets
infringed the Peace, so did Christ, the Apostles, etc. It was thought therefore
not to be for the safety of the Nations to suffer them to live. And Mr. T. does
what he can (by such wicked and unchristian intimations as these) to irritate
the present Rulers to proceed against us in like manner: Which (through the
grace of the Lord) is a small matter to us, who would not account our lives
dear ^o our selves, so we may finish our work and testimony for Christ with
faithfulness and joy. What peace these expressions will in the review of them
administer to Mr. T. I know not; I am sure they will be bitterness in the
latter end. For our parts, where is the person that can testify ought against
us, as the disturbers of the peace of the Nation? Are there any in it, that do
more covet and desire the introducing what may and will most assuredly be a
Basis to support its continual peace and welfare? The way of rigid Conformity
will never do it, as some hundreds of years experience manifest. To this
Animadverter I shall only further say, as Cyril of old (Cyril Epist. ad Cleric.
Constan. in Council. Ephesians. p. 72.) (...). Are we Enemies to Peace? In no wise,
we rather will pull it to us with violence, so that the true Faith withal may
be confessed. If ou^ Testimony do not eventually rectify any thing, we cannot
help it, it is no other than what the servants of God (yea Christ himself, his
(...) servant) met with. The people would go on in their superstitious
practices, say what they could in the Name of the Lord unto them; yet were they
bound to testify against them. This is our comfort, that our judgment is with
the Lord, and our reward with our God. That this Animadverter accuses us of
being guilty of Calumny, and our practice as proceeding not from holy zeal but
evil passion, we are not much conce^ned. It Is a small matter to be judged of
man's day; we must shortly stand before an higher Tribunal, whither we can
cheerfully appeal; and heartily wish that Mr. T. had manifested less passion,
and more holy zeal in this Treatise than I am able to discern; then would he
have had greater cause of rejoicing in the day of Christ.

Sect. 10.
Of the false Prophets that were amongst the Jews. To whom the Ministers of
England bear a great resemblance, manifested in 6 particulars. Isa. 9. 15. and
28. 7, 8. Jer. 23. 11. Zeph. 3. 4. Hos. 9. 8. 2 Pet. 2. 1. explained. To
prophecy lies in the Name of the Lord, what. Ecclesiastical Canons against the
practice of the present Ministers. To do violence to the Law: to be a snare of
a fowler: What they import. (...), or false Teachers, who they are. Damnable
Heresies what, and why so called. Denying the Lord that bought them, what it
imports. The Plea of the Animadverter for the Church and Ministers of England,
not much better than what was, or might have been made use of by Jeroboam
himself.

WHat I mention in the 6th place touching the false Prophets that were amongst
them of Old, who ran before they were sent, and prophesied smooth things to
them in the name of the Lord, according to the desire of the heart of them and
their Rulers, upon the account whereof they were in great esteem amongst them,
Mr. T. grants. But intimates. 1. That the Ministers of England are not such as
the texts produced describe, and therefore those that accuse them, as if they
were such, are false accusers.

Answ. But -- Ne saevi magne Sacerdos.

Have a little patience, and we doubt not but to manifest, that they bear a
very great resemblance and likeness to them.

1st. Did they run before they were sent, Jer. 14. 14, 21. and 23. 21. (i. e.
pretend to come and act in the Name of the Lord, when he never commanded them,
nor spoke to them?) Do not the Ministers of England the same? This we afterward
manifest.

2dly, Did they Prophecy lies in the Name of the Lord, Isa. 9. 15. Lies, what
are they? They are called, False Visions, and Divinations, a thing of naught,
and the deceit of their hearts, which God never commanded, neither ever entered
it into his heart to do so, Jer. 14. 14. Dreams, Jer. 23. 27. Ezekiel 13. 2. and
22. 28. (i. e. the Inventions and Traditions of men, which they mingled with
the Word of the Lord.) That of this the Ministers of England are guilty, we
prove Chap. 4, and 5, of S. T.

3dly. Were they (some of them) swallowed up of Wine, erring through strong
drink, (i. e. a parcel of drunken Sots) Isa. 28. 7, 8. and 56. 12. And has Mr.
T. the forehead to deny this of the present Ministers of the Church of England?
I speak it without passion or prejudice against their persons; I believe, (and
the the whole Nation will (I judge) attest the truth thereof) that there are
not such a parcel of drunkards and debaucht persons to be found amongst any one
profession of men in England, as amongst this Tribe.

4thly, Were they given to Covetousness? Jer. 6. 13. (i. e. the generality of
them were so) and 8. 10. Isa. 56. 11. And is it not the general complaint of
the people of the Nation, who have eyes to see, and understandings to judge of
persons and things, as well as this Animadverter, that the present Ministers of
England are so. From whom (were they Brethren) it is therefore our duty to
separate by Apostolical Precept, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Their greedy gaping after
preferment and greater places of emolument -- heaping one Steeple upon another
(could no more be said) abundantly evince the truth hereof. Which is not only
contrary to Christ's Canons (to which many have too little regard) but to
Canons Ecclesiastical in former days, which interdict such practices, upon
penalty of being deprived of their Office and Benefice. Lib. Council. Epist.
Leo. Pap. 54. and Decret. causa: 7. Qu. 1.

5thly. Were they profane? did the Lord find their wickedness in his House?
Jer. 23. 11. (are profane, i. e. have little or no respect to my Institutions;
their wickedness have I found in my House, i. e. my very Temple is full of
their Superstitions and Idolatries; so our Annotators. Did they do violence to
the Law? Zeph. 3. 4. i. e. corrupt it with their glosses, forced
interpretations, constructions, such as God never put into it; they set by the
Law, and set up their own inventions, wills, traditions, by which the Law was
made void.) And can the present Ministers be acquitted from a copartnership
with them herein? we prove the contrary, chap. 4, and 5. of S. T.

6thly. Were they as a snare of a Fowler in all his ways, and batred in or
against the House of the Lord? Hos. 9. 8. (i. e. they watched the Godly in
Ephraim, or amongst the ten Tribes, who durst not strike in with Jeroboam's
Abominations, but went up though by stealth and secretly (some of them) to the
House of God which was at Jerusalem; and privily) as the snare of a Fowler that
is laid secret, not in the sight of the filly Bird) accused and molested them,
being full of hatred against them, or the Worship that was managed and
carried-on at Jerusalem, whither they went. The very same thing is practiced by
the present Ministers against such as dare not comply with them in their
established inventions: which is so generally known, and by some felt at this
day, that it cannot be denied; Who if they do not (some of them) openly, yet
secretly labor to ensnare, molest and trouble, by causing to be presented into
the Bishops Courts, etc. persons of such a complexion. What the frame of their
spirits is with respect to the Worship which is of the appointment of Christ,
and will be found at the last to be so; their railing (not being able to do
more) and snarling against it in their preaching, etc. together with their
prayers and endeavors for its extirpation, sufficiently evince.

7thly. Did they prepare War against such as put not into their mouths? Mic. 3.
5. Had they no Vision, were they dark, blind, without an answer of God? ver. 6,
7. And does Mr. T. think that he will ever persuade the enlightened people of
God in England that these things are not true of the present Ministers of
England? Has he alone been such a stranger in our Israel, as not to know that
they are legible, and visible upon the Clergy thereof? And if he a thousand
times over call us Calumniators and false Accusers, for our affixing them to
them: Wisdom will be justified of her Children whether he will or no. The good
People of the Nation (yea those that are but sober amongst themselves) will
acquit us that we speak nothing but truth of and touching them in this matter;
knowing full well that these things are indeed so.

But Mr. T. adds, 2dly, They do not bring-in damnable Heresies, denying the
Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1.

Answ. 1. Nor did I in S. T. charge them with so doing: It Is true, I cite 2
^et. 2. 1. but the utmost of my intendment therein was to manifest, That as
under the Law there were false Prophets, so under the Gospel there are false
Teachers: which that Scripture proves. And one step further can none compel me
to go.

2. If the Animadverter thinks that because they are not guilty (if indeed they
are not) of what those false Teachers are there charged with, therefore they
cannot be charged as false Teachers, or such as symbolize with the false
Prophets of old, he is mistaken. They are so, do so upon other accounts, though
they should be acquitted of what is there mentioned. The Apostle says not, the
false Prophets of old brought in damnable Heresies, and denied the Lord that
bought them, (which latter in plain terms they did not) they pretended as much
to him as the true; that they came acted in his Name, that the Spirit of God
was with them, 1 King. 2. 24. yet were they justly and frequently charged as
such.

But 3dly, upon second thoughts I see not but the characters of false Teachers
there mentioned, may truly and properly be charged upon the present Ministers.
First, They are called (...), which imports either that they, 1. falsely
arrogated to themselves the title of Teachers, when really and indeed they are
not so; or 2dly, that they taught false things for true, thus some carry it.
But 3dly, the corrupt and abominable innovations of Antichrist are in 2 Thessalonians.
2. 11. called (...), a lie; with allusion hereunto these Doctors or Teachers
are here called (...), or teachers of a lie, viz. the great Antichristian Lie.
Hence though there were many false Teachers at that day (as is known) the
Apostle says not in the present tense, there are, but in the future, there
shall be, viz. when Antichrist (according to Paul, whose Epistles Peter
conversed with, 2 Pet. 3. 15.) should be revealed. In respect of each of which
the title is applicable to the present Ministers. 1. They assume the title of
Teachers falsely, (as is proved, chap. 3. of S. T.) 2dly. They teach false
things, as we demonstrate, chapter 5. and 10. of S. T. 3dly. That they are teachers
of a great part of the Lie of Antichrist; their Discipline, Worship and
Doctrine thereabout, being for the most part hammered at his forge, cannot be
denied. Secondly, Of them it is said, (...), that they shall bring in Heresies
of destruction. The word (...) signifies to bring in besides, i. e. besides
men's expectations, or besides the Truth taught by Godly Teachers, by themselves
in part also to countenance their Errors, so the Assembly; They shall do it
fraudulently under the vizard of Truth, so Aretius. They shall do it privily
and subtly, pretending a show of Piety and name of the Church, so Gerh.
Heresies of cestruction are no other but the Heresies or false Doctrines of
Antichri^^, such as destroy and lay waste the Church, the Truths and
Institutions of Christ, being alien and contrary to what is of his
prescription, and are supported by force and violence against them that do
oppose them. For which at the last swift destruction is brought upon
themselves. Upon which account Antichrist (as is thought) is called (...), Rev.
9. 11. i. e. a Destroyer, and (...), 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. the son of destruction, or
perdition. That the Ministers and Church of England do thus, is too evident to
admit of a denial. They assume to themselves the name of the Church, cry out
against all others that separate from them as Heretics and Schismatics;
preach some truth, with which they slily mix their Errors; that lay waste the
Institutions of Christ, and persecute all these, imprison, waste, ruin,
destroy them (or at the least attempt it to the utmost of their power) that
stand up against their Innovations, and Church-destroying Doctrines. The
greatest difficulty may seem to be in those words that are spoken of them,
Thirdly, That they shall deny the Lord that bought them; the words are, (...).
They denied not that he bought them (if it be meant of Christ) but denied him,
as (...), or Lord, cast off (in part at least) his Authority as sole King and
Lord of his Church. And this too, not openly and in words, which is against the
express letter of the Text, they shall privily or slily bring it in, but in
practice doing that which does invelop or wrap up in it a denial of the
Despotical or Kingly Office and Authority of Christ. And this says Grotius the
word signifies; De tali desertione quae non verbo, sed reipsa fiat, figurate
usurpatur. Hugo Grot. Whence Dux Gregis, the Captain of this Herd is called,
(...), that lawless-one, that despises, sets light by the Laws and Authority
of Christ. That hereof the present Ministers are guilty we prove, chap. 4. and
5. of S. T. So that not one of the Scriptures produced but may justly be
applied to them. And the Conforming-Ministers are rightly charged, as the false
Prophets of the Jews are in the places produced in S. T. This Mr. T. denies:
but if he would have made good his denial (in my conceit) he should have
produced the particular places mentioned, and manifested that they could not
properly be applied to them. But he knew an easier way, Mentiris, Bellarmine,
mentiris; a few keen words against his Antagonist would cost him little. It Is
true, he tells us that the present Ministers teach the Fundamentals of
Christian Religion, but what he means by the Fundamentals of Religion he tells
us not: Does he intend that they own one God, etc. so did the false-Prophets.
The great Fundamental of true Religion is, That God is to be worshipped
according to the Revelation he has made of himself in the Scriptures of Truth:
that all we do in his Worship and Service, that relates to it as such, be
bottomed on divine prescript. This fundamental they deny, (introducing the
Ordinances and Inventions of man, and making these a part of Worship) A
departure from which is the ground of all the Apostasy that ever was in the
World.

4thly. This Animadverter's plea for the Church and Ministers of England is not
much better than what was or might have been made use of by Jeroboam himself,
for his Ministry, Church and Worship. Touching which precious Ainsworth in his
Arrow against Idolatry, chapter 3. introduces Jeroboam speaking after this rate, I
see my course (O men of Israel) to be much suspected, if not wholly misliked of
many; some thinking my Ceremonies to savor too rankly of Heathen Superstition;
some charging me plainly with flat Apostasy, and forsaking of God: But how far
off I am from all such Impiety, I hope to manifest to all indifferent persons,
chiefly since that I have neither spoken nor done against any Article of the
Ancient Faith, not changed any Fundamental Ordinance of Religion (The very plea
of Mr. T. for the present Ministers) given us by Moses, but worship with
reverence the God of my Fathers, and love him (as I am taught) with all my
heart, and with all my soul, cleaving unto him alone who is my life and the
length of my days. Other Godds of the Nations I utterly abhor, with all their
impure rites and services -- The alteration I have made is in matters of
circumstance, things whereof there is no express, certain or permanent Law
given us of God, and which are variable, as time, place, or person give
occasion, and such as good Kings have changed before me, and have been
blameless. This the sum, upon which he dilates excellently; and Sect. 12.
introduces him asserting his Worship for substance to be the same that God
commanded by Moses: We worship (says he) the same God: we offer the Sacrifices
of Beeves and Sheep, burn Incense, pay First Fruits and Tithes, and observe all
the Ordinances that our Fathers have kept since the World began: We hold the
main Article of our Messiah to come, and of Redemption from our sins by him --
Thus plausibly, with much more mentioned by that worthy person before-named, in
his Arrow against Idolatry; a Tract, to say no more, worthy the perusal. Might
Jeroboam plead for himself and practice (as Josephus tells us he did, B. 8.
Jews Antiq. ^ap. 3.) yet are his ways and worship abominable and not to be
joined with. And yet Mr. T. has not hitherto said more for the justification
of the Ministers and Worship of England.

Parvas habet spes Troja si tales habet. If no more can be pleaded in defense
of the present Ministers and Worship than Jeroboam could plead for his
Innovations and horrible Apostasy from God, their case is deplorable indeed.

Sect. 11.
In the height of the Israelitish Apostasy, God left not himself without a
Witness, reserved to himself a Remnant. Of the self-invented Worship of that
day. Whether there be no such Worship to be found in England. The duty of
Saints with relation thereunto. Of Mr. T. his rash judging.

THat God left not himself without a Witness in the height of the Israelitish
Apostasy, but raised up one or other to testify for him against their
self-invented Worship, that he reserved unto himself a Remnant that clave to
him and his pure Appointments, is a seventh Assertion in the S. T. which Mr. T.
also grants to be true, Sect. 12. but yet has somewhat to say hereunto.

1. That self-invented Worship was bowing the knee to Baal, 1 King. 19. 18.
Romans 11. 3, 4. Serving Idols, 2 King. 17. 12. Burning Incense to Vanity, Jer.
18. 15. Going after other Godds, to serve them and worship them, Jer. 25. 6.
and 35. 15.

Answ. Very good! Does the Author of the S. T. deny, that when the Apostasy of
the Jews arose to its height, it came indeed to this? (the beginning hereof
being laid in the departure from that Principle, That God is to be served
according to the revelation he makes of himself, not according to man's
inventions) his citation of the places now again mentioned by Mr. T. evinceth
the contrary?

2. O but there is no such self-invented Worship found in England.

Answ. That there is not in every particular, the same is granted. I know not
that they set up the image of Baal to worship it; what they do in the chambers
of their imagery, God only sees; openly they serve not the same Idols, nor burn
Incense to Vanity, etc. but that there is no such self-invented Worship to be
found in England is gratis dictum, and without proof. All self-invented Worship
being indeed such, like it in its principle, a departure from the
forementioned fundamental-principle of Religion, being the source and spring
from whence it issues forth; A bowing the knee to Baal, or yielding obedience
to other Lords (viz. the Instituter and Commander of that Worship which is
invented) a serving Idols (in the setting up Man in the room of the Spirit of
God, and the image (or form) created and made by him in the place of Divine
Appointments.)

But 2dly. It Is to me a fond conceit to imagine, that upon a supposition that
the Ministers and Church of England are not guilty of such gross Abominations,
as the places mentioned intimate the Jews to be guilty of, against whom the
Prophets bear their Testimony; Therefore none must bear testimony against
present Abominations, nor can they be justified in their so doing, from these
Texts. Whereas had they been guilty of less wickedness than they were, it had
been the duty of the Servants of the Lord to have testified against them. The
doing of what was not commanded by the Lord (as well as what was expressly
forbidden) is part of their Testimony, 2 King. 16. 11. and 17. 11, 13. We
pretend not to be extraordinarily raised up, and spirited, to witness against
present Abominations, conceiving it not at all needful in the present
undertaking. Every Christian that has tenderness to the honor and glory of
God, (according to the capacity they are in) being obliged to testify for him
against the Innovations and Will Worship of the day. Whether that speech of
Christ to James and John be most aptly applied to this Animadverter, and that
generation he is become the Advocate of, and who they are that call for fire to
come down from Heaven upon those that will not embrace their doctrines, others
will judge. We have through grace otherwise learned Christ. Whether it be
bitter or holy Zeal for God that moves us, by whom whether our language will be
judged just reproof, or unjust reviling, will one day be declared. I am sure
Mr. T. has adventured upon what does not at all appertain to him in judging
before the time. And in this can we rejoice, that under all his Censures we
have the Testimony of the Spirit of the Highest, That in godly simplicity, and
from a principle of holy Zeal ^o God, we are carried forth in this matter.
Though we dare not acquir our selves of fleshly mixtures (which we too much
discern to our abasement and grief in all our undertakings) But what has this
Animadv. to accuse us of? 'Twere as easy to have manifested (if it had been
so, and we conceive he would not have spared us) could he have done it, wherein
the bitterness of our Zeal did appear, as to have said it was bitter; to have
showed wherein our reproof was unjust, as to intimate it to be so. These are
but words, and I hope not spoken from a spirit of gall and bitterness toward
us, though perhaps some other will be apt to think they are so.

Sect. 12.
The People of God of old not to hearken to the teachings of such as were not
sent by the Lord. The Command of God touching their cutting-off. Saints
forbidden to hear them. The false Prophets preached much truth, though not the
whole truth. So does Antichrist. They were not called false Prophets merely for
their preaching falsehood, but because they ran before they were sent. The
present Ministers preach falsehoods, etc. In what sense to be cut off.
Separation from the enjoined false worship of old, commanded. It Is a breach
upon the Sovereign Authority of God, called by the names of Adultery, Whoredom,
Idolatry, etc. Upon what account so called. Jer. 9. 2. Hos. 3. 3. and 1. 2.
Rev. 14. 8. explained, worshipping God at Jerusalem. Non-separation from his
Worship there, no argument of the unlawfulness of Separation from the Church of
England.

IN his 13th Section Mr. T. takes notice of what I offer in the eighth place
touching the duty of the Saints of old, viz. That they were 1. Not to hearken
to the teachings of such as were not sent of the Lord, though they pretended
never so much to be sent by him. This we prove, 1. from the Command of God
touching these false Prophets, viz. to cut them off, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. 2dly. They
are expressly forbidden to hear them, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Jer. 27. 6, 16.

To which the Animadverter replies; 1. None are said in the Texts mentioned,
nor in any other he meets with, not to be sent by the Lord, who delivered the
Truth of God, but such as delivered falsehoods, inciting to Idolatry, or
contradictory to the message to the true Prophets.

Answ. 1. If by the Truth of God, he means the whole Truth of God, it is
granted, That never any false Prophet delivered the whole Truth of God, nor do
the Ministers of England, as we prove S. T. p. 91. If he mean that all they
delivered was false and erroneous, there is nothing more false can be invented
or spoken. They knew (and so did Satan that set them on work) that so to have
done, had been immediately to have miscarried in the design they were advancing.
Antichrist in his Ecclesiastical state, is called the false Prophet, Rev. 19.
21. his Doctrine and Worship, a Lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. yet many Truths are
embraced and preached by him.

2. If Mr. T. thinks they were called false Prophets merely upon the account of
their preaching Falsehoods, and such as incite to Idolatry, and contradict the
message of the true Prophets, he is mistaken. They are called false Prophets,
upon the account of their running before they were sent, Ezekiel. 13. 6. Jer. 14.
14, 15. which they had been though they had delivered nothing but Truth; coming
in his Name, when he never sent them: And as such were to be put to death. So,
says Maimonides in his Treatise of Idolatry, Chap. 5. Sect. 7, 8. (one who
understood these things as well as Mr. T.) The false Prophet is to be strangled
to death, although he prophecy in the Name of the Lord, and neither adds nor
diminishes, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. Whether he prophesies that which he has not heard
by Prophetical Vision, or whosoever has heard the words of his fellow-Prophet, and
says, That this word was said unto him, and he prophesies thereby; lo he is a
false Prophet, and is to be strangled to death. That they preached falsehoods we
deny not, and such intimated (at least some of them) but that they were singly
upon this foot of account so called, this Animadverter will never prove. The
Hebrews (who more perfectly knew these things than we) say the contrary, as but
now was manifested; They were false Prophets though they prophesied Truths,
without adding or diminishing, if they pretended God sent them, spoke to them
when he did not.

3. The present Ministers, as the false Prophets of old, preach falsehood, and
such as incite to Idolatry, as we prove, S. T. chap. 7. and such as are
contradictory to the great Prophet Christ, as we manifest, chapter 4, and 5. of S.
T. Therefore not to be heard by the concession of this Animadverter, though
commanded by Kings and Rulers. By which he may guess how fit these things are
to my present purpose, and how frivolously he speaks when he says, I should
have left out these Allegations, if I had well bethought my self how unfit they
were to my present design: but I will not he presumes say, that the present
Ministers should be cut off. Answ. If by cutting off he means putting to death,
I will not indeed say so; though it may be Mr. T. when an Assistant for the
ejection of scandalous Ministers thought it lawful civilly to slay them; the
saying of Divine Service being one branch of scandal for which they were to be
ejected. And the truth is, the Author of S. T. thinks they should not open
their mouths, as if Messengers and Ambassadors for God, till he opens them by
giving down the holy Unction to them (the great qualification of
Gospel-Preachers, which most of them, it is to be feared want) and an heart to
relinquish their Antichristian standing; that they may go forth in the work of
God from Authority received not from his grand Enemy, but from himself. 2dly,
As not harkning to the false Prophets, was the duty of the Children of the Lord
of old, so is Separation from the devised Worship of that day, in the
forecited places asserted, and proved to be (1.) From the greatness of the sin
of self-invented Worship; which is,

1st, A breach upon the sovereign Authority of God.

2dly, Called by the names of Whordom, Adultery, Idolatry, Fornication, Psalm.
73. 27. Isa. 57. 3, 8. Jer. 9. 2. Ezekiel. 23. 45. Hos. 3. 7. and 7. 3. Lev. 20.
5. Jer. 13. 27. Ezekiel. 16. 17. and 20. 30. Hos. 1. 2. Rev. 14. 8. and 18. 9. 19,
20.

3dly, Separation here-from, is solemnly charged upon them as their duty, Hos.
4. 15. Amos 5. 5. Prove. 4. 14. and 5. 8. Cant. 4. 8. To which Mr. T. reples,

1st, That devised Worship, which is termed Adultery, etc. is Lev. 20. 5.
committing whordom with Molech, Psalm. 73. 27. being far from God, etc.

Ans. 1. But Sir, the Question is not, what that self-invented Worship was,
that is so called, but whether it be not so called (let it be what it will) on
the account of its being self-invented. The Lord had taken that People into
Covenant with himself, for his Bride, Beloved: To them he was Ishi, a Lord, a
Husband. By him, as such, they were obliged by virtue of that Covenant into
which he had taken them, to be solely guided and ruled; to observe his Statutes
and Judgments to do them, not harkning to the voice of any other beside
himself. Their acting contrary hereunto was a breach of this Covenant, which
being a Covenant of Betrothment or Conjugal relation, the breach of it is
therefore called by the names of Adultery, Whordom, etc. which they had been
guilty of, had they in smaller matters than those instanced in, turned aside
from God, Jer. 3. 19, 20. But I said, How shall I put thee among the Children,
and give thee a pleasant Land, a goodly Heritage of the Hosts of Nations? and I
said, Thou shall call me, My Father, and shall not turn away from me. Surely as
a Wife treacherously departs from her Husband: so have you dealt
treacherously with me, O house of Israel. Their turning aside to their own
Inventions is the bottom upon which these abominations are so called. Psalm.
106. 39. Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with
their own inventions; Jer. 9. 2. They be all adulterers (i. e. turned away from
God, say the Assembly) Hos. 3. 3. Her not playing the Harlot, is expressly said
to be, her not being for another man: which should she be (as by subjecting to
the Ordinances of men, in the Worship of God, we are) she plays the Harlot. And
Hos. 1. 2. Departing from the Lord (or his Institutions, and Appointments) is
called, committing great whordom.

2dly, It Is true the Worship which is called Fornication, Rev. 14. 8. and 18.
9. is such as Babylon made all Nations, even the Kings of the Earth to commit.
Which learned Brightman upon Rev. 14. 8. interprets to be, the Superstitions,
Errors, and Idolatries of the Church of Rome, which the West sucked from her as
from her Mothers Breasts, which proved Wine of wrath or jealousy, as well as
Fornication; because hereby the jealousy of God was stirred up and provoked
against them, as to purpose it has been; manifesting and displaying it self in
Characters of Blood and Flames, Ruin and Devastation more or less, throughout
the European Kingdoms. That the very Service of the Chapter of Engl. (called by an
Antiphrasis, Divine Service) is the Service of the Church of Rome; That many of
the Fornications, Superstitions, Errors, etc. of the old Strumpet are yet
remaining in the Church of England, we have demonstrated, Chap. 7. of S. T. The
Holy Days observed by the Church of England, are the Holy Days of Rome, its
Collects, Prayers, Litany, Rites, from thence, Mr. T. knows and in part
confesses, page 102 of his Theodulia. So that if her Worship be Fornication,
the Worship of England (being the very Worship of Rome) is so too; From which
Mr. T. tells us, in this Sect. without controversy the People of God were to
separate, and have no communion with any in. So that,

Habemus confitentem reum. He passes sentence upon himself in having communion
with, and pleading for the Church and Worship of England, and aquits the
Innocent in their righteous Separation therefrom, in that very Treatise he
designed to justify the one, and condemn the other. That which is further, is
a most sorry begging of the Question (a piece of Sophistry this Animadverter is
frequently guilty of) the sum is, But neither the Texts alleged, nor any other
do require separation from the Worship of God, or the Ministers of God, that
are in some things corrupt, even in their ministration; which he exemplifies in
Samuels ministering before the Lord, and Hann^h's presenting him and her self at
the solemn Feasts, when Hophni and Phinehas did corrupt the Worship of God: And
those of Judah were not to separate from the service at Jerusalem, which was to
God, while there was burning incense and sacri^icing on the high places; and
though there were sundry corruptions in the Church and Services of the Jews,
yet did Christ join in the public Service of the Temple, and persuaded the
cleansed Leaper to offer the Gift Moses had commanded. From whence he infers,
That though there should be some degree of corruption in Worship, yet this is
not sufficient to justify our Separation from the Church and Ministers of
England.

Answ. 1. That every corruption in Worship, that every di^order in
Church-administrations is a sufficient warrant for separation from the Worship,
Church or Churches that are of Divine Institution, (as was the Worship and
Church at Jerusalem) I no where asser^; never thought.

2dly. Whilst from h^nce the Animadverter infers, That though there should be
some degree of Corruption in Worship, yet this is not sufficient to justify
our separation from the Ministers and Church of England He does but like an
unwise Soldier, that not well heeding the ground he stands on, is displaying
his Colors till he sinks into the Earth. There is one thing wanting to his
Inference, that makes it too light to pass with persons but of ordinary
understanding; viz. That the Church o^ England is a true Church, the Worship
thereof the true Worship of God, a strong supposition whereof (instead of
evident demonstration) is the Basis upon which the inference is built. For what
though there were Corruptions in the Church and Worship of Israel, in Samuels
time, in Christ's time: What if notwithstanding these Corruptions it were no^
the duty of persons to separate from that Church and Worship which was
originally from God; what is this to the case of separation from the Church and
Worship of England, which this Animadverter knows we deny to be of God? which,
when he or any one for him shall prove to be, I do faithfully assure him never
to plead for, nor practice separation more; which I speak from an assured
confidence they can never be able so to do. Though otherwise (upon supposition
it could be proved a true Church, at first rightly constituted according to the
mind of Christ) such corruptions are to be found upon it, that are sufficient
to j^stifie any man's peaceable separation from it. Though every corruption in
Worship and Church-Administrations, as was said, will not do so. There is
nothing in this 4th. Sect. of that moment as to require our stay in the
consideration thereof. Whether those eight Positions asserted in S. T. touching
the management of affairs of old, be evidently comprised in the Scripture or
no, may be perceived by the examination of Mr. T. his exceptions against them,
let the Christian and judicious Reader judge. I argue not from thence by way of
Analogy, though I conceive the Institution being founded upon some command of
Christ in the New Test. (the only warrant for the practice of
Gospel-Appointments) To argue from the carriage and deportment of Saints to
Divine Ordinances of old, to the carriage of Saints toward New Test.
Institutions, from parity of Reason, is neither irrational nor unwarrantable;
which when Mr. T. proves it to be, or attempts to do so, his Arguments shall be
considered: his second and third Sect. in his second part of the review of the
dispute about Paedo-Baptism (to which he directs us) spoke not a word hereunto
as he knows.

Sect. 13.
Of the word (...), what it imports. Its acceptions in the Scripture. 1 Cor.
12. 28. and 15. 9. Act. 4. 32. opened. The Churches of Asia, Galatia, Judaea,
not National, Diocesan, or Provincial, but particular Churches. The foundation
of Diocesan Churches. Mat. 16. 18. and 18. 17. expounded. By the Church not
meant the Pope and his Cardinals, a Synod, the Bishop, or Chancellors Court,
the Magistrate, the Presbytery, nor select Arbitrators, but the whole Church
consisting of Elders and Brethren, proved.

IN Sect. 15th. Mr. T. begins to consider the Queries in the Preface of S. T.
and in answer to the first Query, whether there be any National Church of the
Institution of Christ under the Economy of the Gospel; he falls upon the
consideration of the word Church, and tells us, in the New Testament its taken
for,

1. An assembly of Unbelievers, Act. 19. 32, 39, 40.

2dly. For the Congregation of Israel in the Wilderness, Acts 7. 38.

3dly, The Universal Church, whether visible or invisible, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Heb.
12. 23. Ephesians. 1. 22.

4thly, The visible Church indefinitely but not universally, 1 Cor. 15. 9.

5thly, The Church Topical, as of a City, Town, or House, Act. 8. 1. Philem. 2.
or of a Country, or Nation; and then its put in the Plural Number; as the
Churches of Asia, Galatia, Judaea.

Answ. 1. The word, (...), Church, is (...), to advocate, or call out; Because,
as says Musculus, in Romans 1. 7. the Church is a number called out from the
rest; and in the general signifies any company of men, singled out, or
separated from the rest, for any end or purpose whatsoever. That it is of
various acceptations in the Scripture cannot be denied; some of which are
rightly assigned by the Animadverter.

First, It Is taken for an Assembly of Unbelievers, Acts 19. 32. 39.

Secondly, For the Congregation of Israel in the Wilderness, Acts 7. 38.

But Thirdly, As touching the third acceptance of the word instanced in by
this Animadverter, we must crave leave a little to demur about it.

1st, If by the Universal Church visible, he mean that which some call the
Church-Catholick visible, consisting of the universality of men professing the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and yielding obedience thereunto throughout the World;
I do very much question whether the name of the Church be given to them
throughout the Scripture. The places instanced in by this Animadverter are
remote from the proof of any such thing. 1 Cor. 12. 28. speaks not a tittle to
it: For,

1. The Church, verse. 28. is the Body of Christ, verse. 27. This Paul tells them
(the Church of Corinth) they were; and every Saint in the Church a Member in
particular.

2. It Is such a Church amongst whom a Schism might be, verse. 25. (as in the
Church of Corinth there actually was, which was the occasion of Paul's writing
to them) That there should be no schism in the Body. But Schism is entirely in
one Church amongst the members of one particular Society, says that learned
man J. O. in his Treatise of Schism.

Besides, 3. It will be hard to prove that in the Church catholick-visible (as
such) Officers are set and placed, as it is verse. 28, 29. These were in the
Church of Corinth, which was founded by Paul, Acts 18. 8, 9, 10. Probably Peter
had been there; for he intim^tes, That, at least, some of them had gloried
overmuch in him, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. (Cephas, i. e. Peter) Pr^^hets, Teachers,
Miracles, Gifts of hea^ing, Helps, Governments, diversities of Tongues were
found amongst them, as is known. Some of these there is no question, but they
relate to a particular Church. That the (...), or Teachers here, are the same
who are elsewhere called, (...), Presbyters, Elders, and Overseers, Mr. T. will
not, I presume, deny. Arguments lie near at hand for the demonstration thereof,
were it needful: These are placed of God in particular Churches, relate to them
as such, Acts 14. 23. and 15. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23, and 16. 4. and 20. 17. and 21.
18. Tit. 1. 5. Jam. 5. 14. Act. 20. 28. Nor am I singular in the application of
this Scripture to the particular Church of Corinth. Pareus has these words
upon the place, Et quia, etc. And because he had said, that the Church of the
Corinthians was the Body of Christ, etc. manifesting his consent and harmony
with us herein, that Paul is not treating of the Church-Catholick-visible, but
of a particular Church of Christ, viz. (...), of the Church of God that was in
Corinth. Nor can this Scripture be meant of the invisible Church of Christ, for
in it God has placed no Officers that I know of, nor will the Animadverter say
he has.

2dly, If by the Universal Church-visible, he mean the Elect of God, redeemed,
sanctified, justified, by the spirit of the Lord and the blood of Jesus. These
are indeed called by the name of the Church, in Heb. 12. 23. Ephesians. 1. 22. To
which we may add Mat. 16. 28. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. That the word Church, 1 Cor. 15.
9. is taken for the visible Church indefinitely, I cannot subscribe to.
Possible by the Church of God he means,

First, The Churches of God (by an usual Figure) there being in those days,
few or no Believers, but were added to one Church or other; as might easily be
demonstrated, Acts 2. 41, 42. and Acts 4. 32. The multitude of Believers is a
Paraphrastical description of the Church, Acts 5. 11. The great care of the
Apostles was to reduce them that embraced and believed the Gospel, into a
Church State, or that Order of the Gospel, which, however oppugned by Mr. T.
will be found to be of the Institution of Christ: As is evident from the
Churches in Jerusalem, Acts 7. Samaria, chap. 8. Antioch, Chap. 14, and 15. In
Syria, Cilicia, Acts 15. 41. Phrygia, Galatia, Acts 16. 5, 6. Macedonia, Chap.
16. Thessalonica, Chap. 17. Achaia, Chap. 18. Ephesus, Chap. 19. Asia, Rev. 1.
and 2. and 3. Rome, Romans 1. etc. planted by them notwithstanding the utmost
attempts of the power of darkness, or great Red Dragon in the Roman Pagan
Empire; and of the Children of the Kingdom, or the chief Priests, Scribes,
Pharisees, Rulers, multitudes of People (especially of the baser sort, fit for
any desperate design) contradicting, blaspheming, opposing them herein. When
once we read of the Gospel preached, and mingled with Faith in them that hear
it, the next news we frequently hear, is, that these Believers embody together
for the worshipping God in the same numerical Ordinances, the enjoyment of those
privileges, and mutual performance of those duties, which in a scattered
individual state and capacity they were not capable of. Though Secondly, By way
of eminency, he might in that expression, (and no doubt he did so) I persecuted
the Church of God, have his eye upon that famous Church of Jerusalem, in the
persecution and dispersion whereof he had, it seems, no mean hand, Acts 7. 58.
and 8. 3, 4. As for Saul, he made havoc of (Gr. (...), he laid waste) the
Church; entering into every house, halling ((...), by force and violence
dragging them along the ground) both men and women, he committed them to
Prison. And the very truth is, this is the most considerable instance (if not
the only one) of Saul's Persecuting the Church of God. It Is true, Acts 9. 1.
it is said, And Saul breathing out threatenings and slaughters against the
Disciples of the Lord; but that only imports the wrath and fury that was in his
spirit against them, and resolution to persecute, imprison, waste and destroy
them (the usual issue of blind zeal, for the Tradition of their Fathers) in
other places, as he had already done at Jerusalem: For which end, he procures
Letters to Damascus, to bring men and women disciples bound to Jerusalem, that
he should find of this Heresy there. But, Oh the wonder of Love! Before he
arrive thither, Christ waylayes him, speaks from Heaven to him, converts him,
and sets him upon preaching up that very way and truth, he was thus violently
persecuting, and setting himself against. So that not the visible Church
indifinitely taken, but some particular Churches of Jesus Christ, and in
especial, and by way of eminency, that famous Church at Jerusalem is intended,
1 Cor. 15. 9.

That which Mr. T. mentions in the 5th. place, That the word Church is taken
for the Church Topical, i. e. A particular Church of Christ, or a company of
Believers (dwelling in this or that place) giving no themselves to the Lord,
and one another, according to his will; walking to gether in the fellowship of
the Gospel, and meeting, (...), in the same place, for the worshipping God in
the same numerical Ordinances, according to the prescription, will and
institution of Christ, Acts 8. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1. and many other
places. Of which Chap. 4. of S. T. we assent to as true. But that we should
ever subscribe,

6thly, To that dictate of the Animadverter, That Church in Scripture is taken
for a Church of a Country or Nation, and then it is put in the Plural Number,
as the Churches of Asia, Galatia, Judaea; being so dissonant to truth, and
contrary to the express language of the Spirit of the Lord, he could never
imagine. For the Churches of Asia, Christ tells us expressly they were Seven:
Not one Provincial, or National Church, but seven particular instituted
Churches.

First, To each Church is there a distinct Epistle written.

Secondly, Each Church had its particular Officer, or Angel, to whom each
Epistle was directed to be communicated to the Congregation (for to them in it
does Christ by his Spirit speak, Rev. 2. 7, 11, 17, 29. and 3. 6, 13, 22.)

3dly. Each Church received its particular commendation, bore its particular
burden. The Evils found in one are not charged upon the rest, nor the Good
found in either imputed to them generally but severally.

4thly. The power of Excommunication, or rejection of Scandalous Offenders,
seems to be seated in each Church severally and apart, therefore no Provincial,
or National Churches, but Congregational. For the neglect of which power some
of them are expressly rebuked by Christ, Rev. 2. 14, 15, 20. (which our English
Annotators apply, and that truly, to a non-rejection of them by
excommunication, and cite 1 Cor. 5. 2, 6.) Alas! a National, Diocesan,
Provincial Church was not then thought of. Diocesan Churches were first founded
(as it is said, but it were no difficult task to evince that their original is
antidated some scores of years) by Dyonisius Bishop of Rome, about 280 years
after Christ (or, as some will, about 251) he was the first that appointed the
limits and bounds of Parishes. Here in England they received their rise and
original from one Honorius Bishop of Canterbury, (Polyd. Virgil. de Invent.
rer. lib. 4. c. 9.) Nay, the truth is, the Churches mentioned were so far from
being a Church of a Region or Nation, that they were not all that lived in the
same Place, City or Town appertaining to the Church there. As for the Church of
Ephesus (one of the seven) Paul speaks of it as distinct from the rest of the
Inhabitants, Ephesians. 1. 1. so does Christ of the Church of Pergamos, Rev. 2. 13. I
know thy works, and where thou dwell (i. e. among what manner of people
thine abode is, Psalm. 57. 4. and 120. 5, 6. Ezekiel. 2. 6. Phil. 2. 15. viz. a
wicked, graceless, ungodly people) even where Satan's seat is, where Satan
dwells: who were sure no part of the Church. The like may be said of the rest
of them. It Is strange to me that when God calls them Churches, any person
pretending to sobriety, should dare to aver them to be but one.

Touching the interpretation of Mat. 16. 18. and 18. 17. there are indeed great
debates (as our Animadverter says) betwixt Protestants and Papists, amongst
Protestants also and Protestants. The exposition the Papists give of Mat. 16.
18. who from hence would infer, that Peter, and after him the Bishop of Rome,
was made Universal Bishop, is so frivolous, that it is not worth the mentioning.

1. (...), super hanc petram, is not (...), super hunc Petrum; upon this Rock
will I build my Church, we Englishmen think to be very different from, upon
St. Peter will I build i^. The Faith Peter confessed we take to be one thing,
his person another.

2. We find not (notwithstanding this promise) that Peter was the Prince of the
Apostles (at which lofty rate these Gentlemen love to speak) or Universal
Bishop. If he had been so, Paul much forgot himself, when he said 2 Cor. 11. 5.
For I suppose (Gr. (...), I conclude for certain) I was not a whit behind the
chiefest Apostles. And much more Gal. 2. 11. But when Peter was come to
Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. Strange!
that he should carry it with no more respect to the Prince of the Apostles, and
Universal Bishop and head of the Church-Catholick-visible.

3. But if these were granted them, what is this to their Pope? Why Peter was
at Rome.

Answ. That is uncertain: Yet should it be granted he was there, it would not
in the least advantage them in their present cause. It Is most certain he was at
Samaria, Antioch, Lydda, Joppa, Cesaria; yet no Primacy or Supremacy affixed to
either of them upon that bottom.

4. Yea but he placed his Chair at Rome, fixed his Seat there.

Answ. This is false and untrue, nor can they ever make it appear that he did
so. Yet if this should be granted, they are never a whit the nearer the mark,
except they prove, 1. That a succession in this universal, Unlimited,
Archiepiscopal power was entailed to the Church of Rome, and that so, that 1.
Though those who ascended that Chair, came to be invested therein, by bribery,
cozenage, cruelty, bloo^, whilst they possessed it were Heretics (and declared
by Councils to be so, and their Successors) Conjurers, Adulterers, Idolaters,
Atheists, Blasphemers, bloody Persecutors, destroyers of bodies and souls of
men, the veriest Villains and Wretches that ever the Earth bore.) 2. Though
this Succession has been interrupted by a Vacancy, or Interregnum, of some
years; polluted by a Woman, a Whore, delivered with her Cardinals about her in
solemn Procession; whence

Papa parit Papam, peperit Papissa Papillum. By the setting up of Anti-Popes,
two or three at a time, contesting to the pouring out of much Blood, wasting,
destroying Villages, Towns, Cities; Cursing, excommunicating one another, and
all that adhere to each other, for the Popedom, or St. Peter's Chair; yet when
in it, and those that succeed them, be they as bad or worse than they that went
before, must infallibly be his successor: which when they prove, I will be a
Papist; and before they shall effect this, it being the grand Principle of
their Religion (or Superstition rather) it would become all that have (or would
be accounted to have) the least spark of Wisdom remaining in them, to have
nothing to do with such a generation. For my part I am abundantly satisfied,
that the Church there, is neither the Church-Catholick visible, nor any
particular Church, as such, but the Invisible-Church, or Elect of God.

Tell the Church, Mat. 18. 17. has diverse interpretations put upon it,
according as the interests of some lead and incline them. In the language of
the Episcopalians it is, Tell the Lord Bishop, and his Consistory: but this is
such an heterogeneous piece, so wild an interpretation, that it would put a
sober man (if concerned in them) to a blush to hear it mentioned. 1. There were
no such creatures at that day, nor for some hundreds of years after. Alas!
there was somewhat else to do, than to think of erecting Episcopal Seas and
Consistories, when they were every day fighting with beasts, and made a
spectacle to Angels and men, for the Truth and Gospel-sake; which was the state
of the Church of God, (for the most part) for the first three-hundred years and
upwards, as is known. 2. One man (as says precious Cotton) is not the Church,
nor can he represent the Church, unless sent by them; but so is neither the
Bishop nor his Commissary. 3. The Bishop ordinarily is no member of the Church
where the offense is committed; and what is his satisfaction to the removal of
the offense given to the Church? 4. The Parisian Doctors say truly, Ecclesiam
nunquam, etc. The Church cannot be taken for one person, nor be governed by
one. Of which the Learned Chamier gives his reason, How can it be that the
Bishop should be the Church, according to whose Ecclesiastical Authority things
should be determined, Mat. 18. when a long time after the Bishop himself by
humane authority had his original? of which Ambrose complains -- And as soon as
the Lord had said, tell the Church, he speaks in the plural number all along
afterward? Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever Ye shall bind on Earth, etc.
Whence it plainly appears, that the Church is not taken for one person, but for
many congregated together. Pol. Eccles. Yea, Sutcliffe when disputing against
Bellarmine, says, Christ did not constitute the chief Tribunal in the hands of
Peter, but of the Church: for not those who refused to hear Peter, but those
who refused to hear the Church, were to be accounted as Heathens and Publicans.
De Pontif. Romans l. 1. c. 5, 6. Besides in matters of controversy, Peter
himself was subject to the Tribunal of the Church. But a superior cannot be
judged by an inferior. If any controversy happened amongst the Apostles, that
could not be defined by particular persons, but a Council of the Church was to
be congregated. This we see done Acts 15. Now one would think our present
Bishops should not be so arrogant as to assume that power to themselves, which
when disputing with the Papists they will not allow to Peter.

2dly. In the judgment of our Brethren of the Presbyterian way, Tell the
Church, is, tell the Presbytery. But they are, I humbly conceive, somewhat wide
of the mark too. My Reasons are, 1. The Church is sometimes put for the
Congregation, as distinct from the Presbytery or Elders and Officers, Acts 14.
23. and 15. 22. never for these, as distinct from the Congregation, throughout
the New Testament. 2. The Presbytery may be the party offending, and then you
must tell the Church that the Church offends; i. e. go tell themselves: But
the Scripture is express, that after private dealing with the offenders
themselves, upon non-amendment, the Church, as distinct from them, is to be
acquainted with it. 3. What if the Presbytery themselves be offended? whom
shall they tell? must they tell themselves? If they are the Church, they can go
no further. 4. Besides, we find, 1 Cor. 5. not the Presbytery alone, but the
whole Church concerned in the matter of Excommunication, of which our Brethren
confess Christ here treats. This Animadverter manifests his good will to
interpret it of an Assembly of the Jews in their Synedrium, or if extended as a
direction to Christian Brethren, whether to refer it to their Assembly, under
an Ecclesiastical consideration, or Political, i. e. the Christian Magistrate:
he seems to demur with an apparent inclination to the latter. To the first of
these Mr. Cotton answers; Treat. of the Keys, p. 40 An. 3.
It is not credible that Christ would send his Disciples to make complaint of
their offenses to the Jewish Synagogues: for is it likely he would send his
Lambs and Sheep for right and healing, unto Wolves and Tygres? Both their
Sanhedrim, and most of their Synagogues were no better. And if here and there
some Elders of their Synagogues were better affected; yet how may it appear
that so it was, where any of themselves dwelt? And if that might appear too,
yet had not the Jews already agreed, that if any man did confess Christ, he
should be cast out of the Synagogues? Joh. 9. 22. To which we add, 2dly, Christ
knew that within a little while the Synedrim and whole Church-Policy of the
Jews would be at an end. And, 3dly, in the mean while charges his Disciples to
have nothing to do with them. Mat. 15. 14. Tell them that they would persecute,
kill them, and think in doing so they did God good service: As it fell out
afterward accordingly. So that it cannot with the least show of reason be
imagined, that Christ should direct them to appeal to them, and stand to their
final determination. 2dly. The second desires not a reply. Go tell the Church,
i. e. go tell the Magistrate, is so wild an interpretation, that the bare
naming it is the giving it too much honor. 1. The Magistrate is no where
called the Church: 2dly, The Magistrate (qua talis) has nothing to do in the
stating and determining Church-Controversies. 3dly, Sometimes, and for the most
part, they have ever since been (for above three hundred years afterward they
undoubtedly were) no members of the Church, but enemies to it, destroyers of it.

Mr. T. adds, that he can find no Institution by preception or command of a
Church, i. e. there is no such thing as an instituted Church of Christ under
the Gospel, but it is left to the prudence of men, etc. to determine, whether
they shall be Domestic, Congregational, Parochial, Classical, Diocesan,
Provincial, Patriarchal, or Ecumenical: which how derogatory to the Honor and
Sovereign Authority of Jesus Christ; to his love and tenderness to his
Children, to his Faithfulness with respect to the obligation that lay upon him
as Mediator, to reveal the whole will of the Father to them, others will judge.
For my part I am fully of his mind, who some while since said, That there were
particular Churches instituted by the Authority of Jesus Christ, ordained and
approved by him; that Officers for them were of his appointment, and furnished
with gifts from him for the execution of their employment; That Rules, Cautions
and Instructions for the due settlement of those Churches were given by him:
that these Churches were made the only seat of that Worship, which in
particular he expressed his will to have continued until he came, is of so much
light in Scripture, that he must wink hard that will not see it. Which is as
much as we need to say to this Animadverter in this matter; what he says
herein, being mere dictates of his own, without proof: which (when he shall be
able to evince that Christ has not the Government of his Churches upon his
shoulders; that he is not sole King and Lord over them, or having so, has not
given them Rules to walk by of his own, but left them to the liberty of their
own wills, or which is worse, the wills of such as by Providence are permited
to ascend the Throne, though such, as whilst they profess to know God, in works
deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate)
he will be supposed to say something in way of confirmation. But of this more
in Sect. 15. It Is true, de facto, Parochial, Classical, Diocesan, Provincial,
Patriarchical, and Ecumenical Churches, by the prudence of men, etc. have had
and yet have their being it the World: and the Animadverter deals ingenuously,
in acknowledging that their original is not from Heaven, but the issue of
humane p^udence, etc. So that to them, or their Rulers and Officers, as such,
we owe no tribute or respect by virtue of any Institution of Christ, which they
are (as he acknowledges, and that truly) destitute of. 'Twe^e easy to fill
many pages with citations of Authors speaking to this matter.

Whereas originally there was a small uncertain number of Presbyters at Roms,
they were brought to a certain number and order by Cletu^ and Evaristus, Popes
of Rome. First, Cletus reduced the Presbytery of Rome to the number of twenty
five: Afterward Evaristus, about the year of Christ 100, appointed and
prescribed a several Parish to every one of these Presbyters, which Parishes
were afterward ^nlarged, and had their bounds and limits more perfectly and
more exactly prescribed to them by Pope Dyonisius, as was said, about the year
of Christ 260; After which time Marc^llus, about the year of Christ 305,
limited the number of those titles, which anciently were first given to the
Presbyters by Evaristus, and did by Decree constitute, That there should be in
Rome 25, as it were so many Diocesses; for the more convenient baptizing of
such Gentiles as were daily converted to Christian Religion: Onuphrius
Panvinius, de praecipuis urbis Romae Basilici^; And Seldom in his History of
Tithes, chap. 6. Sect. 3. writes thus, For Parish Churches, it is plain, that
as Metropolitan See's, Patria^chats (Exarchates, in the Eastern Church)
Bishoprics, these greater dignities were most usually at first ordained and
limited according to the distinction of Seats of Government and inferior
Cities, that had been assigned to the Substitutes, or Vicarii of the Prefect.
Pratorio, or Viceroys of the East and Western-Empire: So were Parishes
appointed, and divided to several Ministers within the Ecclesiastical rule of
these dignities, according to the conveniences of Country-Towns and Villages;
one, or more, or less (of such as being but small Territories might not by the
Canons be Bishoprics) to a Parish: The word Parish at first denoting a whole
Bishopric (which is but as a great Parish, and signifies no other ^han
Dioces^, but afterward being confined to what our common language restrains
it. The Curats of these Parishes were such as the Bishops appointed under him
to have cure of souls in them, and were called Presbyterii Parochiani, i. e.
Parish-Presbyters. But thus far of this matter.

As touching what Mr. T. adds, that there is no precept about the defining how
many should go to a Church, or be accounted to belong to one Church, etc.

We answer, 1. That it is very impertinently produced by him, tending not at all
to the matter in hand; such a visible non-sequitur as he will never be able to
make good. How many should go to a Church, we have no precept of Christ
directing and enjoining us; Ergo no Institution of a Church by preception or
command.

But 2dly, That we are in this matter wholly destitute of Law or Rule is a
mistake of this Animadverter.

First, Mat. 18. 20. manifests that the Church cannot well consist of fewer
than seven. For, 1. there is the Brother offending. 2dly, Two or three
reproving this offending Brother. And 3dly, the Church before whom the matter
is to be brought for final determination, which cannot be supposed to be fewer
(if so few) as the persons bringing it before them.

Secondly, That they be no more than can conveniently meet together in one
place, and so that they may hear and be edified (which is the great end of
Church Communion) the Scripture plainly intimates 1 Cor. 14. 23. If therefore
the whole Church be come together in one place, ver. 26. let all things be done
unto edifying. But if all cannot hear, they cannot be edified. So wide off the
mark of Truth is his Assertion, that neither Christ nor his Apostles have given
us any Rule or Law of bounding or modelling Churches: which (though how many
members may be added to a Church be not expressly prescribed) he has done.

That Text Mat. 18. 17. seems much to perplex this Animadverter; what is meant
by Church there he cannot tell; It Is uncertain (he says) whether the Christian
Civil Judicatory, or Ecclesiastical Consistory or Congregational Assembly of
Believers, or some select Arbitrators be meant.

Of the three first of these we have spoken already, and manifested, that not
the Jewish Synedrium, but the Christian Church; not the Christian Civil
Judicatory or Ecclesiastical Consistory is intended by the Church here. That
select Arbitrators should be meant, is the firstborn of improbabilities. 1.
They are no where called a Church in the Scripture. 2. The Church in the Text
are such a company to whom the party or parties aggrieved may presently have
their recourse; which to select Arbitrators they cannot have: they must first
be chosen (of which notwithstanding there is not the least tittle in the Text.)
3. Here is no mention of the consent of the party offending in the election of
the Arbitrators; which of right ought in such cases to be. 4. From the Church
here there seems to lie no appeal. 5. The Sentence pronounced by the Church, is
a Sentence confirmed in Heaven, ver. 18. which Mr. T. upon second thoughts will
not say can be affirmed of the Sentence of his select Arbitrators. Yea, 6ly, if
the party offending will not hear the Church, he is to be accounted as an
Heathen (i. e. they are to hold no religious communion with him) and Publican
(i. ^. withholding from them familiar, civil communion): but I much question
whether it be my duty to carry it so to a Brother, that shall refuse to submit
to the sentence of Mr. Tombs his select Arbitrators; especially if he had no
hand in their election, never referred his affairs to their arbitrament,
testifies his willingness to hearken to the Church, and stand to their
determination therein. But it is time we attend the reasons this Animadverter
gives of his opinion.

The first whereof is, The offense is private that might be remitted by the
party offended.

Answ. 1. If by private he mean such an offense as was only known to them two,
it is granted: The words are a direction from Christ to Brethren how to carry it
each to other in case of secret and private scandals and offenses: for when the
fact is open, public and notorious, there needs not this private admonition,
another way of procedure is directed to, and established, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Those
that sin (viz. cum scandalo Ecclesia, says Piscator) rebuke before all; that
others also may fear. And the Church of Corinth, without any such previous
process, was bound (the fact being public and notorious) to excommunicate and
purge out from amongst them that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5. 2, 4, 5, 7. but it
follows not that because the offense in his sense is priv^te, that therefore by
Church must be meant not a particular instituted Church, but select
Arbitrators. But it is more than probable by private he means such a particular
injury or offense committed against his Brother, that is not a sin against God:
but in this sense we deny the offense here to be private; and had Mr. T. by one
Argument endeavored to have evinced it, he had done something; a failure
wherein renders the ensuing fabric liable to sink with its own weight. 1. Sins
against our Brother, are sins against God; Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee only have
I sinned, says David touching the wickedness he had wrought in the matter of
Uriah. 2. The word rendered trespass against thee, Mat. 18. 15. is (...), which
signifies properly to err from the prefixed mark, metaphorically, to sin a
sin, or, to do that which is contrary to the Law of God; Alsted in Lex Theol.
which (though by it we are injured) as a sin, is properly against God, As all
Indictments in criminal pleas are styled against the King, his Crown and
Dignity. Nor can the Animadverter give one instance (throughout the whole
New Testament) of the use of the word for such a private offense or scandal
committed against a Brother, as is not a sin and transgression against God.

What he adds, 2dly, That the Brother against whom the trespass is committed,
might remit or forgive it; is, 1. more than the Scripture will justify him in
asserting: Must be received cum grano Salis, with caution, or it is plainly
atheological.

1. If he mean, he might remit or forgive it so far as it was an injury to him,
it is granted (in ^ome cases) he might; but it is also a sin against God, which
he must not suffer to rest upon his Brother, Levit. 19. 17.

2. If he mean, that upon an acknowledgment of the offense, and manifestation
of sorrow and repentance (so far as he is able to discern) unfeigned, he be
bound to own and receive him as formerly, without acquainting any others, or
the Church with it, it is undoubtedly true. He has attained the utmost end
aimed at in the whole process, viz. the conviction and bringing the offender to
repentance; and therefore need not advance one step further: to do so, were
frivilous, ridiculous, irregular, sinful, an open breach upon all the rules of
charity enjoined by Christ. But yet it follows not that by Church is not meant
a particular Congregation, but select Arbitrators. When Mr. T. proves the
consequence of this proposition (The offended Brother may forgive the Offender
upon his confession of, and sorrow for his trespass committed, so as to own him
for a Brother, without publishing his fault, that was only known to them two,
to any other; therefore by Church (to whom without such acknowledgment and
repentance he was to have communicated it) we are to understand select
Arbitrators) I will be his convert.

In what he adds, that there is no act ascribed to the Church, save an
Admonition to the injurious Brother, to do right to him whom he has wronged,
this Animadverter is evidently mistaken.

For, 1st, Here is a Juridicial Sentence ascribed to the Church, verse. 18.
Verily I say unto you (the Church) whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, etc.

2dly. The issue or consequence of this Juridicial Sentence is, That h^ is to
the Church (for what one is lawfully to a part of the Body, he is to the whole)
as a Heathen or Publican, i. e. shut out of their Communion or Fellowship. But
Mr. T. is sure (he tells us) the Publicans were not excluded a sacris.

Answ. 1. If by sacra he means those Ordinances that peculiarly related to them
as members of the Judaical Church, and by Publicans unproselyted, uncircumcised
Publicans, it is most false, that such were not excluded a sacris. They might
not partake of the Passover with them (to instance in no more particulars)
Exodus 12. 48. And Maimonides (in Korban Pesach Cap. 5. Sect. 5.) tells us, That
as the Circumcision of himself omitted, debarreth him from keeping the
Passover, so does the circumcision of his Sons and his Servants, etc. if
omitted: And if he kill it before he do circumcise them, it is unlawful. Of
which R. Menache^ renders a reason, on Exodus 12. Whilst the power of
uncleanness, and the superfluous foreskin is upon him, etc. he is unfit to be
united with the divine Majesty, etc.

2. If by sacra, he mean coming to their Synagogue^ to hear them Preach or
Expound the Law; he speaks nothing to the purpose: an Excommunicated person may
come to the Church Assemblies, and hear and see what is done there, as may an
Heathen: The Scripture instanc't in affords not the least sanctuary to his
Assertion.

First, It Is a Parable, and so (it may be) a supposition of what never was.

Secondly, It Is spoken (it seems) of a broken converted Publican. He looked
down, smote upon his Breast, cried out, The Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

Thirdly, It Is not said that he joined with the Jewish Church in any act of
Worship. That he went up, (...), to the Holy (the whole building of the Temple,
consisting of an inward and outward Court, is so called) to pray, is
Parabolically said of him as of the Pharisee; but both the one and the other
prayed by themselves, severally and apart, verse. 11. The Pharisee stood and
prayed thus with himself, (...), word for word, standing to himself, (or apart
from the Publican) he prayed these things; O God, I thank thee, etc. verse. 13.
And the Publican, (...), standing a far off, viz. in the first Court of the
Temple, where all sorts of People, Publicans and Sinners might come. 1 Kings 8.
41.

Fourthly, It Is most certain, and the Animadverter cannot be ignorant hereof,
That the Publicans were excluded, not only, a sacris, which they were, but also
from Civil Communion, so far as possibly they could; insomuch as it was a great
crime charged upon Christ by them, That heat and drank with Publicans and
Sinners, and that more than once, Matthew. 9. 11. and 11. 19. Mark, 2. 16. Luke
5. 30. and 7. 34. Accordingly upon this sentence of the Church upon the
Offender, the Members of the Society are to carry it toward him, not only as
toward a Heathen (with whom they might have civil Commerce) but as toward a
Publican (with whom they at that day had none) 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 These. 3. 14. And
he that should have seen the Publican, Luke 18. (if there was ever such a thing
done) praying in one Court, and the Pharisee in another; or if in the same
Court, one at one Corner and the other at the other, apart by themselves, would
scarce have concluded, that they held Communion together, or inferred therefore
the Publicans were not excluded a sacris. Which Consequence Mr. T. will take
time to make good, usque ad Graecas Calendas.

It remains, That forasmuch as by Church, Mat. 18. 17. is not meant the J^^ish
Synedrium, nor the Lord Bishop and his Consistory, nor the Civil Magistrate,
nor the Presbytery, nor Mr. T. his Select Arbitrators; (the vanity of each of
which has been evinced) that therefore it is a particular instituted Church of
Christ in the New Testament, as Mr. T. knows the learned of old, and of late
have interpreted it. So Ignatius (who applies it to the particular Church of
Philadelphia) Chrysostom, etc. The judicious Casaubon (Exercit. Lib. 15. p.
433.) etc.

These things premised, we attend his Answers to the Questions proposed in S.
T. of which in the next Section we shall treat.

Sect. 14.
Whether there be any National Church under the Oeconomie of the Gospel. Mr. T.
his answers hereunto, considered. Isa. 49. 23, and 66. 8. explained. That they
are Prophesies that wait their accomplishment, demonstrated. Of the miraculous
conversion of the Jews, Zach. 12. 10. explained. The Sign of the Son of Man,
Mat. 24. 30. What.

THe first Quest. in S. T. proposed by us is, Whether since the Apotomie or
unchurching the Nation of the Jews, the Lord has so espoused a Nation or
People to himself, as that upon the account thereof, the whole Body of the
People thereof may be accounted his Church? Whether there be any National
Church under the Oeconomie of the Gospel? This Mr. T. is pleased to make two
Questions, though in it self but one; the latter being only exegetical to the
former.

1st. He grants, That God has not, since the unchurching* the Nation of the
Jews, espoused a Nation to himself, as that the whole Body of the People
thereof may be accounted his. i. e. There is no National Church of divine
Institution under the Gospel; for if there be, the Lord has most assuredly
visibly espoused that Nation to himself, and they are to be accounted his. What
h^ adds, viz. We own no Church visible now, but of Believers by their own
personal profession, we are not concerned to take notice of. His mentioning the
9th Article of the Church of England, by way of approbation, and as if it were
of the same mind with him touching the subjects of the visible Church, is an
abuse of it and the Reader. It Is known that the addition in the Confession of
Faith of the Assembly, Chap. 25. Art. 2. Of Childrens Church Membership, is the
Doctrine of the said Church. Of this matter we are not now treating.

Secondly, In answer to the Question, Whether there be any National Church
under the Economy of the Gospel? I say (says Mr. T.) that though there be no
National Church, so as that the whole Nation, and every member of the Nation be
to be accounted of the visible Church of Christ, by virtue of their generation
and Proselytism, and such Covenant as was made to Abraham; concerning his
natural Seed, or to Israel at Mount Sinai, or elsewhere, yet the whole number
of Believers of a Nation, may by reason of their common profession be called a
National Church, as well as the whole body of men throughout the world upon the
account of their professing the Faith of the Gospel, etc. are and may be called
the visible Catholick-Church of Christ.

Answ. 1. But if Mr. T. thinks this to be an answer to the Question, he will
scarce find in this matter any Corrival: Quaestio est de ollis, Responsio de
sepis. We are not enquiring, whether a company of Believers living in a Nation,
may be called, upon the account of their Faith and Profession, a National
Church, which by the figure Ca^achresis it may be they may. I am sure most
abusively and improperly it is that they are so called.

Nor, 2dly, Is the enquiry de facto, of what by the Providence of God is come
to pass, in which sense we grant there is a Natio^al Church under the Gospel;
the Church of England is so.

But, 3dly, Whether upon the account of a compulsed, or education-Faith and
Profession (contradicted by the most) assumed and professed by persons living
in a Nation divided in several Parishes and Diocesses, under the conduct of
their Parochial Ministers, and Diocesan, Metropolitan Bishops, united together
under one (or more) Ecclesiastical visible Head; This company of People thus
molded, are or may truly be accounted a Church of Christ, instituted by him
under the Oeconomie of the Gospel. Which, whoever will undertake to
demonstrate, must I conceive attempt the proof of these few things.

First, That a profession of Faith forced and compelled, or at least in which
men have been trained up from their Infancy (as the Turks are in the Doctrine
of their Alcoran) and that for the most part contradicted in their
conversation, is sufficient to give a man or woman a right and title to
Church Membership.

Secondly, That persons co-habiting, or living together in a Parish, are, de
jure, upon the account of that their co-habitation (at least if they make so
much profession as to be able to say the Creed, Lords-Prayer, and ten
Commandments, though, as was said, contradicted by a course of debauchery etc.)
are a Church of Christ; or that Parish-Churches, qua tales, are of the
Institution of Christ.

Thirdly, That the Subordination of these Churches and Ministers to Diocesan
Bishops, Archdeacons, Consistories and Commissaries, and these again to an
Archbishop, or Metropolitan is of the same Original.

Fourthly, That these Bishops, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Courts
Ecclesiastical, Metropolitical Head, are of the Institution of Christ. Which
when Mr. T. (or any one for him) shall do, I will be a Member of the Church of
England. But he knows an easier way; It Is but saying, That there is no
Institution of a Church by Preception or Command; and he avoids, he thinks, the
necessity of putting himself to all this toil. But seriously Sir, very few
considerate and judicious Christians will care to be Members of such a Church
as is destitute of divine Institution, and whether his Clients of the Church of
England will thank him for this part of his Plea, I am not certain. In the
greatness of his love he seems to be killing his Mother with kind embraces. The
Church of England is not, he grants, of the Institution of Christ (for there is
no Church that is) so that there is no need to allege, Isa. 49. 23. and 66.
8. for the Institution of a National Church: Nevertheless that the Prophecy,
Isa. 49. 23. waits the time of its accomplishment, is said by the author of the
S. T. with more confidence than evidence.

Answ. Well, Mr. T. will not be guilty of the same crime: what evidence brings
he of this confident assertion? Why, many learned Interpreters (among whom Mr.
Gataker) think otherwise. But Sir, we have not learned, Jurare in verba
Magistri, to take any man's dictates for evident proof of any thing of this
nature, which we are sure they are not. As learned Interpreters are of the mind
of the Author of S. T. The truth of the Assertion is evident.

1st. The Prophecy has respect to some time after the coming of Christ in the
flesh, of which he speaks, verse. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. which one consideration
manifests the nothingness of the first part of Mr. Gatakers notion; That it had
its fulfilling in Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, Ahashuerus, with the Queens of
some of them.

2dly, Its to receive its accomplishment after the Preaching of the Gospel to
the Gentiles (which was not till after the Ascension of Christ) verse. 1, 6.
which the Apostle cites, Acts 13. 47. for his warrant in speaking the Word of
God to them.

3dly, The Deliverance and Glory, God does in this Chapter engage to bestow
upon the twelve Tribes (as is evident from the Names of Israel, verse. 3, 5, 6,
7. Of Jacob, verse. 5. Of the Trib^s of Jacob, verse. 6. The preserved of Israel
(ibid.) i. e. the ten Tribes, in way of distinction from whom the two Tribes
are called Sion, verse. 14.) evinceth, that as yet it waits its accomplishment.
For though the two Tribes were delivered from the Babylonish Captivity, yet the
ten Tribes (as its known) have remained in their graves ever since they were
carried captive by Salmaneser to this day. It Is true, God did once call his
People of the two Tribes from the North, in the time of Cyrus, etc. But from
the West, and from the Land of Sinim (i. e. from all parts of the world into
which they have been scattered) they have not yet been called, as it is verse. 12.

4thly, When God does this, his People shall not hunger nor thirst, neither
shall the heat or Sun smite them, verse. 10. (i. e. they shall hunger, or thirst
no more, the heat, or Sun shall never after more smite them, Rev. 7. 16. i. e.
they shall never be burnt by the heat or Sun of Persecution more; all sorrow
and crying shall depart, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
(Rev. 7. 17.) which we are sure is not yet accomplished.)

5thly, Verse. 17. Was never yet fulfilled, at their return from Babylon their
destroyers and they that made them waste went not out of them; There were then
the crew of Sanballat, Tobiah, etc. that opposed them, and that so far, that
they put a stop at the last to the work of the Lord at Jerusalem, into which,
anon after Alexander the Great enters; after him Antiochus Epiphanes wastes,
after these the Romans conquer it; and now the Turks possess it.

Nor has, 6thly, the 19th verse. ever been accomplished since the carrying away
the ten Tribes, the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah were never full of their own
Inhabitants. Those sent to p^ssess it 2 Kings 17. 24. we never read were sent
for home again. They that swallowed up the twelve Tribes have been changed (the
Assyrians, Greeks, Romans, Turks, have interchangably done it) but not removed.
All which abundantly evidence the truth of what I asserted; That the Prophecy
waits the time of its accomplishment. If you apply the Scripture solely to the
Gentile Saints, it is evident, hitherto it has not been fulfilled. They are
still under Sorrow, Oppression, Sufferings, which at this day of its
accomplishment they shall not be; (of whom this Prophecy speaks) verse. 10.
Their Wasters, Destroyers, etc. are not gone out from among them, as it is,
verse. 17. The prey is not yet taken from the mighty, nor the lawful Captive
delivered. Nor has God contended with the Persecutors of his People, according
to the purport of verse. 24, 25, 26. So that evidently the Prophecy had not its
accomplishment in the days of the Persian Potentates, or of Constantine, etc.
or since in any of the ten Horns; but waits the time thereof, as we think Mr.
T. himself will say we now assert with as much evidence as confidence. The
former whereof (with a great abatement of the latter) is much desired in the
writings of this Animadverter by sober minded persons, not a few, who have
spent some of their time in perusing them. That the text, Isa. 66. 8. is a
Prophecy expressly relating to the Jews, and their miraculous conversion, (as
is asserted in the S. T.) Mr. T. tells us is not certain; and cites Mr.
Gataker, acquainting us that the most Interpreters understand it of the suddein
delivery of the People out of the Babylonian bondage by Cyrus; Diverse of the
Restitution and Restoration of the Church, under the Ministry of the Gospel,
when so many thousands were converted, Acts 2. 41. and 4. 4.

Answ. 1. But that learned person is no Oracle, to whose dictates we are
indispensably bound to attend, and give evidence.

2. Other Interpreters understand it of the miraculous conversion of the Jews;
and those not a few, nor contemptible.

3. That it hitherto has not had its fulfilling we have the concurrent
Testimony of some of the Ancients. Just. Mart. in his Dialog. cum Tryp. page
312. refers this place of Isa. 66. from the 5th verse. etc. to Christ's second
coming. In which words (says he) is (...), (which Mr. Mede understands as
meant of the Resurrection of the Godly; the mystery of our being again
generated, or made new at the Resurrection) (...), -- and absolutely of all who
expect Christ shall appear at Jerusalem, and by well-doing study to please him.
And the serious consideration of the context will afford that brightness to the
understanding of the judicious Reader, that will lead him captive to the belief
thereof. Let any one tell me when verse. 6, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19, 22, 23, 24,
ever had its fulfilling. Now this one observation removes out of the way, both
the Expositions given in by that learned person. It relates not to the time
either of Redemption from the Babylonish Captivity, or the conversion of those,
Acts 2. and 4. For the context evinceth, that it has not yet been fulfilled.

4. That the Jews shall not be converted by the ordinary preaching of the
Gospel, but by some extraordinary means; and particularly the appearance of
Christ in the Clouds, is no private opinion of our own. Mr. Mede in his
Apocalyptical Key, is of the same mind, who thinks Paul's Conversion was a type
hereof. The Scripture leads us into the belief hereof, Zach. 12. 10. And I will
pour upon the house of David and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of
grace and supplicat^on, and they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and
they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son: and shall be in
bitterness for him as one is in bitterness for his firstborn.

A few things are briefly to be remarked.

1. That the Conversion of the Jews, the whole Nation of them, is here
propesied of, who are here called, The House of David, and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem.

2dly, That this their Conversion is attributed to the pouring down of the
Spirit, and their looking upon Christ.

3dly. The Question is, What is meant by their looking upon Christ? That their
seeing him in Clouds of Heaven in Majesty and great Glory, is hereby intended,
we have an unquestionable infallible Interpreter assuring us, Rev 1. 7. Behold,
he comes with Clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him: and all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him. And Mat. 24. 30.
Then shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man (either per Synechdochen, the
great signs of Glory and Majesty, which then shall compass him round about; or
the Son of Man himself, as the sign of Circumcision is nothing else but
Circumcision it self) in Heaven. And then shall all the Tribes of the Earth
mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, viz.
in Majesty and great glory. The sight whereof shall be the mea^s of their
miraculous Conversion. Accordingly you have here in Isa. 66. verse. 5. The
appearing of the Lord. The issue whereof is (1) The ruin of his enemies, verse.
6, 14, 15, 16, (where you have Christ's appearance, largely discoursed of Rev.
19.) (2) The Conversion and Restoration of the Jews, verse. 7, 8, 9. (3) The
concomitant Glory in the new Heaven, and new Earth state, or the time of the
restitution of all things, verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 22, 23. All which
considered, I humbly conceive I had ground enough to assert, That Isa. 66. 8.
is a Prophecy expressly relating to the Jews and their miraculous Conversion.
That because it is said, Romans 11. 25, 26. When the fullness of the Gentiles is
come in, all Israel shall be saved: Therefore I may find something of a
National Church, consisting of several Parish Churches, bounded by old Customs,
Laws, Constitutions, etc. in subordination to Diocesan, Metropolitan Churches,
with their several Officers, of Priests, Archdeacons, Bishops, Archbishops on
the head of them, which is the National Church we are enquiring after in Isa.
66. 8. is a Consequence I shall never see Mr. T. make good. That he should do
so, is (...), amongst the number of those things that are impossible. And once
for all I desire him, when he writes next, not to think so highly of himself,
as to conceit that his dictates must pass without control, but to remember he
is, (as well as other men) obliged to give us a reason of them; else we shall
not think our selves bound to take any further notice of them, then to reject
them as sayings of no weight or value.

Sect. 15.
Of National Ministers. Peter, Paul, Titus, no National Ministers. Ephesians. 4.
11, 12, 13, explained. The Body of Christ there, not the Church-Catholick
visible, but a particular Church of Christ, proved. Pastors and Teachers are
only belonging to one particular Congregation. If a man be a Minister by the
appointment of Christ, of a Church-Catholick visible, he cannot be a Minister
of Christ of a National Church. The Ministers of Christ are either
Extraordinary or Ordinary. Of Saints Interest in each. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23,
expounded.

THE second Querie in the S. T. is, Whether National Ministers are the
Ministers of Christ? Or, Whether there can be a true Ministry in a false
Church, as a National Church must be if not of Divine Institution?

To this Mr. T. pretends to answer, Sect. 16. And after conjectures of what I
mean by National Ministers, he gives us such a description of them, as he could
not (sure) think any man besides himself would subscribe to; but it served his
design (he thought.) By National Ministers, I mean such as are members of a
National Church, related to it as the Ministers thereof, as such; Ordained and
set apart by National Officers, bound up by its Canons and Laws in their
Ministrations: who when Mr. T. shall prove to be Ministers of Christ, he will
be supposed to say something in answer to the Querie, which as yet he has not
done. His ensuing Arguments speak not a word for such National Ministers,
himself being Judge.

1st, Peter, though he had the Apostleship, of Circumcision, and Paul of the
Gentiles, were not National Ministers.

2dly, Nor Titus, though left in Crete, to set in order things that were
wanting, and to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. F^r they were,

First, No members of a National Church.

Secondly, Not related to it as the Ministers thereof.

Thirdly, Not Ordained, or set apart to their Office by Natinnal Officers.

Fourthly, Not bounded and circumscribed in their M^nistrations, by any devised
Institutions or Canons thereof: None of which were then in being as is known.
He goes on and tells us,

3dly, They that may be Ministers of Christ, though they be Ministers for the
Body of Christ, and all the Members thereof, man be Ministers of Christ, though
National;

But Pastors and Teachers are given for the edifying of the Body of Christ;

Therefore, etc.

Answ. 1. If by the Body of Christ, Mr. T. means the Church-Catholick visible;
The Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. speaks not a word of it; not the Body of
Professors, or multitude of persons professing Faith in Christ, is there
intended; but some particular Instituted Church of Christ. Which we prove,

1. The Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. is the same with the Body and
Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28. as by the serious perusal of both places
(comparing the one with the other) will to the sober and judicious be evident.
That there it signifies a particular Church of Christ, we have demonstrated
Sect. 13. therefore here it also so signifies.

2. Here Pastors and Teachers are said to be given for the edifying of the Body
of Christ, (i. e. particular instituted Churches of Christ) and accordingly we
find them ordained in every Church, Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. and the whole of
their charge limited to particular Churches, Acts 20. 17, 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Col. 4. 17. who are commanded to obey them in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
12. Heb. 13. 17. from whom they might not upon every occasion, nor without ^he
consent of the Congregation, upon any pretext whatsoever, remove; (See Calv.
Institut. l. 4. c. 3. s. 7.) of which Mr. Paul Bains speaks in his Exposition
on the Ephesians, chap. 2. 3. p. 350, 351. As the Lord does give a Calling and
Grace, so a People, toward whom it is especially blessed -- It is true, the
Apostle had a more large Flock, the care of all Churches was upon him; but
wheresoever God gives a Calling, there he gives a People, of whom the
Minister may say, Toward you Grace is given me of God, Acts 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5.
2. God has assigned every ordinary Minister a portion of his People: for this
is the difference between extraordinary, as the Apostles, Evangelists, the
seventy Disciples, and our ordinary Pastors: The Apostles had an Universal
Commission; and the Evangelists were Delegates of the Apostles -- The Seventy
(if not Evangelists, which some of the Ancients incline to) yet they were
illimited helpers, and fellow laborers in the work of the Lord. But ordinary
Ministers the Lord commanded to fasten them to certain places, Tit. 1. 5.
Ordain Elders City by City. And in the Council of Chalcedon, chap. 6. Let none
be ordained at large, lest he prove a wandering Jonathan. Every Minister must
be, 1. Separated, 2. Authorized, 3. have allotted to him a certain portion of
people which may be instructed by him, which the diminutive (...), not (...),
may seem to insinuate. Now as God does give every Pastor his several Flock, so
he will that we travel in leading of them, we must not (...), we must not be
Bishops in other men's Diocesses, lest God say, Who has required this at your
hands? When the Lord lights Candles he does find Candlesticks on which to set
them, etc.

The sum is, 1. The Body of Christ (Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.) is a particular Church of
Christ, for the edification of which Pastors and Teachers are given. 2ly.
Ordinary Officers are limited to particular Churches. From whence the vanity of
this Animadverter's Argument is conspicuous to every eye.

If by Body of Christ he understand, in his first Proposition, the Universal
Catholic Church: 1. His Argument is naught, consisting of four terms: for we
have manifested that the Body of Christ in the Minor (which is the Apostles) is
a particular Church of Christ. 2. Hi^ Major is invalid; It does not follow,
that if men may be Ministers of Christ, though they be Ministers for the Body
of Christ, and all the members thereof, that they may be Ministers of Christ
though National. If he think Ministers for the Body of Christ, and all the
members thereof, and national Ministers are aequipollent, upon second thoughts
he will be so ingenious as to acknowledge he was mistaken. Nay, 3dly. The very
truth is, it is so far from being true, that upon supposition a man may be a
Minister of the Body of Christ, and yet the Minister of Christ; i. e. by the
appointment of Christ a Minister for his Body, and all the Membe^^ (Churches)
thereof. That therefore he may be the Minister of Christ though National, that
ejus contrarium, est verum. A man cannot be a Minister of Christ if a National
Minister, or Minister of a National Church, upon supposition that Christ has
instituted and appointed his Ministers to be Ministers for his Body, i. e. his
Church-Catholick-visible, which is not sure confined within the narrow
circumference of one Nation: A man's residence wherein will be accoun^ed but a
pitiful discharge of his Ministry upon the supposition aforesaid. But, 4thly,
By the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. we have proved a particular Church of Christ
to be intended. That there is any show of reason in the Animadverters
proposition; They that may be Ministers of Christ, though they may be Ministers
of the Body of Christ, i. e. a particular Church of Christ, and all the Members
thereof (which by the appointment of Christ they are) may be Ministers of
Christ, though National, (which none are but by the devisings of man, and
appointment of Antichrist) he himself will not have the confidence to aver.
There are these things incumbent upon him to prove if he ever reinforce this
Argument.

First, That by Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. is not meant a particular Instituted
Church of Christ.

Secondly, That ordinary Church Officers (for to run into a discourse of what
was done by the Apostles extraordinary Officers, who were not fixed any where,
nor could be, whilst they made conscience of their Commission, Mat. 28. 19.
which was to Preach the Gospel to every Creature; In which Office none are
their Successors, as we prove Chap. 4. is such a pitiful fig-leaf to cover
ones nakedness with, that every eye will see through) are not limited to, or
fixed in a particular Congregation.

Thirdly, Manifest the truth of this proposition (should it be granted him for
disputes sake, that by Body, Ephesians. 4. is meant the Church-Catholick-visible)
They that may be Ministers of Christ, though they may be Ministers of the Body
of Christ (i. e. the Church-Catholick-visible) and all the members thereof, may
be Ministers of Christ though National. The Bottom or Basis upon which it is
built, I must acknowledge my short-sightedness to be such, that I cannot ken,
nor, it may be, a wiser man than either of us.

His Fourth Argument is like the rest, it is thus formed: If any of the Saints,
as well as one particular Congregation, have an In^erest in all the Ministers
of Christ, so as that they are truly theirs, then Ministers of Christ may be
National;

But 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23, Paul, and Cephas, and Apollos were all the Corinthians,
and all others who were Christ's;

Therefore.

Answ. En cor Zenodoti, en jecur cratetis.

What is most admirable in this Argument I know not. A few things will manifest
its nakedness to all.

1st, The Ministers of Christ are either such as were called extraordinary, as
were immediately sent by Christ, (or assumed to themselves by them who were so
sent, to be coadjutors, or fellow-workers with them in that service and
employment) to preach the Gospel throughout the world, and were fixed no where;
related as Pastors or Teachers to no one particular Congregation more than
another; or such as were mediately sent by Christ, ordained in, and set apart
for particular Congregations. Of the former sort were the Apostles, etc. Of the
latter, Pastors, Teachers, as we but now proved.

2dly, The having an interest in Ministers, is either the having an interest in
their gifts and abilities God has given them, or in their persons, as
Ministers appointed by the Lord, to oversee, instruct, and watch over their
souls, as such that must give an account, Heb. 13. 17. Now let him take
Ministers in either sense, for extraordinary or ordinary Ministers, and an
interest in them for an interest in their gifts, or in them as Ministers
appointed by the Lord to watch over and instruct them; the consequence of his
first proposition is most weak and invalid. Though all the Saints in the world
might claim an interest in Paul, etc. it does not follow that they were
National Ministers, which 'twas impossible they should be, there being no such
thing as a National Church, from whence a National Minister has his
denomination. And Mr. T. may as well surmise a King without Subjects, a Father
without Children, or a Husband without a Wife, as to surmise Paul, etc. to be
National Ministers, when there was no such thing in being as a National Church.
The like may be said of Pastors and Teachers in that day.

But, 3dly, If he take Ministers for ordinary Ministers (as he must do, if he
speak to purpose, extraordinary Ministers being ceased with the Apostles) and
their interest in them, for their interest in them as Ministers, to oversee and
instruct them in the Lord, by virtue of Office-power; there is nothing more
false than this, that every Saint has an interest in them as such; none but
that particular Congregation having in that sense an interest in them, to which
they are related as Ministers. Nor does the Apostle 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. say that
every Saint has.

1. All is yours, is no more than all is and shall be for your good.

2. He speaks to the particular Church of Corinth, of which neither Paul, nor
Apollos, nor Gephas, were Pastors or Teachers.

3. He is condemning them upon the account of their crying up and preferring
one before another, upon the supposition of the excellency of gifts; some
thought they saw in one, others in the other; which caused them to side and
tumultuate the one against the other: To allay which, amongst other things, he
tells them, All is theirs, whether Paul etc. i. e. the gifts of the one and the
other, were for their use and emolument, as the Lord was pleased in his
providence to cast them amongst them.

4. He speaks of extraordinary unlimited Officers, that were to continue but
for a season, and (whilst they were) fixed and ^etled in no particular Church,
so that the Corinthians might lay as much claim to them upon that account as
any other: Therefore National Ministers may be Ministers of Christ, is this
Animadverter's Logic, which when I purpose ludicre sophisticare, I may imitate
him in.

What follows, viz. That a man may be a Commissioner for approbation of Public
Preachers throughout a Nation, (as Mr. T. was when that was in fashion) and so
a National Minister, or an Itinerant Preacher, and yet be a Minister of Christ,
is not at all to the purpose.

1. If Mr. T. looked upon himself as such an one, when he sat at White Hall
amongst the Tryers, I know many of the^ that then sat there, did not. And in
the sense I speak of National Ministers, as explained in the beginning of this
Section, he could not be one.

2dly. Some (at least) of the then Tryers were so far from being National
Ministers, that to my knowledge they were not Ministers at all, but private
Gentlemen, whom the then Powers thought fit to entrust with the management of
that affair.

Sect. 16.
No National Church under the Economy of the Gospel. The National Church of
England destitute of what Mr. T. makes essential of a true Church. Somewhat
more essential to a true Church than the truth of Doctrine of Faith, the truth
of Worship, the truth of holy Conversation, viz. Segregation and Aggregation,
proved. The A^imadverter's Argument retorted upon himself. Though every defect
of Order does not nullify a Church, yet the defect of that Order that is of
the essence of a true Church does. Of the Disorders of the Church of Corinth.
Their impertinent Allegation by the Animadverter of Synods: the learned
Whitaker's judgment of them, and General Councils. These no proof for National
Churches. Of many particular Congregations under one Presbyterial Government.
These may be yet no National Church. The Church of Jerusalem but one particular
Congregation, meeting together in the same place for celebration of Ordinances.
How this Church was the pattern of all other Churches. Mr. T. his Cavils
refuted.

THe next attempt of Mr. T. in this Section, is to prove a National Church, so
denominated from their subjection to some Canon-Rulers Ecclesiastical (which is
the National Church we are enquiring after) or conveening by Deputies in some
National Synod, though not of Divine Institution, is a true Church.

This seems at first blush to be a difficult task: to assert a Church not of
Divine Institution, to be a Church of God (for so it is if a true Church) his
Temple, Tabernacle, in which he walks and dwells, is to me such a Paradox as
requires a strong brain and hard forehead to make good. But Aquila non capit
muscas, nothing but what others despair of ever accomplishing is thought by
daring spirits worthy the attempting. We attend his proofs. Thus he argues:
They may be a true Church who have all things essential to a Church, and
nothing destructive of its being such. But a National Church may have all
things essential to a Church, etc. Therefore.

Answ. Very good! We deny his minor Proposition, that a National Church may
have all things essential to a Church, etc. What says he for the proof of it?
He tells us, that a National Church may have the truth of Doctrine of Faith,
the truth of Worship, the truth of holy Conversation, besides which there is
nothing essential to a true Church.

Answ. But this is gratis dictum, and without proof.

1. That Mr. T. can give us an account of any National Church under the
Economy of the Gospel, concerning which it may be affirmed that the truth of
the Doctrine of Faith, the truth of Worship, the truth of holy Conversation did
appertain to it, (i. e.) if I do not much mistake him, it has been sound in
Doctrinals, the true Worship of Christ has been managed and carried on in it,
and the particular members thereof (i. e. the multitude of the Inhabitants of
the Nation) holy and righteous, will not hastily be believed by such as have
thought themselves concerned to look into these matters. As for the Church of
England we suppose he will not have the confidence to assert that it may be
truly affirmed of it, that the members thereof are so qualified. The frequent
staggering and shameful spewings, through excess, that we daily behold in no
small number, even of the Captains and chief of this Herd, evince the contrary.
Of the soundness of their Doctrine we give an account, Chap. 11. and of the
truth of their Worship, Chap. 8.

But 2dly, The Animadverter full well knew that his Antagonists look not not
upon the particulars instanced in, to be the Essentials of a Church. We
Country-folk are not wont to say, that when the materials of an House are
fitted and brought together, the House is built; there must be an orderly
forming and placing of each piece in the building according to the Scheme or
Platform thereof, before this can be affirmed of it. And therefore hic pes
figendus, he should have manifested the truth of his dictate, that besides
these there is nothing essential to a true Church.

We are apt to think that two things, over and above wh^t is instanced in by
him, are so essential to a true Church, that without them it is not such. 1.
Segregation, or separation from the wicked, carnal, formal, hypocritical world,
and the worship thereof, of which chap. 4. of the S. T. and in our Epistle to
the Reader prefixed to this Treatise. 2. Aggregation, or a solemn gathering
together, by free and mutual consent, into particular Congregations, in the
fear of the great God, g^ving up our selves to him and one another, according
to his will, to ^alk together in the fellowship of the Gospel, in obedience to
all the Institutions and Appointments of our dear Lord.

1. That thus it should be in Gospel-dayes the Prophets of old bear their
Testimony, Jer. 50. 5. Come let us Heb. (...), which points forth not a casual
aggregation, not a forced conjunction; but a free and voluntary giving up
themselves to the Lord, and to one another. It Is used of such a conjunction as
is made by marriage.
join our selves to the Lord, etc. so Isa. 2. 3. Mich. 4. 2. Isa. 44. 5. Zech.
8. 21, 22, 23.

2dly. Accordingly we have the Churches of Christ in the New Testament
practicing, and commended for their so doing, as acting therein according to
the will of God, Acts 2. 41, 42. 2 Cor. 8. 5.

3dly. The several names and tit^es given unto particular Churches evince as
much. Every such Church is called,

1. A Body, 1 Cor. 12. 27. Col. 3. 15. Romans 14. 4, 5. Ephesians. 5. 30, 32. Col. 1.
18, 21. Now it is not the multitude or number of members, whether many or few,
that constitute or make a Body. We say not, if we come into a Field where a
Battle has been fought, and find an Arm in one place, a Leg in another, an
Hand in a third, etc. though we meet with as many members scattered up and down
as are in the body, yea though thrown together in heaps, that here is a body;
no, no, it is

Rudis indigestaque moles, Their union each with other and coalescency in one,
is that which gives them that denomination: Particular Saints scattered here
and there, or casually coming together are not (nor can they be) called the
Body of Christ; their union each with other by their free and mutual consent,
is that which denominates them so to be.

2. An House or Temple, Heb. 3. 6. Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. 1 Timothy 3. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Mr. T. knows who have thought the world was made by the casual confluence of
Atoms; he does not sure think, that a casual concurrence of people professing
the Name of the Lord, without more ado, are, or can become an House or Temple
for him.

3. A City, a Kingdom, Ephesians. 2. 19. Mat. 21. 43. Heb. 12. 28. Joh. 18. 36. That
a man should be any way a member of these but by his free consent, cannot be
asserted with the least show of reason.

4. A Fraternity or Brotherhood, Zech. 11. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 17. compared with
chap. 5. 2, 13.

5. A Candlestick, in allusion to Moses his Candlesticks, Exodus 25. 31.
(wherein though there were many shafts, yet they did all coalesce in one) Rev.
1. 11, 12, 20. All which as they import Aggregation, or a solemn union; so they
clearly evince that this cannot be but by free and mutual consent.

4. Besides, we find Christ promising his Presence to his Church and People
thus aggregated or gathered (an Argument of his well-pleasedness therein) Mat.
18. 20. which accordingly he makes good to the Churches of Asia (as to the
rest) Rev. 1. 13. which we have proved to be particular, Congregational
Churches. That they were separated from the World and its Worship, gathered
together by their own free consent for the worshipping God, Mr. T. cannot deny;
There were no Laws to compel them hereunto, but the contrary.

So that 3dly, we may righteously retort this Animadverters Argument upon
himself. There cannot be a true Church where those things essential to a true
Church cannot be found: But in National Churches in general (in the Church of
England in particular) those things that are essential to a true Church cannot
be found: Therefore.

The Major is Mr. T's; The Minor we prove. Right matter and form is of the
essence of a true Church, both wanting in the Church of England.

1. The right matter Mr. T. denies not, to be visible Saints; visible
Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, covetous persons are not such: yet of such
as these is the Church of England mostly composed.

2dly. The form of a true Church we have manifested to consist in separation
from Worldly, Formal, Antichristian Worshippers, gathering together by free
consent into a Church State, or particular Societies, for the Worship and
Service of God: neither of which can be asserted of the Church of England. Much
of the Worship of the Nations, of Antichrist (at least their rites and modes of
Service) is retained in it. And into that Church State (such as it is) in which
they are fixed, did they never enter by their free and voluntary consent, but
by the Laws of the Kingdom were they at first (I speak of their
National-Church-state; that the Gospel was early (whether by Joseph of
Arimathea, or some one of the Apostles, is not material) preached in England;
that then a true Church, or Churches, were here planted I grant, but this is
nothing to their present frame as a Church-National) compelled thereunto, and
by severe Laws retained therein to this day. From which (as from the Lordly
Prelacy) the most sober People of the Nation do everywhere (groaning, being
burdened) long to be delivered.

What follows will receive a speedy dispatch. 1. It Is true the defect of
outward order (i. e. of every outward order, though of the institution of
Christ) does not nullify the Church; but want of that order which is of the
essence of the Church, as we have evinced to be the case of the Church of
England, does so. 2dly, Mr. T's instances of the disorders in the Church of
Corinth, yet a true Church, are so evidently impertinent, that the bare
mentioning them is confutation sufficient. The Church of Corinth was a rightly
constituted Church, made up of visible Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 1. gathered together
into a particular body, 1 Cor. 12. 27. meeting together, (...), in the same
place, for the Worship of God, 1 Cor. 11. 20. and 14. 23. Some disorders found
amongst this Church did not nullify it: Ergo the defect of that Order that is
instituted by Christ ad esse, to the very existence and being of a
Gospel Church (as is the case of National Churches) does not nullify them,
will not in have be made good. When Mr. T. proves the sameness of constitution
betwixt the particular Church of Corinth, and the National Church of England,
his instance of disorders amongst the Corinthians will be acknowledged
pertinent; but till then he will not himself, upon second thoughts, say it is
so. The having of Natio^al Rulers Ecclesiastical, either single persons, or in
a Synod or Convocation, make not a false Church, says the Animadverter.

Answ. 1. But should this be granted, it would not follow that a National
Church is not a false Church, which it may be upon other accounts, though upon
the account hereof it should be acq^itted.

But 2ly, National Officers (or Rulers) Ecclesiastical, in whom all
Church Power is stated (as Archbishop,) and from thence derived to Diocesan
Bishops, and by them communicated (in part) to the ordinary Parish Priests (as
is the case of the National Ecclesiastical Officers of England) are false and
Antichristian Officers and Ministers, we prove chap. 3. of the S. T. That a
National Church so denominated from their subjection to these, should be a true
Church, is beyond the reach of my understanding.

What he adds touching Synods owned and submitted unto by those of the
Congregational way, and Churches of a greater number and at a greater distance
than could meet in one place every Lord's day, is not at all to his purpose. At
the best it is but a recrimination. I know not how this Animadverter could
imagine that the owning and asserting of these things as lawful, had the least
tendency to the establishment of a National Church. But some men are so
distempered that they suppose every thing makes for the advancement of that
design they are driving on. If he deems Synods, owned by men of Congregational
Principles, and his Ecclesiastical Convocation of National Officers are of the
same nature, he is mistaken.

1. Those are chosen by the particular Churches to which they are severally
related, and what they act and do is in their name, and upon the account of
that power and authority they receive from them: The Convocation of the Clergy
act in their own name and authority, being never chosen by any one Congregation
to sit and make Laws.

2ly. Those pretend not to be the Church, nor to any self-power to make Laws,
and impose them upon the Churches as obligatory and binding, to be received and
subjected to by them, without the least judgment of discretion allowed them,
or liberty of dissenting, if not persuaded in their consciences of the truth of
what is decreed by them, and its consonancy with the Scriptures of the Lord. As
is known to be the case of the Convocation of the Church of England, to dissent
from whose Canons (at least to oppose them) is censured with no less than an
Excommunication, or delivering up to Satan. Which how directly it leads to the
Popish implicit faith, of believing as the Church believes, every one is able
to discern.

For my part, with reference to these, I am much of the mind of the learned
Whitaker, de Council. p. 12. General Councils may err, and embrace false
opinions: Nam Concilium Antiochenum veritatem damnavit and haeresin apertam
propugnavit: Similiter Ariminense and Ephesinum secundum, ex quo patet
veritatem non esse metiendam ex numero Episcoporum. Of them he says,

1. That their calling together is a certain politic and humane invention,
page 35, 77.

2. That they cannot frame Articles of Faith to bind the Conscience, page 19.

3. That their end in coming together, is not to feed as Pastors, but to
consult what is best for the Churches, page 85.

4. That they are not simply necessary, page 23.

5. That they do not give authority to the Scripture, page 242, 243.

6. That their Decrees are not immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost, page
262, 263.

7. That the ultimate determination and judgment of a General Council may be
false, page 231.

8. That there is no judgment of a Council properly in matters of Faith, ibid.

9. That the truth of things determined in Councils, may afterward be called
into question, and again disputed, page 283.

10. That the Churches of Christ have been kept sound in Faith without them for
the first 300 years, page 23.

To which I add, 11. That I never yet read of any Council, or Synod since that
Act 15. but 'twere easy to demonstrate, that in one thing or other it has
erred.

The most of the Hay and Stubble that is built upon the Foundation at this day
(not to mention their attempts (...)) owing its original to some of them. So
that I confess I am no admirer of them; and am bold to affirm, of any that have
yet been, it had been better for the Church of God that they had never been in
the world. But these things are little to Mr. T. his purpose. That persons
owning the lawfulness of Synods (from Scripture-warrant as they conceive)
should therefore be necessitated to own a National Church as a true Church of
Christ, is a position that Mr. T. will never make good.

I suppose by the view I have taken of some of his Writings, he is very
confident of his own abilities; but he is a rare man indeed that can compose a
Rope of Sand. The lawfulness of a National Church, or unlawfulness thereof,
having no dependence upon Congregational Synods, but is to take its measure
from somewhat else, of which before. Of Churches of a greater number ^han can
meet at one place, for the celebration of all the Ordinances of Christ, I shall
not need to say any thing; till he acquaint us what Congregational men are of
that persuasion, it will be accounted a mere Calumny. The assembling of the
members of a particular Church in the same place, for the celebration of the
same Numerical Ordinances, being one considerable part of the definition given
by our Congregational Brethren of such a Church: And yet if they did own
Churches of a greater number, it is ridiculous to imagine that they could from
thence be compelled to the owning of a National Church, which wants both the
matter (and form) of a true Church of Christ, which yet the other may have. So
that we need not turn aside to consider the proofs used by those that held,
That many particular Congregations may be under one Presbyterial Government,
Printed 1645. Of which this Animadverter reminds us. For though I am not of
their mind, nor do I conceive their Reasons to be cogent: Yet were that true, a
National Church could not from thence be proved a true Church of Christ. For,

1st, They suppose these Congregations to be particular Churches of Christ,
constituted and made up of visible Saints, which cannot (as yet) be affirmed of
any National Church in the world, or any Parish Church as a part thereof.

2dly, They also affirm, that these particular Churches have power within
themselves to determine differences by their own Elders, to excommunicate
Offenders, obstinately guilty of notorious scandals.

3dly, They are utterly against all Archiepiscopal, National Officers, the
source and spring of a National Church.

4thly, They conceive not all in England, nor all in a Parish to be lawful
Church Members because born there; nor will they compel them, as such, to
receive the Sacrament with them; which is the known case of the Church of
England. That at Jerusalem there were more Churches than one under a
Presbyterial Government, is a fond conceit, which the numerous multitude of
Believers thereunto belonging, contribute not the least mite of assistance to.
Be they never so many, they are called Acts 8. 1. (...), The Church which was
at Jerusalem. The like may be said of the Church of Corinth; it was one single
Congregation, the Church of God which was at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1, 1. 2 Cor. 1. 1.
So was the Church at Ephesus, Rev. 2. 1. But as was said, The grant of more
Churches than one under one Presbyterial Government, is remote enough from the
establishment of a National Church, which by other bonds and ligaments (than
the Assertors thereof will own) must be united to one National Head; or it has
not, cannot have, a being in the world. So that these things are little to his
purpose. The next attempt of this Animadverter, is to remove an obstruction
which he sees to lie in his way, which in sum is this: The first Church of
Christ under the Economy of the Gospel, was undoubtedly formed according to
the mind of Christ. But this was a particular instituted Church, which though
numerous, was not so numerous, but that they might meet together in the same
place. Therefore not a National Church, but a particular Church of Christ is of
his institution, etc.

The first Proposition is easily demonstrated: It was formed by the Apostles,
men of integrity and faithfulness, who would not, durst not, innovate in the
things of Christ, who had but lately received charge from him to teach
Believers to observe and do all things whatsoever he had commanded them; and
had promised thereupon his presence with them. To whom also, after his
Resurrection, he opened his heart, or plainly spoke of things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God, or Gospel Church State, Acts 1. 3. Accordingly it is said of
them, That they revealed the Counsel of God; not their own, but his, Acts 20.
27. delivered to them what they had received of the Lord Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 23.
To have done otherwise, had been an establishment of Will Worship, which they
condemn, Col. 2. 13.

The Minor Proposition is manifest: The first Church of Christ under the
Economy of the Gospel, was the Church at Jerusalem: This was a particular
Church of Christ. It Is said of them, Chap. 2. 46. That they continued daily
with one accord in the Temple. Verse. 47. Such as we converted, are said to be
added (...), to that Church, viz. which was at Jerusalem. See Chap. 4. 23, 24,
29. and 5. 12. and 8. 1, 3. and 11. 22. and 12. 5. and 15. 4, 22. It Is strange
to me, that when the Spirit of the Lord, whenever he makes mention of this
Church at Jerusalem speaks of it as one particular instituted Church of Christ,
any persons of sobriety should dare to assert, that it was not such, lifting up
themselves against his dictates and Testimony. Let Us consider what the
Animadverter replies hereunto.

He tells us, 1. That in Luke, in many places the word multitude, with an
universal sign, is not taken for every one, not one exempted; as Luke 8. 37.
Acts 25. 24. and 6. 2. and 16. 12, 30. and 21. 22. To which briefly.

1st, It Is granted, though what he produces Acts 16. 12, 30, to evince I
cannot tell; I am sure it is hugely impertinent to the matter in hand.

Nor, 2dly, Is it at all material, whether in the places instanced in by us
(where that expression is used) it be taken for every one none exempted, or
not. This only is incumbent on us to prove. First, That the Church at Jerusalem
was a particular Church of Christ. And 2dly, Such a particular Church as did
meet (all of them when not providentially hindered) might do so, notwithstanding
their multitude, for the Worship of God: There was no impossibility in rei
natura of their so doing: which he must wink hard that does not see shining
forth in its brightness in the forementioned Scriptures: which when Mr. T.
offers one Argument to evert, it shall be considered. His it is not likely will
not pass for demonstration amongst persons that look for proof of that which is
asserted. The Spirit of the Lord assuring us, that the multitude of the
Disciples were called together, it is not only likely, but most certain that
they were so. Nor is it likely that those whose particular duty and concern lay
in what was to be managed the^e, would willingly absent themselves. Mr. T.
himself tells us (in his Antipaedobaptism, or the 3d part, p. 340.) that all
the Church did come together, Act. 5. 11, 12. were gathered together, Act. 14.
27. and that they were not parts of the Church who did not come together, etc.
His second Reply is scarce worth the mentioning. If it be granted that they
then met for that business, yet there is no likelihood that they met for
Ordinances.

And why so I pray? why it is said, Act. 2. 46. that they did break bread from
house to house.

Ans. 1. But that because they sometimes celebrated that Ordinance more
privately, it should necessarily follow that they never did it all of them
together, that they were not in a capacity, were in an utter impossibility of
so doing (as is the case of a National Church) is beyond the verge of any man's
understanding but Mr. T. And it is desired he would at his next leizure make
good that consequence.

I am informed (and doubt not the truth of it) that Mr. T. after he had been in
hearing of the Parish Priest at Lempster, not long since got as many of the
Church, to whom he once owned himself related as their Pastor, together as he
could, and brake bread privately with them; yet may it not thence rationally be
concluded that he never celebrated that Ordinance with them more publicly, or
that he never intends to do so, much less that the Congregation, he still it
seems holds communion with, is so numerous that they cannot break bread
together in the same place. Such pitiful Sophisms as these will never pass for
proof amongst persons that have the exercise of their understanding or reason.

Yet 2dly, The Animadverter's Concession is a grant of the verity of that he
sets himself to oppose. If, Act. 6. 2. the Church did meet in one Congregation
for that business (as Mr. T. says) it is evident they were not so numerous but
they might meet together in one Assembly, which is the matter in controversy
betwixt us.

He adds, 3dly, The Church of Jerusalem cannot be said to be the pattern of all
Churches.

Answ. 1. Nor is it necessary that we assert it so to be. The discovery of the
Will of Christ, the Laws and Rules he has given forth touching the aggregation
of his Children into a Gospel-Church-state, are the pattern of all the Churches
of Christ in the World: and whatever Church is not constituted according to
this pattern, is none of his, nor will ever by him be owned so to be.

Yet 2dly, This Church at Jerusalem, being planted by the Apostles, according
to the mind of Christ, may with reference thereunto, be said to be the pattern
of all rightly constituted Churches. What has our Animadverter to excep^
against this? He tells us this cannot be, because 1. There was no distribution
of Believers under particular Off^cers.

Answ. 1. But what does Mr. T. mean by the distribution of Believers under
particular Officers? does he mean that they were not distributed into several
Congregations, under their particular Pastors? no one says they were; we
assert them to be one Church. They are no less a pattern of particular
Churches, than if they had been so distributed, so long as we find them in a
possibility of meeting in the same place.

2dly. Does he mean that they had no Pastors amongst them? This is more than he
will in have make good. For, 1. They had Apostles. 2dly, They had fixed
Officers, if Presbyters and Elders be such (as it is evident they are, from Act.
14. 23. and 20. 17, 28.) whom we find in the Church at Jerusalem, Act. 11. 29,
30. and 15. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23. and 16. 4. and 21. 18.

3ly. What he further offers, That the Church of Jerusalem was to be that
Church from whence were to be taken such as might plant other Churches, for
which end they were after dispersed, Acts 8. 1, 4. therefore it cannot be said
to be the pattern of all Churches, is, to speak modestly, such a strange
non-sequitur, that he must take time to make good. That because the Lord in his
providence suffered the enemies of his Son, to dissipate and scatter this
Church, and by it took advantage, in the greatness of his Love and Wisdom, for
the preaching the Gospel to others also, that therefore it should be a Church,
not formed up according to the mind of Christ, or being so formed, was not to
be an example and pattern, with respect to the matter and manner of its
constitution to succeeding Churches, is a consequence that will not be
swallowed down because Mr. T. says it; and yet nothing but his ipse dixit is
tendered toward its support and maintenance.

But what he says in the 4th place, will he thinks do his work, it is this: Be
the Church of Jerusalem of what nature or kind soever, whether Congregational,
Presbyterian or Parochial; it was so, not from any Institution of Christ, but
came to pass according to divine Promises and Providence, which being so
various, as that no certain rule can be accommodated to all times, places and
estates of the Church; We may judge, that Christ has left the shaping of
Churches much to humane prudence. That is in short, there is no Form of
Churches of divine institution. An Assertion so derogatory to the honor and
glory of our dear Lord Jesus, that it cannot but be grievous to Christ-loving
Saints to hear it abetted by any. I confess if this were the state of Churches,
it were to no purpose to contend with him about his National Church: nor is it
at all to be wondered at, if he has always been for that Church Government that
was uppermost in the World. But this being an Assertion wherein most of the
Saints of God in the World, do look upon themselves (upon more accounts than
one) to be greatly concerned, Mr. T. should have brought most irrefragable
Arguments to make it good. But behold in the stead hereof, we meet with a deep
silence; he only turns aside to consider what worthy Mr. Parker offers, to
prove that the form of Churches is of Divine Institution. Of which in the next
Section we shall speak.

Sect. 17.
The Form of Churches of Divine Institution. The learned Parker 's Arguments
vindicated from Mr. T. his Exceptions. Particular Churches called the Body of
Christ, his House, and Temple. The plain upon which the Antichristian Church
was first erected. No other foundation of the Church but Christ. 1 Cor. 3. 10.
Ephesians. 2. 20. Zech. 6. 13. Rev. 11. 1. explained. Twelve Arguments to prove the
Form of Churches is of Divine appointment.

IN Sect. 17. Mr. T. pretends to answer the learned Parkers Arguments, by which
he proves (Lib. 3. de Polit. Eccl. c. 17.) that the Form of Churches is of
Divine Institution: How well he has discharged this province is now to be
considered. The sum of Mr. Parker's first Argument is this: The Church is the
Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 27. But in the first forming of man's Body, he showed
himself such an accurate worker, in the determining the dimension and measure
of it, Genesis 2. that nothing might be added to or taken from it by any:
Therefore it cannot be imagined that he should be so regardless of his own
Body, as not accurately to circumscribe the dimension thereof. This Mr. T. is
pleased to call a Rhetorical flourish; but by his good leave, it will be found
an Argument of such weight, that he will not be able soon to remove it out of
his way. If the Church of Christ be his Body, he has certainly determined the
dimensions of it. Not to have done so, had been an Argument of little care
thereof; of his leaving it to the arbitrary disposements of the children of
men, of which we read not a tittle in the New Testament. Who, or where is he,
that dares assume the confidence of ordering and disposing the Body of Christ
without his leave, or can do so without treading the Sovereignty of Christ over
it, under foot; and proclaims himself to be the (...), that lawless one, the
Antichrist or Beast, that ascends out of the bottomless-pit, and must go into
perdition?

What says Mr. T? The Church of Christ, he tells us, is the Body of Christ;
but this is rather true of the Universal Church, and Mystical Body of Christ,
as may be gathered from, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. and 4. 4. than of a
particular Congregation.

Answ. 1. But he gives us no Argument to demonstrate, that 1 Cor. 12. 27. is to
be interpreted of the Universal Church (we have demonstrated the contrary Sect.
13.) which he should have done if he would have us think our selves concerned
in his reply.

2dly, He himself grants, That a particular Church of Christ is and may be
called his Body (as his words, it is rather true, of the Universal Church, than
of a particular Congregation, import) That he should entrust any with a power
to model, figure and fashion his own Body as they please, and yet never give us
the least hint of any such betrustment, is the firstborn of improbabilities
and absurdities. The (...), the very plain in the Land of Shinar, upon which
the cursed Fabric of the Antichristian Church, Babel, was at the first
erected, as Mr. T. well knows.

The learned Parker further argues: Each first Church of God is the house and
building of God, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Heb. 3. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 3. 15. And what prudent
householder will permit the Figure and Quantity of his House to the arbitrament
and will of others? To this Mr. T. adjoyns, It Is true the Church of God is his
House; God built it, Christ is the only Foundation of it, yet others are
subordinate Builders, and Foundations too in respect of their Doctrine, 1 Cor.
3. 10. Ephesians. 2. 20. to whom many things pertaining to the outward figure and
quantity, i. e. the distributing of Churches into Ecumenical, National,
Classical, Parochial, etc. are left, etc. This the Sum.

Answ. 1. It Is true Paul calls himself, 1 Cor. 3. 10. A Builder (with respect
to his (instrumental) planting and founding of that Church; (...), a wise
Architect, or chief Builder) but that he (or any others) was to build according
to the good pleasure of their own wills, that they had no Idea, Platform, or
Model given them by Christ the Lord and Master of the House, according to which
they were obliged to fashion their building, is not from hence proved. 'Twas
of old prophesied of Christ, That he should build his spiritual House (or
Temple) and bear the glory, Zac. 6. 13. (which accordingly it is said he did in
which he was faithful, Heb. 3. 3, 5.) How either the one or other can be
affirmed of Christ, if he, not at all concerned himself with the figure or
quantity of his House, but left this to the prudence of men, I am not able to
conceive. Certainly if there be any glory in the Structure, it is to be ascribed
(according to this Animadverters principles) to the dreg and net of humane
prudence and policy: Man must bear the glory thereof, not Christ; which whether
it be not plainly to justle Christ out of the Throne of his Glory, and set up a
Man of clay there, a very Idol in his room, let the judicious Reader determine.

2dly, Where any, besides Christ, is called, The Foundation of this Building,
(as this Animadverter asserts) I know not: I remember full well, that the
Apostle speaks of him as the alone Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11. an expression
wholly destructive of Mr. T. his Assertion. It Is true, Ephesians. 2. 20. the Apostle
tells the Ephesians, They were built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, i. e. on Christ, the Foundation upon which they, and all Believers
that ever were in the world, were built. But he no where says, That these were
the Churches Foundation: And yet were this yielded him, it would be short of an
evident demonstration, of what our Animadverter introduces it to evince, viz.
That many things appertaining to the outward figure, and quantity of the
Church, were left to them to order and determine, in and by their own private
spirit. What they did in this matter, they had instructions from Christ to do,
were infallibly guided by the Spirit of the Lord in. Yet were it further
granted him, That the distribution of Churches was in a great measure left to
the Apostles, does it thence follow, That others of the Children of Men,
Antichrist, the Son of Perdition, may distribute and figure them as they
please, and that in direct opposition to the figure and quantity of them
exhibited by the Apostles, in the first Institution of Churches in the world?
What more frivolous? The worthy Parker proceeds, The Material Temple had its
breadth, and its measure described most accurately by God; shall not the
Spiritual have its? Wherefore then was that Reed given to John? Wherefore a
Command to measure the Temple, Rev. 11. 1?

To which Mr. T. 1st, By way of Concession. Each Congregational Church is the
Temple of God: The true Christian Church is shadowed by the Type of the Old
Temple; the several parts of which were of old most accurately described, and
measured by the command of God: that men might know that this House was made by
God, that it is not of humane Structure. God has by his providence described
the Spiritual Temple as well as the Material.

2dly, By way of Negation. God has not given us any such description of the
outward fashion and order, the breadth, and measure (i. e. the number, etc.) of
the Spiritual Temple, as he did to Moses, etc. of the material Temple. And
afterward, God has not determined the distribution and order of particular
Churches so, but that he has left many things therein to humane prudence.

Answ. And this Mr. T. calls, an Answer to the forementioned Argument, that any
person (not bereft of his understanding) besides himself will deem it to be so,
he must not imagine. The Question is, Whether the Form of Churches be of Divine
Institution? Mr. T. deries it. The learned Parker proves it is, Because the
Form of the Temple (which was a Type of the Gospel Churches) was so, and God
cannot be supposed to take less care of his Spiritual, than he did of his
material Temple.

What is our Animadverters reply? Why, the Form of Churches is not of Divine
Institution. He persists in his opinion, without taking the least notice of the
Argument advanced against it. But seriously Sir, persons of judgment and
sobriety will either smile at your folly, or pity you for your self-conceit in
such replies as these. In my shallow judgment, would he have removed this
Argument out of his way, he should either have proved that the material Temple
of old, was not typical of Gospel-Churches, or that the figure and model of it
was not of divine Institution, or that though both these are true (which he
grants) the consequence is not valid; that therefore God has instituted the
form of his New-Testament-Churches; which when he shall be able to prove that
the Antitype must not correspond with the Type, or that Gods care was more
about his material than his Spiritual Temple, he will be supposed to say
someting, but till then, though he cry till his Lungs crack, falleris Parkere,
falleris; though he may amuse the simple, with his noise of words, the
intelligent Reader will discern his weakness, and nakedness.

2dly, Gods describing the Spiritual Temple as well as the Corporal by his
providence, is a certain kind of Gibberish I understand not; he describes both
in his Word.

To that Question, Wherefore then was the Reed given to John? Wherefore a
Command to measure the Temple? Rev. 11. 1. Our An madverter Replies, It was not
that he should set down the figure, or quantity of each particular Church, or
the number of Persons that are to belong to it etc. but his measuring the
Temple was his understanding the the extent of it, i. e how large and how
narrow the Church should be in aftertimes, in what estate of Peace or
Persecution, etc.

Answ. But these are his wonted dictates, without any tender of proof.

1. The Temple of God was typical of the New Testament Churches, who are
therefore here represented under the notion and similitude of the Temple.

2. These had hitherto during the first ten Persecutions remained in some
measure of Purity and consonancy to the first Institution.

3. But now they were to contest with another (an Antichristian) Beast;
therefore measure them, says the Angel to John, with a Reed: Let them look to
it that they mend what is already amiss in, and amongst them by, and that they
swerve not from the measuring Reed or Rule, for therein will lie their safety
(as we know it has done) from Antichristian defilements.

4. The Golden Reed is the Word of God, which though in it self precious and
excellent as Gold to the men of the world, and the carnal Antichristian Church,
it is accounted and used as a Reed, a mean and contemptible thing: though it is
indeed like unto a Rod, the Rod of Christ's strength it is, by which he rules
in the midst of his enemies. That there should be a Command given forth to
measure the Temple, the Churches, by this Reed, if their Form were not
instituted and appointed therein, is not to be imagined; upon that supposition
a measure of them by it, were impossible to be taken.

5. The measured Court (says the learned Mede) sets forth the primitive
state of the Christian Church conformable to the Rule of Gods Word. -- The
measuring is an allusion to Ezekiel. 43. 7 to 10. or to building, viz. That what
the drawing of the Platform is to Builders, the same is Measuring to God in the
language of the Prophets, i. e. the state of the Church figured thereby is
God's workmanship. --

6. The measuring is, as was said, a clear allusion to Ezekiel. 43. 10. but that
measuring was in order to the showing the form of the House. Let them measure
the pattern, ver. 11. Show them the form of the House, and the fashion thereof
-- therefore the measuring here must be for the same end too.

Mr. Parker further argues, If God, when the Church of the Jews is called to
the Faith, designs the quantity, longitude, latitude thereof, it cannot be
imagined that he has left the dimension of the Gentile Churches to humane
pleasure: But when the Church of the Jews is called to the Faith, he designs
the quantity, etc. thereof: Therefore.

Mr. T. replies, 1. That the Holy City is the visible Church of the Jews, etc.
Or, that the measuring it was to design the quantity of particular Churches, is
not probable.

Answ. But this is more than probable, that the Holy City (be it what it will)
is exactly formed and figured by the Lord, as the measuting the City, the
Gates, the Walls thereof -- does abundantly evince. If you take it for the
converted Jews (as some learned men do) or the Gentile Churches after the fall
and ruin of Antichrist, to which it may be Mr. T. rather enclines, it is not
probable that God should then take such exact care about the forming and
figuring of the Church-societies of these, and in the mean while leave his
present Churches to the good pleasure of the children of men, and those none of
the best neither.

2dly. He tells us, Inasmuch as the Apostle, Romans 11. 25. asserts, that all
Israel shall be saved, he might better argue for a National Church of Christ's
Institution, from the visible Church State of the Jews at their future calling,
than for a Congregational Church.

Answ. 1. But then he must argue, that some Church-form is of divine
institution, which would overturn his present structure.

2. He must first prove, that the Jews Church State upon their conversion, will
be National, which the Apostle's words [all Israel shall be saved] do not
evince; for so they may be, though formed up into particular societies, as some
learned men think they shall.

3. God's designing more diligently the quantity, etc. of the Jewish Church at
their calling hereafter, and leaving the dimension of ours to humane choice,
may be done (Mr. T. tells us) out of more special love to them.

Answ. 1. But page 39. he tells us, That God's leaving things appertaining to
the New-Testament-Churches to be set down by man, more than he did to the
Jewish-Church, is an Argument of greater love and care to the
New-Testament-Churches than to them. This needs a Reconciler.

2. However, he neither manifests that God bears greater love to the Jews than
Gentiles, (which to speak properly he cannot do) nor that if he did so, he
should bear so little love to the New-Testament-Churches, as to leave them
wholly to the forming of the sons of men.

What he adds fourthly, in answer to what is further argued by Mr. Parker, that
the Church is compared to a City; but no City is so negligently administered by
man, that no regard is had to the bounds and lin its thereof, is greatly
impertinent: for though it may consist with the pr^dence and care of good
Princes, to leave many things to the choice of some in the City incorporated;
as the ordering their Meetings, etc. ^s shall be found most convenient for
them; yet to take no more care thereabout, than to suffer the City to grow up
into the compass of a Shire, a Nation, would scarce be accounted consistant
with that prudence and wisdom which should be in them. And thus far of Mr. T.
his reply to the famous Parkers Arguments for the Divine Institution of
Churches. For a close of this Section we shall briefly propose twelve
Arguments, for the further clearing of the truth, That the Form of Churches is
of Divine Institution; which our Animadverter may answer at his leizure.

Argum. 1. If the Form of the Church be not of Christ's appointment, it is not
so, either because it was not needful, or because Christ was not careful,
faithful, or sufficient to institute or ordain it: But neither of these is
true. To assert the latter, were blasphemous, etc. That it is needful, is
evident. 1. There are some duties which cannot well be performed, but upon
supposition hereof, as Mat. 18. 15. 2dly, The care of the Apostles to bring
such as they converted, into Church Order. 3dly, Their diligent instructing
them in their duty, as members of particular Bodies and Congregations. 4thly,
Christ's owning them, who walked together in such Societies, affording them his
Presence, promising it to them, and that in opposition unto Babylonish
Assemblies, of the formings of man, abundantly evince the needfulness thereof.
Besides, 5thly, If it be not needful, they are bloodily cruel who persecute
men, to the loss of Estates, Liberties, Lives, and give them up to the Devil by
the sentence of Excommunication; For no other reason, but for refusing
communion with their National Church, or denying its form and frame to be of
the institution of Christ.

Arg. 2. If the Form of the Church be not of Christ's appointment, then there
must be more Lords over the Church besides Christ, (for the forming or figuring
of Churches (pro libito) is an act of Lordly Authority) But there cannot be
more Lords over the Church besides Christ, Isa. 33. 22. 1 Cor. 8. 5. Jam. 4.
12. Therefore --

Arg. 3. If the Form of Churches be not of Christ's appointment, Then is it in
the power of man (without any precept or authority from Christ) to add to, or
take away from the Body of Christ, (for so are particular Churches, as we have
proved) But this is contrary to 1 Cor. 12. 18, 27. with Romans 12. 4, 8.
Therefore.

Arg. 4. That which the Apostles practiced, in pursuance of the Commission they
received from Christ, is undoubtedly an Order and Institution of his: But the
gathering of Disciples into particular Congregations, the Apostles practiced in
pursuance of the Commission they received from Christ, Mat. 28. 19, 20. with
Acts 2. 41, ^2, 43. Therefore --

Arg. 5. If the Form of Churches be not of Divine Institution, Then the Church
of Christ is either not his Palace, Kingdom; or Christ has not that care over
his Palace and Kingdom, as the Princes of the world have over theirs: But both
these are false and highly injurious to Christ: Therefore.

Arg. 6. That Church to which Christ has enjoined his Disciples to appeal, in
matters of Scandal found upon their Brethren, with which he has promised his
Presence, to which he has given the Keys of the Kingdom, power of binding and
loosing, is a Church of his own forming. But this is a particular
Congregational-Church, Mat. 18. 17, 18, 19. (as we have demonstrated) Therefore.

Arg. 7. If the Form of Churches be not of Christ's appointment, then there is
either no beauty, splendor, glory therein; or Christ bears not, cannot bear
that glory. But both of these are absurd, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9. Zech. 6. 13.
Therefore.

Arg. 8. If the Form of Churches be not of Christ's appointment, Then the
Church of Christ may have communion with, yield obedience to the inventions,
constitutions, ordinances and appointments of men, (of Antichrist the Man of
Sin.) But that they are charged ^ot to do, upon most dreadful penalties, Rev.
18. 4, 5. and 14. 9, 10, 11. Therefore.

Arg. 9. If the Form of Churches be not of Christ's appointment, Then either
Christ has not left sufficient Laws for the government of the Saints, or man
may super-add to his Laws. But both these are false, scandalous and injurious
to Christ, Gal. 3. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. Rev. 22. 18, 19.

Arg. 10. If the Form of Churches be not of Christ's appointment, Then the
Church is not to be governed as it is taught, (for it must be taught only by the
Word of God, Isa. 8. 2.) But the Consequence is absurd. Therefore.

Arg. 11. If the placing of Officers in particular Churches, be of the
appointment of Christ; then the Churches themselves are so. But the placing of
Officers in particular Churches is of the appointment of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Therefore.

Arg. 12. Those Churches which Christ owns for his Candlesticks (in allusion to
the Candlesticks of the Temple, which were purely of divine institution) are of
the institution of Christ. But Christ owns particular Churches, for his
Candlesticks (viz. the Seven Churches of Asia) which we have before
demonstrated were particular Churches, Rev. 1. 20. Therefore --

Those that desire further satisfaction in this matter, may consult a little
Treatise, lately published, entitled, A brief Instruction in the Worship of
God, and Discipline of the Churches of the New Testament, p. 93. where they
will find it clearly and amply debated.

Sect. 18.
Of National Ministers. What meant by Ministry. Of extraordinary and ordinary
Officers. Upon what account the Church of Engl. is asserted to be a false
Church. Mr. T. his Arguments to prove, that in a National Church, or a Church
irregular in its constitution, may be a true Ministry of Christ, answered. The
contrary is demonstrated.

THE Design of Mr. T. his 18th and 19th Sect. is to answer the second Query in
S. T. Whether National Ministers are the Ministers of Christ? Or, whether there
can be a true Ministry in a false Church? (as a National Church must be if not
of divine Institution, upon what pretense soever it be so denominated.) Before
he attempts the Resolution of this Query, he considers

First, What the Ministry is, of which it is enquired whether it be true or
false: And having at large acquainted us with the signification of the word
(...), and (...), he tells us, he understands the query to be meant of that
part of the Ministry which is by preaching. But I must crave leave to tell him,
he somewhat misseth the white of the Authors intendment, who by it intends an
Office-Power of Ministry, for discharge of that whole work, that peculiarly
relates to the Ministers of the Gospel, to be performed and managed by them
according to the Will of Christ; Whether it be the Ministry of the Word, the
Lords Supper, etc. This, as Mr. T. says rightly, is either the Ministry of
extraordinary Officers, as Apostles, etc. of which our Question is not; or of
ordinary Officers, as Pastors, etc. of whom it is queried, Whether ordinary
National Officers or Ministers are of the Institution of Christ? What says Mr.
T?

He tells us, 1. That Paul was a Minister not only to a particular Church, but
even to the Gentiles.

Answ. That this does not in the least concern the Question in debate, which is
of ordinary Church Officers, (and Paul, as I remember, (with the rest of the
Apostles) was an extraordinary one, receiving a Commission for the Preaching of
the Gospel to all Nations.) he will be so ingenuous, as upon the review, to
acknowledge.

Secondly, A Church may be said to be false many ways.

Answ. True, it may so; but in his discourse there abouts we are little:
concerned, who assert the Church of England to be a false Church, because it is
destitute of the true Matter (visible Saints) and the true Form (freely giving
up themselves unto the Lord, and one another, to worship him together as a
Community, according to the revelation of his will.)

But he will prove, Thirdly, That in a National Church, or a Church irregular
in its constitution, (i. e. that has neither the matter nor form of a true
Church of Christ) or discipline, may be a true Ministry of Christ.

His first Argument is, Arg. 1. If the truth of the Ministry depend upon the
truth of the Church, or its regularity; then where is no true regular Church,
there is no true Ministry. But that is false, since there may be a true
Ministry where there is no Church at all, and therefore no true Church.

Therefore. --

Answ. If by a true regular Church, Mr. T. means a Church for matter and form
rightly constituted, according to the mind of Christ; and by a true Ministry,
the Ministry of ordinary Officers, such as Pastors, and Teachers (as he must do
if he speak pertinently) we deny his Minor Proposition. Where there is no true
Church at all, in a false Church, or Church not regularly constituted,
according to the mind of Christ, (as is the case of the National Church of
England) there cannot be a true Ministry; which Mr. T. forgot to attempt the
proof of. And indeed his abilities seem to lie much in Dogmatizing, and it is
great pity but he were created a Rabbi in the Pithagorean School, his
accuteness therein being so incomparably excellent.

1st, That there can be no true ordinary Ministry where there is no Church, is
manifest.

First, Where ever we read of ordinary Ministers, we read of them as
appertaining to some one particular Church or other, Acts 14. 23. and 15. 2, 4,
22. and 20. 17, 28. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. As
good a man may imagine an Husband to be without a Wife; or a Major, without a
Corporation; or a Father, without Children; as a Minister, without a Church; in
which he is (...), to minister according to the will and appointment of Christ.

Secondly, Every lawful Minister is elected, and chosen to his Office by the
Church or People of God. Therefore there can be no true ordinary lawful
Ministry, where there is no Church. Of this we have spoken at large, Chap 4. of
S. T. To which multitudes of Testimonies might be added. The Churches of
Helvetia (Harm. Confess. Sect. 11. de min. Eccl.) affirm, The Ministers of the
Church must be called and chosen, by Ecclesiastical and lawful election; (i. e.
they must be religiously elected by the Church, or by some from her deputed
thereunto.) So also do they speak, Artic. 16. ibid. So the Bohemian Churches;
Men who are firm and strong in the Faith, fearing God, having received
necessary gifts for the work of the Ministry, of an honest and unblamable
conversation, by People fearing God, must be chosen, and called to the
administration of holy things. ( Harmon. Confess. Sect 11. cap 9. de min. Eccl.)
And they expressly tell us That they permit none to discharge the Office of the
Ministry without such an Election of the Church, as appears (ibid.) by the
ancient Canons thereof. To the same purpose the Belgic Churches declare,
(ibid. Art. 31.)

But, Thirdly, Ordinary Officers cannot be before the Church;

Therefore, where there is no Church there can be no lawful ordinary Officers.

The Antecedent is evident.

1. All along the Acts we read first of the Constitution of Churches before the
Ordination of Officers.

2. The Scripture says expressly, That all Officers are set in the Church, 1
Cor. 12. 28. Which setting does necessarily presuppose a Church in which they
are set.

2dly, A true Ministry cannot be in a false Church; false, I mean, either with
respect to its first Constitution, or by reason of such an Apostasy as has
destroyed the essence and being of it.

For, first, A false Church is no Church of Christ: Therefore in it can be no
true ordinary Ministry, according to the mind of Christ, for the reasons before
mentioned.

Secondly, Such a Church is entrusted with no Authority from Christ, therefore
cannot communicate any, nor send forth any to act in his Name.

That Christ has entrusted his Church with power to elect and choose Officers,
we manifest, Chap. 4. Page 32, 33, of S. T. That any Church not right in its
Constitution (as is the Case of National Churches) is invested with any such
power, is the firstborn of absurdities and improbabilities. It Is the Queen,
the Bride, the Lambs Wife that has the Keys at her girdle; not the Concubines.
But Mr. T. has more to say to evince the contrary.

Arg. 2. If there be a true Ministry, though to, or in a National visible
Church, or Catholic; then the extent which is conceived to be inconsistent
with a true Gospel Church, makes not the Ministry false. But Peter and Paul's
Ministry to the Jews or Gentile Churches, was a true Ministry, though the
Church were National or Catholic. Therefore. --

Answ. 1. It Is a most sad thing (upon more accounts than one) to be engaged
against Truth, such sorry shifts are men put to, and driven to the use of
Sophisms so pu^rile, that at other times they would be as^amed of. Thus fares
it with this Animadverter, who argues so jejunely, that considering what I have
heard of him for a Disputant, I am ready to question whether the Arguments I
read be his, or no. Though Truth seeks no corners, yet it makes its Adversaries
frequently to do so. The enquiry, as Mr. T. says rightly in p. 34. is of the
ministry of ordinary Pastors, etc. His two first Arguments relate only to
extraordinary Officers, viz. the Ministry of the Apostles; so that we are not
concerned to take the least notice of them. Many such impertinencies is th^s
Animadverters Treatise stuffed with.

2. Besides, the Argument is inconclusive of what Mr. T. pretends to prove,
viz. That in a National Church, or a false Church, there may be a true
Ministry: If there be a true Ministry, though to or in a National visible
Church (says he) then the extent, which is conceived to be inconsistent with a
true Gospel Church, makes not the Ministry false. But Sir, whether there be a
true Ministry in a National Church, is the (...); how it comes to be the medium
of your Argument, I am yet to learn. Sure I am such kind of Arguings would
deservedly be hissed out of the Schools, being in themselves illogical. I
suppose he would have argued thus; If that extent which is conceived to be
inconsist^nt with a true Gospel Church, makes not the Ministry false, Then
there may be a true Ministry, though to, or in a National Church. But the
extent, which is conceived to be inconsistant with a true Gospel Church, makes
not the Ministry false: for Peter's and Paul's Ministry to the Jews and
Gentiles were true Ministries, though the Churches were National, 1 Cor. 12.
28. Ergo. To the Argument I answer; 1. By denying the consequence of the first
Proposition: For though the extent inconsistant to a true Gospel Church, should
not make the Ministry false, yet somewhat else may. What thinks he of an
Antichristian Ordination, or a Mission to officiat from the Antichristian
Persecuting Beast and Whore, though the Church were rightly constituted, in and
to which a man is a Preacher? I conceive his Ministry is false. But 2dly, I
deny his Minor Proposition (if by Ministry he understands the Ministry of
ordinary Pastors, etc. which if he does not, he speaks not a word to the
question, as he himself acknowledges, page 34.) the extent of a Church
inconstent with a Gospel Church, renders the Church false, and indeed no
Church, (i. e. no Gospel Church) Therefore it renders the Ministry false, as we
before proved. Mr. T. his proofs are weak and impertinent. 1. Paul and Peter's
Ministry was not the Ministry of ordinary Pastors, as he grants, p. 34. 2dly.
They were not Ministers in, or to a National Church. It Is true, they preached
to the Jews and Gentiles; but for the first, their Church State was virtually
terminated at the death of Christ, when the Vail of the Temple was rent: as for
the Gentile Nations they were no National Churches. The forming of which ows
its original (as was said) to a latter date. So that hitherto Mr. T. has only
hung out signs of Arguments to prove his Assertion, being weighed in the
balances they are found wanting, are plainly sophistical. It may be in what
follows he speaks more pertinently. Thus he argues.

Arg. 3. If Ministry to Churches Hypocritical, Schismatical, and in some sort
Heretical, may be a true Ministry; much more to a Church National, etc. those
being greater degrees of falsehood than this. But the Antecedent is before
proved from the Epistles to the Corinthians, to the Churches of Pergamos,
Thyatira and Sardis. Ergo. --

Answ. No doubt but Mr. T. and his Associates in this work, think they have
excellently well acquitted themselves in this Argument; but the emptiness and
invalidity of it will soon appear.

1. What if we deny the consequence of the Major Proposition? upon supposition
that there may be a true Ministry to Churches of such a complexion as that
intimated, it does not at all follow, that there may be a true Ministry to and
in a Church National. Where is Mr. T. proof of his consequence? Why these are
greater degrees of falsehood than are to be found in a National Church. Well,
this is denied also. What offers he to make it appear to be so? Why you have
his (...) for it; he says so. But seriouslly Mr. T. is so inconstant to his
own words, principles, and practices, that we are afraid if we should assent to
what he asserts upon that foundation, we should once in seven or eight years,
if the minds of men in authority over us should in that time be different,
believe, and disbelieve the same positions. What if the National Church be as
Schismatical, Heretical, Hypocritical as the Churches instanced in? (this were
a facile undertaking to demonstrate) I hope then it being false in its
constitution, which the others instanced in, were not, we may with this
Animadverter's leave, assert, that greater degrees of falsehood, are not to be
found in and upon them, than are to be found upon his National Church. Besides,
supposing the Churches instanced in to be such as M. T. says they were, they
were once true Churches of Christ, to whom power was delegated from him, for
the election, and choosing of Officers to act in his Name and Auth^rity amongst
them: which cannot be affirmed of any National Church in the World. That
because a true Ministry may be in a true Church, under great degeneracy;
therefore there may be a true Ministry in a false Church: is an Assertion that
this Animadverter had need to consult with some body else to help him to make
good, than his present Adviser^. But

2. We crave leave to deny his Minor; A true Ministry c^nnot be in
Hypocritical, Schismatical, Heretical Churches. If they are such, they are no
Churches of Christ; if known to be so, they are not to be owned as such by them
that fear him.

But he has proved this from the Epistles to the Corinthians, to the Churches
of Pergamos, Thyatira and Sardis.

Answ. What has he proved? that these Churches were Hypocritical,
Schismatical, Heretical? nothing less! It Is true, 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. Paul tells
the Corinthians, that he heard there were Contentions amongst them, etc. that
the Church was schismatical he says not. That there are Contentions amongst
the members of the Church of England, Mr. T. cannot deny: that therefore it is
to be accounted a Schismatical-Church, he will scarce assert. It Is true also,
that there were some in the Church of Pergamos, and Thyatira, that held false
and erroneous opinions; and that the Churches were too much to blame to suffer
them, as they did, (for which Christ rebukes them): In Sardis the generality of
the members were wonderfully declined in their spirits, a time of withering,
decays, deadness was upon them; yet was not the one an Heretical, nor the
other an Hypocritical Church: Nor can Mr. T. make good his charge against
either of them. As for the Church of Pergamos, Christ witnesses of them, that
although they dwelt where Satan's seat was, (i. e. where the Roman Governor
lived, who was Satan's chief instrument for persecuting the Saints) yet they
h^^d fast his Name, and did not deny his Faith: which is not a description of
an Heretical Church. They owned Christ, retained, cleaved to the Doctrine of
the Gospel, i. e. the Body of the Church did (though some few amongst them held
strange Heterodoxies) therefore no Heretical-Church. The like may be said of
the Church of Thyatira, does Christ charge her with Heresy? does he say the
whole Body, or ma^or part of the Church was infected with the doctrine of
Jezebel? nothing less! He says indeed that the Church was too negligent in
their duty to put a stop to her seducing his Servants, and intimates as if some
were led astray by her: But withal testifies, that there were a considerable
number amongst them, that had not received her doctrine, nor known the depths
of Satan (they called them depths, i. e. deep and wonderful things, but they
were the depths of Satan.) Of Sardis Christ also witnesses, that there were
some things remaining that he would have her strengthen, i. e. some graces that
were not quite extinct and dead in them; and of some of them expressly, that
they had not defiled their garments, and that they should walk with him in
white, for they were worthy, (which cannot be affimed of Hypocrites) Rev. 2.
13, 19, 20, 24, 25. and 3. 2, 4. Therefore no Heretical nor Hypocritical
Churches. And I cannot but wonder at the confidence of this Animadverter to
affirm it of them, after the testimony Christ gives touching them: it being
little less than giving him the lie to his face. So that of this Argument we
shall ('it is probable) hear no more.

Of his fourth Argument we need say no more but this, that the Ministry therein
mentioned is the Ministry of the Apostles: which he grants not at all to relate
to our present Question. If he can make good this Consequence, the Apostles who
were extraordinary Officers, immediately sent forth by Jesus Christ, were true
Ministers, before the regular constitution and discipline of Churches, without
their election or mission, Therefore Pastors and Teachers (who are to be chosen
by a Church regularly constituted) are true Ministers though not so chosen; he
will be able to reinforce this Argument, else he must never bring it into the
field more.

His fifth Argument in brief is, The denomination of true Ministers is from the
truth of their Doctrine, and no other form denominating them. But there may be
a Ministration of true Doctrine in a false Church: Ergo --

Answ. 1. The Major is most false; the denomination of true Ministers is from
somewhat else beside the truth of their Doctrine, viz. A regular Mission
according to the mind of Christ, or an entrance in by the Door; else they are
not true Ministers, but Thieves and Robbers. What places they are
beforementioned that he says places the truth of Ministry in the Doctrine
taught, and no other thing, I cannot tell; and do assure him that when he
brings one place to prove it, I will be his convert. Col. 1. 6, 7. says no
such thing. Epaphras preaches the Truth of God to the Colossians, and is said
to be for them a faithful Minister of Christ; therefore the denomination of
true Ministers is from the truth of their Doctrine and nothing else, is one of
those consequences are frequently imposed upon us, without the least shadow of
proof.

2dly. That it is the duty of true Ministers, and in some sense their property,
to preach and promote Truth, is most certain. Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 13. 8. that
they could do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. But that the
denomination of true Ministers is from the truth of their Doctrine, and no
other form denominating them, is I suppose asserted by our Animadverter in
haste, and will upon second thoughts be retracted by him. For it will hence
follow, that whoever brings the truth of Doctrine, is a true Minister. Then the
Devil was so, Mark 1. 24. Luke 4. 34. Every private Brother, a Woman may be so.
For where the Form denominating is, there the Subject is rightly denominated
from it. But this is too absurd for Mr. T. to cleave to.

His sixth Argument is, False Prophets, false Apostles, false Brethren are
only denominated from their false Doctrine: therefore they are not false
Ministers, but true, who teach the truth of the Gospel. The Antecedent he
proves from 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Cor. 11. 13. Gal. 2. 4, 5. 1 John 2. 18, 21, 22, 26.
2 John 7.

Answ. 1. We deny the consequence, it does not follow upon supposition that
false Prophets are so denominated from their false Doctrine; that whoever
preach true Doctrine are true Ministers; the proof whereof we expect by the
next.

2ly. the Antecedent is manifestly false. False Prophets are so called, because
they ran and prophesied in the Name of the Lord, when he never sent them, speak
in them, or to them, Jer. 14. 14, 15. and 23. 21, 22. and 27. 15. and 28. 15.
and 29. 9, 31. and 43. 2. Ez^k. 13. 6. Of false Apostles there is the same
reason. The true Apostles are so called upon the account of their Mission from
Christ: nor is any one so, except lawfully called by Christ, says Pareus on 1
Cor. 1. The false, upon the account of their pretending thereto, when indeed
they were never sent by him. Nor does 2 Cor 11. 13. make void this Assertion,
it rather establishes it. It Is true, the (...), or false Apostles, preached
false Doctrine, but they are not upon that foot of account so denominated, but
because they were metaschematizing, or transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, as Satan is also sometimes transforming himself into an
Angel of light; i, e, they come as the Apostles of Christ, pretend to be his
Ambassadors, men sent by him (as M. T. knows the word signifies) when really
and indeed they were not so. 1 John 2. 18, 21, 22, 26. tells us of Antichrists
that were already come, such as Simon Magus, Ebion, Cerinthus, and that they
opposed the Person and Doctrine of the Son of God, who with their endless
genealogies, and unintelligible conceptions attempted the total overthrow of
the Gospel, wondrously perplexing the Saints of that day; but that therefore
they were called false Apostles, there is not the least mention. Gal. 2. 4, 5.
speaks of false Brethren; but that they are so called singly, upon the account
of their spreading false opinions, is a conceit that Mr. T. will not in haste
make good. They were unsound, hypocritical Professors, that pretending to be
Brethren, sought an occasion to injure and mischieve the Children of the Lord:
(which Paul had too great an experiment of, 2 Cor. 11. 26.) 2 Pet. 2. 1. has
already been considered. So that with more Scripture-evidence it may be argued;
If false Prophets, false Apostles be so denominated, upon the account of their
running before they were sent, pretending to come in his Name, when he never
missionated them; Then they are false Ministers, who come in the Name of
Christ, and have received no authentic Commission from him. But the Antecedent
is true, as we have evinced. Therefore --

Sect. 19.
Of God's determining the whole of our Worship. His so doing of old in the
Statutes and Judgments he gave to Israel, an eminent act of Love: it is so now
to his New-Testament-Churches. Mr. T. his ten Arguments to the contrary,
answered. Acts 15. 10. Heb. 7. 18, 19. and 9. 9, 10. Joh. 1. 18. explained.

THe third Query in the S. T. is, Whether God does not bea^ as much love to,
and exercise as much* faithfulness over his New-Testament-Churches, as over the
National Church of the Jews? To this Mr. T. answers, No doubt of it. He grants
he does.

To the fourth Query, Whether he has not, as of old he did, with reference to
the then Church, determined the whole of the Worship appertaining to them, to
whose Institutions (without any humane additions) it is the duty of fouls
solely to conform? He answers in the Negative; God has not determined
Circumstantials in Worship (he must mean Circumstances of Worship relating to
it, as such, or he speaks nothing to the purpose; and these are such necessary
parts of Worship, that without them it is not accepted) and his not doing so,
is an argument of greater love to his New-Testament-Churches, than his
determining the whole of his Worship to the Church of the Jews was to them.

Answ. 1. In page 32. he tells us, that if God do design more diligently, the
longitude and latitude of the Jewish Church at their calling hereafter, (which
are things Mr. T. accounts Accidentals of Worship undetermined) and leave the
dimension of our Church to humane choice, this may be done out of more special
love to them; So that the same act of God is (it seems) a manifestation and no
manifestation of greater love from God; i. e. when it will serve Mr. T. his
design to assert it to be so, it is so, when otherwise, he will persuade to the
belief of the contrary.

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo. 2dly. When the Lord speaks of the
Judgments and Statutes he had given to Israel (whereby the whole of their
Worship was determined) he speaks of them as the wondrous manifestation of his
love to the^, whereby they were eminently exalted above all the people in the
world, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Ezekiel. 20. 11. Neh. 9. 13. Deuteronomy. 6. 24. That the
determination of their Worship should be an issue of dearest love, and the
non-determination of ours, a manifestation of greater love, is an Assertion
that had need be backed with strong proofs and evidence, else it is not likely
to find the least entertainment amongst the Saints. But this he manifests by no
less than a decad of Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because the determination of the whole of the Worship of God to the
Jews, was the imposing of a yoke on them which neither the elder, nor later
Jews were able to bear, Acts 15. 10.

Answ. But this is a mistake of the Animadverters. The Apostle Peter says not,
the determination of the whole of the Worship of God to them was such a yoke,
but the pressing Circumcision and Mosaical Observances by some Sect-masters
amongst them, as the way to Justif^cation and Salvation, was so; As is evident
from ver. 1, 5, 11. The Doctrine of Justification and Salvation by the works of
the Law, was a yoke that they were not able to bear; Ergo, the determination of
the whole of the Worship of God was so, is a most ridiculous and puerile
Conclusion. 2. Grant the yoke to be Mosaical Observances, their number and
multitude, etc. made them such an insupportable yoke, not their dete^mination
by the Lord. Whatever he institutes and commands (as such) is the joy and
delight of the Saints to conform to, not their yoke and burden.

Reas. 2. Because the determination of the whole of God's Worship to the Jews,
did bring in many things which were unprofitable, weak, and made nothing
perfect, Heb. 7. 18, 19. And if God had so determined to us, he had commanded
things unprofitable, weak, etc. Therefore --

Answ. 1. The will of God was the ground and measure of those things the
Apostle calls unprofitable, etc. which had they been more so, upon the account
thereof they ought to have been submitted unto: the unprofitableness and
weakness of any thing, being no ground for its rejection when commanded by the
Lord.

2dly, This Animadverter is not so much of Gods counsel, as to be able to say
what had been, if the whole of Gospel Worship had been (as it is) determined by
the Lord. That there is some part of Gospel Worship instituted, he will not
deny: Is this unprofitable, weak? If not, what necessity is there, that what he
supposes not to be instituted, had it been so, should be liable to such a
crimination.

3dly, What is most weak, contemptible, and unprofitable in the eye of man, is
usually made the power of God to them that are saved, 1 Cor. 1. 18, 23, 24, 25.

4thly, These supposed accidentals of Worship non-determined of God, are left
by him (according to Mr. T. his dictate) to be determined by Governors. If the
determination of the Lord would have rendered them weak and unprofitable, does
their determination make them efficacious and profitable? Are they wiser,
stronger than God? or being determined by them, may we reject them as
unprofitable, weak, and good for nothing? To what purpose disputes he then for
them?

5thly, If God has left them to be set down by Governors, to whom obedience
is due (as says the Animadverter) it is out of love, and faithfulness to us,
that he has done so: that it should be greater love and faithfulness in him to
us, to leave them to the determination of men (with a necessity of our
subjection to them when determined) than to do it himself, is absurd to assert.

But 6thly, The observances instanced in by Paul, Heb. 7. 18, 19. were not
accidentals of Worship, they were necessary, and essential parts thereof; such
things wherein the greatest part of the Instituted Worship of God amongst the
Jews did consist, which are called weak, and unprofitable, etc. not with
respect to the determination of God, as if his determining them made them so,
which were impious to imagine, nor in respect of the end for which they were
instituted by the Lord (which it was impossible they should be, he never
failing of his end, nor mistaking in the choice of means proper and suitable
thereunto) but with respect to the great works of Justification,
Sanctification, etc. accomplished and wrought by the Melchizedechian Priesthood
of the Lord Jesus, as the Apostle speaks: and in this sense all the Worship
of Christ that is determined by him is weak, unprofitable, makes nothing
perfect, viz. in it self, or with respect to Justification; and by this
Animadverters Argument, it had therefore been a greater demonstration of love
and faithfulness in the Lord to us, to have determined no part of Instituted
Worship.

Reas. 3. The things God determined to the Jews about the Circumstantials of
his Worship, were but shadows of good things to come, which were not fit to be
continued, or to be supplied with any other, Christ being come who was the Body
or Substance, Colos. 2. 16, 17. Heb. 10. 1. Therefore. --

Answ. 1. What was fit or not fit for God to do, Mr. T. is too bold to assume
the confidence to determine: He never made him, or any of the Sons of men his
Counselor.

2. Not the circumstantials of Worship only, but the greatest part of the
instituted Worship of the Lord amongst them, was a shadow of good things to
come. The Sacrifices, Passover, Ordinances of the Priesthood, etc. were eminent
Types of Christ, who was the Substance and Body of them: yet no accidentals of
Worship, but that wherein the Worship it self did consist.

But, 3dly, Mr. T. will never prove, That if God determine the whole of his
Worship under the Gospel, he must introduce such things as are such shadows of
good things to come, as the Jews Observances were. The determination of the
whole of the Worship of Christ, asserted by us, secures us, we find by
experience, from such things; which the asserting a liberty in men to determine
what they please, under the notion of accidentals of Worship, exposes us to;
(witness the Cross in Baptism, Surplice, Hood, Tippet, and a hundred such
ridicu^ous trinkets invented by them) and yet except he prove this, his reason
is irrational, and ludicrous. Let us see if there be any more weig^t in what
follows.

Reas. 4. Such Ordinances were carnal, to endure only to the time of
Reformation, which is this time of the Gospel, Heb. 9. 9. Therefore it is part
of Gods love, etc. that neither the same in particular, nor other are precisely
determined to us by God.

Answ. 1. The Jewish Ordinances, are called Carnal, or (...), the
Justifications, or Righteousnesses of the flesh, because in their own nature
they reached only to the outward man (says Piscator) because they did
sanctify only to the purifying of the flesh, verse. 13. (say our Annotators)
These were to continue but until the time of Reformation, as the Apostle
says, even to the times of the Gospel; but that no other Ordinances that in
their own nature (I speak not of what is done by the blessing of the Lord upon
his own appointments) reach only to the outward man, and the purifying of the
flesh, are of the appointment of Christ; whatever others say, Mr. T. upon
second thoughts will not assert it.

But, 2dly, These Ordinances were carnal and vertually ^bolished at the death
of Christ, actually taken away and removed when the Temple was destroyed by
Titus Vespatian, the same Ordinances in particular are not determined by the
Lord; but that no other Ordinances are, is a slip of Mr. T. his Pen, or it may
be a Typographical error, which he will not justify.

3dly, When this Animadverter proves that it was not an act of rich love and
faithfulness in the Lord, upon the cessation of the carnal Ordinances of the
Jews, to institute de novo, and precisely determine, a more simple or spiritual
Worship; or that because these then ceased, therefore it could not be an act of
love in the Lord so to do: i. e. When he shall make good his Inference, he may
be supposed to say something, but till then an ordinary capacity will be able
to discern that he does but trifle.

His 5, 6, 7, Reasons are not worth the mentioning, concluding only, That
New-Testament-Believers are released from Jewish Observances: which we assert
and own as well as he. And when he shall be able to manifest, that any thing
else can Logically or Rationally be deduced from them, I will be his bondsman.

Reas. 5. For what though the Jews were in their minority, and therefore to be
kept under those beggarly elements, etc. until the time appointed by the
Father, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3, 9. Does it therefore follow, that God has not
determined the whole of his Worship now? Is the Son because grown up, to offer
to God what Worship he pleases? This indeed follows, That we are not under
those beggarly Elements, and to return to them or any like them (not of the
appointment of Christ) is an act of great ingratitude to the Lord, for his love
and faithfulness, manifested to us in the establishment of a more sublime, and
spiritual Worship under the Gospel. As also that it is great wickedness to
introduce, impose or subject to such beggarly Elements; now these stood for the
most part in bodily rites, in differences of meats and drinks, of times,
places, garments, etc. of which he may do well humbly to inform his good Mother
the Church of England, that she is too too guilty.

The like may be said of his 6th, Reason: The time before Christ, was an estate
under Moses, a Servant, the estate of Christians is under Christ, the Son, Gal.
4. 4, 5, 6, 7. Heb. 3. 5. Therefore we are no longer to be subject to Mosaical
appointments, had been somewhat tolerable arguing; but therefore it is greater
love in the Lord, not to determine the whole of his Worship to us now (which
being the Position he attempts the proof of, should have been his Inference) is
such a pitiful illation, that one would never expect from such a learned
person as Mr. T.

It rather follows, Therefore Christ has determined the whole of his Worship
under the New Testament, being faithful as a Son, when Moses the Servant,
according to the appointment of the Lord, gave forth Laws for the ordering the
whole of the affairs of the then House of God: especially considering that he
was the Prophet like unto Moses, whom the Father promised to raise up; into
whose mouth he said, he would put his words, and that he should speak unto the
Sont of Men, whatever he commanded him, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Accordingly when he comes
into the world, it is said of him, He revealed the Father, Joh. 1. 18. (Gr.
(...), he plainly and delucidly expounded to them the mind and will of the
Father) that the Father spoke to us in or by him, Heb. 1. 1. and gives us a
charge to hear him, Mat. 3. 17.

Reas. 7. His seventh Reason is like the rest. It Is true, had not the (...), or
handwriting of Mosaical Ceromonies been abolished, Col. 2. 14. we had not
reaped the fruit of Christ's death, by which they were abolished, Ephesians. 2. 14,
15. and so consequently tasted the less of the love of the Lord. But that
therefore it is a greater argument of love in God, not to determine the whole of
his Worship, or that if he ha^ done so, we had not reaped the fruit of Christ's
death, is such a sort of nakedness in Mr. T. his arguing, that one would not
willingly discover, did not the vindication of Truth necessitate one hereunto.

Reas. 8. His eighth Reason is (if possible) more weak and absurd. The Apostles
judged it a great benefit to the Christian Churches, that they were exempt from
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, Acts 15. 28. therefore they
accounted it an effect of Gods love, that he had not determined the whole of
his Worship to us. --

With what affection others will peruse these passages I cannot tell, for my
part I heartily pity him, that he should ever undertake the defense of a cause
so deplorable, as to be driven to such pitiful shifts, in the managerie
thereof: which I cannot impute to his want of Abilities (which he will one day
find, he might better have employed than in his present undertaking) but the
desperateness of the Cause he endeavors to defend. It follows indeed, that
therefore they accounted it an effect of Gods love, that they were delivered
from the burden of those external Rites and Ceremonies, (especially as they
appertained to the Covenant of Works) and so do we. It Is strange if this
Animadverter reckon it to be so, that he should plead for the same, the like,
yea worse Ceremonies, imposed not by the Lord, but by men, whose servants we
never were, nor in these matters ought to be. But that they accounted it an
effect of love, that God had not determined the whole of his
New-Testament-Worship, is such a c^imination as their souls abhorred.

But he proceeds: Reas. 9. It Is an effect of greater love to the Gentile
Churches, that God has not determined the whole of his Worship; because they
being of diverse Nations and Languages, under diverse Governments, used to diverse
Customs, they could not conveniently (if at all) practice such an Uniformity of
Circumstances, as they must have done, if God had so determined.

Answ. 1. That their being of diverse Nations, etc. should discapacitate them
with respect to their conforming to the will of God, even in Circumstantials of
Worship, as such, any more than they are discapacitated in their conforming to
that part of Instituted Worship, Mr. T. grants to be determined by the Lord, is
beyond the ken of my shallow understanding.

2dly, That the Saints must have practiced any external Uniformity (I suppose
he means it with respect to Liturgies (falsely called Divine Service) in use
amongst the Papists and Church of England, Vestments called Holy, etc.) if God
had determined the whole of his Worship, we crave leave to deny he has so
done; yet such an Uniformity ought not to be practiced, it is wretched and
abominable. And yet had the Lord seen it meet to have enjoined any such thing,
it ought to have been practiced, nor would it by the Saints have been accounted
a less argument of his love to them, because thereby they should have been
exposed to outward inconveniences. This reason at the best is but carnal and
selfish; from our conveniences external, or inconveniences, a measure of the
Lords love, in Divine Appointments, is not to be taken.

But there is yet one Reason behind.

Reas. 10. The Assertion, That God has determined the whole of his Worship in
Circumstantials relating to it, as such, is to infringe our Christian Liberty,
and to bring us into such bondage as they were in under the Law; therefore not
agreeable to that love, God bears to the New-Testament-Churches.

Answ. 1. That the Lords determining the whole of his Worship, should in the
least infringe our Christian Liberty, is a monstrous assertion; it rather
establishes it, in the freedom it gives, not only from the Jewish Ceremonies,
but the Inventions and Devices of men, with force and violence, attempted to be
imposed upon us. For if God had determined the whole of his
New-Testament-Worship, it cannot be supposed that we owe the least homage or
subjection to these: We may not be the servants of men.

2dly, I never yet thought, that a conformity to any thing, that God had
revealed and determined, as our duty, had (upon that account) been our bondage.
It Is the liberty, joy, and delight of the Saints to do his will, Psalm. 119. 45.
1 John 5. 3. Psalm. 19. 8. and 119. 111. Such kind of weak impertinent arguings,
asserted with state and confidence (as is the manner of the man) must he be
content to deal with, who undertakes the consideration of what is proposed by
this Animadverter. But to recite these Arguments had been Answer sufficient to
the judicious and intelligent Reader. We attend his further motion.

Sect. 20.
God had designed his own Officers for the management of the affairs of his
House. Who they are, may be collected from Ephesians. 4. 11. The Animadverter
proves not, that Archbishops, etc. do the work of the Ministers of the Gospel,
are commissionated by Christ. His apprehension when he took the solemn League
and Covenant, not the same as now. The extensiveness of the Privileges of the
Saints under the Gospel-Oeconomie. What things were wanting to the Jews under
the second Temple, which they had under the first. The Election of Ministers
the peculiar Privilege of the Church. That it was practiced by the Saints in
the first Ages, granted by the Animadverter. Many things charged upon the
Saints then living, that are false. Neither former disorders, nor present
distempers amongst the Saints any sufficient Warrant for the changing an
Institution of Christ. The Privilege of Women asserted from Scripture, and
learned Writers. Of the Decree of the Council of Carthage. 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. 1 Timothy 2. 12. explained What is to be done in case of difference in the
Congregation touching the election of Officers.

MR. T. in his 21. Sect. proposes the 5th Query in S. T. to consideration, viz.
Whether God has not now, as then (under the time of the Law) designed the
several Officers and Offices his wisdom thought sufficient for the management
of the affairs of his House; so that the Invention of new ones by the Sons of
Men, is not only needless, but a daring advance against the sovereignty, care
and wisdom of God over his Churches. To which after a large harangue touching
Moses, the 70 Elders, Joshua, the Judges, David and other Kings, the Prophets,
Aaron and his Sons, with the Levites, whom the Lord appointed for the
management of the affairs of his House; (having also learnedly told us, that
God has not in the Christian Church designed such Officers and Offices as
these) the twelve Disciples, and amongst the rest, Peter, (to whom he seems to
assert a Primacy, by way of promise to appertain.) He resolves the Question in
the affirmative. Tells us, that who the Officers of Christ's designing are, may
best be gathered from Ephesians. 4. 11. (of which we have formerly spoke in Chap. 3.
of S. T.) As for what follows, when Mr. T. shall prove,

1st, That the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. of the Church of England do the
works enjoined by Christ and his Apostles, to the Ministers of the Gospel.

2dly, That every one that does those works, though not Commissionated by
Christ thereunto, nor performing them after the order appointed by him, is a
Minister of Christ.

3dly, That its lawful for the Sons of men, to make more degrees of Ministry,
(one above the other) under new Names, Titles, (with maintenance foreign to
the maintenance of Christ) employed in works he no where charges upon them to
do, than Christ ever instituted and appointed, shall look upon our selves as
concerned in what he offers in this Section. But till then we shall neither
trouble our selves or Reader with his Lordly dictates, which being tendered
without proof, may righteously be rejected by us. Only thus much I would tell
him in his ear, That if he had (when he took the solemn League and Covenant)
the same apprehension of this generation of men he now seems to have, he did
very wickedly to swear to endeavor the extirpation of Prelacy (i. e. as in the
Covenant is explained, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellours, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all
other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy.) What? Durst he
swear to extirpate the Ministers and Ministry of Christ, as he now supposes
them to be? But

Tempora mutantur, nos and mutamur in illis. In Sect. 22. Mr. T. takes notice
of the 6th enquiry in S. T. touching the extensiveness of the Privileges of
the Saints under the Gospel, whether not commensurate with theirs under the
Law: which if understood of Saints in appearance, or the visible Church, he
tells us, The visible Church of the Jews had in some things greater
Privileges; as those mentioned Romans 9. 4, 5. and 3. 1, 2. (and are they not as
much committed to the Church and People of God now? so that these Texts are
little to his advantage;) together with Gods revealing his mind to them by Urim
and Thumim, extraordinary Prophets, and many more (which he not being pleased
to particularize to us, we shall not turn aside to make enquiry after:) But to
those instanced in we Answer.

First, That the Church and People of God are destitute of some of the
Privileges mentioned, is granted: and so was the Church of the Jews, after
their return from the Babylonish Captivity. The Rabbis tell us, That in the
second Temple there were five things wanting which had been in the first.

1. The Ark with the Mercy-Seat and Cherubims.

2. The fire from Heaven.

3. The Urim and Thummim, Ezra 2. 63. Neh. 7. 65. whereby the Lord never
answered them more.

4. The Majesty (or divine presence) whereby they seem to mean the Oracle in
the most holy place, where God has dwelt between the Cherubims, Psalm. 80. 2.
Numb. 7. 89.

5. The Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of Prophecy, which was not in the Prophets
after the second year of Darius, after Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachie had
finished their Prophesies.

Secondly, The Inference of the Animadverter is weak, Believers (or visible
Saints) under the Gospel have not some things with which the Church of the Jews
was privileged, therefore their Privileges are not as extensive; which
notwithstanding they might be, yea abundantly more extensive. The first Temple
upon many accounts was more glorious than the second, which wanted (as was but
now remarked) many things wherein its glory lay. Yet, Hag. 2. 9. the Prophet
tells them, that the glory of the latter house should be greater than of the
former; which it was, though it had not the same things for its ornament and
glory, upon other accounts, viz. its being honored with the bodily presence of
Christ there, etc. Of the Privileges of the Gospel-Churches, and their
super-eminency, with respect to the Old-Testament-Church, we shall not now
treat. They are delivered from the Yoke of Ceremonial Observances, have the
Gospel unvailed, preached amongst them, 2 Cor. 3. 18, etc. Nor need we the
intendment of our present enquiry, being only this; Whether the solemn
deputation of men signally pointed out by the Lord for the administration of
holy things in his house, by the Body of the Church, be not now as then; their
peculiar privilege?

What says Mr. T. hereunto?

1. The solemn deputation of Apostles and other Ministers, we find not in the
New Testament, to have been the peculiar privilege of the Church.

Answ. 1. But our Question is not touching extraordinary Officers, such as
Apostles, but of ordinary ones, such as Pastors, etc.

Yet 2dly, a man need not go far to find such a deputation, even of an Apostle,
to the work of the Lord by the Body of the Church, together with the rest of
the Apostles, Acts 1. 14, 15, 16, 23, 24, 26. being an evident proof hereof
beyond exception.

He adds, 2. Their Ordination is no where mentioned as done by the Saints, or
Brethren, which were not Officers.

Answ. 1. The Animadverter mistakes Ordination, for Imposition of hands, which
is only one part of Ordination, and comprehends the whole act of deputing or
setting men apart to the work of the Ministry.

2. That Assertion, That the Church, or Assembly of Believers, are nowhere said
to have an hand therein, must be imputed to Mr. T. his forgetfulness, Acts 6.
3. and 14. 23. manifestly declare the contrary.

He grants, that in the first ages there are relations of the election of their
own Ministers by the Church; but the management hereof with Tumults, Frays,
Disorders, necessitated an alteration: and considering the present temper of
the Saints, how unquiet, injudicious, deceitful, factious, divided they are, he
thinks it not safe it be again committed to them.

Answ. 1. The first Ages in that matter held fast to the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the Privilege, which according to the Institution of Christ, his
Church and People were invested in.

2. Many things are reported of the Saints in the first Ages, notoriously false
and untrue; and it may be the story of their tumults, frays, etc. in electing
their own Pastors, may be so. Contentions I know there were, early amongst
them, about this matter; that there were tumults and frays, may perhaps be
coined by some ambitious spirits, that they might the better take an occasion
to divest the Saints of that sacred Privilege.

3. The former disorders, or present distempers amongst Saints, are no warrant
for the variation, or nullifying an Institution of Christ.

4. What strange Saints (it may be he means only the Parochians of his Mother
the Church of England) Mr. T. has his lot cast amongst I cannot tell. Blessed
be the Lord there are thousands of Saints, and many Churches in England (this
little point of the World) directly of another temper and spirit, being
peaceable, judicious, upright, serving the Lord with one consent, according to
the discovery he has made to them. And if any in any thing are of different
persuasions, praying the Lord to reveal that also unto them. And Mr. T. does
not well thus to asperse and blacken the Generation of the Righteous.

The absurdities that Mr. T. supposes will ensue upon the asserting the
election of Ministers to be the privilege of the Saints, are not worth the
mentioning. I know not any Law that forbids Women to intermeddle herein, whose
privilege reached farther than so.

1. There are many Scriptures that seem to assert it as their right and
liberty. (1.) In the choice of Officers they were unquestionably present, Act.
1. 15. and 6. 2, 34. and 14. 23. and 16. 23. (2.) At the deciding of
Controversies, Act. 15. 22. and 21. 22. 1 Cor. 6. 2. (3.) At the choice of Men
to carry the Benevolence of the Church to the needy Brethren, 2 Cor. 8. 19. 1
Cor. 16. 3. (4.) At the casting-out of Offenders, Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5.
(5.) In their readmission upon Repentance, 2 Cor. 2. 6 to 10. They being part
of the Church, must necessarily be understood as concerned in these matters,
wherein the whole Church are said to be concerned.

2. 'Twere easy to introduce above a Jury twice told, of learned Writers, who
have written as much as this comes to: As Beza, Calvin, Bucer, Bullinger,
Melancthon, Bucan. Paraeus, Junius, Cyprian, Trelcutias, Sibrandus, Rivetus,
Jerome, Augustine, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact; So
the Magdeburgenses in 2 Cent. c. 7. de Consociatione Ecclesiarum; who all
assert that Church Affairs should be executed by the consent of the whole
Church. The Council of Carthage indeed decreed 4. can. 99. That a Woman, though
never so holy and learned, should not preach in public, nor baptize; can. 100.
And Tertullian tells us that in his time it was forbid to a Woman to teach in
the African Church, and baptize; but they deny them not liberty to vote,
consent, or dissent in Church Matters.

Nor do the Scriptures mentioned by this Animadverter in the least advance
themselves against what is asserted by us. Not 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.

1. It Is as much, more against the practice allowed by his Mother the Church of
England. In that Church Women have liberty not only to say Amen, to say Prayers
after the Priest with a loud voice, but with the Men to act their parts in
Worship, the Priest saying one part, and they another. They have (at least they
had not long since) liberty in case of necessity to baptize: which is greater
than the Sisters privilege we plead for. Sure this is speaking in the Church.
But this is clavem clave pellere.

2. That Women might be chosen Church Officers, is evident from 1 Timothy 5. 9.
Phaebe was a Deaconess, Romans 16. 1. Touching the management of their office,
they ought (especially if called upon by them so to do) to give an account to
the Congregation: How they could do this without speaking in the Church I am
not able to understand. Therefore,

3. The sense of the Apostle is, that they be not admitted to public preaching
or prophesying (ordinarily) by virtue of Office-power: That they do not (...),
command, (as the word sometimes signifies) or speak so as to usurp authority
over the man, as the Apostle explains it, 1 Timothy 2. 12. But I suffer not a
Woman to teach, or usurp authority over the Man. The latter expression is
exegetical of the former, i. e. not so to teach as to usurp authority over the
man! Yea I had ever till now thought that speaking so as to testify ones
consent, or dissent, to inform the Church of what they knew not, of concern to
them, and the Apostles, (...), 1 Timothy 2. 12. had been vastly different: And
indeed see no reason to change my thoughts from any thing this Animadverter
offers; that these Scriptures make nothing for his purpose.

As for the second absurdity that Mr. T. supposes would follow upon the
asserting the Saints Privilege in the election of their own Ministers, viz.
That whom the major part choose, the lesser part are not to take for their
Minister -- scarcely deserves to be taken notice of.

1. The difference supposed seldom happens amongst the Congregated Churches; if
but once, it is too often: Though Mr. T. his expression intimates as if a
frequent case; which I cannot but tell him is a mere calumny. 'Twill not one
day be for his credit, however it may at present serve his design, that he
walks so much by that rule,

Calumniare fortiter aliquid adhaerebit. 2. When it happens the exercise of
those Rules of Condescension, Love, and mutual forbearance, enjoined by Christ
upon his Disciples, would soon put an end to the differences suggested. But,

3. If this will not do, the calling-in the help of some Sister-Church, may
quench the flames. Yet,

4. If nothing will do, but, through the prevalency of corruption, Schisms
remain amongst them, and separation at the last each from other ensue, to
prevent this we must not lay aside an Institution of Christ.

5. Besides, the imposing a Minister upon a People by a Patron with a Bishops
Institution and Induction, has more frequently (and I am sure more justly and
warrantably) been the occasion of the offense and difference intimated.

Sect. 21.
Of a visible instituted Church, and its security from Apostasy. What Errors
and Corruptions unchurch a Church. Of the National Church of England. Of the
Governors and Officers of a collapsed Church. The condition of England's
Church Officers. Of Separation from a collapsed Church. Of Communion with a
Church not rightly constituted, and compulsion thereunto.

IN Sect. 23. Mr. T. transcribes the 7th Query in S. T. Whether any visible
instituted Church in the world has greater security against Apostasy from
God, and that sore judgment of having its Candlestick removed (and being
unchurched) than that people of the Jews had? If not, then whether, supposing a
National Church to be of the Institution of Christ, it may not so come to pass,
that it may be so overspread with corruptions, that it may lose the essence of
a Church, and justly be disrobed of that appellation. To which he answers in
the Affirmative, and tells us, that they justly plead it against the Church of
Rome, and that the promise, Mat. 16. 8. does not belong to any particular
instituted Church in the World, but to the invisible Church of Gods Elect. And
we are of the same mind with him in this matter. But lest any reflection of
disparagement should from this Concession, happen to the Church of England, as
a very dutiful Son, he adds, That not every, no nor many corruptions of some
kind do unchurch, but such Errors as overthrow the foundation of Christian
Faith: Corruptions of Worship by Idolatry, in life by evil manners, utterly
inconsistant with Christianity.

Answ. 1. Nor did we ever assert, that every or many corruptions of some kind
did unchurch. So that in this matter Mr. T. might have saved his pains.

Nor 2dly, had we the least occasion to do so with respect to the Church of
England, which we deny to be a true Church, not because dreadfully degenerate
from what at first it was, but because in its first Constitution as National
(which it received under the Pa^acy) it was never a true Church of Christ.

Though 3dly, such fundamental Errors, such corruptions in Worship and evil
manners, are to be found upon it, that are inconsistant with the power of
Godliness (or Christianity) and therefore such as, by Mr. T. his Concession,
were enough to unchurch it.

To the eighth Query in S. T. viz. Whether the Ecclesiastic and Spiritual
Rulers, Governors, and Officers of such a collapsed Church, may not
righteously, as of old, be accounted and esteemed as false Prophets, that go
about to cause the people to forget the Name of the Lord (or his pure Worship)
by their lies or unscriptural Traditions, Innovations, and ceremonious
Pageantries. Mr. T. pretends to answer, Sect. 24. which he fronts with this;
Every Error makes not a false Prophet: which no one says it does. And further,
by way of reply, having placed in the Van 2 Pet. 2. 1. Jude 4. 1 John 4. 1. 2
John 7. 1 John 2. 22. which speak of false Prophets and Antichrist; but
advantage him not in the least in his present undertaking, as we have
manifested. He adds, that so long as they teach the Worship of Christ in his
Name, are without Idolatry in their Worship, and Heresy in their Doctrine,
they are not to be accounted false Prophets.

Answ. But this, as to the present Ministers of England, will not be granted.
They practice not the Worship of Christ, but of Antichrist, as we prove chapter 7.
of S. T. They come not really in Christ's Name (though they pretend to it) but
in the name (by the authority) of the most professed enemy he has in the world,
as we evince chapter 3. of S. T. Though the Doctrine of the Church of Engl. be the
most sincere part, the greatest care of our Reformers at first being
thereabout; yet they own, and preach false Doctrine: the most of them are
greatly degenerated from the Doctrine of the Church of England in not a few
points; as touching Election, Free Will, the extent of the Death of Christ,
etc. as might be evidenced from their Sermons, and printed Papers. Of this we
have spoken chap. 10. of S. T. The addition of this Animadverter of

In Te ipsum cudetur faba, as if guilty of the same things, or such like, as we
charge upon the Ministers of the Church of England, I challenge him to make
good, else he does but calumniate.

His 25th Section is an Answer to the 9th Query in S. T. about separation from
a Church, so dreadfully collapsed as to lose the essence of a Church. The sum
is, 1. Separation by reason of some corruptions is unwarrantable.

Answ. And we say so too: but this is not ad Rhombum, we are speaking not of
corruptions of any kind, but of such as destroy the essence of a Church, as is
evident from the 7th Query in S. T. upon which this has a dependence.

He adds, 2dly. Separation from a Church, somewhat erroneous in judgment, and
corrupt in worship and conversation, that is not Idolatrous nor heretical, nor
requires that to their Communion which would be sinful, especially if from all
attending on Ministers and Ministry at all times is unjustifiable.

Answ. 1. All this might be granted without the least disadvantage to the Cause
we are pleading.

2dly. By his own Sword is the Cause he undertakes the defense of, wounded
under the fifth rib. We prove the Church of England Idolatrous, Heretical. She
requires that to her Communion that is sinful, viz. Conformity to the
Mass Book (I should have said the Liturgy from thence stolen) bowing at the
Name of Jesus; communicating with a Drunken Parish Priest, and a company of
Swearing Drunken Parishioners, whereby persons become one Bread with them;
kneeling at the act of receiving; having their Children signed with the sign of
the Cross: which we are apt to think are things sinful, and till Mr. T. is
pleased better to inform us, are like to abide in our present apprehension
thereabout: from whence Separation from her is warrantable by the Animadverters
concession and grant.

3dly, That Separation from one part of Worship in a Church should be somewhat
justifiable, and not from the whole, at some time and not always (things still
remaining as they were) is a mystery that I profess I understand not. I presume
he suggests it with reference to the Prayers and Sacraments of the Church, a
separation from which he supposes is more justifiable than from their
Preaching.

But seriously I would thank Mr. T. if he would take the pains to prove, 1.
That it is lawful for me to join with that Church in any part of Worship, with
whom I am not obliged, cannot in conscience pray. 2dly, That where the
Sacraments are not duly administered, there is a true Church: The due
administration of Sacraments, having been hither to assert^d as one certain
note of a true Church. If they are duly administered in the Church of England,
why does Mr. T. refuse to join in their Administration? If they are not duly
administered, the Church of England is a false Church, and not to be joined with
in any part of Worship. What follows in this Section, that the Separation
pleaded-for, is for the most part, the fruit of pride, or bitter zeal, and
tends to strife and confusion, and every evil work, must be imputed to the
overflowing of Mr. T. his gall and passion; It Is at the least a fruit of the
flesh, which he will do well to wait upon God to humble him for, and mortify
in him. I shall only say, The Lord forgive thee. The Scripture instanced, Jam.
3. 16. is more applicable to the Church of England, than to those of the
Congregational way, as every considerate Reader will acknowledge.

To the tenth Query in S. T. viz. Whether supposing a Church apostatised, as
aforesaid, never to be, according to Truth, a visible instituted Church of
Christ; and the People of God living in the Nation, never by their free
consent, members thereof, as it is on the pretended Churches part, most
unheard of cruelty to compel them so it be not on the part of the freeborn
Children of God, most stupendous folly and disvaluation of the Institutions of
Christ, and ingratitude to God for the light and liberty from the yokes of men
received, imaginable, to join affinity with it in Worship, or attend upon its
Ministry, he pretends to answer in his 26th Sect. I say he pretends to do so:
for Mr. T. must suppose that Reader to be distempered in his brain, that shall
take what he says to be indeed an Answer to the Query proposed.

1. He grants, compulsion of men may be cruelty.

Answ. But Sir, the question is not about every compulsion, but a compulsion to
conformity to, and communion with a Church (so called) that never was of the
Institution of Christ; of which we never owned our selves members. Is not such
a compulsion cruelty? doubtless (if there be any cruelty in the world) this is
so.

2. He runs to his old shift, of joining with a Church that has some humane
inventions in Worship, a Ministry that (for the main) preach the Gospel, with
some mixture of Errors, not requiring persons to practice that which is in it
self evil --

Answ. 1. This has been answered, as it relates to the Church of England, over
and over. It Is an Argument our Animadverter has little to say (for the defense
of his Church) that is true; when we hear the same story so often, which (yet in
a great measure) is notoriously false, as if he had been brought up at the feet
of old Battus, he speaks exactly like him

-- subillis
Montibus inquit erant, and erant sub montibus illis.
Montibus inquit erant, and erant sub montibus illis.
the same over and over, for fear of failing.

But 2dly, One Key will never fit every Lock, nor one Answer serv^ to every
Question. Sir, the Query is not, what we may do with respect to a Church
collapsed (of which we before spoke) but whether it be not great folly for the
People of God, who by their own voluntary consent were never members of such a
Church, to join affinity with it in Worship, and attend upon its Ministry,
which none of the Texts of Scripture produced by Mr. T. evince. Acts 21. 18,
etc. and 16, 3. 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21. give us an account of the readiness of
Paul to condescend to weak Believers, in what he lawfully might: Ergo it is our
duty, for peace-sake, to join with a Church which is not of the Institution of
Christ. Which consequence when Mr. T. makes good, he will manifest himself to
be a man of rare abilities indeed. Mat. 17. 27. is so remote to his purpose,
that I wonder to what purpose he produces it. Christ works a Miracle, to pay
Tribute, exacted of the Emperors Collectors; Ergo, we must not separate from a
false Church, but attend upon its Ministry, join in affinity with it. How he
will in his next cover these palpable mistakes I know not, nor can I advise him
to a better Apology than that

-- Semel insanivimus omnes. CHAP. II.
Sect. 1.
Of Sanctifying the Name of God in our drawing nigh to him. Of particularities
of Worship and their Imposition. Of an implicit Faith in matters of Worship.
The first Argument in the S. T. against hearing the present Ministers,
vindicated. Of a Warrant by permission; and part accidental of Instituted
Worship. Of Shaphan's reading the Law. 2 Chr. 34. 18. Joh. 8. 47. explained.
The unlawfulness of practicing any thing in Instituted Worship, for which we
have no warrant in the Scripture. Whether Christ has only revealed the
essentials of Worship, and left accidental Parts thereof to be determined by
the prudence of Rulers. The rise of Ceremonies. Col. 2. 8, 9, 10. explained. Of
the Scriptures perfection. The Testimonies of the Ancients. Josh. 22. 34.
explained.

THe Preface of the S. T. being vindicated from the exceptions of Mr. T.
wherein his skirmishings have been manifested to be velitary, and weak indeed:
We attend his advance and onset upon the Triarii, or main Battle (as he
phraseth it) against which let him do his worst, after all his endeavors to
rout it, he will find it keeping the field against him.

Statque ut dura silex, aut ut Marpessia cautes. The first thing he takes
notice of is, a saying of mine, in the beginning of Chap. 1. of the S. T. That
God having said he will be sanctified in all that draw nigh to him. -- It Is
therefore the necessary duty of Saints in all their approaches to God, to see
to his Institution, both in respect of the matter and manner of Worship. To
which he subjoyns, This is yielded, with respect to determined particularities,
but as to such as are undetermined by the Lord, there may be too anxious care,
tending to be get scruples, perplexities, divisions, -- which experience has
proved, to cause fluctuating in men's minds, inconstancy in their practice. --
And its therefore advisable, that people of weak judgments did satisfy
themselves in these things, in the judgment of their faithful, learned, wise,
and holy Teachers and Rulers.

Answ. Bravely spoken, had it been at Rome, our English stomachs can scarce
away with such Coleworts.

O dura Messorum ilia! 1. The Animadverter all along takes for granted, that
which we expressly told him, Chap. 5. 7. of the S. T. page 41, 62. we denied,
viz. That there are any circumstances, or particularities of Worship, relating
to it, as such, undetermined by the Lord. 2dly. Under the notion of
particularities of Worship undetermined, he shrouds the many Popish toys, and
Antichristian inventions, (as Cross in Baptism, Ring in Marriage, Surplice --)
yet retained in the Church of England. These he would not have persons too
careful about. But seriously Sir, those that know the Lord, know him to be a
jealous God, and that he has manifested his jealousy, in such terrible
rebukes, against some of the sons of men (as Nadab and Abihu, Levit. 10. 1, 2.
Vzza, 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7. whom he slew in his fury, for their Worshipping him
otherwise than he had determined) that be they never so weak, they tremble (and
abhor) to draw nigh to God, in a way they have no Scripture-warrant for. 3dly.
They desire to be satisfied in the authority of the Children of men, in their
attempts to impose upon their Consciences, and make those things the necessary
parts of Worship, which they themselves acknowledge, Christ has left as
particularities undetermined. 4thly. They would also be directed by Mr. T. to
those faithful, learned, wise, and holy Teachers, he speaks of, for they can
find few, or none such, in a whole County. And yet 5thly, One thing more they
would be satisfied in, Whether an implicit Faith in matters of Worship, be any
more tolerable and justifiable than in matters of Doctrine: And whether this
will ever be a satisfactory answer to their mighty Sovereign, the Lord of
Hosts, when he shall demand of them, Who has required this at your hands? Why,
truth Lord, we never read that thou did ever do so; but our faithful --
Teachers told us we might, yea ought notwithstanding to practice these things,
and believe it will never be accepted as such. 6thly. His scurrilous
reflections they can freely pardon, though they know that the brood of Ranters,
etc. (he speaks of) have not been produced by the inquisitiveness of any after
the mind of God, with respect to Instituted Worship; but persons taking up,
with such slight thoughts of the Worship of the Holy God, as such expressions,
as these used by him, are apt enough to beget in the minds of men, together
with the instability and inconstancy of persons, whom they have (it may be)
owned as their Teachers and Rulers; being ready to embrace and shake hands with
whatever is uppermost in the world: laboring to support, uphold, and draw
others, to the imbracement of that now, which not long ago they Prayed,
Preached against, and with hands and eyes lift up to Heaven, they swore to seek
(to the uttermost of their power) to root out, and demollish. Sir, these things
are some of those occasions (through the subtilty of Satan, and the corruption
of man's nature) of that Ra^tism, Atheism, etc. that is in the world. And
blessed be the Lord, the Congregations of his People, have been but little
emptied hereby; they are a brood issuing, for the most part, out of the Womb of
the Church of England, and are such (as it is known) that little enquired into
these matters, taking all for Gospel that their Preachers taught them.

The next attempt of the Animadverter, is the exatnination of the Arguments
advanced in the S. T. against hearing the present Ministers of England. The
first is,

That which there is no warrant for in the Scripture, (^eing part of Instituted
Worship) is not lawful for the Saints to practice: But there is no warrant in
the Scripture for hearing the present Ministers (and Heariug is part of
Instituted Worship.) Therefore --

To which he answers, Sect. 2. Chap. 1. The sum is. There is a Twofold Warrant,
by Command, or by Permission. Of Instituted Worship there are two Parts. 1.
Essential, without which it is not, or is not rightly called Instituted
Worship. 2. Accidental, which may be present, or absent, and yet the Worship
be, or righteously be so called: If the Major be meant of Warrant by Command,
and part accidental of Instituted Worship, it is denied; and so is the Minor.
Hearing the Word from this or that person, is a part accidental of Instituted
Worship, undetermined, and has a warrant by Permission as being not contrary
to any Precept or Rule in Scripture about such Worship.

Answ. 1. This Animadverter continues still his old trade of begging, and
dictating without proof, which does not become him; and being in matters
wherein our souls are so nearly concerned, we cannot bear it in him.

1. He te^ls us, That with respect to Instituted Worship, there is a twofold
warrant, by Command, or by Permission; but would he had thought it incumbent
upon him, to have proved, what he asserted. This we deny. Whatever has not a
warrant of Command in the Scripture is plainly interdicted, and forbidden
therein, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Rev. 22. 18. punished with no less than death
upon those that have adventured to act exorbitantly, without such a warrant, as
we but now manifested.

2dly. He tells us, That there are two Parts of Instituted Worship, Essential,
and Accidental; but this also is false, and untrue, we expect his proof of it.
A part Accidental of Instituted Worship, is a sort of gibberish (that as it is
unscriptural so) it is little less than down-right-nonsence. Instituted Worship
is such Worship as is appointed by command from Christ, or that is by Christ's
institution, says Mr. T. (in answer to the Preface of S. T. Sect. 2.) How any
part of instituted Worship, can be an accidental part i. e. such a part of
Worship, (as though enjoined by Christ, which if it be not, it is not
instituted) as may be done, or not done, without sin, I must profess I
understand not. And desire Mr. T. would inform me (not in a Dictator-like way,
as if he were a second Pythagoras, but) from Scripture-evidence. And lest he
should mistake, this is that which is incumbent upon him to prove, That a part
of instituted Worship (which is a Worship commanded by Christ) may be
accidental, i. e. performed, or not performed without sin.

3dly, That hearing the present Ministers of England preach the Doctrines and
Traditions of men (as he must do at some time or other, that constantly attends
on their Ministry) or (according to Mr. T.) the Word of God, has Warrant in
Scripture by permission, as being not contrary to any Precept about Worship, is
another dictate of his, that he will make good ad Graecas Calendas. It Is true
the Light of Nature dictates, That God is to be heard by whomsoever he speaks;
and it is as true, that God having instituted Officers of his own, none are to
be heard, as speaking in his Name, by virtue of an office-power, but those that
are so instituted by him: for if we may hear any one, what need of such an
institution?

That hearing them is contrary to Scripture-Rule, we demonstrate in the
subsequent Chapters in S. T. What Mr. T. further offers in this matter is
nothing to the purpose. God commanded the Levites to read the Law, -- Deuteronomy. 31.
9. -- Yet Shaphan reads it before Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 18. which was an
accidental part of Worship warranted by permission.

Answ. 1. The reading of the Law by Shaphan, was not an accidental part of
Worship warranted by permission (which Mr. T. does ill so impose upon us) it
was commanded, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. and 11. 18.

2dly. Had Shaphan acted therein as a Church Officer (as is the case of the
present Ministers) it had been his sin, and utterly unlawful for any one to
have attended on him in so doing. Luke 10. 16. has been considered in our
Answer to Mr. T. his Exceptions against the Preface of the S. T. Sect. 2. where
we have manifested, That the Spirit of the Lord, in it, lifts up himself
against what Mr. T. endeavors to support by it. Nor does John 8. 47.
communicate the least mite of assistance to his assertion. It Is expressly and
particularly spoken with relation to Christ. The Jews bragged that they were
Abraham's Children, verse. 39. Christ labors to drive them out of that hold,
Verse. 39, 40, by manifesting to them, that they did not the works of Abraham.
They tell him, that God was their Father, Verse. 41. He labors to convince them
of the contrary; and amongst other things asserts that general Aphorism, Verse.
47. (...), He that is of God (i. e. He that is born of God (as it is John 1.
13.) (...), hears Gods Words, (i. e. subjects, conforms to, obeys them) q. d.
If ye were of God as ye say, ye would believe, obey the Word of God, that I the
Son of God, the great Prophet of the Church preach to you; Ergo, Its lawful to
hear Gods Word who ever brings it, i. e. attend upon any Ministry, though of
evil Spirits, unclean Frogs, that come out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast,
and false Prophet, Rev. 16. 13.

-- quod erat demonstrandum. The Apostle seems to be of another mind, 1 John 4.
5, 6.

The next attempt of the Animadverter, Sect. 3. is to dissipate, what we offer
for the confirmation of the Major Proposition, vi^. That it is not lawful to
practice any thing, being part of instituted Worship, for which we have no
warrant in the Scripture.

This I say is evident, 1. From the nature of instituted Worship, which
consists in this, that it be of divine Revelation. -- This is true says he, of
essential, not of accidental parts of instituted Worship.

Answ. 1. But we deny that there are any accidental parts of instituted
Worship; for if instituted (i. e. commanded by Christ) it cannot be accidental
(i. e. left to our liberty as what may or ^ay not be done without sin.) If
accidental, it may be a part of somewhat else, but of the instituted Worship of
Christ it cannot be. And this was in effect told Mr. T. in S. T. but he is wise
and resolves to take no notice of what he sees he is not able to make some kind
of reply or other to! His discourse of Jeho^akims hearing Jehudi, read the
Roll, is not at all pertinent: what may be thought to be of weight in it, is
already answered in the case of Shaphans reading the Law, but now replied to.

2dly, From the Verdict of Christ, who pronounces all the Worship of man to be
vain and fruitless (and so unlawful) that is bottomed on any thing but divine
Revelation, Mar. 7. 7. To which he answers, This is true of those Actions in
which the Worship of God is placed.

Answ. Very good: in hearing the present Ministers, Mr. T. supposes the
Worship of God to be placed; Let him produce an Institution for his so doing,
or, his Worship (by his own confession) is vain, sinful, unlawful. So that to
what follows we need not say any thing.

The hearing the Law of God read, was a part of Worship, but whether in the
Synagogue, or in their own Houses, was not so; it related not to Worship as
such at all, being nothing but what was common to other actions, to be
performed by them in a Community. Circumstances of Worship [as such]
undetermined by the Lord, to be appointed by men, we deny, and challenge Mr. T.
to make good. These circumstances are such as without which the Worship of God
is perfect or it is not; if the first, we need them not, they are vain,
fruitless, having without them a perfect Worship. If the second, the Worship
God has commanded, as it comes out of his hands, without humane additaments is
imperfect; but this is little less than blasphemy.

We assert, 3dly. If it be lawful to conform to any one part of instituted
Worship, without warrant from the Scripture; It Is also lawful to conform to
another, a third, the whole. This is granted says Mr. T. and therein has he
yielded the matter in controversy. It Is no more lawful to conform to any one
part of instituted Worship, without warrant from the Scripture, than it is to
conform to the whole (as our Animadverter grants) but no man in his wits will
say it is lawful to conform to the whole of Instituted Worship, without Warrant
from Scripture; Therefore. --

But I add in S. T. That the asserting it lawful to conform to the whole of
Instituted Worship, without warrant from Scripture, is the ready way to banish
Instituted Worship out of the World. This Mr. T. denies for this reason, The
Pharisees observed many Traditions from the Elders, Mar. 7. 3, 4. but this did
not banish the Instituted Worship of the Passover out of the world.

Answ. Egregie dictum, and as became such a Doctor!

For, 1st, The many Traditions they practiced from the Elders, were but a part
of their Religious Observances, not the whole.

2dly, Had they practiced nothing as a part of their instituted Worship, but
what they had received by Tradition from them, they must most assuredly have
banished the truly Instituted Worship of the Lord out of the world; which
except revealed by him, is not his instituted Worship, nor can it properly be
so called.

We affirm, 4thly, That to assert, it is lawful to conform ^o any part of
instituted Worship, without warrant from the Scripture, reflects sadly upon the
wisdom, and faithfulness of Christ; for either he was not wise enough to
foresee, that such a part of Worship was, or would be requisite, or had not
faithfulness enough to reveal it: though the Scripture compares him to Moses
for faithfulness, who revealed the whole will of God, to the making of a pin in
the Tabernacle.

Mr. T. replies, It was neither for want of wisdom, nor faithfulness in Christ:
he did foresee what parts of Worship were and should be requisite, and what
parts were essential and necessary to be observed, were determined in
Scripture; as for accidental things, they were left to the prudence and
authority chiefly of Rulers, (Who told him so? This canting he surely learned
of the Romish Cabal.) Christ was faithful, in that he revealed what was his
Fathers will in Spirituals, but for Externals appointed but a few things, and
left the rest to be ordered under general Rules, as it should be found
convenient in after times.

Answ. 1. These are Mr. T. his dictates, of which you must expect his proofs
when he has greater leisure; but in the mean while no man can reasonably be
blamed, if he refuse to subscribe to them.

2dly, If Christ has determined what parts of worship are essential, and
necessary to be observed, as he grants, this part of the Controversy is at an
end, and must be by him acknowledged to be so, till he have proved,

First, That there are accidental parts of Instituted Worship.

Secondly, That unnecessary trifles may be added to the essential and necessary
parts of Worship, as parts thereof.

Thirdly, That what Christ thought not necessary to be observed, is necessary
to be observed, because men think so.

But 3dly, Would Mr. T. would direct us, to the place where Christ has granted
that power to the Rulers (or any else) to add what they shall judge convenient
to his Worship, he being Head of his Body, the Church, and King of Saints, we
suppose he will not have the confidence to assert; they may do this without his
leave (the doing so being a plain usurpation of his Throne and Kingly
Authority.) I have read over the New Testament more than once, and must
profess, I find not the least intimation of any such thing therein, but the
contrary.

4thly. We do not understand how Christ could be faithful, if he revealed only
what was his Fathers will in Spirituals, and neglected to do so, with respect
to Externals (as Mr. T. intimates) when he was to reveal the whole will of his
Father to his Church, and for that end came into the world, John 1. 18. Heb. 1.
2.

Nor 5thly, Can we conceive, how it consists with the wisdom of Christ to leave
it to men (the greatest and wisest of them) to determine what is fit and
convenient to be added to his Worship; because nothing is more evident, than
that they are incompetent Judges hereof. Their folly herein being frequently
remarked in the Scripture. Jeroboam thinks it convenient that the People
worship at Dan and Bethel, and that they have golden Calves, as visible
representations of that God whom they worshipped. Ahaz thinks it decent and
convenient, that a stately Altar, (the pattern whereof he had seen at Damascus)
be set up by the Altar of the Lord that was at Jerusalem, which things were the
provocation of the eyes of his glory. The truth is, the wretched additaments of
the Sons of men to the Worship of Christ, owe their original to this one
abominable figment of Mr. T. That what is by men thought convenient, in the
Worship of Christ, is left to be ordered by them. In the Papacy, Holy Water is
by Pope Alexander thought to be convenient to be reserved in Temples, to
sanctify the People, and drive away Devils; So is the Dedication of Temples by
Pope Higinus: That all of ripe years, do every Easter receive the Sacrament, by
Pope Zephirinus. That Priests Stand when the Gospel is read, by Pope
Anastatius: The Letany, by Pope Gregory: Confirmation of the Baptized, by
Clemens (as it is said:) (though many of these things are antedated, and
ascribed, as to their Original, to persons that would have abhorred them.
Scultetus Med. Patr. p. 1. l. 11. c. 10. says, Of all the Epistles of the
first Popes, no man that reads them attentively, but acknowledges them to be
forged. The Epistles Decretal which pass under the Names of Clement, etc. are
all forged, and that for six Reasons, says Perkins. The like says Dr.
Prideaux in his 9th Orat. de Pseudoepigraphis, Sect. 3.) The Celebration of the
Mass upon the Altar, by Xistus (or Sixtus:) The Distinction of Parishes by
Dionysius, with a command to Preachers to keep within their Bounds. The singing
the Creed, by Pope Marcus: The Glory to the Father, to be said after the
Psalms: And the Order of Queristers or Singing-Men, by Pope Damasus: The
Dedication of Churches by Bishops, by Foelix: Pope Stephen the 7th thinks it
convenient to Degrade all that had taken Orders from P. Formosus, and he
himself gives them new ones. John Sicco the Successor of Silvester, an. 1003
makes a Decree, that the election of the Roman Popes, should belong only to the
Roman Clergy, without the consent of the People; because the People are to be
led, and not followed: he establishes the Feast of All Souls. P. Urban An.
1096, ordained, That no Clergy or Layman should eat Flesh from Shrovetide to
Easter. Innocent the third, ordained Transubstantiation: yea the Fathers of the
Council of Constance, publish a Decree in these words, Although Christ after
Supper has instituted and administered to his Disciples this venerable
Sacrament, under both kinds, of Bread and Wine; yet notwithstanding, the
Authority of the sacred Canons, the laudable and approved custom of the Church,
has observed, and does observe, that this Sacrament ought not to be finished
after Supper, nor administered under both kinds -- and seeing this custom has
been according to reason brought in, and a long time observed by the Church and
holy Fathers, it is to be held for a Law. Council. Constable. Sess. 3.

And if the case be so with us, as is suggested by this Animadverter, it is not
to be thought that our condition is in the least bettered by the removing the
carnal ordinances of the Jews, it is by many degrees worse than theirs. They had
a stinted number of Ceremonies, of the institution of the Lord: We have an
innumerable company of the devising of man, nor any security, but we may have a
thousand more: for if ^^e Rulers shall judge them convenient, they may ordain
them, and we are bound to submit unto them, if Mr. T. his Doctrine be true. But
blessed be the Lord, things are far otherwise: Christ hat^ not broken the yoke
of the Jewish observances off the necks of his Disciples, to have them become
such servants of men as to stoop to every Theatrical and Ludicrous Ceremony
(that under the notion of Convenience) shall be by them thought fit to be
imposed on them. If he has, let Mr. T. produce one Scripture in which he has
so done; if not, we expect he manifest so much Christian modesty, as to retract
his over-confident Assertion, that Christ has under general rules left what
(relating to the externals of Worship) was to be added, to be ordered as it
should be found convenient in aftertimes.

We further add in S. T. That it is not lawful for the Sa^nts, in matters of
Instituted Worship, to practice what there is no warrant for in the Scripture,
because so to do (5thly) pours out contempt upon the care of God over the
New-Testament-Churches (as if it were less to these, than to that under the
Law) and the Economy of the Gospel, as not so complete as that of old; the
whole of whose Worship, Orders and Ordinances (as was said) was bottomed upon
pure revelation.

To this says Mr. T. 1. This pours out no contempt upon the care of God over
the New-Testament-Churches, as is before proved, in answer to the Preface,
Sect. 20.

Answ. What Mr. T. there dictates (for he proves little) we have already
considered, and removed out of the way, in our reply thereunto. 2dly. He begs
of us to yield him, that Circumstantials of Worship, as such, are liable to
variation, are not bottomed upon pure revelation divine, but in many things
left to humane prudence.

Answ. 1. But be he never so importunately preca^ious herein, we cannot yield
it him, but demand his proofs hereof, else we judge he speaks injuriously both
to Christ, and Saints.

2dly. We cannot but demur a little upon that expression, pure revelation
divine, upon which he says these circumstantials of Worship are not bottomed.
I hope he does not think his Antagonists own any Revelation, but that which is
Divine. Though as touching the Ceremonies, he is (under the notion of
Circumstantials) pleading for, they are not, indeed, built upon Revelation
Divine, but Diabolical, diametrically opposite to that which is Divine. The
language whereof is, that nothing be offered up to God, but that which is of
his own prescription.

3dly. In many things (he says) these Circumstantials of Worship are left to
humane prudence.

Answ. 1. Would he had told us in what things; 2. Thought it incumbent upon him
to prove his dictate. 3. Manifested how we might be able to discern (if an
exect enumeration of particulars is not to be obtained) betwixt those many that
are left to humane prudence, and the some that are not. 4. Discover to us what
security we have, that if a Protestant-Bishop -- impose on us some of the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, under the notion of Circumstantials and
Accidentals of Worship (though they are indeed such strange accidentals, as
were never heard-of in the world before, viz. such, as without which the
Worship must not be performed) that if the Papists should ever bear sway (which
is not impossible) his Holiness the Pope shall not impose upon us all the rest,
(that are as yet behind the Curtain) upon the same pretentions.

4. He tells us, It Is an effect of God's love and care over the
New-Testament-Churches, that he has not tied them in so many things, to
external rites -- as he did the Jews.

Answ. And we say so too; but herein Mr. T. speaks not pertinently: The
Question is not, Whether the Lord's not tying us in so many things, as he did
the Jews, to external rites, be an effect of his care and love, or no, which we
say it is: but whether it be consistant with that his care and love, in
delivering us from these, not to determine the whole of our Worship, as he did
determine the whole of theirs, but leave us to the wills, lusts and inventions
of men, to be ordered and ruled by them according as they should think meet and
convenient: Which when Mr. T. shall think himself able to persuade any, but the
blind, when the Sun shines in its strength, that it is not day, he may attempt
the proof of.

5. He adds, The Occonomy of the Gospel is not less complete than that of old,
for this cause: This reasoning if he understands the Apostle, Col. 2. 8, 9, 10.
is either the same, or very like that of the Philosophical Judaizing-Teacher.

Answ. 1. But Mr. T. his Assertion is no proof. If the whole of the Worship of
the Jews was complete without humane additaments (being built upon pure
Revelation) and ours be not complete without many things, that are left to
humane prudence to determine, relating to Worship as such, ours is most
assuredly less complete than theirs.

2dly. Mr. T. his abilities of understanding, I have little to say to,
Bernardus non videt omnia. And he has a strange faculty of discerning, that
can see our reasoning to be the same, or much like to the reasoning of the
Judaizing Teachers, Col. 2. 8, 9, 10. 1st. They di^puted for Jewish
observances; we argue as well as we can against them. 2dly. They asserted that
they were not, nor could be complete without them; this we oppose, and affirm
the contrary, That neither our Persons, or Worship are, or can be any whit the
more completed by them, or any other Observances in the world, not instituted
by Christ in the New Testament. Mr. T. indeed asserts, that there are some
Ceremonies left to be ordered by men, according as they shall see convenient:
Which is somewhat like to the Doctrine of these Judaizing Teachers, which the
Apostle cautions the Church of Colosse against, v. 8. That by the Rudiments of
the world is meant Jewish Ri^es, we may grant; the (...), or the Traditions of
men, seems to be somewhat else, viz. humane Additions to Divine Institutions,
such as were those amongst the Jews, that Christ calls (...), Mat. 15. 3, 6.
which he interprets, v. 9. to be (...), the Commandments of men. Whether our
reasoning, or the Animadverter's be more like that here of the Philosophical
Teachers, is left to the judgment of the Judicious to de^ermine.

3dly. How little to Mr. T. his purpose this Scripture-citation is, he already
may discern, how much it makes against the grand Design he is laboring to
advance, the proposing of one or two Arguments from it will fully evince.

1. Those Traditions and Rudiments that are not (...), after Christ, (i. e.
according to the Doctrine and Institution of Christ, which only ought to take
place in the Church (as say our Annotators upon the place) are not to be
complied with, but to be watched and warred against, as such that do (...),
lead us captive from Christ. But the Rudiments Mr. T. pleads for, are such as
are not (...), after the Institution of Christ (if they are, let Mr. T. produce
the place where they are so) Therefore --

2. If the Church at Colosse was so complete in Christ that they needed not to
subject (ought not to do so) to the Jewish Rites, and Traditions of the Elders;
then much less need we to subject to the Rudiments of men, or any of the
accursed Rites and Ceremonies of the Papacy. These Rites are much more weak and
absurd than the former, as never being of the Institution of the Lord, but the
devising and imposing of his professed enemy. Therefore --

6thly. The Assertion, That it is lawful to practice any thing in Instituted
Worship, without warrant from Scripture, we say in S. T. reflects sadly upon
its authority, and perfection, which is the next thing we affirm to evidence
the truth of the major Proposition. This M. T. says is true, with respect to
all Doctrinals of Faith, and Manners, and Worship, in respect of Essentials,
but not of Accidentals thereof, undetermined in the Scripture.

Answ. 1. The unscripturalness, and vanity of that distinction we have already
discovered.

2ly. We had thought that the perfection of the Scripture, had consisted in
this, that the whole of that obedience, that God required of us, had therein
been stated and enjoined; for which end we conceive it was at first commanded
to be written, and hitherto by the wonderful gracious providence of the Lord
continued to us. The Accidentals of Worship are either part of that Obedience
we owe to God, or they are not. If not, how come they to be such parts of
Worship, as without them we are interdicted to perform it? or indeed, whence is
it that we are tendering them up to God, when all our Worship is nothing else
but the solemn tender of that Obedience that we owe to him: if they are, then
there is some part of our Obedience, that is not prescribed in the Scripture;
then is the Scripture imperfect, and that with respect to the main end for
which it was given forth, viz. to indoctrinate and direct us in the whole of
that Obedience that God requires of us (and (...), says Aristotle, l. 2. de
Coelo. c. 4.)

But this is contrary to 1. The testimony and witness of the Spirit of God
speaking in the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Prove. 2. 1, 9. Isa. 8. 20. 2 Pet. 1.
19. Luke 1. 4. John 5. 39. and 20. 31. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Luk^ 10. 26. and 16. 29.
Deuteronomy. 12. 8, 32. Prove. 30. 5. Mat. 22. 29. Gal. 1. 8. Ephesians. 2. 20. Heb. 4. 12.
Rev. 22. 18. 2dly. To the Witness of many of the Worthies of the Lord in their
day. The renowned Waldenses (or the Church of Christ in the Wilderness) some
hundreds of years ago, declare and attest, that nothing is to be admitted in
Religion but what only is commanded in the Word of God; that all men's
Traditions are to be rejected -- and therefore this singing and superfluous
chanting in the Chancel to be left. It is necessary and consonant to reason,
that every man learn that which is needful out of the Scriptures, both for the
fullness of Godliness, and lest they be inured to humane traditions, says
Basil, Regul. contract. 95. page 502. God will ask no more of a Christian
Believer in this life, but only to obey the Precepts of that most blessed Law.
If any Prelate of the Church require more, or else any other kind of obedience
than this to be used, he contemns Christ, exalting himself above God, and so
bec^meth an open Antichrist, says the Lord Cobham in the Confession of his
Faith, offered to Hen. the 5th, about the year 1413. Chrysostom calls them a
most exquisite rule, and exact square and balance to try all things by.
Augustine expounding Gal. 1. 8. says, If we, or an Angel from Heaven, declare
unto you, either concerning Christ, or his Church, any other matter belonging
to our Faith, or Life, any thing but that which you have received in the
writings of the Law and the Gospel, let him be accursed. Cont. Lit. Petilian.
Don. l. 3. c. 6. and de unitat. Eccles. cap. 11. Et honos praeter mandatum est
dedecus, God is dishonored by that honor that is ascribed to him beyond his
own prescription, says Hierome. Yea, 3dly, our Protestant Divines disputing
with the Papists, about an universal Head of the Church, Cardinals, Purgatory,
Mass, etc. have ever thought this one good Argument against them, that they
find them not commanded in the Scripture; and to assert them needful, or lawful
to be used in the Church of Christ, they affirm to be derogatory to the
perfection of the Scripture. Suppose a Papist ^o say, It Is true the Scripture
is perfect with respect to the essential parts of Worship, not so with respect
to Accidentals, such as are Cross, Spittle, Salt in Baptism, Holy Water, Pope,
Cardinals, Crosses, etc. What would Mr. T. answer hereunto? It Is a thousand to
one, but the same Answer would stop his own mouth, in the reply to the Argument
undertaken to be refuted by him. We add in S. T. as a further confirmation of
the truth of the Proposition under debate,

7thly, That God condemns not only that which is done against the warrant and
direction of the Word, but also that which is done beside it, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and
12. 32. Mat. 15. 9. Lev. 10. 1. Prove. 30. 6. Jer. 7. 31.

To which Mr. T. replies, 1. That the Assertion understood of Accidentals of
Instituted Worship is false.

Answ. 1st. Very good! It seems then it is lawful to add, what we please as
accidental parts of instituted Worship, for God no where condemns our doing so.
Altars, Candles, Crucifixes, Baptism with Spittle, Salt, etc. Dedication of
Churches to He-Saints, and She-Saints (with the Inscription of Laus Deo, Sta
Helena,) of the Popes make; Baptism of Bells; the whole Farrago of Popish
Inventions, may by Mr. T. his arguing, be introduced; for these are but
Accidentals of Worship, and no where expressly interdicted.

Secondly, The Protestant Divines have ever thought this a sufficient
convincing Argument, against these fooleries of the Papists, That Christ has
no where commanded them, therefore they may justly reject them as unlawful;
Christ being the alone Pastor, Eccl. 12. 11. Master, Mat. 23. 8, 10. Prophet of
his Church, Acts* 7. 37. Who shall dare to speak where he is silent, or can do
so without an open undervaluing and contempt of his Authority? 'Twere easy to
fill many Pages with citations of Protestants to this purpose; in whose
Writings nothing is more frequent than this, Nihil sine, nihil extra, nihil
praeter, nihil ultra Divinam Scripturam admittendum esse. Peter Martyr, on 2 Samuel cap. 6. page 212, 213, says; From this History we may see, that the true
Worship of God (he speaks of Uzzah's touching the Ark) is not to be deduced
from the Palestines or Ethnicks, but the Word of God. For God will be
worshipped according to his own Praescript, not our Inventions. -- But as
touching what pertains to the Worship of God, nothing is to be sought without
the Word of God. It went ill with Uzza, that he would imitate the Palestines;
with Nadab and Abihu, that they would offer profane fire; with Ozias the King,
that he would offer Incense in the Tabernacle, when he was neither Priest nor
of the Tribe of Levi.

But Thirdly, The Scriptures produced, abundantly manifest the truth of the
Assertion; Let the judicious Reader seriously peruse them, and they will lead
him captive to the belief of it, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Pro. 30. 6. Strictly
interdict man's adding to the Word of God; which if it be not a condemnation of
what is practiced in his Worship, without any warrant from him, I must confess
I know not what is. Is not, You shall sign with the Cross in Baptism, kneel at
the Sacrament, wear the Surplice, etc. an adding to the Word of God, when he is
altogethe^ in the Scriptures silent in these matters? Mat. 15. 9. speaks of the
Inventions of men, with respect to accidental parts of Worship (as Mr. T.
accounts them.) The essentials of Worship, as praying, hearing, etc. they had
from the Lord, these things were not what Christ condemns in them, as the
Doctrines of men; What was it then? Mr. T. in his Fermentum Pharisaeorum, on
Mat. 15. 9. shall answer for me. But in this place (says he) that which our
Savior objects to them is; That they sought to establish the Traditions of
men, -- chiefly that they taught men to observe things, praeter Legem, besides
the Law, in stead of Gods Law, as the washing of hands before meals, the
washing of Cups and Potts, -- with many such like Traditions inve^ted by men.
-- And afterward (Sect. 5.) tells us, That Bowings, Duckings, and such like
Gestures, Usages and Rites, invented by men to express Humility, Devotion, and
Reverence to God, he contemns as Childish, Apish, Theatrical, and ridiculous.
And Sect. 7. he adds, That this teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of men,
intrencheth on Gods Prerogative, who is the only Lawgiver to his Church, Jam.
4. 12. for his Worship, and that with respect to the fashion, and way of
Service. It Is an injuring God, whilst we conceive him to be so childish, as to
be affected with pomps and shows, gestures and carnal Rites, which he never
appointed. It opposes Gods Word, his Law, his Gospel: because it brings in
another Rule of Worship than God's Law, viz. Tradition of Elders, Custom,
Example; contrary to Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Pro. 30. 6. It opposes the manifestation of
the clear light of the Gospel, as shadows, the light of the Sun: Look into the
places where there is so much preaching of Ceremonies, and Church-orders, and
such a regular observation of them, as in places where the Cathedral and
Canonical Preachers, and officiating Priests do bear sway; there is little
spiritual understanding, and lively feeling of the Doctrine and Grace of
Christ, to be found. Sect. 8. with much more to the same purpose. Lev. 10. ^.
Jer. 7. 31. expressly assert, that their sin lay in doing that which God
commanded them not, which had he done, it had been lawful. Let Mr. T. show
where the offering of strange fire was expressly forbidden, and he may be
supposed to say somewhat that is pertinent. Mr. Ainsworth, whom he cites on
Lev. 10. 1. is against him; Strange fire, he tells us, is other fire than God
has sanctified on his Altar, fire not commanded -- And the Assembly upon the
place say rightly, In God's Worship his Command, not man's wit or will, must be
our rule. The citation of Josh. 22. 34. 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. and 30. 23. Esth. 9.
27, 31. by this Animadverter is impertinent. Josh. 22. 34. gives us an account
of their building an Altar, but they expressly affirm it was not for
burnt-offerings nor for Sacrifices; not for an Ecclesiastical, but a Civil use,
v. 22, 23, 24, 26, 28. Had they built it for the Worship of God, it had in the
judgment of the whole Congregation of Israel, been Rebellion against him, ver.
16. So that this Scripture, instead of supporting, cuts the throat of his dying
cause: nor can Mr. T. ever satisfactorily answer this Argument. It Is great
wickedness to commit a trespass against, to turn away from following, to rebel
against the Lord: But the doing, or practicing any thing in his Worship,
besides what God has enjoined to be done, is, to commit a trespass against
him, to turn away from following, to rebel against him. Therefore --

The Major no sober Christian will deny. The Minor is evident from v. 16, 18,
19. Nor will Mr. T. his old shift of Essential and Accidental parts of Worship
serve him in this case. For, 1. The erection of an Altar, he supposes to be
but an accidental part of Worship. 2. He produces this Scripture to prove the
lawfulness of men's orders in, and about the Accidentals of Instituted Worship.
As for his other Scriptures, 2 Chronicles. 30. 23. has been already considered and
answered in our Answer to Prof. Sect. 5. 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. Esth. 9. 27, 31. speak
only of the Proclamation and Decree, or Purpose of the King and People, to
observe and keep certain days unto the Lord, upon the account of such signal
providence that the Lord had brought them under, wherein they judged he was
calling them thereunto.

To what is added in S. T. touching the judgment of the Ancients, Mr. T.
replies, but so jejunely, that it deserves not to be taken notice of. As for
Cyprian's testimony, it is full up to the matter in hand, the foundation upon
which he dealt against the Aquarii, being no other than what we are
pleading-for, that Christ alone is to be heard in matters of Instituted Worship
(as Mr. T. will grant the Sacrament to be.) I stand amazed at the confidence of
the Animadverter, in asserting, that Beza's words on Phil. 1. 1. are to be
understood of things determined in the Scripture, when he expressly speaks of
giving the title of Bishop (for Polities sake) peculiarly to him that did
preside in the Assembly, whereof he tells us the Devil began to lay the first
foundation of Tyranny in the Church of God: and then he adds, Behold of how
great moment it is to decline from the Word of God, though but an hairs
breadth, if it be but in giving titles peculiarly to persons, which are not so
given to them in the Scripture. And much more do I wonder if he did without
blushing, write, that Luther is to be understood of Doctrines and Decrees, (if
he oppose these to Church-Ceremonies, which if he do not, he yields his Cause)
when he expressly says, he means, that nothing with respect to external Rites
(which he calls Traditions, and the mixing the Worship of God with foolish
Gewgaws) is to be taught, without the express words of God for our warrant.
It Is true, Dr. Whitakers words are meant of the Popish use of Oil in their
Sacraments; but the ground of his opposing it, is plainly the same with that we
are contesting about, viz. That nothing is to be added to the Instituted
Worship, as a part thereof, without warrant from the Scripture; for, says he,
we acknowledge no Oil, because we read nothing of Oil in the Scriptures. To
these I say many may be added. Take a few instances instead of many; Whatsoever
things men find and fain, without the Authority and Testimony of the Scripture,
as if they were from Apostolical Tradition, are smitten by the Sword of God,
says Hierom, Comment in Hag. c. 2. And again, Men are (says he) set to eat
their meat without Salt, when they are commanded any thing that has no relish
from the Word; and to build without Hay and Stubble, like Israel in Egypt, when
they be not allowed some warrant out of the Scripture, which only can combine
the matter of the work, and make the frame of the building sure. And Chrysostom
gives a reason, why we must take nothing from the Prelates, which is not clare
perspicuously demonstrated from the Scriptures: for our Cogitation halteth when
the Word wants, which halting is s^n, because we are bound to the (...) of a
full persuasion, even in indifferent things and all. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Homil.
13. So the Churches of Helvetia, The universal Church of Christ has fully
explained in the Scriptures, whatever things appertain to saving Faith, and to
the informing the Life, rightly to please God. To which that nothing may be
added or diminished, is distinctly commanded by the Lord. We judge therefore
that from these Scriptures, true Wisdom and Piety is to be sought. Also the
Reformation and Government of the Church (which are with Mr. T. Adjuncts of
Worship) and the Institution of all duties of Piety. C. 1. Conf. Helvet.
poster. in Harmon. Conf. And those famous Witnesses of Christ, the Waldenses,
speak after the same rate: In hac enim (de Scriptura and ejus perfectione
loquuntur) quae ad Doctrinam, and Sanctae Ecclesiae Disciplinam and
Gubernationem, ad singulos and universos, in ordinario salutis Ministerio (unde
and vera fides existit) necessaria sunt: Ea inquam, omnia plene omnino, and
quantum opus est, ut in eximio, artificiocissimoque Sancti Spiritus opere, in
hac comprehensae sunt, and conclusa, qua nec Angelus de Coelo ullus proferre
aliquid certius potest, and si adferret diversum aliquid credi ei non deberet.
Conses. Bohem. seu Walden. in Harmo. Confess. Which if Mr. T. will not, others
will believe, speak home to the matter in hand.

The Declaration of the Congregational Elders, chap. 1. I own, and told Mr. T.
as much as they say, in S. T. Circumstances concerning the Worship of God, etc.
common to humane actions and societies, are to be ordered by the Light of
Nature and Christian prudence, as place, time of meetings, etc. but they assert
not that Circumstances of Worship, as such, are so to be ordered, or to be
practiced without warrant from Scripture, which is that we deny. Thus far of
the Major Proposition of our first Argument. His Exceptions to the Minor will
receive a speedy dispatch, of which in the next Section.

Sect. 2.
Hearing the Word part of Instituted Worship, proved. Mr. T. his Objection
refelled. The Judgment of Mr. Buroughs in this matter. Hearing the present
Ministers, not warranted in the Scripture. Of the tendency of the Separation
pleaded-for. Mr. T. a self-contradicter. Of declaring for, or against things,
according to affection. The saying of Hierome.

THe Minor Proposition of our first Argument against Hearing, we say, consists
of two parts. 1. That Hearing is part of Instituted Worship, which we proved by
this Argument: That in which we wait upon God, in the way of an Ordinance, for
the communication of good, beyond the virtue of any creature to conveigh, is
part of Instituted Worship: But in the hearing the Word we thus wait upon God:
Therefore --

To which Mr. T. replies, 1. by way of concession. In some sense he grants
Hearing to be part of Instituted Worship. But 2dly, if he takes not the
Argument to be demonstrative, since there be many things, As Marriage, Eating,
Drinking, etc. in which we wait upon God in the way of an Ordinance for the
communication of good beyond the virtue of any creature to convey to us, and
yet are not parts of the Instituted Worship of God.

Answ. 1. But how sophistically and ludicrously does he argue? The Argument is
of Good Spiritual and Eternal, Mr. T. talks of Good Natural, Political,
Temporary. If he will prove the Argumen^, not to be demonstrative, he must
prove, that that in which we wait upon God in the way of an Ordinance, for the
communication of Spiritual and Eternal Good, beyond the virtue of any creature
to convey to us, is not part of Instituted Worship.

2. Precious Mr. Buroughs speaks fully to this Objection; When I am busied in
natural and civil actions, there I must profess that these things can do me no
good without God; but I do not wait upon God in an Ordinance for the conveyance
of Natural good, beyond what God has put into the creature; it is his blessing
with it, that God in the ordinary course of his Providence, does convey such
natural or civil good in the use of those creatures: But now when I come to
hear his Word, I here come to wait on God in the way of an Ordinance, for the
conveyance of some spiritual good, that this Ordinance has not in it self,
take it materially, but merely as it has an I^stitution in it, and is
appointed by God for the conveyance of such and such things. God does appoint
meat to nourish me, and together with his Appointment, he has given a natural
power to meat to nourish my body; that, in an ordinary course of Providence, is
enough for the nourishment of my body: But now when I come to hear the Word, I
must look upon that, not only as a thing to work upon my soul, and to save my
soul by, not as a thing that has any efficacy put into it, as the other has,
in a natural way; it is not in the nature of the thing that carries such a
power in it, but it is the Institution of God, and the Ordinance of God in it.

But I say, 3dly, Hearing the present Ministers is not warranted in the
Scriptures. This will be manifested when we come to the ventilating and
scanning those places which usually are produced for the abetting the practice
of some in this matter. --

To which Mr. T. subjoyns, 1. The Scripture warrants the hearing them, whilst
they teach the Doctrine of Gods Word.

Answ. When he shows us where it does so, he will say somewhat; till then, we
are not bound to believe him: Every one that teaches true Doctrine, we have
proved, is not to be heard.

He adds 2. The Scripture forbids only the hearing false Prophets, Mat. 7. 15.
Antichrists, 1 John 2. 18. etc.

Answ. 1. This Assertion is false, as we have already manifested. 2. We have in
S. T. chap. 6. proved the present Ministers to be false Prophets, and in our
Answer to Mr. T. his Exceptions to the Preface, Sect. 10.

He says further, 3. Personal Exceptions against their entry into the
Ministry, or their sinful practices; or the ventilating the places produced for
the abetting the practices of some in this matter, will not prove the Minor.

Answ. But if we prove they act from an Antichristian Call, and that it is the
mind of Christ we should not attend upon a Ministry that so acts: if we prove
them guilty of such sinful practices, as Christ commands us to withdraw from
persons that are guilty of them; if we demonstrate that there is not a word in
Scripture to justify any in their practice of hearing them, the most partially
addicted Reader to the cause of the Church of England will acknowledge we have
fully proved the unlawfulness of attending on its Ministry. This we do chap. 2,
3, etc. of S. T.

The Argument drawn from Judas his preaching the Gospel, we answer chapter 10. of
S. T. and we are unwilling actum agere.

That the Separation pleaded-for tends to the undoing of men in their estates,
we may thank some for, and this Animadver^er is not wanting to blow the coals.
That it hinders the public peace, is a papistical, wicked, and false
suggestion, than which a more malicious one, could not have been invented by
the Devil. That the furtherance of the Gospel is thereby hindered, is
monstrously false. The aim and motive of the author of the S. T. in that
Treatise, and Mr. T. in this Reply, is known to the Lord, and may shortly be
more manifestly discovered then some would wish. And considering how he does
(...), contradict, and oppose now, what not many years agone he so confidently
pleaded for, I wish him to examine his heart, and to take heed he be not found
(...). Who they are speak for, or against things according to the affection
they bear to men, I know not. And do heartily, wish they may be reduced from
that evil custom, trying, and proving things offered to them, by the
Scriptures, whether they be so, or not. I approve of the saying of Hierome,
Epist. 152. Non juxta Pythagorae discipulos, praejudicata Doctoris opinio, sed
doctrinae ratio ponderanda est: omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete: Et estote
probati nummularii, ut si quis nummus adulter est, et figuram Caesaris non
habet, nec signatus est, moneta publica reprobatur: quj autem Christi faciem
claro lumine praefert, in cordis nostri marsupium recondatur. Cur me lacerant
amici mei, and adversum silentem crassae sues grunniunt? quarum omne studium
est, imo scientiae supercilium aliena carpere, et sic Veterum perfidiam
defendere, ut perdant fidem suam. Meum propositum est antiquos legere, probare
singula, retinere quae bona sunt, et a fide Ecclesiae Catholicae non recedere;
which should all practice, the service and ceremonies of the Church of England
would soon be returned into her Mother's lap of Rome, from whence they were
borrowed. Mr. T. promises fair, he will show Scripture warrant (he says) for
hearing the Ministers of England. -- And I assure him if he does, I will do
what penance, they shall be pleased to impose on me (though it be to hear them,
in a white sheet) for lifting up my pen against them; I only advise Mr. T.

Ne impossibilia captas. CHAP. III.
Sect. 1.
The second Argument in S. T. vindicated from Mr. T. his Exceptions. Speaking
the truth of the Gospel, not the only consideration requisite to the Hearers to
be respected in hearing. Mr. T. his six Reason answered. Christ forbids to hear
others besides such as preach falsehood. Saints fit to examine the office, etc,
of those they hear. Of hearing such who are not in Office, nor gifted Brethren.
The practice of the Bar^ans. The Scriptures not only the Rule of the Doctrine
we hear, but of the Persons whom we should hear. The Principle pleaded-for, no
hindran^e of a man's edification, etc. Of the old Apostolical Rule, of receiving
^one without the Testimonial of Brethren of known integrity in the Churches,
etc.

IN his second Chap. Mr. T. attempts the confutation of the second Argument
produced in S. T. to prove the unlawfulness of hearing the present Ministers of
England, the sum whereof is:

If it be lawful to hear the present Ministers, it is lawful to hear them,
either as Ministers of the Gospel, or as gifted Brethren: But it is not lawful
to hear them, either as Ministers of the Gospel, or as gifted Brethren.
Therefore --

The Major I took for granted, but this Animadverter is pleased to deny it, and
that for a two fold Reason. 1. Because the dis^unction is of terms not
opposite, but co-incident.

Answ. Very good! It seems then that Ministers of the Gospel, and gifted
Brethren, are terms co-incident: but this Mr. T. upon second thoughts will be
ashamed of. This is not the first instance, that his Theodulia was writ in
haste, and requires a review. It Is true, every Minister of the Gospel is a
gifted Brother, yet not qua Minister of the Gospel; It Is most false, that every
gifted Brother is a Minister of the Gospel: so that the terms are not (as he
suggests) co-incident.

He adds, 2. The disjunction is not full, since a third member may be assigned,
that they may be heard as preaching the Word of God.

Answ. This Animadverter has a rare invention, but it will not always serve his
turn: What strange Preachers of the Word of God he surmiseth, that are neither
Ministers of the Gospel; nor gifted Brethren ipse videat, for my part I desire
not to be acquainted with them. I had ever thought, that at least, gifts
enabling a man for the creditable discharge of the office of preaching the
Gospel, had been required in every one, that should have undertaken that
employment.

Cucullus non facit Monachum, nec barba Philosophum. But this Animadverter will
prove, That speaking the truth of the Gospel, is the only consideration
requisite to the hearer, to be respected in hearing.

Answ. 1. He should have excepted the Devil, who spoke the truth of the Gospel,
yet somewhat else was requisite to the hearer to be respected in hearing, for
him he might not hear.

2. He should have put in, the mixed truth of the Gospel, the sincere Word of
God. For those that are partial therein, are not to be attended. Such were the
Preache^s of the Circumcision, whom Paul condemns, and charge us to separate
from them, Phil. 3. 2. (i. e. keep at the greatest distance from them, have no
communion with them) yet they spoke the truth of the Gospel, they only added
therewith the Ceremonies of the Law.

3. Yet upon second thoughts, he did wisely, not to make that addition, for
then he knew what he had said had not been applicable to the present Ministers
(who though they preach the Truth of the Gospel, yet add thereto the
Ceremonies of humane devising, as those of the Circumcision did, the Ordinances
once of divine appointment) But we attend his proof.

Six Reasons he gives of this Assertion.

Reas. 1. Because God has forbidden to hear none, but such as preach falsehood.

Answ. This has been often before inculcated, and as often answered: its
falsehood, and impertinent application to the present Ministers justification
(who preach falsehood) manifested. So that we need not further trouble our
selves or the Reader with it.

Reas. 2. Because hearers are not fit to examine the Office, Power, Gifts, or
Brotherhood of those they hear.

Answ. If he speak of the generality of hearers, it is granted, they have not
abilities so to do: the question relates not to them.

2. If he mean the Saints, spiritual hearers, he contradicts the Spirit of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 2. 15. (...), the Spiritual man thoroughly discerns or judges
all things, viz. belonging to the Worship of God, and eternal life.

Reas. 3. he adds, It is lawful to hear such as are neither in Office-power,
nor gifted. Brethren, as Act. 18. 26. 1 Timothy 1. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 15. The Iberian
Prince, the captive Maid, the Indians Frumentius.

Answ. 1. But when we speak of hearing, we speak of it, as in a Church-society,
true, or false, the Animadverters examples reach only to private instructions
of particular persons.

2ly. He himself p. 46. when he thought it would serve his turn, would not have
a Woman to speak in the Church; now he would have them Preachers to a
Congregation, for else he speaks impertinently.

3ly. Our assertion is of the Ministers of England who must be heard (we say)
as Ministers of the Gospel, or gifted Brethren, to which his story of
Priscilla, Lois etc. has no relation.

Reas. 4. He acquaints us, That the Beraeans are commended for their examining
Paul's doctrine, without examining his office, etc. Act. 17. 11.

Answ. 1. The Beraeans were not Christians: what they did is heterogeneous to
our present dispute, which is of the duty of Believers.

2ly. Of the gifts of Paul they had sufficient evidence, nor could they be
ignorant of the wonders that were wrought by him, a suf^icient evidence of his
Office-power.

3dly. That because the Beraeans are commended for examining Paul's Doctrine,
without examining his Office, etc. Therefore the speaking the Truth of the
Gospel, is the only consideration requisite to the hearer to be respected in
hearing, is such an inconsequent Consequence that he will never make good:
possibly they might examine his Office, though it be not recorded; if they did
not, it does not follow that it was not their duty to have done so; because
they are commended for doing what they did; which was also their duty.

He adds, 5thly. The Scriptures are the Rule of the Doctrine we are to hear;
therefore we are bound to look to no more for the lawfulness of our hearing,
than the congruity of what we hear with it.

Answ. 1. We deny the Consequence, and challenge Mr. T. to make it good: would
I could persw^de him to cease his Lordly dictates; and think it concerns him to
prove what he says, as well as other men; which (considering his frequent
change of opinions, with the change of times) I affure him it does; else
whatever he tenders, will levi brachio be rejected. The Scripture is not only a
Rule of the Doctrine we hear, but to us of the persons whom we should hear.
Mat. 17. 5. John 10. 3, 5. v. 8, 27. Act. 3. 22. and 7. 37. Romans 10. 14. Luke
10. 16. 1 John 4. 5, 6. Phil. 3. 2. 1 John 4. 1. Mat. 7. 15.

2dly. Christ having instituted Officers of his own, laid down Rules touching
orderly prophesying; foretold us that false Teachers would arise, that should
pretend to come in his Name, when he never sent them; charged us to try the
Spirits: We are ready to conclude, that the Commission of men is to be tried
and examined by which they act, as well as the Doctrine they bring, according
to the Scripture.

3dly. This Argument will as well prove the lawfulness of hearing, the Pope,
Cardinals, Jesuits, the Devil himself, as the present Ministers, whilst they
preach Truth,

Nullas habet spes Troja si tales habet. He tells us, 6thly. To forbid a man to
hear him that preaches, because he knows him not to be a Minister in Office,
or gifted Brother, may be a means to hinder his Edification and Salvation, and
to harden him to his perdition.

Answ. 1. This, as proposed by Mr. T. reaches not fully the case of the
Ministers of England, whom we do not only know to be Ministers in Office, or
gifted Brethren, but we are assured they are not so.

2. That it is lawful to hear all Preachers, he will not, when out of heat and
passion of a dispute, assert: I must know them to be Christians, ere it be
lawful for me to hear them; and such as are at least sound in the fundamental
Doctrines of the Gospel. How I should know this of a stranger, and not at the
same time be able to inform my self, whether he be a Minister or a gifted
Brother, I am not able to divine: So that I do no more hinder my Edification
and Salvation, by refusing to hear him, till I am satisfied herein, than I do
by refusing to hear him, because I know him not to be a Christian, which yet I
am bound to do. It were well if the old Apostolical Rule were reassumed, Acts
9. 26, 27. (of which more afterward, p. 124.) as it is amongst some) of
receiving none but such, of whose ability and faithfulness they received
Testimonial from Brethren of known integrity in the Churches, more universally
among Christians, which yet this Animadverter dares not say did (or would)
hinder the Edification or Salvation of any.

3. That the refusing to hear the present Ministers should have so sad an
issue, those who know how little to Edification, etc. the preaching of most of
them is, will not in haste believe.

Besides, 4thly. When Christ has (as was said) not only appointed that the
Word be heard, but also from such as are sent by him, upon the account whereof
they are to be received by us, Mat. 10. 40. with verse. 5. and no spiritual
advantage can groundedly be expected, from any hearing but that which is the
institution of Christ; so that Mr. T. ^rgues (if dictating may be so called)
exceeding weakly, whilst he tells us, That to forbid to hear such as are not of
Christ's appointment, is to hinder men's salvation, etc. And give me leave to
say, what I believe, the most that truly fear God in England will attest, That
more souls (its to be feared) by far have been hardened by attending on the
present Ministers, for these seven years, than have been conve^ted, saved by
them from the evil of their way.

His subsequent discourse, being composed of scurrilous reflections, (being now
pretty well used to them) I pass over. Who they are that reject persons because
not of their party Mr. T. may better know than I, who (as I am credibly
informed) refused to admit an honest godly man, desiring it, to sit down and
break bread with those he had gathered together into Church Communion at
Bewdly, for no other reason, but because he was not baptized, according to his
conception of Baptism. For my part I own my self of no party, it being my
avowed principle, to own Saints upon the account of Saintship, and the shines
of the image of the blessed God upon them, though in lesser matters differing
in judgment from me, according to that Apostolical rule, Phil. 3. 15. Romans 14.
1.

That from Christ's appointment of some, as Ministers, enjoining others as their
duty, upon the collation of Gifts upon them, to preach the Gospel, for the
edification of his Body, a lawfulness to hear them, as Ministers or gifted
Brethren, does not necessarily arise, is, to say no more, a strange assertion!
as implying that it is unlawful to hear some whom Christ has appointed to
preach, which is absurd, as good we may reject Christ.

The reason he gives us hereof, viz. Because a Minister; or gifted Brother,
it is possible may be Heretical, and so to be shunned, Tit. 3. 10. is of no
weight. For, those whom it is our duty to hear at one time, whilst walking in
the ways of Christ, it is most undoubtedly our sin to hear at another, when
departed from those ways. But he has found nodum in scirpo, an assertion of
mine, that he makes himself, for a season, merry with, and thinks he has no
small advantage by. I say (says he) it is lawful to others to preach, as their
liberty permitted to them: which if so, then,

First, It Is lawful for Ministers to Preach as their liberty.

Answ. 1. Who denies it?

2. Why does this Animadverters good friends, the Bishops, hinder them?

3. It does not sure thence follow, that it is lawful for Antichristian
Ministers so to do.

He adds, Secondly, Then it follows, that there is some practice that is a part
of instituted Worship, that is warranted in Scripture, as persons Liberty by
permission without command; Therefore hearing the present Ministers may be
warranted by permission, without command: which was my Answer to this Authors
first Argument against hearing them, is now confirmed by his Concession.

Answ. 1. But what if this be not any Assertion of the Author of S. T. but a
mistake of this Animadverter. His conceived advantage, and triumph is then
suddenly extinct.

2. That I no where assert it, not in the place mentioned, the review of the
passage he descants upon may inform him.

1st, I say only, that the permission of such, as have received enablements
from the Lord, to exercise and improve them in praying and preaching, for the
edification of the Body of Christ, though not solemnly invested into Office, is
assented unto by some of those with whom I have to do.

2dly, I immediately add, that it is enjoined them as their duty (viz. by
Christ) so to do. Which, with what Conscience the Animadverter could overlook,
that he might impose upon his Antagonist (to his own seeming advantage) what
was never asserted by him, I know not. These things ought not to be.

Sect. 2.
It Is not lawful to hear the present Ministers as Ministers of the Gospel. They
are not such, therefore may not be heard as such. The validity of the
consequence evinced. Mr. T. his Exceptions enervated. Hearers bound to satisfy
themselves, that he who pretends to come and act in the Name of Christ, is
indeed sent by him. It Is not above the ability of hearers to judge of the
Ministers call. Peaceable possession no evidence of Gospel-right. The testimony
of Nazianzen. The impertinency of Mr. T. his arguing from Paul's speech to
Ananias, Acts 23. 5. from Caiaphas his prophesying. John 11. 51. etc. evinced.

IN Sect. 2. Mr. T. considers the proof we bring for the confirmation of the
Minor Proposition, viz. That it is not lawful to hear them, either as Ministers
of the Gospel, or as gifted Brethren.

1. Not as Ministers of the Gospel, they are not such, therefore may not be
heard as such

To this Mr. T. replies. I deny this consequence; a man may be heard as a
Minister of the Gospel, though he be not such.

Answ. 1. Nor can I help it, or any man in the world (if Mr. T. be resolved
on it) if he deny the Sun to shine at noonday.

2dly, The consequence presents it self with that evidence to the understanding
of unbiassed men, and shines so clearly in its own brightness, that it is hardly
capable of, further demonstration.

3dly, To hear a man as a Minister of the Gospel, is to hear him as a Preacher
sent from Christ, that I may, that is, that it is my duty to hear one as sent
from Christ, that is not sent from Christ, is an Assertion that the bear naming
of is confutation sufficient.

I must believe that he is sent from Christ ere I can hear him, as such: that I
am bound to believe a lie, Mr. T. will not in haste prove. We attend to what he
is able to say for the confirmation of this Assertion, whereof he gives you
three Reasons.

First, Because every hearer is not bound to examine the entrance of the
Teacher into his Function.

Answ. 1. This (if meant of Christian hearers) is false; every such hearer is
bound to satisfy himself, that he who pretends to come and act in the Name of
Christ, is indeed sent by him; else I see not how he can own, or receive him as
a Minister of Christ to him, and perform those other duties (if he so do) he is
obliged to do and perform to him by express command from Christ.

2. Should it be granted, That every hearer is not bound to examine the
entrance of the Teacher into his Function, it does not follow that its lawful,
or the duty of persons to hear such as are not Ministers of Christ, as
Ministers of Christ. This indeed would follow, That it is possible (had they no
other way of satisfying themselves in the truth of their Ministry) they might
through mistake do so, but that they are bound by command from Christ so to do,
M. T. cannot prove.

3. What if they receive Letters Testimonial from persons of known integrity in
the Church (or some verbal satisfaction from them) touching them, and it be the
duty of Hearers not to receive them without these; this may sure help to mend
the matter. Now this seems to be evident from the practice of the Saints, Romans
16. 1, 2. Col. 4. 10. Acts 18. 27. 2 Cor. 3. 1. Acts 9. 26, 27.

Yet 4. His inference makes much against himself. Therefore (says he) it is
enough to hear them as such, that there is nothing appears to the contrary: for
hence it follows, that if there be any thing appearing to the contrary, it is
not lawful to hear them as such: Now we manifest in S. T. chap. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
etc. that there is much appears to the contrary: Therefore it is not our duty to
hear them.

He adds, 2dly. It Is lawful to hear them as Ministers of the Gospel, though
they are not such, because it is above the ability of the hearers to judge of
the Ministers call, etc.

Answ. 1. We deny this Consequence. It Is above the ability of Hearers to judge
of the Ministers call, therefore it is lawful for them to hear as Ministers of
the Gospel such as are not such: who have indeed nothing like such a call, as
the Scriptures mention in the Ministers of Christ.

2dly. That it is above the ability of Christian hearers, to judge of the
Ministers call, when it is so plainly declared in the Scriptures, is Mr. T. his
mistake; an Assertion that he will never be able to prove: nor need they to fit
themselves herein, to spend their time -- to enquire into their many
proceedings, in getting Testimonials, using means for the obtaining Ordination,
Institution, etc. (as he talks) they have through the great kindness of God to
them, the Bible in their hands, and the holy Spirit dwelling in them, to lead
them into all Truth; they have the qualification of Gospel Ministers laid down,
1 Timothy 32. to 8. Tit. 1. 5 to 10. etc. the manner of their call and solemn
inauguration into their office: where they find persons, let their pretenses be
never so high, that are not able to acquit themselves according to those Rules,
they may judge (and yet it is not they so much as the Spirit of God speaking in
the Scripture) that they are not the Ministers of Christ.

But he has a third Reason; In all Governments and Societies the peaceable
possessor is presumed to have right, till the contrary be evinced. Ergo it is
lawful to hear them as Ministers of the Gospel that are not such.

-- risum teneatis amici. If this be good arguing, it is easy to prove it
lawful to hear the Pope, yea the greatest Heretics that ever were in the
world. He is in the peaceable possession of St. Peter's Chair (as they call
it:) The Arrian Bishops once had it generally, yet not to be heard (I hope) as
Ministers of Christ. The learned Field de Eccl. cites Nazianzen speaking far
otherwise, Neque qui per vim irrupit, successor habendus est, etc. Nor is he to
be accounted the Successor, who gets possession by violence, but he who suffers
violence; not he who defends a false opinion, but he who is endued with the
same Faith: unless any one perchance may be called a successor, as we say a
disease succeeds health, darkness light, a tempest tranquillity, wisdom
madness. And so we confess the present Ministers are the Successors of the
Ministers of Christ, and possessors of their room.

2dly. If by right, he m^an right to their Parsonage and Vicarage-house and
Globe-lands, etc. a right they have (for ought I know) by the Law of the Nation
(as things now stand) thereunto. If a right of Ruledom over the People of God,
in the Nation; 1. They are not peaceably possessed of this right, they protest
against them, as Intruders. 2dly. These being the People and Flock of Christ,
they can have no right over them except it be given them from him; let us see
his Commission whereby they are authorized, and we are satisfied. 3dly. If he
suppose that a Patron's presentation of a sorry thing in black, (suppose a
debauched Sir John, a Knight Errant of the Pope^ make) with the Bishops
institution and induction into a Benefice, and he is in the peaceable
possession hereof, that therefore he is to be heard as a Minister of Christ,
and would impose it upon others, as Truth, he must know, that he has to do
with such who pity him because of his folly, and expect proof of what he
asserts, before they will believe him. The instances of Paul's speech to
Ananias, Act. 23. 5. of Caiap^as prophesying, John 11. 51. Christ's not
excepting against him, when convented before him; are such pitiful stories,
that I must crave pardon of the Reader whilst I mention them. Paul owned
Ananias as High Priest, Act. 23. 5. (which yet it is probable he did not, but
spoke ironically) Caiaphas prophesied, John 11. 51. (and so did Balaam, Number. 23
and 24.) and Christ does not object against his Office, though both supposed to
be unlawful Officers: Therefore it is lawful, from Christ's and Paul's example,
to hear them who are not right Officers (though neither of them heard these
preach, nor had they to do with them in any act of Instituted Worship) when
they peaceably possess the place, and consequently it is lawful to hear them as
Ministers of the Gospel, who are not such rightly called. Such non-sequiturs
(introduced with pomp and state) I must profess I never before read in any
Author, which others it may be take notice of with contempt; for my part I
heartily pity him, and beg him to consider, whether the hand of God be not
gone forth against him, in stripping him of the parts he once had (as well as
in other things) as a just judgment upon him, for his lifting up his hand
against his Truths, and the Kingdom of his Son in the World. Till he prove
these consequences of his, we are not concerned to take further no^ice of them;
there being indeed not the least show of Argument in what he does, with so much
confidence and pomp of words, affirm and declare.

Sect. 3.
The Ministers of England not Ministers of the Gospel. They come not in by the
Door, proved. John 10. 1, 9. opened. Of Petrus Waldo, and other Reformers.
Their contrariety to what Mr. T. attempts to erect. Of Ordination by particular
Churches. The Exceptions of the Animadverter ref^ted. Act. 14. 23. explained.
The Ministers of England imposed upon the People without their consent.
Parish-Churches no true Churches of Christ.

IN Sect. 3. this Animadverter begins to consider the proof of our Assertion,
viz. That the Ministers of England are not Ministers of the Gospel. The sum
whereof is, They that enter not in by the Door, viz. Christ, i. e. by virtue of
some authority derived to them from him, immediately or mediately, are not
Ministers of the Gospel, John 10. 9. But the Ministers of Engl. come not in by
the Door, receive no Commission or Authority from Christ, either immediately or
mediately. The first we say will not be asserted -- The second cannot, for they
receive no Authority from any particular Church of Christ, to whom power is
solely delegated, for the electing their own Officers, Acts 6. 5. and 14. 23.

What says Mr. T. hereunto? Why after he has eased his spleen, by disgorging
himself of that choler that did (it seems) oppress it; in some Billingsgate
Rhetoric (as he speaks) he tells us, 1. That th^^ may be urged against the
Presbyterian Preachers.

Answ. This is only mentioned ad phaleras populi, to take the people: But good
Sir, why may this be urged against the Presbyterian Preachers? is it, because
they disown Particular Congregations, or Churches of Believers? or, because
they absolutely deny the designation of particular persons, to Offices
Ecclesiastical by them? But each of these is owned by them, at least by some of
them.

He adds, 2dly, This makes against his gifted Brethren.

Answ. 1. Why his gifted Brethren? is Mr. T. become a Scorner of the Brethren?
or, are there none (thinks he) that have received gifts from Christ, for the
edification of his Body?

2. Why does it make against these? They pretend not to act as Ministers of
Christ, when they prophecy for the edifying the Body of Christ by virtue of
any Office-power, so that they need not any such Election. What follows is a
Rhapsody of words, that the ingenuous Reader knows proves nothing; introduced
to cast the ^dium of Irreligion-upon the men of his Contest: The best is, the
Nation knows him to be (at least in this matter) a false Accuser.

He tells us, 3dly, That it may be doubted whether Christ be meant by the Door,
John* 10. 1.

Answ. But why it should be doubted when Christ expressly tells us, v. 9. that
He is the Door, I cannot tell. That the Door, v. 1, and v. 9. is not the same
Door, is not probable; and less probable, that by the Door, v. 9. should be
meant the Scriptures of the Prophets, who although they foretold of Christ, yet
can in no sense, that I know of, be said to be the Door through which he
entered. But this he is unwilling to abide by.

He adds 4ly. That if the door be the same Joh. 10. 1, 9. the entering in v. 9
cannot be entering into the Ministry by the lawful election of a particular
Church; for then it would follow that every one that so enters in, shall be
saved, but that is manifestly false.

Answ. 1. But if by saved he mean everlastingly saved, this does not at all
follow, he knows right well, that the word (...), is not always to be
restrained, to such a signification.

2ly. The whole expression he shall be saved, and shall go in, and out, and
find pasture, seems to intimate no more than this, that he may expect the
blessing of God with him, the defense of God upon him in his Ministry, that
thus enters into it according to his mind: according to Deuteronomy. 28. 6. So the
Assembly, Beza, etc. interpret the words: which I think is so far from being
manifestly false, that nothing is more true. Of immediate Calls to the
Ministry, and the ways whereby men may prove themselves to be so called, I
shall not now turn aside to speak, nor in what sense I asserted, that persons
receiving Commission immediately from Christ to preach the Gospel, will never be
made good without the working of miracles, it not being pleaded (as I know of)
that the present Ministers, have any such Commission, nor do they pretend to
it. Of Petrus Waldo (and other Reformers) I think as honorably as this
Animadverter. They were worthy, and eminent witnesses for Christ, in their day,
no small part of their Testimony was against the Abominations pleaded for, by
Mr. T. in his Theodulia. They admited nothing into their Church, but what is
written in the Bible, no Decrees, no Epistles, Decretals, nor the Legends of
the Saints, nor the traditions of the Church, They held that the Preaching of
the word of God is free to every man (that has received abilities from the
Lord for that work) That the Priests Vestments are little worth. That no day a
man may cease from his labor, except the Lords day, and not the feasts of of
Saints. Zanchy introduces a certain Orthodox man, speaking thus, (...), and
afterward adds, the Churches are to be reformed according to the best form: a
better from of the Church cannot be invented, than that which Christ and his
Apostles, in the beginning of the Church did constitute, and appoint. And
afterward all Doctrines of Worship and Discipline are to be examined not by
the Lesbian rule of humane judgment, but by the Touchstone of the Divine Word
-- Zanch. de ver. Eccl. reformand. ration. Johannes Gerson, affirms, That the
authority of the Primitive Church was greater than now it is: for it is not in
the power of the Pope, or Council, or Church, to change the Traditions taught
by the Evangelists and Paul, as some dream; de vit. Spirit. animae. Budaeus
says, Canonum canities, vel caries potius nulli jam usui est, sed velut anus
delira e foro explosa est: de ponte enim jam diu comitiorum paracleti, dejecta
est disciplina Canonica, ut annis sexaginta major, atque etiam sexcentis de
Translat. Heclerismi; lib. 2. And afterward, Navis nobis disciplinae a
servator^ relicta est, Ecclesiae conditore, quae Cantico, Ministerio,
instrumento, miraculisque instructa fuit ab ipso aut ejus auspiciis. These were
some of the Witnesses of Christ in their day (whom we honor as such) that bear
their Testimony against what Mr. T. thinks good for the present to espouse to
himself.

5ly. This Animadv. speaks of the proof of our Assertion, that those that
receive authority to preach the Gospel mediately from Christ, have it from some
particular instituted Church of Christ, to whom power is solely delegated for
the electing their own Officers, according to Acts 6. 5. and 14. 23. as weak
and impertinent. He tells us, 1. That though this should be granted, yet power
may be given to others, to choose, send and ordain Preachers for the
unconverted, who are and may be heard as Ministers of the Gospel.

Ans. 1. This we deny, the Keys being given to the Church by Christ, Mat. 16.
19. with 18. 17, 18. we cannot conceive how any can legally choose or send
forth persons, to act by virtue of an Office-power, in the preaching of the
Gospel, but the Church.

2dly. We never yet understood, that Interrogations were sufficient Answers;
his may not for all this -- is no evidence that it may.

He adds, Yea, may not some others ordain Elders for particular Instituted
Churches?

Answ. 1. Without the Churches consent, Election, etc. they may not: It Is true
Titus was left by Paul in Crete to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. but
that he might do this without the choice, election, and concurrent act of the
Church (as a Diocesan Bishop as some fondly imagine) is a fancy, that as it
has over and over been confuted by many Godly Learned, so Mr. T. will never be
able to make it good.

2ly. Should it be granted (which yet is most false, contrary to the practice
of those times, and many years after) that Titus ordained by himself, (without
the knowledge, counsel and approbation of the people) Elders, it does not in the
least follow that any persons may do so now.

For. 1. He had express warrant and direction from the Apostle to do what he
did.

2. He was an extraordinary Officer, an Evangelist, not limited to a certain
Church, the continuance of which office we have no direction for in the
Scripture.

3. The officers that were to be continued in the Churches are said to be
Elders, or Bishops (which were not names of distinct officers, but of the same
Tit. 1. 5, 7.) to be confined, or limited to o^e particular Congregation, not
having or exercising jurisdiction over many, Phil. 1. 1. Acts. 14. 23. and 20.
17, 28. Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. so that this instance makes little to his purpose.
When he proves his suggestion, that there are any invested with authority,
derived to them from Christ, to elect and ordain officers to, and for the
Churches of Christ without their knowledge and consent, he will be supposed to
speak pertinently, which in this matter hitherto he has not done. Let us
consider if there be ought more to the purpose in what follows.

To Acts. 6. 5. he replies. 1. That was but one act.

Answ. 1. Who says it was many? Consonant to this one act was the practice of
the primitive Church for many years after, some prints whereof in the election
of the Overseers of the Poor do yet remain amongst us.

He adds, 2. They were not such a particular Church as made up one Congregation
that could meet together for all Offices.

Answ. This vanity we have already refelled Sect. of our Reply
to Mr. T. his Exceptions against the Preface of S. T.

He proceeds and tells us, 3dly. They did not choose the Deacons upon any
conceived power delegated from Christ, by virtue of any rul^ that was to be
perpetual, in all ages, to all Churches.

Answ. 1. This is a mere conjecture of his own, without the least tender of
proof.

2dly. It Is the ready way to banish all the instituted Worship of Christ out of
the world. It Is but saying, it is true, this or that was done; but without any
Rule that was to be perpetually binding, and the work is effected.

3dly. It Is injuriou^ to the Apostles, and the primitive Believers, to imagine
(and indeed ridiculous) that they should devise an Office in the Church without
authority derived to them from Christ, and that so necessary an Office, as the
experience of above sixteen hundred years manifests the Church of God could not
have been without; which was not only continued in the Churches afterward,
Phil. 1. 1. but Rules laid down for their future election and choice, 1 Timothy 3.
8 to 13. with a solemn injunction to Timothy (and in him to succeeding
Believers) to keep that Commandment (amongst others) without spot,
unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, chap. 6. 14. So
that these are but shifts, our reverend Dictator scarce knows what to answer it
seems to the Evidence introduced. I shall only add, Male res agitur, cum tot
opus est remediis, it is a bad sore that must be wrapped in ^^ many clouts. Yet
he has not done.

He adds, 4thly. This can be no rul^ for choosing other Officers; there was a
peculiar reason why they should choose Deacons, whose honesty -- was to be
discerned, and not other Officers, whose sufficiency to teach -- was to be
considered, of which the multitude of Church Members then and now are rarely
competent Judges.

Answ. 1. But we had, thought honesty had been as necessary a qualification of
a Pastor or Teacher, as of a Deacon.

2dly. The Apostles mention it as the Churches privilege, without the least
intimation of any peculiar reason thereof, Act. 6. 3.

3dly. There is the same reason for the election of one Officer in the Church
as another: those with whom power is entrusted for the choice of one, it is for
the choice of all the rest.

4thly. That the Saints then, and now, are not competent Judges of the
abilities and Orthodoxie of other Officers this Animadverter is desired to
prove. 1. It Is derogatory to the Spirit of Christ that indwells in Believers.
2. Contrary to the express Testimony of the Spirit of God touching them. 3. A
mere Petitio principii. The question is, whether they did elect and choose
them? the Answer is, they were not fit to do so: but their fitness is
presupposed in that they had liberty or power to do it.

To the other Scripture, Acts 14. 23. he replies. 1. By way of seeming
concession. The word (...), is rendered by Beza, They created by Suffrages, i.
e. when the people by lifting up their hands, had testified their consent in
the election of them, they set them apart to that work. An allusion to the
custom of the Greeks in the election of their Officers by Suffrages and Votes,
signified by the stretching out of the hand: which was unquestionably the
practice of the Church for the first three hundred years. Cyprian who lived an.
240 often intimates as much. Take one instance in the stead of many: Propter
quod diligenter de traditione divina, and Apostolica observatione observandum
est, and tenendum, quod apud nos quoque and fere per provincias universas
tenetur, ut ad ordinationes rite celebrandas, ad eam plebem cui Praepositus
ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus
delegatur PLEBE PRAESENTE quae singulorum vitam plenessime novit, and
unuscujusque actum; de ejus conversatione perspexit: Quod and apud vos factum
videmus in Sabinae collegae nostri ordinatione, ut de VNIVERSAE FRATERNITATIS
SUFFRAGIO, and de Episcoporum (qui in praesentia convenerant, quique de eo ad
vos literas fecerant) judicio Episcopatus ei deferretur -- Epist. ^8.

2dly. By way of Exception he tells us, 1. This is but one example, not
sufficient to infer a perpetual Rule.

Answ. 1. It Is intended but for one example.

2dly. We find the thing practiced afterward; Elders are ordained, Tit. 1. 5.
1 Timothy 5. 22. That they should so suddenly vary from the practice of the
Apostles here (no intimation thereof being given, but rather the contrary, 2 Timothy 1. 14. and 3. 10. Tit. 1. 5. ((...), that thou may set straight, or
according to the li^e or rule that thou have learned of us, the things that are
wanting, and ordain (viz. according to that rule) Elders in every City) is not
probable: That they did not do so for some hundreds of years after Mr. T.
grants, and we have proved. Which is a sufficient Answer to his Exception about
constituting Elders, without the mention of any such election of the People,
Tit. 1. 5.

3dly. In the election of other Officers, as an Apostle, we find the people
concerned. 1. Out of an hundred and twenty persons, they chose and presented
two, v. 23. out of which two, one being c^osen by lot, (...), he was counted
amongst the Apostles by the common Suffrages of them all, v 26. And this very
Scripture amongst others is used by Cyprian to confirm the power of the people,
in ch^sing or refusing their Ministers. Epist. 4. l. 1. Deacons (as was said)
was so chosen, Act. 6. 3, 5, 6. Put all together, and you have as full an
evidence of the truth of the Assertion as can be desired.

But our Animadverter, 2dly, acquaints us from Dr. Field, etc. that the word
(...) is applied to other creating then by Suffrages, as Acts 10. 41.

Answ. It Is granted, it sometimes is so applied; but the proper and most usual
signification of the word is to elect by Suffrages, as Mr. T. knows: That
because it is once (or twice it may be) used in a metaphorical sense, where it
cannot be otherwise interpreted, therefore we must depart from the proper
notation of the word, where the context of the place does induce us, and the
practice of the Church and People of God in after-generations, to abide by it
is not tolerable arguing.

His next Exception is, 3dly. None are said to (...), but Paul and Barnabas,
and they are said to do it (...), for them, viz. t^^ Church, or Disciples.

Answ. 1. Nor is it necessary that we affirm any other so to do: They herein
presiding over them, and regulating the whole affair according to the
instructions received from Christ, bear the name of the whole work, though the
Votes and Suffrages of the Disciples were in it also: The Apostles ordained by
Suffrages, viz. the Suffrages of the Church, Elders for them; But this proves
not that the Vote of the Disciples was excluded, it rather evinceth the
cantra^y.

Yet 2dly, Why (...), must be rendered creating by Suffrages (or ordaining) for
them, I do not understand: It may every whit as properly be rendered with them,
viz. with the Church or Disciples. For so the word (...) is frequently rendered;
so Mat. 13. 29. (...), ye root up also the Wheat (not for, but) with them. Act.
17. 2. (...), reaso^ed with them, Heb. 8. 18. (...), for finding fault with
them: and in many places besides. That it should be so rendered here is evident;
1. It Is consonant to the practice of the Saints then, and in after-generations,
as is known. 2. How Paul and Barnabas may be said properly (...); to ordain by
Suffrages alone by themselves, every understanding is not able to reach, render
the word with them, i. e. with the Disciples, and the c^se is plain and
evident, viz. the Apostles with the Church or Congregation of Believers, by
Suffrages and Votes ordained Elders, which is the matter enquired after. So
that whatever this Animadverter is able to say to the contrary, this Scripture
proves the power of particular Churches, to elect their own Officers: and
therefore if the present Ministers have not received a Commission from Christ
thus mediately by the election of some one or other particular instituted
Church of Christ; if they pretend not to it, have it in derision, come barely
with a presentation from a Patron, Ordination, Institution and Induction from a
Lord-Bishop, things foreign to the Scripture, and impose themselves upon the
People whether they will or no (as it may most truly be affirmed of them) they
are not Ministers of the Gospel, nor may be heard as such.

But Mr. T. has somewhat more to add, he tells us, 1. That it will be hard
for us to prove that the Parish-Churches in England are not particular
instituted Churches of Christ.

Answ. 1. Of what is hard or easy for us to do, or any man else, our
Animadverter seems a very incompetent Judge.

2dly. He is not ignorant that this is already done to our hands by several
learned men, and it is sure no difficult task actum agere, to do over again what
we find done to our hands before.

He further affirms, 2dly, It will also be hard to prove that the Ministers of
England are imposed on the People whether they will or no.

Answ. 1. The generality of the People of England will attest the verity
hereof: who for the most part know not their Minister till he comes to them
with his Orders; nor is their Consent touching his Reception desired, or at all
significant, with respect to his exercising an Office-power over them.

2dly. What they do in London, and some few particular places where the
Inhabitants it may be are the Patrons, is not considerable or worth the
minding. 1. For the most part they are imposed upon the people whether they
will or no. 2. Were they chosen by their Parochial Inhabitants, they were never
the nearer Ministers of Christ; Because, 1. That their choice has not the
least influence upon their being constituted such, it is the Bishops Ordination
-- that in this matter does all. 2. The Parish-Churches of England are not true
Churches of Christ: which we demonstrate,

1. Where there is not the true matter of a Church, there is not a true Church:
But in the Parish-Churches of England there is not the true matter of a Church:
Therefore --

The Minor, which alone is capable of a denial, is evident. That only is fit
matter of a Church, which corresponds to the matter of the Primitive Churches,
planted by the Apostles. These were Saints, Ephesians. 1. 1. Col. 1. 2. Holy
Brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. Such ^^ were not of, but called out of the World,
Joh. 15. 18, 19. whom God had received, Romans 14. 3. Such as please Christ, and
are dearly beloved by him, Ephesians. 5. 29. are built upon the foundation of the
Prophets an^ Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. have the Spirit of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 4. are
built up together an holy and spiritual House to God -- 1 Pet. 2. 5. God 's
House, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Heb. 3. 6. are living Stones, a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, v. 9. faithful in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 1. 1. The sons and daughters of the Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18.
Christ is said to be their Husband, their Head; They his Bride, Ephesians. 5. 23.
Col. 1. 18. his Temple, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Now he must have a brow of brass, that
shall affirm that these Characters are applicable to the Parish-Assemblies of
England, when they themselves will confess they appertain not to them. Are
Drunkards, Swearers, Revilers, Persecuters of God and Holiness, loose,
profane, scandalous livers (of which these Assemblies (for the most part) are
constituted and made up) Saints, holy Brethren, such as are called out of the
World? etc. None will dare to aver it.

2dly. Where there is not the true form of a Church, there is not the true
Church: But in the Parish-Assemblies of England there is not the true form of a
Church; Therefore --

The Minor (which is alone liable to exception) is evident. The form of a
Church consists in the free and voluntary embodying together of Saints, giving
up themselves to the Lord, and one another, according to his will (as we have
already proved.) Now this cannot be asserted of the Parish-Assemblies. Those
Civil divisions (for they are no others) were of the institution of man (as we
have demonstrated) And to this day they are held together by penal Statutes and
Ordinances, such as never came into the heart of Christ to establish.

3dly. There where there is not the Church Power, that of right belongs to a
true Church of Christ, there is not a true Church of Christ: But in the
Parish-Churches of England there is not that Church Power (nor as such are they
capable of it) Therefore --

The Minor (which alone is to be proved) is perspicuous. 1. The power of
electing their own Officers they have not; This belongs to Patrons,
Lord-Bishops, etc. 2. The power of admission of Members, and ejection of the
Scandalous by excommunication they have not. The first a man has by buying or
renting a piece of Land in the Parish, and dwelling there: the other is managed
in the Bishops Courts, by a sorry thing called a Chancellor, it may be as
deboist as the worst that is brought before him. Now that with respect to these
things Christ has entrusted his Church with power, we evince, chap. 2 and 4.
of S. T.

4ly. That company of men that are not capable of performing those duties, and
cannot answer that end that Christ requires of his Churches, for which he
instituted them, are not a true Church of Christ: But the Parish-Assemblies of
England are not capable of performing those duties -- Therefore.

It Is the Minor needs proof. The duties Christ requires to be performed by
them, the end he aimed at in instituting his Churches was*

1. To set forth his honor and praise, Ephesians. 3. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

2. To promote the true Light and Knowledge of God, Ephesians. 1. 8. 1 John 1. 6, 7.

3. The mutual edification of one another in the things of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11.
Ephesians. 4. 29. 1 Cor. 14. 26. Jude 20. I appeal to any unbyassed man in the world,
whether he thinks in his conscience that the Parish-Assemblies of England can
perform these duties, answer this end. The contrary is most evident, and too
notoriously known to be true, than to admit of a denial. But I shall not
enlarge on what is already so judiciously asserted and argued by others, which
Mr. T. is not able to evert. The Ordination of Lord-Bishops (of which he next
speaks) is foreign from Scripture, if the Office it sel^ be. This we prove,
chap. 3. of S. T. and Mr. T. once swore to exti^pate it as such, and I am sorry
to find him now pleading for it. Whether I have abused John 10. 1, 9. neither
Mr. T. nor I must now be judge; the judicious Reader will judge for us both,
and I doubt not according to truth.

Sect. 4.
The Ministers of Engl. not to be heard as gifted-Brothren. Judas not
particularly declared by Christ, Joh. 6. 70. to be a Devil. The Animadverter
abuses the Author of the S. T. in affirming he ^ies up Saintship to particular
Churches; whom the Scripture makes Brethren. Mr. T. reduces the Brotherhood to
a smaller scantling than we. We cannot perform the duties of Brethren to the
Ministers of Engl. and why. If we own the best of them for Brethren, we must
own the worst. Of Judas his receiving the Sacrament. The mixed multitude making
acclamation to Christ of joining with other in Worship. We separate no more
from the Church of England than they do from us. 1 Cor. 5. 1^. It Is not lawful
to break Bread with the visibly profane, proved. I^ what sense the Bishops are
styled Reverend Fathers. They are not to be owned as such. The Ministers of
Engl. disorderly walkers, proved. They engage against Scripture-Reformation. 2
These. 3. 6. explained. Of Obedience to Ministers. -- Romans 13. 1. Heb. 13. 7.
opened. We ought not to hear those from whom it is our duty to withdraw. Mr. T.
his A^guments to the contrary, answered.

IN Sect. 4. our Animadverter replies to the proofs produced in S. T. for the
confirmation of the second part of our Minor Proposition, viz. That it is not
lawful to hear them as gifted-Brethren; because, 1. The most of them are not
gifted, nor 2. Brethren, being Canonical Drunkards, Swearers, etc.

To this he says, 1. That any of them are such, is to be bewailed in a
Christian way; the persons guilty are to be rebuked, Lev. 19. 17. not to be
thus charged in print, in a Book vented in the dark, tending to make them
odious.

Answ. 1. When he shall be pleased to manifest the Rule of Christ I have
trangressed, in thus charging them, I shall as publicly acknowledge my error.
Those that sin, rebuke before all, 1 Timothy 5. 20. is some part of what I have to
plead for my so doing. 2. If the Book were vented in the dark, I may thank them
for it, who would have such things stifled, that their works may not be made
manifest. 3. I make them not odious, they have made themselves so, throughout
the Nation. 4. Mr. T. his hoping this is not true, proves nothing: the contrary
is manifest to thousands.

He adds, 2dly. Were all this and more true, yet they might be heard preach the
Gospel, as Brethren gifted.

Answ. But knows he what he says? We affirm that they are not gifted, nor
Brethren; that this should be true, and more too, and yet they might be heard
as gifted Brethren, is such a Paradox to me, that comes but a little short (if
a little) of downright nonsense; i. e. there are some may be heard as Brethren
gifted, that are neither gifted, nor Brethren. That Judas was declared by
Christ to be a Devil, John 6. 70. as he suggests, is false. He says one of
them was so, but names him not. It Is true, John tells us, ver. 71. that he
spoke of Judas, but this neither he nor any of the rest knew till afterward.

We add in S. T. 3dly. The best of them cannot by Saints, in respect of
Gospel-communion, be accounted Brethren. For, 1. There was never any giving up
our selves each to other, whence such a Brotherhood does result.

To this Mr. T. answers. 1. By Saints he means such as are members of a
particular, instituted, Congregational Church, distinct from the Presbyterian;
for such only are accounted Saints by him, as give up themselves each to other,
etc.

Answ. False, and untrue. I am amazed to see with what conscience this matter
is managed by him, no regard seems to be had to truth and honesty, so he can
cast dirt upon his Antagonist. 2. It Is contrary to my avowed principle and
practice. 3. I do verily believe that there are many Saints in England that are
neither for the Presbyterian, Parochial, or Congregational way; yea, with Dr.
Ames, Trip. p. 523. afterward cited by him, I doubt not to say (according to
my conscience) that amongst those which live under the tyranny of the Pop^s and
do not utterly separate from him, through ignorance, there be many Christians
-- belonging to the true Catholic Church, and so to be accounted our godly
Brethren (viz. upon the account of their Catholicism) and so I believe there
are in the Church of England, some amongst the Ministers thereof, of whom I say
still, I deny not, but they may be good men. But yet we say, 4. That upon the
account of Gospel-Communion, they cannot be accounted by us, as Brethren,
because they are (as Mr. T. says rightly) no members of a Christian Church, i.
e. any particular instituted Church of Christ.

That which is added by him, makes much against him. 1. It Is false That the
Scriptures make all who hold the same Faith, and are Baptized into Christ, to
be Brethren, and Members of all the Churches in the world, Gal. 3. 26, -- 1
Cor. 10. 16. -- and 12. 12, -- Ephesians. 4. 4. They make them to be Brethren only of
those particular Churches to whom those Epistles are directed, as the serious
reading them will evince.

2. Were what he says true, He would reduce the brotherhood, to a narroer
compass, than we, either do or dare; For if his notion be true, only those that
are baptized into Christ, can be so accounted, but Mr. T. thinks, that only
such as are baptized at years of discretion are thus baptized into Christ;
Therefore only such are Brethren, and then I am sure the Ministers of England
are not to be so accounted. Thus frequently does he wound to the heart the
cause he undertakes the management of with his own sword. We add in S. T.

Secondly, We cannot (as things stand) perform the duties of Brethren to them,
according to Mat. 18. nor will they, or can they, in the state in which they
stand to us. What Mr. T. has answered to Man. 18. in his answer to the
Preface, Sect. 15. we have refuted in the Vindication thereof, Sect. and have
evinced a Congregational Church is there meant. It Is no Argument of hatred (as
Mr. T. according to his wonted candor suggests) that we cannot perform the
duties of Brethren to them.

1. They are a Church of such a Latitude, that it is almost impossible we should
do so.

2. We are in no Church State together.

3. Should we reprove them, we could do no more, (therefore we cannot perform
the duties of Brethren, required by that Scripture, which indoctrinates us, in
case of non-repentance, to bring it before the Church) we know no Churth to
whom we may complain: The Parochial Assemblies have no power to deal with them:
The Bishops Court is no Church of Christ, yet thither must we appeal, if any
where, and we have little encouragement to do so, it consisting of persons
altogether ^^ vicious and deboyst as those we are to complain of. We say
further in S. T.

Thirdly, If we acknowledge the best of them for Brethren, we must acknowledge
the worst of them. For, 1. They are all members of the the same Church. 2. They
profess themselves to be one Brotherhood.

To which Mr. T. pretends a Reply, in a Rhapsodie of words, little, or not at
all, to purpose.

He tells us, 1st, Of a twofold Communion, Private, or Public, and that the
worst of the present Ministers, are to be accounted as Brethren, in respect of
private Gospel-Communion; i. e. we are to restore them as Brethren, open our
hearts to them, according to Gal. 6. 1. Mal. 3. 16. Jam. 5. 16. I industriously
omit his Scoff, of Pharisaically minded, reputed Saints, which he must shortly
account for, to him, who will reckon with men for their hard and reproachful
words to his Children. And to what may be thought of any moment in this his
Answer, we Reply.

Answ. 1. His distinction of Private and Public Gospel-Communion, is
impertinent, as is his discourse of the lawfulness of holding private
Gospel-Communion with them. It Is of Communion with them in preaching, etc. that
we are treating, which he accounts Public Communion.

2. Not one of the Scriptures produced, but condemn what he would have them
justify. The Brethren Paul speaks of, Gal. 6. 1. were Members of a particular
instituted Church. Gal. 1. 2. Such as had received the Spirit. Chap. 3. 2. The
Sons of God by Faith. Verse. 26. Baptized into Christ; putting him on. Verse. 27.
Sons into whose hearts God had sent forth the Spirit of his Son, crying Abba
Father. Chap. 4. 6. Heirs of God through Christ, Verse. 7. Such as knew God;
were known of him, Verse. 9, etc. Mal. 3. 16. Speaks expressly concern-such as
feared the Lord, in opposition to the proud and them that work wickedness; such
as those mentioned, Jam. 5. 16. which Mr. T. knows in his conscience cannot be
affirmed of the worst of the present Ministers. Certainly the forementioned
Characters fit not the drunkards, swearers, adulterers (that are known to be)
of that Tribe.

Nor, 3. Am I able to make any tolerable sense of what follows, that
concerning this, it follows not, if we acknowledge the best of them as
Brethren, we must also acknowledge the worst of them, he having asserted, and
introduced the Scriptures but now requoted, to prove it, that concerning this,
The worst of the present Ministers are to be accounted as Brethren.

2dly, As touching public Gospel-Communion, he tells us, It consists in
hearing them, praying with them, receiving the Lords. Supper, etc.

Answ. Very well! How proves he that, with respect hereunto, we may own them,
as Brethren?

Why, 1. Judas might be heard, as an Apostle, was (perhaps) a Communicant at
the Lords Supper; It Is therefore lawful to hear and joy^ in the Lords Supper,
with the worst of the present Ministers.

Answ. 1. Of the case of Judas, that is repeated, usque ad na^s^am; we shall
have occasion to speak hereafter. At present we shall only say.

2. He was an Apostle sent forth by Jesus Christ, which the present Ministers
of England are not.

3. He was a visible Saint, carried it so well, that but immediately before his
betraying his Lord, the Disciples seemed rather to suspect themselves than him;
which cannot be affirmed of visible Drunkards.

4. That he received the Communion is uncertain; If he did, they were in a
Church State, he was a visible Saint, no actual crime, or evil could be laid to
his charge; so that this instance makes not a^ all for Communion with the worst
(or best) of the Ministers of England, who are not in a Gospel Church state,
etc.

He further tells, 3dly, A mixed multitude made acclamation to Christ, yet our
Lord justified their joining together in their praying and praising God, Mat.
21. 16. Luke 19. 39.

Answ. 1. This was but one act.

2. Out of a Church State.

3. From an extraordinary impulse of Spirit.

4. They joined with the Disciples, were not the mouth of the Disciples to God,
and therefore reaches not at all our present Cas^.

5. Mr. T. Can never prove this Consequence valid. The Disciples sing Hosanna
to Christ, and others, a mixed multitude, by an extraordinary impulse of Spirit,
sing so to; Ergo, It Is our duty to join with the present Ministers, as
Brethren, in praying, preaching, receiving the Sacrament, etc. which yet he
must make good, or confess he has hitherto proved nothing.

He adds, 4thly, It Is no sin to join in the true Worship of God, with any, if
we have no command to withdraw from that Service, because of their presence,
nor power to exclude them, and yet bound to the duties then performed;
Believers might prophecy and hear it, though unbelievers came in, 1 Cor. 14.
24.

Answ. 1. This Animadverter takes for granted, what we deny, First, That the
true Worship of God is performed in the Parish Assemblies. All praying and
preaching is not the true Worship of God. The offering Sacrifice at Jerusalem
was so, but not elsewhere. These things must be performed in the way appointed
by him, else they cannot be so accounted.

2dly. It Is true, bound we are to perform the duties they pretend to perform,
but according to the Institution of the Lord, not man's devising, as they are
performed in the Church of England, Isa. 29. 13. Mat. 15. 7.

3ly. Though it be no sin to join in the true Worship of God, yet it is a sin to
join with false worshippers, in a false way of Worship, as praying after the
way of the Common Prayer Book, hearing an Antichristian Minister.

4thly, Believers, it is true, might prophecy though unbelievers came in; but
it does not therefore follow, that '^is lawful for Believers to join with
Unbelievers, or forsake the Way and Institutions of Christ, to go to the
Assemblies of Unbelievers and hear them Prophecy. As the worst of Ministers
(of whom he is discoursing) and the generality of Parochial Assemblies
undoubtedly are, if a Spirit of profaneness, visible debauchery, an excess of
riot bespeak persons to be such. And from such he grants we are to separate by
command from Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 17. to which may be added, Ephesians. 5. 11. 2 Timothy 3.
5. Acts 2. 39, 40. But why talks he of our separating from them, when they
separate as much from us as we do from them; we were never no more of them than
they were of us. Of Rev. 18. 4. we shall hereafter speak. For the present we
deny, that by Babylon there, is meant only literal Rome, and expect the proof
of his dictate. The keeping company, and eating interdicted, 1 Cor. 5. 11. he
tells us, must be meant of eating Common Bread, -- Because verse. 10. That
keeping company which is forbidden to such Brethren, is allowed in verse. 9, 10.
to the Fornicators of the world, which cannot be Gospel-Communion, keeping
company in eating of the Lords Supper.

Answ. 1. It seems then that with the Fornicators of the world, we may not have
Gospel-Communion; if so, then not with the Church of England, for with it we
cannot have Communion without holding fellowship with such as these.

2dly, If it be not lawful to have Communion with a Brother, one of the same
particular Church (for of such an one the Apostle speaks) that is a Fornicator,
or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, so
far as to common eating and drinking, then, a fortiori, may we argue, it is
utterly unlawful to have communion with him in the Worship of God, and much
more unlawful to have fellowship with one we never walked with in the way of
the Gospel, according to any institution of Christ.

3. That it is lawful to hold Communion in eating the Lords Supper, with
Railers, Drunkards, etc. I am sorry to find Mr. T. asserting, of which we
expect his proof. The contrary is evident. 1. Persons must be in a
Church State, before they are capable of the regular enjoyment of that
Ordinance; which is a Church-Ordinance, and part of Instituted Worship; but
Persons of such a Complexion, are not fi^ matter for a Church, as we before
proved. Therefore -- 2. Those who ought to be excommunicated out of a Church,
were they in, we may not have Communion with (especially when in a false
Church State, as is the case of the members of the Church of England) But
persons of such a character, as the Apostle mentions, should be excommunicated
out of the Church. Therefore -- 3. Those with whom we have Communion in
breaking Bread as a Gospel-Ordinance, with them we are one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.
17. But we may not be one Bread with Drunkards, etc. Therefore -- 4. Those with
whom we are commanded to have no fellowship, with them we may not have
fellowship in that Ordinance of breaking Bread: But with such as these we are
commanded to have no fellowship, Ephesians. 5. 11. That the People of God can scarce
ever break Bread with comfort in the best instituted Churches (as he tells us)
from this doctrine, is a notoriously false Crimination, a mere Calumny. His
subsequent scoff, is such froth and vanity as becomes not his years nor
profession, we pass it over as beneath us to take further notice of.

We add in S. T. 3dly, That we cannot acknowledge the present Ministers for our
Brethren, but we must acknowledge the Bishops for our Reverend Fathers, for
theirs they are; but that we cannot do.

To this Mr. T. adjoyns, Sect. 5. 1. They are called their Reverend Fathers, in
respect of their Ordination.

Answ. 1. But we cannot own them as Reverend Fathers, with respect hereunto,
when we assuredly know they are herein usurpers of what does not appertain to
them.

But 2dly, This is not all, they own them as such upon the account of their
Authority over them, and the Parochial-Assemblies in the respective Diocesses,
who are to give forth Canons and Laws for them to walk by, in not a few things
relating to Worship (as is known) Now so we cannot own them as our Reverend
Fathers, we know no honor or obedience we owe them as such. We think the
inspection of one Bishop over an hundred Congregations, can be proved by no
better Arguments than the inspection of the Pope over an hundred thousand: That
a Diocesan and Ecumenical Bishop are much of the same kind, and have their
standing on the same foundation. We know no Bishop of the institution of
Christ, but a Pastor of a particular Congregation. He that pretends to more,
must prove his pretensions, or we cannot but look upon him as an usurper. I
would gladly know whether Mr. T. thought it lawful to own them as his Reverend
Fathers, when he swore to ex^irpate them with the whole Hierarchy? and whether
his so doing were an act of filial obedience? That they are to be accounted
Fathers, in respect of their (Antichristian) Office; because the Apostle says,
1 Timothy 5. 1. That an Elder is to be entreated as a Father, when they are not
Elders, but a degree above them, not from the Institution of Christ, but the
Courtesy (at the best) of Princes, he will never prove. Of their success in
begetting others to Christ, I understand nothing: Those whom they have
begotten, may upon the account thereof esteem them as their Reverend Fathers;
but yet I am apt to think, should they not be invested in the Title till then,
(for the most of them at least) they would go to their graves without it. These
are but Figleave-coverings, The Animadverter knows they are not upon this
bottom so called or accounted, but with respect to that Office-power they have
in the Church over the rest of the Ministers and Parochial-Assemblies thereof;
which being a mere incroachment, usurpation and innovation, we dare not own
them as such. We further argue in S. T.

4thly. We cannot hear them as Brethren; because they are, if Brethren, such as
walk disorderly, from whom we are bound to separate by express precept, Mat 18.
2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. That they walk disorderly we prove. Those that walk not after
the tradition received from the Apostles (and from the Primi^ive Church, for
above 300 years after Christ, but according to the traditions of the old Bawd,
and Strumpet of Rome) are such as walk disorderly: But the present Ministers
walk not after the tradition received from the Apostles, but after the
traditions of the Whorish Church of Rome: Therefore -- The Major is bottomed
upon the express words of the Apostle, in the place instanced in, and were it
not, no person of ingenuity would have the confidence to deny it. The Minor we
prove by particular instances. They have no Apostolical written Tradition for
Liturgies, Surplice, Cross in Baptism, etc. If they have, let them produce it,
and we are satisfied; if not, they are disorderly walkers (and to be separated
from) that they are such, 2. cannot be denied by such as pretend to
Reformation, if submitting to ordination, or reordination by a Lord-Bishop,
covenanting, and protesting with detestation against a Reformation according to
the Scriptures, and the best reformed Churches be so.

In answer to which, Mr. T. tells us. 1. That it belongs not to him to speak
for the present Ministers, but to themselves.

Answ. 1. And indeed many sober minded persons think so too. It very ill becoms
any man (...), and to go about to build again the things he once destroyed.

But yet 2ly, Its not the part of an Advocate thus to desert his Clients in
open Court. If he undertake their defense, it appertains to him to answer for
them, to what is objected against them.

However, he acquaints us, 2ly, what he conceives they would say for
themselves. 1. That they do not covenant and protest with detestation against a
Reformation, according to the Scripture, and the best reformed Churches --

Answer. The whole of my intendment in that expression, was to intimate their
renunciation of that Covenant, wherein the Reformation intimated, was solemnly
engaged to be promoted: which what is it less then to protest against the
Reformation therein asserted, and enjoined? That they did this is evident, from
their subscription of the declaration, or acknowledgement following. I A. B. do
declare that I do hold, there lies no obligation upon me, or on any other
person, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavor any change, or alteration of Government, either in Church or State;
and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath --

That they did, because they judged the matter of the Covenant at least with
respect to reformation of the Church, by purging it of the Hierarchy, to be
sinful, I do suppose they will not deny, nor that they renounce sin without
detestation. So that the Author of S. T. will in the judgment of sober minded
persons, be soon acquitted from being in this matter a Calumniator.

He tells us, 2ly. He conceivs they would justify their submitting to
Ordination, or reordination by a Lord-Bishop, their owning, and reading a
Liturgy in the Church, their wearing the Surplice, Crossing in Baptism, etc.

Answ. 1. No one doubts but they would; nor can any other be expected from
them, who are in the practice of these things. But that because they will
justify them, therefore they are no disorderly walke^s, is not (in my poor
judgment) an argument of the least weight. The Papists will justify their
(...), or Image Worship, and the rest of their abominable idolatries, and bring
Scripture to prove it lawful too. Gregorius de Valentia tells us, there is some
worship of Images lawful, and proves it from 1 Pet 4. 3. because the Apostle
would there deter them from the unlawful worship of Idols: yet I hope Mr. T.
will not affirm they are not disorderly walkers, and to be separated from as
such.

2ly. We say not, that they themselves will confess that they are disorderly
walkers; but that such as Mr. T. who have covenanted against Bishops, and
pretended to be for Reformation, cannot deny, but that they are indeed so, with
respect to the matters instanced in: which he must acknowledge to be true; for
they are the very things they covenanted against, as intolerable disorders and
abuses to remove out of the way. So that however they might call me an
egregious false accuser (which yet were but a sorry answer to the charge laid
against them) yet one would not have expected such language from Mr. T. These
things are disorders, or they are not: If they are not, why did this
Animadverter Covenant, Preach, Print against them, glory that he was one of the
first that in print testified his dissatisfaction touching them. If they are,
most assuredly those that practice them are with respect to them disorderly
walkers. And is Mr. T. of late grown such a fond Admirer of them, that a man
cannot speak truth of them, but he must call him an egregious false accuser, I
am afraid (...), and seriously to review with what spirit he writ such passages
as these.

He adds, 3dly. These practices (except the first) are not of such a degree of
pravity (whether justifiable or sinful) as that barely for them they should be
reputed in the number of Disorderly walkers, and so after due process, to be
separated from, by virtue of positive precept from Christ, Mat. 18. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
6. For 1. Mat. 18. 15, 16. is meant of personal injuries, the Separation
permitted is a Separation only from civil eating and familiar reception, not
from Gospel-communion.

Answ. 1. This is (...), and has already been fully confuted.

2dly. He further affirms, that the disorderly walking, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. must be
understood of sins of greater pravity, than the particulars instanced in, and
charged upon them, except the first, which they will deny.

Answ. 1. But the first we have proved against them; therefore they are
disorderly walkers, according to this Scripture, by Mr. T. his confession, and
so to be separated from.

2. Every sin is a disorderly walking; if persons will stand in, justify,
plead for any sin, they are to be separated from, by virtue of this Apostolical
precept.

But 3dly. If the sins charged upon the present Ministers be too small to
constitute the disorderly walking here mentioned, what are the greater that do
so? The gross sins (he tells us of) of any Brother, not a Minister, who was
bound to work -- v. 10. such as those, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21.

Answ. 1. Why the gross sins of a Brother, not a Minister? Is not the Ordinance
of private admonition, Church Censures, an Institution of Christ, out of the
abundance of his love for the good of his Children? Is a Minister exempt from
it more than others? he will not sure say so.

2dly. Why such gross sins as those mentioned 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2. Cor. 12. 20, 21.
does the Apostle charge the Church of Thessalonica with any such evils as those
there mentioned? nothing less! These are instanced in, because the Animadverter
supposes (at the least some of) the present Ministers are not guilty of them.
Let the Scriptures be perused, if the evils mentioned may not be charged upon
the most (if not all of them) and that without the least breach of charity, I
am mistaken.

Though 3dly, The evil the Apostle calls disorderly walking, is supposed to be
only a Brother's living idely, or not working; which that it is a greater sin,
than what we have here charged the Ministers of England with, will not in have
be believed, by such as know the Lord to be a jealous God, and the abhorrency
of his Soul against humane Inventions in, and additaments to his Worship; I
say, supposed to be -- For I am of the mind, that the disorderly walking, v.
10. is but a branch of that disorderly walking, v. 6. which may be taken in
general for all kind of evil carriage; and so includes in it the particulars
mentioned. That by tradition v. 6. should be meant only that command, v. 10. is
not likely. It Is rather to be extended to those mentioned 2 These. 2. 15. And
laid down as a direction, or help to secure them from the cheats, and
innovations of Antichrist, and his minist^^s, whom he tells them should come,
and that with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, intimates that many should
believe their lie, v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. presses them v. 15. to stand fast, viz.
in the doctrine of the Gospel, with respect to Faith and Worship, to hold the
Traditions they had been taught by them, v. 15. And having prayed for them, v.
16, 17. and exhorted them to pray for him; he tells them of his Faith and
Confidence touching their establishment by the Lord, and keeping them from
evil, chap. 3. 1, 2, 3. And again, praying for them, v. 5. he presses, v. 6.
to withdraw from every Brother that shall walk disorderly, and not according to
their Traditions, i. e. shall so far side with Antichrist and his Ministers, as
to practice and conform to his Innovations in the Worship of Christ; which we
prove they do. And the things mentioned are known to be such. Nor is it
necessary that we produce an Apostolical tradition expressly against them,
because in matters of Worship, that which is not commanded, is forbidden. What
Mr. T. has said in answer to Chap. 1. Sect. 3. we have already replied to.

To his Query, Where is your Apostolical tradition for your Church Covenant,
Election of Ministers? we shall only say, That when Mr. T. (or any one for him)
shall be able to show as much Apostolical tradition, for the matters with
respect to which we charge the Ministers of England as disorderly walkers, as
the learned Ainsworth, Cotton, Bartlet, and we our selves in S. T. have showed
for the matters instanced in by him, we shall surcease our accusation, and
acknowledge we have done them wrong.

That which he adds, 3dly, If every one that has not a written Apostolical
tradition for what he does, walks disorderly, then every one that sins walks
disorderly, will receive a speedy dispatch. Answ. He does so!

Yea but then this Author (says he) if he be not a Perfectionist, nor thinks
himself excluded from the number of those, of whom Jam. 3. 2. 1 John 1. 8. is a
disorderly walker, and to be separated from.

Answ. Setting aside his scoff, which becomes him not at all, I answer, First;
Disorderly walking is twofold. 1. Private, known only to a man's own self, which
is matter of burden* sorrow and lamentation to him, under which he groans and
wars against it. 2dly, More public, which is twofold: 1. Such as through
weakness, and the remainders of corruption the Children of the Lord do fall
into, which they are ashamed of, grieved for, and are thankful to any that
shall reprove them for it, and help them against it. Or 2. Such as is owned,
avowed, men justify themselves in the practice of, will not, whatever is said
against them, be reclaimed from. Persons guilty of disorderly walking in this
last sense, we say are to be separated from; and that this is the case of the
Ministers of the Church of England is notoriously known.

He proceeds and tells us 4thly. The present Ministers will be apt to allege
for themselves, that they have Apostolical tradition for those practices for
which they are accused as disorderly walkers, viz. Romans 13 1. Heb. 13. 17. and
be ready to recriminate us for separating from our Brethren, disobeying our
Ministers and Governors commanding things lawful.

Answ. 1. It Is very like they may do the one, and the other. As for the latter,
Si accusari sufficiat, nemo erit innocens: Let them (or any for them) prove
that we have separated from any of them, and therein broken any rule of the
Gospel of Christ; that they are by virtue of any appointment of Christ our
Ministers and Governors, whom we ought to obey, and that the things required
are lawful, and they will be supposed to say somewhat that we are concerned to
take notice of, but till then we are innocent. Romans 13. 1. Tells us We must
obey the Powers that are of God, but says not we must do so in that which is
sinful, in their additaments to the Worship of Christ. In such cases, neither
Solomon, nor Jeroboam was to be obeyed; neither Kings, Popes, or Bishopes are
to be subjected to. The Renowned Hus tells the Council of Constanc^ to their
face, that If the Popes Commandment be not concordant and agreeable with the
Doctrine of the Gospel, or the Apostles, it is not to be obeyed. And cites
Isidore speaking thus, He which does rule, and does say or command any thing
contrary or BESIDES the will of God, or that which is evidently commanded in
the Scriptures, he is honored as a false-witness of God, or Church-Robber:
whereupon we are bounden to obey no Prelate, but in such case as he does
command or take counsel of the counsels and commandments of Christ. Heb. 13.
17. tells us we must (...), obey our Rulers, or Leaders; but this does not
prove, that we must obey those that we never owned to be our Leaders, that we
are sure by virtue of any institution of Christ are not such, and that in every
foppery they shall devise. Sure it was not the duty of the good people of
England, to obey the Guides or Rulers were set over them in the Marian days,
and yet they might with as good reason have urged this Scripture for subjection
to them, as these now. It was a presentation, institution and induction then as
now, (together with an Episcopal Ordination) that constituted them Ministers of
this or that Parish. Let the Individuals acquit themselves to be Ministers of
Christ, and we shall pay them whatever obedience can be manifested from any
precept of Christ, to be due to them from us, but till then.

(...). But for a conclusion of all, our Animadverter adds, That if the
Ministers were disorderly walkers, and to be withdrawn from, yet it does not
follow, that they might not be heard as gifted Brethren. Of which he gives us
three learned reasons. 1. Because the withdrawing themselves, from every
Brother that walks disorderly, cannot be meant of their excluding themselves
from Hearing, Praying, or receiving the Lords Supper if such an one be present.

Answ. Right! but though this withdrawment from such a Brother cannot be meant
of exclusion from hearing, whilst he is present, yet I hope it may from hearing
him, who walks thus disorderly. The same may be said of receiving the Lords
Supper. If he be there as a looker-on, merely; this ought not to hinder any
from waiting upon Christ, in that institution (though the Church of England in
imitation of the old Pagan custom, of the Druides etc. of old, interdicts the
Priests saying service, whilst an excommunicate person is there;) but if he
shall be forced upon the Congregation, as a member to join with them in that
ordinance, and much more, as their Minister to celebrate it, as is our case, it
is the duty of the Saints to surcease the performance of that duty, for that
season. It was the keeping themselves from being polluted that caused them to
sever from him, that reason remaining, (which it does, till he has testified
his repentance) their withdrawment is to continue.

He adds, 2ly. That the withdrawment mentioned 2 These. 3. 6, 14. is only from
arbitrary communion in entertainments etc.

Answ. This is an old shift of Mr. T. we have already refuted.

He further tells us, 3ly. If we omit it, we omit the Worship of God, and so
break his Commandments.

Answ. 1. This is a mere petitio principii, we deny the ministration of the
Sacraments according to the rights of the Church of England, to be the Worship
of God, strictly so called.

2ly. There Is no need, through grace, of omitting the Worship of God; if we
worship not with them, there are meetings of his people, whither we may have
recourse to worship him in his own way. To what follows in this chapter, we
have already answered. We attend his advance toward the discussion of our
third argument, of which in the next chapter.

CHAP. IIII.
Sect. 1.
Such as act from an Antichristian calling -- not to be heard, proved. (...),
what it signifies. Who is Antichrist, what is Antichristian, explained. The
Ministers of England, derive their Office-power from the Papacy. The Bishops
of England, Petty-Popes. It Is unlawful to attend upon the teachings of
Antichrist, therefore upon the teachings of such as act by a power derived from
him. Christ calls his People to separate from every thing of Antichrist. Rev.
18. 4. and 14. 9. explained. Of trying the Spirits, 1 John 4. 1. of Christ's
instituting Officers of his ow^. No promise of a blessing in attending upon an
Antichristian Ministry.

IN Chap. 3. of S. T. a third Argument is produced against hearing the present
M^nisters, viz.

Those that act in the holy things of God, by virtue of an Antichristian Power,
Office, or Calling, are not to be heard, but to be separated from: But the
present Ministers of England, act in the holy things of God, by virtue of an
Antichristian Power, Office, or Calling. Therefore --

The Major is evident: for, 1. The Power, Office and Calling of Antichrist is
opposite and contrary to the Power, Office, and calling of Christ: not to
separate from such as act by virtue of such an Office-power, is to stand by,
and plead for Antichrist, against Christ.

The sum of what Mr. T. answers hereunto is, If by Antichristian Power, Office,
and Calling be meant the Papal Power -- and the acting in the holy things, be
by preaching the doctrine of the Trent Council, in the points determined
therein against Protestants, by administering Sacraments according to the Roman
Missal, and Discipline according to the Canon Law of the Popes; the Major is
granted and the Minor denied. But if by Antichristian power, etc. be meant by
virtue of ministry according to the Liturgy, Articles of Religion, and Homilies
of the Church of England, from the Ordination and License of the Bishops, his
Major is denied: that which he calls Antichristian, is not truly such; and it
is denied that what he calls Antichristian is opposite, and contrary to the
Power, Office, and Calling of Christ --

Answ. 1. The word (...) (as this Animadverter tells us) found only in the
Epistle of John; and principally 1 John 2. 18. where the Apostle distinguishes
between (...) and (...), between the mean Antichrists and the main Antichrist.
The best interpretation of the word, seems to be a false Christ, or ^
Counter-Christ; one that under the pretense of being for Christ, does really
oppose Christ (the word (...), both in opposition and composition signifies
[For] in the Scripture, as Mat. 2. 22. Acts. 13. 7. and in Classical Writers,
as Homer, Hesycheius etc.) in his Offices, Ministry, Discipline, Worship -- He
is Antichrist that under the pretense of acting for Christ, does indeed (though
covertly) act against him, in his name, and under the vizard of his authority.
That is Antichristian, that though it be pretendedly for, and from Christ, it
really is not. And in this sense the Major is to be understood, Those that act
in the holy things of God, (viz. Praying, Preaching, Administration of
Sacraments, etc.) by virtue of a Power, Office, and Calling, that is not
(though pretendedly) really from Christ, are to be separated from, as we
plainly declare in the first proof of the Major proposition, in S. T. which Mr.
T. would have disproved if he could: But in the stead thereof he labors to
raise a dust with a multitude of words, before the eyes of the Reader, that he
might not be able to perceive wherein the weight of the Argument lay.

2ly. He acknowledges the Major to be true, if understood of the Papal Power,
Office, and Calling, so that he which acts in the Holy things of God (i. e. in
Preaching, for whether it be the doctrine of the Trent Council, (or otherwise)
is not in this case considerable; for if he act from an Antichristian
Office-Power, it is not his preaching Truth which would make that Antichristian
Office-Power, Christian) administration of Sacraments according to the Roman
Missal, and discipline according to the Canon Law) by virtue of an
Antichristian Papal Power, is not to be heard -- but in this sense he denies
the Minor. And I cannot but wonder at the confidence of the man; does he not
know that they derive their Office-Power from the Papacy? he is not so
ignorant, as no^ to know it. Do not the Bishops of England, exercise, the same
power over the Clergy and Laity (as they are called) thereof, as the Pope does
over his, so that they are upon the matter Papilli Petty-Popes? Is this power
Antichristan in the Papacy, and not so in the Prelacy? Is not the manner of
administation of Sacraments in use amongst us, taken out of the Popish Missal?
Mr. T. knows it is. Is not the Discipline of their Church from the Canon Law?
with what forehead can he deny it? Whence is the Hierarchy, Ecclesiastical
decrees, Episcopal jurisdiction, Procurations, Dispensations, Pluralities,
Non-residencies, Popish-retained-Ceremonies, their Excommunications by a
Commissary, Ordinations, Absolutions, Degradations, Visitations, Offerings,
Courts, Silencing of Godly Preachers, disquieting the Lords people for
Nonconformity, if not from the Cannon-Law? These things are notoriously known
to be from them. So that Mr. T. grants the present Ministers may lawfully be
separated from. But this might be a slip of his pen before he was aware. That
it is our duty to separate from persons acting from an Antichristian Power,
Office, or Calling we prove.

2ly. It Is unlawful to attend upon the Teachings of Antichrist, therefore upon
the teachings of such as act by virtue of a power derived from him.

To this Mr. T. replies. If by teachings of Antichrist be meant the teachings
of the present Doctrine of the Church of Rome -- and the power derived from him
be meant the English Bishops Ordination, it is impudency to say they derived
their power from Rome. --

Answ. 1. We are not yet speaking of the Ministers of England, to separate from
those that act from an Antichristian power, be they Ministers of Germany,
Holland -- if they so act in their Ministry, they are to be separated from, and
that because we may not attend upon Antichrist in his Teachings, or
Ministration: does Mr. T. deny t^is? He says indeed if they preach truth, we
may attend upon their Ministry though they so act.

Answ. But this has been often said without the least proof, and as frequently
replied to, and its inconsutilousness in its appl^cation to the present
Ministers, who preach Popish Errors, and are interdicted the preaching all
truth manifested. It Is an assertion most derogatory to the Dignity, and
Authority of our Lord and King, and not to be born by his Loyal Subjects. Has
not he Servants enough of his own, to do his work, to preach his Gospel, but he
must be beholding to the greatest enemies he has in the world, to send forth
Servants into his Vineyard.

2dly. The present Ministers of England deny their power from the Papacy, or
they do not; if they do not, it had been my mistake, not impudency to say they
did. If they do, (as most certain it is they do, and they themselves
acknowledge it and plead it) the Impudency is rather in Mr. T. to deny it.

I add in S. T. 3dly. Christ calls his to separate from every thing of
Antichrist, Rev. 18. 4. and 14. 9, 10, 11. Therefore from his Ministry, or such
as act by virtue of an Antichristian power --

To which our Animadverter replies. 1 Rev. 18. 4. may be understood of a local
departure from Babylon, when her judgment of destruction from the Kings of the
Earth draws nigh.

Answ. 1. And who can hinder Mr. T. from making conjectures? his it may be is
no proof that it is. However the ground of the Lord's calling them out of Rome
(should it be granted him, that by Babylon were meant the City of Rome) is
plainly intimated to be, lest they should partake of their sins. Not their
dwelling in Rome, but their complying with the Antichristian Ministry, Worship
-- thereof, their abominable Rites and Ceremonies is that which is loathsome to
the Lord.

2dly. It Is true, God calls not his People to depart from every doctrine the
Pope teaches (there is some truth remaining amongst them, which is to be
cleaved to, because truth) much less a rejection of the Bible -- These are but
vain words, empty flourishes, this Animadverter knows full well that these
things are not affirmed by those with whom he has to do.

3dly. To a departure from her by forsaking Communion with her in Worship, and
leaving subjection to her Government, he grants this Scripture may be extended:
which is all we need contend for. The Worship of Rome and England are much the
same, as we prove. The Church Government in use amongst us by Archbishops,
Bishops, issues from the same sourse and spring, as is known. Therefore a
separation from the Worship and Ministry of England lawful by the
Animadverter's confession.

4thly. When God commands to come out of her, he must be interpreted to come
out of every thing of her, viz. that which is truly hers; whatever has not the
stamp and authority of God upon it: for the reason why the Lord would have his
forsake any thing of hers, is, because it is hers, and has not his own Image
and Superscription. It Is ridiculous to imagine, that God should command a
separation from her Worship and Government, and not from her Ministry, when
this is a main part of her (...), or Church Government.

He adds, 2dly. By the Beast and his Image, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. is meant some
Empire or State, which promotes Idolatry, the Roman Papacy, the worshipping of
which is undoubtedly the acknowledging of its power, and subjection to their
Idolatrous Decrees and Edicts; The receiving his mark is a profession of our
being the servants of the Pope, to subject to his authority: and after the
citation of Mr. Brightman and Mr. Mede speaking to this purpose, he says,
which does evince that the worship of the Beast and his Image -- is not
retaining every usage of the Papists, though superstitious and corrupt, but
acknowledging the universal Monarchy, of the Popes adoring Images, the Host,
etc.

Answ. 1. But what does evince that this is all that is intended by worshipping
the Image of the Beast? Mr. T. would bear his Reader in hand, as if he had
produced somewhat for the confirmation of his Assertion, when he has not said
the least word tending thereunto.

The very truth is, 2ly. The Beast mentioned, Rev. 14. 9, 10. is the same with
the Beast mentioned Rev. 13. 11. or the false Prophet, Rev. 19. 21. or
Antichrist considered in his Ecclesiastical State, composed of head (the Popes)
and members, the rest of the Antichristian Clergy (whether at Rome, or
elsewhere:) for as the learned Mede says, the Pope alone makes not up the
Beast, except the Clergy be jo^n'd with him: since the Beast does signify a
company of men composed of a certain order of members (like as the Beast has)
not one man alone: the Image of the Beast cannot be a dumb Image, it is expressly
said to be a speaking one, viz. the Ecclesiastical policy, that in its
Cannon-Laws (upon which both that of Rome and England is founded) breaths
forth nothing but Excommunication against such as shall disobey them, upon
which they are delivered over to the Secular Power here with us, though not to
be burned, yet to perpetual Imprisonment. The worshipping the Beast and
receiving the mark, is subjection to an Antichristian Ministry, and
Church-polity, from which it is the duty of the people of God to separate; and
if we prove not the Ministers of England to be so, we acknowledge this Argument
to be null, and that notwithstanding any thing in it hitherto asserted, it may
be lawful to attend them.

We say in S. T. 4ly. That there is not a command in the Scripture, enjoining
Saints to take heed of being deceived, to try the spirits -- but is an abundant
demonstration of the truth of the first Proposition.

To which Mr. T. subjoyns; 1. If by acting in the holy things of God by virtue
of an Antichristian power -- be meant their acknowledging the power, teaching
the doctrine, owning the calling of him that is truly Antichrist, it is granted.

Answ. To this we have already replied; It Is enough to prove any person ought
to be separated from, if he act in the holy things of God by virtue of an
Antichristian power, though the doctrine he preach be true.

He adds, 2ly. The Scriptures mentioned forbid (command he means) only to
reject Antichristian Doctrine, and Worship, not every thing said by any without
proof to be a thing of Antichrist.

Answ. 1. Very well; If we prove then the Worship of the Church of England to
be Antichristian, it is to be rejected. Now it being the Worship of the Papacy,
which is acknowledged by him to be so, I cannot see how it can be otherwise.

2ly. The Scriptures mentioned, fairly import, not only a command for the
rejection of the Doctrine and Worship which is Antichristian, but them also
that pretend to be, but really are not of God. The persons are to be proved and
tried, (...), try them as Goldsmiths try Gold, whether it be pure and right;
and if you find them not to be so, reject them. 1 John. 4. 1.

We proceed, and in S. T. say further, 5ly. The institution of Officers of his
own, by Christ to be continued to the end of the World, Ephesians. 4. 11. evinceth
the truth of the Major proposition.

To this our Animadverter answers, 1. It Is true some of the Officers mentioned
Ephesians. 4. are to be continued to the end of the World in the way appointed by
him, but that there is any particular way of Election -- of ordinary ^astors,
and Teachers, in those words appears not.

Answ. Who says there is? It Is sufficient they prove the continuation of the
Officers in the Church to be an Institution of Christ. Of the particular way of
their election we have mentioned elsewhere, as we have showed. 2ly. It Is well
this Animadverter will acknowledge that there is a way appointed by Christ, in
which Church Officers are to be continued: which as I conceive is a part of
Church Government, which therefore cannot be left to such an indifferency as he
sometimes intimates.

He tells us 2ly. How the Major is proved by it he discerns not, unless this be
the Argument; Christ has appointed these, therefore no other are to be heard,
which overthrowes the hearing of Gifted-Brethren.

Answ. We are contented with the form our words are by him cast into: only with
this alteration, therefore no other are to be heard as Ministers, acting by
virtue of an Office-Power, which makes nothing against the hearing of gifted
Brethren. We further add in S. T.

6ly. That there is no promise of a blessing in the whole Scripture, upon
persons attending upon such a Ministry --

Mr. T. replies, 1. Though there be no promise of a blessing upon persons
attending on such a Ministry, yet if they Preach the Gospel truly, there is.
Luke 11. 28.

Answ. 1. It Is not probable they should Preach the Gospel truly; as touching
the present Ministers of England, they do not so. 1. They preach it from a
false mission. 2ly. They preach it by halves (as is known) 3. They mixed many
humane traditions therewith, and thereby obscure the Gospel, as Mr. T. himself
in his Fermentum Pharisaeorum asserts. 4ly. There is no blessing promised to
persons attending upon such a Ministry, Luke 11. 28. Christ speaks not there of
any such Ministry; the whole of his intendment is, that no external p^iviledge,
though it were to bear him in the Womb, etc. who was a true Messiah, renders a
man glorious, blessed, and excellent, as a conformity to the divine will, which
how much it is to his purpose others will judge.

He says, 2ly. If there were no promise of a blessing, the Major is not
proved, unless this were true, They are not to be heard, but separated from, to
whose Ministry as such, a blessing is not promised; which makes unlawful the
hearing of gifted Brethren, unless they can produce such a promise.

Answ. Let me seriously ask this Animadverter, whether he does not when he goes
to hear, -- go to meet with God in that duty, and to receive a blessing from
him? This he will not sure deny: now, I would know further, whence it is he
expects to meet with God, and be blessed by him in his so doing? can he or any
one in the world, give any other reason* but this, Because God has promised to
meet and bless his people, while they are waiting on him, in his own ways?
Whether the work be managed by a Minister of Christ, as acting by Office-power,
or a private Brother acting by virtue of Talents received, for the profiting
and edification of the Body, we are not destitute of a promise of a blessing;
Exodus 20. 24. Isa. 64. 5. Mat. 18. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11 to 15. But if we run to a
false Ministry, to such as act from an Antichristian office and calling, I know
not any promise of a blessing, but rather the contrary. So that the Major
Proposition remains unshaken, notwithstanding Mr. T. his Battery against it.
His next attempt is against the Minor, of which in the next Section.

Sect. 2.
The present Ministers of England, act in the holy things of God by virtue of
an Antichristian power, office, or calling, proved. They are not from Christ.
There is a twofold Church, Ministry, Worship. Of Luthers Ministry. The names,
office of the present Ministers, their admission thereinto foreign to the
Scripture. Of Suffragan Bishops.

THat the present Ministers of England act in the holy things of God by virtue
of an Antichristian power, office, or calling: (which is the Minor Proposition
of the last mentioned Argument) we say in S. T. wants not sufficient
demonstration. 1. The present Ministers of England are either from Christ, or
from Antichrist, there is no medium -- That they are not from Christ, besides
what is already proved, may be further evinced.

To which our Animadverter answers. 1. Mr. Bradshaw asserts, that there is a
medium, and that a Ministry may be from Christ in re^pect of the thing
ministered, though from Antichrist in respect of the way of entry into it; yea,
he says, it is not necessary that the ministry of Priests and Deacons, though
ordained by Antichrist himself, should be the ministry of his apostasy; but
notwithstanding his Ordination, their ministry may be the Ministry of Jesus
Christ, as was the Ministry of Luther, Hus, etc.

Answ. 1. All that Mr. Bradshaw says is not Gospel, nor to be believed because
he says it.

2dly. That the thing ministered should render that Ministry, that with respect
to the way of entry into it is Antichristian, a Ministry of Christ, is to me
such a riddle, as needs an Oedipus to unravel; I am sure the distinction is
unscriptural. We read therein but of two Churches, 1. The Woman clothed with
the Sun, (afterward in the Wilderness) the Bride the Lambs Wife, with her
Ministry, Ordinances, Worship, (though in a mean persecuted state) called the
Ministers of Christ, Men of God, Stewards of the Mystery of God, Angels,
Pastors, etc. 2. The false Antichristian Church, called Babylon, the Whore, the
Mother of Harlots, the Woman in pompous array, outward splendor and glory,
drunk with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17. 2, 3, 4. her Worship called the
Wine of her Fornication, Abominations of the Earth -- her Ministry called
False-Prophets, Locusts (as some think) Rev. 9. 3. unclean spirits like Frogs,
Rev. 16. 13. And to one of these every (called Christian) Minister in the world
must appertain: if to the first, they are of Christ; if to the second, of
Antichrist.

3dly. That a Ministry of Priests -- ordained by Antichrist himself, is not a
Ministry of his Apostasy, but a Ministry of Christ, had need be attended with
more evidence than a bare assertion; it being so evidently false and untrue.
How there should be any Antichristian Ministry in the world if that were true,
I know not.

4ly. The Ministry of Luther -- was the Ministry of Christ: but he received not
his Ministry from Rome, but his Friardom.

Mr. T. adds of his own. If by being from Christ, or Antichrist, be understood
of outward calling, Ministers may be neither from Christ nor Antichrist, and
yet true Ministers (he should have said of Christ) as those that preached
Christ even of envy, Phil. 1. 15, 18.

Answ. 1. That a man should be a Minister of Christ, and not from Christ, or
externally called according to his appointment, i. e. a Minister of Christ, and
not a Minister of Christ, is somewhat a strange Assertion.

2dly. How does he prove that those, mentioned Phil. 1. preached Christ by
virtue of an Office-power, as Ministers and not as gifted Brethren.

3dly. If Ministers, how proves he that they were not from Christ in respect of
outward calling. This he should have proved if he would have made good his
Assertion, his failure wherein exposes it to the contempt of the judicious
Reader. But our Animadverter delights in dictates without proof.

His next advance is to the consideration of the evidence we bring to prove the
present Ministers not to be from Christ. 1. Their names are foraign to the
Scripture; where read we of Priests, as distinguished from Christians, in the
new Testament, Deans, Canons, Petty-Canons -- these are only found in the Popes
Pontifical, whence they are derived.

To this he answers, 1. That the term Priests is the same with Presbyters, and
that is sure found in Scripture, Acts. 11. 30. --

Answ. 1. Thus indeed Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. and before him Whitgift Answer
to the Admonit. say, but in vain. For, 1. The words are never used to signify
the same thing, but diverse. 2. The first Assumers of the title (under the times
of the Gospel) never intended to signify any such thing thereby. They assumed
it not (merely) to distingush themselves from the people, but as a note of
distance amongst themselves.

2dly. The other names (says M. T.) note not any Ministry different from the
Ministry of Christ. --

Answ. 1. I stand astonished to hear Mr. T. say so: if they do not, those who
bear those names are the Ministry of Christ: (...)? Is this the draught of that
hand, which was solemnly lift up to Heaven, when he swore to extirpate them, as
none of Christ's Ministry?

2dly. Where read we of any such Officers of Christ in the Scripture (who are
not so called, as Lecturers -- with respect to the manner of their doing the
work of the Ministry) but with respect to some place in the Church, higher or
lower then the residue of the Clergy?

3dly. The Author of the S. T. argues not the names are foreign to Scripture,
therefore the things, as this Animadverter falsely pretends, he asserts, as fast
as he can, that both name and thing is so.

4thly. It Is a shrewd sign that those Ministers came out of the Mint of
Antichrist, who bear the names wherewith he stamps his Ministers.

We add, 2dly. As their names are foreign to the Scripture, so are their
Offices. Deacons attending tables we read of; But Deacons praying, preaching,
administering Sacraments by virtue of an Office-power, an order of the first
step to the Priesthood, we find not: Priests in the old Testament we read of,
in the New, Saints are so called -- but an Office of Priesthood in men for the
Ministry of the Gospel, that are to be bounded by men in that their Office,
must preach what they would have them, and cease when they would have them (as
in the case of the present Ministry of England) the Scripture is a stranger to.

To which Mr. T. adjoyns, 1. If they be appointed to pray, preach, and
administer Sacraments, they have this to say, that P^^^ip did so, Acts. 8.

Answ. 1. The Church at Jerusalem, to which he was related as a Deacon, was
first scattered. 2. It appears not that he preached by virtue of an
Office-power, as a Deacon, or in any other capacity then as a gifted Brother.
3. It Is most certain it was no part of his work as Deacon, Acts. 6. 2. the
attending on the Ministry of the Word is peculiarly distinguished from the
attending Tables. 4. His baptizing seems to be by the extraordinary, and
immediate call and impulse of the Spirit: none of which can be asserted of
these Deacons.

He adds, 2dly. The Deacons Office may be well conceived the first step to the
Priesthood -- in that Paul requires of the Deacons, that they hold the Ministry
of Faith, in a pure Conscience, and tells us that they who have used the Office
of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree -- 1 Timothy 3. 9, 13.

Answ. It Is true, Paul says so, but that thence this Animadverter should be
able to infer, therefore the Deacons Office may be well accounted the first
step to the Priesthood, must be imputed to that acuteness of his, whereby he is
enabled to deduce quidlibet ex quolibet, what conclusion he has a mind from
any premises. There being not a tittle more or less spoken by Paul of any such
thing, nor thought of in those days.

As for the name Priest, (he says) if the Saints, as Saints, may be termed*
Priests, then may the Elders.

Answ. It Is true, the Elders, as Saints, may be so called, but not as Elders,
or in respect of their Office of drawing nigh to God: nor does the expression
used by Paul, Romans 15. 16. prove any such thing.

Mr. T. proceeds. As for that which is added, that the present Ministry of
England is bounded by men, in their Office; so as that they must preach what
they would have them, and cease when they would have them; I think (says he)
it is not without example in the best ordered Churches.

Answ. 1. I remember Pope Leo the 10th, in the Lateran Council, Ses. 2.
decreed, That none should preach concerning the coming of Antichrist, but if
the Lord shall reveal some things to others, as by Amos he promises to do,
they ought not to divulge it, before the Sea Apostolic has examined it, or if
that cannot commodiously be, the Bishop with some others; he that does
otherwise let him be excommunicated. From whence the Reader may easily
conjecture from what quarter the present practice of the Bishops in this matter
does arrive.

2dly. It Is true, the Apostle would have Timothy to abi^e at Ephesus, that he
charge some, that they teach no other doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 3. and Titus to reject
an Heretic, Tit. 3. 10. and says, 1 Cor. 14. 30. If any thing be revealed to
another that sits by, the first must hold his peace -- But that because Paul
took all the care he could, to hinder the spreading of error, and the
preventing disorderly prophesyings, (as more than one speaking at once)
therefore it is lawful for the Bishops in an Antichristian way, by force and
violence, to hinder the free passage of Gospel Truths, is like the rest of this
B. D. Logic, for which I dare say the least Smatterer in that kind of
learning, will say, he needed not to have taken any degree in the Schools.

3dly. That the practice instanced in, is not without example in the best
ordered Churches (after an unusual rate of modesty with him) our Dictator tells
us, he does think; but he might easily have informed himself otherwise. It Is
such a piece of tyranny, that ^ell ordered Churches cannot bear, that persons
sanctified, and taught by the Spirit of the Lord, sound in the Faith, called
also according to the appointment, and way of Christ, to preach the Gospel,
should no^ be suffered so to do without the license of an Antichristian
Foundling, a dumb Idol of the Popes make, called a Lordain (I should have said
a Lord) Bishop; Many of the worthies of the Lord have protested against, as the
renowned John Hus, the Churches in Bohemia, the most eminent in the Council of
Basil -- as abominable and Antichristian.

But Mr. T. further tells us, that if the Prelates silence persons when they
should not, they are accountable to Christ, but it is no proof that their
Ministry is not from Christ; who submit to the commands of men, who have power
over them, forbiding them to preach some truths --

Answ. 1. That the Prelates are accountable to none but Christ (as this
Animadverters expressions intimates) I am sorry to hear from him: the most
flattring Canonist would not say more of the Pope himself.

2ly. It Is a proof that the Ministry is not of Christ, that is so bounded, if
Paul's words be true, Gal. 1. 10.

3. That Lord Bishops have any power over the Ministers of Christ, by virtue of
any institution of his, he cannot prove; the submission of Ministers unto them,
in things Ecclesiastical, when they are distitute of such authority, is so far
from being an extenuation, that it is an aggravation of their crime.

We add in S. T. 3dly. That the admission of the present Ministers into their
Office, by a Lord Bishop, without the consent of the Congregation, in which
they act as Officers, is also foreign to the Scripture.

What Mr. T. has before said in opposition hereunto, is already answered. What
he has further to argue, shall be now considered. He tells us, 1. The
admission of the present Ministers has not always been by Lord-Bishops, some
have been made by Suffragan Bishops --

Answ. 1. The most of the present Ministers (Mr. T. denies not, nor can he)
have their admission from a Lord-Bishop.

2dly. The very truth is, they all have so, the Suffragan Bishops (he speaks
of) is but the Lord Bishops Deputy, who represents his Lordships person in that
act of Ordination, and therefore what is done by him, is done by the Lord
Bishop.

3dly. Admission by a Suffragan, titular Bishop, is foreign to Scripture, as
well as admission by a Lord-Bishop.

He proceeds, 2dly. Where the Parishioners are Patrons, there is the election
of the Congregation.

Answ. There are but few Parishes, that as Patrons, present their own
Ministers, and yet those that do, must not have any Minister, but whom the
Lord-Bishop pleases; his admission is still from him.

He further tells us, 3dly. In others there is an implioit consent, in their
Ancestors yielding that power to their Patron, to present; and an
after-consent, by receiving him that is instituted as their Minister.

Answ. This is a vanity not worth the minding. 1. He cannot produce any
authentic Writing, testifying such a reddition by our Ancestors. 2. If he
could, though it may be supposed they may alienate what of right belongs to us
as men (which yet in many cases is false) it is impossible they should do so,
with respect of what appertains to us as Christians. 3. The after-consent
signifies nothing, they must consent whether they will or no; if they do not,
but testify their dissent, by abstaining from hearing them, -- they are
presented into their Ecclesiastic Courts, excommunicated, imprisoned, ruined.

He adds, 4thly. But whether these usages be right, or wrong, notwithstanding
them, yet may the Offices of the present Ministers of England be from Christ.

Answ. 1. This is a dictate without proof, which we reject. 2. That a Minister
should in their names, office, and admission thereunto, not symbolize with the
Ministers of Christ, and yet be his Ministers, is absurd and irrational to
imagine. This we have proved of the present Ministers, and add, that in all
these they symbolize with the Popish orde^ of Priests: which we at large
demonstrat^ in S. T. what Mr. T. excepts against it, shall be considered in the
next Section.

Sect. 3.
The present Ministers of England symbolize with the Popish order of Priests.
Of the name Priests. The abolition of names once abused to idolatry. Hos. 2.
15. Z^ch. 13. 2. explained. Baali what it signifies. Exodus 23. 13. Psalm. 16. 4.
opened. Of Orthodox Antiquity, it is no sufficient justification of what we do
in divine things. The Testimony of the Ancients. M. T. his arguing and Baronius
the Papist, alike. Ignatius his (...). The book of ordering Priests and Deacons
is stolen out of the Popes Pontifical: as is evident by the parallel drawn
betwixt them.

THat the present Ministers of England symbolize wit^ the Popish order of
Priests, we evince in S. T. under several considerations.

1. They are both called, and own themselves Priests; which being a term
borrowed either from the Priests of the Law, the assertion of such a
Priesthood, being a denial of Christ come in the flesh; or from the Priests of
the Heathen (from whom the word Orders is undo^btedly borrowed) or from the
Antichristian Church of Rome, such idolatrous, superstitious names, being
commanded by the Lord to be abolished. Hos. 2. 15, Zech 13. 2. wants not its
sufficient weight --.

To which Mr. T. 1. The word Priest is no more than Presby^er, nor used in any
other sense by the Papists, or the Church of England.

Answ. 1. this has already been replied to, than which there is nothing more
false: The English of Sacerdos, is not, (nor ever was) Presbyter or Elder, but
Priest.

2ly. This is not to his purpose: The Ministers of England and Rome symbolize
in name, if they are both called Priests, which this Animadverter cannot deny.
Whether there has not been a willingness in some to return to Popery
manifestly discovered, let the Nation judge.

He adds, 2dly. Zach. 13. 2. is not a command, but a promise. 2ly. Its the
abolition of the names of Idols, not of Priests, that is there promised.

Answ. 1. It Is true Zach. 13. 3. is a promise, but such an one as abundantly
manifests the detestation of the Lord against them, which implies a command
from God to his people, not to make use of them. 2dly. The names of Idols are
the names used (peculiarly) in Idolatrous Worship; so that though Mr. T. never
found Priests to be reckoned amongst Idols, (which yet they might too in days
past have been, when too much idolized by the people.) Yet he knows the name
Priest has been used in idolatrous worship, both Heathen and Antichristian,
peculiarly appropriated unto their Ministers therein employed.

3dly. Hos. 2. 16, 17. is rather, he tells us, a prediction then a prohibition,
God would be called Ishi not Baali, because that name signifies a kind husband,
this, one that is cruel and rigorous: or, lest she should in thought remember
the Idol, or be thought by others to continue that Idolatrous name.

Answ. 1. The words are not merely a prediction, they are a prohibition also:
Thou shall call me no more Baali, we had thought had been an express forbidding
them so to call him.

2dly. The Question is, Whether these names were superstitious names, commanded
by the Lord to be abolished, or not? upon whatother accounts they were so
commanded: so that till Mr. T. proves that this was not abused to Idolatry, nor
commanded by the Lord to be abolished, he does but auram vapulare, speak
nothing to the purpose.

Yet, 3dly. That God would not be called Baali, because that name signifies a
cruel and rigorous husband, is 1. more then puerile, every smatterer in that
language knows the word Bagnal, or Baal, signifies not an austere, but a kind
husband, (coming of (...), exceedingly to love) it signifies indeed a Lord, but
that is metaphorically, and not a tyrannous and cruel Lord neither. 2dly. It Is
wicked, being a charging of the holy God falsely; He is called Baali, their
Lord, Isa. 54. 5. yet no cruel, and rigorous one I hope: I am sure he is there
so called upon the account of his love and tenderness to his people, rolling
away their reproach, and crowning them with dignity and glory. 3. The Spirit of
the Lord gives us another reason of the rejection of the name v. 17. Groti. us
says well upon the place, the Church is interdicted the use of the name, out
of horror of that name which has been imposed on an Idol.

We add in S. T. Of the same mind with us in this matter, is Hierom, the Hebrew
Docters, Sanctius, Polanus, Rivet --.

M. T. replies, I do not think any of his Authors say so.

Answ. 1. But it is evident they do say so: viz. that the names given to the
Idols are to be abolished, and not given to God, Hierom in the words cited by
him, affirms as much: I so hate the names of Idols, that I will not have it
said Baali, but Ishi -- Gods hatred to the Idol, he tells you, is the ground why
he will not have that Idolatrous name used in his service. I do not think but
sacrificing Priests are altogether as abominable to the Lord; and by the same
reason that name that has been given to them, ought not to be given to his
Ministers. What Rivet says, he assents to, yet that is as much as we affirm,
God abhors the use of names because they have been abused to Idolatry, the
name Priests have been so abused, and this Animadverter must acknowledge as
much, except he will deny the abominable Sacrament of the Mass, a propitiatory
Sacrifice for the quick and dead, (as the Papists say) to be Idolatry; The
Sacrificers, or Mass-Priests, being so called.

The testimony of the Helvetian Churches he grants is, as we have reported:
They give not the name Priest to their Ministers, not because they think the
word as it answers to Presbyter (he tells us) is evil -- but as it is used in
the Church of Rome.

Answ. 1. They know the word Sacerdos, Priest, answers not to the word
Presbyter at all. 2. They reject the word Priests, because it has been abused
in the Papacy to Idolatry, and they read nothing of it as peculiarly applied
to Ministers, by way of distinction from other Christians in the New Testament.

He tells us further, If Hos. 2. 16, 17. (as he will not deny, ver. 17. to
import) be a prohibition according to the Law, Exodus 23. 13. it only forbids
the using such names with honor, or so, as to trust in them, as Psalm. 16. 4.

Answ. 1. The Text says expressly, Thou shall call me no more Baali; for I will
take away the names of Baalim out of their mouth, and they shall no more be
remembered by their name.

2. Should we accept his interpretation, we must not use such names with
honor, liking or approbation, according to Exodus 23. 13. Deuteronomy. 12. 3. Josh.
23. 7. Psa. 16. 4. it would avail him nothing; for ^lthough some ('it is true) do
affix the name of Priests to the Ministers of England in a way of disgrace, yet
they themselves assume it, as given to them by the Bishops, as an Ensign of
Honor and Renown.

But 3dly, there seems to be somewhat more in those prohibitions, they forbid
the frequent use of Idolatrous names, or names abused in Idolatrous service,
and their use at all, in the Worship of God* The name of other Gods might not
be heard (says precious Ainsworth) out of their mouths, or imprinted in books,
or graven on pillars -- The Reub^nites therefore changed the names of Cities
that carried Idol*names, Numb. 32. 38. And by the Hebrew-Canon it was decreed,
from this Law; Whosoever makes a Vow in the name of an Idol, or that swears by
it, is to be beaten, whether he swears thereby for himself, or for an
Infiael. And it is forbidden to make an Infidel swear by his God, or to mention
the name thereof, though not by way of Oath. Maimonid. Treat of Idol^try. chapter
5. sect. 10. That the Prophets who speak as the holy Ghost gave them utterance,
did afterward use the name Baal -- is not at all to his purpose, the Spirit of
the Lord is not bound, the Law was not made for him, but for us, it is not said
I will not, but, you shall shall not.

What he adds is most frivolous; 'twere wicked and abominable in our addresses
to God to call him Molech, Milcom, Malcham, Jove, -- but that therefore, if the
names of Idols be to be abolished, we may not call him King, Lord, Jehovah --
because some of the forementioned Titles so signify, and others as it is
thought were derived from these names of God, is most absurd. Christ is called
Priest, he is truly, really so; and upon the account of his once offering up
himself for the sins of the people, before any Mass-Priest was thought of in
the world, that therefore the name of Priests may lawfully be applied to a
company of persons, accounted Ministers of the Gospel (which was a title
assumed by the most idolatrous generation of men, professing themselves to be
of the same order, when such as these pretend to be, are no where in the
Scripture so called) will not in haste be proved.

We manifest in S. T. 1. a further agreement betwixt the Priests of England and
Rome. 2. They are both Deacons before they are Priests. 3. Ordained to their
Office by a Lord-Bishop, or his Suffragan. 4. Both presented by an Archdeacon,
or his Deputy, with these words, Reverend Father, I present these men unto
thee, to be admitted to the Order of Priesthood.

Our Animadverter replies. These are granted and avouched as not Popish, but
justifiable and agreeable to Orthodox Antiquity.

Answ. 1. That these things are not Popish, are avouched without proof: They
are exactly extracted out of the Pope's Portuis, not retained in any one of the
Reformed Churches, but ejected as the sour leaven of Popery.

2dly. That they are justifiable, is said, not proved. Mr. T. should not talk
thus confidently of Orthodox Antiquity, when he knows it is of all things, the
most difficult to determine what things are agreeable to Orthodox Antiquity.

3dly. Nothing will justify what we do in matters Divine, but the Scriptures:
Orthodox Antiquity is not sufficient. Hear what Basil says, If whatever is not
of Faith is sin (as says the Apostle, but Faith is by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God) without doubt whatever is without Divine Scripture, since it
is not of Faith, is sin. So Hilarie ad Constant. Augustine, Tertullian de
praescript. cap. 15. 8. Hierom in Mat. 23. and Lactantius, Humane Precepts have
no weight which want Divine Authority; lib. 3. c. 27. Theophylact says, It Is
Diabolical to account any thing Divine, without the authority of
Divine-Scriptures: that is Divine which is Apostolical, nor is it ^o be sought
any where without the Scripture; lib. 2. Paschal. The saying of Ignatius is
worthy to be written in letters of Gold, (...), Christ is our Antiquity.

Yet, 4thly, the Animadverter cannot justify these things from Orthodox
Antiquity, any better than the Papists can justify their Oil, Spittle, Salt,
-- in Baptism, their orders Ecc^^siastical of Exorcists, Acolytes -- And indeed
his arguing and Baronius's for these, seems to be much a like, although there
is mention made in Scripture only of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons; yet
(says he) Ignatius (in those counterfeit Epistles you must understand that
pass under his name) mentions more, so that it is necessary that either they
were in the Apostles time, or at least were approved of by them. By such
Orthodox Antiquity, Mr. T. may soon justify, not only the forementioned
practices of our Clergy, but all the inventions of the Romish Bawd: It Is a
trick of the Devil, says Augustine, under the pretext of Antiquity, to commend
fallacies to us: de quaest. Vet. and Nov. Testa. q. 14. some things seemed to
be new, that were indeed ancient, as Christ's Doctrine to the Pharisees,
Christian Religion to Celsus and his Pagans: some things seem to be ancient,
that are but the impostures, cheats, and fallacies of the later days.

We add in S. T. 5thly. The Priests of Rome, must be ordained to their Office,
according to their Pontifical; the Priests of England according to their Book
of ordering Priests and Deacons, which is taken out of the Popes Pontifical.

To this Mr. T. returns the same answer that Archbishop Whitgift gave, the
sum whereof is: 1. That what is good in the Popes Pontifical, if in our
Pontifical, our Pontifical is never the worse for having it.

Answ. That nothing but Divine Institution, in the Scripture of the Lord,
renders any thing good, considered as it relates to the Worship of God, as
such, we have already proved: In such cases to talk of things as good, for
which no precept instituting them can be produced, is to talk without book.
It Is diabolical, says Theophylact.

He proceeds, 2dly. It Is most false, that the book of ordering Ministers -- is
word for word drawn out of the Popes Pontifical -- Ignorance, and rashness
drives you into many Errors.

Answ. 1. Why the Book of ordering Ministers should be called a Pontifical, if
not from the chief Pontifice of Rome, I understand not. 2. We say not, that the
English Pontifical is taken word for word out of the Popes, but that it is so,
i. e. for the substance there^f. 3. I have often observed that persons most
guilty of ignorance and rashness, have been most free in charging their
Antagonists therewith. Thus fares it with our Animadverter, as is evident to
the eye of an ordinary Reader from the view of the ensuing parallel.

Romish Pontifical.
1. Tempora ordinationum sunt, etc. The times of ordination are the Sabbaths,
in omnibus quatuor temporibus -- Romans Pontif. de ordinibus conferendis.

2. Ordinationes Sacrorum Ordinum -- The ordination of holy Orders shall be in
the times appointed, and in the Cathedral Church, the Canons of the said Church
being present thereat, shall be publicly celebrated in the time of Divine
Service. ibid.

3. They are taken to the order of Presbytery who have continued in the Office
of a Deacon at least a whole year except for the profit, and necessity of the
Church it shall otherwise seem good unto the Bishop -- ibid.

4. Episcopus autem Sacerdotibus* but the Bishop, Priests being adjoined to
him, and other prudent men, skilful in the Divine Law, and exercised in
Ecclesiastical functions, shall diligently examine the persons age -- of him
that is to be ordained.

5. Nullus ad ordinem -- None shall be admitted to the order of a Deacon before
he be twenty three years old, nor to the order of Presbytery before the twenty
fifth year of his age.

6. Archidiaconus offerens -- The Arch Deacon presenting those who are to be
promoted to the order of Deacons, (each of them being decently habited) unto
the Bishop, sitting in his seat before the Altar, says, Reverend Father. --

7. Pontifex, etc. The Bishop shall ask, Do you know them to be worthy? the
Archdeacon shall answer, As much as humane frailty suffers me to know, I know
and testify that they are worthy. --

8. Pontifex -- The Bishop shall speak to the Clergy and People, If any one
has ought against th^se persons, let him come forth, and with confidence speak
for God, and before God. --

9. Postremo -- Lastly, the Bishop takes and delivers to them all the Book of
the Gospel, saying, Receive power of reading the Gospel in the Church of God.
--

10. Pontifex -- The Bishop shall say, the Ministers and Chaplains answering,
Lord have mercy upon us -- O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy on us. O God
the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us -- That it may please thee to
bless, sanctify and consecrate these elect --. We beseech thee hear us.

11. They sing one and the same Hymn, only the one is in Latin the other in
English.

Veni Creator Spiritus,
Mentes tuorum visita, etc.
12. Pontifex -- The Bishop shall lay his hands upon the heads of each of them,
kneeling upon their knees before him, saying to every one, Receive the Holy
Ghost; whose Sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven; and whose Sins thou
do retain they are retained.

13. Pax -- The Peace of God be always with you, the blessing of God Almighty,
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost descend upon you --

English Pontifical.
1. We decree that no Deacons, or Ministers, be ordained, but only upon the
Sundays (more heathenishly spoken, then the Pope in his Pontifical) immediately
following, jejunia quatuor Temporum, commonly called Ember-weeks -- Constit. and
Can. Eccl. can. 31.

2. And this be done in the Cathedral, or Parish Church where the Bishop
resideth, and in the time of Divine Service, in the presence not only of the
Archdeacon, but of the Dean -- ibid.

3. And here it must be declared unto the Deacon that he must continue in that
office the space of a whole year (except for reasonable causes it shall
otherwise seem good unto the Bishop. The Book of ordering Priests and Deacons.

4. The Bishop, before he admit any person to holy Orders, shall diligently
examine him in the presence of those Ministers that shall assist him at the
imposition of hands -- Can. 35.

5. None shall be admitted a Deacon except he be twenty three years of age --
and every man which is to be admitted a Pries^, shall be full twenty four years
old. The Preface to the Form and Manner of making Priests and Deacons, etc.

6. The Archdeacon, or his Deputy, shall present unto the Bishop (sitting in
his Chair near to the holy Table) such as desire to be ordained Deacons (each
of them being decently habited) saying these words, Reverend Father --

7. The Bishop -- Take heed that the persons whom you present unto us be apt
and meet for their learning -- The Arch Deacon shall answer, I have enquired of
them, and also examined them, and think them so to be.

8. Then the Bishop shall say to the people; Brethren, if there be any of you
who knows any impediment, or notable crime in any of these persons -- let him
come forth in the name of God, and show what it is.

9. Then the Bishop shall deliver to every one of them the New Testament,
saying, Take thee authority to read the Gospel in the Church of God. --

10. The Bishop with the Clergy and People, shall sing, or say, the Litany. O
God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us, miserable sinners, O God the Son,
Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us. -- That it may please thee to bless
these they Servants --. We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Come Holy Ghost our souls imspire,
And lighten with Celestial Fire, etc.
12. The Bishop -- shall lay their hands severally upon the heads of every one
that receive the order of Priesthood, the Receivers humbly kneeling upon their
knees, and the Bishop saying, Receive the Holy Ghost: whose Sins thou do
forgive, they are forgiven; and whose Sins thou do retain, they are retained.

13. The Peace of God -- and the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost be amongst you, and remain with you always. Amen.

To which it were easy to add other parallel particulars, but these upon a
slight view of the Roman Pontifical, offering themselves, being sufficient to
confute that assertion of Whitgift, and Mr. T. that the Book of ordering
Ministers and Deacons is almost in no point correspondent to the Roman
Pontifical, we content our selves with them. From whence the ingenuous Reader
will soon determine, to whom ignorance and rashness may justly be imputed.

We add, 6thly. The Popish Priests must kneel down upon their knees, at the
feet of the Lord Bishop that ordains them; and he must say to them
(blasphemously enough) Receive the Holy Ghost; whose Sins ye forgive, they are
forgiven; whose Sins ye retain, they are retained: which exactly accords with
the fashion of ordaining the Priests of England.

To which Mr. T. replies in a long harangue, not at all to the purpose; giving
us an account what Whitgift and Hooker say to this pr^ctice, confesses at last,
they offer some force to the Scripture to which they allude, tells us, those
words may be used prayer-wise.

Answ. 1. The Question is, Whether in the particular instanced in, there be an
exact symmetry betwixt the Ordination of the present Ministers of England, and
the Priests of Rome? This Mr. T. denies not; but leads the Reader to the
consideration of somewhat else.

2. The use of the words, John 20. 22, 23. he grants to be an offering force to
the Scripture, and if so, it is wicked and abominable; to wrest the Scripture
to our private interpretation is undoubtedly so.

3. That they should be used prayer-wise is a most ridiculous evasion, the
manner of expression evinceth the contrary.

4. Mr. Richard Hooker Eccles. Polit. lib. 5. sect. 77. as c^ted by our
Animadverter, interprets it of the collation of the gifts of the holy Ghost,
which if we should interpret of the Office of Ministry, it belongs (as we have
said) to the Church, not to such a thing as a Lord-Bishop, to collate. We
proceed in the Parallel.

7thly. The Popish Priests are not ordained in, and before the Congregation to
whom they are to be Priests, but in some Metropolitan, Cathed^al City -- So the
Priests of England.

To which Mr. T. replies, 1. This is not always so.

Answ. I challenge him to give one instance of the contrary, for these six or
seven years last past.

2dly. It may be before the Congregation to whom the person is to be Priest.

Answ. What may be is one thing, what is, another. We say not only that it may
be, but that it ought to be, yet we know it is not. It Is added in S. T.

8thly. The Popish Priests take the care of Souls, though not elected by them,
from the presentation of a Patron, by the Institution and Induction of a Lord
Bishop: so the Ministers of England.

To which our Animadverter, This is not always so, nor when so, Popish.

Answ. 1. The first is most notoriously false, and we challenge Mr. T. to make
it good if he can. 2. the latter remains to be proved by him: to assert it is
not Popish, is a piece of beggary this Animadverter is much used to. What he
has before said is already answered. We add,

9thly. The Popish Priests wait not the Churches call to the Ministry, but make
suit to some Prelate, to be ordained Priest, and giving money for their Letters
of Ordination; so the Priests of England.

Mr. T. replies. To offer a person's self for ordination, is in some case a
duty, 1 Timothy 3. 1. Isa. 6. 8.

Answ. 1. The Scriptures produced, prove not his assertion. Isa. 6. 8. is
sufficiently remote from any such thing, there is not the least mention of
Ordination therein, its only a testimony of Isaiah's readiness to obey the
voice of the Lord, in going forth to bear a testimony for him against an
untoward rebellious people. 1 Timothy 3. 1. only tells us, that he that desires the
office of a Bishop, desires a good work (i. e. as say our Annotators, is
inwardly moved by the Spirit of the Lord thereunto) which he may do, and yet I
hope wait the Churches call thereunto.

Besides, 2ly. Should this be granted, it signifies little, till he prove that
it is the duty of any, with the neglect of the Churches call to this Office, to
seek ordination thereunto from an unscriptural Prelate, which is that we charge
upon them; which Mr. T. knows they do.

He tells us, 2dly. Giving money for their Letters of Ordination, is only Wages
to the Register for writing.

Answ. 1. Be it so, that they give money for their Letters of Ordination, is
all that is asserted by us, which Mr. T. grants they do. 2. It Is well if there
be no Simony (as it is called) found amongst them. 3. If provision be made
against the Registers exacting overmuch, by the Canons of the Church of
England, he informs us that the same provision is made by the Popish
Trent-Council. The Parallel in this particular holds good. We say,

10thly. The Popish Priests are ordained to their Office, though they have no
Flock to attend upon: So the Priests of England.

Mr. T. replies. The Priests of England are not to be ordained without some
title, according to Can. 33. even the Trent-Council has made some provision
thereabout.

Answ. 1. Mr. T. does well to consociate the Canons of the Church of England,
and the Church of Rome in the Trent-Council together, they are (in not a few
things) near of kin. 2. However I cannot but stand astonished at his
confidence, in telling us that the Priests of England are not to be ordained
without some title, according to Can. 33. when that Canon says expressly, That
they may, if a Fellow, or in right as a Fellow, or to be a Chaplain in some
College in Oxford or Cambridg; if a Master of Arts of five years standing,
that lives of his own charge in either of the Universities, if to be shortly
admitted either to some Benefice or Curatship then void; or if the Bishop do
after his admission into the said office, keep and maintain him with all things
necessary till he prefer him to some Ecclesiastical Living. 3. But it may be
the Animadverter, by title, means some one of those things mentioned. To which
I shall only say, that if so, he does openly prevaricate; pretends to answer,
to what he speaks not one word; such Titles are supposed to be without a Flock
to attend upon.

What he adds, of Ministers being necessary for Armies, etc. is nothing to the
purpose: This proves not that they may be ordained Ministers, without a Flock
to attend upon, which they may have, and by them be sent forth for the works
mentioned for a season: We know it has been the practice of the Churches so to
do. 2. Priv^te Brethren may act for the supply of the services mentioned, (and
frequently have done so) nor indeed do I conceive how any can act therein in
any other capacity. Which is not incongruous to Acts 23. 2. (as this
Animadverter suggests) which speaks not a tittle of their ordination to the
Office of Ministry which they had before, but only a solemn commending of them,
by Fasting and Prayer, to the Blessing of the Lord by the Church, in the
Service they were now setting upon; in which they testified their consent, by
the laying on their hands, as say our Annotators.

To the 11th Parallel, viz. That the Priests of England must swear Canonical
Obedience to their Ordinary, as the Priests of Rome. Mr. T. only says, That
it is true at their institution into Benefices they do so, but it is so bounded
that it is not intolerable, it is nothing like that which is required of the
Papists.

Answ. 1. The Parallel herein betwixt the English and the Popish Priests is
acknowledged, which is all we affirm. 2. That the Oath is tolerable, that it is
nothing like the Oath of Canonical Obedience, tendered to the Popish Priests, is
only affirmed by Mr. T. without proof: that was the copy and pattern of this,
as he cannot be ignorant.

The 12th Parallel (touching their leaving their Benefices for advantage-sake,
without consent of the People; The 13th, touching their special License to
preach (without which they must not) from ^he Prelates, though thereunto before
ordained. The 14th, (touching their subjection to be silenced -- by the
Prelates) betwixt the Ministers of England and Rome, he grants to be true, nor
says he any thing by way of reply that deserves the taking notice of. To the
15th, viz. the Popish Priests are not of like and equal power, degree and
authority amongst themselves, but are some of them inferior to others herein,
as Pastors to Archdeacons, Archdeacons to Lord-Bishops, Lord-Bishops to
Archbishops -- so the Priests of England.

Our Animadverter replies, 1. Inequality is judged to be in the Elders of the
Primitive Churches by the inscription of the seven Epistles to the Angels of
the seven Churches of Asia.

Answ. But this rather proves there equality; to each is a several Epistle
directed; whereas had there been one Arch-Bishp, or Superintendent over them,
one Epistle had been sufficient, and had been, no doubt, directed to him.

He adds, 2dly. It has been in some sort in all well-ordered Churches, and is
necessary to settled order.

Answ. These are his dictates, which he is not at leisure to prove. The Church
of Rome (in the Apostles days) of Corinth, Ephesus -- were (as I remember)
well-ordered Churches, yet cannot be manifest any inequality amongst their
Elders. No Superintendent, Lord-Bishop, or Archbishop as I read of.

2dly. What thinks he of the Church of the Waldenses, were they well-ordered
Churches? They were from the beginning without this Superiority of Elders, one
above the other. The like may be said of most, or all the Reformed-Churches.
The Churches of Helvetia reckoning up the degrees of Archbishops, Suffragans,
Metropolitans, Deans, Subdeans -- tell us plainly, they are not sollicitous
about them. That the Apostles Doctrine touching Ministers, is sufficient for
them, cap. Confess. Helvet. poster. c. 18. And afterward, there is one, and the
same equal Power, and Function, in all the Ministers of the Church; and though
in process of time, one was chosen from amongst the rest to preside in Synods,
yet was he not set over others, nor endowed with greater power, than the rest.
cap. conf. Helvet. prior. Arti: 15. the French Churches say, We believe that
all true Pastors wheresoever they are placed, are endowed with equal authority,
under that only head, high, and sole universal Bishop, Jesus Christ: and
therefore it is lawful for no one Church, to claim authority, and dominion over
another. cap: conf. gal: Confess. Art. 30. So say the Belgic Churches. Belly.
conf. Art: 31. So that Mr. T. out of his great love and dutifulness to his
Mother the Church of England, is not sparing to cast dirt in the face of the
Churches planted by the Apostles themselves, and most, or all the Reformed
Churches at this day, who own no such inequality as he pleads for: and
therefore were, are all of them not well-ordered Churches, in comparison at the
least, to her, and the Church of Rome, where the Hierarchy is established.

To the 16th. parallel about holy Vestments he is able to object onthing worth
the considering.

The 17th. is, The Popish Priests are tied to a book of stinted Prayers and a
prescript Order devised by man, for their Worship and Ministration: so are the
Ministers of England, and that to such a one as is taken out of the Popes
Portuis --

To this Mr. T. replies. 1. The Assembly of Westminster prescribed a Directory
for Worship.

Answ. 1. Quid hoc ad Rhombum? I am not in the least concerned to justify all
that was done by that Assembly; and am apt to think they might in that matter
have spared their pains. 2dly. The same Assembly abhorred the
Common Prayer Book Service, as a most detestable, and filthy Idol, preached,
printed against it, procured its Abolition. 3dly. Every one that knows any
thing, knows that upon various accounts, there is no likeness betwixt these
two. None were compelled to the use of this or that form of words, by the
Directory, as in the Book of Common Prayer.

He adds, 2dly. Those prayers, and portions of Scripture, which are holy, and
good, are never the worse because they were in the Popes Portuis, no more than
the acknowledgement of Jesus to be the Son of the most High God, is the worse
because the Devil used it, Mar. 5. 7.

Answ. 1. Of the Scriptures, and that glorious Truth of Christ's Eternal Deity,
as the Son of the most High God, and the Common-Prayer-Book-Service, there is
not the same reason: They were from the inspiration of the Holy Spirit,
originally Divine; this of man, devised upon the prevailing of Apostasy upon
the Churches of Christ, imposed with threatenings, cruelties and slaughters upon
the Children of Christ by his professed Enemy, abused by a confessed Idolatrous
generation of men (if there be any such in the world:) That because the abuse
of the Scriptures, and the Truths contained in them, does not render them the
worse, therefore a devised Service (that it the best is wicked and abominable,
in its imposition intolerable) used by Idolaters is not the worse, I challenge
Mr. T. to make good. 2. Though the Scriptures are not the worse because
portions of them are read in the Romish Idolatrous Service, yet the following
the Romish Synagogue in curtailing the Scriptures, reading one part of a
Chapter at one time, another at another, and manifestly misapplying them,
causing them also to give place to the Apochryphal Writings, is abominable.

He goes on, 3dly. That which is suggested as if the Common Prayer Book now in
use, were little different from the Popes Missal (he tells us) is untrue.

Answ. 1. The Animadverter is a little mistaken: We affirm in S. T. that the
Common-Prayer-Book-Service used in King Edward the 6th's days, and the Popes
Missal were not much different: And for the proof of that we produced the
Testimony of the King and Council: which we thought M. T. would never have
questioned. That the Common Prayer Book now in use, and that then used is not
much different, every body knows.

2dly. It Is true, all that is in the Pope 's Missal is not in the
Common Prayer Book (nor did any one ever assert this) but the most that is in
the Common Prayer Book is stolen out of the Popes Missal. The Epistles and
Gospels, the Prayers (or Collects) the rites and usages therein joined are so:
and this Mr. T. denies not. I had thought to have represented the truth of
this, to the eye of the Reader, by exhibiting our English, and the Popes Latin
Mass at one view to him; which I have by me faithfully collected, and compared
together. But the swelling of this Treatise unexpectedly, and the difficulty of
printing any thing of this nature that is voluminous, through the tyranny of
the Prelates, makes me wholly to lay aside that intendment to a fitter season,
if need be.

The sum of what we have been offering in this matter, (we say in S. T.) is
this:

1. Those Ministers, that in their names, office, admission into their offices,
are not to be found in the Scripture, are not Ministers of Christ, act not by
virtue of an Authority, Office-power, Calling received from him.

2. Those Ministers that in their names, office, admission into their office,
are at a perfect agreement with the Ministers of Antichrist, (such are the
Popish Priests acknowledged to be) are not the Ministers of Christ -- But such,
as have been abundantly demonstrated, are the present Ministers of England.
Therefore --

The Minor Mr. T. says is manifestly false, he has said nothing to prove it
in the main.

Answ. This is soon said: had he proved it manifestly false, be had done
somewhat. Whether any thing considerable has been offered by us, for the proof
of the Minor, others besides Mr. T. and I, will now judge.

Sect. 4.
The present Ministers of Engl. proved Antichristian. They act from a Power,
Office, and Calling received from a Lord-Bishop, whose Office is Antichristian.
The opinion of the Learned touching them. Their Office is not to be found in
the Scripture: Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Timothy 3. 12. Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5,
7. Acts 20. 28. know them not. They were not known in the Church for some
hundreds of years after. The Office of Lord-Bishops wherein it consists. Of
Diotrephes his asserting Supremacy. Our Bishops neither Evangelists, nor
Pastors, nor Teachers, nor Apostles, proved. Mat. 28. 19. explained. Of the
Rise of Episcopacy. The Testimonies of Dr. Hammond, Whitaker, Reynolds,
Eusebius, etc. touching it.

WE further prove in S. T. The present Ministers of England act in the holy
things of God by virtue of an Antichr^stan Power, Office and Calling. Because,
2dly, That they act from a Power, Office, and Calling received from a
Lord-Bishop, whose Office is Antichristian. This the sum.

To which Mr. T. replies, That neither himself, nor any sober Writer judged
them Antichristian.

Answ. 1. Whether he once so judged of them, his taking the Covenant to
extirpate them, wherein they are condemned as Antichristian, will evince.

2. What he or I judge them is not material; that no sober Writer, or
considerate man (that ever he met with) has judged them Antichristian, must be
imputed to the shortness of his memory: He ha^h, I suppose met with Zuinglius,
Keckerman, who say little less. The former, Art. 34. p. 254, 255, tells us,
That for any to claim any Rule, Power, or Superiority over any Church of Christ
(which we know out Bishops do) is Devilish, Proud, and Popish Arrogance. And
Aretius in his Problems producing Christ's prohibition of Superior power to
his Apostles, Mar. 10. 5. Luke 22. 25. says, None but Antichrist dare be so
fancy as to usurp it. -- Marlorat, on Rev. 17. 3. says, That Archbishops --
are in Office under Antichrist. And on Chap. 19. The tails of Antichrist. Bale
on Rev. 17 says, That Canterbury and York are the Beastly Antichrists
Metropolitans. And on Chap. 13. That Archbishop, Diocesan -- are very Names of
Blasphemy. Of these we spoke page 28. S. T. who I dare say, were sober Writers,
and considerate men. Mr. T. his answer to their Testimony, viz. That they writ
thus against the Romish Hierarchy, is ridiculous; they writ against the Offices
of Archbishops as such, which are not a whit the better because they
constitute the English Hierarchy. We mention Cartwright, the seekers of
Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's days, proclaiming them to come out of the
bottomless Pit of Hell, to be Antichristian, Devilish. These also must pass in
the Roll of inconsiderate fellows; yet others (as wise as Mr. T.) think
otherwise of them. For the proof of the Antichristianism of the Office of
Lord-Bishops, I propose a few things briefly in the S. T. as,

1st, That Office that is not to be found in the Scripture of the Institution
of Christ, but is contrary to express Precepts of his, is Antichristian: But
the Office of Lord-Bishops is not to be found in the Scriptures, is contrary to
express Precepts: Therefore --

The Major Mr. T. is nibling at, but he does but think he tells us, if
Universal, it is not true. The Office of the Religious Votaries he talks of, is
Antichristian. If there be any Antichristian Office in the World, that must
needs be so, that is introduced into the Church of Christ, though not of his
Institution, directly contrary to express Precepts. That this Assertion should
necessitate any one to affirm every sin to be Antichristian (though in a large
sense, as Antichristian signifies, that which is against Christ, every sin,
every error is so) is absurd to imagine.

The Minor, I say, consists of two parts. 1. That the Office of Lord Bishops is
not to be found in Scripture of the Institution of Christ. This I manifest by
considering the most remarkable places, where the Officers and Offices that are
of Christ's appointment are enumerated, in which we have a total silence of
them; Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Timothy 3. 12. Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5, 7.
Acts 20. 28. I add also, that they were never dreamt of in the world for some
hundreds of years after Christ: We introduce the Testimony of Clemens, Lombard,
Dr. Hamonds acknowledgment of their Rise.

To which Mr. T. answers, The whole Discourse is impertinent: the thing to be
proved was, that the Office of Lord-Bishops was not to be found in the
Scriptures; and the whole Discourse is about the Superiority of Order above
Presbyters, Primacy, or Supremacy of Degrees among Bishops.

Answ. 1. We have examined the particular places wherein mention is made of the
Officers of Christ's Institution, and find no Lord-Bishops instituted in any of
them, which manifests that they are not; If this be not taken for proof, I know
not what will; If this be not to the purpose, I am in despair of producing any
thing that he will account so.

2dly, The Office of Lord-Bishops, as such, consists in the Primacy,
Superiority, and Supremacy mentioned (as is known.) If Mr. T. grants this not
to be found of the Institution of Christ in the Scripture, he gives away the
Cause.

3dly, They themselves do own and avow a great part of their Office to consist
in the foresaid Primacy, Jurisdiction. -- And if this be not it, I am sure some
of them are seldom or never minding their Office, these things are what is most
attended by them. Of whom we may complain as Bernard of old, Vides omnem
Ecclesiasticum Zelum forvere pr^ sola dignitate tuenda: honori tantum datur,
sanctitati nihil aut parum. Si causa requirente paulo submissius, agere, aut
socialius to habere tentaveris, absit inquiunt, non decet, tempori non
congruit, majestati non convenit; quam geras personam attendito: De placito Dei
ultima mentio est, pro jactura salutis nulla cunctatio: quod sublime est hoc
salutare putamus, and quod gloriam redolet id justum. De Considerat. Lib. 4.

His following Exceptions are not worth the heeding. I mention Diotrephes in S.
T. and say, That some appearances of a Spirit striving to ascend into this
Chair of wickedness was seen in him, and others in the Apostles days.

To this Mr. T. But this was not the usurping the Superiority of Order, of a
Bishop above a Presbyter.

Answ. Nor do I say it was, I expressly affirm the contrary, when I say that
such a Superiority was not in the world, for some hundred of years after
Christ; we only say, that some appearances of that Spirit was seen in him,
which the Apostle affirms, John Epist. 3. Verse. 9. (...), -- He loves the
pre-eminence among them; attempts the Primacy, so Beza. Which if it be not an
appearance of the Spirit mentioned, I know not what is; he endeavored to rule
all himself, carried it proudly, pragmatically, arrogantly over the Church, the
Brethren, John himself, who was an Elder, says Mr. T. He that cannot see
somewhat of our Episcopal Spirit in this, is (I fear) wilfully blind, I am
fure he must wink hard.

He takes notice that in reciting Ephesians. 4. 11. I twice leave out Evangelists,
which he knows not the reason of.

Answ. Nor do I my self, possibly it was an oversight, it may be an omission of
the Amanuensis: However it was, it was not I assure him, any fear I had that
he, or any one could justly plead, that our Prelates were Evangelists.

1. I know that Title is declined by Pleaders for Episcopal Jurisdiction.

2. Our Bishops do not the works of Evangelists. They had no settled residence,
but traveled up and down with, or after the Apostles, to help forward the work
of Christ, that was set on foot in the world by them. We find Titus (who was an
Evangelist) sometimes at Crete, Gal. 2. 3. At Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4. 10. appointed
to meet Paul at Nicopolis, Tit. 3. 12. Sent to Corinth, 2 Cor. 12. 18. At
Macedonia, 2 Cor. 7. 5, 6. Such an itinerant laborious life that our Bishops
are unacquainted with.

3. Evangelists were such extraordinary Officers as ceased with that Age; for
we find no directions given touching their future Election in in the Churches.

Mr. T. tells us, Our Prelates challenge the term of Pastors and Teachers; this,
I had said, was too great a debasement of their Lordships, he tells us, This is
a Satirical Sarcasm, no proof.

Ans. 1. However it is evidently true. Pastors and Teachers we have already
proved are Officers appertaining to one particular Church. It Is certainly a
debasement of their Lordships, who preside (as petty Princes) over hundreds of
Pastors, and Churches (so called) to be reduced to a laborious oversight over
one.

2dly, I had said in S. T. That their Parochial Priests, over whom they
preside, are supposed to be Officers in that degree.

The Argument is this (which Mr. T. may take time to answer) If the Parochial
Priests, over whom the Bishops of England preside, be such Pastors and Teachers
as the Scripture mentions, then the Bishops of England are not, cannot be such
(for they are an Order and Degree above them, to them as their Superiors they
promise and swear fealty:) But tho former (according to the judgment of the
Church of England) is true: Therefore; --

The Story he after tells us of a Presbyters having, in case of infirmity,
Assistants, who notwithstanding may be called a Teacher, is so remote from the
business in hand, that though some would cry out,

Quis temper^t a risu. For my part I heartily pity him.

1st, This is known not to be the reason of the Bishops having Parochial
Priests under them; were they never so strong, it were impossible they should
perform the Office of Pastors to the several Congregations in England.

2dly, The Presbyter is not an Order above his Co-adjutor (as is the case of
the Bishops) he is a Co-Presbyter; one of the same degree with himself. So that
of this, we shall I suppose, hear no mere.

We add in S. T. That they pretend to be (and are so accounted by some) the
Apostles Successors: but if they derive their s^ccession through the Papacy;
it is an evident Argument they are Antichristian, if the Pope be the
Antichristian head over many Countries, as Protestants affirm. In respect of
their Office we prove they are not their Successors.

Because, 1. The Apostles were immediately sent by Christ.

2. Extraordinary Officers sent forth to preach the Gospel throughont the
Nations of the world.

3. We find no Apostles after them.

4. None appointed by them, to succeed them.

5. None are qualified with gifts for the discharge of such an Office; and
Christ sends not forth servants in any employment, but he furnishes them with
gifts suitable thereunto. This the sum.

To which our Animadverter pretends to answer, Sect. 5. Chap. 3. 1. Apostles he
grants they may not be reckoned; yet 2. They may be their Successors.

1st, Dr. Owen (of Schism. Cap. 6. Sect. 55.) grants That persons adhering to
ordination by succession from Popish Bishops, may be right worthy Ministers of
the Gospel, but not upon the account of that their Successional Ordination, but
the eminent gifts God has vouchsafed them, and the Lords people submitting
themselves to them in the administration of Ordinances. And the Author of S. T.
denies not they succeed them as Christians; and if so, they may be heard as
gifted brethren, which was denied by him, Chap. 2.

Answ. 1. How all this proves the Bishops of England to be the Successors of
the Apostles, in respect of their Office, which was what he pretends to attempt
the proof of, I know not.

2. I deny indeed that they may be heard as gifted Brethren, Chap. 2. and give
my reasons of my so doing, which I have vindicated from this Dictators
exceptions. That we are to have communion with all, that we cannot deny to be
Christians, in that wherein they act not as such, but by virtue of an
Office-power (we know) they have not received from Christ; Mr. T. will not in
have attempt the proof of.

He asks, Why may they not succeed them in Office?

Answ. I wonder he should ask such a Question. En Tabulas! The reasons thereof
are given in the place he undertakes the confutation of; They were (it seems)
too weighty for him, and he wisely lets them alone without burthening himself
so far with them as to attempt their removal. The Apostles Office was indeed no
other than that mentioned, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mar. 16. 15. but that was,

1st, An Office of Preaching, not of Lording and Loytering.

2dly, Into it they were immediately invested by Christ.

3dly, They were to preach the Gospel through the Nations of the World, (not to
stretch themselves upon Beds of Ivory, in a Lordly Palace) which was as much
their Office as Preaching the Gospel; upon the account whereof, Paul says, He
was a debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians. -- Romans 1. 14. Christ
its true, promises his presence with them, (...).

But, 1. I am not satisfied that the (...), or the Consummation of this world,
is any more than the winding up or perioding of that Age. I am sure the word
(...), signifies the space of 70 or 100 years, and sometimes not near so many,
as Mark 13. 30. which came to pass within 50 years. And (...), is no more than
the perioding of the Jewish Paedagogie, or Church state. Heb. 9. 26.

2. I hope Christ is with them now, so that there needs not a succession of
persons in the same Office (which we have proved there never was) to whom
Christ may make good his promise.

3. The Lord promised Joshua never to leave him nor forsake him, Josh. 1. 5.
This Promise he will not say does necessarily suppose a succession of Officers
in the place of Joshua, which upon all accounts there was not. The Apostle
applies it to the Saints, Heb 13. 5. And I am of the mind, Christ does as
really fulfill that Promise, Mat. 28 20. made originally to the Apostles, when
he vouchsafes his presence to the Saints, to comfort, quicken, uphold, defend
them, -- according as their exigencies do require, as ever he did to the
Apostles themselves. So little reason is there of asserting the necessity of
Officers, as successors of the Apostles in their Office of Apostleship, to
vindicate the faithfulness of Christ in that Promise of his. The succession we
speak of, which the present Ministers pretend to, is a personal succession
through Papacy, (i. e. that the Apostles ordained Bishops, these ordained
others downwards, to this day; a Catalogue of whom, from time to time some
pretend to.) That when Antichristianism overspread the world, and the Pope, as
the Head thereof, ordained and sent forth Ministers, from whom they received
their Office-power, these should be notwithstanding not Antichristian, is a
fond conceit. He could not communicate that he had not; that he had any true
power (any other than a false Antichristian Office-power) Mr. T. will not have
the conside^ce to aver. So that the whole fardle of words that ensue, are not
at all to the purpose; A succession in doing the same work after them, and
preaching the same Gospel (which yet they do but rarely, if at all) is not the
Succession pleaded for by our Prelates. They care not for Preaching (hinder,
oppose it, (many of them) dreading it as the Engine in the hand of the Spirit,
that would shake their Kingdom, and utterly overturn and demolish it) so they
may have their Lordships, Pleasures, and Palaces. It Is not indeed
Antichristian for me to confess the Apostles Creed, because it is conveyed to
our hands through the Papacy, for however it cannot be so called, because the
Apostles were the Formers of it, which they were not; yet the matter thereof,
being (except in one Article) bottomed upon the Scriptures, I ought to confess
it. But this is remote from what he is pleading for, viz. A personal succession
of Bishops through the Papacy, receiving their Power and Authority from the man
of Sin, -- which (I say still) whilst the Bishops pretend to, they do therein
proclaim their shame, and yield the matter in controversy; though their
Advocate shamefully prevaricates, that he may with a multitude of words cover
their nakedness; omitting the consideration of what was incumbent upon him,
especially to have removed out of the way, viz. The Arguments produced to
evince, That the Apostles, as Apostles, had no successor in that their Office:
Which if it remain good, the present Bishops most assuredly cannot be their
Successor^ as Apostles.

He adds, 5thly. That Bishops as a Superior order, or degree above Presbyters,
were not dreamt of in the world for several hundreds of years after Christ, he
thinks can hardly be made good; but he wisely re^reats with a Protestation,
that he will not enter the lists with respect to that point.

The truth is he knows it has been proved, and that with that strength of
evidence, that he cannot bear up against. That Clemens his not taking notice
of them, as distinct from Presbyters, is balanced by the passages in Ignatius
his Epistles (which I am persuaded he rejects as spurious, and counterfeit, I
am sure it were easy to manifest them to be so, it is already done by others)
is such a pitiful covert, that a man would never fly to but in case of extreme
necessity, when he knows not what to say. Lombards words import, he grants,
that the order of Bishops above Presbyters was not known, till after the
Apostles days; and if so, they are no order of divine institution, in which he
once more perfectly yields the cause; they are not of the institution of Christ
in the Scripture. Though he cannot prove that by the primitive Church, Lombard
means the Churches in the days of the Apostles, his words seem to import
somewhat more. And Bellarmins himself acknowledges, that the name of Elders
was given in common to Bishops and Elders. And Eusebius, lib. 5. c. 24. calls
Victor, Anicetus, Pius, Telesphorus, Xistus (who was almost three hundred years
after Christ) Bishops of Rome, Elders. And the learned Whitaker ingenuously
confesses, That betwixt an Elder and a Bishop, there was of old no difference
-- That such Bishops, as are now, in the Roman Church (in the English Church we
may as truly say) were from the beginning, is most false and can never be
proved. There were then more Bishops, i. e. Pastors of one Church, Act. 20. 17.
contr. 2. q. 5. c. 6. p. 284.

But Mr. T. tells us, It Is enough for his purpose if the office be found in
Scripture, though not their Superiority.

Answ. And is this your pleading for your Clients? Seriously Sir, you would
discourage any person in the world from entertaining you as his Advocate, when
you are exposing your Client thus to ruin by your own pleadings, at every turn.
The question is, whether the office of Lord-Bishops, which as such, consists in
there Superiority, jurisdiction over the Priests and Ministers of England, be
of the institution of Christ? Says Mr. T. their Superiority is not. Very good!
what needed so many words to no purpose; it is well however he will be so
ingenuous as to confess at last that the juridicial office of Lord-Bishop is
not of Christ's institution. The words of Dr. Hammond he grants to be as we
recite them, but thinks we misapply them, But certainly if, as the Dr. says, a
Primary and Metropolitical seat was constituted over Episcopal Seats and
Churches (viz. such as are Diocesan) that their state and frame may be
accommodated to the state and condition of the Government of the Nations, in
the Empire; he that has but half an eye will see, that hence it follows that
the Primacy, and Supremacy of the Bishops over these Churches, was the result
of the designs of men, to accommodate the state and frame of the Church, to the
state and condition of the Government of the Nations. But the truth of this
Assertion depends not upon the Doctors concession; its notoriously known, and
acknowledged by several others; The distribution of Churches ordinarily
followed the destribution of the Commonwealth: so that when some Regions were
subjected to the Civil jurisdiction in any City, the same were ordinarily
subjected also to the Ecclesiastical; and as they were reckoned to be of the
same Province in respect of the Civil, so were they of the same Church or
Diocese, in respect of the Spiritual Government, says Rainoldes Confer. with
Heart. And the Council of Constantinople decreed, That if any new City, by the
Authority of the Emperor, was erected, that the order of Ecclesiastical things
should follow the Civil and Public form. Hence by the same Council,
Constantinople receives the Primacy, because it was New Rome, Can. 5. which
before Old Rome enjoyed for that very reason. But that you may understand, how
the Pope incroached on Bishops by degrees, until of an Equal he became a
Sovereign, first over a few, next over many, at last over all: I must fetch the
matter of Bishops Metropolitans, and Archbishops somewhat higher; and show how
Christian Cities, Provinces, and Diocesses, were allotted to them. First
therefore when Elders were ordained by the Apostles in every Church, Act. 14.
23. through every City, Tit. 1. 5. to feed the flock of Christ, whereof the
Holy Ghost had made them overseers, Act. 20. 28. They, to the intent they might
the better do it by common council and consent, did use to assemble themselves
and meet together. In which meetings, for the more orderly handling, and
concluding of things pertaining to their charge, they chose one amongst them,
to be the President of their Company, and Moderator of their actions -- (And
this is he, whom afterward, in the Primitive Church, the ^athers called Bishop.
i. e. the President of the Presbyters --) who was the Bishop of the chiefest
City, whom they called the Metropolitan. For a Province, as they termed it,
was the same with them, that a Shire is with us: And the Shire-town, as you
would say of the Province, was called Metropolis. i. e. the Mother-City: In
which as the Judges and Justices with us do hear at certain times the causes of
the whole Shire: So the Ruler of the Province with them did minister Justice,
and made his abode there ordinarily. Whereupon, by reason that men for their
business, made great concourse thither, the Church was wont to furnish it (of
Godly Polity) with the worthiest Bishop, e^dued with gifts above his Brethren.
And they reposed in him such assiance, that they did not only commit the
Presidentship of their Assemblies to him, Council. Antioch. ^an. 20. Chalced.
can. 19. But agreed also, that none throughout all the Province, should be made
Bishop without his consent; nor any weightier matter be done by them, without
him. Council. Nic. can. 4 and 6. Council. Antioc. can 9. Now the Roman Empire was
governed in such sort, that the Circuits of the Lord-Presidents had many
Provinces within them, and were called Diocesses. Through occasion whereof the
Bishops of those Cities, in which these Lievtenants of the Emperor were
resident (The state Ecclesiastical following the Civil. Wolfgang. Luzu.
Comment. Reip. Romans l. 2. c. 2.) did grow in power too. Neither were they only
named Archbishops, and Patriarks of the Diocese, i. ^. the chiefest Bishops,
and Fathers of that Circuit, which the Lieutenant ruled, but also obtained that
the Metropolitans of the Provinces in their Diocese, should be likewise subject
and obedient to them, as Bishops were to Metropolitans. So the Archbishop and
Patriarch of Antioch had Prerogatives given him through the Diocese of the
East, wherein were seven Provinces. Council. Constable. 1. can. 2. Council. Antio. in
exord. So nothing could be done in the Diocese of Egypt, which under the Bishop
had ten Metropolitans, without the consent of the Archbishop and Patriarch of
Alexandria. Conc. Chalc. Act. 4. so it was granted to the Archbishop and
Patriarch of Constantinople, that the Metropolitans of the Diocesses of Pontus,
Asia and Thracia (within which were twenty eight Provinces) should be ordained
by him. Finally so was it decreed, that if a Bishop had any matter of
Controversies with the Metropolitan of his own Province, the Patriark of the
Diocese should be Judge thereof, Council. Chalced. can. 9. and 17. as also if
any man did receive injury of his own Bishop, or Metropolitan. Thus were the
Roman Popes (as they are called now) first Bishops over Elder^ within their own
City, next Metropolitans over Bishops within their own Province; Then
Archbishops and Patriarks over Metropolitans within their own Diocese: And
this is the Princely Diocese which I meant, when I said that the Pope in the
time of Pelagius was become Archbishop of the Princely Diocese; but he was yet
but an Archbishop: He was not universal Pope and Patriarch of the whole World.
For although the Patriark of Constantinople, being puffed up, because in his
City, the Emperor himself was resident, he would be called the Patriark of the
whole world, as the Emperor was called the Lord of the world, Greg. Regist. l.
4. Epist. 39. yet the Roman Patriarks, Pelagius and Gregory did withstand his
Pride. Rainolds Confer. with Heart, c. 8. Beza also These. Geneves. tells us,
that the Fathers in the distribution of Churches (under Bishops, Archbishops,
etc.) followed the type or pattern of the Roman Emperor. And the learned
Brightman in Rev. 13. 4. tells us, that they are the worshipers of the Dragon
in the Beast, who wonder at the P^imacy for the Political Majesty of the
Dragon, granted by the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 16. Indeed in Clements
Constitutions we find, if possible, a more filthy source from whence their
original is asserted: In the place where they were before first-Flamines, Pet^r
commanded Patriarks to be placed; and in Cities where before were
Arch-Flamines, Archbishops, the rest were only Bishops -- That we had h^re in
England twenty eight Head-Priests, which they called Flamine^, and three
Arch-Priests among them, which were called Arch-Flamines, which had the
oversight of their manners, and were as Judges over the rest, is known: hence
the pattern of our Archbishops and Bishops.

Sect. 5.
The office of Lord-Bishops contrary to express precepts of Christ. Mat. 20.
25. Mark 10. 42. Luke 22. 25. 1 Pet. 5. 3. considered. Of the titles of Dr. of
Divinity etc. The office of Lord-Bishops derived from, and only to be found in
the Papacy. The Popes of Rome the head of Antichrist. No Lord-Bishop till after
Constantine. Of the first Nicene Council: whether there were any Lord-Bishops
before: what difference betwixt Lord-Bishops then, and now. Of the retention of
the same office in the Greek, Eastern, Russian Churches. The difference betwixt
the Superintendency of the Lutheran Churches, and our Bishops. An Objection
answered. The Bishops of England act not in the matter of Ordination as
Presbyters.

THat the office of Lord-Bishops is contrary to express precepts of Christ in
the Scripture, is the second part of our Minor Proposition, which in S. T. we
prove from Mat. 20. 25. Mark 10. 42. Luke 22 25. 1 Pet. 5. 3.

To which Mr. T. answers, 1. That we shoot wide of the mark.

Answ. This we have already replied to. His instance of the Titles of Doctor of
Divinity in the Schools, is not at all to the purpose: They pretend not to any
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over Elders and Churches, by virtue of their being
invested into such titles, as our L-Bishops do.

2dly. He considers the particular Scriptures instanced in, to which what to
reply he seems to be much at a loss. 1. He would have the words of the
Evangelists not to be a precept showing their duty, but a prediction
manifesting the event of what should be.

Answ. 1. This is expressly contrary to the letter of the Text.

2. The Lordship, Supremacy, Superiority (call it what you please) is a
Lordship -- (...), amongst themselves, over one another, that is interdicted
and forbidden by Christ; that it was lawful for them to exercise such a
Supremacy, this Animadverter will not say* now this must be supposed, if the
words be not a precept, but a prediction.

3dly. He expressly tells us in his Romanism discussed, Art. 7. Sect. 8. p. 174.
l. 14. That Superiority is (in these words) plainly forbidden. 2ly. He is
inclined to think, that if it be a precept, it is a precept to the Apostles
only, not to others.

Answ. 1. Then not to the Pope; then Mr. T. palpably abuses this Scripture in
his Roman. discussed, Art. 7. Sect. 8. p. 173. where from hence he argues and
enveighs against the Pope's Supremacy. But 2ly, as good he may say that the
great Doctrines of Self-denial -- frequently pressed by Christ upon the
Apostles, is a precept only to them. 3ly. We find the Apostle charging the same
thing upon the Elders, 1 Pet. 5. 3. who knew the mind of his Lord in this
matter it is to be thought as well as Mr. T.

He tells us, 3dly, If it be a precept to others besides the Apostles, whether
to all Christians, or only to Ministers of the Gospel? and whether it forbid
simply Dominion at all, or tyranical Dominion -- is doubtful.

Answ. And yet the first he positively affirms within ten or eleven lines
afterward: and here, and in his Roman. discussed asserts, that it is not
tyrannical Dominion, but the Dominion of one Apostle over another that is
interdicted. So that the same thing is doubtful, and not doubtful with Mr. T.
in the writing a few lines. And this he proves by no fewer than ten reasons in
his Romans discussed.

2dly. Here he tells us, that it is an affectation of the Rule which a person may
have, and lawfully exercise, that is forbidden there, that the Dominion or Rule
it self is interdicted: which he would do well to reconcile, and answer his
Arguments he there produces for its confirmation. The sum whereof is, Christ
would have none amongst them superior, but all equal; he forbids not only
tyrannical Dominion, but also any Dominion at all over one another: which is
(says he) apparent, 1. From the occasion of the words: Christ forbids what
they sought for, -- but they sought for chief Dignity, Seniority and priority
of Order (as do the Bishops of England.) 2dly* From the Subjects whose Dominion
is forbidden, viz. Kings, that had lawful Authority, and therefore such Rule,
is forbidden as the best Rulers, used amongst the Nations. 3dly. The word
(...), although sometimes meant of mere lordly, forcible Rule, against the will
and good of the person ruled; yet here it cannot be so meant, since (...) to use
Dominion at all, and to have power at all over one another, is forbidden Luke
22. 25. 4thly. (...), and the simple (...), which is used still of Rule without
abuse, is forbidden. 5thly. It is forbidden to be called (...), i. e. to affect
that title which implies one to be under another, and to be beholden one to
another, as persons that could gratify one another -- which does imply
superiority in some sort. 6thly. The additional speech of Christ commanding in
the stead of Dominion, Mat. 20. 26, 27. rather Ministry and Service, shows he
would have none among them superior, but all equal. 7ly. Christ's propounding
himself as their example, only in service. 8^y. He requires such a mutual
debasement -- as takes away the taking to themselves priority of order, or
place -- or rule over one another, Mat. 20. 26, 27. Mark 10. 43, 44. Luke 22.
26. 9ly. This is confirmed by other places upon a like occasion, Mat. 18. 1, 2,
3, 4. Mark 9. 33. -- Luke 9. 46. In which Christ resolves them that they should
be as a little child, that assumes not Empire, but is humble, and accounts
others as equal to him. 10ly. From Luke 22. 28. -- that Christ having forbidden
superiority in any of them, among themselves, promises them a Kingdom,
afterward, in recompense of their abiding with him in his temptations.

All which manifest, 1. a Superiority interdicted. 2. That the Superiority
interdicted is not interdicted to all Christians (as he would in his Theodulia
bear us in hand) for then Christians should be forbidden to exercise Civil
Dominion and Power, as Mr. T. his ten Arguments manifest. But, 3. a Superiority
of order over one another, as the Bishops of England exercise over their
fellow-Ministers. That the Apostles exercised any such Superiority over the
Church of God, or Ministers of a lower order, as the Bishops of England
exe^cise over them, this Animadverter will never prove; And if he were able so
to do, this would not justify the Bishops in their exercise of such
Superiority, who are invested with no Apostolical Power that I know of. It Is
true, a rule over the Faith of Saints is disclaimed by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.
24. but that this is not the whole of what is interdicted in the places
before-cited, he has himself proved by ten Arguments, but now repeated by us.

As for 1 Pet. 5. 3. he tells us what the Assembly in their Annotations say on
the place, viz. that is, not imperiously commanding your own inventions, in the
stead of the Doctrine of the Gospel; not carrying hemselves insolently and
magisteriously toward Gods People, 3 John 9.

Answ. 1. All this is known to be practiced by the present Bishops. They
command imperiously their own inventions, to which the preaching of the Gospel
must give place, when there is not time for both, as in the case of
Liturgy-worship is known to be true: How insolently and magisterially they
carry it toward the people of the Lord, the whole Nation is witness. 2. The
Elders being interdicted, (...), to exercise Lordly Rule over the Heritage of
God, is certainly an interdiction of the introduction of any such Officer into
the Church of God, as against the will of the Lord's People, should by virtue
of an Office-power, exercise a Lordly jurisdiction over them and their
Ministers, (as a superior order of Priesthood) and certainly more forbidden
than the office of an Elder. Jurisdiction is not an abuse of our Prelates
Office, as is known, though they too often abuse it, by exercising it
exorbitantly, even contrary to their own Canons, but a great, a chief part of
it, wherein they do (...) and (...), exercise dominion over the People of God,
and that against their will by fore and violence, to their utter undoing, and
that in execution of that office they have received, and exercise according to
their Canon Laws, in their Courts Ecclesiastical.

We further prove in S. T. That the office of Lord-Bishops is Antichristian,
because derived from, and only to be found in the Papacy: none of the Reformed
Churches have retained it; the Woman in her flight into the Wilderness carried
it not along with her: it is rejected by the true Spouse and Witnesses of
Christ, in all ages. We instance in several, as Hierom, the Churches of
Helvetia, etc.

To this Mr. T. replies, 1. Though the latter Popes, viz. from the time of
Boniface the third (about the year 606.) be the head of Antichrist, yet it does
not follow, that the office that is derived from, and is only to be found in
the Papacy, is surely Antichristian; there having been bad Officers perhaps
derived from good Popes, and continued only in the Church of Rome.

Answ. 1. That the Popes of Rome were not the head of Antichrist, till the time
of Boniface the third, this Animadverter will never prove.

2dly. Should it be granted him, what good Popes he will find from the time of
Sylvester about the year 320 I know not, nor what Officers were derived from
them. Lord-Bishops there were none till afterward. When Constantine coming to
the Throne, the Man of Sin began by little and little, according to the
prophecy of Paul touching him, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. to show himself in the following
Popes. The (...), or the Letter, viz. the Roman Pagan Emperors, being removed
out of the way (about which time many report a Voice was heard, Hodie Venenum,
etc. This day Poison is poured forth into the Church of Christ) And from this
time, the noble and renowned Witnesses of Christ, the Waldenses state the
Defection of the Church; Catal. Test. 1509. From which time at least, whatever
Offices or Rites were introduced, being introduced by the Antichrist, that was
now gradually revealing himself, are justly to be accounted Antichristian.

3dly. Would Mr. T. had told us what Officers they are that are only continued
in the Church of Rome that are of divine appointment, that we might have
considered the truth of his suggestion. Lord-Bishops we prove are not such.

He further tells us, 2dly, That it is not true, that the office of
Lord-Bishops is derived from, and is only to be found in the Papacy. 1. It is
manifest in the first Nicene Council, can. 6. that then and before were
Patriarchs, Metropolitan Bishops, and Lord-Bishops with their Office.

Answ. 1. That they were before is not so easily proved: Hither, as to their
source and spring, are they usually referred. The learned Hooper tells us; A
Bishop ought to be a Bishop only of one City: it is to be lamented that the
Episcopal Office is so greatly degenerated: I^ was not so from the beginning,
when Paul commanded Titus to constitute Bishops through every City. And
certainly if the ancient love toward the people did flourish (in us) we should
confess that there is more to be done in one City, than can easily be performed
by the best. It Is sufficiently known that the Primitive-Church had no such
Bishops (as were over more Cities or Congregations than one) before the time of
Sylvester the first; In whose time was the first Nicene Council.

2dly. That because the first Nicene Council acknowledged Metropolitan and
Lord-Bishops, therefore they are not derived from the Papacy, is not so easily
demonstrated. This Council was in o^ about the year 315. Long before the
Spirit, by which the body Antichristian is animated, visibly manifested it
self, not once, nor twice, a^ is known. What other spirit showed it self in
Victor, who excommunicated the Eastern Bishops, for not keeping Easter with him
at the same time: which brawl continued till the first Council of Nice; which
sides with Victor (an Argument that they were acted by the same spirit).

3dly. What assurance will our Animadverter give us, that this Canon (as well
as some others, which confessedly are) is not foisted into the Acts of that
Council by persons of after-ages? He is not ignorant that Protestants plead
this against the Papists, who for the establishment of the Tyranny of the Roman
Primacy, produce a fictitious Canon of the Nicene Council.

4thly. It Is incumbent upon him to prove that such Metropolitan Bishops and
Lord-Bishops as are now in England, were in and before the first Nicene
Council; which he knows to be false and untrue.

1. The English Episcopacy is an order above the order of Presbyters; then
Episcopacy and Presbytery was accounted one and the same order.

2. Ruledom and Jurisdiction is the peculiar flower of the Garland of our
English Episcopacy; of that it was not so. As the Pres^yters were to do nothing
without the Bishop, so neither was the Bishop to do any thing without the
Presbyters.

He adds, 2. That in the Greek, Eastern, Russian Churches, the same Office is
continued.

Answ. 1. Nor do we affirm the contrary: that we should do so, is not
necessary. The Greek-Churches were at the first involved in the same Apostasy
with the Roman, at least with respect to the matter in debate betwixt us. 2. We
only say, that it is only found in the Papacy; with respect to the
Reformed-Churches, none of them have continued it.

He therefore adds, 3. That it is also pleaded, that the Lutheran Churches
Reformed, that have separated from the Papacy in Germany, Denmark, Swethland,
have retained the same Office under the name of Superintendents.

Answ. It Is indeed thus pleaded by Downham, etc. who it is like took up the
story of Hadrianus Saravia, a known Patron of the Popish Hierarchy, who asserts
it in a way of reproach to the Lutheran Reformation; whether it be truly
pleaded, or otherwise, Mr. T. tells us not; though he cannot be ignorant of the
contrary. The Superintendency of the Lutheran Churches is exceeding different
from the Office of our Bishops. 1. Their Superintendent is only as a President
or Chairman, for the preservation of order in an Assembly. 2. He is only so
during the Session, out of it he exercises no authority at all (more than the
rest of his Co-Presbyters) as do the Bishops of England. 3. He is subject to
the Presbytery; our Bishops Lords over them. 4. He differs not in order and
degree from the rest of the Ministe^^; as do the Bishops of England. 5. He is
but a Pastor of one particular Church; our Bishops are of scores, hundreds.

He proceeds after the same rate of confidence and verity, 4. That it is false,
that the true Spouse and Witnesses of Christ have in all ages utterly rejected
the Office of Lord-Bishops, and that it has its entertainment only by the
false Antichristian Church.

Answ. 1. It Is much he does not produce one instance of this Assertion, and yet
so confidently avers it; which could he have done, he would as well have proved
it false, as said it was so.

2dly. For the confirmation of the truth of what he says is false, we have
produced several Testimonies; his Answer thereunto, such as it is, we have
already taken notice of it, and manifested its lightness and vanity.

He adds, This is manifest by the many Epistles written to the English Prelates
by their reception at the Synod of Dort. --

Answ. 1. What the Epistles are he intends, what the Reception mentioned, is
not of such import, as to spend our time in enquiring thereabout.

2dly. That they have rejected the Office of Lord-Bishops is known; they have
published their dislike and detestation of it, in their Confession to the
world. What respect any of them give them (either in point of civility, or as
Messengers, or persons sent from the King, or perhaps not being truly informed
what the Jurisdiction and Office is they exercise) in their private Letters, or
otherwise, is not considerable in the matter in hand. The Office of
Lord-Bishops, or a superiority of Order above Presbyters or Elders, they
absolutely condemn, as we have proved.

We add in S. T. One Stone of Offense must be removed out of our way -- It is
said, that though Lord-Bishops are Antichristian, yet it does not follow that
the Office and Ministry derived from them is so: for they are also Presbyters,
and ordained as Presbyters.

To which Mr. T. subjoyns, 1. There is nothing replied to the allegation that
Bishops ordain with Presbyters.

Answ. 1. Nor is there any such allegation in the objection proposed. 2ly. If
there were, its not so considerable as to deserve to be taken notice of: They
are only assistants to the Bishop: it is he (not they) that sets them apart,
admits them into Sacred Orders, as they heathenishly call them.

He adds, 2dly. Nor to this, that some of the Bishops have acknowledged
Episcopacy, not to be an order above Presbytery.

Answ. 1. Who they are that have thus acknowledged I know not.

2. Mr. T. says not that any of the present Bishops do so. 3. If they did in
words, their practice contradicts it, exercising jurisdictions over the
Presbyters, or Elders.

3dly. Nor to this (says he) that though the Bishop imposing hands do act as
of superior order, yet being a Presbyter his act is valid; as he that convey's
a thing, as conceiving himself as Heir and Executor, if he be not Heir, yet if
he be only Executor and by that has power to convey i^, the Grant is good.

Answ. 1. But this is Mr. T. his mistake; I say expressly, though it should be
granted that they act as Presbyters, yet their act is not valid, because they
act not as Presbyters of the institution of Christ^ of which he afterward
takes notice.

Though 2dly, Mr. T. will never be able to prove, that the Bishop imposing
hands, as a Bishop, and acting under that capacity, yet being a Presbyter, his
act is valid. For. 1. when a Bishop, he is no longer a Presbyter, but one of an
higher order and degree; as a Presbyter, is no longer a Deacon, when once made
a Presbyter. 2. As a Bishop he has no authority from Christ at all, to act in
the business of imposition of hands; therefore acting as such, his act is
invalid, which his once being a Presbyter cannot make otherwise, because he is
not now so, nor acts as such but avowedly the contrary. 3. His instance of a
persons conveying a thing, as conceiving himself as Heir and Executor -- is not
pertinent. For. 1. He has originally and legally the same right if he be one,
as if both, and pretends to a right to both in his conveyance. 2ly. Should he
refuse his Executorship, and make a Conveyance as Heir, and he prove not to be
so, his Conveyance is naught. Nay, 3. if he make a Conveyance of what neither
as Heir or Executor, he has any right to, the Grant is undoubtedly not good.
This is evidently the case of our Lord-Bishops.

To the objection as proposed by us, we answer. 1. That they act in the
capacity of Presbyters in the matter of ordination, is false: 2. Contrary to
their avowed principles.

Mr. T. replies, This is uncertain --

Answ. And he may as well say it is uncertain that the Sun shines at noonday:
The least smatterer in the usages of the Church of England, and principles of
these Doctors thereof, see, and know it to be certainly true. 2. Contrary to
the known Law of the Land, by which they receive power to act therein, in which
they are known, and owned only in the capacity of Lord-Bishop.

Mr. T. replies, This is not true, for the ordination of Suffragan-Bishops who
are not Lords, is valid by Law.

Answ. A weak proof of such a crimination. A Suffragan-Bishop is a
Titular-Bishop when he acts: in the matter of ordination, he represents the
Lord-Bishop whose Suffragan he is. And the Law accounts his act, not his own,
but the act of the Lord-Bishop, whose Representee he is. And this Mr. T. could
not be ignorant of.

We say, 3dly. It Is contrary to their late practice, whereby they have
sufficiently declared, the nullity of a Ministerial Office, received from the
hands of a Presbytery, in thrusting out of doors several hundreds of Ministers,
so ordained. Strange! that it should be pleaded they act as Presbyters in the
matter of ordination, and yet they themselves judge a Presbyterian ordination
invalid.

What says Mr. T.? Why, 1. They do not nullify ordination by a Presbytery in
foreign Churches.

Answ. But this is not at all to the purpose; have they not done so at home? To
attempt to do so in foreign Churches, where they have no power; were but to
expose themselves to greater contempt, as busy Bishops indeed.

2dly. In England they do it, because the Laws (says he) require Episcopal
Ordination --

Answ. But Sir, the question is not upon what accounts they have so done in
England, but whether their so doing, be not a manifestation, that they act not
in the capacity of Presbyters in the business of Ordination; for if they did,
they fore-condemn their own act, in condemning Presbyterian ordination; their
ordination being upon this supposition only such.

2dly. He grants The Law requires Episcopal ordination; if so, it does sure tie
them that act in it, to think themselves Bishops, to act with such an
intention, and under that notion, which not many lines before he denied.

We further answer in S. T. What if this should be granted; it would avail
nothing, except it can be proved, that they are, and act as Presbyters of the
institution of Christ, which (these being only in a particular instituted
Church of Christ) will never be to the worlds end,

To which our Animadverter replies, If this be held, then all the Presbyters of
the French, Dutch, and other Churches under Presbyterial government, are not of
Christ's institution, and so a separation avowed from all Protestant Churches,
except their own.

Answ. 1. But this is no proof, that the Bishops of England act in the matter
of ordination, as Presbyters of the institution of Christ: which is the one and
only thing he should have heeded in his reply, but of that he is wholly silent.

2dly. No doubt he thinks he has sufficiently bespattered u^; but if he
account it a discredit to speak palpable untruths, it will be his own.

1. It Is false that we avow separation from all Churches, but those of our own
way: that our Assertion tends to such an end, I challenge our Dictator to make
good. 2. The Presbyterians own particular Churches of the institution of
Christ, have their Presbyters, fixed officers, in and amongst them, and that
both in England and beyond the Seas. What satisfaction he will think meet to
make us, for so foul an aspersion, whereby he labors to render us odious to
the Godly, at home and abroad, we shall know by the next. In the mean while we
are ready to attend his motions in the next Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1.
The fourth Argument in S. T. against hearing the present Ministers,
vindicated. A twofold denial of the Offices of Christ. Whether the Papists are
guilty of a verbal, professional denial of Christ's Offices. It Is not lawful to
hear such as are guilty of a verbal or real denial of Christ's Offices. The
present Ministers oppose the Kingly and Prophetical Offices of Christ. They do
so who hearken not to that revelation Christ has made touching the Orders of
his House. Deuteronomy. 18. 18, 19. Act. 3. 23. Mat. 3. 17. Isa. 9. 6. explained. The
vanity of Mr. T. his dictates to the contrary, evinced.

IN Chap. 4th of S. T. we advance a fourth Argument against hearing the present
Ministers, which is this.

Those that deny any of the Offices of Christ, are not to be heard but
separated from: But the present Ministers deny some of the Offices of Christ:
Therefore --

Before we come to clear the several parts of the Argument, we premise, 1. That
there is a twofold denial of the Offices of Christ. 1. Verbal, and
professional, (of this the Jews, not the Papists, no^ the Ministers of England
are guilty.) 2. Real, and actual, when persons do that which enwraps in the
bowels of it a denial of the Offices of Christ. Thus the Papists, the present
Ministers are guilty.

To this Mr. T. replies, I allow the distinction; but it is false, that the
Papists are not guilty of the verbal professional denying of the Offices of
Christ: for though they acknowledge Christ to be King -- yet their doctrine
overthrows all the Offices of Christ; as he that ascribes Kingly power to a
Subject, does make another King, and so does unking him -- Thus the Papists do
while they will have unwritten traditions to be received --

Answ. 1st. To dispute about words with any man living, I shall not: by a
verbal professional denying of Christ's Offices, I mean, express, and downright
asserting, that he is not King -- of his Church; this I say the Papists do not,
they own, preach up all the Offices of Christ, i. e. they acknowledge him in
their discourses of his Offices to be King -- to his Church, which Mr. T. knows
they do. Their ascription of Kingly power to any but Christ, in assertions
mentioned, I make a real and actual denial and oppugning the Offices of Christ.
It being a doing what enwraps in the bowels of it such a denial of them.

2dly. This Animadverter has already asserted, what will in part at least make
good our charge in this matter against the Ministers of England. The ascription
of Kingly power to any but Christ, is a denying his Kingly authority; the
Papists [Prelats and Ministers of England] do so, in asserting, that traditions
unwritten are to be received -- That the Pope [a Convocation, or Assembly of
Prelates and Priests] can make Laws to bind the Conscience by virtue of his
[their] authority, can dispense with Gods Laws, incestuous Marriages (by
granting a License for a good Spill) prohibited by God -- therefore the Papists
[the Ministers of England] do deny the Kingly authority of Christ.

We premise in S. T. 2dly. That a verbal professional acknowledgement of
Christ, is nothing when contradicted in practice: To which we subjoyn, that
such as really oppose, or deny any of the Offices of Christ, are not to be
heard, but separated from: which we prove, 1. Because such a^ do so, are the
Antichrists, 1 John 2. 22. and 4. 2, 3. 2 John 7. 2dly. To hear such, is to
strengthen and encourage them in that their denial of, and opposition to the
Offices of Christ, and thereby to become partakers with them in their sin. Of
which we treat more at large in S. T. chap. 4. p. 29, 30.

Whereunto Mr. T. replies; 1. That a verbal professional acknowledgement of the
Offices of Christ, when contradicted by practice, is nothing to the salvation
of the person so professing; his plea shall not be admitted before God, or man's
Ecclesiastcal censure (i. e. he may be suspended, excommunicated for his so
acting notwithstanding his profession,) yet all this does not prove -- that his
doctrine may not be heard --

Answ. 1. It seems then its lawful to hear persons, not wa^king exorbitantly,
but under Church censure for so doing, which pours forth most fearful contempt
upon that institution of Christ, Excommunication. To what purpose is it that
any one is cast out of the Church, if it may be lawful to hear them
notwithstanding -- i. e. own them as the mouth of God to me, and my mouth to
God, whom the Church thought not meet to be continued as a member in the body.

2dly. In vain (then) are all the exhortations of the Apostle to the Saints
with relation to their withdrawment from such as these, 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11.
Ephesians. 5. 11.

3dly. To no purpose did Paul write to the Corinthians to receive the
incestuous person, had they but known their liberty, they might have done so
before: for if his doctrine did not oppugn the Offices of Christ, it might have
been heard, to their profit (according to our Dictators dictates) they might
not only have received him, but as a Preache^ amongst them.

Nay, 4thly, In vain is the charge of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 5. for if they
profess to own the Offices of Christ (i. e. Have a Form of Godliness) though
they contradict it in their walk (i. e. deny the Power thereof) they may be
joined with. Poor Paul understood not so much of our Christian Liberty, as
rich, confident Mr T. who is driven to such pitiful shifts, and gross
absurdities in the management of this Controversy, that I really pity him.

He adds, It Is not true, that Christ says, the false Prophets are to be
descried by their vicious Life only. Nor do I say (in this place) he does; I
say, he says, they are to be known by their fruits. Preaching, and practicing
what invelops in it a denial of the Offices of Christ, though attended with a
visible holy Conversation I am contented that he make the fruits mentioned to
be. His discourse of Judas, and false Prophets being so called, not in respect
of their outward Calling, or vicious Lives, but of their Doctrine, that upon
the least occasion he runs frequently forth into, we have already answered. Nor
say we, that teaching something (through ignorance, and inadvertency) as is
appointed by Christ, which is not, or denying something to be instituted which
was so appointed, is what does denominate a man a false Prophet.

The Animadverter forgets what it is he attempts to answer; we are not talking
of false Prophets, but of such as deny the Offices of Christ, nor do we say
that this (as thus proposed by him) does render a man guilty of real denying
the Offices of Christ (or is a sufficient ground of separation from him, much
less then an opposing in heart any of the Offices of Christ is so, as he
suggests afterward we do) but that those that do really oppose any of the
Offices of Christ, viz. by setting themselves against the most, if not the
whole of Gospel-Institutions, by owning a power in others, to constitute Laws
for the Family and Household of Christ, even contrary to his Institutions, and
acknowledging another Head beside him, of his Church, is such a real denial of
the Offices of Christ, that upon whomsoever it is found, it is the duty of
Saints to separate from them, and that for the reasons before mentioned; which
Mr. T. may disprove when he can.

The rest of this Section being spent in railing, and sorry impertinencies: I
come to his second Section, were he sets himself to consider our Minor
Proposition, viz. That the present Ministers of England do oppose and deny the
Prophetical and Kingly Offices of Christ; Which we prove thus.

Those that hearken not to the Revelation Christ has made, and as Supreme Lord
and Lawgiver has enjoined to be observed, touching the Orders and Ordinances
of his House, deny the Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ, Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
Acts 3. 22. Isa. 9. 6. But the present Ministers of England hearken, and
conform not to, the Revelation Christ has made, touching the Orders and
Ordinances of his House; Therefore. --

To which Mr. T. replies by denying the Major, (or first Proposition) But he
wisely takes no notice of the Scriptures produced for the Proof hereof, as
Deuteronomy. 18. 18, 19. where the Lord promises to raise up Christ from among his
Brethren, in whose mouth he would put his words, by whom he would speak to
them, to whom whosoever will not hearken, God says, he will require it of him;
(i. e. take vengeance on him, as the Greek renders it, or as the Apostle, Acts
3. 23. (...), He shall be exterminated from amongst the People; rejected by the
Saints, as a Despiser, oppugner of the Offices of Christ, into which he was so
solemnly invested by the Father, Mat. 3. 17.) In Isa. 9. 6. It is Prophesied of
Christ, That the Government should be laid upon his shoulders, he should be
King in Sion, give forth (as such) Laws and Constitutions, for the Government
of his People; which accordingly he does, and solemnly promulgates them by his
Heralds, and Messengers, fixes them as upon public Pillars, in the Scriptures
of Truth, to be seen and read of all men. That after all this; persons should
refuse, slight, neglect to hearken to these Institutions of Christ, violate,
oppose preach against them, and yet not be guilty of denying his Prophetical
and Kingly Offices, is the firstborn of absurdities. Go, and offer it to thy
Prince; deal so by the constitutions of thy Rulers, and see what they will say
to thee, what interpretation will be by them put upon thy so dealing with them.
But he gives the reasons of his denial; and tells us,

1. Denial is more than not hearkening to.

Answ. There is a denial its true, that is more than a not hearkening to, but
there is a not hearkening to, that is a real denial, rejection of the Authority
of him to whom we refuse to hearken. The Scripture expressly affirms it, Psalm.
81. 11. But my People would not hearken to my voice: Israel would none of me.
Ezekiel. 20. 8. but they rebelled against me, (i. e. opposed, rejected my
Authority) and would not hearken unto me. Nor can I tell how those Luke 19. 14.
are said to send a message after Christ saying, We will not have this man
[(...)] to King it over us (which is sure a denial of his Kingly Authority) but
by refusing to hearken, and conform to his Royal Appointments.

He adds, 2dly, The not harkening may be out of ignorance, incapacity to
understand, fearfulness, etc. without any enmity of heart, habitual
stubbornness, -- which are requisite to a plain denial of the Offices of Christ.

Answ. 1. It may be so indeed, but whether this be the reason of the Ministers
of England, not hearkening thereunto, he acquaints us not. Certainly they are
not fit to be Ministers of the Gospel, or to be accounted Overseers of the
flock of Christ, who are ignorant of his Institutions, and incapable of
understanding them.

2. Though it be out of fearfulness, prevalency of temptation, that they
hearken not, yet may their not so doing be a denial of the Offices of Christ.
It was out of fearfulness, the prevalency of temptation, that Peter denied his
Lord, without any enmity of heart, yet his denial was a plain denial. So false
is that which Mr. T. says, That enmity of heart, habitual stubbornness, or
wilful gainsaying are requisite hereunto.

He tells us, 3dly, There may be sundry Orders of his House controverted, if
acknowledged such, not thought to be of that moment, as to break the Peace of
the Church, by contending for them, or not judged perpetual or not binding the
Ministers to observe till the Magistrates reform. --

Answ. 1. But upon such Principles as these, I know not but Christ may be
divested of the Scepter of his Kingdom, all his bonds and cords broken asunder,
and cast away; and yet no one would be nocent. It is evident that this is the
lot of many, most of them already.

2dly, There are but few of the Orders of Christ's House, but are controverted
amongst the Children of men; will this excuse any from subjection to them? May
not the Papists plead thus for their rejection of the Institutions of Christ?
Must Christ lose his obedience, till the parties Litigant are at an agreement?
Nugae, and tricae sic^lae! what more frivolous could have been invented!

3dly, This Animadverter will one day find, that there are no Institutions of
Christ, but what are of moment, how derogatory to the glory of Christ, the
Oeconomie and Administration of the Gospel, such assertions as these are,
others will judge.

4thly, That any of the Institutions of Christ remarked by us were temporary, I
challenge Mr. T. to make good, i. e. such as were not to endure till his
coming. Such Principles as these would soon evert all Gospel-Institutions, and
make way for the Introduction of unwritten Vanities, and humane Traditions,
which the soul of our Lord abhors.

5thly, I desire to be informed, what Appointments of Christ those are, that
are not binding to the Ministers, till the Magistrate reform; I know not any
such, and conceive the assertion to be foreign to Truth.

1. The Primitive Believers were obliged to conform to them all, though the
Magistrate blasphemed, and opposed.

2. It Is wondrous derogatory to Christ's honor to ask the Magistrate leave
whether his Institutions shall be binding or not (i. e. ^f he will reform, they
shall, otherwise not) such trash as this, will nev^r pass for sound reason:
absurd dictates, without proof, though never ^o importunely imposed, Mr. T.
must not imagine will meet with reception amongst judicious Christians.

6thly, That it should be scandalous to hearken to the Institutions of Christ
(as he suggests) is such a monstrous assertion, that I a^ amazed to think it
should drop from such a person. The reciting it i^ refutation sufficient. So
that the Major Proposition I still take for manifest truth, notwithstanding his
three dictates to the contrary, which are now abundantly refuted.

Sect. 2.
The present Ministers of England do not hearken and conform to the Revelation
Christ has made touching the Orders and Ordinances of his House, proved by the
induction of seven particulars. All power for the Calling, Institution, Order,
and Government of his Church, is invested solely in Christ. Mat. 28. 19. 1 Timothy
6. 14, 15. John 3. 35. Acts 3. 22. and 5. 31. Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
and 14. 37. Gal. 1. 8. 2 John 10. Rev. 22. 18. Acts 15. 25, 28. considered. The
present Ministers own other Lords (that have a Law-making-Power) over his
Churches, besides Christ; which Mr. T. grants is a denial of his Kingly
Authority. Separation from the World, and Saints walking together in particular
Societies an Institution of Christ, proved. This is opposed by the present
Ministers. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 1, 5. 2 Cor. 8. 5. John 15. 19 and 17. 6. 1
Cor. 5. 12. Acts 2. 40. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Acts 19. 9. Rev. 18. 4. considered. Of
the acception of the word World. Characters of persons that are not of the
World. A third Institution of Christ remarked. Of the power Christ has
entrusted his Church with. Acts 1. 23. 1 Cor. 5. 5. explained. Of the Officers
of Christ's appointment. Their Election by the Church. Of the Liberty of
Prophesying. Nothing must be offered up to God in Worshi^ but what is of his
own prescription. The present Ministers of England refuse to subject to these
Ordinances of Christ. An Objection answered. Mr. T. his Exceptions considered,
and removed out of the way.

2dly. THat the present Ministers of England do not hearken and conform to the
Revelation Christ has made touching the Orders and Ordinances of his House; we
prove in S. T. by the induction of seven particulars.

To this Mr. T. replies, in Sect. 3. Chap. 4. 1st, In the stead of Argument, he
proves all with Interrogations. --

Answ. False and untrue; I wonder at the conscience and confidence of the man
in asserting it. He knows I prove it by the induction of the most remarkable
Orders of the House of Christ, which they hearken not to.

2dly, He asks, Which of the Ordinances of Christ have they made void?

Answ. They were under his view whilst he wrote these words; so that his
question is frivolous. I enumerate seven of the Orders and Institutions of
Christ they have so dealt with.

He adds, 3dly, He should have reckoned up seven times seven.

Answ. 1. And why so? If guilty of a rejection of these, which are the
principal; they oppose his Kingly and Prophetical Office, though they embrace
some others that are of his appointment. The Romanists do so, yet this
Animadverter grants they are guilty of the crime instanced in.

2. Mr. T. cannot reckon up seven times seven Institutions of Christ that are
of the peculiar Institutions of his House, to be performed by Saints embodied,
and united together in the fellowship of the Gospel, nor many more than these
seven mentioned by us. He instanceth in hearing the Word, praying to the Father
in the Name of Christ, -- which he tells us they have not made void by their
Traditions.

Answ. 1. The first of these is in a great measure (if not totally) made void
by them. 1. They oppose and deny the management of this duty, in the way of
Christ's appointment, whilst they debar Christians from electing their own
Officers, or attending upon the Ministry of such as are according to the mind
of Christ elected by them. 2. The Preaching of the Word must give way to their
Service-Book-Worship; or Forms of humane devising; which I am much mistaken, if
it be not, in a great measure, a making void of that Institution of Christ (he
speaks of) by their Traditions.

2. I wish the same may not be said (with respect to the most of them at least)
of praying to the Father in the Name of Christ, which none can do but by the
Spirit, whom they despise, reproach, set up their stinted Form^ in opposition
to him and his breathings.

The first of the Orders of Christ's House instanced in, is, That all Power for
the Calling, Institution, Order and Government of his Church, is invested
solely in him, as the alone Lord, Sovereign Ruler, and Head thereof, Mat. 28.
19. 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15. John 3. 35. Acts 3. 22. and 5. 31. Hence Christ charge
his Disciples, not to be called of men Rabbi; nor to call any Father; (viz. not
to impose their authority upon any, or suffer themselves to be imposed upon by
any in the matters of their God.) Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10, because one is their
Master and Lord, viz. Christ. Hence also the Apostles lay the weight of their
exhortations upon the Commandment of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 23. and 14. 37.
proclaim all to be accursed that preach any other Gospel, Gal. 1. 8. Charge
Chr^stians not to receive such as bring any other Doctrine, 2 John 10. The
Spirit terribly threatens such as shall add to the Revelation of God, Rev. 22.
18. This Institution, we say, they conform hot really unto, they own other
Lords, Heads and Governors (that have a Law-making Power, over his Churches)
beside him.

To this Mr. T. 1. That all power for the Calling, Institution, Order and
Government of his Church is invested solely in Christ, as the alone Lord,
Sovereign Ruler, and Head thereof, he grants as a Truth.

Though, 2dly, He assents not to our Paraphrase on Mat. 23. 8. -- As if Christ
did forbid the Apostles to impose their Authority upon any in the matters of
their God; which they did, Acts 15. 25, 28.

Answ. 1. By imposing their Authority, -- is meant giving forth Commands,
Doctrines in their own Names, as from themselves, without the Authority of
Christ. Where did they so? Do they not every where disavow it, 1 Cor. 1. 15. 2
Cor. 4. 5. 1 Cor. 11. 1. Divine Revelation, not the Dictates of men, one or
other of them, is the Foundation of a Christians Faith.

2. Mr. T. mistakes when he says, they did this, Acts 15. 25, 28. For, 1st.
They enjoined nothing but what was before enjoined by the Lord, (only
acquainted the Gentile Believers therewith) as is, 1. Abstinence from
Fornication, Exodus 20. 14. Ezekiel. 16. 26, 29. Mat. 5. 32. 2. From things
Strangled, Deuteronomy. 12. 24. 3. From Blood, Genesis 9. 4. 5. (i. e. the Lifeblood, or
any member of the creature pulled from it whilst it is yet alive, as the
Jewish Rabbis expound it, and that truly.)

2dly, He speaks against the express Letter of the Scripture, verse. 28. It
seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us; Expressions very remote from the
countenancing such an authoritative imposition, as he speaks of.

2. He asks, How comes this to be an Order, -- of the House of Christ, he took
such Orders to be Precepts of Christ to us, but this seems to be Gods gift to
him.

Answ. That Christ's Ruledom and Sovereignty over his House is a gift of God to
him, we grant; but such a gift as does necessarily imply a duty, on the part of
his Household, viz. That they own, obey, subject to none, in the matters of
Worship, but only him, admit no Laws or Institutions amongst them but his. And
this is expressly asserted in S. T. which we took then, and still do, for an
Order of Christ's House.

3. He tells us further, That to assert, the present Ministers of England own
other Lords (that have a Law-making Power over his Churches) besides him, is to
unchristen them.

Answ. 1. And however Mr. T. his Book came to be licensed, with an intimation
from the reverend Licenser, That he finds nothing in it contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England. Some of them think (though I assure him I do
not) he has asserted that, page 123, that does indeed unchristen them.

2. However, if the assertion mentioned unchristens them, they unchristen
themselves. The persons, I mean, that they own as Lords and Governors, that
have a Law-making power, are the Prelates -- in the Convocation-House -- That
they own these, as such (to them and their Canons they promise obedience and
subjection) needs no more proof, than the Sun at noon-dayes that it shines.
Whether this be a denial of Christ's authority, rebellion against him, let the
Reader inform himself from Mr. T. Chap. 4. Page 119. of his Theodulia. He that
ascribes Kingly power to a subject, does make another King than the right King,
and so does, unking him: this he tells us the Papists do, when they assert the
Pope can make Laws to bind the Conscience, by virtue of his authority; and I
know no more power our Convocation of Bishops -- have to do so then the Pope.
Till that be showed, the Animadverter grants our Ministers asserting the same
of them in this matter (as the Papists of the Pope) they really unking Christ.

Nor, 3dly, Let him think, that he is to deal with such Children, that with his
drollery, will be persuaded that they see, and know not, what they both see and
know. It Is not the calling persons (as he does, by what spirit let him judge)
Diabolical Calumniators, Railers and Scolds (in Latin and English) that now a
days will be taken for an answer or confutation of what the whole Nation know
to be true. And they themselves will acknowledge and plead for it.

A 2d Order and Institution of Christ we mention in S. T. viz. That it is his
will, that those whom he has called by his Word, should separate from the
World, walk together in particular Societies, and Churches, -- 1 Cor. 1. 2. and
5. 12. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Rev. 18. 4. John 15. 19. and 17. 6. Acts 2. 40. and 19. 9.
Phil. 1. 5. Acts 2. 41. and 17. 4. 2 Cor. 8. 5. -- This Institution we say the
Ministers of England are at open defiance with; admitting persons visibly
wicked and profane, into their Communion.

To this Mr. T. replies, Sect. 4. 1st. He has read somewhat in Ainsworth,
Cottons Writings (for to them we refer the Reader for further satisfaction) But
he does not find in them, nor the Scriptures mentioned, any such separation as
these Authors press. --

Answ. The Separation we press is a separation from the visible wicked and
profane; cannot the Animadverter find this in the Scriptures, nor in the
Authors instanced in? Let me prevail with him in a sedate frame without passion
or prejudice, once more to review them, and beg of the Lord to open the eyes of
his understanding, that he may see his mind therein. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 1,
5. 2 Cor. 8. 5. Give us an account that those who constituted and made up those
particular Churches, were visible Saints, sanctified in Christ Jesus. (The like
instance might be given of the rest of the Churches mentioned in the
Scripture.) The Disciples of Christ are said to be chosen out of the World,
John 15. 19. and 17. 6. The Saints in a Church State are commanded not to
suffer a Fornicator, Covetous person, an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard,
or an Extortioner, in their Communion (though allowed civil commerce with them
in the world) 1 Cor. 5. 12. In Acts 2. 40. 2 Cor. 6. 17. we find the Apostles
pressing, and Chap. 19. 9. practicing Separation from the wicked World; which
is also commanded with respect to Antichristian worship, Rev. 18. 4. If Mr. T.
cannot see such a Separation as we press, contained in these Scriptures, I
cannot but pity him. It Is said that when this way was more countenanced, he
practiced somewhat not much unlike thereunto.

2dly, He grants, That Separation from the World, in respect of Worship, is the
duty of Saints, -- 2 Cor. 6. 17. but then by the World is meant professed
Infidels, -- or at least such as were professed unbelievers, as John 15. 19.
and 17. 6. Acts 2. 40. and 19. 9.

Answ. 1. That the word World is (...), a word of various acceptions in the
Scripture is known, with which we shall not trouble the Reader. The
Animadverter grants, That it is taken for persons living in the World: Now
these are but of two sorts, that I know of, regenerate, or unregenerate; such
as walk after the Flesh, or such as walk after the Spirit; Believers, or
Unbelievers. And when the word World is put in opposition to the Saints, its
always taken for the World of unregenerate persons that lies in wickedness, or
(...), is in subjection to the wicked one, 1 John 5. 19. That men are not of
the World, because from Tradition, Education, Compulsion, Interest, or the
like, they profess the Name of Christ, though they never knew a work of Grace,
or change upon their spirits is a fiction of this Animadverter that he will
never make good. If such as these are not of the world, they are chosen, called
out of it, let us a little consider whether the Characters of these be found
upon them.

1. They are said to be Branches in Christ, that abide in him, and bring forth
fruit, John 15. 2, 4, 5.

2dly, They are clean through the word that he has spoken to them, verse. 3.

3dly, They have a mighty power and prevalency with God, verse. 7, 16.

4thly, They have the words of Christ abiding in them, verse. 7.

5thly, Are such whom Christ loves, verse. 9.

6thly, His Lovers and Friends, ready pre^st to do whatever he commands them,
verse. 14, 15.

7thly, To whom he has revealed the Mysteries of God, verse. 15. Chap. 17. 6,
14.

8thly, They are hated of the world, verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. and Chap. 16. 2, 3,
33. and 17. 14.

9thly, Keep Gods Word, Chap. 17. 6.

10thly, To them Christ gives the glory that the Father has given to him,
Chap. 17. 22. will have them to be with him where he is, to behold his glory,
verse. 24. with much more that might be instanced. Elsewhere they are called
such as are delivered from the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. Quickened, who
were dead in trespasses, and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Called to be Saints, Romans 1. 7.
1. Cor. 1. 2. Are Light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. have received the Spirit,
which the World, or Men of the world cannot receive (and abide such) John 14.
17. These are the Characters of those that are not of the world. Do we refuse
to hold communion with, do we separate from persons of this complexion? What
more false? We cry aloud to them, woe, beseech, entreat them, as many of them,
as are yet, too much holding fellowship with the carnal wicked world in
Worship, to come out from them: which was one, and no small part of our design
in S. T. As for others, that know nothing of the things mentioned, they are yet
in their sins, though they profess the Name of Christ, under the regiment of
the wicked one, and of the world; and therefore to be separated from as this
Animadverter grants. Of the Apostles going into the Jewish Synagogues, etc. we
shall speak in its proper place. Though we have no command to separate from the
true Worship of God, and the professors of the true Faith, walking suitable
thereunto, yet we have express precepts, to have no communion in Worship, that
is of the devising of man, the Pope, Antichrist, with persons as members of the
same Body, and that have the very Lineaments of Satan, the portraiture of Hell
upon them, with whom Christ does not, will not walk. The Scriptures but now
instanced in, evince as much. Rev. 18. 4. commands separation from a false
Church; false either in constitution or by apostasy: The Church of England
(Rome) is so, as we have proved, and the false Worship thereof, of this we have
already spoken. Let the Reader seriously consider the Scriptures, he will find
it to be so. In a word, the Babylon mentioned, our Animadverter will grant, is
the Roman Church, Chap. 17. 1, 2, 3. The scarlet colored Beast is th Civil
Power (not once represented under the notion of Beasts, Dan. 7. 3, 17.) by
which she has ever been supported from the beginning. The seven Heads are the
seven sorts of Governments, viz. Kings, Consuls, Dictators; Decemvirs,
Tribunes, Caesar's, Christian Emperors, (and the seven Mountains upon which Rome
was built, Rev. 17. 9, 10.) The ten Horns, are the ten Kingdoms, which her
abominations, and filthiness of her fornications did overflow (of which England
was one (as is known, and generally granted) verse. 12, 13. The coming out of
her is a separation from the whole of her Abominations, Ministry, Rites,
Inventions (which if we do not, we come not out of her) she has in the ten
Kingdoms, by the power of the Civil Magistrate, that supported her, erected,
and by external force and violence, compelled persons to bow down to; with
respect hereunto she is represented as drunk with the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus. This is all we plead for from this Scripture. We would not
have the Institutions, Inventions of this old Bawd and bloody Strumpet, imposed
upon us, and subjected to, as if from Christ.

Let the Animadverter or any one for him prove the Hierarchy of Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Chapters, etc. their Parish-Churches, as such, Organs,
Singing-Service, bowing before Altars, Candles, (there placed) Copes, holy
Vestments, Service Book, -- to be of the Institution of Christ, and we are
ready to stoop to them, and own those that practice them: but if they have no
other foundation but what ^he Mother of Harlots, compelled the Civil Powers to
give them, when she rid them at her pleasure, and made them serve her Lusts, to
the mu^thering of millions of the Servants of Christ, in the Nations, as most
certain it is they have not; as it would be the honor of the chief Rulers of
the Nations, to eradicate them, they remaining as a badge of their old slavery,
to the worst of Strumpets: So its eminently the duty of the Children of God, by
virtue of express precept from this Scripture, in the mean while (whatever they
may suffer) to separate from them. The Church of England (i. e. the best, and
most enlightened amongst the chief of the Nation) thought it their duty in days
past to separate from the Doctrine of the Papacy, and some of her Trinkets to
cast overboard: we plead but for separation from her Discipline, and Ministry,
and the rejection of the rest of her fopperies; that as we profess our selves
Christians, we may have (not the Canons of Rome, but) the Laws of our dear Lord
for our Rule and sole guide in this matter, which one would think above many,
Mr. T. might permit one peaceably to do, 1 Cor. 5. 12, 13. Phil. 1. 5. Act. 2.
41. and 17. 4. were brought to prove it the duty of Saints as such to walk
together distinct, and apart from the world; not to distinguish of the duties
of Pastors and People, nor to prove any written Church Covenant, which we were
not treating of. So that in what follows in this Sect. we are not at all
concerned. We have thrown no dirt upon the face of the Church of England (as he
is pleased to talk) we only tell her what di^t and filth is there, that evety
body sees, but her Admirers. Nor are we solicitous touching his throwing dirt
in the face of the separated Churches, from the Writings of any railing false
accusers; God will plead their Cause, and bring forth their Righteousness in
the fit season.

The third Institution of Christ mentioned in S. T. is this, That he has
entrusted his particular Churches with power for the carrying on the Worship of
his House, to choose Officers, admit Members, excommunicate Offenders -- Acts
1. 23. and 6. 3, 5. and 14. 23. 2 Cor. 8. 19. Mat. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4. The
Ministers of the Church of England own not, conform not to this Institution of
Christ, we manifest in the said Treatise.

Mr. T. his Reply hereunto is, 1. The Election, Acts 1. 23. was of an Apostle,
and that by Lot, and contains no Institution of Christ we are bound to follow.

Answ. 1. This last is Mr. T. his dictate, which it is fit should be rejected,
till he proves it; especially considering, that the Churches for some hundreds
of years, afterward, chose their own Officers.

2. Though it was the Election of the Apostle, yet he was I hope an Officer of
Christ, and that to the Churches.

3. His being chosen by Lots, does not evince that he was not chosen by the
Church; they gave forth the Lots, seems to be expressive of the way they took,
to manifest the person whom they chose. What he has said of Acts 6. 3, 5. and
14. 23. is already answered. The Election, 2 Cor. 8. 19. being of a person
employed in service by them, manifests that none are to do services for the
Church, but by their appointment. Of Mat. 18. 17. we have at large spoken
already, and vindicated it from Mr. T. his Exceptions. That 1 Cor. 5. 5. is
more than Excommunication practiced by the Churches of the Saints, he cannot
prove: his turning Mat. 18. 17. also to another sense, is an argument of his
denial of any such Institution of Christ to be practiced by the Churches in the
World.

1st, That It Is a Church-Act is evident from the words, verse. 4, 5. The Church
is to be gathered together for this end, to deliver the Incestuous person over
to Satan; But no Church (says Mr. T.) had power over unclean Spirits, to
command them to cruciat the Bodies of persons: Therefore (say we) that cannot
be here intended.

2dly, The Church comes together to do that which Paul condemns them, that they
had not done before, stirrs them up to set about verse. 2. Now it had been
absurd to have condemned them for not doing that which they had no power or
Authority to do.

3dly, That which he calls here a delivering to Satan, he calls a purging out
from among them the old leaven, verse. 7.

4thly, To the working of Miracles by the Apostle, there had been no need to
have assembled the Church, but it was necessary, that to the doing of this act
the Church be assembled, verse. 4, 5.

5thly, He is to be delivered to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved; which is not likely to be effected by Satan's Ministry.

6thly, It Is more than probable, the Church did what the Apostle commanded them
to do. Now this is called, (...), the public rebuke inflicted by many (which
many cannot signify the Apostle, but the Church of Corinth) all which evince,
that it was a Church-act, and no more than what is practiced by the Churches of
Christ at this day. Though it is true, it is more than the ordinary
Excommunication of the Church of England; by a Chancellor or Proctor, several
miles from the Parish Church to which the person is related, and (it may be)
unknown to them; an argument they own not this Institution of Christ. We add in
S. T. as another Institution of Christ,

4. That the Officers of his appointment are only such as these, Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, Deacons, Widows, or Helpers; who as they are in one
particular Congregation, so they have not any Lordly authority over each other,
-- Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 7. and 16. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 5. 1,
2, 3. Acts 6. 5. and 15. 2. and 20. 17. and 28. 21, 28. 1 Timothy 3. chapt. and 5.
9, 10, 17. This Law of Christ they subject not (we say) unto; set up other
Officers and Offices. --

To which Mr. T. 1st, There were other Officers given by Chrst, besides these
mentioned, viz. Apostles, therefore these are not the only Officers of his
appointment.

Answ. 1. Had he said therefore, These were not the only Officers of his
appointment, he had spoken more properly; Apostles were of his appointment, are
not now, as we have proved.

2. We are speaking of ordinary fixed Officers, in the particular Churches of
Christ, which the Apostles were not; so that his instancing these, and
inference thereupon, is frivo^ous and impertinent. If these had Superiority
over others, it will not advantage the Animadverter, except he can prove the
Bishops in respect of Office, to be their Successors, which he will never be
able to do. That because the Elders mentioned, 1 Timothy 5. 17. must be accounted
worthy of double honor, therefore they were of a Superior order of Ministry,
to lord it over the rest, is one of Mr. T. his Consequences, that a youth of
half a years st^nding in the University would be ashamed of. Besides Sir, the
double honor is due to the working Presbyter, not the lording loytering
Bishop, as is the custom of England. The person mentioned, 2 Cor. 8. 19. was
chosen by the Churches for the present expedition, was no standing fixed
Officer amongst them, therefore appertains not to our present disquisition.

He adds, Whether all the Officers and Offices, be rightly ordered in the
Church of England, is not our present inquiry.

Answ. But this is no small part of our present enquiry: for if they are not
rightly ordered, they are not Officers of Christ; if they are not such, it is
evident they reject this Institution of his, set up other Officers and Offices.
--

What he tells us is notoriously false, viz. That the present Ministers of
England, have neither Name, nor thing required by Christ in this Law, is
manifestly true; Their Parish Ministers, are called Priests, not Pastors, or
Teachers. It Is true they have those are called Doctors, which signifies
Teachers, but that is a School, not a Church-Title; they are called so, with
respect to an Academick degree, not with relation to any particular Church or
Churches in whom they are placed. They have those tha^ are called Deacons, but
they are not such Officers as Christ calls so; those that come nearest to
these, are those they call Churchwardens, o^ Overseers of the Poor. But they
have the thing, the Office of preach^ng the Gospel continues with them.

Answ. 1. 'Twere well if it could be said of many of them, that they preached
the Gospel. Alas! they understand it not.

2dly. However, they have not the Office, as we prove: whilst he suggests the
contrary, he does but beg the Question. Whether the Assertion, That they set up
other Officers and Offices, as if in open contempt and defiance of Christ's
Authority, be very unrighteously said, others will judge, I am sure as was said
in S. T. They are such, of which it may righteously be said, he did at no time
command them, neither did it ever enter into his heart so to do. And I
challenge Mr. T. to give an instance of the contrary.

We remark a 5th Institution of Christ in S. T. viz. That these Officers be
chosen by the common Suffrage of the Church of Christ, -- according to Acts 1.
15, 23, 26. and 6. 1, 2, 3, 5. and 14. 23. and 9. 26. which we find the Church
in the practice of for some Centuries of Years. As the Epistle of Clemens to
the Church of Corinth, Martin Luther, Cyprian, Lambard, Peter Martyr,
Bullinger, Gualter, Zanchy, Calvin, Beza, the united Brethren of Bohemia,
manifest. Of which at large we there treat. This Institution of Christ, we say,
the present Ministers conform not to.

Mr. T. replies. 1. He finds not this to be an Appointment of Christ, in the
Scriptures mentioned.

Answ. Whether it be or not, let the Reader judge; the impertinency of his
Answer to the three first, we have already showed. Acts 9. 26, 27. proves thus
much, That it is in the Churches power to reject any one, or refuse to receive
him as a Preacher amongst them, till they have received satisfaction touching
him; which does not a little demonstrate the power of Election of their own
Officers, to be seated in them. For he assayed, (...), to join himself to the
Disciples, as a Brother in the fellowship of the Gospel, (as the word
signifies, Acts 5. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 16, 17.) but they would not suffer him so to
do, till better informed of him, and then he comes in, and goes out at
Jerusalem, ver. 28. i. e. is owned, received by them. What follows is a
repetition of what he had before said, Sect. 22. in answer to the Preface, to
which we have there spoken. Clemens speaks fully to our purpose, Ministers must
be appointed by famous and discreet men, with the good liking and consent of
ALL the Church, (without which it seems they could not be constituted) In that
which follows in Clemens his Epistle, touching a readiness in the Elder or
Pastor to depart, or return, according as the multitude of Believers should
determine. We have sure a proof that the choice or rejection of a Pastor is
seated in them. That Luther, Bullinger, meant no more, than the not obtruding
unable Ministers on the Churches of Christ, is Mr. T. his mistake. They both
assert the Churches privilege in the choice of their own Pastors. Their voice
(says Luther) ought not to be severed from the choosing Ecclesiastical
Persons: It Is tyranny to do so, says Bullinger. Let the judicious Reader
peruse the words of the rest recited in S. T. and he will be convinced that
they speak home to the matter in hand, and that Mr. T. does but trifle whilst
he labors to avoid their Testimony. That there is nothing like this
Institution of Christ, practiced amongst the Ministers of the Church of
England, is known. And Mr. T. acknowledges, That by reason of the continuance
in force, of so much of the Popes Canon Law, things are far otherwise than they
should be. Now this is that we say, A non-hearkening to the Institutions and
Laws of Christ, with an imbracement and subjection to the Cannon-Law of
Antichrist, is a real denial of Christ's Kingly Authority. This the Ministers of
England are guilty of. The latter our Animadverter has the ingenuity to
confess; the former we have proved. What difficulties Congregational men have
found in the rectifying these things, besides what they have ground to expect,
in any work of God, (in which it is no new thing to find Satan at our right hand
to resist us) I know not.

That Separation and Election by the Churches makes things worse than they are,
is a plain calumny against the known experience of them all.

We proceed, and in S. T. instance a sixth Institution of Christ, viz. 6thly,
That Saints may Prophecy one by one, and ought to admonisy, exhort and build
up one another in their most holy Faith, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Romans 8. 26. and 12. 6.
1 Cor. 4. 17. and 5. 4. and 11. 23. Ephesians. 4. 7, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 2. 1. and 3.
15. Jude 20. 1 Cor. 12. 7, 11. Mat. 25. 24. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 12. 15.
and 14. 12, 24. Ephesians. 4. 3, 7, 15, 16. Acts 2. 42. Romans 15. 14. Ephesians. 5. 19.
Col. 3. 16. 1 These. 5. 14. 2 These. 3. 15. Heb. 3. 13. to which might be added
the frequent Examples of the Saints in the Old and New Testament, 2 Chr. 17. 7,
8, 9. John 2. 11. Mal. 3. 16. Luke 4. 16. Acts 13. 15. 1 Cor. 14. 24, to 34.
and the practice of the Primitive Church, as witness Origin, (in his Epistle to
Celsum.) Tertullian (in his Apol.) Justin Martyr (in his Apol.) and many
others. This Institution of Christ, the present Ministers trample under foot,
rail against, oppose, reproach, do all they can to cause to perish from amongst
the people of Christ.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 8. upon the matter speaks not one wo^d, in a way of
contradiction, tells us, Prophesying was an extraordinary gift, by an immediate
Revelation of the Spirit, whereby some hidden thing is discovered, and this
prophesying the Ministers of England neither do nor can hinder; none that he
knows of have this gift. --

Answ. 1. Were all this granted, it would not at all advantage him. There is a
Prophesying that was (as he says) an extraordinary gift. -- But that is not
the Prophesying (as he knows) we are treating of, but a speaking to men to
edification, exhortation, and comfort: This we say is an Institution of Christ,
bottomed upon the forecited Scriptures, which notwithstanding the present
Ministers of England oppose and deny.

Are not these things so? Is Mr. T. able to disprove them? Does he attempt to
do so? nothing less. A very fardle of Contradictions, not worth the mentioning,
is the whole of what he is pleased to return in Answer hereunto; one while the
restraint of such exercises, is no transgression of Christ's Command, and yet
immediately adds, that the duties in the Texts, ought to be cherished,
furthered, and such meetings countenanced.

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo. An Institution of Christ he denies not
this to be, nor that it is not hearkened to, but rejected, opposed by the
present Ministers. His imputing practices to us, tending to Sedition and
Disturbance very ill becomes him. The whole Nation is under the conviction of
the contrary. It Is no more than what of old was charged upon the Saints. A very
false crimination, for which I advise him, that he pray to God to give him
repentance unto Life.

A 7th Institution of Christ remarked in S. T. is this, That nothing be offered
up to God, but what is of his own prescription, divine and spiritual, without
affectation of Legal Shadows, John 4. 24. Of worldly Pomp, or carnal
Excellency, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and 2. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 12. and 6. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Isa. 33. 22. Jam. 4. 12. Mat. 15. 6, 9. Heb. 8. 5. 1 King. 13. 33. and 12. 13.
Jer. 7. 31. Numb. 15. 39. Deuteronomy. 12. 1. and 4. 31. This the Ministers of England
conform not to, they act what is contrary thereunto, whilst they offer up a
Service not of his prescription, affect Legal Shadows, worldly Pomp, and carnal
Excellency.

M^. T. replies, Sect. 9. Where God has left us free, not forbidding us to use
a prescript form of words; Music in the praising of God, there we may so do.

Answ. 1. This is such a shameful petitio principii, or begging the thing in
question, that he could not sure write without blushing.

2dly. Contrary to what he has in other Treatises formerly asserted.

3dly. Directly opposite to some of the Scriptures instanced in, which he takes
no notice of.

4thly, An open door for the Introduction of all the Popish trinkets, and
fopperies.

5thly, A most Papistical assertion, generally exploded by Protestant Writers,
when they dispute against the Papists, who affirm that an Argument from the
authority of the Scripture negatively, is valid, i. e. it is not commanded in
Scripture, not to be proved thence, therefore not to be believed nor practiced,
as Sutcliffe argues against Bellarmine, de Pontif. l. 2. c. 9. p. 134, 135, and
others. So that notwithstanding what Mr. T. is able to say to the contrary, the
present Ministers of Engl. refuse to subject to, despise, oppose, persecute the
Orders and Institutions of Christ in his House, and therefore deny his
Prophetical and Kingly Office.

We proceed in S. T. to the removing an Objection, which is thus proposed.

But perhaps to these things some may say, These are but small matters, good
men differ among themselves herein.

To which we Answer, 1. That they are part of the Instituted Worship of God, --
has already been proved: To say that any part thereof is a small matter, is no
small derogation to the wisdom of him who instituted it.

To this Mr. T. Sect. 10. Replies, 1st, Though nothing commanded by God is
small, yet some things are comparatively small, Mat. 23. 23.

Answ. 1. Christ speaks not of Gospel-Institutions, of which we are treating.

But, 2. Of Commandments, and Ceremonies, that were then drawing apace to their
period, and full point.

3. He says not that they were so small that they ought not to be observed,
but the contrary.

4. The Appointments instanced in by us are of such import, as that in them,
the visible Kingship of Christ, in and over his Churches, does consist; the
taking away, rejection of which, is to take away, and reject the visible
Scepter of his Kingdom; So that betwixt these two there is no compare.

He adds 2dly, That they are part of Gods instituted Worship needs better proof.

Answ. 1. This is but Mr. T. his opinion, he has not manifested the weakness
of the proof exhibited.

2. He acknowledges some of the Institutions mentioned to be the Appointments
of Christ. We say,

2dly, What if it should appear, that as small as these things seem to be, they
are the grounds of the late Controversies of God, pleaded with fire and sword
in most of the European Kingdoms? This may perhaps a little stay sober persons
from so rash a Conclusion, That these are small matters.

To which our Animadverter says, This is not demonstrated.

Answ. I am upon some accounts unwilling to review things; he cannot be
ignorant of the truth of the suggestion. What was the ground of the first
contest in Scotland, was it not the imposition of the Liturgy? What begat the
bad blood in England? was it not the Prelates Pride, imposition of their
Inventions upon the Saints? What the Covenant was against, this Animadverter
has not yet forgot; But enough of this.

I add, 3dly, As small matters as these have been severely punished by the
Lord, as 2 Chr. 26. 16. Number. 16. 1 Chr. 15. 13. with Number. 4. 11, 15. 1 Samuel 8.
7. which we more at large speak to in S. T.

Mr. T. Replies, It Is not demonstrated that in the rejection of these
Institutions that the Minsters sin, as Uzziah, etc.

Answ. But that herein they do so, and that at an higher rate, is evident. 1.
Uzziah, etc. sinned but against one Institution of the Lord, these against many.

2. They sinned under the Law, against the carnal administrations thereof,
these under the Gospel.

3. They sinned of ignorance and weakness, (as may charitably be deemed, at
least some of them;) which ('it is to be feared) cannot be said of many of the
present Ministers; who have preached, printed, sworn against, what they now own
and practice.

We add, 4. As small matters as these, when once commanded by the Lord, are of
that force, as not only to deface the well-being, but to overturn the true
being of the Worship of God. We instance in the case of Sacrifices, which being
appointed to be offered at a certain place, if offered elsewhere (which was but
a failure in a circumstance of place) they were a stink in the Nostrils of God,
and not accounted by him as any Worship performed to him. Does Mr. T. deny
these things to be so? Not at all. He only tells us, That the Ministers of
England in their opposing the Institutions mentioned, overturn the true Worship
of God, is not demonstrated. Which how much it is to the purpose others will
judge. The judicious Reader knows, we were not upon the proof of any such
thing, the utmost of our intendment, being only to demonstrate, that the
particular Institutions remarked, were not such small matters as some made
them, since as small matters (viz. a circumstance of place commanded)
neglected, have been of that force, as to overturn the true being of the
Worship of God, which we are apt to think abundantly demonstrated; and desire
Mr. T. to leave dictating, and manifest by Argument and Reason our mistake.
Though we did not, yet may we righteously argue, non-subjection to
circumstances of Worship enjoined, is of that force as to overturn the true
being of the Worship of God (sacrificing any where but at the place appointed
was so) Therefore the non-subjection of the present Ministers of England to the
forementioned Institutions (should we assert them to be only Circumstances of
Worship determined) does so. Their Ministry is no Ministry of Christ, their
Excommunication no Institution of Christ, because not according to divine
appointment.

We say further in S. T. As for what is added, that good men differ among
themselves in this matter, its of no more weight than what went before.

1. It Is not at all to the business in hand.

2. It Is possible good men may for a while do that which really enwraps in the
bowels of it a denial of the Offices of Christ. --

The Animadverter adjoyns, 1. That good men may do that which by consequence
may be a denial of Christ's Office is granted, it being no more than that they
may err, or sin.

Answ. 1. We say more; Good men may under the power of Temptation, plainly,
directly, with cursing and banning themselves, deny Christ. Peter did so, Mat.
26. 74. (some say that he curs^ Christ)* yet a good man. It Is true this is no
more than that they may e^re or sin; the greatest miscarriage any of the
Children of the Lord, ever were, or can be guilty of; David's Murder and
Adultery, the Corinthians Incest, was no more.

He adds, 2dly, If the Ministers of England are in the account of God good men,
we should not have censured them so deeply, as walking disorderly, symbolizing
with Antichrist, -- nor have dissuaded men from hearing them, or joining with
them in Gods Worship.

Answ. 1. Good men (in the main) may be guilty of great miscarriages, may be
told of, censured for them, and that publicly, if they are public and
notorious.

2. When Mr. T. proves that I have said any thing of them that is false and
untrue, or that by mentioning these I have made any breach upon any rule of
Christ, I do assure him in the word of a Christian, to make a public
acknowledgment and recantation thereof: till then I have so little cause of
being afraid or ashamed, that I have boldn^ss, and confidence through the grace
of God in the Testimony I bear (though unworthy) against their enormities, and
cause of rejoicing in Christ, whatever I may suffer.

3dly, That good men, (that in the account of God may be so) ought not to be
separated from, when under the guilt of scandalous offenses, this Animadverter
cannot prove; many Scriptures have already in this Treatise been produced for
the confirmation of the contrary.

We add in S. T. 3. That good men differ is an Argument of their ignorance and
darkness, which though in some cases it excuses a tanto, yet not a toto; it may
alter the degree, never the nature of the sin.

To this our Animadverter replies, There may be darkness in this Author. --

Answ. 1. And this Author says so to; it is what he is daily bemoaning before
the Lord.

But 2dly, In the matters he is treating of, he knows, and is persuaded by the
Lord Jesus, that the truth is with him, and he dares not call Light, Darkness,
for fear of man, or advantage in the world.

3dly, He conceives these words might have been spared, inasmuch as they are
greatly impertinent, whether Darkness be with them or me; If we sin, though our
sin be not a sin of that magnitude, as if it had been committed against Light,
yet it is a sin still, and so to be censured; and if scandalous in some cases,
the persons guilty of it to be separated from.

We say moreover in S. T. 4thly, It Is false, that good men pressing after
Reformation -- according to the primitive pattern, do differ touching the
substance of the things instanced in. --

To which Mr. T. adjoyns, The more to blam^ is this Author to widen the Breach.
--

A. But this Author does no such thing, he widens not the Breach, urges not
Separation from good men, who press after Reformation according to the
primitive pattern: But such as have renounced the pursuing such a Reformation
(though they were once sworn (some of them) to prosecute it to the uttermost of
their power) persecute, oppose it in them that are pressing after it. As is the
known case of the present Ministers of England.

What is added by us, in the 5th place, viz. That the particulars instanced in,
being commanded by Christ, they are not discharged from the impeachment drawn
up against them (who conform not to them) of Nonconformity to the Laws of
Christ by this Plea, That good men differ in these matters, (i. e. some good
men transgress the Laws of Christ --) he grants to be true: Nor does he offer
any thing further in this Chapter that deserves our attendment.

CHAP. VI.
Sect. 1.
The present Ministers own Laws not of Christ's revealing, contrary thereunto,
therefore deny his Offices. The first proved by the induction of fourteen
particulars. Mr. T. yields the matter in controversy. Ezekiel. 43. 8. explained
An Objection answered. Of the Authority of Rulers touching Laws and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical. Of Synods. --

THE second Argument whereby in S. T. we prove the present Ministers deny the
Kingly, and Prophetical Office of Christ, is this:

Those who own, submit, and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances, which not only
are not of Christ's revealing, but contrary thereunto, do really deny, and
oppose the Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ: But the present Ministers
of England do own, submit and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances that are not
only not of Christ's revealing, but contrary thereunto: Therefore. --

The Major (or first Proposition) is beyond exception. Persons nonconformity to
the Laws of Magistrates (if in what they have power to command) their giving
forth Laws of their own, without the consent of their Rulers, directly contrary
to their Laws, is a visible, notorious opposition, denial, and rejection of
their Authority, in them that give forth such Laws, and in them that conform
and subject to them. This we manifestly prove to be true of the present
Ministers of England, with respect to Christ, the alone Independent Lord, King
and Sovereign of his Church and People.

That which Mr. T. opposes hereunto Chap. 5. Sect. 1. will receive ^ s^eed^
dispatch.

1. His distinctions about the Orders and Ordinances of Christ are needless,
they are but a clouding and darkning of Truth, by words without knowledge: The
Orders we speak of, are the Appointments of Christ to his Church, with respect
to Worship, wherein their practice is more or less concerned; to deny and
reject these, and in the place of them to substitute others, of their own, of
Antichrist, and subject thereunto, is a denial of the Offices of Christ
mentioned, or it is not: If Mr. T. his conscience tells him, that it is, he
does ill to equivocate. This he grants to be true of the Pope of Rome, Chap. 4.
page 119, 120. Why it should not be so of the Pope of Canterbury and his
Prelates, -- I yet understand not. That the giving forth and subjection to the
Cannon-Law in the Papacy, should be Antichristian and a denial of the Offices
of Christ, and the same thing in the Church of England not so, is a Riddle to
me.

Henry the 8th rejected the Popes Supremacy; an Act of Parliament is instituted
25. H. 8. c. 9. for the retention of the whole of his Canon Law in its wonted
vigor, that is not contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, nor
prejudicial to the Royal Prerogative; by virtue whereof, how great a part of
his Law, whereby he ruled his Kingdom of darkness (and still rules it) received
its establishment, Mr. T. knows and in part confesses, Chap. 4. Of which the
Institutions and Orders mentioned are a part, by which the Pope yet speaks as a
King amongst us (though his Supremacy be justly by Law rejected) for the Law of
a King is his mouth. That very Law (that is, the Canon Law of the Papacy) by
which the Saints were burned in Smithfield (and other places) is that Law, by
which in the stead of the Institut^ons of Christ, the Church of England is
governed, the Saints are excommunicated, delivered over to the Secular Power,
imprisoned, ruined at this day. This Law the present Ministers of England
subject to, which is the Canonical obedience they promise to their Ordinary.
And though this Animadverter multiply millions of words, he will never make
persons of judgment and sobriety believe that this is not a real denial, and
rejection of the Authority of Christ. They tell him in their practice, that
they will have none of his Institutions; they prefer Antichrists Canon Law
before them, which is stufft with such filthy Abominations, that Luther was
wont to call the Decretals, Excretal^, and had them publicly burned at
Wittemburge. And Whitaker (one of their own) says, The Canonical, Decretal,
and Pontifical Law, ought to have no place amongst us because it is
Antichristian and altogether a stranger to all Piety and Religion, Lib. de
Council. 9.

2. If the Animadverter will speak to the purpose, and evert what has been
offered in this matter, he must, I conceive, either manifest that the Popes
Canon Law, is not the Law of Government to the Church of England, or that a
retention thereof (with a rejection of the Institutions of Christ) is not a
denial of his Offices.

To tell stories of things done of ignorance -- (which we have over and over,
and in this matter cannot have place, they themselves know that things are with
them as we have reported them) the setting up open Antichrists, and Universal
Monarchs, is the ready way to expose himself to contempt for his
impertinencies, no probable one to carry the Cause he undertakes the defense of.

There being nothing further worth the considering in this first Sect. we
hasten to the 2d.

In order to the confirmation of the Minor Proposition of the forementioned
Argument, two things, we say in S. T. are incumbent upon us to prove.

1. That the present Ministers of England do own, submit, and subscribe to
Orders and Ordinances that are not of Christ's revealing, which we manifest by
the Induction of 14 particular Instances.

As First, They own the Orders and Offices of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and
promise subjection and obedience to them, Eccles. Can. can. 7.

To which Mr. T. 1. He will not undertake to justify all that is in the
Ecclesiastical Canons, nor need he, nor perhaps will the present Ministers or
Bishops.

Answ. 1. But he having undertaken to be their Advocate, he must either
justify their Canons, or manifest that they themselves do not.

Secondly, It Is notoriously known that that the present Ministers justify the
aforesaid Canons Ecclesiastical, and dare not but do so.

He adds 2dly, It Is not said Ca^. 7. That the Orders and Offices of
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. are Orders needful and necessary in the Church of
Christ, nor is it required therein that Ministers promise subjection and
obedience to them.

Answ. 1. But the former of these is fairly implied, in the foresaid Canon,
which says, It Is a wicked Error to assert them to be Antichristian or repugnant
to the Word of God; for which persons are ipso facto to be excommunicated.

2. The latter they actually do when they are Ordained Ministers. And in Artic.
36. They are to subscribe to this, That the Book of Common Prayer, and of
Ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, contains nothing contrary to the Word
of God, and that it may lawfully be used, and that they themselves will use the
Form in the said Book prescribed, in public Prayers and administration of the
Sacraments, and none other. Whence it follows, that they own, submit to
whatever is contained in the Canons Ecclesiastical (though in every particular
Canon it is not said they do) and the Common-Prayer-Book-Service, the Orders
and Rites thereof, with the Orders and Rites of the Book of Ordering Bishops,
Priests and Deacons. So that when we prove this, or that, to be contained it
this or that Canon, we prove their submission thereunto, Canonical Obedience
(or Obedience to these Canons) being what at the time of their Ordination (as
was said) they promise to the Bishop, which is a sufficient answer to all that
Mr. T. asserts in this Sect. In Can. 4. The Liturgy-Worship is asserted to be
the Worship of God, whoever affirms, It is a corrupt, superstitious, and
unlawful Worship of God, is to be excommunicated. They promise at the time of
their Ordination (as was said) To use the Form in the Common Prayer Book,
prescribed, in Public Prayers -- and none other; which if it be not a
sufficient proof, that they own and submit to it, I must profess I shall for
ever despair of ability to prove any thing.

His exceptions to the Third Particular, touching their engaging to conform to
the Rites of the Common Prayer Book, are not worth the mentioning.

They own Fourthly, The Office of a Deacon to be the first step to the Order of
Priesthood, inasmuch as this is asserted so to be in the Book of Ordering
Priests and Deacons, to which they are to subscribe by Can. 36. and Can. 32.

It Is fairly intimated also, Fifthly, That no person be admitte^ to expound the
Scriptures, though judged worthy of the Cure of Souls, without License from the
Bishop thereunto, is plainly asserted, Can. 49. Though the words, judged worthy
of the cure of Souls, be not expressed, they are evidently implied; the Cure
they there speak of, can be no other th^n that they so call.

Sixthly, That there be some lawful Ministers, which are no Preachers. And,

Seventhly, That these unpreaching Ministers, may lawfully administer the
Ordinances of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, is fully asserted, Can. 49, 57.

So is the Eighth particular, touching the sentence of Excommunication to be
passed upon such as refuse to have their Children Baptized, or to receive the
Sacrament from such dumb Ministers.

Ninthly, Though it be not said in so many words, That Confirmation by Diocesan
Bishops, is an Ordinance of God, Can. 6. yet it is fairly implied, and in the
Common Prayer Book they bottom it upon the Apostles practice, which fully
evinceth; they esteem it as such.

That it (Tenthly) appertains to the Office of Ministers to Marry, the
regulation of the Ministers therein by Can. 62. clearly manifests.

Eleven. That the Bishop of the Diocese may lawfully suspend a Minister from
his Ministry, for refusing to bury the Dead, Mr. T. grants is presupposed, Can.
68.

So is, 12thly, The unlawfulness of Ministers Preaching, and administering the
Communion in private Houses, except in time of necessity.

And 13thly, The unlawfulness of appointing Fasts, holding Meetings for
Sermons, Can. 71, 72. I wonder he dare aver the contrary.

Whether, 14thly, It be not said, Can. 74. That Ministers ought to be
distinguished by their Vestments and Apparel, as Gowns, Hoods, etc. Let the
Reader satisfy himself by the perusal of the said Canon, to which their
practice is known to be correspondent.

Having instanced in these 14 particulars, we add in S. T. Are any of these
Ordinances of the appointment of Christ? when, and where were they instituted
by him? To which this Animadverter replies,

1. That he might answer by cross interrogations, Are the Church
Covenant-gathering-Churches in the Congregational way, election of Ministers by
the Church, etc. Ordinances of Christ? when and where were they instituted?

Answ. 1. He may so indeed, but he must not imagine that any one besides
himself will take this for an Answer to what is proposed and argued in this
matter by us.

2. Of the particulars instanced by him, we have hinted somewhat in S. T. and
more largely in this Treatise, proving them to be Ordinances of Christ. Cotton,
Ainsworth, Bartlet, Robbinson, Can, etc. have distinctly proved these matters
at large.

When Mr. T. (or any one else) is able to say half so much for the particulars
instanced in, we will openly acknowledge our error and mistake.

But 2dly, He grants, They are not Ordinances and Institutions of Christ.

Answ. Ingeniously said: Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, and the
rest of that Hierarchy, is no Ordinance of Christ (then are they not Ministers
of Christ, for none are such but by his Institution.) The Lyturgie-Worship,
Rites, enjoined in the Common Prayer Book, the Office of a Deacon, as the first
step to the Priesthood, denial to expound the Scripture without the Bishops
License, unpreaching Ministers, or bare Readers, administration of Sacraments
by such, Confirmation by Diocesan Bishops, the Marrying of persons, burying the
dead by the Priest, are no Ordinances of Jesus Christ, is acknowledged by Mr.
T. Yet all these, and much more, as a National Church, -- are owned, and
subm^tted to by the present Ministers; Therefore they do own, and submit to
Ordinances that are not of the appointment of Christ; their own Advocate being
judge.

We add in S. T. That these are Posts set by the Lords Posts, -- of which he
complains, Ezekiel. 43. 8. who sees not?

To which Mr. T. replies, I see not; I think him in a dream or frenzy that
says he sees it; no Interpreters that I have met with so exp^und the place.

Answ. 1. It Is no disparagement to Mr. T. that he sees not every thing; though
some think he sees further than he is pleased to own, in his Theodulia, or at
least has done so, and are sorry to find him at that toilsom work, of building
again the things he once destroyed.

Nor am I, 2dly, concerned with his thoughts touching this matter; If I am in a
frenzy, it is (through grace) an holy one, and I would be more phrenetical for
the Interest of my dear Lord, Sorne think these expressions might have been
spared, though for our parts

Contenti sumus hoc Caton^. 3dly, What Interpreters he has met with I know
not. The Assembly, in their Annotations upon the place, are of our mind, Their
setting of their thresholds by my thresholds, i. e. adding their Traditions to
my Precepts, Isa. 29. 13.) So is Mr. Greenhill, etc.

We further propose (in S. T.) an Objection to consideration, viz. That though
these Canons, and Constitutions, owned by the Ministers of England be not
(...), to be found in the Scripture of the Institution of Christ, in so many
words, yet by consequence they may rationally be deduced from thence. As where
it is commanded, that all things be done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
which it is the duty of the Church to make Rules and Constitutions about; which
when it has done, it is the duty of every Son thereof, to own, or subject to
them without questioning its Authority.

To this Mr. T. Sect. 3. subjoyns. 1. He asserts not, that the Canons and
Constitutions of the Church of England, may rationally be deduced from
Scripture.

Answ. Goodly Constitutions surely, that cannot rationally be deduced from
Scripture, but have their Original singly from the bloody Canon Law of the
Papacy, and worthy to be submitted to by such as profess themselves Ministers
of the Gospel! what greater contempt any one could pour forth upon them I know
not!

But 2dly, Whilst Mr. T. refuses to assert this, he plainly relinquisheth his
concern in the Objection proposed by us, and tells us, He will not stand up in
its defense. However, 2. This he asserts in the room thereof, That Canons and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, concerning Divine Worship, and Church Government,
may be made by Governors, if not opposite to such Rules as are in Scripture
about Gods Worship, and the Rule of his Church, and be indeed subservient and
conducible to the well-ordering of such Worship and Rule; which it is the duty
of the Members of such a Church to obey.

Answ. 1. But I would be informed, whether by Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, concerning Divine Worship, he means only Canons touching the
spreading the Table at the Communion, with a linen Cloth; the Sermons
beginning at the Reading of the Text -- at which rate he speaks in Sect. 4. Or
whether he means Canons and Laws for the Institution of considerable parts of
Worship, together with such accidentals (as he calls them) that must be
submitted to, by such as are admitted to the public managery of Worship,
without which they shall not be permitted so to do. If the first, he does but
trifle, we have not been taking notice of things of such an inferior allay. If
the latter, I desire to be satisfied by what Law any Rulers or Governors do
assume to themselves such an Authority, which when Mr. T. shall be pleased to
show us, we shall further consider it. Heb. 13. 17. speaks not a tittle
thereunto. Of the vanity of its Application to the Governors of the Church of
England we have already spoken. The Reasons of his Assertion are these.

1. Without such Regulations Church-Societies cannot be continued by reason of
the difference of mi^ds. --

Answ. 1. The contrary is manifest, before ever such constitutions as those he
speaks of were in the World, Church-Societies were continued. One of the first
open breaches amongst them, was because of them: as he knows fell out, betwixt
Victor Bishop of Rome, and the Eastern-Churches, about the observation of
Easter. All the confusion, differences, breaches, that have been in the
Churches (so called) is for the most part to be charged upon their Impositions.

2dly, The Animadverter supposes, That without such Constitutions, the
Churches should be wholly destitute of Regulation, but falsely; It Is derogatory
to Christ, the Scriptures perfection, a pitiful begging the thing in question.
As Christ has a Church in the world, he has Laws (with respect to external
polity) by which he rules it; needs not be beholding to Antichrist for his.
It Is impious, scandalous, to conceive, endite such dictates.

He further adds, 2dly, All sorts of Churches have had their Synods to this end.

Answ. 1. To what end? To make Laws and Constitutions for an Order of Ministry
that Christ never established, to impose a Ly^urgical Worship upon his
Churches, to set up an unpreaching Ministry, in his House -- Mr. T. knows that
these things are false, and untrue. If he mean not these, I would advise him to
speak pertinently in h^s next. These are the Institutions we charge the present
Ministers with submitting to.

2. That all sorts of Churches have found it necessary to have Synods, is more
than Mr. T. can prove. The Learned Whitaker tells us, That they are not simply
and absolutely necessary, De Council. q. 1. p. 22. and I am sure they may be
well enough without them. Licinius interdicts them, Eusebius. de Vit. Constant. l.
1. c. 44. yet the C^urches continued, and in a flourishing sttate.

3dly, That few or no Synods that ever were yet in the World, have had a right
Constitution, were a facile undertaking to demonstrate. The Synod (so called)
of the Church of England, (by which the Laws we mention were out of the Popes
Canon Law collected) was not so. A right Synod is constituted of the Messengers
of the Churches (upon the account whereof they are said to be the Churches
Representatives) sent by them with Instructions from them, touching matters to
be debated in that Convention. This cannot be affirmed of the aforesaid Synod,
nor of any Synod that ever was in the World, since the Apostles fell asleep. So
that whilst our Animadverter is discoursing of them as necessary, he is talking
of the necessity of ^ Non-ens, a mere Chimaera.

4thly, The Churches of Christ had a perfect Discipline, before ever the Synods
he speaks of had a being in the World.

Nor, 5thly, had these ever from Jesus Christ any Authority (and what they have
not from him, is not Obligatory) to impose any thing upon the Churches, to be
observed by them by virtue of an Authoritative power seated in themselves. It Is
a Yoke not to be endured by the freeborn Subjects of Christ, that any of the
Children of men should impose upon them in the matters of their God. The Synod
of Jerusalem did not do so, as we have proved. His third Reason is downright
begging the thing in question: Christ has left nothing relating to the Worship
and Government of his House, as such, undetermined; against which I advise him
not to talk so confidently in his next, till he has proved the contrary. The
Texts mentioned by him, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Heb. 13. 17. prove no such thing, as the
lawfulness of additional Institutions, in matters of Church-Polity, as a part
thereof to the Institutions of Christ. 1 Cor. 14. 40. is afterward in S. T.
(Heb. 13. 17. has already been) considered. That because Paul gives direction,
in some cases, to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. 34. and tells them, the
rest he will set in order when he comes to them, therefore it is left to
Church Governors to institute, de novo, Ordinances and Institutions of their
own, and impose them upon the Churches, is such a Conseq^ence, that would put a
modest (concerned) person to a blush, to review: we have no Apostles, none
acted by an infallible Spirit as they.

In answer to the Objection, as proposed by us, we say, that the whole of it is
built upon such false suppositions as these. That Christ has not determined in
the Scripture, how the affairs of his House should be managed with decency and
order, as well as commanded that they be so; which is derogatory to the
Scriptures perfection; to the Wisdom and Faithfulness of Christ; diametrically
opposite to the Scripture (1 Cor. 14. 40.) instanced it; of which we give this
brief account. The Apostle having condemned them for their irregularity in the
matter of Prophesying, verse. 26. He gives direction touching its regular
performance: And that, 1. Generally, verse. 26. 40. 2. Particularly, by telling
them how they ought to manage this affair in a way of decency and edification,
verse. 27, 28, 29, 30, 34, 35. That from hence a power invested in the Church,
for the binding the Consciences of men touching Ceremonies in Worship, should
be regularly deduced, is the firstborn of improbabilities. --

1. Paul speaking by an infallible Spirit, advises the Church of Corinth, That
all things be done decently and in order.

2. Tells them wherein that decency and order lies; therefore such as pretend
not to such a Spirit, may, of their own heads, bind our Consciences by Laws of
their own, in the Service of God, is such a non-sequitur, as will not in have
be made good.

To this Mr. T. pretends to answer, Sect. 4. The sum is, Christ has left many
particularities undetermined in his Worship, and the Rule of his Church to be
determined by Governors.

Answ. 1. If by particularities of Worship, he mean such as relate to it, as
such; of Church Government, such as are special parts thereof, as the things
mentioned by us are made to be, this has been often denied and disproved by us.

2. He egregiously trifles in the matters instanced in by him: though I think
it horrible wickedness, not to be born, for Ecclesiastical Governors by penal
Laws and Statutes, to impose even those things upon the Churches; That it
should be criminal at the Communion, not to have the Table spread with a Cloth.
That the Service begin with the recital of the Institution, or otherwise; (as
he speaks) and beseech this Animadverter, if he resolves again to draw the Saw
of this Controversy, that we may agree in this, not to multiply
impertinencies, and so prove what we say. I know not any of the Sons of men
that have power to bind my Conscience, where Christ has not. But this Mr. T.
proves, because, 1. Parents are charged to bring up their Children in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. 2. We are to pray for Kings,
-- that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life under them. Ergo, (Antichristian
Church Officers, or) Governors Ecclesiastical have power to make and impose
Constitutions for Church Government upon the Saints. Apage ineptias! That the
Reader should suppose such arguings as these worth the considering, I cannot be
so injurious to him as to imagine, whilst I conceive him to be one not bereaved
of his understanding. Much after the same rate that some admirers of the
Gentleman at Rome are wont to argue for his Supremacy above Princes; because
it is said, God made two great Lights, the Sun to rule the Day, and the Moon to
rule the Night: Does Mr. T. at present argue for the power of the Rulers, of
the Church of England, in matters of Worship and Government, without authority
from Christ.

Yea, but 3dly, The Bishop must take care of the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3. 5.

Answ. 1. But this is a Christian-Gospel-Bishop, a Pastor of a particular
Church, which our Bishops are not.

2. It remains to be proved, that his taking care of the Church of God, is his
imposing institutions of his own upon them. A forced Interpretation; to say no
more. We read Luke 10. 34. that the Samaritan took care of the wounded man, and
v. 35, bid his Host take care of him; yet I am persuaded neither the one nor
the other, called Synods to establish Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical
to impose upon him. The whole work of a Bishop is not surely to Rule and
Govern, he is to instruct, exhort, admonish, rebuke, with all longsuffering and
mee^ness, to strengthen the weak, comfort the comfortless, and in all to have
respect to the will and appointments of his Sovereign Lord and King, not to act
exorbitantly, according to his own will and pleasure.

What he adds by way of Answer to what we assert, that the conceit that Christ
has not determined in the Scripture how the affairs of his House should be
managed, is a derogation to the perfection of the Scripture and the
faithfulness of Christ, is already fully replied to, and removed out of the
way. Only whereas he cites, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and intimates that the sufficiency
there ascribed to the Scripture, consists in affording Doctrines of Faith, and
Rules of Life, we crave leave to tell him, That his Assertion is, 1.
Papistical; exploded by our Protestant Divines. 2. False and untrue; the
Apostle expressly asserts their sufficiency with respect to Church-Politie, to
instruct Timothy wherein, is no small part of his design in this Epistle.

He goes on and tells us, That we give not a true account of the Apostles
dissertation, 1 Cor. 14. 1. He asserts not the Liberty of Saints in Prophesying.

Answ. Of the truth of this let the Reader inform himself from verse. 31. It Is
not material as to our present purpose, whether by Prophesying he meant a
particular gift of foretelling things to come, or an Exposition of Scripture
for the edification of the Saints, whether it were the one or the other, those
to whom the gift was given were to improve it, and this the Apostle expressly
asserts to be their Liberty and duty.

He tells us, 2dly, It is not right that the Apostle, verse. 40. represseth his
direction, verse. 26.

Answ. The serious perusal of the Chapter will evince the contrary to this
dictate of his.

Yea, but 3dly, says he, If it were so, there is nothing to prove that no
particular ways of decency and order, are permitted to the care of
after-Rulers.

Answ. 1. We are answering an Objection, not proving a Position or Doctrine.
It Is enough that we manifest that the Scripture produced warrants not
Governors to introduce New Orders and Institutions, an endless company of
ridiculous Ceremonies, under the notion of Decency and Order; which whether we
have evinced or not, let the Reader judge.

2. That he waves the Controversy about Ceremonies, as Cross, Surplice,
Kneeling at the Sacrament, is wisely done, and had he waved the whole
Controversy some think it had been no argument of his indiscretion, but his so
doing is no Answer: He that will justify the present Ministry and Worship of
the Church of England, persons of such dull capacities as our selves conceive,
must justify these too; They being made so necessary a part of their Worship,
that the Worship it self must rather be omitted, than these devices of their
Prelates (or rather the Archpriest of Rome:) a Minister, though never so able,
must not Preach, if he will not wear the Surplice; nor Baptize, if he will not
Cross; nor may any either administer the Communion, or receive it, without
Kneeling: In which things, if they transgress, they are liable to be presented,
suspended, excommunicated. -- I have no power to compel Mr. T. to plead for any
thing that he has no mind to plead for. In due time, for ought I know, he may
as fast draw off from the tents of these men, as he has of late been advancing
toward them. He will not plead for their Canons, nor for their Ceremonies (at
least some of them) he tells us, p. 54. It may be the next step may be, nor for
their Ministry. To what purpose Mr. T. disputes for the power of Governors to
Institute Rules for Church-Polity, when he will not plead for those they
Institute, I know not.

We manifested in S. T. the invalidity of this Argument; The Apostle by an
infallible Spirit advises the Church of Corinth, That all things de done
decently and in order; and discovers to them wherein that Decency and Order
lay; therefore persons that pretend not to such a Spirit, may of their own head
bind our Consciences by Laws and Rules of their own in the Service of God.

To this Mr. T. replies, He conceives none would thus unadvisedly conclude.

Answ. And I believe so too; but if they will argue rightly from this
Scripture, thus must they argue, as we have demonstrated. But he will yet prove
the power of Governors in this matter, from 1 Cor. 14 40. thus.

That which belonging to Decency and Order, is commanded in general, but not in
the particularities determined, is in respect of Communities left to be
determined by their Rulers. But so is the Apostles command, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Therefore. --

Answ. 1. Both Propositions are liable to exception. 1. Upon supposition that
what in the Worship of Christ belongs to Decency and Order is left
undetermined, it does not follow that it belongs to the Rules of the Church to
determine thereof, which is to make the Rulers Lords over Gods Heritage, to
introduce insupportable Tyranny into the Churches of Christ. -- They are the
Churches Servants, not Lords, that are her Ministers.

2dly, The Minor Proposition is notoriously false and untrue, the Apostle is
debating the business of Prophesying, touching this he lays down particular
rules for Decency and Order, which he requires them to conform to. Let any
sober Christian peruse the Chapter, he will see this shining therein in
brightness; So Ambrose, Aquinas, etc. inform us. Decently and in Order, that no
unseemliness or tumult arise. But this prescription of the Apostle is not to be
applied to any Episcopal Traditions, but the Apostles own, viz. such as he had
delivered to the Churches, says a learned man. Thus the heat of this contest
is allayed.

Pulveris exigui jactu. We further reply in S. T. But let this be granted,
suppose that it is the Privilege and Duty of the Church to make Laws and
Constitutions for the binding of the Consciences of men in matters of Decency
and Order; this Church herein is bounded by the Scripture, or it is not; If it
be, then when it has no prescription therein for its commands, it is not to be
obeyed, and so we are where we were before, That Decency and Order is to be
determined by the Scripture. If it be not bounded thereby, then whatever
Ceremonies it introduces, not directly contrary thereunto, they must be
subjected to; which how fair an inlet it is to the whole Farrago of Popish
Inventions, who sees not?

To this Mr. T. adjoyns, That he does not plead, that it is the Privilege and
Duty of the Church to make Laws and Constitutions for the binding of the
Consciences of men in matters of Decency and Order.

Answ. Very good! The Church of England Mr. T. thinks has no such Power,
Privilege or Authority granted unto them, by the Lord Jesus; Then have they,
whilst they have so done, invaded his Throne and Kingly Authority. The Parish
Priests whilst they own, abet and subscribe to what they have done in this
matter are Copartners with them in their iniquity, are really guilty of
opposing the King-ship of Christ, which was the matter we have been all this
while contesting about, and is now, in effect, granted by our wary Antagonist.
We argue thus.

Those that assume power to make Laws and impose the reception of them, upon
the People of a Nation, beside those (and without any Privilege or grant to
them by such given) in whom the Sovereign Power of Ruledom resides, are guilty
of Rebellion against such their Rulers and Governors: Those that abet them
herein are guilty of the same Rebellion: But this the Church of England, with
respect to Jesus Christ the only Sovereign Lord and Ruler of his Churches,
has done, her Ministers have abetted her herein. Therefore. --

The Major cannot be denied. The Minor is evident. 1. That the Church of
England has made Constitutions for the binding the Consciences of men in the
matters of Decency and Order; their Book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical evince; that they have no authority from Christ so to do, Mr. T.
grants: So that in what follows we are little concerned, partly because he has
already yielded the cause, and partly because the particularities he speaks of,
be they what they will, are only, he tells us, of Decency and Order, not
determined in the Scripture. Now we deny any such particularities undetermined,
we think it a most fearful undervaluing of the Wisdom of Christ, to assert,
That mans' Devices can add Beauty, Order, or Decency to Christ's Institutions,
i. e. They are not Orderly or Decent without Humane Impositions. Nor see we how
these can be prescribed by Canons Ecclesiastical to be obeyed, because enjoined
by the Rulers of the Church, to whom we are, says Mr. T. in Conscience bound
to submit; if it be not the Privilege nor Duty of the Church to make Laws and
Constitutions for the binding the Consciences of men in matters of this nature,
and think that the latter part of his Answer is in contention with the former.
Besides we are yet ^o seek for a proof of this matter; That we are obliged to
obey Rulers Ecclesiastical, commanding us any thing in the Worship of God, as
such, under the notion of Decency and Order; and believe this very assertion is
contrary to the Law of Nature and right Reason, which teaches us, That God is
to be served after that way that pleases him best: That ^he Will of God (who
is the alone Master of the House) not man is solely to be heeded in the
Ordering of his Family and Household.

Mr. T. would take it ill should I prescribe Rules to him for the well-ordering
of his Family, and that without his License, and that after I know he has
Constituted and appointed Laws himself for that very end. And yet I conceive he
is not so far above me, as the great and only wise God is above the mightiest
and wisest of mortals. So that whilst he would avoid the horns of the Dilemma,
that of the Poet is verified of him,

Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Carybdim. Nor do I see how he avoids the
horns of the Dilemma by what he replies in this matter: The Rulers
Ecclesi^stical are either when they make Laws binding the Conscience,
indirectly bounded in their so doing by Scripture, or they are not, i. ^. they
must impose no Laws upon us without Scripture Precept, or they may. If the
first, we are bound to obey them no further than they are able to evince the
justness and righteousness of their Commands, upon the account of their being
bottomed upon the Scripture. Then no Obligation lies upon us to observe the
Canons, Ceremonies of the Church of England any further than they can manifest
their Observation commanded therein; then she and her Ministers do wickedly to
Excommunicate, Imprison, Ruin us, for not yielding subjection, when and where
none is due. If the second, then whatever Ceremonies they introduce, under the
notion of Decency and Order, that are not contrary to the Scripture, must be
subjected to, which is an open inlet to the whole Farrago of Popish
Inventions. We fear the General Rules in Scripture, the Laws of Nature, right
Reason, other laudable Customs, -- that Mr. T. tells us, must be observed in
this matter, will be but a weak defense against them. For who shall be judge of
their consonancy to these Principles? Shall every man be judge for himself?
This our Rulers think to be absurd, and contrary to the Principles asserted by
our Animadverter to be observed. If our Governors, they will tell us, whatever
they impose, it is consonant to all the forementioned Principles, that we
subject to them therein. Ask our Bishops they will tell you so with respect to
the whole of their Popish-English-Canon-Laws and Ceremonies.

Ask Mr. T. and he will tell you little less, than That a blind obedience
should be yielded to them in undetermined particularities. Chap. 1. Sect. 1.
Ask the Pope and his Concl^ve, they will tell you, It Is consonant to the
forementioned Principles, that we subject to all his Ceremonies: Nor indeed
can we say of most of them, that they are more dissonant to right reason, --
than some that are retained amongst us. So that the horns of the Dilemma are
piercing the heart of the Cause, whose defense Mr. T. has undertaken.

We further argue in S. T. Yet were this also yielded them, they were never a
jot nearer the mark aimed at, except it can be proved that supposing a power of
introducing Ceremonies, to be invested in the Church, thence a power for the
Institution of new Orders and Ordinances, the introducing of Heathenish,
Jewish, and Superstitious practices in the Worship of God may be evinced. And
yet should all this be yielded them, how will they prove the Constitutions
mentioned, to be the Constitution of a right constituted Church, a National
Church? the Church of England is not so. Yet if all this were granted, where
are the Constitutions of this Church, that we may pay the homage to them that
is meet? When was it assembled in the same place together, in its several
Members, freely to debate and determine what Laws and Constitutions were fit to
be observed by them?

If it be said, That it is enough that it be assembled in its several Officers,
or such as shall be chosen by their Officers, whose Laws every Member is bound
to be obedient to.

We Answer, But these Officers being not the Church (nor are true Officers of a
right constituted Church, any where so called in the Scripture) I owe no
subjection to their Laws or Constitutions, it being pleaded that it is the
Church that has only power in this matter. It remains therefore,
(notwithstanding what is pleaded in this Objection) That the present Ministers
of England own -- Laws and Constitutions that are not in any sense of Christ's
revealing, and therefore oppose the Kingly and Prophetical Office of Christ.

To which Mr T. 1. I do not plead for the Constitutions of the Church of
England. --

Answ. But the framers of the Objection proposed do; Which if Mr. T. will
justify, he must also plead for them; but I shall not co^pel him to a warfare
he is not willing to engage in, he may take his liberty to stand by and look
on, but then he had done fairly not to have pretended to justify what he
scarce speaks a word to. The impertinent Questions he speaks of, are pertinent
to the Objection and Objectors we have to deal with.

What he has spoken of a National Church in answer to the Preface Sect. 15. we
have removed out of the way by our Reply thereunto.

He tells us, 2dly, That the Church of England was Assembled at London in its
several Members, by Deputation freely to debate things, at was the usage of the
Synods in the ancient times, -- as the Kingdom is said to meet in the
Parliament, so the whole Church may be said to meet in their Synod.

Answ. 1. No doubt Mr. T. (and his Abettors) thinks he has now spoken to the
purpose indeed, but the emptiness of the whole is soon manifested. No Synods
whether ancient or new, can be supposed to represent the Church, but upon the
account of the free Election of the persons constituting them, and deputation
by the Members of that Church which they represent. Whosoever is sent by the
Church, represents the person of the Church, says the Learned Whittaker, De
Council. q. 3. c. 3. p. 103. Yea Bilson himself tells us, None are bound to the
Council, but those who send to the Council. No Council does bind the whole
Church except the consent be general. Con. Ap. p. 49, 51. And Saravia tells us,
The Council represents no Churches except those who send their Messengers to
the Churches, Con. Gretz. p. 379. Yea in every rightly constituted Synod, the
Laity (as they are called) are not to be excluded. It Is a Rule founded in
Nature and Reason, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet. That which
concerns all, ought to be handled by all. Although the Priests and Clerks do
alone exercise Judgments Ecclesiastical, yet where a matter is agitated that
pertains to the Church Universal, which consists not only of Clerks, but also
of Laics; it is not equal that the Laics (or Lay People) should be removed
from these deliberations; but all Decrees ought rather to be confirmed by
common consent: Which that it was observed by the Apopostles of Christ, the
sacred History testifies, Acts 15. And this is the Opinion of the most famous
Doctors of the Canon Law, says Durandus De Sanct. Minist. Lib. 1. c. 11. He
says more truly perhaps than he was aware, That as the whole Kingdom is said
to meet in the Parliament, so the whole Church may be said to meet in their
Synod, and no otherwise. Now we know that the meeting of a company of Knights,
and Gentlemen at Westminster is not the Parliament, the Representative of the
Kingdom; Their free Election by the Body of the People of the Nation renders
them so. In like manner the Convention of a company of Prelates and Priests
make not a Synod (by our Animadverters own Argument) but their Election by the
People, to meet and sit in Council together as their Representees, which the
Synod, so called at London, One thousand six hundred and three (nor any
National Synod ever since) had not; the Choice of the People was never minded,
never was their consent required: So that in the sense he takes the word
Church, (which yet is foreign to the Scripture, as we say in S. T.) the Church
of England was never yet concerned.

In what follows in this Section, Mr. T. himself will acknowledge I am not
further concerned.

Sect. 2.
The present Ministers oppose the Kingly and Prophetical Office of Christ,
whilst they own Laws contrary to the Revelation of Christ. That they do thus,
evinced by the induction of particular instances, Acts 8. 27. ^ Tim. 6. 15.
Jer. 51. 26. Luke 11. 2. Mat. 6. 7, 8, 9. Whether Christ there instituted a
form of Prayer. Romans 8. 26. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Mark 14. 18, 22, 23. opened. That
Christ sat with his Disciples in the celebration of the Ordinance of breaking
Bread, evinced. Of Kneeling. The reason of its first institution. Its
opposition to 1 These. 5. 22. manifested. Of forbidding to Marry, and commanding
to abstain from Meats.

IN Sect. 6. Mr. T. proceeds to the examination of what is further produced in
S. T. for the manifestation of the guilt of the present Ministers, in their
opposing the Kingly and Prophetical Office of Christ, which we further prove,
because they own, submit, and subscribe to Laws, Constitutions and Ordinances
that are contrary to the Revelation of Christ. This we prove by particular
instances.

They own and acknowledge, 1. That there may be other Archbishops, and
Lord-Bishops in the Church of Christ, besides himself. Which is contrary to 1
Pet. 5. 3. 1 Cor. 12. 5. Ephesians. 4. 5. Heb. 3. 1. Luke 22. 22, 25. 26.

To which our Animadverter replies, 1. They do not acknowledge them in
opposition to these Scriptures.

Answ. But that is the (...); Mr. T. may be ashamed of such pitiful beggary.

He adds 2ly, They do not acknowledge Archbishops over the whole Church, as
the Pope, but in their own Province.

Answ. This is not at all material, the authority of Archbishops -- over a
Province -- is as much against the Texts mentioned, as over the whole Church.
It Is not the extent of Authority, Lordship, -- that is therein condemned, but
the thing it self.

3ly. He further tells us, They have no such dominion ascribed to them over the
Church they oversee, as is forbidden, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Luke 22. 25, 26.

Answ. 1. This is again to beg the thing in question. 2ly, We have proved the
contrary.

He adds 4ly, They are not Lords in the Church -- but in the Kingdom and
Parliament.

Answ. False and untrue, I wish he speak not against knowledge in this matter.
1. When invested into their Episcopal Sees, they are styled Archbishops of
such a place or Province, Lord-Bishop of such a See. 2. The Priests submit to
them, pray for them as their good Lords. 3. They have Power, Authority,
Precedence as such over the rest of the Clergy, give forth Laws and Canons to
rule and guide them, to whom they promise obedience at their Ordination. 4.
They exercise jurisdiction, authority over their respective Diocesses in their
Ecclesiastical Courts, and Consistories as such, all evident Ensigns and
Demonstrations of Lordly Dignities, even in and over that which they call the
Church.

That which he 5ly adds of the Eunuchs being called (...), Acts 8. 27. without
contradiction to 1 Timothy 6. 15. where Christ is said to be (...), is frivolous.

1. The Eunuch is not said to be (...), a Potentate with respect to the Church
of God, over it he was not such, but with respect to the Kingdom of Aethiopia,
where he was a Noble Man, a Governor under Candace the Queen: Our Bishops are
Potentates in and over that which they call the Church of Christ.

2. That any other besides Christ should exercise Lordship and Authority in the
World, is not interdicted, as is their so doing in the Churches of Christ, in
the Scriptures mentioned.

He says 5ly, He has not showed that what is acknowledged is a Law,
Constitution, or Ordinance, nor the Ministers own it by subscription.

Answ. True indeed, I did not do so, for I thought it needless to demonstrate
that the Sun shines at noon-dayes. Are not the Offices of Archbishops,
Lord-Bishops Constitutions and Ordinances? Have they not their Foundation and
Establishment by Law? Does not Mr. T. know it? Is he only a stranger in our
Israel? Of the Truth of this there are not many in the Nation that are or can
be ignorant. That the Ministers own these (whether by subscription, or
otherwise, is not considerable, Mr. T. deals injuriously whilst he suggests, I
say, they own these, with the rest of the particulars mentioned by
subscription, when I assert only, That they own, submit, and subscribe to, i.
some of them they manifest they own by Subscription, others other ways, but
they own submission to them all) is too notorious to admit of a denial; They do
so in their Ordination, when they promise Canonical Obedience to them, in their
prayers for them, subjection to their precepts from time to time, transmitted
to them, which they dare not transgress. 2ly, That men may and ought to be made
Ministers, only by these Lord-Bishops, is we say in S. T. owned by the present
Ministers: which is contrary to Heb. 5. 4. John 10. 1, 7. and 13. 20. Acts 14.
23. with 6. 3, 5. What Mr. T. adjoyns hereunto touching Ordination by Suff^agan
Bishops, has already been removed out of the way. How much they own a
Presbyterian Ordination, (of which he speaks) many good men in the Nation feel
and find. Of these things we have already spoken. That Ordination by
Lord-Bishops is established by Law, is known, and that exclusively to any other
without them. Hereunto the Ministers subscribe, Can. 36. The Scriptures
instanced in prove this to be contrary to the Revelation of Christ, Heb. 5. 4.
John 10. 1, 7. and 13. 20. manifestly evince; That who-ever undertakes to be a
Minister of the Lord in his Church, must be called of, sent by him. (So was
Aaron --) Acts 14. 23. and 6. 3, 5. manifest that the Way of the Lord's mission
is not by Lord-Bishops, but by his Churches and People. What he tells us he
has said in answer to any of these Scriptures, we have replied to Chap. 2.

We add in S. T. 3ly, That Prelates, their Chancellors and Officers have power
from Christ to cast out of the Church of God, is owned by them, contrary to
Mat. 18. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4.

To which our Animadverter subjoyns, He finds no such Law. --

Answ. It may be he is willingly ignorant hereof. This he cannot but know, that
in the Name of Christ the Officers mentione^ do excommunicate out of the Church
(so called) of Christ. Do they do this without Law? Is it not one of their
Church-constitutions, that they may do so? Do not the present Ministers own
them herein? Whilst they cite, present, persecute their Neighbors for not
coming to Divine Service, (as they call it) it may be for refusing to pay them
a four-penny-due, in the Ecclesiastical Courts, even to an Excommunication,
whose Act therein they afterward publicly denounce and declare, once and
again in obedience to them? What more evident* The weakness of his answer to
Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. we have already manifested.

We say further in S. T. That they own 4ly, that the Office of the Suffragans,
Deans, Canons, -- are lawful and necessary to be had in the Church, contrary to
1 Cor. 12. 18, 28. Romans 12. 7. Ephesians. 4. 11. The Officers instituted by Christ
are sufficient for the edification and perfecting of the Saints, till they all
come unto a perfect man, -- v. 12, 13. In what sense the forementioned, being
not one of them of the Institution of Christ, may be owned as lawful and
necessary, without an high contempt of the Wisdom and Sovereignty of Christ, I
am not able to conceive; -- this is the sum.

Mr. T. replies, 1. He knows not where this imagined Ordinance is.

Answ. That there are such Officers and Offices in the Church of England
established by the Laws thereof, he cannot be ignorant: To say, They are
Antichristian, or repugnant to the Word of God, is censured by the Canons
thereof, Can. 7. That the Ministers own, submit to some of them, is known. The
vanity and impertinency of Mr. T. his pleading for them (not to mention his
perjury therein) is discovered in our present Vindication of Chap. 3. from his
exceptions against what is by us therein argued.

We say they own -- 5thly, That the Office of Deacons in the Church is to be
employed in public Praying, administration of Baptism, and Preaching, if
licensed by the Bishop thereunto, contrary to Act. 6. 2. Ephesians. 4. 11.

Mr. T. replies, It Is not contrary to Christ's Revelation -- that they should
be employed in those works.

Ans. 1. But when Christ has instituted the office of Deacons for this end, to
attend Tables, or look after the provision, and necessities of the Saints; That
any persons may own an Office of Deacons in the Church, to be employed by
virtue of Office-power in any other work than that for which they are entrusted
by Christ, and called unto Office, without an advance against that Institution
of Christ, is absurd to imagine.

2. That the present Ministers own such an Office he does not deny.

3. What he speaks of Stephen and Philip, he had said before, and to it we have
replied already, and need no^ add more.

A sixth Law or Ordinance that we say they own -- is this, That the Ordinance
of Breaking Bread, or the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, may be administered to
one alone, as to a sick man ready to die: Which is diametrically opposite to
the Nature and Institution of that Ordinance, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 33. Mat.
26. 26. Acts 2. 42. and 20. 7.

To which Mr. T. This is not easily proved from the Scrip^ures instanced in.

Answ. Whether it be or not, is left to the judgment of the judicious Reader to
determine. I am weary in pursu^^g him in his impertinencies. He grants a
Communion is proved in that Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10. 16. but verse. 17. and 1 Cor.
12. 13. prove the Communion to be rather with all Christians; Of which yet
there is not one word in either of the places. In verse. 17. He speaks of the
Church of Corinth, that was one bread, one body. The other Scripture speaks
nothing of Saints Communion one with another in this Ordinance, 1 Cor. 11. 33.
Acts 20. 7. he confesses prove, That it should be administered when all the
Communicants (Church or Brethren, he should say) are come together. Whether its
administration to one alone, be not diametrically opposite hereunto, as also to
the very first Institution of this Ordinance, Mat. 26. 26. let the Judicious
judge. Though it be said, Act. 2. 46. that they brake bread from house to
house; it does not follow there was none beside the Minister and the sick man;
the words import the contrary.

We manifest further in S. T. That they own, 7thly, a prescript form of Words
in Prayer; that a ceremonious pompous Worship devised ^y man, and abused to
Idolatry, is according to the will of God, and may lawfully be used under the
New Testament Dispensation; contrary to Mat. 15. 9. and 28. 20. John 4. 23.
Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Jer. 51. 26. Romans 8. 26. 1 Cor. 14. 15. By this prescript form of
Words, -- this ceremonious pompous Worship -- the Common Prayer Book,
Collegiat-Worship and Service is intended. This I say is devised by man, the
owning whereof is contrary to Mat. 15. 9. and 28. 20. Deuteronomy. 12. 22. abused to
Idolatry: The owning hereof is opposite to Jer. 51. 26. It is Ceremonious and
Pompous, the abetting whereof is adverse to Joh. 4. 23. as is the owning of a
prescript Form of Words, to Romans 8. 26. 1 Cor. 14. 15.

To which our Animadverter replies. 1. He should have told us what part of the
Common Prayer Book was abused to Idolatry.

Answ. The whole of it is so, being Worship not appointed by the Lord, and used
in that Church, that is the most Idolatrous Church in the world.

What he has said in this Chap. Sect. 3. or in Chap. 3. Sect. 4. We have
already answered. His great outcry of our abuse of Jer. 51. 26. produced to
prove it unlawful to use any thing in the Worship of God abused to Idolatry,
will soon be evinced to be an empty sound.

-- Vox and praeterea nihil. 1. We have for our Companions in this Exposition,
persons not contemptible for wisdom and holiness, who make conscience of
applying Scriptures, and abusing the Reader.

2. Of all men Mr. T. i^ the most incompetent for the management of this
charge, who most egregiously perverts Scriptures in this Treatise, contrary to
former Interpretations given by himself to them, and to the plain intendment of
the Spirit therein: As we have in part manifested, and may do further in our
Appendix.

3. He egregiously abuses the Reader in this very passage, whilst he bears him
in hand, that we expound the words of a prohibition to the Jews, That they
should not use the stones of Babylon to build a Temple to God at Jerusalem,
because abused to Idolatry, which we do not. Nor was it likely they would ever
have gone about to do so. Babylon was too remote for them, such a prohibition
had been altogether needless and vain.

But 4. That Chap. 50, and 51. -- are one entire Prophecy, that reaches
farther than the Destruction of Literal Babylon, even to the ruin of all the
Scripture calls so, is evident.

For 1st, This Prophecy relates to the restoration of all the Tribes; Israel
as well as Judah, verse. 4. 5. which to this day has not been fulfilled. The
ten Tribes (represented by Israel) being in a dispersed state, ever since they
were carried away Captive by Salmanasser. It Is true Judah after the 70 years
Captivity did return; but what is that to Israel? when this Prophecy is
accomplished, they must also be brought to their habitation, which is again
repeated verse. 19. And I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he
shall feed on Carmel. -- This Carmel was the portion of the half Tribe of
Manasseh, belonging to the ten Tribes, Jos. 19.

2dly, When God does this, the iniquity of Jacob shall be sought for, and there
shall be none. -- verse. 20.

3dly, He will then make use of Israel as his Battle-Axe and weapon of War, to
destroy and break in pieces Kingdoms and Nations, verse. 20, 21.

4thly, The Deliverance and Vengeance here prophesied of, is the issue of the
groans and cries of the Inhabitants of Sion against Babylon, verse. 35, 36. But
against Literal Babylon the Children of Israel were not to cry, but the
contrary, Jer. 29. 7.

5thly, Many material passages in this Prophecy are applied by the Spirit of
the Lord to Mystical Babylon, as Chap. 50. 8. Rev. 18. 4. verse. 29. Rev. 18. 6.
Chap. 51. 6. Rev. 18. 4. --

6thly, The Babylon mentioned in this Prophecy, and the Babylon spoken of in
the Revelation, is one and the same Babylon, differing at most but as Type and
Antitype. Babylon is a Type of the City and Seat of Antichrist, says the
Learned Ainsworth on Psalm. 137. v. 1. This is evident to the eye of the
understanding Reader from the ensuing Scheme.

Jeremiah's Babylon.
Jer. 50. 8. Remove out of the midst of Babylon. And 51. 6. Flee out of the
midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul, be not cut off in her
iniquity, for this is the time of the Lords vengeance, he will render unto her
a recompense.

Jer. 50. 29. Recompense her according to her work; according to all that she
has done, do unto her: for she has been proud against the Lord, against the
Holy One of Israel.

Jer. 50. 39. The wild beasts of the desert shall dwell there, and the owls
shall dwell therein, and it shall be no more inhabited for ever: neither shall
it be dwelt in from generation to generation; as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah. --

Jer. 51. 7. Babylon has been a golden cup in the Lords hand, that made all
the earth drunken: the nations have drunk of her wine, therefore the nations
are mad.

Jer. 51. 8. Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed, howl for her.

John's Babylon.
Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her Sins,
and that ye receive not of her Plagues: for her sins have reached unto heaven,
and God has remembered her iniquities.

Rev. 18. 6, 7. Reward her even as she has rewarded you, double unto her
double, according to her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her
again. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much
sorrow give her.

Rev. 18. 2. Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the
habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird. Rev. 18. 22. The voice of harpers and musicians --
shall be heard no more at all in thee: and no crafts man shall be found any
more in thee. -- verse. 8. she shall be utterly burnt with fire.

Rev. 17. 2. With whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and
the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
fornication. And 18. 3. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of
her fornications.

Rev. 14. 8. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, -- Rev. 18. 2. Babylon the Great is
fallen, is fallen, verse. 9. And the Kings of the earth who committed
fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, -- saying, alas,
alas, -- for in one hour is thy judgment come, verse. 11, 15, 19.

The sum is; the Prophecy not being confined to Literal Babylon, but eminently
relating to Mystical Babylon, or the false who^ish Church, in the Revelation,
the not taking a stone of her for a foundation, -- (having no respect to the
Jews not using the stones of Babylon in building the Temple, which it is not
like they had the least intendment to do) points out the duty of the spiritual
Jew, or Christian Believer in his departure from the Antichristian Church, not
to introduce any of her things, once abused to Idolatry, into the Worship of
the House of God: which we cited this Scripture to prove.

Mr. T. proceeds and tells us, 2dly. That external words and gestures, are not
contrary to John 4. 23.

Answ. Nor do we say they are: this we affirm, That a form of words enjoined,
the Ceremonious pompous Worship of England, managed and carried on in our
Collegiat Churches and Chapels with outward pomp and state is so. That which
he says in answer hereunto, viz. That this Text excludes the Legal
shadowy-Worship of the Law, establishes what we say: For if a pompous,
shadowy-Worship, once of the Institution of the Lord, be excluded by this
Scripture, much more that which is so, and of the devising and establishment of
Antichrist. --

In what he says, 3dly, That we conceive a form of Words prescribed and
devised by man, to be contrary to Mat. 15. 9. and 28. 20. Deuteronomy. 12. 31. he
openly prevaricates; For though, as commanded in the Worship of God, it be so;
yet we rather refer those Scriptures to the whole of their humane devices, in
their Worship and Service, viz. Surplice, Organs, Cross in Baptism, etc. that
have not the least foundation in Scripture, and are therefore contrary to them.
What Mr. T. dictates, That if no prescript form of Prayer, devised and imposed
by penal Laws, to be used by man (for thus he must speak if he speak
pertinently) may be used, then conceived forms of Prayer may not be used: I
desire him not to attempt the proof of, because it is such an imposible task that
he will never be able to make good. That Christ has commanded a set form of
Prayer, Luke 11. 2. Mat. 6. 7, 8. is first false.

For, 1st, If he had done so, it were utterly unlawful to use any other than
the words therein contained, because he says, When ye pray say, Our Father. --

2dly, That which is in Mat. 6. is a full Interpretation of Luke's expression,
and Christ's intendment, viz. verse. 9. After this manner pray ye, etc. (Gr.
(...), to this purpose.)

3dly, We no where find the Disciples, either themselves using the form of
words here mentioned, nor in all their directions given to the Churches,
touching this important duty, is there the least recommendation of the use of
these words to them, nor are they prescribed as a matter of duty upon any of
them.

4thly, There are not the same words, nor the same number of words in Mat. 6.
9. as in Luke 11. 2. -- So that if Christ enjoins us to the use of the words,
he enjoins us to sin; for if I use the words recited by Matthew, I sin against
the injunction in Luke, and so contra^ily.

5thly, Paul expressly says, We know not what to pray for as we ought, Romans 8.
26. which were scarce consistant with truth, if Christ had tied us to the use
of those words in Prayer. 2. Impertinent, ^estructive of the cause he has
undertaken the defense of, upon supposition that Christ has prescribed a Form
of Prayer to be used, it follows not that others may so prescribe and ordain,
but rather the contrary. The prescription of another form by them, casts on his
the reproach of imperfection and insufficiency. Our Savior has prescribed us
a form of Prayer to be used as a form, by the repetition of the same words,
therefore we may use it, yea we must, is an invincible Argument, on supposition
of the truth of the Proposition: But our Savior has prescribed us such a
form, -- Therefore we may use another which he has not prescribed, has (says
a learned man) neither show, nor color of Reason in it.

But Mr. T. will prove, That a form of Prayer prescribed and imposed is not
contrary to Romans 8. 26. 1 Cor. 14. 15. For,

1st, It Is not said, the Spirit helps our infirmities by suggesting the form of
words, but by making known what things we shall ask, and by exciting in us
groans and sighs that are unutterable.

Answ. 1. The words are, (...), The Spirit helps (as the Nurse the Child, or
as a strong man him that is fainting under his burden) our sicknesses,
weaknesses, infirmities. Whatever the inabilities and infirmities of the Saints
are, he helps them in and under them, which Mr. T. does ill to apply solely to
our inward weaknesses, when the Lord does not do so.

2. Has he never known an unap^ness of expression to be upon him, in this and
other duties in which he has been helped by the Spirit of the Lord?

3. Is not such an unaptness one of our weaknesses (to prevent which i^ is
pleaded, forms of Prayer are prescribed; which is directly to justle out the
Spirit and put these forms in his place) this the Spirit shall help says the
Apostle.

4. Have not many of the Saints, under the sense of their inabilitie, suitably
to express themselves lived in a dependence upon this promise, and found the
Spirit helping their infirmities indeed?

5. Is it not as much our duty to wait for the Spirit to give us a Mouth and
Wisdom to speak to God, a door of utterance when before him, as when we are
speaking to men.

6. The Assembly in their Annotations interpret it of the assistance of the
Spirit, in respect of words, as otherwise.

But Mr. T. will prove the contrary; because, 1. It Is said the Spirit makes
intercession for us with groans unutterable.

Answ. 1. Groans unutterable are either, 1. such as my words and expressions
cannot fully reach; or, 2. such whose virtue and excellency does not consist in
the number and flourish of words, as the prayers of Hypocrites, Mat. 6. 7. but
in most lively feelings and pangs of the Spirit; but that therefore we must not
use words in prayer, or that in so doing we may not expect the help and
assistance of the Spirit, is yet to be proved.

He adds 2dly, That 1 Cor. 14. 15. is such a praying in the Spirit as may be,
1. without the understanding of him that prays; or 2. others, even such as he
that occupies the room of the unlearned, cannot say, Amen.

Answ. 1. The first is not said; Mr. T. does ill to impose his own crude
conceptions upon the Spirit of the Lord: It Is said indeed, That his
understanding is unfruitful, viz. to others, what he conceives they are not
bettered by, because brought forth in an unknown tongue.

2. The words they speak in an unknown Tongue, were from the assistance of the
Spirit, therefore called a praying in, or by the Spirit; so that this is so far
from abetting what he produces it for, viz. that the Spirit does not suggest
words, that it proves the contrary.

3. A manifest evidence also, that a form of prayer imposed is contrary to this
gift of praying in the Spirit; for had they been tied to the former, the
exercise hereof had been altogether shut out; which being a Spiritual gift, was
to be coveted by the Saints, chap. 14.

1. As for what he adds, 1. That the assistance of the Spirit, Romans 8. is meant
of secret, private prayers, not of public, is frivolous. It Is not to be
imagined that God should promise his help in the managerie of private duties,
and not afford it in such as are more public, in the honorable performance
whereof his glory is more eminently concerned. It Is, 2. fond to imagine that it
should be meant of raptures and ecstasies in Prayer. It Is a promise made to the
Saints in general, which they reap the daily fruit of, to their own Souls, and
cannot be persuaded upon such easy terms to let go their interest therein.
These Texts stand diametrically opposite to a form of Prayer, which renders the
assistance of the Spirit, both as to matter and words, useless; both which are
ready prepared therein.

We say in S. T. That the present Ministers own, 8thly, That wicked and ungodly
persons, and their Seed are lawful Members of ^he Church, and if they consent
not willingly to be so, they may be compelled thereunto, contrary to Psalm 110.
3. Acts 2. 40, 41, 47. and 19. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 17. and 9. 13. Which is so
notoriously known to be according to the Canons of their Church, (and consonant
to their daily practice) that I wonder Mr. T. should enquire after the Law or
Constitution of this instance; and much more that he should say, He knows not
where to find it, (as he does Sect. 8.) He has sure read Can. 112. 22, 57.
where he will find an abundant demonstration of the truth of what we have
asserted.

He adds, None of the Scriptures produced prove that persons may not be
compelled by pecuniary mulcts to come to Common Prayer, or the Communion.

Answ. 1. And why pleads he only for the lawfulness of Pecuniary Mulcts? Does
the Canon Law extend no further? Does the Bishops cruelty arise no higher? What
means the sighs of the poor and needy, who to the ruin of their Families have
for many years lain in noisome Prisons for their nonconformity?

2. Why pleads he not for the Spanish Inquisition, the Stake and Faggots in the
Marian days? he knows they have all the same bottom and foundation.

3. Several of the Scriptures produced, prove that none but such as of their
free will (being under no constraint but that of the Spirit thereunto) desire
to be so, were Members of the Churches of Christ, (compulsion whereunto we are
so foolish as to think to be hereunto contrary) as Psalm. 110. 3. (a Prophecy
of Gospel Times, as he grants) Acts 2. 41, 47. 2 Cor. 9. 13.

From whence we argue; If it be prophesied of such as are to constitute the
Gospel-Church-State, that they shall be a willing people, and we find only such
in the time of the Gospel taken thereinto, their subjection of consent or
willingness to the Gospel of Christ, both with respect to Doctrine and
Discipline, being what the Saints rejoiced to behold, then compelling any by
Pecuniary mulcts, or ot^erwise, to be Church members, is wicked and unlawful,
contrary to the forecited Scriptures. But the first is manifestly proved by
them. Therefore --

'Twere easy to manifest that this is a Principle decried by the Primitive
Believers, with the Witnesses of Christ in all Ages; A^ Tertullian, Clemens
Alexand. Lactantius, the Council of Sardis, of Toledo, Chrysostom, Epiphanius,
Ignatius. Constantine at first made a Decree, That Liberty of Worship ought not
to be denied. -- Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 10. c. 5.

The noble Lord Cobham, in answer to Dr. Walden's speaking contemptuously of
Wickliff, says, Where do you find in all God's Law, That you should thus sit
in judgment of any Christian man, or yet give sentence upon any other man unto
death, as ye do here daily: no ground have you in all the Scriptures so lordly
to take it upon you, but in Annas and Caiphas, which sat thus upon Christ and
his Apostles, -- of them only have you taken it, to judge Christ's Members as
you do; and neither of Peter nor John. It Is some of the sour leaven of the
Papacy yet left amongst us, the only prop by which Antichrist's Kingdom has
from the beginning been supported and propagated in the World; the same Spirit
animating it, that breathed in the Roman Pagan Empire, to the ruin and
destruction of multitudes of Christian Souls. Whether, Acts 2. 40. and 19. 9. 2
Cor. 6. 14, 17. prove that wicked and ungodly men are not fit matter for
Church Communion, we will leave to the Judicious Reader to determine.

We add in S. T. 9thly. That Women may administer the Sacrament of Baptism, is
owned by them; which is contrary to 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 12. Mat. 28. 18,
19, 20. Ephesians. 4. 11.

Mr. T. replies, This was allowed in the English Church before the Conference
at Hampton Court, in the Reign of King James, but not since.

Answ. 1. Yet the Learned Hooker, (who is supposed to speak the mind of the
Church, and Ministers of England, as much as another man) after the aforesaid
Conference, pleads for the lawfulness thereof, Eccles. Pol. Sect. 62.

Yea, 2. I find no public renunciation of the foresaid erroneous Principle,
nor is it any where (as I know of) expressly and avowedly condemned by them. And
am persuaded, that upon enquiry it will be found, that it is generally owned by
them to this very day. What he seems to urge for the justification of this
practice, is trivial, viz. Philip had four Daughters that did Prophecy, Acts
21. 9. Mention is made of the Woman Praying or Prophesying, 1 Cor. 11. 5.
Priscilla instructed Apollos, Therefore we cannot exclude them from private
Teaching of the most able, if they be fitted thereunto: Which no body that I
know of denies, but that therefore they may Baptize, which should have been his
inference, is such a non-sequitur, that deserves no other answer t^an contempt.

We proceed, and in S. T. say, 10thly, That the present Ministers own that the
Lords Supper is to be received kneeling. Touching which we affirm three things.

1. That the posture of kneeling is opposite to the practice of Christ in his
first institution of that Ordinance, and so it is if kneeling be directly
opposite to sitting, which it is expressly said he did, Mark 14: 18, 22, 23.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 9. replies, The word (...), used Mark 14. 18. signifies
lying along on Beds.

Answ. 1. Dato non concesso, Yet Kneeling is directly opposite to that posture;
so that that observation (were it true) adv^ntageth not his cause at all.

2. The word (as it is known) signifies, to sit down, or to sit down together at
Meat, Mark 16. 14. Luke 17. 37.

3. It Is most evident Christ sat with his Disciples in the Administration of
this Ordinance.

1. So say all the Evangelists, Mat. 26. 20. Mark 14. 18. Luke 14. 22. John 13.
12.

2. The Papists themselves confess as much,

Rex sedet in caena, turba cinctus duodena, -- Alex. Alens. 3. Most foreign
Ministers and Commentators, (as Aretius, Brentius, Calvin, Beza, Deodat,
Zuinglius, Pisca^or, Danaeus, --) together with our Countrymen, affirm as much.

4. Till above 1460 years after Christ, we meet with no Council or Synod, no
Rubric in all the Lyturgies, that enjoin people to kneel in the act of
Receiving.

5. Our first Reformers in the time of H. 8. in their Treatise touching the
Lord's Supper, desire that Christian Princes would command and establish a form
of administering the Lord's Supper, wherein all the Congregation may be ordered
to sit round about the Lord's Table, as Christ, his Apostles, the Primitive
Christians did.

Nor is, 6. one main end of this Institution, viz. our communion with Christ,
and one with another, so fitly represented by the posture of Kneeling, as
sitting. What else he mentions, is not worth the reminding. Christ sat out of
choice in the celebration of this appointment, for there was no constraint upon
him so to do, he might ^ave stood, or kneeled, if he had pleased.

That we are rather to subject to Antichrist's Canons, and Custom in kneeling,
than follow Christ's Example, sober Christians will not be over forwardly to
be^ieve.

1. Paul. 1 Cor. 11. 23. omits the gesture, because then it had not been in the
least controverted.

2dly, That the posture of Kneeling is opposite to the practice of the Churches
of Christ for several hundred years after, to the time of the invention and
introduction of the Popish breaden God, to the judgment and practice of most of
the Reformed Churches to this very day. The truth of this Mr. T. denies not.
The sayings of Dr. Burgess the Bishop of Rochester, Paybody, etc. in opposition
to the former of these, being without the least tender of proof, and they
themselves sticklers, for kneeling is not to be heeded. The contrary has in
part already, and may be anon more fully evinced.

We say further in S. T. 3dly, That the posture of kneeling, is contrary to 1
These. 5. 22. It has an appearance of evil in it, being a gesture used by the
Papists, in the adoration of their breaden God.

To this Mr. T. replies at large. Having acquainted us with several
interpretations that may be given of the words, (too large to be here
repeated); he tells us, That Interpreters of all sorts, apply it to the
appearance of evil, in practice; but whether the Apostle means it of that which
appears evil to another, or to a man's self, may be doubted. To this latter he
inclines, and gives his reasons.

Answ. But what if a man should say, That what has in it self really an
appearance of evil, is to be abstained from, and that by this Apostolical
precept, and that the trial and probation mentioned, is in order to the finding
out of this? This renders all that Mr. T. has asserted and laid down,
impertinent and invalid.

1. This best suits with the context.

2. None of the absurdities mentioned would follow hereupon.

Kneeling at the Sacrament has a real appearance of evil in it self, were not
men's eyes blinded with passion, custom, self-interest, prejudice, etc. they
could not but see it.

Whatever, not of the institution of the Lord, has been abused to Idolatry,
the greatest Idolatry in the World, has a real appearance of evil in it.
Kneeling in receiving the Sacrament has been so abused. Therefore, --

That which Dr. Burgess (afterward cited by this Animadv.) says, is rather a
confirmation of the truth of the minor Proposition, than otherwise. The Papists
he confesses receive it kneeling as we do; he denies indeed that in that very
moment of time they intend to adore it. But this is the Doctors mistake; they
themselves acknowledge they do so, and protest that did they not believe, that
the very Body and Blood of Christ, were really and carnally in that Sacrament,
they would abhor to kneel at the reception thereof, as do the Protestants.

3. We conceive that should it not be the duty of men to abstain from evil,
till it appear to them to be so, they might commit many evils without being
justly charged as Transgressors, many practicing what is really evil (has a
real appearance of evil) under the notion, and apprehension of an appearance of
good.

Though, 4thly, An appearance of evil in any thing (that is indifferent) to a
tender conscience (another conscience) is what obliges Saints to abstain from
it, as the Apostle argues in the case of the Idolothyte: afterward reviewed by
us, Chap. 9.

None of the absurdities mentioned follow hereupon. Not the first, because till
I know the thoughts of the Brother, to whom it appears to be evil (upon
supposition that it is in it self indifferent) I am not obliged to abstain from
it: nor the second or third; for there are many things, the most, all, that I
am by positive Precept engaged to conform to, that either appear not to be evil
to the Saints I converse with, or if they do, they being my duty, I am obliged
to do it; b^t this is not our present case.

Kneeling in receiving the Sacrament will not be pleaded to be my duty, by
virtue of any positive Law, or Precept from Christ, which is also a sufficient
answer to his 4th reason. I shall only add what I find delivered by one of
their own, viz. Tho. Bacon, Prebend of Canterbury, in his Catechism printed Cum
privilegio; Who writes thus, I could wish all such gestures were avoided, as
have outwardly any appearance of evil; according to this saying of St. Paul,
Abstain from all evil appearance. He instanceth in the gesture of Kneeling at
the receiving the Sacrament, tells us 'twas introduced by the Doctrine of the
Papists, wishes it were taken away; for, says he, i^ has an appearance of
evil. When the Papists had made, of the Sacramental Bread and Wine a god, and
has taught and commanded the People to worship it as God, then gave they
commandment, That all the People should with all reverence kneel unto it. --
And b^ this means the gesture of kneeling crept in, and is yet used in the
Church of the Papists, to declare that they worship the Sacrament as their Lord
God. -- Kneeling with the knowledge of Godly honor is due unto none but God.
Sitting at the Lord's Table, he tells us is the most comely gesture. It Is not
to be doubted but Christ and h^s Disciples, and the Primitive Church a long
time after used that gesture. --

It is added in S. T. Ioly, What should I mention the Constitutions and Canons
before pointed to, wherein it is forbidden to any to preach, not Licensed by the
Bishops thereunto, to marry or eat flesh at certain times, -- directly
contrary to the sovereign Edicts of Christ, and some of them evident Characters
of the last days Apostates, 1 Timothy 4. 3. from whom Saints are warned to turn
away. 2 Timothy 3. 5.

To which Mr. T. replies, Sect. 10. 1. Of forbidding to preach, answer is made,
Sect. 2.

Answ. And to that we have already replied.

2. Forbidding to Marry, and to abstain from Flesh upon Politic
considerations, or for the better observing a religious Fast, may be justified
by Jon. 3. 7. Joel 2. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Dan. 10. 3.

Answ. 1. Of abstaining from Marriage, there is not the least tittle spoken in
the Scriptures produced.

2. They are wholly silent of a set, involuntary, compulsive fast; and from
flesh only.

3. Interdiction of Marriage, and abstinence from Flesh, is bottomed upon the
Canon-Laws; persons are liable to be presented into the Ecclesiastical Courts
for their contrariety thereunto: Dispensations from thence may be obtained for
money; a sufficient evidence, that whatever persons pretend, these things are
of an Ecclesiastical consideration.

4. Eating Flesh is not absolutely forbidden, by the Papists themselves, but on
certain days; nor Marriage, but to certain Persons; yet to these the Character
of the last days Apostates Mr. T. grants does appertain; and why not as much
to the Daughter as to the Mother, to England as to Rome, I am not able to
divine? I am sure the same times of abstinence both from Meats and Marriage, is
enjoined in both. The serious perusal of 2 Timothy 3. 5. will abundantly satisfy
the unprejudiced Reader, that the present Ministers of England are such, as are
there spoken of. So then it being undeniably evident that the present Ministers
of England do own, submit and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances that are
contrary to the Revelation of Christ, they do really deny his Prophetical and
Kingly Office.

Sect. 3.
The present Ministers deny the Kingly and Prophetical Offices of Christ,
whilst they acknowledge another Head of the Church beside him. There is no
other Head of the Church but Christ, proved. Of the Head-ship of the Pope. H.
8. assumes the same, within his own Dominions. The testimony of the learned
Fuller, Rivet, Calvin. Of Christ's Headship of influence and Government.
Whether particular Churches may be said to be the Bodies of their Governors?
Whether the Apostles were the Heads of the Church? Ojections answered. Mr. T.
his Exceptions thereunto considered. 1 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13. expounded.
Whether the Kings of Israel were Heads of the Church? Isa. 44. 28. explained.
The Government of the Church and State proved distinct. --

WE further manifest in S. T. That the present Ministers deny the Prophetical
and Kingly Office of Christ, thus.

3dly, Those that acknowledge another Head over the Church beside Christ, deny
his Prophetical and Kingly Office: But the present Ministers of Engl. do own
and acknowledge another Head over the Church beside Christ. Therefore. --

To which Mr. T. Sect. 11. The Author of S. T. speaks darkly, and thence falls
to conjecturing what I mean by the Head of the Church.

Answ. To satisfy this Animadverter once for all, By the Head of the Church, I
mean the King and Bishops, that as Heads and Lawgivers thereunto assume unto
themselves a power to institute Laws and Ordinances of their own, and create
Officers in the Church which were never of the appointment of Christ; (which
Danaeus and others make to be some of the essential parts of Church Government,
and they are indeed so) And if the owning such an Head-ship be not a denial of
his Kingly Authority, I must profess I know not what is.

This Mr. T. denies. But 1. without giving us the least reason of his so doing.
2. In contradiction to what is affirmed by himself, p. 119. chap. 4. of his
Theodulia. 3. It Is avowedly condemned by many sober judicious Protestant
Writers and Churches, as Rivet, Calvin, etc.

He tells us, 2dly, That no such Headship is owned by the present Ministers, as
the Pope claims.

Answ. 1. The question is not whether such an Headship be owned by them as the
Pope assumes; but whether such an one as is not a denial of the Sovereignty of
Christ.

2. With respect to the extent thereof it is acknowledged there is no such
Headship owned by them: The King is not Universal Monarch of the Church.

Yet 3. For the kind of it, it is the same, i. e. Henry the 8th having cast off
the Popes supremacy, rests himself with it in his own Dominions. Hence the
learned Fuller in his History of the Church of England, tells us, That the King
became the Popes heir at Law. And it was indeed evidently so.

1. Did the Pope claim a right to that Title, Summum Caput Ecclesiae sub
Christo, The Supreme Head of the Church under Christ?

2. Did he account himself the Fountain of all Ecclesiastical Power?

3. Did he undertake to make and dispense Laws pro libitu, according as he saw
meet? So did H. 8. and his Successors the Kings of England, with respect to the
Church of England. The Title of Supreme Head or Governor under Christ is given
to them. They are the Fountain of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, it being by
Statute Law annexed to the Crown. The Bishops Courts ought to be held, all
Processes to go out in their Name: With a Synod of Priests (or without
sometimes) they can make and dispense with Laws for the binding or loosing of
the Members of the Church thereof.

Hear what the learned Rivet says, Explic. Decal. Edit. 2. p. 203. touching
this matter (taxing Bishop Gardener for extolling the Kings Primacy --) For he
that did as yet nourish the Doctrine of the Papacy, as after it appeared, did
erect a new Papacy in the person of the King. And reverend Mr. Calvin; And at
this day (says he) how many are there in the Papacy that heap upon Kings
whatsoever right and power they can possible; so that there may not be any
Dispute of Religion, but this power should be in one King to Decree according
to his own pleasure, whatsoever he list, and that should remain fixed without
controversy? They that at first so much extolled H. King of England (certainly
they were inconsiderate men) gave unto him Supreme power of all things: and
this grievously wounded me always, for they were Blasphemers (and yet the
present Ministers avow the same) when they called him, The Supreme Head of the
Church under Christ. -- Thus he, in Amos 7. 13.

What this Animadverter says, Heart the Jesuit acknowledges of the Pope, with
respect to the whole Church, is for the most part acknowledged by the present
Ministers of the King, -- with respect to the Church of England. The Power
which we mean to the Pope (the King and Archbishop) by this Title of the
Supreme Head, is that the Government of the whole Church of Christ throughout
the World (of the Church of England) does depend of him. In him does lie the
power of judging and determining causes of Faith, of ruling Councils, (or
National Synods) as President, and ratifying their Decrees; of Ordering and
Confirming Bishops and Pastors, of deciding Causes brought him by Appeals from
all the Coasts of the Earth; (all the parts of the Nation) Of reconciling any
that are Excommunicate, of Excommunica^ing, Suspending, or inflicting other
Censures and Penalties on any that offend. -- Finally all things of the like
sort, for governing of the Church; even whatsoever touches either preaching of
Doctrine, or practicing of Discipline in the Church of Christ, (of England)
which whilst the Animadverter goes about to insinuate as not appertaining to
the King, -- he advances himself against the Royal Prerogatives of his Crown
and Dignity. --

Nor does the Explanation mentioned Artic. 34. and 37. -- contradict what we
have asserted, Jurisdiction and Power of exterior Government is acknowledged
to belong to him; which comprehends the substance of what we are contending for.

In what follows we are not in the least concerned; we abhor the Primacy of the
Papal Antichrist; we deny not the Kings Headship and Supremacy over the Church
of England, by the fundamental Laws of the Nation it appertains to him. We only
infer from hence,

1st, That the Church of England is no true Church, because Headed by some one
else besides Christ.

2dly, That whilst the present Ministers account it Christ's Church, and own
another Head over it besides himself, they deny his Sovereignty and Kingship;
they make another King over it, and there^y really unking him.

We add in S. T. as a proof of the Major Proposition, If the assertion of
another King in Engl. that as the Head thereof has power of making and giving
forth Laws to the free born Subjects therein, be a denial of his Kingly
authority (as no doubt it is) the Major cannot be denied. If Christ be the
alone King of his Church (as such) he is its alone Head and Lawgiver; If he
has not by any Statute Law established any other Headship in and over his
Church, to act in the holy things of God from and under him, besides himself,
the assertion of such a Headship carries with it a contempt and denial of his
Authority; If there be any such Headship of the Institution of Christ, let us
know when and were it was Instituted? Whether such a Dominion and Sovereignty
over the Subjects of his Kingdom with respect to Worship be granted by him to
any of the sons of men, absolutely or conditionally? If the first, t^en must
the Church be governed by persons casting off the yoke of Christ, trampling
upon his Royal Commands and Edicts; for so its possible it may fall out, those
that attain this Headship, may do, as its evident many Popes of Rome (the great
pretenders hereunto) have done. If the second, let one iota be produced from
the Scripture of the Institution of such an Headship, with the conditions
annexed thereunto; and we shall be so far from denying it, that we shall
cheerfully pay whatever respect, homage or duty, by the Laws of God or man, may
righteously be expected from us. But this we conceive will not in have be
performed, and that for these Reasons.

1. The Scripture makes mention of no other Head in and over the Church, but
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 22. and 5. 23, 29. 2 Cor. 11. 2.

To this Mr. T. answers, 1. We use not the title of Head, but of Supreme
Governor; yet that title being given to Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 17. and others, 1
Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 5. 23. Exodus 6. 14. -- and may be used.

Answ. 1. What We Mr. T. means, when he says, We use not the title of Head, I
know not; it is the usual form of the present Ministers to style the King in
their prayers, Under Thee, and Thy Christ, Supreme Head and Governor.

But 2dly; Head of the Church, is a title nor to be given to any in that sense
in which it is given to Christ, this Animadverter grants.

I ask, Has Christ only an Headship of influence to his Church,
(communicating vital Spirits unto the true Members thereof;) Has he not also
an Headship of Government over it? If he assert the first, he knows he is
departed into the Tents of the Antichristian Papal Shepherds, who allow indeed
such an Headship to Christ alone. The second they divide betwixt him and the
Pope, as Mr. T. seems to do betwixt him and the King. -- If the second be owned
by him, than none of the Children of men have an Headship of Government over
the Churches of Christ, they are not so the Supreme Governors thereof, as to
give forth Laws and Institutions of their own, for the Saints to conform to,
For this title of Head is not to be appropriated to any, in that sense in which
it is given to Christ, as says our Animadverter.

Besides, 2dly, If the Kings of the Earth are the Supreme Governors of the
Churches of Christ, they have this Supremacy over them by grant from Christ,
and that either absolutely, or conditionally; if the first, then whoever
ascends the Throne of worldly Ruledom, has a right of supremacy over them,
though they themselves be such as have cast off the Yoke of Christ, are
trampling upon his Royal Laws and Edicts; If the second, let us see the proof
thereof from Scripture, with the conditions annexed to this their supremacy,
and we are satisfied.

This we told Mr. T. before, but he was not pleased to take notice of it, That
because the Scriptures mentioned by him, attribute ^he title of Head of the
Tribes to Saul, and the Man is called the Head of the Woman, -- Therefore the
Governors of the World may be called the Head of the Churches of Christ, when
that title of Head of the Church is given to none but Christ in the Scripture,
is such a pi^iful non-sequitur, as Mr. T. will not (surely) without blushing
review.

Sir, Saul was constituted by the Lord King over Israel: a Man to have
superiority over the Woman, with allusion hereunto, they are called their Head
by the Spirit of the Lord: But where is the Scripture constitution of the
Superiority, Kingship of any over the Church beside Christ? Amongst whom he
says, He will have no such thing.

Where is it that any have this title of Head of the Church ascribed to them by
the Holy Ghost? This must be proved, or you must acknowledge the impertinency
and invalidity of their present arguing; the best of it is, whether you will be
so ingenuous or no, it is but a Fig-leaf covering, that every eye can discern
your nakedness through it.

We say in S. T. 2dly, If there be any other Head of the Church besides Christ,
he must be either within or without the Church.

The latter will not be affirmed; Christ had not sure so little respect to his
Flock as to appoint Wolves and Lions to their Governors and Guides in matters
Ecclesiastical: nor can the former, for all in the Church are Brethren, have no
Dominion or Authority over each others Faith or Conscience, Luke 22. 25.

Mr. T. replies, Though all in the Church are Brethren, yet all are not equal,
nor does Luke 22. 25. prove it.

Answ. It Is enough for our present purpose, that all in the Church are thus far
equal, that being all brethren, none may exercise any Ruledom or Authority over
the rest, without their consent, nor any such Ruledom as to command in case of
Worship where Christ is silent, which is at least asserted, Luke 22. 25. and
Mr. T. may confute it when he is able. Of this Scripture we have spoken at
large, Chap. 4. and of Romans 13. 1. Heb. 13. 17. frequently; and have fully
removed out of the way what is here repeated touching the Laws of Rulers, and
their obligation upon Conscience -- nor need we add more.

We say further in S. T. 3dly, If any other be Head of the Church, but Christ,
then is the Church the body of some others beside Christ; but this is absurd
and false, not to say impious and blasphemous.

To which Mr. T. Particular Churches, in respect of that ministration and
government which their Governors afford them, may be said to be the bodies of
their Governors.

Answ. Boldly ventured however! 1. The Church is frequently said to be the Body
of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 27. Ephesians. 5. 30, 32. Col. 1. 18.

2dly, Is no where said to be the body of any other, not of Peter, Paul, --
much less of Nero, Domitian, (the Supreme Governors of the Empire at that
day.) By what Authority Mr. T. takes the body of Christ and joins it to another
Head besides himself, I am yet to learn.

3dly, The Church is called his Body, upon the account of that glorious
nearness and union is betwixt Christ and them; the reception of Spirits, life
from him, their absolute indisputable subjection to him. Is the Church the body
of any other with respect hereunto beside Christ? Where is it so called? Is it
united, or in subjection to any other besides Christ, as the Woman is to the
Man, upon the account whereof she is called his body, Ephesians. 5. 28. (his, I say
not another) That Mr. T. should assert, That upon the same account the Church
may be called the body of some other beside Christ?

We add, 4thly, There was no Head of the Church in the Apostles days but
Christ. That upon any account the Apostles or Elders were Heads of the Church;
that in respect of ministration and government they were so, as our Dictator
speaks, is notoriously false.

1. There is not the least intimation of any such thing in the N. T. Nor, 2.
any Language or Speech of any Headship over the Church, but Christ's, till the
rise of that man of sin, who profaned the Crown of our Lord, by casting it to
the ground.

3. We find not the Apostles talking of themselves at this lofty rate; they
confess themselves to be the Brethren of the Saints, their Servants for Christ's
sake.

4. Why talks he of Heads of the Church? Does the Scripture mention any more
than one? Is this the Language of Christ or Antichrist? Will he make the Church
a two-headed Monster; but

Quo passim sequerer corvum? I am sorry, and ashamed, that so learned a Person
as Mr. T. should suffer such trifles to drop from his Pen.

We proceed in S. T. and say, 5thly, If any be Head of the Church beside
Christ, they either have their Headship from an original right seated in
themselves, or by donation from Christ. To assert the first, were no less than
blasphemy: if the second, let them show when and where, and how they came to be
invested in such a right, and this controversy will be at an end.

To which our Animadverter answers, Their Headship is by donation from Christ,
in the places often alleged. He means, Romans 13. 1. Heb. 13. 17. That they
refuse to afford shelter to this dying Cause, we have already manifested.

We add 6thly, He that is asserted in Scripture to be Head of the Church, is
said to govern, feed, and nourish it to eternal Life, is he^ Husband, 2 Cor.
11. 2. In which sense none of the Sons of men can be the Head thereof, and yet
of any other Head, the Scripture is wholly silent. But of this matter thus far.
It cannot by any sober person be denied, but an owning a visible Head over the
Church, having power of making Laws, with respect to Worship, (such an Headship
not being of the institution of Christ) must needs be a denial of his Sovereign
Authority and Power.

To which Mr. T. replies, None can be said to be the Husband of the Church as
Christ is, or to govern, feed, and nourish as he, by the influence of his
Spirit, yet the Apostles, and such as convert and build up Souls, may in a
qualified sense be said so to do, as, 1 These. 2. 7, 11. the Apostle says of
himself.

Answ. 1. This is a mere Dictate without proof, and so fit to be rejected; the
Apostle says not any such thing, 1 These. 2. 7, 11.

2. He tells us not in what qualified sense they may be said so to do. Nor, 3.
does he show us where any one is said to be the Husband of the Church beside
Christ, nor indeed can he; so that the Argument abides firm. He that is in the
Scripture. said to be the Head of the Church, is also said to be her Husband,
to govern, feed and nourish her to eternal Life; but Christ alone is, and does
so. Therefore, --

We add, That the present Ministers do own such an Headship, is undeniable,
witness their Subscription, Oath, Conformity in Worship to Laws and Edicts made
and given forth by the sons of men as Heads-of the Church, which are not only
foreign to, but lift up themselves against the Royal Institutions of Christ.
This being matter of fact, the individuals charged herewith must prove
themselves not guilty, or manifest that what they do is lawful. The former
being notoriously known to be true, the latter must be insisted on.

Mr. T. answers, Sect. 12. 1. He cannot justify all the present Ministers do
in their subscription and conformity.

Answ. It Is good to be ingenuous, we know he cannot,

Longa dies citior brumali tempore, noxque
Tardior Hyberna solstitialis erit.
Nor is there any one will compel him to more than he has a will to.

He adds, 2. The Ministers may own Laws -- given forth by men (as the Governors
and Heads of the Church) that lift up themselves in opposition against the
Institutions of Christ, and yet not deny his Kingly Office. Because 1. this may
be done out of weakness or error.

Answ. This is already removed out of the way. 2dly, A man may subscribe, yield
subjection to the commands of a Usurper, (as some did to Richard the Third, who
acknowledged him not to be King of right, and some do to the Decrees of the
Trent Council, or the Popes Edicts) and yet not own his power.

Answ. 1. This is such a legerdemain, so like to those Jesuitical equivocations
condemned by our Protestant Writers, that I understand not, nor desire to be
acquainted with.

2. By my subscription to the Laws mentioned, and promising obedience to some
of the formers of them, as my Reverend Fathers in God, I avowedly own their
power, except I have learned Fallere mill modis, nec non intexere frauds. to
use such hard dissimulation and treachery as an Heathen would abhor.

3. Will Mr. T. stand by this plea, will he undertake the Ministers of England
shall do so? If not, Why does he multiply words to deceive the Reader; if he
will, he egregiously scandalizeth the King and Bishops, supposing them to be
Usurpers. Though he has taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, he has
not thereby manifested his loyalty in acknowledging him to be King of right,
but only has submitted for peace-sake; to what, though he owns not to be just
or right, he cannot remedy. If the Laws of Trent Council, or the Popes Edicts
should be established amongst us, (which God forbid) Mr. T. can it seems
subscribe to them, without owning them as just, or the power imposing them; he
seems well acquainted with the cursed carnal Machiavellian principle of
self-interest and preservation,

Cum fueris Romae Romano vivito more. No need of taking up the Cross daily to
follow Christ, to subscribe to what is uppermost (which we may do without
owning it, or the Authority by which it is established) is better and safer.

We proceed in S. T. to the answering of some Objections that lay in our way;
as, 1. That the Headship owned by them, is an Headship under Christ.

To which we Answer, 1. But this Headship is either of Christ's appointment, or
it is not; if it be, let it be shown where it was instituted by him. -- If it
be not the assertion and owning of such an Headship, is a denial of Christ's
Authority.

To this Mr. T. replies, Sect. 13. The term, Head of the Church, is not used
in the Oath of Supremacy, (this we have already answered in this Sect. and need
not say more) but Supreme Governor: And this is agreeable to Romans 13. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13.

Answ. By Supreme Governor over the Church of Christ, is meant one that has
power seated in him for the prescribing Rules in things undetermined (as Mr. T.
grants) the establishing of Laws, Institutions not of the appointment of Christ
(contrary thereunto) who is the Fountain of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and
Church-Politie. That Mr. T. sees such a Supreme Governor to be agreeable to
the Scriptures produced by him, must be imputed to that acuteness of his
whereby he may be supposed to t^anscend the rest of his Neighbors.

Ille solus sapiens, reliqui velut umbra vagantur. Of Romans 13. 1. we have
already spoken. Though the Church be comprised under every soul, yet it does
not follow that Magistrates are the Heads, or such Supreme Governors of the
Church as are invested with power for the establishing and instituting of parts
of Worship, or commanding them in any thing relating to Worship, as such; of
which the Apostle speaks not a tittle in that place. Civil subjection as
subjects of the Empire, is the utmost can rationally from thence be argued for.
Those that were then Rulers and Governors, were such as Nero, Domitian, -- who
persecuted the Church, designed to root the Worship of Christ out of the world;
were Idolaters, establishe^ by force and violence an Heathenish Idolatrous
Worship, whom Christ never intended to entrust with any such power: which is a
sufficient answer to 1 Pet. 2. 13. which is exponed by our Annotat. Of Civil
Government. 1 Timothy 2. 2. is impertinently cited, That because the Apostle there
exhorts that Prayers be made for Kings, -- therefore they have Ecclesiastical
Power and Sovereignty committed to them over the Churches of Christ, is a
consequence that the very reciting of is confutation sufficient. When I ascribe
(as he talks) as much power to the Church as he does to the King and Bishops, I
know not. That I should make the Church the Head of the Church (which is
downright nonsense) is not probable. For the present I must crave leave to tell
him he is utterly mistaken. I ascribe no power of inventing Rites and
Ceremonies, devising Laws and Constitutions of their own, relating to Worship,
as such, to any one Church or Churches in the World. I challenge him to make
good his assertion. I dispute against it as well as I can in S. T. Chap. 5.
page 41, 42. Whatever power I ascribe to the Church, it is only such as Christ
has entrusted her with; that this should be as much a denial of Christ's
Kingly Office, as the ascription of a power over the Churches of Christ, to any
to whom he has not committed such a power, Mr. T. will not in have be able to
prove.

We further reply in S. T. 2dly. The Headship pleaded for by the Church of Rome
is no other, viz. than a Head-ship under Christ.

To this Mr. T. 1. I grant the Church of Rome pleads for no other Headship. But
2. They usurp a power in some respects superior to Christ, in their
dispensing with the keeping of lawful Oaths, allowing of Incestuous Marriages.

Answ. And the same may be said of the Heads of the Church of England. I
suppose this Animadverter may be yet of the mind that the Oath of the Solemn
League and Covenant was a lawful Oath; yet that can be dispensed with.
Marriages prohibited -- are not seldom allowed of by their Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.

We add 3dly, It Is not so as is pretended; they own an Headship that is not in
all things subordinate to Christ, having a Law-making and a Law-giving Power
touching Institutions of Worship, that never came into his heart, are flatly
against his appointments, as has been proved.

We add in S. T. 4thly, One Head in subordination to another, does as really
make the Body a Monster, as two Heads conjoined.

To this Mr. T. The terms Head and Body, being used only Metaphorically,
there is no more Monstrosity in making a Head under a Head, than in making a
Governor under a Governor. --

Answ. 1. Should it be granted there were no Monstrosity in the thing it self,
yet there is in the expression in the Title; an argument it was never from the
Spirit of the Lord.

2. Bernard is of another mind; Thou make a Monster, says he, if removing
the hand, thou make the Finger to hang on the Head. -- Thou make the Body
of Christ a Monster, if thou placest the Members of his Body otherwise than he
has placed them in the Church. -- Lib. 3. cap. 10. Con. ad Eugen. Much more to
take a Beast, a Lion, or Bear, as wicked and graceless men are (whom yet Mr. T.
see^s to allow for Heads in the Churches of Christ) and place them not only as
Members in, but as Heads over (though under Christ) the Church of God.

3. The making of a Governor under a Governor in the Commonweal, has no
Monstrosity in it, because agreeable to the Will of God, Principles of
State-polity, which a Head under a Head in the Church has; because dissonant,
contrary to the Law and Sovereignty of Christ its Supreme Independent and alone
Head.

A second Objection is in S. T. thus proposed by us. That the Kings of Israel
were the Heads succesively of the then Church, and therefore a visible Headship
over the Churches of Christ in the New Testament is lawful.

To which we Answer, 1. That betwixt the Economy of the Law and Gospel, there
is a vast disproportion; many things were of old lawful, which now to practice
were no less than a denial of Christ come in the flesh.

2. The Kings of Israel were Types of Christ; which (notwithstanding Mr. T.
dictates that it is falsely and vainly asserted, Sect. 14.) till he prove the
contrary, we take for truths. What he speaks with reference to the Kings of
Israel and England, we are unconcerned in. That the Rulers of the Jews or any
other Nations had, de jure, any such Dominion or Power over their Subjects as
to make Laws, introduce Constitutions of their own framing, in matters relating
to Worship, and compel them by force and violence to subject thereunto, Mr. T.
has not proved. Isa. 44. 28. Is a Prophecy of the Liberty the Jews should
obtain under Cyrus to go up to Jerusalem to build the Temple; of the fulfilling
whereof you have an account, Ezra. 1. 1, 2, 3. But not a tittle of his Dominion
about things sacred, or introducing Constitutions relating to their Worship as
such; or compelling any to go up to Jerusalem, is there mentioned. He only
removes the Babylonian yoke that was upon them, and sets them at liberty to
build the Temple of the Lord -- (which the Kings before him would not grant
them to do) and Worship him according to his own appointments, Isa. 45. 1. is
impertinently alleged, relating only to the Victories and Conquests the Lord
would afford unto Cyrus over the Cities and Nations of the World. Jonah 3. 7,
8. gives us an account of a Decree published by order of the King, for a
solemnization of a Fast, and to turn from ^mpiety; but this comes short of the
proof of the Headship argued for, which is an Headship, having power of making
and giving forth Laws touching Institutions of Worship, Orders, Rites, etc.
that never entered into the heart of Christ; the judicious Reader will easily,
from what we have already offered, discern the impertinency of Ezra 6. 7. and
7. 13. Dan. 3. 29. and 6. 26. to the present design.

It Is true, as he says, Christianity alters not civil Relations or Estates, 1
Cor. 7. 24. And it is as true, that if in the time of my infidelity, I have been
the servant of men that are my Political Masters, with respect to Worship,
though I am, whilst I continue their servant, to perform faithful service to
them, with respect to things Civil, yet am I not to own them or subject to them
as my Lords and Governors, with respect to the Service of God; therein one
only being my Lord and Master, viz. Christ.

2. I say not that all the Kings of Israel were Types of Christ, but that the
Kings of Israel were so, i. e. some of them; nor do I restrain the word Israel
to the ten Tribes, but to the twelve, headed by David, Solomon, a pair of
eminent Types of the Messiah.

That Christ and the Apostles yielded subjection to Civil Powers with respect
to things sacred (of which this Animadverter must speak, or he speaks
impertinently) is a gross mistake unworthy so learned a person.

We say in S. T. 3dly, That the Kings of Israel were Heads of the Church is
false, God was its alone Head and King. Hence their Historian says, Their
Government was (...). And when they would needs choose a King, God said, They
rejected him; to whom even as to their Political Head, a Shekel was paid yearly
as a Tribute, called the Shekel of the Sanctuary. True indeed as they were a
Political Body, they had visible Political Governors, -- but that these had
any Headship over them, to make any Laws, introduce Constitutions of their own
framing, in matter relating to Worship, will never be proved.

To which Mr. T. replies, 1. That the Church of Israel was different from the
Kingdom of Israel is one of the proper opinions of those who would establish
from that example an Ecclesiastical Independent Government in the Church,
distinct from the Civil Government of the State.

Answ. 1. It Is no matter whose opinion it is; if Truth, it ought to be embraced.

2. That there is a real and formal distinction betwixt the two Societies,
Church and Commonwealth, is at large proved by several. As Mr. Gillespy in his
Aarons Rod Blossoming, b. 1. c. 3. The Assembly in their Jus Divinum. Hear
their Reasons, p. 88, 89.

1st, The Society of the Church is only Christ's and not the Civil Magistrates,
its his House, -- and he has no Vicar under him (as is abundantly proved by
Mr. Rutherford, in his Divine Right of Church Government, Chap. 27. Q. 23. Page
595, to 647.)

2dly, The Officers Ecclesiastical are Christ's Officers, not the Magistrates,
1 Cor. 4. 1. Ephesians. 4. 8, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28.

3dly, These Officers are elected and ordained by the Church without Commission
from the Civil Magistrate, by virtue of Christ's Ordinance; and in his Name,
Acts 6. 3, 4. with 14. 23. 1 Timothy 4. 14. with Acts 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.

4thly, The Church meets not as Civil Judicatories, for Civil Acts of
Government, -- but as Spiritual Assembles, for such as are spiritual, viz.
Preaching. --

5thly, Should not these two Societies be acknowledged to be really and
essentially distinct from one another, several gross abs^rdities would follow:
As, 1. Then there can be no Commonwealth where there is not a Church; but this
is contrary to all experience: Heathens have Commonwealths, yet no Church. 2.
Then there may be Church Officers elected where there is no Church, seeing
there are Magistrates where there is no Church. 3. Then those Magistrates where
there is no Church are no Magistrates. -- And if so then the Church is the
formal constituting Cause of Magistrates. 4. Then the Commonwealth as the
Commonwealth, is the Church; and the Church as the Church, is the
Commonwealth. -- 5. Then all that are Members of the Commonwealth, are,
because so, Members of the Church. 6. Then the Commonwealth being formally the
same with the Church, is, as Commonwealth, the Mystical Body of Christ. 7.
Then the Officers of the Church are the Officers of the Commonwealth, the
power of the Keys gives them right to the Civil Sword, and consequently the
Ministers of the Gospel, as such, are Justices of the peace. -- All which how
absurd let the world judge.

He adds, 2dly, That Solomon and other Kings did exercise power over
Ecclesiastical persons is evident, because he deposed Abiathar.

Answ. 1. Who denies it? How this proves the power of the Kings of Israel, as
Heads of the Church, to innovate in Worship (which is the thing to be proved) I
know not.

Hic labor, hoc opus est. And Mr. T. has more wit than seriously to attempt
it. 2. Solomon deposed Abiathar not as High Pontifee, or Head of the Church,
for male administration in Church Affairs, but as King of Israel for treason
against the Commonwealth, in the business of Adonijah. Ergo Solomon was the
Head of the Church of Israel.

-- risum teneatis amici. Of 2 Chr. 29. 30, and 30. 2. which he produces to
prove That the Kings of Israel had power in Ecclesiastical things, we have
already spoken.

What follows in this 14th Sect. is not worthy our spotting paper with the
repetition of.

1. He grants, That God was the alone Head and King of the Church of Israel,
with respect to power Legislative, to assign what Faith, Worship, Judicatories,
and what other things were necessary for that Congregation; all which solely
appertained to him: which is all we need contend for. The Kings of Israel had
not any Legislative power with respect to these, he grants; from the power of
these Kings then it cannot be argued, that any have power now to innovate in
matters of Faith and Worship, they are not Heads of the Church invested with
authority to introduce Constitutions of their own framing, in matters relating
to Worship, as such; nor had the Kings of Israel any such Authority.

Jam sumus ergo pares nec ab uno dissidet alter. 2. What he talks of Kingly
Government, we are not at all concerned in. All that we assert in S. T. is that
Josephus says, Their Government was (...), a Theocracie, that when they choose
a King, they rejected God, 1 Kings 8. 17. which when he attempts the
confutation of, we may attend him.

3. That a Shekel was yearly paid to the Lord, Ex. 30. 13.-(which continued to
the destruction of Jerusalem, Josep. l. 7. c. 28. of the Jewish Wars) he
grants, that it was paid to him as their Political Head, he denies. Now though
this be not of any moment, as to our present concern therein, yet the truth
thereof is easily demonstrated. 1. It was paid to the Lord in token of their
thankfulness for his delivering them from the Egyptian yoke, which he did as
their Political Head. 2. None were to pay it under 20 years of age; because
till then they were not so fit for the service of the Commonwealth, though at
8 days old they were reckoned as Church Members. That because it was converted
to the service of the Temple, therefore it was not paid to God as their
Political Head, is a consequence Mr. T. will never make good, since it belongs
(as he will say) to Political Heads and Governors to take care for the
furtherance and maintenance of the Worship of God. 4. The sayings of the Author
of S. T. interfere not, inasmuch as he owns God to be both their Political and
Ecclesiastical Head, which the having visible, Political Governors does not in
the least enervate. 5. That the Kings of Israel had an Headship over the Church
of Israel, to make Laws relating to Worship, as such, is not proved by the
Scriptures cited by him. Hezekiah 2 Chr. 29. 27. commands no more than what was
long before commanded by the Lord. Jehoshaphats act oh. 20. 3. is warranted by
divine precept, Joel 1. 14. and 2. 15. in appointing singers, v. 21. he only
revives what was by David from divine Revelation instituted. Of c. 30. 1, 2. we
have already spoken. What is mentioned chapter 31. 2, 3. makes against our Animad.
It was no constitution of his own framing, but a revival of what was written in
the Law of the Lord, verse. 3.

CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1.
A 5th Argument against hearing the present Ministers. That they have the
Characters of false Prophets -- upon them, proved. Jer. 23. 21. Romans 10. 15.
reviewed and expounded. Of Christ's Mission. Whether such a Mission be of the
Essence of a lawful Ministry. Of Spiritual Adultery. Jer. 23. 14. opened.

THE 6th Chap. of S. T. contains a fifth Argument against hearing the present
Ministers, which is thus formed.

Those who have the Characters and Properties of false Prophets and Priests
upon them, are not to be heard but separated from: But the present Ministers of
England have the Characters and Properties of fals^ Prophets and Priests upon
them: Therefore. --

The Major or first Proposition is proved from the Injunctions and Cautions of
Christ, Mat. 7. 15. and 24. 4, 5, 23. 1 John 4. 1. 2 John 10. 11. Acts 20. 29.
-- To which Mr. T. faith nothing but what we have already replied to.

The Minor we prove by the introduction of the signal Characters of false
Prophets, which are visibly upon the present Ministers. -- The whole Nation
knows they are truly affirmed of them.

Mr. T. has assumed a forehead of brass whilst he de^ies it. 2 Pet. 2. 1. is
manifestly true of them, as we prove Chap. 1. Sect. 10.

The 1st Character we mention is, That they run before they are sent, Jer. 23.
21. That a Mission from the Lord is of the Essence of a lawful Ministry. That
whoever wants such a Mission is no Officer of Christ, but a false Prophet and
Minister of Antichrist, may hence by way of Analogy be deduced is evident:
Which also exactly accords with what is asserted by the Apostle, Romans 10. 15.
That the present Ministers of England want such a Mission has already been
demonstrated, and we shall not actum agere. -- from whence it follows, that
they have this Character of False Prophets upon them.

To which Mr. T. Chap. 6. Sect. 2. 1st* The sending mentioned Jer. 23. Romans 10.
is not meant the mediate, regular, outward calling.

Answ. Nor did we say it was, but a Mission or sending from God, either
immediately or mediately, which whoever wants, and goes sorth notwithstanding
to preach the Gospel authoritative, or by way of Office, has the Character of
a false Prophet upon him. The former of these the present Ministers pretend not
to; the latter, we have already demonstrated they have not.

He dictates, 2dly, That a regular outward mediate Calling is not from a
rightly constituted Church of Christ.

Answ. But we have proved the contrary by such evident Testimonies as Mr. T.
will not in have be able to refell.

He adds, 3dly, That either an immediate or mediate Mission, are of the essence
of a lawful Minister, I deny.

Answ. 1. If neither of these be of the essence of a Minister, then a Minister
may be a Minister without either of them; then an outward calling is not
necessary for him that takes on him the public function of Preaching; but this
Mr. T. in the very next Page, in contradiction to what he here asserts, affirms
to be necessary.

Then 2. The Institution of Officers by Christ, to be sent forth in the way
appointed by him is needless; men may be Officers in his House without any such
Mission from him, which must be either mediate or immediate; a third way of
sending I believe he cannot easily coin, and both these he has exploded.

3. The directions given by Paul, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. with respect to the right
management of this affair, are vain and frivolous. If a man spend a few years
in Oxford or Cambridge, read a little of Aristotle, Logic, Physics and
Metaphisicks, get a few Notions of Divinity from some Common-place-Book, though
he have never read the Bible over in his life, and is Ordained by a Prelate,
with a black Cassock and Girdle, a Presentation, Institution, and Induction, he
is, if Mr. T. may be believed (because he can Preach some Truths) a Minister of
Christ without any more a-doe. -- nobis non licet esse tam desertis. The
Churches of Christ have other thoughts (and ever had from the beginning) of
this matter. That because it is said, They stood not in the counsel of God,
they prophesied lies in his Name, -- therefore their running without a Mission
from God is not condemned in them, and made a Character of a false Prophet, is
such a perverting of the Scripture as cannot be justified.

He tells us, 5thly, To make an outward Mission of the Essence of alawful
Minister, is contrary to the Authors grant, chap. 2. where he allows gifted
Brethren to preach without such a Mission.

Answ. He does so indeed, but who allows this Animadverter thus sophistically
and openly to prevaricate, I know not? I a^low them to Preach but not by virtue
of an Office-Power, as Ministers of the Gospel, which I expressly deny in the
forecited place they may do. Of the Preaching of the Brethren, Acts 8. we have
already spoken.

It is added in S. T. as a second Character of false Prophets, 2. That they
commit adultery, (i. e. spiritual adultery, a departure from the Institutions
of the Lord in Worship to the Inventions of me^, is usually in Scripture
expressed under that Notion, Jer. 3. 8. Ezekiel. 23. 37. Rev. 2. 22. All
Interpreters that I have met with so expone it) and walk in lies (a worship of
humane devising, called a lie, Isa. 28. 15. Am. 2. 4. Joh. 8 44. 2 These. 2.
11.) Jer. 23. 14. This Character, we say, appertains to the Ministers of
England, and ask, which of the Institutions of Christ have they not mixed with
their own inventions? --

To which Mr. T. Sect. 3. 1. Mr. Gataker interprets the Words of Corporal
Adultery.

Answ. 1. It may be so; I have not that Author to converse with.

2. He is no Oracle, that his Dictates must be subscribed to.

3. The Adultery mentioned in the Text, is made a Character of a false Prophet,
which corporal Adultery Mr. T. says is no^.

He says, 2dly, Every departure from the Institutions of the Lord in Worship
to the inventions of men, is not any where committing Adultery.

Answ. Of this matter we have treated, chap. 1. sect. 12. whither we refer the
Reader.

3dly, Walking in lies, he tells us, is a character of a false Prophet but they
are lies in Doctrine, not Worship that is intended in the places cited.

Answ. 1. Of the Annotators he cites, not one of them is of his mind. Diodati
interprets the Phrase of false worships and superstitions, as do the Assembly
in their Annotations on Am. 2. 4.

2dly, We have manifested from other Scriptures, that the expression is used by
the Spirit of the Lord in this sense, both he^e, and Sect. 10. p. 96. to refute
which he offers nothing, and his own Dictates will never pass for proof.

3dly, We demonstrate the present Ministers walk in lies in the sense contended
for by this Animadverter, chap. 10. of S. T.

4thly, To the Q^eries he answers, The Institution of Preaching the Gospel they
have not mixed with their own inventions.

Answ. But this they evidently do, whilst none must be allowed to Preach the
Gospel, but such as subject to Episcopal Ordination, promise Canonical
Obedience to their Ordinaries, observe the Regulations for Preaching given
forth by the Pope of Canterbury, they are bound to omit the preaching of the
Gospel when they have not time to Preach, and read Service too. Wherein Divine
Institution must give place to humane inventions: In Baptism, he will tell you,
they mix an Institution of Christ's with the inventions of man, in respect of
the wrong Subject, and they evidently do so whilst they sign with the sign of
the Cross, and make it such an essential part of Baptism, that it is not lawful
to be omitted. The Institution of the Lord's Supper they mix with that Popish
humane invention of kneeling in the Act of receiving, which they constitute
such a necessary part thereof, that they will not admit any to receive in any
other posture. --

To the second, viz. From how many have they gone a whoring? He answers, it
concerns him that accuses, to show.

Answ. And that concern I dispatched, chap. 4. of S. T.

To the third, viz. Is not a great part of their Worship, drops of the Whores
cup of Fornication? --

Mr. T. though he multiply many words, answers not at all, not understanding,
or being willingly ignorant of my intendment in those expressions, which was
solely this, that their Divine Service, wherein a great part of their Worship
does consist, is for the most part taken out of the Service Book of Rome, which
Mr. T. may disprove if he can.

Sect. 2.
A third Character of false Prophets, mentioned Jer. 23. 13. A fourth, Jer. 6.
14. etc. A fifth, Isa. 56. 11. etc. Which exactly agree to the present
Ministers.

THE third Character of a false prophet, mentioned in S. T. is this, That they
strengthen the hands of evil doers, that none does return from his wickedness,
Jer. 23. 13. This it is said the present Ministers do, whilst though in the
general they denounce the Judgments of God against sinners, they Saint them in
the Chancel, tell them that the body of Christ was broken for them. --

To which our Animadverter ^ubjoyns, Sect. 4. 1. Mr. Gatakers Paraphrase upon
the Text is, That they confirmed them in their wickedness, by bearing them in
hand that they should do well enough whatsoever Gods Messengers tell them,
though they continue in their sins.

Answ. 1. The sin laid to their charge, is strengthening the hands of evil
doers, whether they did this practically or doctrinally, is not expressed, it is
all one. Probably they told them, they were the holy People, the true Church,
had his Temple and Ordinances with and amongst them, and therefore God could
not reject, destroy them, notwithstanding the Prophecy of Jeremiah to the
contrary, whom they reviled as a made seditious fellow, thereby laboring to
take off the people from an attendance on the Prophecy, and threatenings given
forth by him. This we charge the present Ministers to be guilty of, as the holy
People, and Church of God, they admit the visibly profane and wicked to the
Lords Table, and their Children to Baptism; bury them as holy Brethren (whom
they call so, not upon the acco^nt of Creation, but Christianity (which their
conversations contradict) and Church Membership with them) though they die in
the very act of drunkenness -- of whose joyful resurrection to eternal Life,
they profess they have a sure and certain hope, (which can be referred to no
other but the person interred) they asperse, reproach those who would deal
truly and roundly with them, as seditious mad persons that are fit for the
Stocks, Prisons, Dungeons, whereby they evidently strengthen their hands in
their wickedness.

2. It is not true, that the false Prophets told them expressly that they should
do well enough, though they continued in their si^s; they flattered them with
the mercy and patience of God, the privileges and immunities he had crowned
them with, by which they lead them into the belief of this, that God would not
reject them.

3. The Assembly in their Annotations, explain the Phrase of strengthening the
hands of evil doers, with this, they confirm them in their wickedness, and so
keep them from Repentance, Ezekiel. 13. 22. Which by the ways and means instanced
in, it is known the present Ministers do.

4. It Is not charity, as he intimates, to say to a known Drunkard, Swearer,
that the body of Christ was broken, the blood of Christ shed for him, that he
should take, and eat, and drink the Bread and Wine in ^ membrance that Christ
died for him; but cruelty, tending to the nourishment of false peace and
confidence, to the ruin of millions of Souls. If Judas was at the Sacrament,
he was a visible Saint, is no Warrant to administer it to persons of the
complexion intimated. The expressions above mentioned; are not at all like
those used by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. 11. Heb. 10. 29. He speaks of visibly
Saints these are spoken of, and to the visible wicked and profane.

5. That these things do not confirm and strengthen the hands of evil doers,
was the alone thing to have been proved by our Animadverter, but to that he
speaks not at all.

What he further mentions, is a pretended reply to what is remarked touching
the Ministers of England, that it is a rare thing to hear of one Soul that is
brought over to God by all their Preaching; so that visibly that Judgment of
God seems to be upon them, Jer. 23. 32. Therefore they shall not at all profit
this people.

He tells us, That the Prophets, Isa. 49. 4. (he should have said Christ, for
the Prophet there personates Christ) and 53. 1. and Christ John 12. 37, 38. had
the same success.

Asnw. False and untrue: that they had not that success as was desirable is
true; that it was rare to hear of one soul converted by them, our Animadverter
cannot prove.

What he cites from Mr. Robbinson, is directly against what it is the good
pleasure of Mr. T. to plead for, he says, The Ministers that convert Souls may
be said to be sent of God.

We affirm that this is rarely (if at all) found to be the attendment of the
present Ministers preaching, and all that know any thing, know it to be true.
Nor indeed do I know how upon their Principles they can preach the Doctrine of
Conversion, when they reckon and account all those to whom they preach to be
Church Members, i. e. such as are converted already, for of such only is the
Kingdom of Heaven, or Gospel-Church-State, John 3.

A fourth Character of false Prophets instanced in is, That they prophecy
placentia, smooth things, according to the desires, tempers, and lusts of men,
to the pleasing of whom they addict themselves, Jer. 6. 14. and 27. 9. Ezekiel.
13. 10, 11. This it is said the present Ministers have been, are guilty of;
which whilst they do, they cannot be the Servants of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.

In answer to which, Mr. T. tells us, Sect. 5. what Mr. Gataker says upon Jer.
6. 14. which is not at all opposite to what is affirmed by us, nor is that
which is afterward added by himself: let it be granted that the false prophets
told them that they should not serve the King of Babylon, that all should be
well, notwithstanding what Gods Prophets told them, the false prophets knew
these things would please the people, and therefore they gave them forth. And
this is called, Ezekiel 13. 10, 11. Daubing with untempered mortar. Upon which
Scripture Mr. Greenhil observes, that it is a clear Argument of a blind and
false Teacher, to speak things answerable to the humors and corruptions of
men. This Mr. T. attempts not to disprove. That the Ministers of England are
guilty hereof he grants.

A fifth Character of a false prophet mentioned in S. T. is, That they are
greedy dogs that can never have enough, and look every man for his gain from
his quarter, Isa. 56. 11. seeking and serving themselves in their ministration,
Ezekiel. 13. 19. Mic. 3. 5, 11. The present Ministers of England do so. Their
gaping after preferment -- manifests as much.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 6. replies; 1st. Isa. 56. 11. may be understood as well
of the Civil Magistrate as the Minister; it is not a character of a false
Prophet.

Answ. 1. Of this you have only his say-so for proof. 2. It appertains to the
Prophets to admonish the people of their sins, Isa. 58. 1. and forewarn them of
evils approaching, Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19. the neglect whereof is charged upon the
Watchmen in the Text, under the notion of dumb dogs that cannot bark, v. 10. an
evident demonstration that they are Prophets that are spoken of, v. 11. 3. The
generality of Expositors interpret the words of them. 4. That they should be
Prophets that are there characterized, and not false prophets, is a vanity once
to imagine: They are sure no character of true Prophets; these were men of
another complexion, and therefore must be a description of them that are false.

2. He grants that Ezekiel. 13. 19. and Mich. 3. 5, 11. characterize false
prophets; But the proper character of them, as such, is not their prophesying
for handfuls of Barley, -- or preparing War against them that put not into
their mouths, but that they polluted God among his people; by lying to them,
that they make them to err.

Answ. Seriously Mr. T. is a bold man, who dares to separate what God has
joined together, and outface the Spirit of the Highest, when he bears
testimony against him. Let the Reader seriously peruse the Scriptures, and he
will be led captive to the belief of the truth of the Suggestion; Will ye
pollute me among my people for handfuls of Barley? q. d. pollute me ye do by
your ceremonies, inventions, prophesies of your own heart, and ye do it for
reward; and ye slay the Souls that should not die, by raising persecution
against them, who will not receive your lies, submit to your ceremonies,
inventions, looking after gain, and persecuting such as put not into their
mouths, he will plainly see is made equally, (Mich. 3. 5, 11.) the character of
the Prophets spoken of, as their causing the people to erx. Ribera (though a
Jesuit) is forced to acknowledge as much in his Comment on the place, In what
follows we are but little concerned.

We manifest in S. T. That the present Ministers have this character of false
prophets upon them. 1. From their removing from places of less, to places of
greater value.

Mr. T. replies, 1. This may be objected to the Pastors -- of the
Congregational Churches.

Answ. 1. This is but a recrimination, no answer. 2. This has been but rarely
(if at all) practiced by them. 3. Never without the consent of the Churches,
(as I know of) to which they were related, upon the account of greater
opportunity of Service for God as they judged: If otherwise, 4. let the
individulas plead for themselves, I shall never be their Advocate.

2. This may be upon just cause, of it self, it proves not a covetous mind.

Answ. 1. We grant it, but outward advantages and emoluments are no just cause.
2. Their removal from places of less to greater profits, (seldom or) never from
greater to less, is no small Argument of such a frame of Spirit, which being
their constant practice, men may righteously judge of. 3. From their
persecuting persons that cannot in Conscience put into their mouths, by
imprisoning, ruining them and their Families, which it is known they do. What
Mr. T. discourses in a way of justifying them in their so doing, till he
produce a Scripture Warrant for what he undertakes the defense of, we are not
obliged to take notice of it. I am sorry to find him an Advocate of such
cruelties.

Sect. 3.
A 6th, 7th, 8th Character of false Prophets found upon the present Ministers.
Mat. 7. 15. Rev. 13. 11. opened and explained. The second Beast, Rev. 13. and
false prophet, Rev. 19. are the same, proved.

THE sixth Character of false Prophets instanced in, is this, That they sadden
the hearts of the Righteous, Ezekiel. 13. 22. This we say they do by profaning
the Name and Ordinances of God, by their subjecting to the ceremonies and
inventions of men. --

To which Mr. T. adjoyns, It Is granted, that sadning the hearts of the
Righteous by lies, is a Character of a false prophet, but the Author omits by
lies.

Answ. That by lies is meant the inventions of men introduced into the Worship
of God, we have already manifested; that by their supporting of, subjection
hereunto, they make the hearts of the Righteous sad, we affirm, (and it is
generally known and felt amongst such whose hearts the Lord has made tender);
So that till Mr. T. proves that by lies is not meant devices of their own, they
have by his confession the character of false prophets upon them: Which renders
his heap of perhapses and conjectures, frivolous. The dirt he casts upon the
Churches of Christ, he will one day find will rather tend to his own
disparagement than theirs, and that herein he has reproached the Tabernacles
of God. Till he prove that the Pastors of the Congregational Churches have by
introducing, practicing humane devices (and such as have been abused in the
Papacy) in the Worship of God made the hearts of the Righteous sad, which it is
universally known they have not done, he will acknowledge that his reflection
upon them is impertinent, and not at all to his purpose. All that he has as
yet said, amounts not to the least mite of proof, cannot at all be called so.

That the insinuations of the Author of S. T. against the Ministers of England,
would have proved the Teachers of the best Churches in the Primitive times to
have been false Prophets, is untruly said. These made not the hearts of the
Righteous sad, by profaning the Ordinances of Christ, introducing subjection
to the inventions of men; which is known to be true of the present Ministers.

The seventh Character mentioned, is, That they mix the Word of God with their
Dreams, Jer. 23. 25, 29.

The answer Mr. T. intimates, Sect. 7. that he has given to this before, is
already replied to.

We add 8thly, as an eighth Character of false prophets, That they come in
Sheeps clothing, having the Horns of a Lamb, but are inwardly ravening Wolves,
and speak like Dragons, (i. e. pretend to the holiness and meekness of Christ,
and Saints, but are inwardly full of raven and cruelty, yea, terrible in their
Edicts and Laws, stirring up, and making use of the powers of the World to
persecute, kill, and destroy the Saints) Mat. 7. 15. Rev. 13. 11. (which second
Beast is no other than the false prophet mentioned Rev. 19. 20.) This
Character, we say, is upon the present Ministers; Upon this Generation of men,
all the cruelties that the first Beast has exercised upon the Saints for these
1260. years, is to be charged: They now press a rigid conformity to the
infringing the liberty of the Saints.

Mr. T. replies. 1. Outward holiness and meekness, inward ravenosity and
cruelty, is not a signal Character of false prophets.

Answ. Christ says it is; and it is fit we believe him before Mr. T. for having
cautioned his Disciples to beware of them, he tells them in what manner they
will come to them; what is their signal character and property: They will come
to you in Sheeps-clothing, (which the Apostle phraseth they shall be
transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 15.) but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves; which if not their character and property, had in
vain and to no purpose been mentioned by Christ.

The second Beast, and the false prophet, Rev. 19. 20. we say, are the same; by
it is understood Antichrist in his Ecclesiastical State, or the Antichristian
Clergy; their character is, Rev. 13. 11. That they have the Horns of a Lamb,
(and outward semblance to the meekest of Lambs, the Lord Jesus) but speak like
Dragons; are cruel in their Edicts and Laws. Does Mr. T. disprove what is
herein affirmed by us? does he attempt it? nothing less!

He confidently tells us, That this did not show them false prophets.

Answ. But this is made the character of the second Beast, which is no other
than the false prophet, as say Mede, Brightman. -- And therefore what shows
them to be the second Beast, shows them to be false prophets. Which if Mr. T.
will confute, he must prove the second Beast, Rev. 13. and false Prophet, Rev.
19. not to be one and the same. Which it is manifest they are, by a serious
comparing what is said of the second Beast, Rev. 13. 13, 14, 15, 16. with what
is said of the false Prophet, Rev. 19. 20.

1. The second Beast is a worker of miracles, Rev. 13. 17. so is the false
Prophet, Rev. 19. 20.

2dly, The second Beast deceives them that dwell on the Earth, Rev. 13. 14. so
does the false Prophet, Rev. 19. 20.

3dly, The first and second Beast are helpful one to the other, Rev. 13. so are
the Beast and false Prophet, Rev. 19. 19, 20.

As to what follows, 1. I say not that all the persecutions -- of the Children
of God, that the Antichristian Civil State, or powers of the World has
exercised, is to be charged upon the present Hierarchy and Ministry of England,
but upon this Generation; i. e. Persons that have appertained to the same
Hierarchy. Yet, 2. whilst the present Hierarchy and Priests of England are (as
it is known they are pressing rigid Conformity to the ruining (as to the outward
man) of the Saints, are walking in the steps of their Progenitors, they entitle
themselves to all the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, that by the persuasions of
those that possessed the same Seats before them, was poured forth by the Civil
Powers of the World, that upon them may come (as it will undoubtedly do, if
they repent not) all the blood that was shed from the beginning to this very
day. A manifest demonstration that the Lineaments of the second Beast, or false
Prophet, is visibly to be read and found upon them.

Sect. 4.
A 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th Character of false Prophets, each
applicable to the present Ministers. Ezekiel. 22. 26. 8* 34. 4. explained.
Ecclesiastical Shepherds ther^ meant. Rev. 13. 11. explained. Of the obscurity
of the Revelation. Rev. 13. 13, 14, 15. opened.

THE ninth Character of false Prophets mentioned, is, That they put no
difference betwixt the holy and profane, Ezekiel. 22. 26. Of this the present
Ministers (we say) are deeply guilty. Drunkards, Swearers, -- (living and dead)
are their dear Brethren and Sisters; i. e. the children of them all are
admitted to the Font, and they themselves to the Lord's Table. --

Our Animadverter replies, 1. This is a charge against the Priests of the Law,
accusing them of neglecting to discern between clean and unclean persons, or
offerings, but is no character distinguishing a false Priest from a true.

Answ. Whether it be, or not, let the Reader satisfy himself from the serious
review of the words, compared with Jer. 15. 19. Ezekiel. 44. 23.

However, 2. This is nothing (says he) to our Ministers, who are not now to
count any wan or creature, common or unclean, Acts 10. 15. 28.

Answ. 1. That the Lord has not as great care that his New Testament Churches
be not polluted by the admission into them of persons morally unclean, as that
the Sanctuary and Congregation of Israel of old was not by the entrance
thereinto of persons legally so, is this Animadverters dictate, of which we
expect his proof at his leisure. In allusion to the Priests of old, the
Porters, or New Testament Officers, are commanded to watch, Mark 13. 34. (viz.
that as much as in them lies, they hinder persons morally unclean from entering
into Gospel-Churches.)

2. He tells us, That none but Saints are to be admitted thereinto.

3. Threatens those Ministers that shall be careless, and negligent in this
matter, with a deposition from their Office, Ezekiel. 44. A Prophecy, though in
Old Testament-clothing, expressly relating to New Testament days; as is
acknowledged by most. And to any that shall compare what is there spoken, with
what is recorded of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 20, 21, 22. Chap. 'twill manifestly
appear so to do.

4. Acts 20. 28. is most impertinently alleged, and wretchedly abused by the
Animadverter. It only preaches forth thus much, That the Gentile Nations were
not so unclean (as the Jews fondly imagined) but that persons might go unto
them, and preach the Gospel amongst them, as verse. 28, 29, 34, evince. But that
Adulterers, Drunkards, -- should not be accounted unclean and common, so as not
to admit them into Church Communion, or if admitted, that they ought not
legally to be ejected, Mr. T. attempts not the proof of. The Scriptures fully
manifest that they ought so to be. Whether every single Minister has power to
keep any professing the Faith, from the Lords Supper, is not of our present
disquisition; if Ministers of Christ, they with the particular Church to which
they relate have power so to do. The constant practice of the present Ministers
in admitting the visibly wicked and profane to the participation of
Church-Ordinances and Privileges, is a manifest discovery, that they symbolize
with the Priests of Old, of whom the complaint of the Lord is, That they put no
difference betwixt the holy and profane.

The 10th Character of false Prophets instanc't in, is this, that they do not
exercise pity to the weak, broken, scattered sheep of Christ, nor show bowels
in their recovery, but with force and cruelty rule over them, Ezekiel. 34. 4. This
we say is evidently true of the present Ministers, with force and cruelty they
rule over us, (in stead of exercising pity toward us) threaten us with
Excommunications, Imprisonment, dispoi^ing us of our Goods, yea condemning us
to Death, if we stoop not to their lure.

All that can be called an Answer hereunto Sect. 9. is this. 1. The Shepherds
mentioned in Ezekiel. 34. are Civil Rulers, for the Prophets did not rule over the
People with force and cruelty, but with lies and deceit.

Answ. 1. Junius, the Marginal Notes of the Geneva Translation, Diodati, the
Assembly in their Annotations on the place, the most of Interpreters expound it
of false Ecclesiastical Shepherds or Ministers. That this is the intendment of
the Spirit of the Lord is evident.

1st, He speaks of such Shepherds whose special duty it is to feed the flock,
the neglect whereof he condemns them for, v. 2, 3. But this is the duty of
Ecclesiastical Shepherds, Cant. 1. 8 John 21. 15, 16, 17, 1 Cor. 9. 7. 1 Pet.
5. 2.

2dly, They are condemned for ruling over them with force and cruelty, verse. 4.
The like condemned in Ecclesiastical Rulers, 1 Pet. 5. 3.

3dly, Its a Prophecy that runs down to the times of the Gospel, and speaks of
such Shepherds, in opposition to whom Christ is said to be the true Shepherd,
verse. 23, 24. John 10. 11, 12, 14.

The Reason alleged by Mr. T. to prove Civil Rulers are here meant, being
weighed in the Balance, is found wanting. They may righteously be said to rule
over the flock of God with force and cruelty, when they provoke the Magistrate
to do so: as the Woman or Antichristian Church is said to be drunk with the
blood of the Saints, Rev. 17. 6. And in her, it is said, was found the blood of
-- all that were slain upon the earth, Rev. 18. 24. because she prompted and
provoked the Civil Magistrate to pour it forth.

That the present Ministers of England are not righteously charged with ruling
over us with force and cruelty -- he says not, thinks there are some to whom
this evil may be imputed. --

It Is added in S. T. What should I mention, 13thly, that ^hey come u out of the
Earth, Rev. 13. 11. i. e. are raised up by men of earthly spirits and
principles.

To this, after an harangue of words, Sect. 10. that I might leave him upon
second thoughts to correct himself for. As 1st. Tha^ the Book of the Revelation
is obscure; which in it self is not, but a Lanthorn, a Light. It Is a horrid
disparagement to any part of the Scripture so to speak of it. The Sun is not
dark, though blind men discern not the ligh^ and brightness of it: The
obscurity is in us, not in the Scripture.

2. That sober men have wished it were less read. Which wish (whatever the men
are) I am sure is not over sober, being directly opposite to the advice of the
Spirit, for the reading of it with an encouragement thereun^o, Rev. 1. 3.

He answers, 1. That the first and second Beast, Rev. 19. are differently
conceived. --

Answ. Who the first and second Beast are, we have already explained, which Mr.
T. may confute when he is able. That the second Beast and the false Prophet,
Rev. 19. are the same, we have but now demonstrated. The Hierarchy of England,
and Rome are the same Antichristian Hierarchy, their Original the same; the
Canon Laws, by which their Jurisdiction is supported, their Courts, Officers,
etc. the same.

He further acquaints us, 2dly, With horrid consequences that attend this
Principle, that the second Beast is to be interpreted the Hierarchy and
Ministry of England.

1. The first we own with this limitation; The first Beast is the Antichristian
Civil Powers, who if at the coming of Christ are found such, and in actual
rebellion against him, shall be cast into the Lake burning with fire.

2. The second, about worshipping the first Beast (if understood of the Pope, as
he says) may be truly affirmed of the present Hierarchy, who cause the Earth
and them that dwell therein so to do, whilst they cause them to own, bow down,
subject to his Canon-Laws in their Consistories, Ecclesiastical Courts. --

3dly, That all who subject to the Image of the Beast, or Ecclesiastical
Government, shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God. -- Without general or
particular repentance, being no more than this, That those that die in any one
sin unrepented of shall do so (as Mr. T. will grant) we affirm, and challenge
Mr. T. to prove these things to be horrid consequences, monstrously
uncharitable, an argument of dotage, the speech of a furious Bedlam.

Sir, you will one day know that your tongue is not so your own, but you must
give an account of these hard speeches with which you are beating your
fellow servants; I pray may not be laid to your charge.

He asks, 3dly, How does it appear that to come out of the Earth, is to be
raised by men of earthly Spirits and Principles?

Answ. 1. That the word Earth, is to be taken Metaphorically, and points out
the men of the earth, or men of an earthy spirit or principle, he will not deny.

2. Precious Brightman expounds the expression much after the same rate: His
words are (on Rev. 13. 11.) He ascends out of the Earth, as being both made
more ample and great by the authority of earthly men, and those of the Laity
(as they call them) whom the earth does chiefly signify.

3. The best Interpretation of Prophetical Expressions is from their actual
fulfilling; now take this second Beast for the Pope and his Clerly, or his
Hierarchy of England, it is notoriously known, that men of such Spirits and
Principles have elevated them to the state and dignity to which they are
ascended. Which is a full answer to his second Query.

The 12th Character minded is, That they exercise the power of the first Beast,
or make use of the Civil Power for their supportment, verse. 13.

M. T. replies, To exercise the power of the Beast is not to make use of the
Civil Power for its support, but to act with the same Power the first Beast
used in making war with the Saints.

Answ. 1. The Power the first Beast used is the Civil Power, it was the same
Power the Dragon, or Devil made use of in the Roman, Pagan Emperors, Rev. 13.
2. which was such. This Mr. T. grants the second Beast acted with, i. e. made
use in persecuting the Saints, which was done in order as he thought for his
support; so that Mr. T. acknowledges what he sets himself to oppose.

2dly, The mind of the Spirit in Prophetical expressions, is best understood
when the Prophesies are accomplished. (or in accomplishing) Grant this second
Beast is the Pope and his Hierarchy (as our Animadverter is apt to think) Have
not they exercised the Power of the first Beast, or made use of the Civil Power
for their supportment in persecuting the Saints? they have made use of no
other. They deliver the Saints over to the Secular Power to be burnt by it,
they ^ever did it themselves. This from the beginning has been the support of
their Grandeur and Empire, as is known. The same may be said of the Popish
English-Hierarchy.

He adds, 2dly, But this is no evil, to make use of the Civil Power for their
support.

Answ. 1. To have no other Basis or Foundation of their Hierarchy and
Government but that, is an argument it is not of the Institution of Christ.

2. To make use of the Civil Power in order to their own support and security,
in the Banishing, Imprisoning the People of God, is an Argument of persons
being acted and influenced by an Antichristian beastly-spirit; that they are
members of that Beast or false Prophet, whose proper Character it is so to do.

The 13th Character remarked is, That they make an Image to the Beast, verse.
14, 15. (i. e. erect an Ecclesiastical State of Government, in ^
proportionableness unto, and resemblance of the Civil State.)

Mr. T. adjoyns, If the Ecclesiastical State, as it resembles the Civil, be the
Image of the Beast, and to erect it be the Character of a false Prophet, and
this be so evil: Then it is much more evil to erect the Civil State. The
Ecclesiastical State is rather the better and more desirable for this.

Answ. Neither the one nor the other follows hereupon. Not the first, because
the evil of the resemblance, and proportionableness of the Ecclesiastical State
to the Civil lies not in this, That it is the resemblance of a Civil State that
is evil, but that Christ has no where said it should resemble or bear a
proportionableness unto the Civil State, but the contrary. No Civil State that
ever was in the world, though never so just and righteous, was instituted as a
Prototype and exemplar, according to which the Churches of Christ were to be
conformed. To make any Civil State such, is evil, be the State never so
righteous. Not the second, because the conformity and proportionableness of the
Ecclesiastical Church State, to the Platform of Christ, or the Rules given
forth by him, is that wherein its beauty and excellency lies. Its being laid in
a subserviency to the interest of Men or States renders it not so.

We add 14, That they compel all under the penalty of Death to worship or bow
down to the Image of the Beast (or Ecclesiastical Government, in its Courts,
Canons, Laws and Ceremonies devised by it) verse. 15.

To this Mr. T. When did they thus compel them?

Answ. 1. I am sorry Mr. T. his memory so much fails him, as that he asks such
a question. He cannot sure forget what was done in Queen Elizabeth's days to
Barrow, Greenwood, etc. and who were the cause of pouring forth of that blood.

2. He knows that all are civily slain with respect to any Ecclesiastical
promotion (as they speak) who cannot subject hereunto: and who promoted that
business?

3. He cannot forget Mr. Prin, Mr. Burton, Dr. Bastwick, and what they suffered
in the Pallace-Yard and elsewhere, for standing out against the Pope of
Canterbury, and opposing the Church-Ceremonies, and how short it came of Death*
if upon some accounts it were not in it self more grievous.

Besides 4. Those poor men that by Writs of Excommunication have been cast into
stinking Goals, and there kept many years to the utter undoing of themselves
and families, as to the world, (some of them choked to death there) because
they dare not stoop to their Hierarchical jurisdiction and sopperies. All which
with much more that might be mentioned, are an abundant answer to his question.

The 15th Character instanced in is, That they compel all to receive a mark
either in their right hand, or foreheads: i. e. secretly or openly, one way or
other to acknowledge subjection unto this Beast, without which they may neither
buy nor fell; being cut off from the Church by their Excommunications for their
stubbornness, verse. 16, 17.

Mr. T. replies; Do all great as well as small, -- receive such a mark?

Answ. 1. No, th^ugh the grace of the Lord there are a Remnant that have not
bowed their knees to this Baal: But no thanks to the Hierarchy, who (as I said)
compel all, i. e. some of all sorts; as the particle frequently signifies, and
so our Annotators, Brightman, Mede, expound the place.

2. Those that do not, when they are called thereunto, are cut off from the
Church by their Excommunications, and no man by their Canon Law is permitted to
eat or drink, buy or sell with them. I^ which they speak like the Dragon
indeed. For the Bloody Dioclesian set forth the like Edict against the
Christians, That no man should sell, or secretly give any thing to them, except
first they would burn Incense to the Godds. Of whom venerable Beda thus
sings, in the Hymn of Julian the Martyr.

Non illis emendi quidquam aut vendendi copia:
Nec ipsam haurire aquam dabatur licentia,
Antequam thurificarent detestandis Idolis.
The truth of these things is so generally known throughout the Nation, that as
I am sorry the mention thereof should drive Mr. T. into such a swea^ing
passion, as it seems to do; so can I not but wonder at his confidence, in
calling those things palpable gross untruths, when the whole Nation knows the
contrary. His Satirical expressions I omit. The visible Lineaments and
Characters of false Prophets being instamped upon the foreheads of the present
Ministers, they are not to be heard but separated from.

CHAP. VIII.
Arg. 6. Sect. 1.
A sixth Argument against hearing the present Ministers. Saints must not have
Communion with Idolaters. The vanity of Mr. T. his arguings to the contrary,
evinced. 1 Cor. 10. 14. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, opened. A threefold
Idolatry. Whether the Idolaters of old worshipped the creature terminatively.
Of the golden Calf. Baal. Molech. That the Worshippers of them worshipped them
not terminatively; proved. Of Devil-Worship. Psalm. 106. 37, 38, explained. The
Heathen Images dedicated to the true God. The Testimony of the Heathens in this
matter. Of refined Idolatry. Worshipping of God in a way not of his appointment,
is Idolatry. The Testimony of Calvin, Perkins, Ames, Pareus, Willet, Peter
Martyr, etc. to the truth of the Assertion. The Romans worshipped the Godds, an
hundred and seventy years and more, without Images.

A Sixth Argument advanced in S. T. against hearing the present Ministers is
this.

Those that are guilty of Idolatry, Saints may not have communion with, much
less own them as their Teachers, but ought to separate from them: But the
present Ministers of England are guilty of Idolatry: Therefore. --

The Major is bottomed upon express Commands from Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and 10.
14. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 18.

To which Mr. T. replies, 1. The Conclusion is not the same with that which
Chap. 1. was undertaken to be defended: That it is not lawful for Saints to
hear the present Ministers, which we may do though Communion with them be
unlawful, though we are bound not to own them as our Teachers, but separate
from them. --

Answ. Now this I confess I understand not; Communion consists in giving and
receiving, a constant or frequent attending upon any ones teaching (especially
when by the Prelates instituted and inducted to such a Parish as a Teacher,
whereof I am a Member) is an Argument of my owning him for my Teacher.
Separation from any one consists in this, that I have no Communion with him in
that, in respect of which I am bound to separate from him. That I should with
frequency hear a man preach as a Minister of the Gospel, and yet be said to
have no Communion with him, to separate from him, -- is an Aenigma that needs
some Oedipus to unravel.

He tells us, 2dly, The Major is not true; if the Idolatry be in worshipping in
any other way than what he has prescribed; or if the Idolatry be secret or if
open, if by infirmity a man falls into it and repents, or be not censured as
such, or teaches not such Idolatry, nor requires any communion with him in his
Idolatry.

Answ. 1. If the Major be not true, it follows that its lawful to have
Communion with Idolaters, for with persons guilty of Idolatry the Major says
we must not have Communion. Mr. T. is drive^ to his shifts indeed, when to
defend the cause he has undertaken, he is forced to plead for such gross
absurdities, so contradictory to the Scriptures, and the judgment of all sober
Christians that ever were in the world.

2. If worshipping God in another way than he has appointed, be in Scripture,
Idolatry, and in it we are commanded to abstain from such Worship and
Worshippers; then though the Idolatry consist therein, the Major is true. When
the Scripture commands us to flee from Idolatry, it means that which is so in
its own sense, not Mr. T's.

3. It Is true I am not to separate from a person I know not to be guilty of
Idolatry till I know he is so; but this reaches not the case of the present
Ministers, whom we prove manifestly guilty hereof. When Ezekiel once came to
understand that the Ancients of the House of Israel committed Idolatry in the
Chambers of their Imagery, Ezekiel. 8. 7, to 13. he might not have Communion with
them, though they committed it in the dark.

4. Repentance restores a man fallen into the same place amongst the Saints he
was in before he fell; but this is not at all to the purpose; the present
Ministers justify their actings, would compel a^l to do as they do.

5. That it is not our duty to separate from Idolaters till they are under
Church-censure, is a mere fancy.

1st, What if they are such as are in no Church State, persons without, with
whom the Church has nothing to do?

2dly, What if the so called Church be generally overspread with Idolatry, as
our Animadverter will confess the Church of Rome is? must I wait the Churches
censure till I refuse to hold communion with Idolaters? Is it ever likely that
an Apostate, Idolatrous Church will pass sentence upon it self? or rational,
that I hold communion with them till they do?

So is, 6. That it is not our duty so to do, except they teach it, and require
my communion with them in it.

For, 1. he that practices it, teaches it by his practice. 2. As it relates
to the present Ministers, it is vain and frivolous, they both practice and
preach it, and require my communion with them in it. --

He says 3dly, The Texts do not prove the Major.

Answ. Let the judicious Reader judge for himself whether they do or no, 1 Cor.
5. 11. we have already vindicated from his exceptions.

That 1 Cor. 10. 14. is not to our purpose, because the Apostle only says,
Flee from Idolatry, not from teachers that are Idolaters, is a fond conceit.
The intendment of the Apostle is to provoke to the greatest circumspection, not
only to avoid the thing it self, (which says Pareus, Was not only the gross
Idolatry of the Gentiles, but every kind of Idolatry) but all the occasions
thereof. And certainly the hearing or attending on the ministry of persons,
guilty of Idolatry, is no mean occasion thereof. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
commands separation from the Idol, Mr. T. grants: Now I must profess, I know
not by what Logic he will prove, that though it be my duty to separate from
Idols, I may so far retain communion with the Idolater, as to own him for my
Teacher; the very repeating these absurdities is confutation sufficient.

Before we attempt the proof of the minor Proposition, we premise in S. T. That
Idolatry may be considered under a threefold Notion. 1. Most gross and absurd
Idolatry, when the creature is worshipped terminatively. This we say few are
guilty of. In the matter of the golden Calf Israel was not, they worshipped God
in it, Exodus 32. 5.

Maimonides de Idolat. 8. 2, 3. tells us, That through the Idols, Idolaters
worshipped the God that made the Heaven and the Earth.

Mr. T. replies, 1. To worship the Creatures terminatively is most
gross-Idolatry, the Israelites, Exodus 32. and many Heathen Idolaters did not do
so. 2. It Is not true that few or none worship the Creature terminatively, for
the most of the Idolaters of old worshipped the Host of Heaven, and at this day
the Devil himself is worshipped in the East and West Indies. --

Answ. 1. That most of the Idolaters of old worshipped the Host of Heaven, is
granted; that they worshipped these or any other Idols terminatively, our
Dictator attempts not the proof of. What is said of Baal, 1 Kings 16. 31. or
Molech, Psalm. 106. 37, 38. who is also called Moloch, Amos 5. 26. and Milcom, 1
Kings 11. 33. and Malcham, Zeph. 1. 5. (i. e. the Sun) proves not that they so
worshipped the Sun, (in commemoration of which these Images were erected) It Is
true, Psalm. 106. 37, 38. it is said, They sacrificed -- to Devils, but that
therefore they worshipped the Devil as the utmost terminus, cannot be
conceived. It Is called Devil-worship, because it was not from God, but of the
invention and instigation of the Devil, as all the false worship in the World
is. Of their worshipping Molech, or Milcham, it is expressly said, that they
worshipped the Lord too, when they worshipped him, Zeph. 1. 5. (Heb. to the
Lord, and in Malcam, as the Papists say, they direct their worship to God only,
in, or through their Images) which fully answers what can be pleaded from Acts
7. 41, 42, 43.

2. The most learned of the Heathens do affirm, That their Images were
dedicated to the true God, whom in them they worshipped, reputing the Images
themselves but Stooks and Stones, and that in them they worshipped but one God.
Seneca says, By Jupiter standing in the Capitol with Lightning in his hand,
they understand the Preserver and Governor of all things, -- the Maker of all
the World, Qu. nature. l. 2. c. 45. Who it was that sang,

(...),
(...) --
Mr. T. is not ignorant. See Arnobius, l. 6. contra. Gent.

We premise 2dly, That there is a somewhat more refi^ed Idolatry, -- and to
this Head we refer,

1. The ascription of a Godhead to any creature, as to Herod, Acts 12. 22. 2.
The ascription of the properties of the Godhead to any Creature. 3. The
worshipping God in any other way than what he has prescribed, which is the
Idolatry forbidden in the second Commandment. 4. The Oblation of Worship, and
Service to God that has been offered up to Idols, for which there is no
prescription in the Scriptures.
It Is this second sort of Idolatry, we say, the present Ministers of England
are guilty of.

Mr. T. answers, 1. The definition of Idolatry by Dr. Rainold, ^ath hitherto
been received by all Protestants that he knows of, that it is exhibiting Divine
Worship to a Creature, proved from Romans 1. 15.

Answ. 1. That this is Idolatry, I grant, that nothing else is so, will not be
proved. Protestants affirm otherwise, as Calvin, Perkins, Ames, Paraeus.

Though, 2. the very truth is, when we submit to a Worship of humane devising,
we exhibit Divine Worship to a Creature, viz. the deviser, imposer thereof, we
worship him (...), besides the Creator, as Hilarious, Beza, expound the Phrase,
Romans 1. 25.

And Paraeus, Explicat. cate. p. 3. Q. 9. p. 528. says, What is required in
the second Commandment? Answ. That we express not God by any Figure, and that
we worship him not in any other way or manner than he has in his Word
commanded us to worship him, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Mat. 15. 9. --
Idolatry is contrary to this Commandment, which is a false and superstitious
worship of the Deity, of which there are two chief kinds; one more gross,
as when a false Deity is worshipped; this is forbidden in the first
Commandment -- another more refined, when the true God is pretended to be
worshipped; but there is a mistake in the kind of Worship, i. e. when Worship
is pretended to be performed to God in some work which he has not required;
this is condemned in this second Commandment. -- and p. 529. Those who sin
against the second Commandment, sin also against the first, because they who
worship God otherwise than he will be worshipped, they feign to themselves
another God, and indeed worship not God, but the figment of their own brain. --
To feign another Worship of God, is to feign another will of God, and by
consequence another God. --

Mr. Perkins, Vol. 1. p. 659. says, When God is worshipped otherwise, and by
other means than he has revealed in his Word, that is Idolatry. Idolatrous
Worships are all they which are appointed without the Command of God, Mel. Tom.
2. p. 107.

We shall only add what we find mentioned by the Learned Peter Martyr, in his
Comment on the first of Sam. chapter 7. p. 40. Men are wont sometimes to feign to
themselves Commentitious gods, as Jupiter, Neptune, Mercury: Sometimes to
worship the one and true God, but with a Worship that is forbidden, or strange,
(i. e. not commanded) as if any one should slay his Son, or do what King Ahaz
did, who constituted a Damascene Altar in the Temple of God. -- To do thus, is
nothing else than to worship an Idol. For men do hereby feign a God who will so
be worshipped, who is in truth no God. --

Therefore August. Quest. 29. in lib. Jos. in which place the same thing is
proposed to the people by Joshua that is here by Samuel, He that feigns to
himself God to be other than he is, does carry in his heart another God.
Wherefore not only Jupiter, and the vain Deities, but also those Idols and
Phantasms are altogether to be cast out of our mind. This will be done if we
constitute to our selves God to be such as he is described to us to be in the
Holy Scriptures.

Tertul. in lib. de idololat. says, Not only the Cross and made Worship of
Images is Idolatrous, (for the Ancients of old had Temples The Romans for above
170. years, worshipped the Godds without Images, say Vario, Plutarch.
without Images, who were nevertheless Idolaters. It matters not whether thou
make to thy self a God of Plaiscering, or Marble, or of a Trunk of a Tree, (I
add, says P. Martyr, or of thy own Phantasm) -- an Idol is so called of (...),
which is a Form, an Idol therefore is a little Form.

Samuel therefore exhorts (chap. 7. 3.) that they cast away commentitious
Godds, and vain Worship, and evil Opinions of God out of their minds.

What this Animadverter mentions out of Tertullian in his Book of Idolatry, c.
15. makes for us. If Idolatry be when any thing that is not God, is extolled
beyond the measure of humane honor, then when the Prescribers of Divine
Service are so extolled (as they are when the Service prescribed by them is
subjected to, it being the peculiar honor and prerogative of God to prescribe
his own Worship, (as say the Heathens themselves from the Light and Dictates of
Nature) there is Idolatry.

2dly, Mr. T. tells us, That the worshipping God in any other way than he has
prescribed, is not the Idolatry forbidden in the second Commandment, that all
who write upon it say not so, that worship (not of Divine prescription) abused
to Idolatry, is not Idolatry.

Answ. 1. If the first be true, this last is undoubtedly so, i. e. if
worshipping God in any other way than he has prescribed be the Idolatry
forbidden in the second Commandment, that Worship that has been abused to
Idolatry, and was never of Divine prescription, is undoubtedly so.

2. Mr. T. grants that there is some kind of Idolatry forbidden in the second
Commandment, and I desire to he informed what it is; If he say the worshipping
false Godds, that Idolatry is forbidden in the first Commandment; If he say the
making of Images, I ask, 1. Whether the making of Images for civil uses, or
Divine Service? The first he will not assert; if the second, their forming for
that use and purpose, is condemned, because a medium of Worship not instituted
by the Lord; for had it been so, it had not been Idolatry, but our duty to have
formed them.

2. Wether by Images he mean corporeal Images, or incorporeal Idea's, or false
Conceptions of things in the mind of man? and whether this later, in the
Judgment of most eminent Divines, be not as really Idolatry as the former? and
if so (as undoubtedly it is) the worshipping God in any other way then he has
prescribed, is evidently Idolatry, and that forbidden in the second
Commandment; and so say all that I have yet met with that write thereupon.

What he adds the Pharisees washing their hands, and that Christ does not
accuse them as Idolaters, is frivolous.

1. That Custom did not so immediately border upon the Worship of God, was not
made such a part of it as our Common-Prayer-Book-Service.

Yet 2, They placing too much of their Religion and Devotion therein, Christ
does little less than call them so, in the place instanced in by Mr. T. Mat.
15. 9. In vain do they worship me; Gr. (...), ^. 1. They shall reap no fruit by
it.

2. Their Worship is vain, frivolous, vanity, as the Lord calls Idols and
Idolatrous Worship, Lev. 26. 1. Ezekiel. 30. 13. Psalm. 97. 7. Isa. 19. 3. Jer. 14.
14. Zach. 11. 17. Hebr. (...) which the 70 render (and that truly) (...), vain
things, and so the Apostle calls all the Godds of the Gentiles, Act. 14. 15.

3. That because Christ does not expressly call them so, therefore they were not
such, Mr. T. will not prove. Christ calls not Pilate an unjust Judge, yet he
was so. --

We add in S. T. 3dly, That there is a most refined sort of Idolatry, when the
heart goes forth in desires after any thing beyond what is limited by the Lord,
and trusts in any thing on this side God, which Mr. T. gives no occasion of
debate about.

Sect. 2. Arg. 1.
The present Ministers of England are Idolaters, proved. Of Worshipping God in
a false way. That to do so is Idolatry; proved. Acts 17. 23, 24. explained.
(...), what it signifies. Why the Athenians are so called. The present
Ministers worship God in a false way. The Common Prayer Book Worship, a false
way of Worship, evinced. Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2. and 10. 5. The judgment of
Grotius, Tertullian, Cornelius a Lapide, Musculus, on Mat. 6. 9.

THat the present Ministers of England are Idolaters, (which is the Minor
Proposition of the forecited Argument) we manifest in S. T. by several
Arguments. As,

Arg. 1. Those that worship the true God in any other way then he has said he
will be worshipped in, and is prescribed by him, are Idolaters. But the present
Ministers worship God in another way than he has said he will be worshipped
in, and is prescribed by him. Therefore. --

The Major we say is evident from this single consideration: To Worship the
true God through false Mediums is Idolatry. Such as so worship him are
Idolaters. But to worship God in any other way than what is of his own
prescription, is to worship him through a false Medium. Therefore so to worship
him is Idolatry, those that so worship him are Idolaters.

To which Mr. T. replies, Sect. 2. 1st, By descanting upon the expression [any
other way] which what I meant thereby, he might easily have informed himself
from the Treatise he attempts to confute I mean away of drawing nigh to God,
invented and so established by man, as to be made such a necessary part of
Worship, as that without it I trust not publicly draw nigh to God in worship
at all, which is to worship him through a false Medium; and this I say is
Idolatry, or else there is little or no Idolatry in the World. (The Achenians
were Idolaters upon this very account and no other, for they worshipped the
true God, Acts 17. 23, 24.) What he adds touching their worshipping by an Image
is of an easy dispatch.

1. That Image through which they worshipped the unknown God, was a false
Medium, and upon this foot of account singly are they charged with Idolatry. No
doubt but they had a multitude of Images, and that in respect of these their
City is said to be (...), full of Idols, or wholly given to Idolatry; which it
was, in as much as through these Images, as false Medium's, they worshipped
God; and so it had been if through any other false Medium's they had drawn nigh
to him, though there had not bee^ one of these Statuae, or pillars abiding
amongst them.

2. That the unknown God to whom their Altar was dedicated, was as a Demon,
is, to say no more, a very inconsiderate assertion: When Paul tells them, in
verse. 23. It was God that made the world, whom they ignorantly worshipped. Nor
is there the least footing for such an assertion from the word (...), it is true
Mr. Mede renders it a Worshipper of Daemon-Gods, but our Translators better,
too superstitious. They are said to be (...), with respect unto their (...),
which Budaeus demonstrates, signifies Religion; Plutarch explains it of the
overmuch, and importune worship of the Godds, whence arose multitudes of
superstitious Ceremonies. No doubt they were great devotionists who miscarried
not in this, that they directed not their Worship to the true God (which the
Apostle says they did) but in their worshipping him* (...), with many
Ceremonies of humane Invention: upon the account whereof they are said to be
(...), or too Ceremonious, or Superstitious, and verse. 16. to be given to
Idolatry; which is what we charge upon, and prove against the Ministers of
England.

The Minor Proposition, viz. That the present Ministers worship the true God in
another way than he has said he will be worshipped, and is prescribed by him,
is in S. T. thus demonstrated.

Those that worship God after the way of the Common Prayer Book, worship him in
another way than he has said he will be worshipped in, and is pr^scribed by
him: But the present Ministers of England worship God after the way of the
Common Prayer Book: Therefore. --

The Minor cannot be denied; their subscription before they are admitted into
the Ministry, with their daily and constant practice, are sufficient evidences
thereof.

To this Mr. T. replies Sect: 3. 1. Way of Worship not prescribed by God, he
tells us may be, 1st, When the Worship is to another thing besides or with God,
in which sense the Minor was denied and should have been proved.

Answ. 1. But in this sense we discharged the Ministers of England of the guilt
of Idolatry: What obligation lies upon us to prove a charge against them, we
never impleaded them as guilty, I know not.

2. If this be all Mr. T. contends about, That they worship not another thing
besides, or with the true God, he fights with a man of straw of his own making.

3. When he demonstrates (as he how dictates) that this alone proves Idolatry,
i. e. there is no other Idolatry but the worshipping that which is not God by
Nature, I will acknowledge my mistake; we have proved the contrary, in which we
have the concurrent testimony of the most (all) Expositors and Casuists that
have written about Idolatry, who make worshipping the true God in a way not of
his perscription, to be the Idolatry forbidden in the second Commandment; Dr.
Willet (one of their own) tells us as much, Com. on Exodus p. 338. So does the
learned Usher, Ball, Ursin, Calvin, Wendeline, Altingius, Ravanellus,
Maccovius, etc. besides those we have already mentioned.

He adds 2dly, By another way may be meant, another Ceremony or Rite in which
the Worship of God is placed; but this Author goes not about to prove the minor
in this sense.

Answ. 1. By worshipping God in another way, -- I understand the tendering to
God a Worship and Service of humane devising, that he no where calls for. This
I prove the Ministers of England do, when they draw nigh to God with their
Common-Prayer-Book-Service in their hands: And Mr. T. talks idely, when he
says, The Worship of God is not placed therein. If it be not, they have in
many places of the Land no Worship of God at all; it is frequently by them
called Divi^e Service, and the Service of the Church. It Is made such a
necessary part of Worship, that Preaching must give place to it.

As to what he adds, 1. That I suppose that God has appointed the
particularities of the way of his Worship. --

We answer, 'That particularities of Worship, as such, are determined by the
Lord, we have asserted and proved; what Mr. T. has offered to the contrary in
answer to the Preface, Sect. 20. chap. 1. Sect. 3. chap. 4. Sect. 9. chap. 5.
Sect. 3, 4, 5, 7. is fully answered in our Reply thereunto.

2. That the Argument may be retorted upon my self, is a vanity of the
Animadverter; because, 1. our dispute is not (as he would bear the Reader in
hand) about every form of expression, but of such a form wherein the Worship of
God is placed, which is ^mposed upon the Churches of Christ, without subjection
to which it is denied them to worship God at all as such, for refusing whereof
they are exposed to Excommunications, and total ruin in this World. 2. We have
already proved that forms of prayer enjoined, are condemned by the Lord, and
praying in the Spirit, commended and commanded.

We proceed in S. T. and prove, That to worship God after the way of the
Common Prayer Book, is to worship him in a way that is not of his appointment,
(which is the major proposition) because the least footsteps of such a way of
Worship is not to be found in the Old or New Testament, enjoined by Christ or
his Apostles; nor for several centuries of years afterward; of which we treat
at large in S. T.

What Mr. T. is pleased, Sect. 4. in the first and second place to answer
hereunto we have already replied to.

He adds, 3dly, He still acknowledges that the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is
the Worship of the true God.

Answ. 1. I do so indeed, and so was the Athenian Worship, Acts 17. 23. yet an
Idolatrous Worship, and they themselves Idolaters.

2dly, Though I grant it to be the Worship of the true God, yet I prove it not
to be the true Worship of God, and therefore Idolatrous.

He adds, 4thly, That he does not except against the matter of the prayers in
the Common Prayer Book. --

Answ. True, in the place under consideration, I do not, but it does not
therefore follow that it is not liable to exception. Somewhat was hinted in S.
T. touching this matter, and more may be added in its proper place.

He adds, That these three things are affirmed by me; 1. That all Liturgies, or
stinted forms of prayer, are not of Gods appointment, but of humane invention.

2. That they are unduly imposed on Ministers.

3. That Ministers do sinfully, yea, idolatrously use them, because it is ^ way
of Worship not appointed of God. With respect to which he affirms;

1. That stinted forms of Prayer, and Service of God, which are not otherwise
faulty, then in that they are stinted, may be lawfully used by a Minister of
the Gospel in his public Administration.

2. That such Prayers and Service are a Worship of God in a way of his
appointment.

Answ. 1. And both these might be granted him without the least detriment to
the Cause undertaken by us. For the Common-Prayer-Book-Service is otherwise
faulty than in that it is stinted, viz. because abused to Idolatry; the matter
of it is in not a few things liable to exceptions, the Rites and Modes enjoined
therein abominable.

2. He should have proved one thing more, viz, That a Service devised by man,
(as the Common Prayer Book is) may lawfully be imposed, and as so submitted to,
and that this is justifiable. A failure wherein renders us unconcerned in what
is nextly offered by him.

This he expressly tells us, p. 222. He will not justify.

So brave a Champion is he for the Clergy, that when he should come to a close
encounter, he fairly takes his heels and quits the Field, leaving them, poor
men, to shift for themselves as well as they can.

However we attend the proof of his Assertions, 1. Christ appointed the Lords
Prayer to be used by the Apostles, (as a stinted form, tying them to the use of
so many words and no more) Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.

Answ. 1. Notoriously false, as we have manifested, together with the
invalidity of men's arguings from hence, for a stinted imposed Liturgy, cap. 6.
of this Treatise.

2. Nor is this one of the Placita of the Separatists, Grotius is of the same
mind, (on Luke 11. 1. Teach us a compendium of those things we are to pray for;
for at that time they were not bound to the use of so many words and syllables.
--) as are Tertullian, Cyprian, Cornelius a Lapide, Musculus, etc.

But, 3dly, should it be granted that Christ enjoined the use of that form of
Prayer as a form, this will not prove that stinted forms of Prayer are lawful,
and as such may lawfully be imposed and used; which can have no other basis
then this; it is as lawful for Civil or Ecclesiastical Rulers to devise and
impose forms of Prayer upon the Churches as for Christ, a most absurd and
blasphemous assertion.

As touching what he adds, 2. Christ justifies the Childrens crying of Hosanna,
uses himself the forms which David used before in the Psalms, etc.

We answer, That in all this he does but beat the Air, and speaks not one word
to the purpose: We find no footsteps of any enjoined Liturgy, or stinted
forths of Prayer imposed either in the old Testament or the New; though we find
the same words used sometimes by them, yet that they might never use any other
in their public devotions, which is the condition of stinted enjoined forms,
and the known case of the Ministers of Engl. with respect to their
Church Service, we find not, (which is also a full answer to what he cites out
of Cyprian, touching their use of the Lord's Prayers, and other Forms, -- if
they used any, they were not bound to use them and no other --)When he proves
this consequence, the Saints of old used the same words in prayer sometimes,
and Christ used words before used by them -- Therefore a set and stinted
Liturgy was in use amongst them, and such an one as our
Common-Prayer-Book-Worship, I will be his Convert. He knows the contrary: His
answers to Justin Martyr and Tertullian, are impertinent, and not worth the
reciting. The words of the former are, (...), etc. Atheists we are not, seeing
we worship the Maker of the World. -- And in all our Oblations we praise him
according to our abilities, in the way of prayer and thanksgiving. And
afterward tells us, that the President of the Assembly pours our prayers --
according to his ability, and continues long in this work. -- Tertullian tells
us, The Christians looking toward Heaven, (not on their Common Prayer Book)
with their hands spread abroad, prayed without a Moniter, because from their
hearts, expressions wholly exclusive of, inconsistant with, the forms of
prayer contended for. The sayings of Socrates in his Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 21.
who lived about the year 430. tells us, That among all the Christians in that
Age, scarce two were to be found that used the same words in prayer: He passes
over in silence, as he does the account I give of the use of them, not till
about the year 600. and the imposition by Charles the Great of Gregory's
Liturgy, as is thought, and the support thereof by threats and punishments ever
since. These things h^ knows to be true, and yet they are such as the Dragon he
labors to support, cannot possibly stand before.

Sect. 3.
Common-Prayer-Book-Worship not of the appointment of Christ, because an
obstruction of some positive Duty charged by Christ upon the Saints. Mr. T. his
Exceptions refuted. Of resting on the Sabbath Day. Whether Sacrificing was an
obstruction of that Duty. Mat. 5. 12. explained. Following Christ no
obstruction of positive Duties to Parents. Of the gift and grace of Prayer.
Romans 8. 26. opened. It Is the duty of Saints to improve Gifts received.
Common-Prayer-Book-Worship contrary to Scripture. It Is not necessary to the
edification -- of the Saints. The Judgment of the Reformed Churches.

A Second Argument advanced in S. T. to prove that Common-Prayer-Book-Worship
is not of the appointment of Christ, is thus formed. That Worship which is an
obstruction of any positive Duty charged by Christ to be performed by the
Saints, is not a Worship that is of his appointment. But this is undeniably
true of the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship. Therefore. -- Christ has given
Officers to his Church, Ephesians. 4. 11. to them he has given gifts every way
suiting the employment he calls them forth unto, the improvement whereof he
expects and charges upon them, 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Ephesians. 4. 11. Prove.
17. 16. Luke 19. 20. To think after all this that any Worship should be of the
institution of Christ, that shuts ou^ as unnecessary the exercise of the gifts
given, is absurd, and injurious to Christ. --

To which Mr. T. answers, Sect. 5. 1. The major is not in all cases true;
resting on the Sabbath Day was a positive Duty; yet sacrificing, which was an
obstruction of that Duty, called profaning the Sabbath, Mat. 12. 5. was
Worship of Gods appointment; following Christ preaching of the Gospel, were
Worship of Christ's appointment, yet they were obstructions to positive duties
to be done to Parents. --

Answ. 1. Resting from our own works on the Sabbath Day, was a positive Duty,
not from the works of Religion, and the Worship of God, as was Sacrificing.
It Is true, Christ says, Mat. 12. 5. That the Priests in the Temple profaned
the Sabbath; but this is spoken in respect of the vulgar Opinion, that thought
the Sabbath violated if any neces^^ry work were done therein, not that indeed
the Sabbath day was broken by them. So Dr. Willet, on Exodus 20. 9. and our
Annota^ors upon the place expound it.

2. That following Christ, -- is an obstruction of any posstive duty we owe to
Parents, Mr. T. will prove,

Quum durae quercus sudabunt roscida mella, i. e. never. It Is true, Christ
sometimes calls us to leave Father and Mother -- for his Name and Gospel-sake,
but then our abiding with them is no longer any positive duty enjoined us by
him, but the contraty; so that the major Proposition abides firm.

To the minor, viz. That the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is an obstruction of a
positive duty, viz. the exercise of the gift of Prayer, which is excluded
hereby. He answers,

1. It Is supposed that the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is a different sort of
Worship, from such as is used by those who exercise the gift of Prayer.

Answ. And so it is, the one being of the Earth, earthy, carnal, devilish, the
other from Heaven; as good he may say the Ark and Dagon are the same, as that
the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship, and the Worship of Jesus Christ is so. When he
proves the absurdities mentioned are the proper issue of this assertion, we
shall think our selves concerned to take notice of them, but till then we
reject them as the spurious offspring of his own begetting.

He adds, 2dly. The Author intimates, that ability to conce^ve, compose, and
utter in variety of Expressions, Petitions to God, is the gift of Prayer; and
the exercise of it, is the exercise of that gift.

Answ. I do so indeed. That there are some that have ability so to do, Mr. T.
will not, cannot deny, nor that this ability may be where there is not true
Grace; what will Mr. T. call this? Ability to express ones self in variety and
suitableness of expressions to the Children of men, is a gift given by the
Lord, and that not to every one; that to be able so to do to God should not be
a gift of his, is absurd. Romans 8. 26. speaks not solely of the gift, but of the
grace Prayer, which sometimes meet in the same subject, but are distinct. There
may be the gift, where there is not the grace of Prayer; and on the contrary. I
say not, p. 62. That the gift of prayer is the donation of the Spirit, as if I
thought this could not be, where the Spirit did not indwell, though indeed none
but such can be in the acceptable exercise of that gift. I account not the gift
of Prayer to be a gift proper to Ministers, i. e. exclusively to others, but
affirm that all Christ's Ministers have the gift of Prayer, and ought to use it;
which the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship shuts out of doors as unnecessary, and
therefore is not of Christ's appointment.

To this our Animadverter replies, 1. That Ephesians. 4. expresses not Ministerial
gifts.

Answ. This is evidently his mistake; they are expressly mentioned, v. 7, 8.

He adds, 2dly, If they are implied, it is questionable whether they are
ordinary or extraordinary.

Answ. They are ordinary, for they are such as are to continue with the
Ministry to the perfecting the Body of Christ.

3dly, If ordinary, whether the gift of Prayer, as he means, were one? --

Answ. This must be one, if the exercise of the duty be for the edification of
the Body of Christ, v. ^, 11, 12. To imagine that Christ does not continue to
dispense this gift unto his Gospel Ministers, for the foresaid end, is
injurious to his faithfulness to, love, and care of, his Children, to conceit
that better provision can be made, than he makes by the bestowment of his gifts
for that end; and such as shall exclude the exercise of them, is derogatory to
his Wisdom, and blasphemous.

He adds, 4thly, That though the Apostles said, Acts 6. 4. We will give our
selves continually to prayer, -- and Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 1. Exhorts, that prayers
be made for all men; yet we read not that it is made the Ministers work to
express the necessities of the Church in the public Auditory. --

Answ. 1. But this is not to the question; whoever they are that are called
forth to this work, they are to do it according to the abilities the Lord has
given them.

But, 2dly, if it be not the Ministers work, whose is it? whence is it that
they who repute themselves such, exclude all others, and monopolize this work
unto themselves?

3ly2, Christ and his Apostles used no forms of prayer before or after their
preaching, he grants; and I am sure there is not the least tittle of direction
touching the composing and imposing any for the future; hence it follows not
that either way of praying (I conceive he means by stinted prescribed forms, or
otherwise) is lawful, but that dev^sed, and imposed forms of prayer are utterly
unlawful; for who shall dare to prescribe where Christ is silent, upon his
freeborn Subjects?

What he further adds, That the one way of Worship, (he must mean that of
imposed stinted Liturgies, if he speak pertinently) shuts not out of doors the
other, is notoriously false.

But, 4ly, Christ has given to his Ministers gifts for the edification of his
Body, amongst the rest the gift of Prayer, which they are bound to improve when
ever called to the discharge of that duty, as we prove from 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Cor.
12. 7. Ephesians. 4. 11. Prove. 17. 16. Luke 19. 20. The exercise whereof is shut
out by the Common-Prayer-Book-Service. This Mr. T. should have disproved. The
reading of a Prayer cannot possibly by a man of the least understanding in the
things of God, be supposed to be the exercise of this gift. Reading is not
praying, nor any where so called in the Scripture. As for Women, we assert, if
they have the gift of Prayer, when ever called forth to the performance of that
duty, they are bound to the exercise of that gift, which is a sufficient Answer
to what follows: though persons are not bound to be always in the actual
exercise of this gift, yet when called to the performance of the duty of
prayer, for which it is eminently given of God, they are obliged to be
improving it; their not being so, is a napkening up of their Talent; and Mr. T.
may prove the contrary when he is able.

It Is added in S. T. That it will not in the least take off the weight of the
Argument, to say, That liberty is granted for the exercise of this gift before
and after Sermon.

For, 1. the whole Worship of God may according to these men's Principles be
discharged without any Sermon at all, and is requently in most of the
Assemblies of England.

2. Those their prayers are also bounded and limited by the 55. Canon, and that
both in words and matter, for they are enjoined to pray in that form, or to
that effect, as briefly as conveniently they may, which will by all sober
persons be accounted a boundary, notwithstanding Mr. T. his confident Dictate
to the contrary.

3. We had always thought that Christ having given gifts unto Men, did require
the use of those gifts whenever persons were called to the performance of that
service, to which they were designedly given by him by virtue of the
forementioned precepts. When Christ has given a gift of Prayer unto his
Children, and charged them to stir up the gift given them, and not to napkin
their Talent, we had verily thought that whenever they had been called forth to
the performance of that duty he did really intend, and expect that they should
be found in the exercise of the Gift given. --

To the first and last of these Mr. T. is wholly silent, what he says to the
second we have already removed but of the way.

Mr. T. adds yet further, The Common-Prayer-Book-Worship may further the duty
of exercising the gift of Prayer; and therefore may lawfully be used. Which he
proves thus,

That form may be lawfully used for Worship which may be a means to further any
positive Duty charged by Christ to be performed by the Saints: But such may be
the Forms of Prayer in the Liturgy of the Church of England: Therefore. --

The Major he proves thus. That which requires a Duty, requires the Means
conducing thereto.

The Minor thus; The Common Prayer Book directs what things are to be prayed
for, by reason of the brevity of the Colects, the Responds, the frequent use,
the plain expressions, help the memory and cloqution, wherein the gift of
Prayer consists.

Answ. 1. A Papist may say as much and as truly for their Books of Devotion,
their Whippings, Pilgrimages, -- Mr. T. knows they do so. They are means, they
tell us, tending to the furtherance of positive duties.

To which our Divines answer (as we do Mr. T.) That only those things are to be
accounted a means of furthering any positive duty, that God, not man, has
appointed as such thereunto. And in this sense is the Rule given by them about
the Decalogue. That which requires the duty, requires the means conducing
thereunto. And except means be taken by him in this sense we deny his Major, No
Form may lawfully be used in Worship but that which is a means of the
appointment of God to further a positive Duty. If he prove his
Common-Prayer-Book-Service to be such a Form, he does somewhat, but till then,

-- Rapiunt conamina Venti. Hebeats the air.

2ly. Why speaks he so faintly in his Minor? Such May be the Forms -- Why
speaks he not out, and plainly, as one that believes he speaks Truth? Such Are
the Forms of Prayer in the Common Prayer Book.

Now this we also deny; not only, 1. Because they are not means appointed by
the Lord for that end: But also because, 2. The gift of Prayer consists in
somewhat else than memory and eloqution, viz. In an ability of mind to form
words expressive of the desires of our hearts, wherein these Forms are not
pleaded to be helpful. And yet 3. However it comes to pass we find not the most
devout Liturgists to excel either in memory or eloqution. And 4. Our own
experience, and the experience of the whole Nation tells us the contrary to
what Mr. T. affirms. The Common-Prayer-Book-Priests are of all persons the most
dull, unapt, and heavy in that duty of Prayer; who must have a praye^ penned
for them for every occasion, or they can say nothing. Now Mr. T. has not
produced one convincing Argument to prove that a man must believe contrary to
what he sees and knows.

We add in S. T. 3dly, The Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is a Worship of which we
find no footsteps in the Scripture, as has already been demonstrated: Whence
it follows that it is a Worship of pure humane invention, which is not only not
of Christ's appointment, but contrary to the very nature of instituted Worship
(as is proved in our first Argument) and to very many precepts of the Lord in
the Scripture, Exodus 20. 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 13. 32. Prove. 30. 16. Jer. 7.
31. Mat. 15. 9, 13. Mar. 7. 7, 8. Rev. 22. 18. The mind of God in which
Scriptures we have exemplified, Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Jos. 22. 10. Judge. 8. 2. 2
Kings, 16. 11. 1 Chr. 15. 3.

What Mr. T. answers hereunto Sect. 6. is, 1st, No more than what he has often
said, and has been as often answered.

2dly, He has culd out five or six Scriptures from the rest, which he yet
wrests to another purpose than they were produced for. We do not introduce them
to prove the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is an Humane Invention (which we
demonstrate it to be, because not founded upon the Scriptures) but that the
Introduction of Humane Inventions into the Worship of God is interdicted in
them: The verity whe^eof the Reader will evidently see proved by a sober
perusal of them.

3dly, He absurdly asserts that a Worship not founded in the Scriptures is not
of pure Humane Invention; I confess it may be Diabolical, and is called
Devillism, or worshipping the Devil, Psalm. 106. 37. But Divine it is not whilst
not built upon that Basis.

4. He yields the whole cause whilst he grants that all Inve^tions of Men
whereby our Worship of God is signified are unlawful, if made necessary, when
the Worship of God is placed in them, or their use, which all know to be the
case of our Liturgical forms. Of Jos. 22. 10. we have at large treated, chap. 2.

We say further in S. T. 4thly, That Worship which is not necessary for the
edification, comfort, or preservation of the Saints in the Faith and Unity of
the Gospel, is not of the institution of Christ; but such is the Worship of the
Common Prayer Book. Therefore. The major is evident, the particulars instanced
in, were the great aim and end of Christ in all Gospel-Administrations, Ephesians.
4. 7, 10, 15. Col. 2. 19. Acts 9. 31. Romans 14. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 10. 23. and 14.
3, 4, 5, 12, 26. 2 Cor. 12. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 4. The minor is proved by this, that
the Churches of Christ, for the first four Centuries of years and more, knew
not any thing of such a Worship, yet they enjoyed the ends of
Gospel-Administrations mentioned.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 7. 1. Insinuates that the Scriptures produced, are
abusively wrested, as proving nothing of Christ's aim in his Institutions. --

Answ. 1. Let this be considered, Ephesians. 4. 7, 8. Ye have an account of the
ascension of Christ, and his giving gifts unto men, as Apostles, -- v. 11. For
what end and purpose? v. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints -- for the
edifying of the Body of Christ. Col. 2. 19. speaks of the Churches increase as
a Body, through the nourishment ministered (in the Administration of the Gospel,
or through the Golden Pipes of Gospel-Institutions, by which) Acts 9. 31. it is
said, The Churches were edified. Romans 14. 19, 20. It Is pressed as the duty of
Saints in Gospel-fellowship, to follow after things wherewith one may edify
another; and 1 Cor. 10. 23, 24. tells us, That some things in themselves
lawful, are to be forborne amongst Saints in Church Communion, because they
edify not. Chapter 14. 3, 4. etc. 26. tells us, That the end for which the gift of
prophesying was given, was the edification of the Saints, which Paul
professes, 2 Cor. 12. 19. to be the aim of his Soul, and charges Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 4. to mind this as the great thing in his Ministry. An evident
demonstration that this was the main end of Christ in these
Gospel-Institutions; and that the Separatists (as Mr. T. talks) multiply not
Texts impertinently, b^t he needlessly cavils against what is from
Scripture-evidence asserted, and egregiously abuses the unwary Reader.

2. Does he deny the things mentioned to be the aim and end of Christ in
Gospel-Administrations? Does he prove that the Common-Prayer-Book-Service is
necessary for the obtainment of these ends? nor at all.

He tells us indeed, That Prayers, Prais^s, etc. are so.

Which if meant of such as are of his appointment, managed according to his
will, in his own way, by his own Spirit, we grant to be true; but he forgets to
prove that the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is so. That we confound the form or
mode of the Worship with the Worship, is not true; they themselves make these
forms such a necessary part of Worship by their imposition, that without them
we may not pray to, or praise God at all. Whilst he grants Liturgical forms are
not necessary for the ends mentioned, he throws down the master Pillar upon
which it stands upright in the thoughts of some; the preservation of union
amongst the people, necessarily requires such an uniformity, say the Masters of
Ceremonies. His retortion of the Argument is ridiculous.

We say not, That that Worship which in respect of the mode or form of
performing it, is not necessary for the edification -- of the Saints in the
Faith and Unity of the Gospel, is not of the institution of Christ; but that
those modes and forms that are made an essential part of Worship, (which the
Common Prayer Book forms are (though using Notes in the Pulpit -- are not,
which are therefore impertinently and ineptly produced by our Animadverter) not
being necessary to the forementioned ends, are not of the institution of
Christ, because in all Gospel-Institutions those ends were aimed at by him; by
which the Judicious Reader will easily perceive how little we are concerned
with his Argument.

That the Common-Prayer-Book-Service is as a polluted, accursed, abominable
thing to the Reformed Churches, is from hence evident, that they will not touch
nor meddle with it, no more than with any thing that is most notoriously so.
Their expressions touching Popish Rites and Ceremonies (of which not a few are
retained in our Common Prayer Book) manifest as much. Calvin calls them, Filthy
Dunghils, Conrad. Schlusselburg, l. 13. p. 593. says, That the Adiaphorism of
Rites Popish retained, is the very Image of the Beast, whose Mark, Character,
and Name, those Adiaphorous Rites are.

The third Angel, who preaches against the Image of the Beast, and the
receiving his Mark, represents the Preachers that withstand the rayl of
Antichrist left behind in the Church of God.

The German Divines, These. de Adiaph. Theol. Sax. p. 193. tell us, That the
retention of Popish Ceremonies, under pretense that they be Adiaphora, is a
countermand to that precept, Go out of her my People, seeing hereby men do even
return, yea enter into Antichrist.

And Buc^r expressly avers, That all things that are of the Roman Antichrist,
are abominated, -- in Censur. cap. 3. p. 460.

What this Animadverter speaks further in this Section, will receive a speedy
dispatch.

Calvin speaks of the Prayers and Rites, not their Imposition (when he speaks
favorably of them in Epist. 87.) which he abhorrd.

Maresius his Assertion amounts only to a justification of forms of Prayer,
not our English forms, much less their imposition. --

So that, notwithstanding what Mr. T. is able to say to the contrary, The
Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is not of the appointment of Christ; and therefore
those that Worship him in the way thereof, worship him in a way that is not of
his appointment.

Sect. 4.
An Objection answered. Nothing in the Instituted Worship of Christ that is a
Circumstance thereof as such. Of praying in a Form. The unlawfulness thereof
evinced. Mr. T. his Arguments to the contrary answered. Praying in the Spirit,
what it is. What is meant by quenching the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. Forms of
prayer imposed, are necessary parts of Worship. The Opinion of the Papists and
present Ministers touching this matter.

THere is one stone of offense, that lying in the way of our former discourse,
we endeavor in S. T. to remove; It Is this,

Object. That the Liturgy, or Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is no essential part
of Worship, but merely circumstantial: Praying, it is true, is part of Worship,
but praying in this or that form is not so, but merely a circumstance thereof;
and therefore though it be true, that the present Ministers of England worship
God after the way of the Common Prayer Book, yet it follows not that they
worship him after away that is not of his appointment.

To this we answer, That many things are supposed as the Basis upon which the
weight of this Objection is laid, which we cannot grant, as,

1. That there are some things in the instituted Worship of Christ, that are
merely circumstances thereof as such, which we deny. Circumstances in the
Worship of Christ attending Religious Actions, as Actions, we grant; but
Circumstances of Worship, as such, will never be proved: To infer, that because
time and place, with sundry things of the like nature, are Circumstances in
Worship, therefore there are Circumstances of Worship, as such, is frivolous:
these things being the attendment of Religious Actions common to any civil
actions of the like nature, to be performed by the Sons of Men: no action to be
managed by a community can be orderly performed by them without such an
assignment of time and place; public prayer being so to be managed, as a
Religious Action, has the circumstances before mentioned attending it, and so
it would, were it a mere civil action to be performed by a community, though it
related not at all to the Worship of God.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 8. 1. It Is not true that the Objection supposes that
some things in the Instituted Worship of Christ are but mere circumstances
thereof as such. --

Answ. The naked meaning of the Author of S. T. in that expression, is this,
That whereas the Liturgical forms of prayer are by their imposition made parts
of the Instituted Worship of Christ, the Objection supposes that they are but
mere circumstances thereof as such. This was so obvious to any ordinary
understanding, that I cannot but fear our Animadverter did wilfully mistake our
meaning, whilst he makes it to be this, that that particularity of action that
is instituted by Christ, is a mere Arbitrary circumstance -- which no Christian
in his wits will affirm.

2dly, He tells us, The distinction of circumstances in the Worship of Christ
attending Religious Actions as actions, and circumstances of Worship, as such,
is an unnecessary nicety -- and intimates as if we were agreed in the thing.

Answ. 1. If it be a nicety, it is such a one as cuts the thro^t of his cause;
nothing is then to be subjected to, or used in the Worship of God or Christ, as
a circumstance thereof, there are no circumstantial, accidental parts of
Worship, (for which he has hitherto pleaded) nothing to be practiced relating
to it, as such, of an indifferent nature. The whole of it being either
commanded by Christ, and so to be indisputably subjected to, or else not of his
Institution, and so to be rejected; how great a part of his tottering Fabric
he has by this one concession shaken about his ears, the Judicious Reader is
able to discern.

We add in S. T. the Objection supposes, 2ly, That it is lawful for Saints to
tie themselves to a written stinted form of words in prayer. This we say is not
yet proved, nor like to be. That it is not needful that we enter into the
debate thereof, till it be proved, that to pray in the form of the
Common Prayer Book, or imposed devised Liturgies is so. We only briefly offer a
few things that evince the unlawfulness of Saints, tying themselves to a
written stinted form of words in prayer.

Because, 1st, it is a quenching of the Spirit in prayer,

2dly. A rendering useless the donation of the Spirit, as a Spirit of Prayer
unto the Children of God.

3dly, Directly opposite unto the many positive Precepts of Christ before
instanced in, of stirring up the gifts given to us of God.

4dly, If it be lawful for Saints to pray in a form, it is lawful, (...) because
they have not the Spirit, or that having the Spirit, he is not a sufficient
help to them in their approaches to God: If the first, they are not Saints,
Romans 8. 9. to assert the second is little less than blasphemy; besides its
direct opposition to Romans 8. 26.

To which Mr. T. pretends to answer, Sect. 9. 1. It Is no hard thing to prove it
lawful to pray in the form of the Common Prayer Book, if we suppose the
Ministers, and Common-Prayer-Book-Worshippers not to have the Spirit, for then
they do not quench the Spirit. --

Answ. 1. But upon this supposition, they are not Christians, (for if any man
has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his) are not Ministers, and so to
be separated from.

2dly, Our present enquiry is of the duty of Saints, with respect to forms of
prayer, of others we are not now speaking; which what Mr. T. says, Is wholly
foreign to, and greatly impertinent, as he knows.

He adds 2dly, We must prove it lawful for the Saints -- to use once a stinted
form of words, -- which will be done by this Argument. That Prayer may be
lawful to Saints, in which neither is any thing done forbidden by God, nor any
thing omitted which God requires thereto. But such may be praying in a form.
Therefore --.

Answ. 1. Were he able to prove a stinted form of Prayer lawful, he will not
carry the cause, except he manifest that Liturgical forms are so.

2. We deny his minor, with which he deals very unkindly to leave it to shift
for it self, so soon as he has brought it forth into the World. And retort his
Argument thus, That Prayer is utterly unlawful to the Saints, in which
something is done forbidden by God, and something omitted which God requires
thereunto. But in a stinted form something is done that is forbidden, (the
Spirit is quenched, undervalued, grieved, the form is rested, trusted in rather
than the Spirit) something is omitted which God requires, viz. the exercise
stirring up, and improvement of the gift given.

To what we briefly offer touching the unlawfulness of stinted forms of prayer.

Mr. T. answers, 1. That the things offered, are bottomed upon mistakes. As, 1.
that praying in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. Jude 20. is meant of extemporal
unprescribed forms of words; whereas it is meant of praying by operation of the
Spirit within, not of prayer, in respect of the form of words wherein it is
expressed.

Answ. 1. To pray in the Spirit, is to pray from the power and assistance of
the Spirit, who not only forms requests in the hea^s of the S^^^ts, but also
gives in apt words for the expressing those inward groans in a way of
edification, and comfort to the household of Faith, and the assistance of the
Spirit in both these they experience. The expressions of praying allway with
all prayer -- do not in the least intimate that the Apostle speaks of solitary
prayers, and if he did, Saints are wont to use words when they draw nigh to God
in their secret Chambers. Ephesians. 5. 19. is so far from proving that Ephesians. 6.
18. is meant of solitary prayers, that it totally enervates it. Their speaking
to themselves in Psalms, -- is their speaking one to another for their mutual
edification.

2dly, We say not that meditation and preparation to this important duty of
Prayer is unlawful, or that he who beforehand gives himself hereunto, prays
not in the Spirit, as Mr. T. intimates; yet this we assert, that no awakened
enlivened Saint under the highest preparation for this duty, dares say, these
words will I speak and no more, nor can he do it, without an high
undervaluation and contempt of the love, care, and faithfulness of the good
Spirit of the Lord to him, who is often enabling him in a way of enlargement
beyond the utmost thoughts of his heart.

3dly, Suppose it lawful to use a form of words in prayer, the Spirit assists
in the forming of groans within answerable to that form of words without; I
ask, What if the Spirit should form in us requests beyond what are in words
expressed in the form, (which sure he may do, for however it be pleaded that
it is lawful to bind us to the form, it will not be supposed that the Spirit is
bound) Must I pour them forth in words he helps me to, or must I not? if he say
the first, actum est, perlisti, there is an end of his stinted forms of prayer;
if the second, there is an apparent slighting, quenching of the Spirit in his
motions and assistance he is ready to afford us.

A second mistake, upon which he says, The things offered proceed, is, That
the ability to express petitions in words extemporary, is termed the Spirit of
Prayer, as if it were in every one that has the sanctifying Spirit of God, and
they only; for so the alleging Romans 8. 9, 26. for it, in the fourth Argument;
must infer: now a man may have the Spirit, and yet not have this ability; he
may have this ability, and yet not have the Spirit.

Answ. Crimen inauditum Caie Caesar.

Does Mr. T. consider what he writes? 1. We no where say that this ability to
express our inward desires in prompt and significant expressions to the Lord,
as separated from the grace of Prayer, or the sanctifying presence of the
Spirit of God, is the Spirit of Prayer: En tabulas! Let him direct us to the
place where we so do.

2. We grant there may be the grace of Prayer without the gift, and the gift
without the grace; but say, that when God calls forth his Children to the
public discharge of this duty, he bestows the gift of Prayer upon them; which
if they have not, they are not called forth thereunto: When otherwise the
Spirit of Adoption in them is abundantly sufficient to enable them to pour
forth their souls to God, so as that they need not the help of the Crutches of
Forms, as some speak.

3. The Question is whether it be lawful for Saints to use a stinted Form of
words in Prayer? Of others we are not speaking. Romans 8. is produced to prove it
is not lawful for them so to do.

The particular Answers he gives to the Arguments produced against such Forms
of Prayer, are of an easy dispatch.

To the first he answers. 1. The quenching of the Spirit is not meant of the
Spirit of Prayer more than any other exercise. --

Answ. Grant it, its meant as much of the Spirit of Prayer as any other
exercise. The expression is wholly Metaphorical. The Spirit in his operations
and motions is frequently called and compared to fire (as is known) the
quenching of him is our resisting, not giving up our selves to the obedience of
those motions; how we do this by stinted Forms of Prayer was but now showed.

He adds, 2dly, The quenching of the Spirit is the act of him in whom the
Spirit is quenched.

Answ. Very true, the tying of our selves to a prescript form of words in
Prayer is our own act, none can actually compel us thereunto; hereby we quench
the Spirit.

Yea but 3dly, The hearer is stinted in all joint Prayer. --

Answ. 1. Not as he is when he ties himself to a Form of Words in Prayer.

2. Not so, but if the Spirit (whose motions are regular, and leads not to such
confusions as Mr. T. talks of, of all speaking together) moves powerfully upon
the heart of the hearer, he ought after the other has done to proceed further
in that work according to the ability shall be given him, and not to do so were
his sin. So that of these things there is not the same reason. How the true
motions of the Spirit of God are to be discerned, from the stirrings of our
natural affections, is of greater import than in this haste to be spoken to:
caution and carefulness is herein to be used.

To the second he answers, In some cases a stinted Form is helpful to the
understanding, memory, affections, utterance in Prayer.

Answ. 1. To this we have already replied.

2ddly, The experience of many Saints is far otherwise.

3dly, The Spirit is given to help our infirmities in Prayer, Romans 8. 26. both
as to matter and manner of expression; the donation of the Spirit as to both
these ends is by a Form of Prayer rendered useless; direct me as to matter he
must not, for what I am to pray for is in my Prayer Book under my eye; nor as
to words, for I am absolutely tied up to the use of those verbal expressions,
are in the Prayer before me.

To the third he tells us, 1st, That that of 2 Timothy 1. 6. is to be understood
of his ability to preach the Gospel, so is the improving the Talent^, Mat. 25.
15, 27. Luke 19. 13, 23.

Answ. By the Gift given and the Talents, we are to understand every gift and
ability given to us of the Lord, which we are bound to improve by virtue of the
forecited Scriptures; for to that end was it given us. If God has given the
gift of Prayer, for the edification of the Body of Christ to any one, woe be to
that man that shall neglect to improve it.

Mr. T. talks carnally whilst he calls the gift of Prayer a mean thing;
Spiritual Saints know it to be sublime, excellent and glorious, being in them,
the fruit of the Spirit of Adoption.

He adds, 2dly He may stir up the gift of expression at another time, who is
tied to a Lyturgical Form.

Answ. 1. The gift of Prayer is more than the gift of Expression, as we have
showed.

2. Gifts received are always to be exercised when called to the work for
which they are received: We must offer of our own that God has graciously
given us, when we offer to him, not another man's.

3. We are always obliged to those Lyturgical Forms in every
Church-administration, except before and after Sermon, and then we are not
without a boundary, as was showed.

To the fourth he answers, The lawfulness of Saints praying in a Form is
neither because they have not the Spirit, nor because he is not sufficient to
help them in their approaches to God, but because there is nothing in such
praying done that is forbidden, nor any thing that is required omitted. --

Answ. The falsity and vanity of this we have evinced but even now; nor is
there any thing further offered touching this matter that is worth the
considering, but what is already replied to.

What he has spoken Chap. 5. Sect. 7. we have answered in our Reply thereunto.

'Twere easy to multiply Arguments to prove the unlawfulness of stinted Forms
of Prayer, were it needful; As fifthly, They are no where commanded by Christ,
or permitted.

Sixthly, They are neither lawful for unregenerate or regenerate persons. Not
for the first, because 1. They teach them to blaspheme, belie, and misreport
God, viz. to call him Father when they are not begotten again of him. 2. They
harden them in a way of sin, and strengthen their vain confidences that they
are in a saved state. 3. They lead them forth to a plain mocking of God, viz.
In praising him for that he never bestowed upon them; as regeneration, the holy
Spirit, peace, joy through believing, etc. Nor for the regenerate are they
lawful for the reasons but now mentioned, as also because the most exact Forms
are not expressive of what they want. They bound them where God has not bound
them: Ask what ye will, says God: Ask only what is in the Form, says the
Formalist. They hinder their spiritual growth, divert the intention of the
mind, cool the fervency of the Spirit in the performance of the duty of Prayer;
with much more that might be offered were it needful.

We add in S. T. 3dly, That the Objection supposes that Forms of Prayer
imposed, are but mere circumstances of Worship, and not parts thereof: The
contrary hereunto we say is evident.

That which is made so the condition of an action that without it the action is
not to be done, is not a circumstance of it, but such an adjunct as is a
necessary part thereof: But Forms of Prayer imposed are so made by that their
imposition: Therefore. --

Sacrificing of old on the Altar at the Tabernacle and Temple, was part of the
Worship of God that they were to perform; this Worship only at those places
being once commanded, was not a circumstance of that Worship, but as real an
essential part thereof as sacrificing was. The case is the same here; Prayer is
commanded, so is the use of these Prayers, which are as really by that command
made alike parts of Worship.

To this Mr. T. replies. That what is made so the condition of an action by
virtue of Gods appointment, as that without it the action is not to be done, is
thereby made a necessary part of Worship: Not so when made such a condition of
an action by virtue of man's precept (as is the case of Lyturgical Forms, which
are therefore notwithstanding that imposition but mere circumstances of
Worship.)

Answ. 1. What strange Circumstances and Adiaphorisms does Mr. T. make, which
are so essential to Worship, as that without them it may not be performed?
Andr. Frisias (though a Papist) spea^s better. If it be Adiaphorus, why is it
not left to the Liberty of every one to use or not to use as he pleases? for
that is the nature of those things that are Adiaphorus, -- De Eccles. Lib. 2.
Tract. 13. in Epist. ad Paul. 4. fol. 542.

2. How bloodily cruel and sanguinary does he make our Spiritual Fathers! who
deliver their own Children over to Satan, yea imprison if not banish or hang
them for trivial circumstances. Strange paternal affections!

Yet 3dly, There is indeed somewhat of Truth in what is asserted by our
Dictator; It Is the Authority of God alone that can make any thing a part of his
own Worship, the imposition and commands of men make it a part of theirs.
Bowing the knee, falling down, is no essential part of Gods Worship, but it was
of Nebuchadnezzars, when the Decree was once published, neglect of Conformity
to which had nea^ cost the Three Children their Lives. Worshipping at Dan and
Bethel was no necessary part of Gods Worship for the same reason, but it was of
Jeroboams, when once established and commanded by him. The case is the same
here, Liturgical Forms are no necessary parts of Gods Worship, because no where
commanded by him; but are of the Lyturgists Worship because established by Law.
And this is all we affirm, they are the necessary parts of that Worship which
is managed and carr^ed on by them, which they suppose is the Worship of God.

What he adds from the Preface of the Common Prayer Book, That particular Forms
of Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to be used therein,
are things in their own nature indifferent, and altera^le, makes not void what
we have asserted, it rather establishes it. For, 1st, The same may be said of
many acknowledged essential parts of Divine Worship, Circumcision, Sacrificing,
-- yet alterable and abolished. If it be said that none could abolish them but
God; the answer is easy, nor can any abolish the Lyturgical Forms and Rites,
but only those who have such Authority as that by which they were imposed, who
are to the Lyturgists as Vice-Godds.

We add in S. T. 2dly, That the present Ministers of England make the Liturgy,
or Common-Prayer-Book-Worship a principal part, yea the whole Worship of God.
Whence we conclude, That the present Ministers of England worshipping God in
the way thereof, which he has not prescribed, they are Idolaters.

To which Mr. T. 1. He does not think its true that any Minister of England
would affirm the Common Prayer Book to be an essential part of Worship.

Answ. But what Mr. T. thinks in this matter is not considerable, the truth of
the assertion is notoriously known, and he may as well tell us they disown the
Cross in Baptism, -- which they are daily in the practice of.

He adds, 2dly, If it were, they do not think it an essential part of Worship
by virtue of Gods Command, but they conceive they ought to obey their
Governors Laws, not judging others who use it not.

Answ. 1. This is not at all ad Rhombum. Jeroboam's Priests and those
Apostatick Worshippers that struck in with him, did not account sacrificing at
Dan and Bethel, an essential part of Worship by virtue of Gods Command, but the
Kings.

2. To obey their Governors in such things as these, Mr. T. says, is bottomed
upon Christ's Command: and if so, whilst they account it their duty from divine
Precept, to subject to their Governors imposing it upon them as an essential
part of Worship, they do little less than account it to be so by virtue of
Divine Command.

3. I wonder with what forehead Mr. T. could say, They judge not others who use
it not, when their Pulpits ring with invectives against them, and they will not
suffer them to preach, but Excommunicate, and Imprison them for no other reason
but because they will not conform to it.

Sect. 5.
A second Argument proving the Ministers of England Idolaters. They act in holy
things by virtue of an Office-power received from Idolaters, and offer up to
him a Worship abused to Idolatry with the Modes and Rites of Idolaters. All
will worship Idolatry. The testimony of the Ancients, etc. The Romish Church
Idolaters: their worship Idolatry. The present Ministers act by virtue of an
Office-power received from that Idolatrous Church. Com.-Prayer-Book-Worship
Idolatry. The Rites used by the Ministers Idotrous. Rites in themselves
indifferent, when once abused to Idolatry, not to be used, proved. The
Testimony of the Learned touching this matter.

A Second Argument proving the Ministers of England Idolaters, is in S. T. thus
formed.

Those who act in the holy things of God by virtue of an Office-power received
from-Idolaters, and offer up to him a Worship nearly of Humane composition,
once abused to Idolatry with the Modes and Rites of Idolaters, are themselves
such: But the present Ministers of England do so: Therefore. --

In the Major two things are asserted.

1st, That such as act in the holy things of God by virtue of an Office-power
received from Idolaters, are themselves such, at least in respect of that their
Office-power. Jeroboams Priests being Idolaters, those that acted by virtue of
an Office-power from them must needs be so: as those who act by virtue of
authority to them committed from Rebels in matters civil, are equally guilty of
Rebellion, as those from whom they derive that their authority. --

This Mr. T. denies: But, 1. for the ground of his denial nothing is offered
but Dictates built upon this mistake, That none can be accounted Idolaters but
such as exhibit Divine Worship to the Creature: The vanity of which is before
evinced.

2dly, I desire at his leisure to be informed whether there be any truth in
that Maxim, One cannot give that to another that he has not himself. If the
Idolater communicate an Office-power to another, and he have none himself but
that which is Idolatrous, he does most assuredly communicate an Idolatrous
Office-power to him. That persons acting from authority received from Rebels,
if under hand they design the restitution of their Prince, are not to be
accounted Rebels (as he says) is an assertion, 1. That will scarce pass for
truth amongst the learned of the Law. 2. Impertinent. For, 1. The present
Ministers act from such an authority for the support of Antichristian Courts,
oppressive diabollical Usurpations and Prerogatives, for the keeping out their
lawful Prince, Christ Jesus. 2. They justify their acting from the authority
aforesaid, refuse to act from any other, contemn and despise it.

2dly, That worshipping God by a Form merely of humane composition with the
Rites and Modes of Idolaters is Idolatry; those that so worship him are
Idolaters.

Mr. T. replies, That this makes not Idolaters, unless there be Idolatry in the
Form, and the Rites be Idolatrous in the Use.

Answ. 1. This he speaks without proof.

2. Upon this mistake, that there is no other Idolatry but the giving of Divine
honor to the Creature.

3. All will worship is Idolatry, so says August. de Consens. Evang. Lib. 1.
Cap. 18. Vazq. de Adorat. Lib. 2. Disput. 1. Cap. 3. Dr. Bills ag. Apol. p. 4.
p. 344. and Mr. T. denies not such a worshipping God, as that mentioned to be
will worship.

What he adds, That it is not true, that they are Idolaters who use that which
is of divine appointment to the right use, because Idolaters abused it to
Idolatry. Those may do well to take notice, of that are concerned in it: For
our parts we say no such thing; the allegation is impertinent to the matter in
hand, the Form used in the English Liturgy is not of Divine appointment, nor
the Rites thereof; neither will Mr. T. have the confidence to assert they are.
That I any where revoke that assertion of mine, That few or none worship the
Creature terminative, is Mr. T. his mistake. It Is true page 65. I say, That
Bellarmine affirms, that the Images themselves terminate the veneration given
to them, as they are in themselves considered. -- But this is but one Doctors
opinion (retracted by him, de Sac. Euch. l. 4. c. 29. where he asserts that
which is contrary thereunto) should two or three more be remarked of the same
mind with him, they amount but to a few in comparison of the generality of
mankind, otherwise minded.

The Minor Proposition, viz. That the present Ministers of England act in the
holy things of God by virtue of an Office-power received from Idolaters, and
offer up to him a Worship merely of humane composition, once abused to
Idolatry, with the Modes and Rites of Idolaters, we do in S. T. demonstrate.
Three things are in this matter argued and evinced.

1st, That the Romish Church are Idolaters, their Worship in the complexion
thereof Idolatry. This we prove at large, and our Animadverter grants it to be
true.

2dly, That the present Ministers of England act by virtue of an Office-power
from this combination and Assembly of Idolaters. This they themselves will not
deny. Succession from hence being one of the best pleas they have for the
justification of their Ministry. This we argue at large in S. T. and Mr. T.
after a great many words, grants their succession from Rome.

But adds, 2dly, That this is not one of their best pleas they have for the
justification of their Ministry.

Answ. 1. When they (or he for them) produce a better, it shall be considered;
this is what they especially plead: an Argument it is one of their best pleas in
their account, however our Animadvert^r thinks otherwise.

Nor indeed, 2dly, Do I see how their Episcopal Ordination can be justified
without it.

He conceives, 3dly, That they will deny that they act by virtue of an
Office-power received by succession from the combination of Idolaters in the
Church of Rome. --

Answ. 1. The derivation of their succession from the Papacy they deny not:
This their succession pleaded for is a succession of Ministry; That they should
be so absurd as to acknowledge a succession in respect of their Ministry, from
them, and deny the reception of their Office-power from them, (which is nothing
more or less than their Office of Ministry) I cannot imagine.

What follows in this Sect. has already been replied to, and therefore we
shall not further trouble the Reader therewith.

We say in S. T. 3dly, That the present Ministers offer up to God a Worship
merely of Humane composition (as the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship has been
proved to be) once abused to Idolatry (being the Worship of that Church, whose
worship is so; the whole of it being taken out of the Popes Portuis) with the
Rites and Modes of Idolaters (viz. their Holy Vestments, Bowings, Candles,
Altars, -- which are the Rites of the Idolatrous Church of Rome, and were
introduced from thence by Austin the Monk) cannot be denied. And hence
conclude, That the present Ministers acting in the holy things of God, by
virtue of an Office-power received from Idolaters, and offering up to him a
Worship merely of Humane composition, once abused to Idolatry, with the Rites
and Modes of Idolaters, are deeply guilty of Idolatry.

What Mr. T. replies hereunto Sect. 14. has for the most part already been
removed out of the way.

1. The Forms of Prayer in the Service Book, by their Imposition are made an
essential part of Worship (as we have proved) as such, they are not agreeable
to Gods Word, not of Divine (but merely humane) composition.

2. Had these Forms never been in the Mass Book, being made by their imposition
a part of Worship, they had been superstitious, Idolatrous, being an open
violation of the second Commandment.

3. I wonder at the forehead with which it is affirmed that the Rites and Modes
used in the Church of Rome, that are Idolatrous, are not observed and used.
What thinks he of bowing at the Altar, the Name of Jesus (which Dr. Willet
acknowledges to be superstitious, Idolatrous, Synops. Papism. the 9th gener.
Contro. p. 492, 493. as do our Protestants generally) kneeling at the receiving
of the Sacrament, the Cross in Baptism? These are some of the Rites used in the
Papacy, and as so used, Mr. T. will not, I presume, deny them to be Idolatrous.

4. The learned Muccovius proves what he asserts (That the sacred Rites of
Idolaters (though they be things in themselves indifferent) are So say our
Divines generally, to whom Z^nchie, Junius, Pelican Calvin, Beza, Farrel, (yea
Lyra, though a Papist) Pezelius, Mollerus, Zegedinus, Danaeus, Zepperus, Sadael.
not to be retained, because all conformity with Idolaters is to be avoided)
from Lev. 19. 19, 27, 28. and 21. 5. and Deuteronomy. 14. 1. The things there
interdicted were in themselves indifferent; the ground of their interdiction
was, because they were the sacred Rites of Idolaters, as say Salmasius,
Herodotus, l. 3. Maimonides, Treat. of Idolatry, chap. 12. Sect. 7, 11.
Vatablus, Fagius, etc. I cannot upon this occasion but remind the judicious
Reader of what the learned Zanchy writes touching this matter to Q. Eliz. l. 1.
Epist. p. 431. It Is not honest (says he) that those things which have a long
time been used in idolatrous Worship, if they are things in themselves
indifferent, should be retained in the Church, with the hazard of the Salvation
of the Godly. The brazen Serpent which was appointed by the Lord, and indeed
for the Salvation of Israel, because the Isruelites ab^sed it contrary to the
Word of God, was by the good King Hezekiah taken away, who is greatly praised
for it, -- how much more should things and Rites indifferent, instituted by
men, when they decline to Superstition and other abuses, be removed; which Mr.
T. may answer at his leisure.

Sect. 6.
A third Argument proving the Ministers of England Idolat^rs. That worshipping
God in, by, or before the creature respective, or with relation to the
creature, is Idolatry.

WE advance in S. T. a third Argument to prove the Ministers of England
Idolaters, which is thus formed; Adoration in, by, or before a creature
respective, or with relation to the creature, is idolatrou^, such as so adore
or worship God are Idolaters: But the present Ministers of England do adore or
worship God in, by, or before a creature respective, or with relation to the
creature. Therefore, --

The major proposition, we say, is generally owned by Protestants, it being the
very same Maxim they make use of, and stop the mouths of the Papists with, in
the point of adoring God mediately by the Creature. The truth of the minor
proposition, their bowing and cringing at the Altar, their kneeling at the
receiving the Sacrament do evince. That their kneeling is an adoration or
worshipping God before the creature respective, or with relation to the
creature, is manifest: Nothing being more certain than that the Elements are,
objectum a quo, or the motive of their kneeling, which if they were not there,
they would not do. Didoclavius, p. 755. tells us, That Genuflexion is Idolatry;
which Maccovius assents to, Loc. Com. p. 861.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 15. 1. The Author of S. T. contradists himself, for in
chap. 5. p. 40. he has said, That kneeling at the Lords Supper, is one peg
beneath the adoration of the Breaden God, he will not affirm, but here he
says, it is an adoration, in, by, or before the Creature respective, or with
relation to the Creature. --

Answ. 1. Very good, and I say so still, nor am I able to discern the least
contradiction betwixt these two assertions. The present Ministers may not
worship the Popish Breaden God, (as the Papists do) and yet worship the true
God, in, by, or before the creature, respective, or with relation to the
creature. His pitiful jibes are beneath ^e to take notice of. The Idolatry in
kneeling at the Sacrament, is to be referred to the second kind of Idolatry we
at the beginning mentioned, it being a way of adoration enjoined by man, not
commanded by the Lord; and every thing beside the Commandment is an Idol, has
been an hitherto received Maxim.

But it cannot be this kind of Idolatry, (says Mr. T.) for kneeling in prayer
-- to God is appointed by him.

Answ. 1. This is false; I no where find any such appointment exclusive of any
other posture.

2. Impertinent; We are not treating of kneeling in prayer, but in receiving
the Sacrament. Where has God said he will have this Gesture and no other used
in this part of his Worship? It Is true, man has of late so determined it, and
written the cruelty of their determination in bloody Characters. Worthy Mr.
Dyton and Mr. Porter of Ware, being stifled by their Imprisonment, the one in
the Gate House, the other in the New-Prison, for not conforming thereunto, not
to mention others then, nor late sufferers for the same cause.

3. Even in prayer to God, the posture of standing seems to be more used
throughout the Scriptures, Genesis 19. 27. Levit. 9. 5. Deuteronomy. 10. 8. and 29. 10. 1
Kings 8. 14, 15. 2 Chronicles. 20. 5, 19. and 29. 11. Jer. 15. 1. and 18. 20. Ezekiel.
44. 11, 15. Luke 18. 11, 13. Mark 11. 25. an Argument kneeling in that duty was
no appointment of the Lord. That the Primitive Christians, for above 800. years
after Christ, on all Lords Days throughout the year, and from Easter till
Whitsuntide, constantly prayed standing, Mr. T. knows is upon good Authority
affirmed.

What he nextly adds, we have already answered, (That I speak ambiguously, and
indistinctly, I cannot help, it is not given to every one to be a B. D. nor to
speak with that eloquence and clearness as Mr. T. I did what I could to be
understood.

However to make sure work on it, he denies both major and minor,

1. Adoration in, by, or before a creature respective, or with relation to the
creature, is not Idolatry; such as so worship God are not Idolaters; for the
Holy Ghost invites the Jews to worship at God's Footstool, his Holy Hill,
Psalm. 99. 5, 9. which were creatures in, by, or before whom respective, or with
relation to them, as the objectum significative a quo, or the motive of their
Worship, they were to bow down to God.

Answ. 1. From God's Commands, to man's Inventions, is but lame arguing; God
commanded Israel to worship at Jerusalem before the Ark, Altar there, which
they did, without being guilty of the sin of Idolatry; therefore when men
command us to bow down, and worship before the creature, we may do so without
the contraction of any such guilt, is a sort of reasoning that Mr. T. upon
second thoughts will be ashamed to defend. As good he may argue, It Is lawful
for men to rob and spoil their Neighbors, for the Israelites, by the command
of God, spoiled the Egyptians, without being guilty of Theft.

But, 2dly, that the Temple, Altar -- was the objectum significative a quo, or
the motive of their Worship is not true; it was solely the command of God that
was the motive thereof; and had neither Temple, nor Altar -- been there, had
God bid them worship there, they would have done it.

3dly, To worship at his Footstool, is no more than to worship in the Temple,
to worship in the House of his Sanctuary, says the Chald. Paraph. which is as
remote from Mr. T. his purpose to prove it lawful to worship God in, by, or
before the creature respective, as it is from Bellarmines who introduce it, to
prove the lawfulness of Image Worship.

What follows, 2dly, is of an easier dispatch. It Is true, the use of the Bread
and Wine in the Lords Supper, is of the Institution of Christ, but bowing down
before it is not so, as worshipping at the Temple, before the Altar -- was.

So is 3dly, the instance he gives of the Israelites falling down upon their
faces and worshipping God, when the fire came down, and the Glory of the Lord
was seen, 1 Kings 18. 38. 2 Chronicles. 7. 3.

For, 1st, should we grant that the people bowed and worshipped God, by
occasion of the coming down of the fire, it would not follow that they
worshipped before it, which is somewhat more.

2dly, The Plea is Papistical, and may as righteously be used for the
worshipping God before Images.

3. The sight and presence of the fire was not the motive of their worshipping,
but the conviction of the Glorious Majesty of God, that from that Vision fell
upon them.

4. Their bowing was as to man a voluntary act, from the extraordinary
compulsion of the Spirit, and by singular occasion: ours a forced act
frequently performed in imitation of the most horrid Idolaters in the World, by
the compulsion of the spirit of Antichrist, and Satan: Their Act has therefore
no place in our present case, wherein neither such a compulsion nor occasion
can be pleaded.

Dr. Jackson tells us, That such actions as have been managed by Gods Spirit,
suggested by secret instinct, or extracted by extraordinary and special
occasions, are then only lawful in others, when they are begotten by like
occasions, or brought forth by like impulsions. Which is indeed what is usually
asserted by our Protestants, in answer to such Papistical Arguments, as our
Animadverter, for want of better, is forced to make use of.

He adds, 2dly, The minor may be denied, the present Ministers do not worship
God, in, by, or before the creature respective, or with relation to the
creature, as the objectum significative a quo, or the motive thereunto, for the
Common Prayer Book says, That kneeling is not for adoration of the Elements,
but for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the
benefits of Christ.

Answ. 1. But it says not the Elements are not the motive of their kneeling,
which they are, else why is not this posture enjoined in other parts and acts
of worship, wherein it is our duty to signify our humble and grateful
acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ.

Nay, 2dly, whence is it that in that very Ordinance another posture is after
the receiving the Bread and Wine permitted? Yea, do not our kneelers teach us
that we ought to stand up at Gloria Patri, (which is as solemn a thanksgiving
as any they have in their Common Prayer Book) rising from our knees and seats
to repeat it.

Nor, 3dly, do I understand the bleating of that expression in the place cited
by Mr. T. That genuflexion is enjoined for the avoiding such profanation in
the Holy Communion as might ensue: Except they give honor more than enough to
the Elements, it being much like what was pleaded by the Papists for the same
practice, viz. that the Priests may put it more easily into the mouth of the
Receiver, without danger of spilling it.

Nor, 4thly, know I a greater profanation of any Ordinance, than the adding
something of our own devising thereunto, as a part thereof, and kneeling in the
Act of receiving by their imposition being so added, that which they pretend to
do for the avoiding of profanation in the Communion, is the greatest
profanation thereof imaginable. I crave leave to add that it is to be feared
that there are hundreds of ignorant people in the Country, who upon strict
enquiry, would be found to make the Bread and Wine, not only the motive, (which
all know it is) but the object of their Worship. Touching the Ministers bowing
and cringing at the Altar, he leaves them that are concerned to plead for
themselves, he will be no Advocate for them; only this he will say, That those
who use it, avouch they do it not to any other but God, and therefore are not
to be charged with Idolatry.

Answ. 1. The vanity of this consequence we have over and overconfuted. 2dly,
Many of the Heathens, the Romanists avouch as much touching bowing to their
Images, they do it not to any other than God; yet he will not sure say,
therefore they are not guilty of Idolatry. These coverings are quite too short
to cover the nakedness of the Ministers of England, which may be easily
discerned through them.

Our next attempt in S. T. is, The removal of Objections; the first whereof is
thus proposed.

Object. 1. The charging the present Ministers of England with Idolatry, is
exceeding harsh, and that which is an Argument of a very unchristian and
censorious Spirit.

To which we answer, 1st, That many words of Christ himself were accounted hard
sayings, and not to be born. --

To which Mr. T. Christ's sayings were unjustly counted hard, because they were
true, yours justly because not so. --

Answ. 1. Whether ours are true or false, is left to the Impartial Reader to
determine.

2dly, That they are unchristian and censorious, is an uncharitable Dictate of
this Animadverter, they tend not to division amongst the Saints, but Union.

We add, secondly, That in this matter we have said nothing but what is
asserted by most, or all, Protestant Writers upon the second Commandment, who
tell us, That the worshipping God in a way not prescribed by him, is Idolatry,
such as do so are Idolaters; Our Application hereof to the present Ministers,
whom we have proved guilty of so worshipping God, we see no reason why any
should account unchristian or censorious.

Mr. T. replies, That which by the Protestant Writers is said, is not all true.

Answ. Nor do I say it is; but when the same thing is asserted by them in
Thesi, that we in this matter affirmed, 'twas supposed that we might no more
justly be charged with censoriousness and uncharitableness than they; the truth
whereof Mr. T. does not deny.

We say, 3dly, What would these Objectors have said to Tertullian, who is by
far more nice in this point of Idolatry than we have declared our selves to be,
-- yet could he not justly be charged wi^h an unchristian and censorious Spirit.

To which our Animadverter adjoyns, 1. Tertullian in the close of his life was
a man that ascribed too much to private revelations.

Answ. 1. And what if he did? Is what he says touching Idolatry, bottomed upon
those private revelations? Nothing less. Was he in his declamations against
Idolaters uncharitable and censorious? Who besides himself will affirm it? What
rule of charity have we broken in what we have argued and offered in this
matter? What one particular have I laid to the charge of the present Ministers
that is not evidently proved? Let him manifest the one or the other to be done
by us, and we will acknowledge our evil; till then declamations and o^tcries of
uncharitableness and censoriousness are but empty sounds.

2. His reflection, as if we were guilty of ascribing too much to private
revelations, we can bear with contentment,

Non hoc primum pectora vulnus mea senserunt graviora tuli. with this
intimation, that through Grace we are not. Nor dare we embrace any thing
(should an Angel from Heaven preach it) which is not consonant to the Law and
Testimony of God contained in the Scriptures.

3. That Tertullian had more reason (as he says) to be nice about the point of
Idolatry than we, he proves not; the contrary is evident: Did he live amongst
Pagans? do not we live amongst Romish Idolaters? who have been not a little
industrious to introduce and impose upon us the whole of their Idolatrous
Worship and Service. Christians were then hastening from the superstitions of
the Heathens; many are now posting toward Antichristian Idolatry. Who could
have thought that so much of the Worship of Rome, their Prayers, Anthems,
Rites, and Instruments of their Idolatry, as Surplice, Altar, Candles, Organs
-- shluld in so little time have taken root in England, as in five or six years
they have done? --

The second Objection proposed in S. T. is, What shall we judge of Latimer,
Ridley, Hooper, -- who worshipped God after the same way of worship that these
do now, were they also Idolaters? --

To which we answer, 1. That they were eminent Witnesses of Jesus Christ in
their day. --

2dly, That they are now with Christ, and shall come with him to judge their
unjust judges we believe.

But, 3dly, they were but men encompassed about with many infirmities; that
they were guilty of the sin of Idolatry cannot be denied. Yet, 1. They were in
that day but just peeping out of the Gates of Babylon; and it is no wonder if
some of the filth of her Fornications did cleave to them.

To which Mr. T. How is it that they are now with Christ, where no unclean
thing enters?

Answ. 1. How is it that Joshua is now with Christ, who comes out of Babylon
with filthy Garments, Zach. 3. 3.

But, 2dly, his question is answered in what follows in S. T. 2. God (of pure
Grace) accepted them in Christ, granting them a general repentance for those
iniquities they saw not to be so. --

Mr. T. adjoyns, That they should repent of that they offered to ^ustifie a
little before they died, is not likely.

Answ. 1. But that they had a general repentance for what they seeing not to be
evil, did not particularly bewail, he attempts not the proof of. The Patriarks
manifested no particular repentance for their poligamy, they justified it by
their practice to the last. Abraham took him Concubines when very old. David
added to those he had, Abishag, when ready to leave the World. I ask, Was this
their sin i^ Mr. T. will not deny it, nor that they were defiled with it; every
^niquity leaving defilement behind it. How is it that they are now wi^^ Christ
where no unclean thing enters? That they should repent of that which they
justified a little before they died is not likely; what will Mr. T. answer? If
I mistake not, the same answer will serve to stop his own mouth with respect to
his present arguings. Nor know I a better than this; it is true, we find not
that they particularly repented hereof, but a general repentance we in charity
believe they had, which God accepted in Christ.

2dly, What is that they offered to justify a little before they died? Did
they offer to justify kneeling in the act of receiving? Nothing less! the
wearing of the Surplice? But some of them, as Ridley -- abhord it, and were
troubled at the very heart that they imposed it upon others, as he knows.

We conclude in S. T. The Intelligent Reader knows that these things are not of
any moment for the invalidating what has been offered upon this Subject.

Our Animadverter replies, 1. Though this be not a direct answer to their
Argument, yet it is a very great prejudice against it, that by striking at the
present Ministers you wound the Holy Martyrs, and make them Idolaters for that
very thing for which they died, that they might not be Idolaters. --

Answ. 1. It Is true, in the thoughts of some this might be a great prejudice
against the Argument, against the Truth. It Is no new thing for the Truths of
God to be attended with as great prejudices as this.

2dly, That this should be accounted any prejudice at all by persons that
desire to weigh things uprightly in the Balance of the Scriptures; setting
aside the consideration of persons, cannot be imagined.

Nor is it, 3dly, any greater prejudice against our Argument, than lies against
the Arguments of the Protestants against the Papists Idolatries and
Superstitions; who yet (some of them that have been guilty thereof) have been
true Christians, and in some things witnesses of Christ against Papal pride and
abominations, and have sealed their Testimony with their blood.

He adds, 2dly, That I should when I wrote this Chapter, have thought of Psalm.
73. 15.

Answ. 1. But to what purpose I know not; that mentioning the infirmities and
weaknesses of the Children of the Lord, (with that tenderness, regard to their
due honor, and esteem amongst the Saints as I did) for the removing of
prejudice that might arise in the minds of any against what I was pleading for,
under this assurance, that it is Truth, should be a sinning against the
Generation of the Righteous. Mr. T. is the first that I believe did ever
suggest it; and it is pity but he should be the last, it being a most monstrous
and absurd figment. The Patriarks Poligamy, Aaron's, Moses, David's, Peter's, --
weaknesses are in Scripture (and may be by any one upon just occasion)
mentioned, I hope without sinning against the Generation of the Righteous; and
why not the Idolatry of these last Worthies? The Animadverter sees I have
(according to his advice) reviewed this Argument, and do assure him, I see not
the least cause from what he offers to retract what was offered in S. T.
touching it; but conclude that the present Ministers of England are guilty of
Idolatry, and therefore it is the duty of Saints not to hear, but separate from
them. And if this be in Mr. T. his account an extreme of Fanaticism, (as he
speaks) I desire for ever to be found in this extreme.

CHAP. IX.
Arg. 7. Sect. 1.
A seventh Argument against hearing the present Ministers. It Is an offense,
grief, scandal, and cause of stumbling to their Breathren, forbidden, Mat. 18.
6. Luke 17. 1, 2. Romans 14. 13, 15, 20. 1 Cor. 8. 8, 9, 13. and 10. 24. Mr. T.
his eight Arguments to the contrary, refuted.

THE eighth Chapter of S. T. contains a seventh and eighth Argument against
hearing the present Ministers; The seventh is thus formed; It Is not lawful for
Saints to do any thing (for the doing whereof there is no positive precept in
the Scripture) that is an offense, grief, scandal, and cause of stumbling to
their Breathren. But the hearing the present Ministers of England (as there is
no positive precept in the Scripture for it, so it) is an offense, grief,
scandal, and cause of stumbling to the Brethren. -- Therefore --

The major, or first Proposition we prove from Romans 14. 13, 15, 20. 1 Cor. 8.
9, 13. and 10. 24. The minor, we say, consists of two parts.

1. That for hearing the present Ministers, there is no positive warrant in the
Scripture; if there be, let it be produced, and this Controversy is at an end.
--

Now considering Mr. T. his brag, p. 61. of the facility of producing
Scripture-Warrant for hearing the present Ministers, one might justly have
expected he should here produce it. But in the stead thereof, Chapter 8. S. 2. you
have only an intimation of what he has already showed in this matter, which
has already been refuted by us.

We add in S. T. 2ly. That the Saints hearing the present Ministers of Engl. is
an offense, grief, scandal, and occasion of stumbling to their Brethren, -- to
many thousands it is so, as their groans and tears alone, and together upon
this foot of account demonstrate; many have been drawn (as is known) by the
practice of some leading Brethren in this matter against the checks of their
own Consciences to a conformity herein to their after grief and wounding.

To which, Sect. 3. Mr. T. replies, (after he has talked of men's appropriating
the term visible Saints, to those of the Congregational way, or Presbyterial
(which we do not) that this Argument is unnecessary if the other be good, that
it supposes all that is formerly disputed to be weak (which is one of his
empty flourishes) that we affright persons by such Arguments to keep them to
our selves (in which he speaks falsely, wickedly --) That hearing the present
Ministers is not such an offense, grief, scandal, as that which is forbidden,
Mat. 18. 6. Luke 17. 1, 2. Romans 14. 13, 15, 20. 1 Cor. 8. 8, 9, 13. and 10. 24.
and this he will prove thus.

Arg. 1. That is not scandalizing forbidden in these texts which is neither by
giving evil example in doing that which is intrinsecally evil, nor by enticing
practices, or persecution impelling to evil, nor by abuse of liberty in things
lawful to the harm of another: But the Saints hearing the present Ministers, is
not scandalizing either of these ways: Therefore. --

Answ. 1. We deny his Minor, for which he brings no proof. We say with him,
That hearing the Ministers of England is not a matter of indifferency; it is not
the duty of the Saints, but their sin; yet some others accounting it neither
matter of duty nor sin, but liberty, we were willing to debate the case of
scandal with them, upon that their avowed principle, as we afterward do. So
that we are wholly unconcerned in what follows in this Argument, which yet we
have already fully answered to.

2dly, His Argument is justly retorted upon himself, thus; The scandalizing of
Brethren by giving of evil example, in doing that which is of it self evil (as
joining with an Antichristian Ministry and Worship is) by enticing practices,
or persecution, impelling to evil (as those do who by their practices in
hearing -- allure, or by presenting (or abetting those that do so by holding
Communion with them --) impel such as are weak thereunto) or by abuse of
liberty in things lawful (as some hearer^ judge their hearing to be) to the
harm of another (viz. the wounding grieving the consciences of the weak, it may
be striking them off the ways of Instituted Worship, when they behold the
turning to and fro of a zealous forwardly professing people) is scandalizing
forbidden in the forecited Scriptures. (This Mr. T. grants) But the Saints
hearing the present Ministers, is a scandalizing with respect to each of these
particulars: (as we have showed) Therefore. --

Arg. 2. His second Argument is, That is not scandalizing forbidden in those
Texts which does not tend to one of those evils, for preventing of which those
precepts of non-scandalizing were given: But the hearing the present Ministers
tends not to any of those evils: -- Therefore. --

Answ. 1. It tends to some or all of those evils mentioned in the Texts; it
tends to sin, it is a joining with a false Antichrist an Ministry, to the
justification, encouraging of them in the exercise of a false Ministerial
power; it tends to the sorrow, or godly vexation of the Saints, whilst they see
their Brethren in the constant disobedience of the Calls of God to come out of
Babylon; forsaking those ways in which they have found rest and peace, and
returning to those their souls lately loathed and abhorred. His following
Sarcasms he will one day know had been better omitted; the representing hearing
the present Ministers as dangerous and sinful, occasions not any to fall to
erroneous Principles and Practices. The compliance of Professors together with
the debauchery of the Priests, is for the most part the source and spring
hereof; so that we may better argue,

2dly, That is the scandalizing forbidden in those Texts, which tends to any of
those evils, for preventing of which those Precepts of not scandalizing were
given; (this Mr. T. grants) But the hearing the present Ministers tends to some
of those evils: (as we but now showed) Therefore. --

Arg. 3. His third Argument follows thus; That is not scandalizing forbidden in
those Texts, which does not arise from any defect of Charity, or undue
behavior of the person offending, but from the distemper of the person
offended: But the scandalizing by hearing does not arise from the defect of
either of these, but from the distemper intimated: Therefore. --

Answ. 1. We deny his Minor, and expect is proof thereof by the next; till when
we crave leave,

2. To retort this Argument upon himself; That is scandalizing forbidden in the
Text which does arise from the defects intimated, and not from the distemper of
the person offended: But this is the scandalizing by hearing.

1. It Is a defect of Charity to the souls of their weak brethren, whom they
wound, grieve, before whom they are continually laying a temptation of
apostasy from Profession, Religion, whilst they behold noted Professors to
cleave to those ways, persons and things, that they once could have no
communion with, with hands lifted up to Heaven, covenanted against.

2. It Is a defect of Charity to poor sinners, who are hereby encouraged to sit
under a dead, formal, sapless Ministry, to abide in a lazy formal way of
worshipping God. --

And. 3. In both these respects it is an undue behavior.

4. That it arises not from distemper we shall evince when we come to consider
what Mr. T. has offered to prove that to be the sourse and spring from whence
it does arise.

We attend his fourth Argument, which is thus formed.

Arg. 4. That is not the scandalizing forbidden in those Texts which is not
offending persons weak in the Faith, and of doubting Consciences, yet peaceably
minded, but of persons conceiving themselves strong. -- But such is the
disposition and carriage of those that pretend to be offended at hearing the
present Ministers: Therefore. --

Ans. 1. This Argument interferes with his first, where he makes the giving an
evil example, by doing that which is in it self evil, to be the scandal
condemned: Now I conceive not only persons weak in the Faith, but strong
Christians, will be, cannot but be scandalized at professors so doing.

But to wave that; 2. We deny his Minor, for the confirmation of which he
offers nothing that may deserve the Name of proof; (For what if the persons
offended think themselves strong, able to argue against the practice of hearing
the present Ministers, oppose it with violence, -- they may be weak in the
Faith notwithstanding. The weak brother thought himself able to dispute against
the practice of him that ate the Idolothyte as sinful, and yet a weak brother.
--)

However, 3. We are engaged to him for affording us a fourth Argument, to prove
the scandalizing by hearing to be the scandalizing in the Texts.

That is scandalizing forbidden in those Texts which is offending persons weak
in the Faith, and of doubting consciences, yet peaceably minded: But such is
the scandalizing by hearing the present Ministers: Hundreds of weak Saints,
tender, young Converts are hereby offended. Therefore. --

Arg. 5. His fifth Argument is this, That is not scandalizing forbidden in
those texts which is by using our liberty, where we know not any present that
will be offended at the use of it, or that signifies the offense at our action
when we do it. In which case the Apostle allows the eating of things offered
to Idols, 1 Cor. 10. 27, 28, 29. and consequently the use of our liberty in
other things lawful; and if any absent be offended, we are ready to give a just
reason of our doing --: But so it is at the offense of persons in hearing the
present Ministers. -- Therefore.

Answ. 1. We deny his Major, partly because that scandalizing is forbidden in
the texts, which tends to the grieving the Saints; now this they may be, are,
as much by the report and information of their brethrens action, that they
conceive evil, though these judge it their liberty, as if they were present; of
which a just reason can never be given; for if the thing I do be matter of
liberty, I can never give any just reason of my doing it to the grief and
wounding of my weak b^other; for my so doing is an express violation of the
commandment of Christ in the Scriptures mentioned; partly because the
scandalizing in hearing is by giving evil example in doing that which is
intrinsecally evil; which whether the person offended be present or absent is
condemned, and no just reason thereof can be given.

Nor 2. Is the Minor always true, but rarely (if at all) there are persons
present that will be, are offended at it; it may be weak Saints that by their
example (it may be) with a doubting Conscience are brought thither.

Arg. 6. His sixth Argument is, That is not the scandalizing in the texts, in
which if the offense be regarded, the person supposed to offen^ shall be
always deprived of the use and ben^fit of his liberty, contrary to 1 Cor. 10.
29, 30. and that is a matter of the greatest moment for his souls welfare, the
hearing the Word of God; whereby his liberty will be lost, and a yoke of
bondage received, contrary to Gal. 2. 5. and 6. 1. But so it is in the offense
for hearing the present Ministers. Therefore. --

Answ. The discovery of the unsoundness and rottenness of the foundation upon
which this Argument is built, will totally enervate and render it useless, with
respect to the end for which it is produced.

1. It Is supposed that we ought not always to deprive our selves of that which
is the matter of our Liberty, if a weak brother be always offended with our use
of it. But this is notoriously false. First, The ground or reason of my first
forbearance to exercise my Liberty rem^ining, Reason will dictate that I must
forbear the exercise thereof still. Secondly, Directly contrary to what is
asserted by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. 13. Thirdly, Opposite to his intendment in
the place cited by the Animadverter, viz. 1 Cor. 10. 29. For why is my Liberty
judged of another man's Conscience, i. e. why should I give occasion to another
of judging my Liberty? The Interrogation is of one denying (says Paraeus) q.
d. I will by no means do it, I will rather abstain from eating flesh for
Eternity, as he speaks, 1 Cor. 8. 13.

2. It Is supposed that except a man hear the present Ministers, he cannot hear
the Word of God at all, which blessed be the Lord is far otherwise.

3. The Liberty mentioned, Gal. 2. 5. and 5. 1. Is a Liberty from Jewish
Ceremonies, the Bondage is owning, subjecting to them. which what it makes to
his purpose, I cannot tell. Sure his Liberty from these will not be lost by his
not hearing the present Ministers; Liberty from some of them, together with
Ceremonies of Humane Invention will hereby be established and obtained, in
which it is the duty of Saints to stand fast.

4. It Is supposed that it is my Liberty to hear the present Ministers, or
otherwise; but that Mr. T. cannot plead, who has denied hearing them to be a
matter of Liberty.

Arg. 7. His 7th Argument is this, That is not scandalizing forbidden in those
texts, the avoiding of which draws after it a greater scandal: But in shunning
to hear the pr^sent Ministers there is a greater scandal than in hearing them.
-- Therefore. --

Answ. We deny his Minor, his proofs whereof are a mere petitia principli,
false and ludicrous.

1st, The person refusing to hear scandalizeth not himself, by confirming
himself in his superstitious error, hindering his spiritual growth, and
ensnaring himself in an unjustifiable separation. Nor does he scandalize others
by his example, confirming those that refuse to hear in their error and schism,
whom he ought to oppose as Paul did Peter, Gal. 2. 11. For, 1. Refusing to hear
the present Ministers is no error; Nor, 2. Superstitious; Nor, 3. An hinderance
of spiritual good and growth. (Saints experience, through the grace of the
Lord, the contrary) Nor is, 4. Separation from them unjustifiable; Or, 5.
Schismatical; nor cannot be: for Schism, according to the Scripture notion of
it, as a worthy learned person has lately proved, is in one particular Church
amongst the members thereof; which of the Church of England we are not. Nor, 6.
is Gal. 2. 11. a ground sufficient for any one to reprove or oppose persons in
their nonconformity to the present Ministers.

1st, Paul reproves Peter for non-communion with the Saints upon Principles
purely Judaical; those that refuse to hear, refuse communion with visibly
debauched and wicked persons upon Gospel-Principles.

2dly, 'Twas Peter's dissembling that Paul reproved, verse. 11, 12. One while he
would eat with the Gentiles; other-while for fear of the Jews he will not;
which will rather countenance a persons reproving such as hear those whom not
long since they refused to have communion with, and swore to extirpate.

He adds, 2dly, By refusing to hear the present Ministers, 1. The sheep of
Christ are scattered. --

Answ. They are rather united in one. That there is such bitterness and enmity
in the best of the Separatists (as Mr. T. mentions) toward dissenters from
them, that breaks the bond of Charity, is false and untrue. I wish that he
speak not against his knowledge and conscience in this matter. The bond of love
and charity amongst the true disciples of Christ, they are so far from going
about to break, that they labor to strengthen, increase it. And could wish
that all those names and titles of distinction, which either some have assumed
to themselves, or others have reproachfully applied to them that love Christ in
uprightness, were removed; that we might know one another as Christians, and
study the exaltment of truth and peace amongst each other, and the Nations
where our lot is cast.

He tells us, 3dly, The refuser to go to hear, scandalizeth those that do so,
who are censured and shunned as lapsed Brethren, and mere Fo^malists, and
thereby are grieved: -- He scandalizeth the conforming. Ministers, who are much
hindered in their performance of their Ministry --

Answ. 1. It may be those who are censured as lapsed Brethren, are justly so
censured, being such as have departed from the truth and way of the Gospel they
once embraced and walked in, and if so the censure is not unjust, but
righteous; and, if managed in a Gospel-spiri^ of love and meekness, there is no
just cause of grief administered: The censure (if the Lord bless it for their
awakening and recovery) may be a foundation of future joy and rejoicing.

2. That the Conforming Ministers should hereby be much hindered in the
performance of their Ministry, is not likely, since what they do therein they
have ready prepared in their hands; and if it were true, their Ministry being a
false Ministry, it is our duty in the way of the Gospel to hinder them therein.

Arg. 8. His 8th Argument follows: That scandalizing is not forbidden in these
texts, by avoiding of which the Magistrate is scandalized, his Government
disturbed, his Power excited against others as disobedient to his Laws; whereby
many persons with their Families are undone: But so it is when the present
Ministers are not heard as the state of things now is Therefore. --

Answ. 1. The Major Proposition understood of scandalizing, by giving evil
example, in doing that which is in it self evil (which is our present case) is
notoriously false and untrue. The not coming to the Service and Sacrifices of
the Gentiles, in the days of the Apostles; The not owning the Pope, the
Sacrament of the Altar, coming to their Parish-Churches in the Marian days,
was that which scandalized the Magistrate, disturbed (as was said) the
Government, excited the Magistrate against others as disobedient to his Laws,
whereby many persons were, as to their Families and Estates, undone, they
themselves lost their lives, yet were they not to scandalize the Saints, by
adhering to the foresaid abominations.

2. The Minor understood of a just ground of scandal, is not true, i. e. the
Magistrate has no real or just ground to be scandalized by persons not coming
to hear the present Ministers, nor is the Government disturbed thereby, nor
has he, as we know of, any Scripture-Warrant to exert his power against the
Non-conformists, to their and their Families ruin; and if he do so, it is
better to suffer than sin, to hazard the loss of all, than debauch our
Consciences, and sin against God.

Sect. 2.
Of Scandal taken and given, Wherein the nature of it consists. Of offening the
World. Hearing the present Ministers, a scandal given. 1 Cor. 8. 10. explained.
Of sitting in the Idols Temple. Some of the Corinthians thought they might be
present at the Sacrifice of Idols. Of having fellowship with Devils. 1 Cor. 10.
20. exponed. The Judgment of the Learned Paraeus thereupon. The offended
Brother had not greater reason to be offended at persons eating the Idolothyte,
nor so great, as we have at persons hearing the present Ministers. Of the
Scandalizing. Mat. 18. 6. Romans 14. 3. explained. Of offense by forbearing to go
to hear. Mat. 17. 27. 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17. John 10. 27. Mark 4. 23.
opened.

THE next attempt in S. T. is to answer Objections that might be made against
what was in the foregoing Discourse, in the matter of scandal argued by us. The
first is this;

Object. 1. There is a twofold scandal; 1. A scandal or offense taken. 2. A
scandal or offense given. In respect of the former, possibly many may be
offended at persons hearing the present Ministers -- that there is any just
offense given by them herein is denied.

To this we answer, 1. That as we admit of the distinction, so no doubt there
is a truth in what is suggested thereupon, That whatever I do, some one or
other will be offended at it; there are a Generation of men, whom the doing my
duty will offend, and cause to blaspheme, these are not to be minded, but to be
pitied.

To which Mr. T. replies, Sect. 4. That there is any Generation of men, whose
offense is not to be minded, is not the Doctrine of the Aposile, but contrary
to it, 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. and 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

Answ. Nor is it any doctrine delivered by us. We say not, That in matters of
liberty we are not bound to heed giving offense to the World, we believe the
contrary. But this we affirm, tha^ such persons as will be offended at me, and
blaspheme because I do my duty, (for so are the words) are not to be heeded, i.
e. I am not to surcease what God requires me to do, because they are offended,
and blaspheme, which what is cited by Mr. T. does not contradict.

That which follows touching hearing the Ministers of England, being avowedly
asserted upon this Foundation, that it is lawful so to do, we pass by, as what
we are not in the least concerned to take notice of; though there is indeed
upon that supposition nothing of Argument in it.

We add in S. T. 2dly, But it is not yet proved, nor like to be, that the
scandal treated of is a scandal taken and not given; the very nature of scandal
given, (as is confessed by all) and evident beyond exception, from the Apostle^
discourse, 1 Cor. 8. 10. lying in the doing of what is judged by me to be my
liberty, but other Saints account my sin, and from thence have occasion of
grief and stumbling administered to them. This was the very case of the Church
of Corinth, (upon the occasion whereof Paul writes to them) some of them judged
it their liberty to sit at Meat in the Idols Temple, others not being fully
persuaded hereof, were scandalized many ways at this their practice, which the
Apostle therefore condemns as unlawful.

To which Mr. T. 1. It Is not confessed by all that the nature of scandal given,
lies in the doing what is judged by me to be my liberty, which other Saints are
ready to conclude to be my sin, and from thence have occasion of grief and
stumbling administered unto them, Dr. Hammond, M^. Jeans, -- are otherwise
minded.

Answ. But Mr. T. abuses us and his Reader; we say not that scandal given lies
in angring -- our Brother; but evidently assert that there are two things that
constitute it.

1. It must be a matter that the giver of it judges to be his liberty, and the
receiver accounts his sin.

2. It must administer occasion of stumbling, grief, and sorrow unto the
scandalized, i. e. he is either grieved, troubled at it, or by it influenced to
sin against God. And this I say is confessed by all. Nor do the Authors cited by
him, or he himself contradict this notion of scandal given -- so that the heat
of this velication is allayed.

Pulveris exigni jactu. He adds, 2dly, This Authors notion about the nature of
scandal given, is not evident beyond exceptions from the Apostles discourse, 1
Cor. 8. 10.

Answ. 1. That the Apostle speaks there of scandal given, Mr. T. will not deny.

2. That the nature of the scandal lay in this, the Corinthians eating the
Idolothyte, or sitting at meat in the Idols Temple, wherewith others were
scandalized many ways; 'twas an occasion of causing them to eat the Idolothyte
with a doubting Conscience, or being wounded, grieved, discouraged in the way
of Christianity, 1 Cor. 8. 9. which he more plainly, if possible, expresses,
Romans 14. 13, 15, 20, 21. which if it consort not with our notion of scandal
given, I know not what does. As for what follows, we are little concerned,
whilst he attempts not the confutation of what is asserted by us touching the
nature of scandal given.

He tells us, We are mistaken in these things, 1. That the offending person
judged it his liberty to sit at meat in the Idols Temple.

Answ. But this is Mr. T. his mistake, not mine, 1 Cor. 8. 10. [In the house of
Idols, says the Arabic,]

And the Learned Paraeus, in 1 Cor. 10. 21. tells us, That some of the
Corinthians were of this Opinion, That they might be present at the Sacrifices
of the Idols.

Yea but (says our Animadverter) this is ill applied however to the case of
hearing; for the sitting at meat in the Idols Temple, was having fellowship
with Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 20. But this is the Service of the living God; the
hearers of the present Ministers judge it not only their liberty, but their
duty so to do.

Answ. 1. If they judge it to be their duty, they are able to produce some
Scripture to evince it so to be; let them do that, and take the Cause.

2. Many of the hearers do not judge it their duty, but matter of liberty.

3. He begs the question, whilst he supposes hearing the present Ministers to
be the service of the living God; were it so, it were unquestionably our duty
to hear them; but that is the (...).

4. For the rest, the Learned Paraeus shall answer for me, who in 1 Cor. 10.
20. says, God does forbid the Jews, Levit. 17. 7. to sacrifice after the
manner of the Gentiles, (...), to hairy Devils. Numb. 25. 3. He complains that
they had joined themselves to the Devil of the Moabites, (...), which is, the
Lord of opening, i. e. Fornication. THIS IS THE JUDGMENT OF GOD OF EVERY
WORSHIP. -- WHICH IS NOT PERFORMED ACCORDING TO HIS WORD; IT IS NOT PERFORMED TO
GOD, BUT TO THE DEVILS. But Idolaters, neither in the Pagan State of old, nor
now in the Papacy, do intend to offer to Devils, but to God. What then? The
Apostle pronounces the contrary, whatever they intend. For God is worshipped
not by humane inventions, but by his own precepts. --

The second mistake Mr. T. mentions, is his own, not mine; I say, the scandal
lay in grieving the offended Brother, and occasioning him by the evil example
of the offender to act with a doubting Conscience, i. e. Some Brethren were
grieved at the liberty the Offender took, others stumbled to act doubtingly by
his example, and so to sin: The latter he grants, the former Paul asserts, Romans
14. 15.

He adds, 3dly, That I do not set down that the Corinthians might have reason
to be scandalized at the eating the Idolothyte, because against the Mosaical
Law, and the Apostles Decree, Acts 15. 25.

Answ. Was I obliged so to do, the Saints have greater reason to be offe^d^d at
persons hearing the present Ministers, because against the Oeconomie of the
Gospel.

He tells us, 4thly, This Author does not mention that the scandal in the
Corinthians case, was foreseen as future, 1 Cor. 10. 27, 28.

Answ. Nor need he do so, when the scandal in hearing the present Ministers is
also foreseen as future.

He adds, 5thly, This Author takes no notice, that scandal given in the use of
our liberty, is not to be made perpetual. --

Answ. 1. This has been already answered. 2. It follows not that we must never
hear the present Ministers of England, if we must not hear them for the reasons
given. I would hope that God may convince and convert some of them from the
evil and error of their way, make them to acknowledge their sins, -- bring them
out of their Antichristian standing and office, and then the reason of the
present scandal ceasing, the scandal it self will be removed also.

He tells us, 5thly, That the case of the offended among the Corinthians, by
eating Idolothytes, and the Brethren now in England cannot be paralleld
rightly, because the Corinthians offense was at the time when the Doctrine of
Gospel-liberty was not fully cleared; Professors in England have been fully
instructed therein.

Answ. Mr. T. suppose^^ that we shall not yield him, 1. That the hearing or not
hearing the present Ministers is our liberty: we prove the first our sin, the
last our duty.

2. That the case of scandal cease when persons have been doctrinally
instructed in their Christian Liberty. Now this is most evidently false,
contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle in the forecited places, Romans 14. 1,
2, 6, 14, 17. What could be more plainly doctrinally delivered touching the
Christians liberty of eating or not eating? yet there remaining scruples upon
the Consciences of the weak touching this matter, Paul commands the strong not
to eat to their offense and scandal, v. 20, 21. So 1 Cor. 8. 4, 8. the
Christians liberty is fully asserted, yet v. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. the use of it
is interdicted for fear of offending the weak. -- So that evidently in this
matter the case betwixt the Corinthians and Professors of England (who suppose
it to be their liberty to hear the present Ministers) runs parallel. I confess
there are some things that may be argued on the behalf of the offended Brethren
now, that the offended Corinthian could not plead; God had spewed out this
Generation of men with loathing and contempt, with the whole fardel of their
Liturgical Rites and Ceremonies, wounded them in the head, removed their Lords
the Bishops, from whom they derive their Authority; the present scandalizers
(many of them) rejoiced in what was done; swore before it was done, to do their
uttermost to effect it; that after all this they should strike in with them,
attend on their Ministry, is an aggravation of their scandal. The Offenders
have no Apostolical word to warrant the lawfulness of hearing them, as the
Corinthian Offenders had to warrantize the eating the Idolothyte out of the
case of scandal. So that they that hear them, are justly charged with scandal
given; notwithstanding the empty flourish, and wordie dispute of Mr. T. to the
contrary.

We add in S. T. Should it be granted for Arguments sake, (though in truth it
is not so) that it is the liberty of Saints to hear the present Ministers, yet
many sincere Lambs of Christ being (groundedly) stumbled and scandalized
hereat; for that very reason, if no more could be said, it becomes our sin: to
be guilty whereof, who can choose but be filled with trembling, that has ever
with seriousness read that terrible commination of Christ? Mat. 18. 6. --

Mr. T. replies, 1. This were to make every honest hearted Christian a Pope, a
Lord over my Conscience. --

Answ. No in no wise: It Is touching (supposed) matters of Liberty that we are
treating, in my acting, wherein to the scandalizing of the weak Christian, I
sin, and this Paul affirms, 1 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and so do all that
write about scandal. Yet it is not to be thought they hereby make the weak
Christian a Pope, infallible Judge, Lord, or Law-give^ to them; This is so far
from divesting Christ of his Kingly Authority (as he speaks) that it rather
establishes it; he is exalted as King, whilst in obedience to his command I am
forbearing the exercise of my Liberty, because offensive to my Brother, though
upon every other account it were lawful for me to be found in the practice of
it.

He tells us, 2dly, That his Treatise of scandal sh^ws Man. 18. 6. to be meant
of other scandalizing than such as this Author means. --

Answ. But if it be a scandalizing to make them to halt or turn away from God,
Luke 17. 2. i. e. from his Ways and Divine Appointments; if it be with
despising them, promoting their persecution, causing their perdition, that is
meant, Mat. 18. as Mr. T. says it is, it is such a scandalizing as we mean. The
professing People of God that are in the practice of hearing, are
stumbling blocks in the way of the weak, occasioning them to turn off from God
to the institutions and inventions of men, whereby they are made worse and more
languid in true godliness, (as some say the word (...) signifies, Polyc.
Lyser.) And as by experience we find them to be, who forsaking the Assembling
themselves together, attend upon the Ministry of England; they despise,
disdain, vilifi^, set at naught, basely esteem them (as Paul speaks, Romans 14.
3. (...)) as such whose grief and offense is not to be heeded and regarded, by
preferring the matter of their own liberty above their Brothers scandalizing;
they promote their persecution, by strengthening the hands of Persecutors, and
incensing them so much the more against them, to force them to a compliance,
because others of the same way and persuasion in days past with them, are
wrought over thereunto. --

Mr. T. his Application of the sayings of Paybody, (an enemy to the
Non-conformists in days past, and a bitter one, who would speak the worst of
them, and more than is true) to such as are against hearing the Ministers, is
wicked and scandalous; Do these merely profess in imitation -- out of humor --
are they such as cannot abide to be instructed by them of contrary judgments,
despising what they say before they know it, that never seek to have their
doubts resolved, who avow the necessity of confessing against kneeling, and yet
upon some other man's Declaration of the lawful liber^y of it, profess they
never studied the Point; that make no Conscience of slandering, ^ackbiting,
conformity to the World in apparel, pleasures, scandalous, covetousness,
unfaithfulness in their Callings, unjustice in their Dealings, who have
confessed themselves to be convinced of the lawfulness of Conforming, and yet
will not, or would, but for their discredit in the World, especially among the
persons of that side.

Estn^ haec tua tunlca mi pater! Is this the voice of Mr. T. (a once zealous
and forward Professor) against those who dare not attend on the present
Ministers? Are these persons of the complexion intimated? How durst he affirm
it? Will not the worst of their Neighbors where they live give them a better
character, and tell Mr. T. to his face, that he has aspersed and belied them?

We propose in S. T. a second Objection to be considered, viz. But if I do not
go to hear the Ministers of this day, many godly and sober Christians will be
offended at my forbearance; so that whether I hear, or whether I forbear, I
shall offend.

To which we Answer, 1. That granting the Case to be as is suggested, (though
perhaps somewhat else upon a serious and strict search may be found to lie at
the bottom of men's Conformity -- I am apt to believe were a tolleration
granted, they would not so do.) We ask, 1. Do you look upon your going to hear
as your duty, or liberty? If the first, let the proof thereof be produced, and
we are satisfied; if the second, you are bound by many solemn Precepts not to
use your liberty to scandalize your Brethren.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 6. 1. If the Case be granted, as is suggested, the same
Argument which proves it unlawful to hear the present Ministers, proves it
unlawful not to hear them.

Answ. 1. Granting the Case to be as is suggested, is no more than dato non
concesso, granting it for Arguments sake, not yielding what is suggested to be
true; from whence it is not granted by any rules of Disputation that I know of,
for Mr. T. to draw conclusions, 'twere irrational so to do.

Though, 2dly, were the case granted in Mr. T. his sense, yet what he infers
from thence, he has not, will not be able to demonstrate. It Is granted, Mat.
17. 27. speaks of scandalizing by omission.

But, 1. there were none on the other side who would have been offended at the
doing thereof, as is our case.

2. Peter had but now said that his Master did pay tribute, and for him to have
refused, it had been upon that account a scandal with a witness.

As for what follows, we said not in S. T. that somewhat else lay at the bottom
of persons Conformity, but intimated our jealous^es, desired the Conformists to
make a strict search thereabout; which when Mr. T. manifests to be untrue, we
shall be far from justifying it.

He tells us, 2dly, If a tolleration were embraced by them, this would only
show they did not tie themselves to the present Ministers. --

Answ. 'Twould sure do somewhat more, 1. Manifest that they judge it not matter
of duty, but liberty, to hear them: for, if their duty, the giving toleration
would not discharge them thereof, they were as much bound to attend them
afterward as before.

2. Discover that it was not the fear of offending any that caused them to
attend on the Ministry of England, for that offense continuing, (as it would,
notwithstanding a to^leration granted) they would hear them still.

His reflections upon the grounds of our separation we can bear; 'Twas indeed
(as he says) somewhat else that did heretofore engage hereunto, besides
offending the Lambs of Christ, viz. his Command (of which we have given an
account in this Treatise) which yet (together with the springs of Love, and
Life, Peace and Pleasantness in Communion with himself he is pleased to dig up
for us) keeps us therein. His stories of preferment, power, adherence to a
party, I am, through grace, a stranger to, and do from my Soul abhor. Possibly
he may better understand these things.

To the question, Do you look upon your going to hear as your duty?

He answers, That it is the duty of Saints to hear the present Ministers,
thoug^ not chosen by them to be their Pastors, I think may be proved from 1
These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17. John 10. 27. M^rk 4. 23.

Answ. The impertinency of these citations to his purpose will soon be
discovered, 1 These. 5. 12. Paul beseeches them, to know them that labor among
them, and are over them in the Lord, i. e. by his appointment, according to the
Orders and Ordinances of his House are deputed Pastors -- over them; But what
is this to the Ministers of England, who (we prove) are not set over us
according to any institution of Christ, but according to Antichristian Canons
are obtruded, and thrust upon us whether we will or no? The impertinency of
Heb. 13. 17. to his present purpose we have already discovered. John 10. 27.
speaks of Christ's Sheep hearing his Voice, but in the way he has appointed. --
Mark 4. 23. is a proverbial expression, in use at that day, exciting the
Auditors to a solemn attendment unto what was spoken to them; Christ uses it
to press them to a serious attention to what he spoke; which that it has the
least tendency toward the proof of attending upon an Antichristian Ministry,
or the present Ministers of England, such dull persons as we, are not able to
discern.

Seriously Sir, you do but expose the cause you undertake to defend, to
contempt, and your self to the scorn of some, and pity of the more sober,
whilst you are able to make no better defense for it.

It Is added in S. T. 2dly, Let both parties be weighed in an upright balance,
such as you judge to be offended with you for not hearing, and such as are
offended thereat; I am bold to say the last mentioned, for number, holiness,
spirituality and tenderness, do far surmount the former. --

Mr. T. his Answer herento, 1st, is A composure of passionate expressions, and
reflections upon the Brethren of the Congregational way, even the prime Leaders
of them, of stories of the piety of Hildersham, Ball, Bradshaw, Gataker; of the
rottenness and stinkingness of puffing up my own party, and disparaging
dissenters.

Answ. 1. But what needs all this wrath? I own my self of no party, love all
that love Christ, disparage not such as dissent from me, have a reverend esteem
of many of them; only say, That such as attend not on the present Ministers,
for number, holiness, spirituality and tenderness, surmount those that do;
which I should not say, but that this is generally known to be true. The
generality of their hearers being a debauched, formal, covetous generation of
men, but few, very few, serious, enlightened souls to be found in their
Assemblies, they worship elsewhere.

2. That which he says, That by the Authors Rule if we would know our duty, we
must leave studying of the Scriptures, and study men, is false and scandalous.
I am fully of Tertullian's mind, Non ex personis fides aestimanda, sed ex fide
persona: and crave leave to tell him, that had he studied men less, and the
Scriptures more, we should have met with fewer Antiscriptural Notions than we
do in his Theodulia.

I conceive the Rule, mentioned by the Author of S. T. is bottomed upon
Scripture.

1st, Let it be remembered that the matter of our debate is touching what is at
the least conceived to be the Christians Liberty, not Duty.

2dly, That the case as proposed is of scandal by the use of my Liberty,
whether it be this way or that. The eating the Idolothyte is my liberty, I may
do it or not do it without sin. If I do it not, my Heathen Neighbor will be
offended, and say I am proud and unsociable. -- If I do it, my Christian
Brother will be scandalized. What shall I do? Offend not thy weak Brother,
says Paul: He bears the Image of Christ, the other does not. But what if some
Brethren be offended at my going, others at my forbearing, What shall I do now?
Why truly I know no better way to determine the doubt by a parity of Reason,
than by the Answer before given: Consider who they are that will be offended,
that exceed in number. -- For certainly if it be not my duty to offend one
Saint because a Saint, then when the case is brought to that pass, that I must
necessarily offend some Saints, my duty l^es in doing that whereby I shall
offend the smallest number of Saints; which Mr. T. may confute at his leisure.

We add 3dly, Let also the grounds of the offense on both sides b^ weighed: the
one are offended at you that you build not up in practice in a day of trouble,
and cause thereby the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme and triumph, what in a
day of liberty you did in your preaching and practice pull down and destroy:
The other, because of your disobedience to what they are satisfied, and you
your selves once were, God is calling you to (viz. to have nothing to do with,
separate from this generation of men.)

To which Mr. T. 1st, These words are Aenigmatical, and require an Oedipus to
unriddle them.

Answ. 1. It may be Sir, you your self stood so in your own light, that you
could not see to unriddle them. 2. It may be you were not willing to have them
unridled. 3. If they need an Oedipus, you your self shall be the man. Sir, you
were he that in your Fermentum Pharisaeorum, called the People from attending
upon the Ministers of England, as Preachers of Superstition; though for the
generality of them (in some things) much better then than now: it is an offense,
and just ground of offense, to your Brethren, to see you in this day of their
distress, to plead for what in the dawnings of Liberty you preached down. You
are the man that, with hands lift up to Heaven, swore to extirpate the
Hierarchy, with its Appurtenances, Traditions, -- who rejoiced, and were glad
at the prosperity of those who carried on that work, resisting unto blood: You
are he who sat at White Hall as a Commissioner for the approbation of
Ministers, and rejection of such as were scandalous (gloried in Print, that the
then Protector had so good an opinion of you, as to constitute you one of that
number) and 'twas one part of scandal to use the Service Book: Now after all
this, for you to write a Book for the defense of this very Hierarcy and
Worship, your Brethren think it a just ground of Scandal, and at their refusing
to hear, you have (and such as you at least) no real ground at all, since it is
no more than what they practiced in days past, and that without your offense,
by your leave, or at least connivance, as the People you particularly walked
with at Lempster did. Hereby you have given occasion to Saints to mourn, wicked
profane persons to rejoy;: So that the grounds of offense on your side are not
in the least considerable in comparison of theirs. What follows is a heap of
impertinencies that I am not concerned in.

1. I count not any the enemies of the Lord, but such as are evidently such; a
generation of Swearers, Drunkards, Adulterers and Adulteresses; these, the
turnings about of Professors cause to blaspheme, thereat they rejoice.

2. He is mistaken whilst he thinks the Author of S. T. was for violent
practices in days of Liberty, who more or less was not concerned with those
public transactions, nor ever was the prosecutor of one person in any kind,
who by the then Law might be obnoxious to ejection out of their places of
spiritual or temporal promotion, or otherwise.

3. Of some of the things he mentions, he himself was once guilty, particularly
of setting up private Brethren to preach; which I account not his fault, but
wish he had had a little more respect to his own repute, (if regard to the
ways of truth and peace had not been prevalent upon him) than to condemn
others for practicing the very things he himself has been found in the
practice of. That we gather Churches out of Churches, that particular Churches
of Christ have not the power of government within themselves, -- he should have
proved before he had given liberty to his Pen to wander at this wild rate. That
eminent Independent (as he calls him) who would not have the Lords Prayer used
in a prescript form of words, is of age to answer for himself; that he has
given any one just cause of offense by that assertion, Mr. T. may evince by
disproving what he has written thereabout in his, Vindiciae Evangelicae. page
667. -- when he is able.

The ground of the offense on the Non-hearers side, is so visibly just and
righteous, the others so notoriously groundless, that his impertinent and false
stories (some of them contrary to his own knowledge and Conscience) are
insignificant to remove the one, or justify the other.

We add, 4thly, That it is the duty of Saints, especially if in a
Churchrelation, to meet together as a people called and picked by the Lord out
of the Nations of the World, cannot be denied; The neglect of which is charged
by the Lord as the first step to Apostasy, Heb. 10. 25. Be you in the practice
of this duty, and see what Spiritual Saint will be offended at you: If any
should, you might have peace therein; you doing your duty, no just cause of
scandal is given.

Mr. T. replies, They do not think it their duty to meet together as a
separated Church.

Answ. 1. Who do not so think? Do not they that are for Separate Churches so
think? To these we are speaking.

2. That it is the duty of Saints so to do, we evince Chapter 9. of S. T. Heb. 10.
25. is again taken notice of by him, Chap. 9. S. 2. where we shall consider it.

We yet add in S. T. 5thly, Consider on which side the Cross lies, which the
flesh and fleshly interest is most opposite to, whether in going, or forbearing
to go to hear these men: Usually that is the way of God that has most of the
Cross in it, and the flesh is most struggling and contesting against. In which I
only assert, That the way of God has usually most of the Cross in it, and is
mostly opposed by flesh and blood; which Mr. T. knows is true, and therefore
though of it self this be no certain sufficient Rule to judge by, yet is it
not, together with others, inconsiderable: which Mr. T. does not oppose.

Sect. 3.
An eighth Argument against hearing the present Ministers. We cannot do so
without being guilty of partaking with them in their sin. The several ways of
partaking with others in their sin. Romans 16. 17. 2 These. 3. 14, 15. explained.

THE 8th Argument against hearing the persenr Ministers is in S. T. thus formed.

That which Saints cannot do without being guilty with others in their sins, is
utterly unlawful for them to do: But the Saints cannot attend upon the
Ministers of England, without being guilty of partaking with them in their
sins. Therefore. --

The Major Proposition is bottomed upon Psalm. 50. 18. Ephesians. 5. 7. 1 Timothy 5.
22. 2 John. 11. Rev. 18. 4. 1 These. 5. 22. This he grants is true.

In order to the confirmation of the Minor two things are briefly enquired into.

1st, What that or those sins are the Ministers of England are guilty of. These
we say are worshipping God in a false way, acting from an Antichristian
Office-power therein, opposing the Offices of Christ, -- doing what such as go
to hear them account to be sinful, who therefore cannot do the same, nor join
with them whilst they do it.

We instance in the case of Reordination, using the Service Book, administering
the Sacrament to all. -- To which, when Mr. T. (or any one for him) shall
inform us of any thing that is offered by him, by way of Answer that deserves a
Reply, we shall consider it. What he says requires proof, we have already
proved.

We enquire in S. T. 2dly, How it will appear that any person attending on
their Ministry, renders him guilty of partaking with them in their sins. This
we say, the consideration of the several ways persons may be justly charged
with being guilty of partaking with others in their sin will demonstrate. We
instance in these particulars. 1. Then may persons be justly charged as guilty
hereof.

1st, When they are found any way consenting with them in their sin, Psalm. 50.
18.

2dly, When they do that which has a real tendency to encourage persons in
their sin, 2 John 11.

3dly, When they neglect the doing those duties which the Lord requires at
their hands for the reclaiming of them from their sins, such as watching over,
rebuking, admonishing, first privately, then by two; and in case of obstinacy
and perseverance therein, telling it to the Church, according to 1 These. 5, 14.
Heb. 3. 12, 13. and 10. 24, 25. Lev. 19. 17. Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. (all this Mr.
T. tells us he grants; nor does he except against the Texts brought to prove
them, except that Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. the vanity of his exceptions whereunto
we have demonstrated, page 87. of this Treatise.)

4thly, When they (notwithstanding all that they can do) perceive them to
persevere in their sin, shall still continue to hold Communion with them and
not separate from them, Rev. 18. 4. The abiding with obstinate offenders, as it
is against positive injunctions of the most high, Romans 16. 17. 2 Cor. 6. 14,
15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 6. 5. Ephs. 5. 8. 11. Rev. 18. 4. so in the last place
instanced in, it is assigned by the Spirit to be one way of pertaking with
others in their sins. So says learned Brightman upon the place.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 7. This is not true, we may hear the Word of God, pray
with, receive the Lords Supper from a Minister that is an obstinate offender,
and yet not be partaker with him in his sin. The texts alleged prove not
separation from such.

Answ. Whether they do or not we leave to the judgment of the discreet and
pious Reader to determine; yea to Mr. T. himself (the texts are so marvelously
plain for the proof of such a separation) when he is able, in an undistempered
unprejudiced spirit to review t^em. What he here offers to the contrary is not
worth the spotting Paper with.

1. A man may cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Apostles Doctrine,
Romans 14, and 15. touching the use of Liberty in matters indifferent to the
offense and scandal of the Saints; as the Ministers of England do, (if Mr. T.
his notion about the indifferency of their Ceremonies be true) whilst they
practice them to the offense of the Saints, and yet preach the same Doctrine in
other things the Apostles preached, which yet the present Ministers do not.

2dly, When Mr. T. is at leisure, he may prove that sep^ration from the wicked
and profane, or from a false Church, is contrary to Romans 16. 17. Because the
Apostle charges them to note and avoid those that cause devisions in a true
Church. By the use of things indifferent, contrary to his Doctrine thereabout
of 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. and Rev. 18. 4. we have already spoken and
vindicated it from Mr. T. his exceptions.

We add in S. T. Not to multiply more particulars, let us in a few words make
application of these remarked to the business in hand. Is there any thing in
the world that carries a greater brightness, and evidence with it than this,
that the hearing the present Ministers is to be partak^rs with them in their
sin?

To which Mr. T. Just as if one should say, he that heard Juda^ preach the
Gospel, was partaker with him in his theft; which is like the inference of a
man crazed in his intellectuals.

Answ. 1. With thanks to him for the civility of his expression I answer, the
case is not at all the same; Judas acted from a true Commission, was not a
known Thief, nor guilty of any notorious visible wickedness till he betrayed
his Lord: The Ministers of England act from a false Antichristian Authority,
and some of them are visibly scandalous and profane.

2. Had Judas acted from a false Commission, as these do, such as had attended
on his false Ministry had been guilty of the sin thereof, whilst by their so
doing they had encouraged him in the exercise of it.

3. Paul was sure sound in his Intellectuals, yet he tells the Corinthians,
That their not casting the incestuous person out of their Communion was a
partaking with him in his sin. --

We add in S. T. Our hearing them is a secret consenting with them, and
encouraging them in their evil deeds.

Our Animadverter replies. It Is not so, but a consenting with them and
encouraging them in preaching the Gospel, which is well-doing.

Answ. 1. Many of them preach not at all.

2. Many of them that do, preach not the Gospel.

3. Few or none preach it without the mixture of humane Inventions.

4. They all preach it from an Antichristian call.

5. They read the Service Book, and conform to the Rites thereof, which is evil
doing; and our attendment upon their preaching encourages them herein.

In what nextly follows we are little concerned till he prove, That because
men's withdrawment from a godly lawful Christian Ministry, was to them ground of
discouragement and complaint, therefore we must hear such as act from an
Antichristian calling in their Office of Ministry, and for the most part are
vicious and deboyst.

Of Phil. 1. 18. we speak afterward. We righteously blame them that attempt to
silence good Preachers, for non-assenting to the Liturgy because it 's a
setting up an Idol of Man in opposition to the Command and Work of God.

He tells us, The Prelatists may as well argue, If we should permit the
Separatists to preach, we should consent secretly with them, and encourage them
in their evil deeds, such as gathering a separate Congregation, and taking a
Commission from it.

Answ. 1. But they must prove these things to be evil deeds; they are (as we
have proved) the Institutions of Christ.

2. Betwixt hearing men preach, and permitting them so to do, we conceive there
is a vast difference. For our parts, were it in our power, we should not by
outward force and violence hinder a Prelatist from preaching. We know Christ's
Kingdom admits of no such weapons for its propagation in the world.

We add in S. T. That hearing the present Ministers is very remote from the
discharge of those duties are incumbent upon us (if we account them as
Brethren) for their reclaiming; it is not separating from them, it is in respect
of some or all the particulars remarked, a participation with them in their sin.

To which our Animadverter adjoyns; If it be not the discharging their duty for
their reclaiming them, (which, as it is stated, would perhaps be rather their
sin) yet it is to discharge their duty in hearing Gods Word.

Answ. 1. But that it is our duty to hear the Word of God from Antichristian
Officers, when Christ has appointed some of his own to dispense it, should
have been proved and not begged.

2. That it should be the sin of any Brother to reprove his Minister for what
he sees evil upon him in the way of the Gospel, is something strange Doctrine,
which we know not what to make of; that when he has done so, and no
Reformation follows, and he has proceeded as far as he is able for his
amendment, that he ought to attend still on his Ministry, to his grief and
wounding, and not separate from him, is contrary to the many Scriptures
produced by us in this Argumen^.

3. Not to reprove, rebuke, admonish a guilty sinner (being a Brother) of his
sin, I have but now proved to be a partaker with him in his sin; to which Mr.
T. sets his probatum est, p. 295. That the same act neglected and done should
be a sin, seems to me to be inconsis^ent: That I should be guilty of sin in not
reproving an offender, and g^ilty when I reprove him, seems to me a
contradiction.

He adds, Hearing them fits them for the reclaiming of Ministers from any sin
they are to reprove in them; for this shows they account them not as their or
the Lords enemies; which is agreeable to the Apostles Rule, 2 These. 3. 15.

Answ. 1. In hearing them I join with them in (am pa^taker of) their sin, viz.
the sin of their false ministry: That part^king with others in their sins
should fit me for the reclaiming them from them, is an absurd dictate.

2. The Apostle intends not in that Rule 2 These. 3. 15. That we still hold
Communion with the Brother there spoken off, nor, says he, that our so doing
is the best way to reclaim him but the contrary, v. 14. (...), Note him with a
brand of infamy, that all may avoid him, (...), and be not mingled with him,
have no such familiarity with him as a man with his friend: But that in
tenderness and love as I have opportunity I am still seeking to reclaim him
from the evil of his ways. Mr. T. does ill (though we take liberty to weary
men with his unproved dictates, by them) to oppose the Spirit of the Lord.

What follows being a very dunghill of unsavory words, and unhandsome
reflections upon the men of his dislike, not having the least of Argument or
Answer in them, I pass over, and attend his dictates in the following Chapter.

CHAP. X.
Sect. 1.
The 9th Argument against hearing the present Ministers. It Is a casting
contempt upon the ways and Institutions of Christ; a hardening persons in a
false way of Worship and rebellion against him. Separation from the World and
ways of false Worship an Institution of Christ, proved. Who meant by World.
Numb. 23. 9. explained. The Children of Israel in what respects Typical of the
People of God. John 15. 19. 2 Timothy 3. 5. Hos. 4. 15. Prove. 14. 7. Mat. 13. 30,
39, 40, 49, expounded. The distinct Meetings of the Saints for their mutual
edification, an appointment of Christ, proved. Particular Congregations of
Believers for the celebration of the Worship of God, in opposition to National
Churches an Ordinance of Christ, manifested. Christ has instituted Officers of
his own, for his Churches, given them abilities for the discharge of the
services he calls them to, evinced. Whether Ministers belong to the C^tholick
Church, or particular Churches, discussed.

IN Chap. 9th, of S. T. We propose several Arguments for the Demonstration of
the truth enquired after, of which the 9th is thus formed.

That the doing whereof does cast contempt upon the ways and Institutions of
our Lord Jesus, and hardens persons in a false way of Worship and Rebellion
against him, is utterly unlawful for the Saints to do: But the hearing the
present Ministers of England is that, the doing whereof does cast contempt upon
the ways and Institutions of our Lord Jesus, and hardens persons in a false
way of Worship and Rebellion against him. Therefore. --

The Major we understand of real contempt and hardening; -- in which sense Mr.
T. acknowledges the truth of it, Chap. 9. Sect. 1.

In the Minor we say three things are asserted.

1st, That hearing the present Ministers casts contempt upon the ways and
Institutions of Christ. The truth whereof we evince by the review of several
Institutions of Christ which they pour forth contempt upon.

As, 1. That separation from the World, and all ways of false worship, and the
inventions of men thereabout, until the Saints of the most High, be apparently
a people dwelling alone, and not reckoned amongst the Nations, is one grand
Institution of Christ, Numb. 23. 9. John 15. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 17, 19.
Ephesians. 5. 8, 11. 2 Timothy 3. 5. Hos. 4. 15. Rev. 18. 4. Prove. 14. 7. Which we say
is not denied by some of our conforming Brethren. By the World we understand
persons in an unregenerate state, in their enmity, rebellion against God, who
though accounted Christians, are really visibly enemies to the Cross of Christ.
By the Saints dwelling alone, we mean their distance from the worship of the
World, and worldly, carnal, anti-evangelical Church, as Israel was from the
ways and worship of the Nations. --

This, says Mr. T. is false and dangerous, not proved by the Texts. Numb. 23.
9. Is a proph^sie of Balaam concerning the people of Israel after the flesh,
that they should dwell alone, and not be reckoned among the Nations, which
yields a better proof for a Nations-Church-Christian, -- than for separation.

This must be a little farther considered. First then, that the people of
Israel were Typical of the Church, and people of God, has hitherto for the
most part been taken for granted. These upon this bottom are called his Israel,
Israelites indeed, Jews, the Circumcision, the Seed of Abraham, who is said to
be their Father, an holy Nation, a Royal Priesthood, a peculiar People, (as
Israel of old was called) Heb. 8. 8. John 1. 47. Romans 2. 29. Phil. 3. 3. Gal.
3. 29. Romans 4. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. They are the chosen; called of God, taken by
Covenant near to him, above the rest of the World, sensible, and sighing under
a worse than Egyptian bondage, from whence God brings, redeems them by an
outstretched Arm: Their Enemies pursue, overtake them, they are surrounded
with Red Sea difficulties, ruin, destruction inavoidable, (in the eye of
reason) yet God lifts up his hand wonderfully for them, and makes a way for
escape, they then magnify him, and sing his Praises. They are brought into a
Wilderness, yet not without the Pillar and Cloud, the directing, protecting,
presence of God with them, Lions, Bears, Beasts of prey continually ready to
devour them, ye^ upon them as his glory, Jehovah has a defense, provides
plenteously for them, and at last brings them into the rest remaining for them,
as Israel in the Letter and Type.

2dly, Of this the Apostle discourses at large, 1 Cor. 10. 11. their
Institutions and Ordinances were all Typical of the Spiritual things of the
Gospel: Their Laws and Statutes touching the Non-admission of persons legally
unclean into the Camp, Sanctuary, Temple, Numb. 5. 2. and 19. 20. for which end
Porters were set at the Gates, 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. were Types of the exclusion of
persons morally so from the New Testament Churches; their Canaan was a Type of
the Rest that remains for the People of God, into which Joshua will lead
them, Heb. 4. 1, 2, 3, 9. There dwelling alone not being reckoned amongst the
Nations, i. e. their separation from the Nations of the World, with respect to
Faith and Worship, as Exodus 19. 5. Levit. 20. 24, 26. Ezra. 9. 2. was Typical
of the separation of the New Testament Saints from the Wicked of the World in
their Communion, Worship, and Service of God.

Answ. 1. That Israel should in most remarkable passages be Typical of
New Testament Saints, and not in this, as remarkable as any, upon some accounts
the most remarkable of them all, is not probable.

2. With respect to their Separation from the World, they are called, Exodus 19.
5, 6. A peculiar Treasure to God, a Kingdom of Priests, an Holy Nation. In
answer whereunto Peter so calls New-Testament-Believers, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The
Chaldee says, Ye shall be before me Kings, Priests, and an holy People, such
has Christ made the Saints unto God, Rev. 1. 6. and 5. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Romans
12. 1.

3. Accordingly the Church of Christ is said to be chosen out of the World,
John 15. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 9. They are said to be of God, in opposition to the
whole World beside, which is said to lie in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. So that
evidently the duty of the New-Testament-Believers, with respect to separation
from the World, and its Worship, is typed out in what is spoken of Israel
according to the flesh, the great Type of them, Numb. 23. 9. The weakness of
Mr. T. his Assertion, that from this Scripture a National-Church-Christian may
better be proved, than separation is from what has been said, abundantly
evinced. Israel was to the Nations of the World, what the Churches of Christ
now in the Nations thereof are, distinct from them in their Ministration,
Worship, and Service. Herein they were Types not of National Churches, which
are not of the institution of the Lord in the New Testament, but of particular
Churches, as we have proved.

His exceptions to the other Scriptures, will receive a speedy dispatch. In his
answer to John 5. 19. He supposes, that persons professing Christ from
education or compulsion, being formed up by Penal Laws into a National Church,
under Ecclesiastical Heads and Governors that are foreign to the Scripture,
though they live in a course of debauchery, and actual Rebellion against him,
are not the World, nor so called by Christ; Of which we expect his proof.

Of this matter we have discoursed at large in this Treatise: What he has
before said of 2 Cor. 6. 14. Ephesians. 5. 8, 11. Rev. 18, 4. we have already
considered. What Paul writes to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 5. he writes,

1. For our Instruction.

2. It being a prophecy of the last days Apostasy, under the Conduct and
Regiment of Antichrist, it was more directly and immediately intended for us
than him.

3. It Is not a separation in respect of Arbitrary society in the World (the
Apostle is giving directions how we should behave our selves with respect to
Instituted Worship --) that is enjoined, and yet if it were, certainly those
with whom we may not have such society, we may not walk with in the fellowship
of the Gospel, Hos. 4. 15. is a Precept to Judah not to have communion with
Idolatrous Israel in matter of Worship; thence separation from such as worship
God in a false way, is evidently demonstrated to be our duty. That it is our
duty (as the Spirit tells us it is Prove. 14. 7.) to fly from the presence and
sight of foolish men, and yet have communion with them in Worship, is a most
absurd Dictate.

But he will prove the Position false, 1. It supposes Christ to have
instituted such a separation as he has told us shall not be to the end of the
World, Mat. 13. 30, 39. 40.

Answ. This is the Animadverters mistake, the separation Christ tells us shall
not be till the end of the World, is a separation in respect of Civil Societies
and Cohabitations in the World, which we plead not for. And this he plainly
tells us, v. 38. The Field is the World, wherein both the godly and the wicked
do and may grow together undisturbed by us, notwithstanding the separation
pleaded for. And that this is the whole of Christ's intendment is evident.

1. The Tares, when discovered, are not to be pulled up out of the field, v.
15. But when persons are discovered to be (Tares) wicked ones, they must be
cast out of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 2. -- Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16, 20.

2. The plucking up of the Tares is forbidden, lest thereby some detriment
should happen to the Wheat, v. 29. but the excommunicating, separating from
scandalous Offenders, is not to the prejudice, it is to the good and advantage
of those that are truly Righteous, as the Apostle intimates, 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8.
Ver. 39. is the Key of the Parable of the Draw-Net.

Which, 1. fairly intimates to us that the same line of Interpretation is to be
stretched over it, as over the Parable of the Tares.

But, 2. grant it to be meant of a Gospel-Church-State, it opposes not the
Separation pleaded for; there is no doubt there may be foolish Virgins as well
as wise, Judasses as well as Peter's in the best constituted Churches, and are
like to be to the end of the World; but though they are known to God to be
Devils, they are not upon their admission into the Churches for other than real
Saints, and when they are found to be otherwise, they are to be cut off from
them as useless Members. The separation pleaded for, is not a separation from
such refined Hypocrites, as can act the part of Saints so well, as that none
but God is able to discern them from such; but from those who have the visible
Lineaments of men of the World, and Children of Disobedience upon them, which
is not in the least opposite to either of these Parables. The Fish in the
Draw-Net were supposed to be good whilst in the Draw-Net, till brought to Land,
and taken out from thence* The account is given of the Churches of Asia,
Corinth -- manifests that they were constituted of visible Saints, Rev. 2. 1,
2, 3, 9, 13, 19. 1 Cor. 1. 2. They are blamed for suffering those that had
discovered the rottenness of their hearts by works of unrighteousness, (though
when admitted they seemed to be Saints) to continue in their Communion, Rev. 2.
14. 20. --

What he adds, That the Separation pleaded for, was ever judged Schismatical,
and proved unhappy in the conclusion.

Is, 1. an Arrow drawn out of the Popish Quiver: What the Papists usually
object against the Separation of the Protestants from the Church of Rome; as
indeed many of his Arguments and Answers in this Treatise are, which I had
thought to have manifested at the close, by the induction of particular
instances, but that this Treatise so unexpectedly swells under our hands.

2. All that is accounted Schismatical, is not presently so because so
accounted.

3. Schism being a breach of some Union of the Institution of Christ, he must
prove our Separation to be a breach of some such Union before he proves it
schismatical.

What unhappiness the Animadverter means that has attended separation from the
visibly wicked and profane, I know not; all things are not unhappy that men
account so. That which is of God in the Premises (as we have proved Separation
to be) cannot have unhappiness in the conclusion.

He adds, The separation pleaded for is dangerous, since it puts persons upon
withdrawing their subjection from Ecclesiastical, Civil, Houshold-Rulers and
Governors, it would overthrow all States, Bodies Politic, and
Houshold-Government.

Answ. 1. If by Ecclesiastical Rulers and Governors, he ^ean such as are of the
Institution of Christ, (and to others we owe no subjection as such) the whole
(and every part) of what is affirmed by him in this matter, is most
scandalously, falsely, and wickedly spoken; ^ question whether not contrary to
his own knowledge and Conscience; if not, he undertook to answer a matter
before he understood it, which i^ not much to his honor.

2. The separation pleaded for, is no other than what was pleaded for by the
Apostles of old, and Primitive Believers; So that if it overthrows Government,
theirs did also; and indeed this was laid to their charge, as it is to ours, how
truly let the whole Nation judge: of this we have already spoken.

A second institution of Christ instanced in, in S. T. is this, That Saints
separate from the World, should frequently meet together as a distinct Body
therefrom, for the edification and building up of each other in the way and
will of God, according to the gifts bestowed, Mal. 3. 16. 1 These. 5. 11. Heb.
3. 12, Jude 20. Heb. 10. 24, 25. 1 Cor. 12. 9. Acts 12. 12. and 18. 23. Ephesians.
5. 19. James 5. 16. 1 These. 5. 14.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 2. Saints separated from the World, i. e. unbelievers,
should frequently meet for the ends aforesaid: But, 1. one party of Christians
should not call another party of Christians, the World, who own the true Faith
of God, and worship him, because they are not of the same way of
Church Government and Worship.

Answ. Right, but with Mr. T. his good leave, Christians may call such, as
(though they outwardly profess the Name of Christ) drive a trade of sinning
against God, are strangers to the Work of Grace upon their Spirits, who are
(...), in subjection to the wicked one, the World, they being really, (...),
unbelievers, if any in the Wo^^d be so; which is all we contend for. And if
this b: granted, (which yet I see not how it can be denied) farewell a
National-Church; the most of whose Members are of the Complexion intimated.
That which follows in this Section we are not at all concerned in. The
Scriptures produced sufficiently evince that what we affirm to be the
Institution of Christ is indeed so; nor is Mr. T. able to gainsay the truth
thereof.

A third Institution of Christ mentioned in S. T. is, That particular
Congregations and Assemblies of Believers, gathered into one Body for the
Celebration of the Worship of God, (in opposition to any National-Church or
Churches whatsoever) are of the appointment of Christ, Acts 1. 13. and 12. 1.
and 13. 14. and 15. 22. and 18. 22. and 20. 14, 28. 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 6. 4. Acts
9. 1. 1 Cor. 16. 19: Romans 16. 4. 2 Cor. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 2. Acts 16. 4, 5. and 14.
23. 1 Cor. 11. 16. and 14. 4, 5, 12, 19. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Rev. 1. 2, 3, 11.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 3. It Is questionable whether Acts 15. 22. and 18. 17. be
not a Provincial Church.

Answ. 1. Of this we have formerly spoken. 2. That it was the particular Church
of Corinth, v. 2, 4, 12, 22, 23, 25. evince. 3. That a Provincial Church had
not as yet a being in the World Mr. T. knows, and we have proved, Chap. 1.
Sect. 13. The same line of Interpretation is to be drawn over Acts 18. 22. (for
that he intends instead of v. 17.)

The Texts he grants, mention Churches in several Cities and Provinces, but he
questions, Whether they were by their voluntary agreement under Pastors of
their own choice, gathered into one Body, for the celebration of the Worship of
God. They are called the Church of such a City, as of Jerusalem, -- from their
Habitation, where they had many meetings from House to House for celebration of
Worship, as Acts 2. 46, 47.

Answ. That there is any thing of weight in this Answer, none will imagine but
Mr. T.

1. It Is built upon this rotten Foundation, that the particular form of
Churches is not of the Institution of Christ; of which we have at large
treated, Chap. 1. of this Treatise.

2. It plainly contradicts the Spirit of the Lord, speaking in some of the
Scriptures mentioned, He questions, he says, whether they were by voluntary
agreement gathered together into one Body; But this the Spirit of the Lord
affirms, Acts 2. 41. 2 Cor. 8. 5. Nor can it be otherwise; there was no
external force or Law to compel them thereunto. Whether they were under
particular Officers of their own, see Acts 20. 28. and 15. 4. 23. and 21. 18.
that these were chosen by themselves, that the Church consisted of no greater a
number than could meet together, (...), in the same place, to worship God in
the same numerical Ordinances, we have before demonstrated.

The reason why there were not more Congregations than one in a City, was,
because that the multitude of Disciples was not so great but that they might so
do. No wonder that we read only of the Elders of the Church, Acts 15. 4, 23.
-- when there was but one Church at Jerusalem; none ever pleaded for one's
being an Elder of one part of the Church, another of another; but such as
assert Provincial-National-Churches; with us, he that is an Elder to a part, is
an Elder to the whole. That the Churches mentioned in the Scriptures inst^nced
in, were not particular Independent Churches, Mr. T. attempts not the proof of.

What he adds from 1 Cor. 12. 28. is already answered, nor is there any thing
more in this matter replied by him, that requires our stay.

It Is added in S. T. 4thly, That Christ has appointed Officers of his own to
act in the holy things of God, in and over these Assemblies, whom he furnishes
with gifts every way suiting their employment, to whom, without turning aside
to the voice of strangers, or attending upon the Ministry of such as are not of
his appointment, 'its the duty of Saints to hear^en, is very evident from
Ephesians. 4. 11. Heb. 13. 7, 13. Mat. 24. 4, 5, 23, 24. 1 John 2. 18. and 4. 1. 2
John 10. Acts 20. 29, 30, 31. Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16. Which exactly agrees with
what was practiced by Primitive Believers, who, it seems, received none without
the testimony of some Brethren of known Integrity in the Churches, 1 Cor. 16.
3. Acts 9. 26.

To which Mr. T. 1. That Christ has appointed Officers of his own, and
furnished them with gifts whom we are to follow and obey in opposition to the
Ministry of strangers, viz. Such as are deceivers, false-teachers, Antichrists,
he grants, which being the substance of what is pleaded for (at present) with
his subsequent Discourse we are little concerned.

Whether we have proved the Ministers of England to be deceivers, -- the
judicious Reader will determine; and if such, Mr. T. grants we have proved they
are not to be heard. Whether Christ has appointed Officers to the Universal
Church, or appropriated them to particular Congregations, is not of our present
disquisition. The for^er Mr. T. has not demonstrated. The latter we have in
part evinced, Chap. 1. Sect. 15.

To which may be added, If by virtue of Christ's appointment Ministers are not
fixed to particular Congregations, then Ministers are no more by virtue of
Christ's appointment Ministers of this Company or Flock of Christians, than of
another, which is expressly contrary to Acts 20. 28.

2. Then either Ministers have no Authority over this or that particular Flock,
to which, as such, they minister; or if so they have as much authority over
every particular society of Christians to whom they providentially preach, and
this without their actual consent, which is absurd and tyrannical.

3. Then no Church can claim by virtue of Divine appointment a greater right
and Interest in one Minister than in another, nor is any by virtue of such an
appointment, more obliged to minister to them then to others; though we deny
not but the gifts given to Ministers (to Brethren) are given for the
Edification of all Christians, amongst whom by the Providence of God they are
cast, which they are bound for that end to improve; nor that its unlawful to
hear others besides Pastors of Congregational Churches, we assert the contrary
in the Treatise he undertakes to confute. Yet does it not hence in the least
follow, that we may lawfully hear the present Ministers, we have proved the
contrary; the non-attendment upon whom tends not to the decay of Spiritual
Life, it promotes it rather. --

We say in S. T. That the hearing the present Ministers pours forth contempt
upon each of these Institutions of Christ.

It supposes, 1st, That separation from the Assemblies of England, though in
their Constitution carnal and worldly, and the Worship thereof (although false,
and merely of Humane Invention) was and is our sin and evil.

2dly, That it is not by virtue of any Institution of Christ, the duty of Saints
to meet together as a Body distinct (without going out to other Assemblies to
worship with them) for their mutual edification. --

3dly, That particular Assemblies are not solely of the Institution of Christ,
but that National Churches are also to be accounted true Churches of Christ.

4. That the Officers of Christ's appointment are not sufficient for the Saints,
but together with them, the help of false and Idol Shepherds is to be sought
after. Than which, what greater contempt can be poured forth upon the
forementioned Institutions of our dear Lord.

The truth of the assertion we fully manifest in S. T. nor does Mr. T. deny,
but that the hearing the present Ministers does pour out contempt upon the
Institutions mentioned, he denies them to be the Institutions of Christ. Sect.
5. tells us, That it is a gross error which is often in the mouths of the
Seperatists, that they may not hear with the world, nor pray with the world,
whence it has come to pass, that some have left off praying in their Families,
-- unless Members of their Church.

Answ. The first and second we have proved, beyond what Mr. T. has as yet been
able to reply to.

2dly, The last I hope is not true; God forbid that any that pretend to
Christianity, much more such as are so in truth, should so far degegenerate
into the Spirit of Heathenism, as not to call upon God in their Families, or
cease to do their uttermost to convert their Children and Servants to the Lord,
and instruct them in his fear.

3. That this is the consequence of the principle of Separation, or that it is
in it self a gross Error, that it is unlawful for me to hear with the world, or
pray with the world, i. e. join with them in their Worship, he may prove when
he is able.

What follows has either already been replied to, or will be in its proper
place; so that we need not attend it here.

The second thing in the Minor Proposition incumbent upon us to prove, we say
in S. T. is, 2dly, That hereby poor souls are hardened in a false way of
Worship, what can be thought less (supposing the worship in the
Parish-Assemblies of England to be so, as has been proved) when they shall see
Professors that were wont to pray and preach together, to prosess and protest
against Common Prayer Book Worship, and Priests, to cry up, or at least approve
of (as Mr. T. it is tho^ght, did) Laws made for their ejection, if guilty of no
other crime than conformity to the Worship they now conform to and practice,
now flock to their Assemblies, and hear their Priests. What can they imagine
less than that these persons thus acting in a direct contrariety to their
former judgment and practice, do now see they were mistaken; and are beginning
at least to return unto those paths from whence they departed; and that these
ways in which they and their forefathers have walked, are the good Old Way in
which rest is to be found? To which Mr. T. Answers nothing but what has
already been considered, no^ any thing that deserves our stay.

The 3d, Particular asserted in the Minor Proposition, its said in S. T. is,
That hereby poor souls are hardened in their rebellion and blasphemy against
God, his Spirit, and Tabernacle, and them that dwell therein. This is not to be
questioned, we every day hear stout words spoken against the Lord because of
the practice of some in this thing; what say the wicked less, thanthat Religion
is but a fancy; that the professors thereof are but a generation of Hypocrites,
that will turn to any thing to save themselves; that the Spirit by which they
are acted, is but a Spirit of Phanaticism and delusion? Yea how do they bless
themselves, that they are not nor ever were of the number of such Professors!
and that because they see these for fear of Persecution desert their former
principles, strike in with their Assembly and Ministers. --

To which Mr. T. adjoyns, 1st, Papists have thus insulte^ over Protestants upon
the return of any seeming zealous Protestant into the Roman Church, yet the
Answerer knows how to reply to such, that men's instability shows their own
weakness, not the thing in which they have been zealous to have been good or
bad. --

Answ. Very right, and we know how to reply to the insulting of the Conformists
upon the account of the return of any seeming zealous Professors to them; but
still we say, that their return to them gives them too just occasion of
insulting. The contrary to which Mr. T. should have proved, of which he speaks
not one word.

He adds, 2dly, This Author does not do well to call the Obloquies against his
party, speaking against Religion, blaspheming God, the Spirit, Tabernacle and
them that dwell therein.

Answ. Sir, the party I am through grace of, are not mine but Christ's, the
followers of the Lamb in opposition to the wicked profane world, of no other
party do I own my self to be.

2. The Obloquies, Blasphemies mentioned, being such as are vented against the
Institutions of Christ (as we have proved them to be) and such as conform to
them, by the Beast and his party, may well be called Blaspheming God, his
Temple, Tabernacle, and them that dwell therein: They are so called by the
Spirit, Rev. 13. 5, 6.

He adds, 3dly, It were very sad should we be afraid to do a thing because of
Clamours (Answ. True, if the thing done be our duty which if he supposes in
the present case, he begs the question) or continue in that which we cannot
justify, because men will be hardened in their own way.

Answ. Very right, but if a man depart from that way which he once owned to be
the way of God, which he justifies in the Scriptures to be such, and in so
doing hardens persons to cleave to a way of Superstition, Formality to their
utter undoing, and gives them just occasion to open their mouths against the
Institutions of Christ, reviling, blaspheming them, and those that walk in
them; this is not justifiable, nor will it be found matter of joy to us at the
end of our days, that we have administered such occasions to them. --

It remains then that inasmuch as the hearing the present Ministers pours out
contempt upon the ways and Institutions of Christ, hardens persons in a false
way of Worship, Rebellion, and Blasphemy against God, its utterly unlawful for
Saints to be found in the p^^ctise thereof.

Sect. 2.
A 10th Argument proving the unlawfulness of hearing the present Ministers.
It Is not lawful to go to the places of false Worship. All Monuments of Idolatry
to be abolished, proved. The judgment of the learned Mede, Cotton, Ainsworth,
Robbinson. 2 Cor. 6. 17. 1 John 5. 21. Jude 23. 1 Samuel 2. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 20.
and 14. 26. explained.

THE 10th Argument against hearing the present Ministers, is in S. T. thus
formed.

God calls his People out of, and strictly charge them not to go to the place
of False Worship, Hos. 4. 5. Amos 4. 4. Therefore it is unlawful for the Saints
to attend upon the present Ministers of England. The Reason of the Consequence
is, because we cannot go to hear them, without we go to the Places and
Assemblies of false Worship, (as the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship has been
proved to be.)

To which Mr. T. replies, Sect. 7. 1st, This Argument is bottomed upon this
Opinion, That all Monuments of Idolatry, all Temples, Altars, Chapels --
dedicated by the Heathens or Antichristians, to their false Worship, ought by
lawful Authority to be rased and abolished, not suffered to remain for
nourishing Superstition, much less employed in the true Worship of God.

Answ. 1. That the Animadverter can see any such Principle at the bottom of our
Argument must be imputed to that wonderful quicksightedness that is predominant
sometimes in him; we only say, that God calls his people out of -- places of
false-worship, i. e. not such as have been, but such as are at present such;
which is the utmost of what Mr. T. can compel us to own, from any thing we have
asserted in this Argument.

But,. 2dly, Having such good company, as the learned Ainsworth, Robinson, and
other Worthies and Witnesses of Christ in their day, and being satisfied,
(which is the all in all to us) that they have in this matter the Spirit for
their Guide and Leader, we are contented to advance a step or two farther with
them.

The Proposition but now laid down by Mr. T. we subscribe to, and judge its
clearly proved by Exodus 20. 4. 5, 6. and 23. 13. Isa. 30. 22. Genesis 35. 2, 3, 4.
Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3, 30, 32. and 17. 18, 19, 20. 2 King. 10. 26, 27, 28. and 18. 4.
and 23. 12, 13, 14, 15. 2 Chr. ^7. 6. Acts 17. 23. and 19. 26, 27. Jude 23.
with Lev. 13. 47, 51, 52. Rev. 17. 16. and 18. 11, 12. The Scriptures cited by
the Separatists of old. We are not willing to debate this matter at large. That
the things mentioned should be abolished they give their Reasons in their
Apology, page 76. The sum whereof is,

1. The retaining of them is a breach of the second Commandment, Exodus 20. 4,
5, 6, with Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3. Isa. 30. 22.

2. So long as they are continued Antichrist is not fully abolished, according
to Rev. 17. 16. and 18. 11, 12, 13. -- 2 These. 2. 8. with 2 King. 10. 26, 27,
28.

3. The consecrating of any Garments, Places, or the like, peculiarly to the
Worship of God now in the time of the Gospel, has no Warrant in the Word.

4. The worshipping God in the places, and by the things appointed, and
hallowed of God himself, was under the Law a part of honor done to him, and
pleasing him, Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6. Lev. 17. 3, 4. The destroying them tended to his
dishonor, Psalm. 79. 1. and 74. 6, 7, 8. The building and repairing them
pertained to the establishing and restoring his true Worship, Hag. 1. 4, 8. So
on the contrary, the worshipping God now in the places and by the things
dedicated, and hallowed by Antichrist, is a special part of Popish Devotion;
such is the building, repairing them, as the razing them will be to their
dishonor and greater confusion: The like may be said of the Heathen Places,
touching which, see Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3, 4. with 2 King. 10. 26, 27, 28. and 14. 3,
4. and 23. 8, 13, 15, 19.

5. Godly Princes are commended for abolishing the Monuments of false Worship,
2 Chr. 17. 6. 2 King 18. 4. and 23. 12, 13, 14, 15.

6. This being done the People are more easily persuaded to the true worship of
God in Spirit and Truth; whereas otherwise they are still nourished in
Superstition, -- Genesis 35. 2, 3, 4. 2 King. 18. 4. 2 Chr. 11. 34. Acts 17. 23.
and 19. 26, 27. Lev. 13, and 14, Chap. with Jude 23.

7. The Lord has promised a blessing to them which do reject and abolish them,
and threatened a curse to the contrary, and so also has done, Isa. 30. 22, 23.
Exodus 20. 5, 6, 2 Chr. 17. chap. and 31. 20, 21. with 2 Chr. 21. 13, 14. and
24. 17, 25. and 28. chap.

We shall only add, 8. That the soul of the Lord did detest and abhor whatever
was used to Idolatry, whether Vestments, or Places, -- under the Law, is
evident from the forecited Scriptures; that he is as jealous a God now as
ever, the Animadverter will not deny, nor can he, That the Idolatrous
High*Places, dedicated to the Popish Mahuzzims, or Saints-Idol Godds (as the
most of the High Places of England the Image of the Saint to which each was
dedicated, being set up in the Rood-Loft betwixt the Church and Chancel, where
in many places the Rood-Loft yet remains) are as Idolatrous, and upon that
bottom as much abhorred by the Lord, as those of old were; and therefore are to
be separated from, destroyed as those of old.

9. They are some of the things of Antichrist; they were consecrated by him,
dedicated (as is known) to his He-Saints, and She-Saints, and therefore must
perish with him.

10. The People generaly Idolize them, bow down when they come in to them,
honor them with Cap and Knee, think there is holiness in them, and that God is
more acceptably served there than else where; which if nothing else could be
said, they being detestable Idols, are therefore to be abhorred by the Saints.

We shall only add the sayings of two Learned men of late days, who give their
judgment touching this matter. The one is Mr. Mede, who expounds the 39th verse.
of Dan. 11. as a part of the description of Antichrist. He renders the Text
thus; He shall make the holds of Mahuzzims, with all, or jointly to the
foreign Godd. And paraphraseth t^us, And though the Christian God whom he
shall profess to acknowledge and worship can endure no compeers, yet he shall
consecrate his Temples (Ecclesiastical holds) jointly to the Christian God, and
his Mahuzzims to God and the Saints. The other is precious Cotton, on the
Vials, who, page 14. on Vial. 7th. says thus, When the zeal of God lifts up
the hearts of people, then they will not endure a consecrated place in all the
World where they come: and when this Vial is poured out, the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of God, and then all the Chapels of ease, and Churches
of state, and Temples of glory,
wherewith the world has been deluded, shall be thrown down; they will not
leave them a stone upon a stone that shall not be thrown down.

Our Animadverter cites Mr. Robinson touching this matter, who page 354, 356,
in his Justification of the Separation from the Church of England, there pleads
against going to worship in these Ecclesiastical holds, and tells us,

1. That his Arguments are fully answered by Mr. Paget.

Answ. How much to the purpose Mr. Pagets Answers are to the Arguments
produced, others will judge.

2. Mr. Robinsons Texts he tells us, are impertinent. The unclean thing 2 Cor.
6. 17. not to be touched, is the Idol it self, not the place abused to
Idolatry, which is touched when adored or worshipped.

Answ. 1. This is more than the Animadverter proves, no^ i^ it likely that any
in the Church of Corinth, did, or were about to worship the Idol, that he
should caution and charge them not to do so. Being converted from dumb-Idols to
the living God, it is not to be thought they should return to worship them
again; that they were guilty of so doing is not in the least intimated, as is
their going to the Idols-Temple, and sitting at meat there, which the Apostle
would have them abstain from. 2. Mr. T. himself says, page 279, That it was
unlawful for them to touch, or go to the Idols Temple, and sit at meat there.
3. The place it self in our case is the Idol, its worshipped, adored, idolized,
by the People of the Nation, as its known, therefore not to be touched.

He says further, 2. They which join not in any Idol-Service or Honor, keep
themselves from Idols, as is required, 1 John 5. 21.

Answ. All self-devised Worship, as is the Worship carried on in those places
at this day, is Idol-worship, the deviser thereof being in a conformity
thereunto idolized, the second Precept touching Idolatry thereby violated:
those that would keep themselves from Idols, must upon Mr. T. his own grounds
keep themselves from that Worship, and consequently from those places where it
is solemnized and carried on.

2. The place it self, as was said, is the great Idol of the Nation; if we must
keep our selves from Idols we must keep our selves from it. Jude 23. enjoynes
us to avoid the very appearances and occasions of evil, and is therefore
righteously urged by Mr. Robinson for Separation from the places of false
Worship. Rev. 14. 9. and 18. 4. enjoin a total relinquishment of all the things
of Antichrist, whereof his Ecclesiastical Holds, (as Mr. Mede calls them) are a
part. What he talks with respect to the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship has been
showed, we have already replied to, and proved it to be false-worship,
notwithst^nding all our Dictator is able to say to the contrary.

He adds, Were there some superstition in the Worship, it were not sufficient
to make the places, places of false-Worship, as is evident from 1 Samuel 2. 17. 1
Cor. 11. 20, 21, 22. and 14. 26. nor were it necessary to go out of them,
except Idolatrous.

Answ. But if false-worship be managed and carried on in the places, they must
undoubtedly be places of false-worship, i. e. places where false-worship is
managed and carried on; to assert the contrary were absurd and ridiculous. Nor
is there any thing in either of the Scriptures produced by our Animadverter,
that speaks the least syllable to what (...) produced by him for. The first
gives us an account of the wicke^^^^s of Samuels Sons, but that they offered
not the Sacrifices commanded by the Lord, upon the Altar of the Lord, at the
place appointed by him, it says not. The latter condemns some disorder about
some acts of Worship in some Members of the Church, but that there was any
superstition in the Worship it says not; much less was there (as in our case)
the introducing a new, formal, sapless Service, cut out, dressed and served in
for the nourishment of an Idol, and idle dumb Priesthood, of which the
Scriptures speak not a tittle. 3. The places themselves are superstitious and
Idolatrous, as we have showed, and therefore Hos. 4. 15. Am. 4. 4. are rightly
cited by us, as our Animadverter himself acknowledges. What he adds, That Gods
People were required to go up to Jerusalem to worship, after it had been
defiled with Idolatry, and the Idol removed, and that Christ himself went up
thither, he ^ill upon the review, I suppose, raze out upon the account of its
egregious impertinency. That place was built by the appointment of the Lord,
his Name placed there, there was the Ark, Altar, etc. there he was solemnly to
be worshipped, and would be no where else, none of which can be said of the
Temples of England.

He further tells us, That its false, that we cannot go to hear the present
Ministers, without we go to their places and Assemblies of false Worship; Which
if understood of the public Meeting-places allowed by Law, (as he must mean if
he speaks pertinently, for of such is the reason of the consequence meant) I
suppose he cannot prove. That they frequent private Meetings, set up
Conventicles, (as they are called) is not likely, it being expressly against the
Canons of their Church.

To which he adds, That we are guilty of Judaizing, in tying people to worship
only in the place of the separated Churches, contrary to John 4. 21. 1 Timothy 2.
8.

Answ. 1. This is notoriously false, we tie persons to worship in no place upon
the account of its holiness, but an House, a Mou^tain, a Ship, any place, if
not polluted with Idolatry, is equal and alike esteemed by us.

2. This may righteously be retorted upon the Clergy of England, who judaize in
their going about to compel us to worship in their Temples dedicated to
Antichristian Mahuzzims, and consecrated with Popish Holy Water, and Prayers,
and accounted more holy than other places in the Nation, of which they are
notoriously guilty, contrary to John 4. 21. -- 1 Timothy 2. 8.

Sect. 3.
There is no promise of a blessing upon hearing the present Ministers,
therefore it is not lawful to hear them. Isa. 55. 3. Luke 11. 28. explained.
Sion typical of the New-Testament-Churches; Babylon of the Antichristian Herd.
National Churches bear a resemblance, not to Sion, but old Babel.

THE 11th Argument produced in S. T. against hearing the present Ministers, is,
That, upon the doing whereof, Saints have no promise of a blessing, nor ground
to expect it, is not lawful for them to do: But in the hearing the present
Ministers, there is no promise of a blessing, nor ground to expect it.
Therefore --

The Major, or first Proposition we took for granted: But Mr. T. is pleased to
enter his demurrer against it.

Sect. 8. He tells us, Blessings are of many sorts; 1. Immunity from evil, or
punishment, in this sense the Major is true. 2. Collation of some special good;
in this sense it is not true; there are many things lawful to be done, as
eating, drinking, buying, selling, in respect of which men have no ground to
expect any such blessing. Ezekiel preached lawfully when he was told Israel
would not hearken. Ezekiel. 3. 2, 7. And Jonah when he thought Niniveh would not
repent, Jonah 4. 2.

Answ. 1. Not to make many words, the things done by the Saints are either such
as appertain to the sustenance of their life and being, the management and
carrying on the concerns of their particular Callings in the World, in respect
unto which they have ground to expect, not only a general but a special
Blessing, Psalm. 1. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 8.

2. The things relating to the Worship and Service of God, in which sense the
Major is to be understood, his instances of eating, drinking, -- are
impertinent hereunto; that I am to do nothing in the Worship of God, in the
doing of which I have no promise of a blessing, nor ground to expect it; viz. a
special Spiritual Blessing, God having said, Where he records his Name, he will
meet with his People, and bless them, Exodus 20. 24. That where two or three are
met together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20. viz. In
respect of his gracious pr^sence, or communication of special Grace; I had
thought we might rationally have inferred from hence, That that, upon the doing
whereof (relating to the Worship and Service of God, of which we were treating)
Saints have no promise of a Blessing, nor ground to expect it, is not lawful
for them to do; for when they are attending upon God in his own way, he has
promised to meet them and bless them, Isa. 64. 5.

3. What he writes of Ezekiel's being told that Israel ^ould not hearken, is
very frivolous and impertinent.

1. He had in his going forth to act for God in that Work, a promise of his
presence, and Blessing, though Israel abode obstinate, Ezekiel. 3. 8, 9, 19. --

2. There were a Remnant that attended upon the Word of the Lord from his
Mouth, to whom God made it a blessing.

But he is upon second thoughts willing to wave this, and denies the Minor.

He tells us, That the Saints have a promise of a Spiritual Blessing by hearing
these men, while they preach the Gospel; which he proves from Isa. 55. 3. Luke
11. 28.

Answ. 1. The former place relates not at all to a mere external hearing, or an
outward attendment upon that Ordinance; nor does the latter, but an obediential
giving up our selves unto the Word of God.

Yet, 2. they both imply an hearing according to the appointment of the Lord,
which if we do not, but go out of his way, at^ending upon a false Ministry, (as
we have proved the present Ministry of England to be) these words import not
the least promise of a blessing.

3. They may be as well urged to prove an attendment upon the Ministry of Rome;
and that upon our so doing we had ground ^o expect it.

He adds, 2dly, The experience of former times tells us, that more have been
converted, strengthened -- by Conformists, yea Bishops themselves, than by the
best of Separatists.

Ans. 1. Of this the Animadverter is no competent Judge; Reformation to
civility, is not Regeneration, Conversion to Christ and Holiness. 2. Should it
be granted, all that could be inferred from hence were this, that God did of
mere Grace honor his own Word for the conversion of sinners, -- not that we
have any ground to expect a blessing upon our attendment on that false
Ministry, by wh^m it is dispensed.

We say in S. T. To prove a promise of a blessing -- upon our attendment on the
present Ministers, we conceive is no easy task for any to do; for these
Reasons.

1. The blessing of the Lord is upon Sion, Psalm. 87. 2. and 78. 68. There he
dwells, Psalm. 9. 11. and 74. 2. Jer. 8. 19. Isa. 8. 18. Joel 3. 17, 21. The
presence of Christ is in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. 12, 13.
and 2. 1. It Is his Garden in which he feeds and dwells, Cant. 6. 2. and 8.
13. And we are not surer of any thing than we are of this, that the Assemblies
of England, in their present constitution are not the Sion of God, his
Candlestick, his Garden, but a very wilderness, and that Babel, out of which
the Lord commands his People to hasten their escape, Rev. 18. 4.

2. God never promises a Blessing to a people waiting upon him in that way
which is polluted, and not of his appointment, (as we have proved the Worship
of England to be.)

3. The Lord has expressly said, concerning such as run before they are sent,
that they shall not profit the people, Jer. 23. 32.

4. He professes, that such as refuse to obey his calls, to come out of
Babylon, shall partake of her plagues, Rev. 18. 4.

5. Where the Lord is not in respect of his special presence and Grace, there
is no ground to expect any blessing: But God is not so in the midst of the
Parochial Assemblies of England: Where are the Souls that are converted,
comforted, strengthened, stablished by their Ministry? --

To which Mr. T. answers, 1. The first reason is a fond application of what is
said of Gods dwelling in Sion, (meant of his special presence there, in that
his Temple and Service was upon that Hill, in the time of the Old Testament) to
the Congregational Churches, exclusively to the Assemblies of England, who in
their present constitution are not the Sion of God. --

Answ. 1. Will Mr. T. stand to this, that by the Lords dwelling in Sion, we are
to understand nothing more than his presence in the Temple with his people of
old worshipping there? This he seems immediately to retract, whilst he cites
the Assembly in their Annotations on Heb. 12. 22. making Mount Sion a Type of
the Gospel Church, with approbation.

2. That the People of Israel were Typical of the Saints in Gospel-dayes, we
have already demonstrated; Sion was so.

1st. Their Assemblies are called, the Assemblies of Mount Sion, Isa. 4. 5.

2dly, The solemn investment of Christ into the exercise of Kingship, and regal
Authority over them, is called, The Lords setting his King upon Sion, or over
Sion, the Mountain of his Holiness, Psalm. 2. 6.

3dly, Saints, Believers, are called Sion -- Psalm. 146. 10. and 147. 12. and
149. 2.

4thly, The New Testament Churches are called his Temple, 2 Cor. 6. 16. -- with
allusion to the Temple that was built upon M^unt Moriah, one of the Mountains
of Sion; to which the true Worship of God was affixed, not only in opposition
to the Heathen Worship of the Nations, but the Worship of the Apostatick ten
Tribes under Jeroboam, the infamous head of their Apostasy; as to these the
true Worship of God is fixed, in opposition to the Antichristian worship of the
Mother Church of Rome and her Daughters.

5thly, Mount Sion is called the Holy Hill, -- the people that Worship there,
an holy People; -- evidently expressive of the qualifications of the
Church Members in the times of the Gospel, as we have proved.

6thly, As Sion was typical of Gospel-Churches, so was Babylon of false
Antichristian-Churches, who are her very Picture, (the Church of England is so)
as 'twere easy to demonstrate. That Old Babylon was given to superstiaion, and
self-invented-worship, Jer. 50. 38. and 51. 44. Isa. 46. 1. (bottomed upon no
better Authority than tradition and antiquity) compelled others to Uniformity
in her false worship under Penal Laws and Statutes, Dan. 3. 3, 6. was cruel and
tyrannical against the People of God, Jer. 51. 25. Isa. 14. 17. and 47. 6. Jer.
50. 33. and would not permit them to build the Temple at Jerusalem, and worship
God there according to his appointment; that in an^wer hereunto the false
Antichristian Church, or New-Babel is described, as given to superstition, and
self-invented-worship, Rev. 13. 14. and 17. 5. compelling others to uniformity
thereunto under Penal Laws and Statutes, Rev. 13. 15, 16, 17. and 17. 2. and
18. 3, 9. most cruel and tyrannical against the Saints, who cannot conform to
her Inventions, Rev. 13. 7, 10, 15. and 16. 6. and 17. 6. and 18. 24. is so
evident, that none can deny it.

So that, 7thly, except Mr. T. can prove the Assemblies of England, in their
present constitution, to be Gospel-Churches, they are not the Sion of God, nor
to be accounted so.

Of this we have already spoken, and shall only add, Those Churches that have
no answerableness to Mount Sion, the Type of the true Gospel-Churches, but are
the very Picture of old Babylon, the Type of Antichristian Churches, are not
the Gospel-Churches typed out by Mount Sion, but the Babel, out of which it is
the duty of the Lords People to fly, in whom God dwells not. But
National-Churches are not answerable to Mount Sion, but old Babel. Therefore.
--

Look upon Sion, consider her diligently; 1. She was an Holy Mountain or Hill,
Psalm. 2. 6. and 15. 1. where the holy People dwelt.

2dly, There was the Temple of God built according to his appointment, of hewn
stone ready fitted and prepared, -- precious costly stones, 2 Chronicles. 3. 6.

3dly, There was the Worship of God managed by Officers of his own, according
to his own direction and appointment. What more evident then that National
Churches, the Church of England, is most unlike hereunto? May it be called an
Holy Hill? rather a Mountain of Corruption. Are its Members an Holy People?
What less? A Generation of Atheists, Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers and
Adulteresses cannot be so accounted. If God's Worship managed according to his
own appointment, by Officers of his own in their Assemblies, we have proved the
contrary. Are not they the very Picture of old Babylon in their self-invented
Worship, rigid pressing of Uniformity under Penal Laws, the only support of
their Service, and murdering the Children of the Lord who dissent from them?
All that know any thing, know these things to be so. Nor can they be called his
Candlesticks, who are not of pure Gold, fashioned in all respects (so near as
humane frailty will admit) according to the Idea and platform given forth in
the Scriptures of Truth, upon which account the New-Testament-Churches are so
called, with allusion to Exodus 25. 31. but the contrary: Their matter for the
most part is Reprobate Silver, the very dross of the Earth, and scum of the
World, instead of pure Gold. They are formed according to the devices of men,
laid in a subservency to their pride, arrogance, and lusts; of them we have not
the least print in the Scriptures, nor for some Ages after, as we have proved.
Nor can they be called his Garden, being constituted of such as were never
chosen, and separated by him from the rest of the World, in whose hearts the
Fruits of Paradise are not planted, as their outward deportment shows, who are
not dressed by him, nor bring forth fruit to him, who are not enclosed by his
own Rules, but the Canon Law of Antichrist his professed Enemy. His answer to
the following Reasons has nothing in it but what we have already considered.

To the Question, Where are the Souls that are converted, comforted,
strengthened, stablished, that are waiting at the doors of their House?

He Answers, 1. That though there were none such, yet this proves not God not
to be present in them (in respect of his special presence and Grace.)

Answ. 1. This I confess is to me a most strange Paradox, that no Souls should
be converted, comforted, strengthened, stablished in the Parochial Assemblies
of England, and yet God be present there in respect of his special Presence and
Grace; when these things are as much the proper issues of such a presence, as
light and heat are of the shining of the Sun in its brightness.

2. The Scriptures cited by him are impertinent; 1. Because they expressly
relate to the people of the Jews, to whom (I speak with respect to the body and
bulk of them as a Church National) God gave not of his special Presence and
Grace; at that day he had blinded them, Isa. 6. 9, 10. John 12. 40. 2. Because
notwithstanding those complaints, there were some, yea many, converted,
comforted, strengthened, stablished. Isa. 49. 4. is a Prophecy of Christ. Were
none converted by him? Isa. 53. 1. John 12. 38. Romans 10. 16. Isa. 65. 2. Romans
10. 21. Mich. 7. 1. Luke 7. 31. -- Mat. 23. 37. are the complaints of the Lord,
and his Messengers against the Church of the Jews for their obstinacy against
Gospel tenders of Grace and Love; but say not that God was with that Church in
respect of his special Presence and Grace, which had he been, they had most
assuredly believed and obeyed the Gospel, nor do they intimate that there were
none converted. -- We read of many, yea of some thousands converted -- by
Christ and his Apostles, notwithstanding these complaints.

What follows, being an heap of impertinencies, we might omit. 1. We design not
to beget enmity and prejudices in the minds of men against the present
Ministry, they themselves for the most part are the occasion hereof, by their
covetousness and debauchery. 2. We know not any of the Churches of whom they
may say you are the Seal of our Ministry. -- 3. Our groans to the Lord are for
poor England, that God would show mercy to it, and give them hearts to receive
the Truth in the love of it: We hope he has a great Harvest yet to reap in the
midst of us, and we are incessantly praying him to send forth Laborers into
his Harvest. Though to be plain, we think not that God will use any in this
work of gathering Souls to Christ, who come with an Antichristian Call, and the
Wooden Sword of a Common Prayer Book and Homily under their Arms, which will
never pierce so much as skin deep; but such as come with a glorious
Gospel-Unction upon them, the great Character of Gospel Ministers. 4. He
grants, That a sad Spirit of withering and visible decaies are to be found upon
the Auditors of the Ministers; but reflects upon the Congregational Churches.
To which I shall only say, That through the good presence of God with them,
things are far otherwise with them than this Animadverters words import. They
meet with choice Springs of Life, and Royal establishments from the God of
Glory; the s^out of the King, the Lord of Hosts, is many times heard in the
midst of them, and they triumph gloriously in him.

Sect. 4.
The 12th Argument against hearing the present Ministers, vindicated. It Is one
step to Apostasy, proved. Heb. 10. 25. considered. Some Reasons why persons may
not hear Parochial Ministers as formerly. Mr. T. his Answers to the Queries in
S. T. considered. His agreement with Bellarmine in the qualification of
Church Members, evinced.

THE 12th Argument produced in S. T. for the proof of the unlawfulness of
hearing the present Ministers of England, is this, That, the doing whereof is
one step to Apostasy, is not lawful to be done. But the hearing the present
Ministers of England, is one step to Apostasy. Therefore --

To which Mr. T. adjoyns, Sect. 9. 1. If the Major be understood of Apostasy
from the living God, and the Christian Faith, it is true; if of the
Congregational Principles and Practices, it is false.

Answ. 1. The Congregational Principles and Practices we have in this Treatise,
in part proved to be from God, others have done it more largely; that it is
lawful to do that which is a step to Apostasy from the Institutions of God or
Christ, Mr. T. will not, out of the heat of dispute, assert.

2. Apostasy from one Institution of Christ, to the imbracement of the
traditions of men, is one step to Apostasy from God, and the Christian Faith,
tending indeed to Superstition and downright Atheism. It Is no less than a
rejection of the Authority of Christ, and espousing to our selves other Lords.
The rejection of this one Principle founded in the Law of Nature and Grace,
that God is to be worshipped solely according to that Revelation he is pleased
to make of his mind and will, touching his Worship in the World, was what lay
at the bottom of all that Apostasy, that from the beginning has been in the
World, as is known. And inded that Spirit which leads me to a departure from
any one Institution of Christ, will lead me (if Grace prevent not) to a
rejection or corrupting of all the rest. Those who laid the first stone of the
Antichristian Fab^^^k, never thought it would have grown to such a Babel of
horrible Abominations as its grown to. The beginning of great evils are
certainly to be resisted, a departure from any one Institution of Christ is a
great evil. So that the Major cannot be denied.

The Minor, or second Proposition, That the hearing the present Ministers is
one step to Apostasy, we manifest in S. T. because, 1. it cannot be done
(especially by persons of Congregational Principles) without a relinquishment
of Principles owned by them, as received from God: That the Church of England,
as National, is a Church of the Institution of Christ, that persons not called
to the Office of the M^nistry by the Saints, are rightful Ministers of Christ,
must be owned, and taken for granted, ere the Conscience can acquiesce in
hearing the present Ministers (for we suppose it will not be asserted by those
with whom we have to do, that there can be a true Ministry in a false Church,
o^ that false Ministers may be heard, and yet the present Ministers are
Minis^ers in, and of the National Church of England, and were never solemnly
deputed to that Office by the Suffrage of the Lord's People, (to which Mr. T.
faith nothing that deserves our stay,) 2. Nor can it be done without the
neglect of that duty, which with others is of the appointment of Christ, to
secure from Apostasy, Heb. 10. 25. viz. the Saints assembling themselves
together as a people dictinct from the World and its Assemblies, to exhort and
edify one another. --

To which our Animadverter replies, 1. They may hear the Ministers, and do the
duty enjoined, Heb. 10. 25. they may do the one some hours, and the other some
other.

Answ. 1. But the Scripture instanced in, requires as freq^ent an attendment
upon this duty as may be, which whilst they are hearing the Ministers they must
neglect. 2. It commands that they go not forth to meet with any other than
themselves, not forsaking the assembling of your selves together. --

Yea, but 2dly, they were Hebrew Infidels, from whom the Apostle would have
them meet as a body distinct.

Answ. And they are Christian Infidels, (for the visibly wicked, and profane,
are notwithstanding their assumed Christianity, (...), unbelievers, or
Infidels) from whom we would have Saints now to meet as a body distinct; for as
to any that fear God in the Assemblies of England, it would be the joy and
rejoicing of our Souls to see them forsaking them, we should gladly receive
them into our Communion, and in the mean while we love and tender them; nor do
we separate any more from them than they do f^^m us. If those that separated
themselves, Heb. 10. 25. departed to Judaism, the people of England are
departed to Antichristianism, (a mixture of Judaism and Heat^enism) inasmuch as
they embrace the very Worship, Modes, and Rites of Antichrist.

To what he adds, That he sees no reason why persons of Congregational
Principles may not hear Parochial Ministers as formerly.

We Answer, 1. They are not the same persons, have not the same gifts,
qualifications. 2. They pretend to press after the work of Reformation, these
have protested against it. 3. They came with the Word of God, these with the
Instruments of foolish Shepherds, the Common Prayer Book and Surplice. 4. They
abhorred the Inventions of men in Worship; these plead for, embrace, promise
obedience to them; which are some of those many Reasons may be given of persons
refusing to hear in Parochial Assemblies as formerly.

To the Queries proposed in S. T. he answers, Sect. 10. 1. Whether the Lord
Jesus be not the alone Head, King and Lawgiver to his Church? To which he
replies, meaning it of the supreme absolute Independent Head, -- He is. Which
is no more than what Bellarmine himself grants; a very Papistical Answer. There
are other Heads of the Church, (it seems) though Christ be the alone Supreme --
Of this matter we have already spoken.

The second, Whether the Laws, -- Orders, and Ordinances of Christ be not
faithfully to be kept, though all the Princes in the World should interdict and
forbid it?

He Answers, They are. Whereby he justifies the men of his indignation, in
their Nonconformity, separation from the present Ministers, and Worship --
notwithstanding the Edicts of men to the contrary, till he be able to remove
out of the way what they produce to prove their practice herein to be according
to the Orders and Institutions of Christ.

To the third, Whether to introduce other Laws for the Government of the Church
of Christ, and the Worship of his House, be not an high advance against, and
intrusion into his Kingship and Headship?

He replies, No; If they be no other than such as are showed to be warranted in
this answer to the Preface, Sect. 8. 20. to Chap. 1. Sect. 3. to Chap. 5. Sect.
11, 12. --

Answ. The unwarrantableness of his Warrant we have discovered in our Answer to
the places quoted by him.

To the fourth, Whether the Lord Jesus, as King and Head over his Church, has
not instituted sufficient Officers and Offices for the administration of holy
things in his House, to whom no more can be added, without a desperate
undervaluation and contempt of his Wisdom, Headship, and Sovereignty over it?

He Answers, Some servants and services may be appointed by Rulers without such
an undervaluation.

Answ. If by Servants -- he understand Church Officers, (as he must if he speak
pertinently, the enquiry being of them) he would have done well to have proved
his dictate; we can see no foundation for it in Scripture or Reason; but
believe had he settled his Family, and appointed every one their Place and
Office in it, he would account others appointing new Officers, and Offices,
that he thought no^ of, and introducing them without his consent as necessary
to the well-being of his Family, such a disvaluation as that intimated. Of this
we ^ave already treated.

To the 5th. Whether Officers instituted by Christ are not only Pastors,
Teachers, Deacons and Helpers, he replies; I find not Helper^ Officers
instituted by Christ, but others I find here mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4.
11.

Answ. 1. Of helpers you may read, Romans 16. 3, 9. 2. There are indeed other
Officers mentioned of Christ's Institution in the places cited by him, but they
being such as are confessedly gone off the Stage, we purposely omitted them.
Those mentioned, are the alone knownstanding Officers in the Churches of
Christ; directions touching whose qualifications, Election, Office, Work, are
laid down in the Scriptures.

To the 6th, Whether the Offices of Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Deans,
Subdeans, Prebendaries, Chancellors, Priests, Deacons, (as the first step to a
Priesthood) Archdeacons, Subdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, Proctors,
Registers, Apparitors, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Canons, Petty-Canons,
Gospellers, Epistolers, Chanters, Virgers, Organ-players, Queristers, be
Officers any where instituted by the Lord Jesus in the Scripture? He Answers,
Some are, some are not. See the Answer to Chap. 3.

Answ. To our Reply thereunto, we refer the Reader for satisfaction in this
matter.

To the 7th, Whether the Calling and admission into the^e last mentioned
Offices, their Administration and Maintenance, now had and received in England,
be according to the Word of God; he replies, This is answered before in sundry
places.

Answ. The vanity of his Answers we have already discovered.

To the 8th, Whether every true visible, particular Church of Christ be not a
select company of People, called and separated from the world and the false
worship thereof, by the Spirit and Word of God, and joined together in the
fellowship of the Gospel, by their own free and voluntary consent, giving up
themselves to Christ, and one another, according to the will of God; He
answers, The terms are so ambiguously used, that in some sense it may be
answered Affirmatively, in some Negatively.

Answ. We have already explained the terms, and demonstrated the truth of the
Question in the Affirmative, in all the branches thereof.

To the 9th, Whether a company of People living in a Parish, though the most of
them, be visible Drunkards and Swearers, -- or at least strangers to the work
of Regeneration upon their souls, coming by compulsion or otherwise to the
hearing of public Prayers or Preaching, are in the Scripture account Saints,
and the Church of Christ according to the pattern given forth by him, -- He
answers, If their Faith be right, they are: i. e. if I mistake not, If they
assent to the Doctrine of the Church of England, if they own no other
Doctrinals but what are right (for as to true saving Faith, the persons
described are undoubtedly strangers to it, it is impossible but they should be
so whilst they abide such.) Now I believe never man in the world gave such an
account of Saints; Saint Drunkard, and St. Swearer, and St. Whoremaster, sounds
but harsh in the ears of men of understanding, they themselves will swear they
are no Saints. That external profession of Faith is sufficient to constitute a
person a Churchmember, Bellarmine indeed affirms (it may be Mr. T. received
his notion from him) and is therein opposed by the learned Whitaker, who cites
that saying of August. Collat. 3. cum Donat. The Church is one Body, in which
is both a Soul and Body; the Soul is the internal gifts of the Holy Ghost, i.
e. the internal graces: The Body is the external profession of Faith, and
Communion of Sacraments. And Sutliffe, one of their own, says better. To the
Church not only profession of Faith, but also holiness is required. If the
persons characterized by us, are not the Church of Christ, the Bride the Lambs
Wife, (as we have proved they are not) they must be accounted Daughters of the
old Whore, and Babel, spoken of in the Scripture.

To the 10th, Whether in such a Church there is (or can rationally be supposed
to be) a true Ministry of the Institution of Christ? He replies, It may: But we
have proved the contrary:

To the 11th, Whether the Book of Common Prayer, or stinted Liturgies be of the
prescription of Christ, and not of man's devising and invention? he says, The
Worship or matter for the greatest part of the Common Prayer Book is of Christ,
though the method and Form of Words be of men.

Answ. 1. Modestly spoken however; The whole of the matter of the
Common Prayer Book he seems to grant is not of God, though the greatest part he
thinks is. 2. Sufficiently impertinent! it is the method and Form of words that
is the Liturgy or stinted Service, to these men are tied; If these are not of
Christ, as he grants, their Liturgy is not.

To the 12th, Whether some part of the Worship used by a People be polluted,
the whole of the Worship be not to be looked upon in a Scripture account as
polluted and abominable, according to 1 King. 18. 21. 2 King. 17. 33. Isa. 66.
3. Hos. 4. 15. Ezekiel 43. 8. Zeph. 1. 5. So that if their Prayers be naught and
polluted, their Preaching be not so to? He answers; No, nor is any such thing
said in these Texts.

Answ. Let the Reader consult them, and he will find that they condemn the
whole of the Worship (though they did somewhat that was, for the matter of it,
right and of the appointment of the Lord) as polluted and accursed, because
some part of it was so. His talk of the Imperfections of Ministers in prayer is
impertinent; every imperfection in Prayer, renders not the Prayer naught and
polluted, in that sense in which we affirm the prayers of the Church of
England, or their devised Liturgy to be so, upon the account of its
non-institution by the Lord, and oblation to an Idol.

To the 13th, Whether a Ministry set up in direct opposition to a Ministry of
Christ, which rises upon its fall, and falls by its rise, can by such as so
account of it, be lawfully joined unto? He replies, No; but they are bound to
leave this account, if it be erroneous. Answ. 1. But they think it not to be
erroneous: And, 2. Mr. T. was lately of their mind, when he swore to extirpate
the Hierarchy.

To the 14th, Whether such as have forsworn a Covenant-Reformation according to
the Word of God, and swear to a Worship that is merely of humane devising, that
have nothing of the essentials of a Ministry of Christ to be found upon them,
may be accounted of, as his Ministers, and be adhered to? He replies, No.
Wherein he has given away the Cause pleaded for by him. The Ministers of
England are known (and we have evinced it in this Treatise) to be persons of
the Complexion intimated.

To the 15th, Whether such as shall do so be not guilty of casting contempt
upon the Institutions of Christ, and disobedience against his Ro^al Edicts,
commanding them to separate from persons of the complexion intimated? He says,
They would be if they should do so wittingly and willingly.

Answ. But if they do it ignorantly, (though their sin be not so great) the
action it self casting contempt upon the Institutions of Christ, they are
guilty hereof.

And thus far in Reply to Mr. T. his Answers to Arguments and Questions
proposed.

His next attempt is to make good the Catasceuastick part of this Dispute; how
well he discharges that Province, shall be considered in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
Sect. 1.
Mat. 23. 1, 2. explained Mr. T. his two Arguments drawn from thence to prove
the lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers, refuted. Whether the Scribes
and Pharisees were Teachers and Expounders of the Law. Mr. T. his proofs
thereof examined. The Titles of Rabbi, Doctor, Master, Father, (...) not
peculiar to Ecclesiastical Officers. Of their paying Tithes, Mat. 12. 18. If
they were Ministers, they were lawful Ministers, proved. Christ does not
command or permit his Disciples to hear them, demonstrated. Of the true reading
of the words. Mr. T. his mistakes manifested.

THE first attempt of Mr. T. in his 10th Chap. is to vindicate the Arguments
produced by others, mentioned in S. T. as Objections against the Truth
contended for therein from the Answers we have given thereunto. The first
whereof is thus proposed.

Object. 1. Christ commands, (or at least permits) his Disciples to hear the
Scribes and Pharisees, who were men as corrupt in their Doctrine as vicious in
their Lives, as the present Ministers of England can be supposed to be, Mat.
23. 1, 2. Therefore its lawful to hear these.

The Animadverter, after many words, which our present have admits not our stay
to consider of, (nor is it at all necessary that we should do so) draws up a
twofold Argument from this Scripture.

Arg. 1. That hearing of Ministers against which there is no more just
exception than was against the hearing the Scribes and Pharisees, -- is lawful
for Christian Saints now: But there is no more just exception against hearing
the present Ministers of England than was against hearing the Scribes and
Pharisees: Therefore. --

Answ. 1. We deny the Major Proposition, to the proof whereof we say, That
Christ allowed not his Disciples to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, as we prove
in S. T. 2. The Minor also is short of Truth; to the proof where of we say,
That the Exceptions against the present Ministers are upon some accounts
greater and more just than against the Scribes and Pharisees. Neither of which
he attempts the proof of, but prays it may be granted him; which upon these
terms will never be; the contrary we afterward manifest.

Arg. 2. That which warranted Christ's Disciples hearing the Scribes and
Pharisees, -- notwithstanding other defects, warrants the Saints hearing the
present Ministers of England notwithstanding other defects: But the Scribes and
Pharisees preaching the will of God, warranted Christ's Disciples hearing the
Scribes and Pharisees notwithstanding other defects: Therefore. --

Answ. 1. By the very same Argument the lawfulness of hearing the Priests of
Rome, the Friars -- may be evinced, for they preach some some Truth. 2. We deny
his Minor, and to the proof thereof say. 1st, That sitting in Moses Chair, is
their teaching the observation of Gods Laws, is begged by him without the least
tender of proof. So is, 2dly, That Christ therefore permitts the Disciples to
hear them because they so taught. And, 3dly, That he allowed the hearing them
a^ all. Each of which is denied by us: and fail he in the proof thereof, his
Argument sinks of it self, as he himself knows.

To the Objection as proposed by us, which contains the sum of Mr. T. his two
Arguments, we answer in S. T. That there are some things which the Objectors
take for granted, which are the very Basis upon which the stress of the
Objection lies, that will never be proved.

As, 1st, It Is supposed that the Scribes and Pharisees here spoken of, were in
the Ministerial Seat Teachers and Expounders of the Law. Some of them it is
granted were, these here mentioned, are said to sit in Moses Seat, which was
the Magistratical Seat (to the Posterity of Aaron the Office of Priesthood did
appertain) and are condemned for neglecting Judgment and Mercy, things most
nearly relating to the Office of Magistracy. Now 'twill not in the least
follow, that supposing Christ enjoined his Disciples to attend upon the Scribes
and Pharisees, acting as Magistrates, and conform to what is justly and
righteously prescribed by them, as such; that therefore it is lawful to attend
upon the present Ministers.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 2. It Is supposed that the Scribes and Pharisees here
spoken of, were Teachers and Expounders of the Law: which he attempts the proof
of, 1. Because, verse. 4. it is said, They bind heavy burdens, and lay them on
men's shoulders. --

Answ. But Mr. T. should have proved, that they did this as expounders of the
Law, and not as Magistrates by civil sanctions; till when he says nothing.

2. They affected to be called of men Rabbi, Masters, Fathers, Leaders, verse.
8, 9, 10. --

Answ. What then? This is no proof that they were Ecclesiastical Officers. 1.
They might affect these Titles and not have them. 2. Others besides such who
were Expounders of the Law had them given to them. 1st, The very words that
were spoken at the time of the Investment of any into the Title of Rabbi, viz.
(...), Behold thou art promoted, and there is power given to thee of exercising
capital Judgments; (which I am sure appertained not to them as Expounders of
the Law) abundantly evince, that that Title was given to those that had
authority in things Civil. As is the Title. 2dly, Of Master, Exodus 1. 11. 1 Samuel 26. 16. 2 Samuel 2. 7. 2 King. 10. 2, 3, 6. 1 Samuel 29. 4. 2 King. 9. 31. and
19. 4. 1 Chr. 12. 19. 3dly, Of Father, 1 Samuel 24. 12. 1 King. 5. 13. and 16. 7.
In which sense Machir is said to be the Father of Gilhad, i. e. the Prince of
that Country, 1 Chr. 2. 21, 23. And David is called the Father of the Jews,
Mark 11. 10. Nor, 4thly, Is it necessary that we restrain the word (...),
Leaders, to Ecclesiastical Leaders or Guides, when it may as propperly be
referred to Civil Rulers. 5thly, The Title (...), Doctors or Teachers, he tells
us, is translated, Master in Israel, Joh. 3. being applied there to Nichodemus,
who was a Ruler of the Jews, (i. e. a Civil Ruler amongst them.) The other
Title, 6thly, (...), Blind Guides (or Captains) there is no necessity that we
refer to Ecclesiastical Rulers, so that hitherto he fails of the proof of his
Assertion.

He adds, 2dly, They were not Priests, for they paid Tithes, verse. 23.

Answ. 1. This upon the present supposition makes rather for, than against us.
If they were not Priests, it is the more probable they were not Teachers of the
People, who were to seek the Law at their mouths, Mal. 2. 7. And if his
Argument be good, they were not Priests because they paid Tithes (whereas the
Priests were wont to receive Tithes) they were not Levites neither, for to them
were Tithes paid, Neh. 10. 37. and 13. 12. Heb. 7. 5. Numb. 18. 31. And if
neither Priests nor Levites, lawful Officers, or Expounders of the Law, by
virtue of Officepower committed to them by the Lord, they could not be; for to
these only, by virtue thereof, did the Exposition of the Lay appertain (as is
known.)

2. He seems to grant that they were such ordinary Magistrates as were in the
Jewish Synedrion, which is as much as we need plead for. From an attendment
upon the Synedrion of the Jews determining in cases of Judgment and Justice, a
lawful attendment on the present Ministers will never be proved. He himself
afterward grants, Tha^ the Scribes and Pharisees were, many of them, Rulers of
the Jews; but, very learnedly tells us, not as Scribes and Pharisees; which
none ever thought they were, being as he acknowledges particular Sects among
the Jews: That these here mentioned were not such, he is not able to
demonstrate. They sat in Moses Seat as Magistrates, though their jurisdiction
or power was not so great as his.

He adds, That what we say some observe, that these Scribes and Pharisees are
especially charged with the omission of Judgment and Mercy, things most nearly
relating to the Office of Magistracy, to whom it does especially appertain to
look thereunto, is frivolous.

Answ. But others think not so, nor has Mr. T. said any thing to incline them
to think so. That (...), Judgment, is any where taken for right ordering the
conversation toward God and man, he cannot prove; in Mat. 12. 18. it is not so
taken: It Is rather taken for the Ruledom and Government of God. Christ was to
publish true Religion among the Gentiles, and to cast out Superstition; which
thing, where ever it is done, the Lord is said to Reign and Judge there. And
Mr. T. cannot be ignorant, that (...), Judgment, is the act, (...), o^ the
Judge, or Magistrate, (...), which passes sentence, or judges, and that this
is the proper notation of the word, which its being joined with Mercy and
Faith, Luke 11. 42 does not disprove, except he will suppose that these are not
to be regarded by Governors in the Administration of Justice, which they
eminently are: Faith or faithfulness in the discharge of the trust committed to
them by the Lord, with the exercise of Mercy and bowels toward the Body and
Souls of men, is what especially becomes a Ruler; so that the observation wants
not i^s weight. --

For disputations sake we suppose in S. T. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees to be
Teachers and Expounders of the Law at that day; But if such, they were lawful
Church Officers, of the appointment of the Lord, which we have proved the
present Ministers of England are not; and therefore a lawfulness to hear these,
from a lawfulness to hear them, cannot be pleaded; except we grant they were
mere intruders into the Ministry, which (upon supposition, that they were
Ministers) we cannot yield, for these Reasons. 1. The Pharisees are expressly
said to be Priests and Levites, John 1. 19, 24. which were the ordinary lawful
Ministers of that day.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 3. This only proves that some of the Pharisees were
Priests and Levites, not that all were so.

Answ. True! but the Scripture testifying there were some Pharisees that were
Priests and Levites, when it speaks of their doing what peculiarly, and by
way of office, did belong to the Priests and Levites; it is but rational to
interpret it of them, and not of any others.

He adds 2dly, But if they were Priests, it does not follow that they were the
lawful Ministers of that day. 1. Christ's Apostles were the lawful Ministers of
that day.

Answ. 1. It Is true, they were so, but not of the Jewish Church, exclusively to
others, so that this Allegation is impertinent.

2dly, It Is certain, that the Priests of those times got their places by
bribing the Roman Deputy, as Josephus reports the high Priest did.

Answ. Grant the high Priest did so, it does not follow that the inferior
Priests should so do, nor does any Historian report so of them.

We add in S. T. 2. These of all others were most apt to question the Authority
of such as taught the People: So when John appears Preaching and Baptizing, and
professes to them that he was not the Christ, -- they immediately question his
Authority, John 1. 25. which they could not be supposed to have the face to do,
if they themselves, of all others, had been the greatest intruders.

To which our Animadverter says, That they did so, is no wonder, for they were
puffed off with conceits of their Authority and Righteousness. --

Answ. This is no reason of his Assertion, they had great Authority amongst the
people, their outward conversation was Righteous and blameless, as says
Josephus, Jewish Antiq. l. 18. c. 2. so that in this matter they had whereof to
glory.

We add, 3dly, When they question Christ himself about his Authority, he asks
not them from whence they had theirs, which doubtless upon that occasion he
would have done, had they not been lawfully seated in the Seat they did
possess, but from whence John had his, who was esteemed as a Prophet.

To which our Animadverter, Though Christ did not then, yet he does afterward,
calling them a Generation of Vipers, blind Guids; and his charging them with
affectation, and ambitious seeking the chief Seats, and to be called Rabbi;
What is it but an evidence that they did unlawfully climb into Moses his Seat?

Answ. A marvelous evidence indeed, which no one in the World would have ('it is
likely) lighted on, if it had not been Mr. T. his hap to have stumbled on it,
nor he himself if he could else have told how handsomely to have salved up the
matter. 2. Christ calls them, Generation of Vipers, -- therefore he seems to
charge them, that they did unlawfully climb into Moses his Seat, (of which he
speak^ not one word) is such an absurd consequence, as he will not be able
easily to make good. As if a man should say, such a one is a Drunkard,
therefore he says he is a Thief; or such a one affects the title of Bachelor
of Divinity, therefore he usurps it; which every one wou^d smile at as
inconclusive.

We say further in S. T. 4thly, We have the Lord Jesus many times crying out
above all others against the Pharisees, condemning them of pride, hypocrisy,
avarice, -- but not the least tittle of the usurpation of Moses his Seat, is by
him charged upon them, or in the least intimated, which doubtless would have
been, had they been guilty thereof.

Mr. T. replies, 1. It Is no wonder that Christ's charging them herewith is not
in express terms related, since their instigation of Herod to take away John
Baptists life, (related by Josephus) is not related as impu^ed to them by him.

Answ. 1. It Is very uncertain whether they were guilty of any such crime. 2. If
they were, it might might not be known. 3. The Scripture gives us another
account of Herod's taking away his life, Mark 14. 3. -- Therefore probably
Josephus was mistaken.

He adds, 2dly, How irrational this Argument is, We read not that Christ
charged them with usurpation of Moses Seat, therefore he did it not. every Pung
in the Schools knows it, who have learned that rule of Logic, an Argument from
Testimony negatively is not of force, especially in matters of fact, it is not
related, therefore it was not done. --

Answ. 1. As irrational as this way of arguing is, it is what is made use of by
as learned Protestant Writers as Mr. T. who to prove that the Original Copies
of the Scriptures of the Old Testament were not corrupted in Christ's time, make
use of the same medium, viz. Christ no where condemns the people of the Jews
for corrupting the Original Text, therefore they kept it entire, toward whom
he will sure exercise more modesty than to tell them its an irrational
Argument, though perhaps his good Friends the Jesuits may assume the
confidence so to do.

2. An Argument from testomony negatively is not of force in matters done,
whereof nothing at all is mentioned, nor any just occasion so to do offered, we
grant is true; but when any persons are frequently charged with evils by the
Spirit of the Lord, that their putridity, rottenness and corruption might be
seen and read of all men; and that in particulars instanced in; to imagine that
any particular Crime whereof they were guilty, and that of so great moment as
that whereof we are speaking, should be omitted, men of reason, (with the leave
of our Animadverter be it spoken) will be apt to conclude irrational to imagine.

We add in S. T. That if this also be granted except it be granted, 3dly, that
when Christ says, What they say unto you, do; he is to be interpreted to
command, or at least to permit an attendance upon their ministry, it will
advantage the Objectors nothing. Now this we deny, for these reasons, 1. The
words are in the Original, (...), -- Which may more strictly be rendered, the
Scribes and Pharisees have sat in Moses Seat, all things therefore whatsoever
they have said unto you, -- (i. e. whatever in times past you have heard
delivered by these men, according to the Mind of God, do you not now reject,
because of that hypocrisy, pride, covetousness -- you are made to see is
predominant in them.)

To which Mr. T. ^. The command to do what they bid, implies a permission to
hear.

Answ. Not so, they might hear what they bid in times past, to which so far as
it was consonant to Truth, they were to conform without any command for the
future attendance on their Ministry.

2. Though the words, v. 2. may be rendered, have sat in Moses Seat, yet the
word sit, being in the first Aorist, is best rendered, sit, noting an indefinite
time, and so is to be conceived, signifying a continued time, past and present,
they have, and do still sit; and the words, v. 3. according to the Greek
Language, must be rendered, whatsoever they shall say unto you.

Answ. 1. That the former part of the words may be rendered as we have rendered
them, Mr. T. grants. 2. That the first Aorist of the Indicative Mood, is most
fitly and properly so rendered, every one that has but read his Grammar knows.
3. Why it should not here be so rendered, he gives no reason, and we know not
any Law compelling us, jurare in verba Magistri. 4. That the words, (...), --
must be rendered, whatsoever they shall say unto you. -- He speaks after the
same rate with the former. It Is true, the first and second Aorist of the
Subjunctive Mood, is usually rendered in the Future Tense, but that it is always
so, or must be so rendered, he will not upon second thoughts assert; Since
instances not a few, lie near at hand to be produced, that evince the contrary.
1. It Is sometimes rendered in the Present Tense, Mat. 7. 9. (...), -- whom if
his Son ask Bread. -- and 3, 9. (...), -- and think not to say. -- 2. It Is
sometimes rendered in the Future Tense, Mark 4. 15. (...), -- but when they have
heard. -- John 16. 21. (...), -- as soon as she is delivered, after she has
brought forth. So Beza, Jud. 9. 43. (...), -- and laid wait for him. To which
many more might be added.

He proceeds, and says, Were it granted, that the bidding were meant of the
time past, the Argument were of force; they heard, therefore they may hear, for
Christ does not disprove their former practice, but gives a reason, which
infers a continued permission to hear them, because they sat in Moses Chair,
(i. e.) taught the Law of Moses, which while they did, they were to hear them,
notwithstanding other corruptions. --)

Answ. 1. That because the Disciples had heard the Scribes and Pharisees,
therefore they might hear them, our Dictator will never be able to make good,
it being no better an Argument than this; Paul sat at the feet of Gamaliel
before his Conversion, therefore he might do so still. The Corinthian Believers
had communion with Idolaters, therefore they might still. Those that have gone
to Mass may do so still. That what they did in an uncovered state, when they
were in darkness, blindness, sin, and Hell, they might do when converted to
Christ, sanctified, enlightened, is such an absurd assertion, that the very
naming it is confutation sufficient. -- Yet this is one of those solid
Foundations upon which this Answer is built.

2. That Christ does not disprove their practice of hearing them, is no better
reason that they might do so than the former. 1. 'Twas needless that he should
do so, when they themselves were already taken off their attendment on their
Ministry, saw its emptiness, discerned the wickedness, blindness, hypocrisy of
the guides they once followed. Yet, 2. the very discourse of Christ in this
Chapter, and elsewhere touching them, is a sufficient disapprobation of, and
disswasive from the hearing of them. 3. Mr. T. takes for granted, that which we
deny, and he should have proved, that their sitting in Moses seat was their
teaching the Law of Moses, which for the most part they did not do. They taught
for Doctrines the Commandments of men, Mat. 15. 9. They made void the Law by
their Traditions, Mat. 15. 6. Corrupted it with their false glosses, Mat. 5. So
that their teaching the Law of Moses, could not be any reason at all why they
should hear them.

We add in S. T. 2. Let the words be as they are rendered; the Disciples might
observe, and do what they said from the knowledge thereof, through their
particular occasional meeting and discourse with them, (as otherwise) though
they had never spent one hour in attending upon their Ministry; which that our
Savior did not enjoin, no not so much as permit, -- we suppose may be clearly
demonstrated from the ensuing considerations.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 5. 1. If by attendance on their Ministry be meant a
constant and ordinary hearing of them, as their ordinary Shepherds, doubtless
neither Christ did command nor permit his Disciples such an attendance.

Answ. 1. Very good! a constant attendment upon the present Ministers of
England, cannot be proved from this Scripture: Christ did not permit his
Disciples so to attend on the teaching of the Scribes and Pharisees. 2. Own
them as our ordinary Shepherds we may not, for so the Scribes and Pharisees
were not to be owned by the Disciples of Christ, as Mr. T. grants. Wherein how
much the greatness of Truth has prevailed upon him, others will judge. But, 3.
hearing being an institution of Christ, to be conformed to according to the
directions given forth by him thereabout, I am not able to divine by what Law
or Rule I may hear a man rarely, upon whose ministry (if by providence I have
an opportunity afforded so to do) I may not more frequently, constantly attend.
Nay, 4. I am apt to think that Mr. T. by this one concession has given away
the whole of his concern in this Argument. The Scribes and Pharisees might not
be heard as their ordinary Shepherds by the Disciples; the present Ministers of
England (should it be granted, it were proved by this Argument lawful to hear
them) are not then to be heard as our ordinary Shepherds or Ministers, because
of any thing that is contained in this Scripture, or can be deduced from it.
Now as such for the most part we must hear them, or not at all; they being
imposed on us as our Parish -- Ministers, our hearing required of us by Law, is
hearing them as such. This, by this Argument, Mr. T. grants cannot be proved.

We produce several reasons in S. T. why we suppose Christ neither commanded
nor permitted his Disciples to hear the Scribes and Pharisees. 1. There are not
a generation of men of whom he speaks more contemptuously, and charge with
greater enormities than he does that generation of Scribes and Pharisees, and
that in this very Chapter, see, v. 5, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29. and v. 6, 7. and v.
13, 15, 16, 19, 24, 26. and v. 16, 17, 18, 33* 34. And can it be imagined that
Christ should have no more tenderness to poor Souls than to direct them to an
attendance upon such persons as these for teachings? are they likely motives to
persuade or enforce any thereunto? 2. Yet this is what he immediately subjoyns,
having said, Whatever they bid you observe, that observe and do.

To which Mr. T. These personal evils were not sufficient motives to keep them
back from hearing Gods Law expounded by them.

Answ. 1. But their exposition of Gods Law was abominable, intolerable; had
they been guilty of no personal evils not to have been born, a sufficient
ground of it self to have forborne hearing them; they corrupted, perverted it by
their expositions.

2. We are in the mind Mr. T. has not his second in the World of sober-minded
men, who will aver that such personal evils as those mentioned, are not a
sufficient Bar to hinder the attendment of Saints upon preaching, (or
expounding of the Law) by those upon whom they are to be found.

3. It Is sure, a bad cause he has undertaken the defense of, that in the
pursuit thereof he is forced to assert the lawfulness of he^ring persons that
we infallibly know to be Hypocrites, (for Christ having told them so, they knew
it to be infallibly true) proud men (whom the Lord abhors) such as shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men; will not go in themselves, nor suffer others;
such as make their Proselites worse than themselves, either by their evil
example, or by making them more zealous for their Traditions, and more bitter
against the Preachers and preaching the Gospel than themselves; who are blind
guides, preverters of Scripture, such as make void the Commandments of God by
their Traditions; that are Serpents, a Generat^on of Vipers, that cannot escape
the damnation of Hell; that kill, crucify, scourge, persecute the Messengers
of the Lord. To repeat ^o absurd a Position, is confutation sufficient, and
honor more than enough. I wonder if our Animadverter could write it without
blushing. Jeroboam was not to be blamed, who made Priests of the lowermost of
the people. Our Animadverter thinks, if the scum of the World, and Hell get
into a Pulpit with a Bible and Common Prayer Book in their hand, and a Surplice
on their back, they may lawfully be attended. Tush! Paul was too scrupulous,
(and almost a Phanatick) who talks of qualifications in Bishops, 1 Timothy 3. 2 Timothy 2. Tit. 1. It Is no great matter what they are, so they read some
Scripture, and interl^ce it with the traditions of men, persons may lawfully
hear them wit^ out more ado. This is some of that Hay and Stubble that Mr. T.
his Theodulia is stuffed with, that will one day be burnt up.

We add, 2. It Is not likely that Christ would command or permit his Disciples
to attend upon the preaching of the Scrib^s and Pharisees; because they
preached false Doctrine, viz. justification by the works of the Law, which was
diametrically opposite to the Doctrine he preached, and the work he was upon.

To which our Animadverter replies, Christ does not permit them to hear the
Pharisees teach all the Doctrines of their Sect, touching some of which he
forewarns them, Mat. 15. 14. and. 16. 12. but as they taught them the duties of
Moses Law.

Answ. 1. But if Mr. T. calls this an answer, I am afraid he will not find a
second in his Assertion; it being indeed nothing like one: The Question is,
Whether Christ commanded or permitted his Disciples to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees? We prove he did not, because they preached false Doctrine, another
Gospel to what was preached by Christ. Mr. T. answers, He did not permit them
to hear all the Doctrines of their Sect. But Sir, the Question is, Whether he
permitted them to hear any at all, to attend upon their preaching, who were
every way such Anti-Gospellarians; that he should do so, we conceive is not
rational to imagine, when the very scope of their preaching tended to the
overthrow of that he came to promulgate.

But, 2. if they were to attend them, only as they taught the duties of Moses
Law, (as he says) they were so seldom to attend them, that upon search it will
be found they were not to do so at all, since they had so foully perverted it,
that upon the matter they made it another thing.

3. By Mr. T. his Argument, it is lawful for persons to hear such as preach
another Gospel; for so did the Scribes and Pharisees. Paul was out when he
wishes such accursed, calls them Dogs, Gal. 1. 8. -- Phil. 3. 2. and bids them
beware of them, i. e. not attending upon their preaching.

We add, as a third Reason of our Assertion, that they denied Christ to be the
Messiah, blasphemed him in his Doctrine, (as the deceiver of the people;) in
his Life, as a Wine-bibber and gluttonous person; in his Miracles, as one that
wrought them by the Devil, who are therefore condemned by Christ as guilty of
the very sin of blaspheming against the Holy Ghost, Mat. 12. 31. And we cannot
imagine that Christ would permit his Disciples to hear such as thus blasphemed
him.

Our Animadverter replies, The third Reason has the same answer, with this
overplus, that to prevent any conceit of allowing the hearing of them in their
blasphemy, he avoucheth himself to be their Master and Teacher, v. 8, 10.

Answ. 1. They took all occasions to blaspheme him, and if they attended their
Ministry with any constancy, 'twas impossible ^ut at one time or other they
must hear them so doing. But, 2dly, What is this to the purpose? Is it lawful
to hear such as blaspheme Christ? Is it likely that Christ would permit his
Disciples to do so? That the Scribes and Pharisees were persons of such a
complexion is known. 3dly, The same Answer he talks of is already replied to.

We add, 4thly, We no where find the Disciples attending upon the Ministry of
the Scribes and Pharisees, notwithstanding this supposed command or permission
of Christ. --

Mr. T. replies, This is but from a testimony negatively, and so of no force;
we read not that they used the Lords Prayer, yet none will say they did not,
less that they might not. --

Answ. 1. But if Christ had commanded or permitted them so to do, and that with
an intendment to make it a president to walk by, with respect to persons of the
same or like qualifications with these who should in the last days stand up to
speak in his Name to his Child^en: It Is more than probable that the practice of
the Apostles herein would have been registered, as well as in matters of lesser
concern. 2dly, We find expressions touching the practice and deportment of the
Disciples that utterly evert this figment, Acts 1. 23. and 10. 41. 3dly, That
we no where read of the Disciples using the Lords Prayer (when we have an
account of other of their Prayers) its an Argument they did not use it, that
they might not so do. Of which before at large. 4thly, Of their Alms, we have
mention Acts 11. 29. Although they havi^g little in the world, it was not
possible they should be over-liberal o^ over-frequent in almes-giving. 5thly,
It Is more than probable they did not fast while Christ was with them, Mat. 9.
15. No wonder we have no account of their doing so during that season.
Afterward we have mention made hereof, Acts 13. 2, 3. and 10. 30. and 14. 23.
2 Cor. 6. 5.

We say in S. T. 5thly, We cannot but think the supposition of Christ's
permitting his Disciples to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, not only
inconsistent with, and opposite to that expression concerning Christ, Mar. 6.
31. but also to that command, Acts 2. 40. and the practice of the Disciples,
verse. 42.

To which our Animadverter, 1st, Christ did conceive the People to be without a
Shepherd, notwithstanding the Pharisees teaching the duties of the Law; because
though that doctrine were right, and to be observed, yet it was not sufficient
to feed them to Eternal Life.

Answ. Here are several mistakes in these few words. 1st* That the Pharisees
teaching the duties of the Law was right Doctrine, which is most notoriously
untrue: It Is true, the Doctrine of the Law was right Doctrine; but the
Pharisees teaching the duties of the Law, was not so. For, 1. they taught
duties of the Law that were not contained in the Law, Mat. 5. 43. -- 2. They
corrupted, perverted the duties of the Law by their traditions, Mat. 15. 3.
They pressed the duties of the Law for justification of life, which was not right
Doctrine. 2dly, It Is false, and not to be supposed without great reproach to
Christ, that he should send his Disciples to attend upon such a Ministry as
break not the Bread of life, preached not the Doctrine which was sufficient to
feed them to eternal life. --

He says further, 2. Peter did well to exhort his Auditors to save themselves
from that untoward Generation, viz. in not doing their works, nor following
their perverse Doctrine; and the Church did rightly practice* in continuing in
the Apostles Doctrine, -- v. 42. Yet he was not to dissuade them from hearing
or practicing the Pharisees Doctrine of observing the duties of Moses 's Law.
--

Answ. 1. The Pharisees Doctrine of the observing the duties of Moses his Law,
was, that men observe them for life; this as I remember the Apostles opposed,
and it was their duty to do so. 2. Our Animadverter supposes, That the
exhortation of Peter, Acts 2. 40. was only meant of their not doing their
works, non-embracement of their perverse Doctrine; but it is evident from v. 42.
that Peter meant it of non-communion with them in acts of Worship. And I cannot
discern how I can hear a man preach, but I must have Communion with him in that
act, which is an act of Worship.

We add, 6. Were that the intendment of Christ, as is suggested, (and the
Argument of our Brethren valid) a lawfulness to hear the veriest blasphemer in
the World, that denies Christ is the Messiah, affirms that he was a deluder of
the people, a gluttonous person, a Wine-bibber, one that did Miracles by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, that persecutes even to death Christ in his
people, might by a like parity of reason be deduced. Christ commanded, or at
least permitted his Disciples to hear the Pharisees, who were such, as has
been proved; therefore its lawful to hear persons with the same Character upon
them. But God forbid any such injurious dealing should be offered to Christ, or
that any who pretend to fear God, and I hope do so in reality, should stand by
a cause that has no better Arguments to defend it, than what may be as
righteously every way made use of for their attending upon the Ministry of the
greatest blasphemer, and opposer of Christ in the World.

To which Mr. T. I grant it lawful to hear any man preach Truth with whom God
allows us converse and communion, as we are m^n.

Answ. 1. Would he had given us his reasons of his monstrous assertion. 2.
Thought it incumbent upon him to have reconciled it with former printed
passages of his own. 3. I am allowed converse and communion (if my occasions,
and calling in the world compel me thereunto) with the worst of men, as men, a
Turk, a Jew, the Pope himself, a Drunkard, Swearer, Adulterer or Adulteress, --
but that I may have Communion with these in instituted Worship, as I have when
I hear them, is such a monstrous Figment, so devoid of Scripture evidence, so
opposite thereunto, so abhorred, and abominable to the Spirit of God breathing
in his Children, that I stand amazed he should assert it:

But enough of this; it is evident that Mat. 23. 1, 2. refuses to afford the
least sanctuary to the opinion of hearing the present Ministers.

Sect. 2.
The Answer to the second Objection vindicated from Mr. T. his Exceptions. Of
Christ, and the Apostles going into the Synagogues. The ends of their so doing.
The 3d Objection vindicated. Phil. 1. 15, 16, opened. All preaching of Christ
not to be rejoiced in, proved.

A Second Objection proposed in S. T. to be considered, is this; We find Christ
and his Apostles going frequently into the Synagognes where the Scribes and
Pharisees preached.

Which Mr. T. proves they did from Luke 2. 46. and 4. 16. Acts 3. 1. and 13.
14, 15. and 16. 13. and 17. 2. And further add^, That the Synagogues, nor their
Rulers, nor their order of the reading of the Law, nor their Teachers were of
the appointment of God; yet our Lord and his Disciples were present at them,
and joined with them in hearing them read, and such other services of Religion,
as were done to God, which i^ a good reason wherefore it should not be
accounted necessary to separate from the present Assemblies of England, and the
public Ministers, notwithstanding corruption in Worship, defect in calling, --

To which we Answer in S. T. 1. That all that Christ and the Apostles did, is
not lawful for Saints to practice.

To which Mr. T. Sect. 6. What they did out of peculiar power, commission or
instinct, is not lawful for us to do; but what they did as m^n, or part of the
Jewish People in the Worship and Church of the Jews, is a warrant for us in the
like case to do in the assemblies of the Christians. --

Answ. 1. But he proves not, that they did not this out of peculiar instinct;
which if they did, by his own confession, the Argument deduced from hence for
the lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers is not valid. 2. If they did it
in discharge of their duties as members of the Jewish Church, as he intimates,
their example binds us, as he says, only in the like case, i. e. Members of a
rightly constituted Church, (for so was the Church of the Jews) are to worship
in the Church Assemblies with them, notwithstanding some corruptions: But the
Church of England, we have proved, is no rightly constituted Church, we were
never Members thereof. So that hitherto he has said nothing that is pertinent.

We further answer in S. T. 2dly, That it is one thing to go into the
Synagogues, and another thing to go thither to attend upon the Ministry of such
a^ taught there. This the present case, which that Christ or his Apostles ever
did, cannot be proved.

Our Animadverter replies, Though Christ and his Apostles did not go to attend
on the Ministry of such as taught there, yet they did there hear the Law and
the Prophets read, and join in Prayers.

Answ. 1. If they went not to attend on the Ministry of such as taught there,
an attendment upon the present Ministers of England cannot be proved from their
example. In which assertion, that Mr. T. has given away the cause he has all
this while been pleading for, is in it self evident. If we may not attend on
their Ministry, we may not hear them as Ministers. Nor indeed 2dly, can we hear
them at all, for in that their Ministry they act as Ministers. It Is true Christ
and the Apostles went to the Synagogues whither the People were gathered
together, and sometimes they heard the Law, and the Prophets read (that they
joined in Prayer with them is no where affirmed.) Acts 3. 1. it is said, They
went up to the Temple at the hour of Prayer; but it is evident they went not in
to pray with them, for Peter having wrought that miracle in cureing the
Cripple, they flock to him, and he preaches to them. And Act. 16. 13. it is
said, Paul went to the Rivers side where Prayer was wont to be made, but that
he prayed with them there, is not intimated (nor probable) but their end in
going thither, as is evident by their practice, was to take an opportunity to
teach and instruct the People who were convened together, which is no warrant
for our going to the present Assemblies, where liberty so to do is not afforded
us; nor do we or can we propose such an end to our selves in going thither.

We add in S. T. 3dly, They went thither to oppose them in and confute their
Innovations and Traditions in the Worship of God, to take an opportunity to
teach and instruct the People, -- Which when any have a spirit to do, and are
satisfied they are thereunto called by the Lord, in respect of the present
Ministers and Worship of England, we shall be so far from condemning them
therein, that we shall bless God for them. But this is not to the purpose in
hand.

The attendance of our Brethren upon the Ministers of England is quite another
thing, that requires other Arguments for its support than we have hitherto met
with. What says Mr. T. hereunto? Does he manifest that these were not the ends
of their going to the Temple and Synagogues? Does he manifest that upon
supposition they ^ere, the Argument from their example is valid. -- He attempts
not the one or the other; which yet if he will not give up his concern in the
present Argument, he could not but see was incumbent upon him ^o prove.

He only tells us, That Christ or his Apostles went into their Synagogues: to
oppose them in, or confute their Innovations, Traditions in the Worship of God,
he does not remember to have read.

Answ. 1. That they came thither to take an opport^nity to teach the People,
Mr. T. denies not, which were enough to enervate what can be argued, for the
hearing the present Ministers from their example, as was said before. But 2dly,
The shortness of his memory I am not able to mend; would he converse with the
Scriptures of the Lord more, possibly that might make him more ready than he
seems to be in them: It Is evident they did oppose them in, and confute their
Innovations. -- Christ did so in the Temple, Matthew. 21. 12, 13. and Chap. 23.
For that Discourse of his was in the Temple, as is evident from Chap. 24* 1. In
the Synagogue, Mark 3. 1. where he confutes their Innovation touching the
Sabbath, by manifesting that works of mercy might be done on that day. verse. 4,
5. (see Mat. 12. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Luke 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and 13. 10. --)
contrary to the Tradition of the Elders. The Apostles, Acts 17. 1, 2, 17. and
18. 4, 19. and 19. 8. How little Mr. T. has said to reinforce the Argument,
the Reader will judge.

We proceed in S. T. and propose a 3d Objection. Object. 3. Paul rejoices at
the preaching of the Gospel, though it was preached out of envy, Phil. 1. 15,
16.

From whence our Animadverter argues; Arg. 1. They in whose preaching of Christ
we may rejoice, though they should not preach Christ sincerely, but in
pretense, out of envy, -- may be heard by the Saints lawfully: But the Saints
may rejoice in the present Ministers of England preaching Christ, though they
should not preach him sincerely but in pretense: -- Therefore. --

Answ. 1. We deny his Major. I may rejoice and that lawfully in those men's
preaching Christ, whom I have no warrant to hear. There may be cause of
rejoicing, as we told Mr. T. in S. T. in respect of the issue and event of
things, by the wise Providence of God, though the means used for their
production be evil, and not to be complied with. In what have Christians
greater cause of rejoicing than in the death of Christ? Yet had it been utterly
unlawful to have joined in Counsel with, or any ways abetted or encouraged
those wicked persons that crucified or slew him. Should the Pope send some
Jesuits into any remote parts of Asia to preach the Gospel to the poor Indians
there, here were upon some accounts ground of rejoicing, yet no ground to
attend upon a Jesuitical Ministry. Nor do his Scriptures in the least prove his
Major, Isa. 52. 7. (...) 1. 15. being applied by the Apostle to
Gospel-Preachers: Romans 10. 15. evince only thus much, That such as act from
Gospel-Authority in that work, are to be welcomed and heard. What Mr. T.
replies is not considerable. 1st, It Is true preaching Christ is a good thing
and to be rejoiced in, but preaching Christ by virtue of an Antichristian Call
and Office-power is not so, nor to be rejoiced in, or complied with. 2dly, That
he knows no reason why the Saints may not attend on the Ministry of the
Jesuits sent from the Pope to preach the Gospel, if they do so, is no Argument
that there is no reason. That they act from an Antichristian Call and
Commission, is to Christ-loving Saints reason sufficient.

2dly, We deny his Minor Proposition; Saints may not rejoice in the present
Ministers of England preaching Christ. Because, 1st, All preaching of Christ is
not to be rejoiced in; as the Devils, Mar. 1. 24. Luke 4. 34, 41. Acts 16. 17,
18. The Judaical Preachers preaching Christ with the Ceremonies of the Law,
Gal. 5. 12. Phil. 3. 2, 3. Grievous Wolves, Acts 20. 29. Such as hate to be
reformed, Psalm. 50. 16, 18. (as the Author of Prelatical Preachers none of
Christ Teachers Argues.) Which though Mr. T. thinks to put off with this, All
these Texts are impertinent, for as much as these do not preach Christ (in
which I wish he speak not against his own Conscience) yet others will not take
this for an answer. They all preached Christ, and upon other accounts are not
to be heard but turned from, as the intelligent Reader may inform himself by
the perusal of the Scriptures instanced in. We shall only infer, If the
Judaical Teachers were not to be rejoiced in though they preached Christ,
because they mixed therewith the Doctrine of Mosaical Ceremonies, much less is
their preaching to be rejoiced in; who mix therewith the Doctrine of
Antichristian fopperies, and manifest themselves to be grievous Wolves in their
persecuting the flock of Christ, who cannot conform thereunto. Because, 2dly,
In propriety and strictness of speech (as says the Author of the forementioned
Treatise) Christ cannot be said to be preached by a Prelatical Ministry they
justify them who deny Christ to be the sole Lawgiver of his Church, and so
make him an Idol. (What the Animadverter has dictated Chap. 5. in opposition
hereunto, is there answered by us.) Nay, 3dly, In case such a Minister as this,
that preaches by the Bishops License, should in his Doctrine affirm Jesus
Christ to be the sole Lawgiver to his Churches, yet in and by his very act of
Preaching he should deny it. Which though Mr. T. makes a dreadful outcry
against, spitting the fire of his passion on the face of his Antagonist, an
Argument that he has nothing soberly to reply, is evidently true. For, 1st,
Thereby he does own an Officer no where of the Institution of Christ in the
Scripture. 2dly, He makes the Biship a Lawgiver to himself, by whose License
he preaches, and not otherwise. What Mr. T. would rejoice in I am not
concerned to take notice of, there are some men who dare rejoice in a thing of
naught.

Arg. 2. He adds, That preaching of Christ that is no other than Paul rejoiced
in, -- the Saints now may rejoice in: -- But such is the preaching of the
present Ministers: Therefore. --

Answ. 1. To wave the general exception we have against the Argument, which
proves not what it is produced to prove, viz. The lawfulness of hearing the
present Ministers, which we find not in the Conclusion, nor is it deducible
from the Premises. We answer, 2dly, The Minor is most notoriously false and
untrue: There is other exception taken against hearing the present Ministers,
than against the persons mentioned by Paul: And we told this Animadverter so in
S. T. 1. It cannot be proved, (as it has been, with respect to the Ministers
of England) that those mentioned by Paul were not true Gospel Ministers. 2.
Their preaching Christ out of envy does not evince it; the Object whereof was,
not Christ but Paul; notwithstanding which, they might be real Saints and true
Gospel Ministers. To which he only opposes his Dictates without proof, which
we are not concerned to take notice of. There might be in them at the root
Brotherly-love to Paul, though under the power of temptation they preached
Christ out of envy to him.

We say in S. T. 4thly, Here is not in this Scripture the least word requiring
Christians to hear them. That because Paul rejoices at their Preaching,
therefore it is the duty of Saints to attend upon their Ministry, is such a
non-sequitur as will never be made good. To which he speaks not the least word
that may be called a Reply, he attempts not at all to manifest the validity of
the consequence, which he should have done, if he would have reinforced this
Argument.

What he cites out of Mr. Robinson, in his Justification of the Separation, p.
307. we are not concerned to take notice of it. Had he not cited it by halves,
the Reader would soon have perceived his cause smitten by it through the fifth
Rib.

Sect. 3.
The answer to the fourth Objection vindicated. All that preach truth are not
to be heard, proved. The Ministers of England preach truth but by halves, as
the Bishop is pleased to allow them. Many of the truths they preach, they
contradict in their practice. With them they mingle many errors. Particular
Instances (in the most remarkable Heads of Divinity) hereof produced.

THE fourth Objection proposed in S. T. is, The Ministers of England preach
Truth, and is it not lawful to hear Truth preached?

To which we answer, 1. That it is lawful to hear Truth preached, but this must
be done lawfully, and in the way of Christ's appointment: Which the hearing the
present Ministers we have proved is not. 2. All that preach Truth are not to be
heard, nor will our dissenting Brethren say they are. For, 1. there was never
yet any heretical Preacher in the World, but he preached some truth. 2. The
Devil himself. 3. The Popish Priests did, do so; yet who will say it is lawful
to attend upon their Ministry.

To which Mr. T. 1. All that preach some truth are not to be heard; yet all
that preach the great truths of the Gospel, notwithstanding some errors
non-fundamental, may be heard. 2. It Is no sin to hear either Heretical
Preachers, or Popish Priests, (who preach errors which overthrow the
Foundation) preach truth. 3. The Devils we are to have no communion with, God
having put an enmity between the Serpent and the Seed of the Woman.

To which briefly, 1. The two first assertions are mere Dictates, without show
of proof, and therefore fit to be rejected. So abhorred by the Saints, and
contrary to all the solemn cautions given by our Blessed Lord, with respect to
this duty of hearing, touching which we have already spoken, that it were
frivolous to take further notice thereof. 2. To the third we answer, If we may
not hear the Devil, because we are to have no communion with him, God having
put an enmity between him and the Seed of the Woman; then may we not hear a
wicked Priest, the Lord having said, We must not have communion with the
wicked, who are the Seed and Children of the Devil, Mat. 23. 33. 1 John 3. 10.
John 8. 44. betwixt the Righteous and whom God has put an enmity, Genesis 3. 15.

It Is added in S. T. 3. That the present Ministers preach truths but by halves,
and dare not preach any thing they are inhibited by the Bishop to meddle with,
though never so clearly revealed in the Scripture.

To which our Animadverter, The Bishops allow them to preach truths necessary
to Salvation, and if they forbid them to preach things disputable, as
Church-Constitution, -- they have the same reason as Christ had for not
acquainting his Disciples with many things he had to say to them, and is
agreeable to the Apostles rule, Romans 14. 1. and practice, Acts 15. 28. If they
preach those truths by halves, it is lawful to hear those halves.

Answ. 1. That it is lawful to hear such as are such perfect Servants and
slaves of men, (upon the account whereof they cannot be the Servants of Christ)
that they dare not for fear of a Lord-Bishops Inhibition, communicate what of
the mind of God they have received from him, is intolerable confidence to
impose on us without proof. 2. Their so doing is direct rebellion against
Christ, in whose Name they pretend to act, who has charged all that so act, to
publish and declare whatever he reveals to them. 3. There is no truth that
Christ has revealed, but is for the comfort, stablishment, peace, edification,
or direction of the Saints, that he is to be heard as a Minister of Christ, who
will suffer his mouth to be muzzled by a sorry thing, called an Archbishops
Prohibition, is the firstborn of absurdities to imagine. 4. The Scriptures
cited, are most impertinently alleged by him. John 16. 12. Christ tells his
Disciples, He has many things to say which they are not able to bear. Romans 14.
1. Paul advises, That the weak Christian be received, but not to doubtful
disputations. It seems good, Acts 19. 28. to the Holy Ghost, and to the
Apostles, to lay upon the Gentiles no greater burden than those necessary
things. -- Therefore an Archbishop may interdict persons to preach any other
truth than he has a mind they should, is some of Mr. T. his Lempster Logic,
which a young Sophister would laugh to scorn. What follows is already answered.

It Is added in S. T. 2. The main truths they preach (at least many of them) are
contradicted in their practice, conforming to Institutions, and Laws that are
not of his prescription. This we have abundantly demonstrated.

What Mr. T. tells us he has replied hereunto, we have already removed out of
the way.

We say, 3. With the truth they preach, they mix many errors. -- Instances of
this kind have been already exhibited, to which may be added many more. We name
several in S. T. the very truth is, they are grossly erroneous in most of the
chief heads of Divinity, as a man may run and read in the following Particulars.

1. Concerning the Scriptures; they hold, 1. That they are not the certain,
exact, and alone rule of all things which appertain to Religion and Worship;
but that humane additaments make it more decent and amiable. 2. That traditions
that have no foundation in the Scripture, are to be believed, received,
practiced. 3. That Apocryphal Books which have in them Errors, 2 Mac. 12. 44,
45. and 14. 41, 42. Eccles. 46. 20. Wisd. 19. 11.) Untruths, (2 Esd. 14. 21,
22, 23. 2 Mac. 2. 4, 8. Tob. 5. 11, 12, 13. with 12. 15. Judith 8. 33. and 10.
9. with v. 12. and 11. 6, 12, 13, 14, 15. 2 Mac. 1. 13, to 17. and 9. 1, 5, 7,
9, 28, 29.) Blasphemy (Tob. 12. 12, 15. with Romans 8. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Rev. 8.
3, 4.) Magic (Tob. 6. 6, 7, 8. and 9. 2, 3. with 3. 7, 8. and 11. 10, 11, 13.
with 2. 9, 10.) and contradiction to the Canonical Scriptures, Judith 9. 2, 3,
4. with Genesis 49. 5, 6, 7. Esther in the Apochrypha, Chap. 12. 5. and 15. 9, 10.
with Esther Canonical, Chap. 6. 3. and 5. 2. Eccles. 46. 20. with Isa. 57. 2.)
may be used in the public Worship of God.

Mr. T. replies, This is not preached, as I know of, by any of them.

Answ. 1. Their pactice in readi^g them (according to their
Calender-directions) in their public Worship, is a loud preaching, that they
may be so used. What the Animadverter adds in this matter, is inconsideroble.
1. We charge them not with owning them as part of the Canonical Scripture; 2.
Nor say we that they are all read: but this we crave leave to add, That it is
most wretched and accursed dealing to have such Writings as these so full of
abomination to be used in the Worship of God, to the justling out of a great
portion of the Canonical Scriptures, which are not read at all, which we are
apt to think is a fearful contempt and undervaluation of God and his Laws. 3.
What was once resolved by Archbishop Abbot, I am not at all concerned with,
notwithstanding which they are still appointed to be read. 4. That any of the
places instanced in, are capable of an easier censure than I put upon them, he
may demonstrate when he is able so to do. 5. That they are read, when and where
we need not be present, signifies little, they are read in their Worship, to
the shutting out the Canonical Scripture, which we account a notorious error.

2. Touching God and Christ; they own; 1. That it is lawful to bow down before
that which is not God in Religious Worship, as the Altar, the repetition of the
Name of Jesus, the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, (of which one of their
Reverend Prelates has been mo^e than once heard to say, That the presence of
Christ in the Sacramen^ is not Symbolical, but Realiter, and upon that account
we give adoration; it is like more are of his mind) as horrible Idolatry, as
bowing before a Crucifix or Image. 2. That Christ is not alone the Head of the
Church. 3. They seem to attribute greater efficacy to the Blood, than the Body
of Christ, whilst they pray, That their bodies may be made clean by his Body,
and their souls by his most precious Blood. (as they do in the prayer before
that which is used at the Consecration.) 4. That Christ descended into Hell,
(as if he descended into the place of the Damned, as ^he Papists hold.)

To which Mr. T. 1. It Is in the Creed, called the Apostles.

Answ. 1. This is no part of Scripture. Nor, 2. ever composed by them whose
name it bears. Nor, 3. is it certain when or by whom it was so done. 4. To this
very day it was never in any full and general Council confirmed and
established. So that its being in the Creed proves it not so authentic as that
we are bound to believe it. 5. What is said by Bishop Usher -- touching this
matter, I have not leisure to enquire: since it is put after his burial, it can
signify no other descent but into the place of the damned, which is as rotten
a figment as ever was invented.

3. Touching Man. 1. They generally own (I speak, especially of them who are
called the Church) free will. And, 2. an implicit Faith, not in words, but
really and indeed, whilst they say, We must practice in Worship the
determinations of the Church; though we our selves see no reason for them,
because she has determined them, and that this is reason sufficient for our so
doing, i. e. We must (in these things) believe (^or Faith must preceed practice
in the Worship of God) as the Church believes.

4. Touching Worship. They hold, 1. That Worship dev^sed by man, (though abused
to Idolatry) is the Worship of God, with which he is well-pleased. 2. That God
is more particularly to be worshipped in one place than in another; and that
these places being Consecrated, are the Houses and Churches of God, and upon
that account holy, and to be reverenced. 3. That reading an Homily, or a few
Prayers out of the Liturgy, is a more excellent worship of God (though no
where commanded in the Scriptures) than Preaching, which must therefore give
way to it. 4. That none must be suffered publicly to worship God, or privately
(except in their own Families) but according to Forms of man's devising. Which,
5. they say, Is the Worship of God.

5. Touching the Sacraments. 1. They seem to intimate that there are more than
two, when they say there are two only generally necessary to salvation. 2. That
Women may Baptize in casu necessitatis (as the Papists hold) and that such
Baptism is valid. 3. That Baptism is to be administered with a Cross in the
forehead. 4. That all Children when baptized, are regenerate, and received by
the Lord for his own Children by adoption. (Common Prayer Book of Public
Baptism) 5. That Children being baptized have all things necessary for their
salvation, and shall undoubtedly be saved. 6. That all that are baptized have
received remission of sins. Confirmation before the imposition of hands. 7.
They seem to make the imposition of hands a Sacrament, when they say, It Is a
sign to certify Children of Gods grace and favor toward them. (Ibid. in the
Prayer after the imposition of hands) Yea they really do so; if the definition
they themselves give of a Sacrament be right, viz. That it is an outward and
visible Sign of an inward and spiritual Grace. 8. So they; to make Matrimony,
by that expression used by them, consecrated the state of Matrimony to such an
excellent mystery -- in one of the Collects in the form of the solemnization of
Matrimony. 9. They adore before the Elements of Bread and Wine. 10. That the
wicked and ungodly may receive it. 11. That though the most notorious offenders
be partakers of it, yet the People that join with them are not defiled thereby.
12. That the Body of Christ was broken, the blood of Christ was shed
(particularly) for them.

6. Touching the Church. 1. That under the time of the Gospel there is a
National Church. 2. That the most wicked and their seed may be compelled and
received to be members of the Church, which is notoriously known (nor have they
the face to deny it, though Mr. T. talks as if they would) to be consonant to
their principles and practice. 3. That it is not lawful to separate from this
Church; whoever do so are Sectaries, Schismatics, to be excommunicated,
imprisoned, -- a bloody error. 4. That the Clergy is the Church (as is the
Pope and his Conclave to the Romanists.) 5. That these is another Head of the
Church besides Christ. 6. That it is not in the power of the Church to choose
their own Officers. 7. That it is in the power of Kings to appoint the highest
Church Officers. 8. That Lord-Bishops are Officers of the Church of Christ.
(though no where of his appointment) 9. That Lord-Bishops can give the Holy
Ghost, and power to forgive and retain sins* 10. That it is in the power of a
Priest to absolve from sins [In the Visitat. of the Sick.] 11. That it is not in
the power of the Church to excommunicate, but the Bishop. -- 12. That Pastors
and Teachers are to be ordained by Lord-Bishops. 13. That dumb Ministers are
lawful Ministers of Christ. 14. That the Ministry, Worship, and Government
which Christ has appointed to his Church, is not to be received or joined
unto, unless the Magistrates where they are reputed Christians, do allow it.
And this their practice preaches forth.

7. Touching things supposed indifferent. 1. That it is in the power of the
Church (i. e. the Bishops in their Convocation --) to make that which is in it
self indifferent, a necessary part of Worship. 2. To devise what Rites it
pleases, and add to the Worship of Christ. 3. That Marriage may be forbidden
at certain (Popish) seasons, as in Lent, Advent, Rogation week. -- 4. That the
Cope; Surplice, Tippet, Rochet, -- are meet and decent Ornaments for the
Worship of God, and ministry of the Gospel. 5. That Altars, Candles, Organs, --
are necessary and useful in the Church of God. Mr. T. his thoughts are vain,
when he thinks that they will not assert this. Certainly they will not be so
imprudent as to aver that they lavish the Gold out of the Bag for the erection
of that in the Service of God, which is neither necessary nor useful. 6. That
there may be Holy Days appointed to the Virgin Mary, John Baptist, the
Apostles, all Saints and Angels, together also with Fasts on their Eves, on
Ember days, Fridayes, Saturdayes, (so called, heathenishly enough.)

Mr. T. answers, They will deny this to be their Tenent, and c^tes Whitgift,
etc. telling us, That they mean not that on these ^ayes the Saints should be
honored.

Answ. 1. To these Saints, for their Worship and Service days were instituted
by the Popes of Rome -- to be observed; Lessons peculiar and proper thereunto,
appointed to be read in their Service-Books: If no intendment of honor to the
Saints were in their present observation, whence is it that the very same
days, the very same Lessons* the very same Collects and Prayers are appointed
to be used in the Church of England, on many of the Saints days that are
appointed in the Church of Rome on the same days? 'Twere easy to demonstrate
the truth of this by particular instances, but that would be too ^edious. 2.
They are called still (in their Common Prayer Book) by the names of the Saints,
as St. John's day, -- and are accounted Holy, (for not resting on them, persons
are more liable to be excommunicated by their Church, than for Swearing and
Drunkenness) which as it is an imitation of Heathenish and Antichristian
Superstition, so it is an occasion of nourishing a most horrid error, if not
Idolatry in the hearts of the simple and ignorant, who think that day to be set
apart in honor of the Saint whose name it bears. Which, 3. if it be not, I see
no ground why it should be called by his name; as the same day is in the
Papacy, from whence the rise and spring of our observation thereof.

Now although we say not that it is unlawful to hold communion with persons that
hold some errors, yet this we are bold to affirm. 1. That the ground or
foundation is laid by Mr. T. upon which we may hear the present Ministers, viz.
Their preaching truth is hereby discovered to be sandy and rotten, they being
guilty of so many errors. Which, 2. being of such a nature as enwrap in them
(some of them) a denial of the Offices of Christ. 3. Such as lie at the bottom
of that superstitious corrupt, idolatrous Worship and Service, that is directly
contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel, Clouds, and obfuscates the splendour
and glory thereof, (as this Animadverter elsewhere acquaints us.) Yea, 4. Such
as they have frequently, sacrificed, the Liberty, Estates, and precious blood
of the Children of the Lord for the support of, they may well cause a Saint to
enter his demurrer against hearing them; yea, if they obstinately hold and
maintain them as they do. Though many of the Witnesses of Christ have born a
testimony against them, whom they have no otherwise been able to resist, but by
force and violence utterly to separate from them, and have nothing to do with
such an hardened and bloody Generation.

Sect. 4.
The Answer to the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th Objection, vindicated. Of the
case of Judas his preaching. Of hearing good men. Of the practice of Learned,
and good men in this matter. Of the Magistrates command; how far obligatory. Of
men's converting Souls, whether an Argument of true Gospel Ministers. Of
spending the Lords Day. Wherein the sanctification of it consists.

THE fifth Objection in S. T. is, Judas preached, though a wicked man, and no
doubt it was lawful; yea, the duty of Saints to hear him. To this we say, no
doubt it was so. But, 1. Judas was not a visible wicked man at the time of his
preaching, (that Christ, as God, knew him to be so, is not in our case
considerable) but so close an Hypocrite, that he was not known, no not to the
Disciples to be so; but some of the present Ministers are visibly wicked and
profane. What Mr. T. answers hereunto has already been considered. There was
a special reason in the case of Juda^ his preaching to answer the Prophecy,
Psalm. 41. 8. of which Acts 1. 16. -- Nor can any thing rationally from hence be
deduced more than this; that it is lawful to hear visible Saints known only to
God to be Hypocrites; for so was Judas.

We add, 2. Judas was chosen and called by Christ to be an Apostle,
commissioned by him to preach: but the present Ministers of England are not so,
as has been proved.

To which when Mr. T. shall be pleased to offer any thing that deserves
consideration, it shall be considered. His reflection upon the Congrational
Ministers (as it is false) is no answer. That because Judas, a commissionated
Officer, by Christ was to be heard, though an Hypocrite, therefore it is lawful
to hear such as are not commissiona^ed by him, (though visibly profane) will
be an hard task for any to prove. We proceed in S. T.

Object. 6. But there are some good men amongst them, and such as belong to
God, may we not hear such?

Answ. 1. That there are some good men amongst them we deny not.

Mr. T. adjoyns, With what face can he acknowledge them good men, who has
represented them as walking disorderly, deniers of Christ's Offices? --

Answ. 1. Mr. T. thinks there are good men in the Papacy, yet I presume he will
thus represent them, and that with a better face ^e may do so than build again
the things he has destroyed. 2. Good men may be guilty of the greatest
enormities, the sin unto death excepted. 3. Noah, David, Solomon, Peter, --
were good men, yet represented by the Spirit of the Lord as guilty of heinous
iniquities.

We add in S. T. Yet we crave leave to say, That they are all of them such as
are sadly polluted by their compliance, in respect of their standing in the
Ministry, Antichristian, whose teachings Saints have no warrant to attend upon.

Mr. T. subjoyns, 1. That their Ministry is Antichristian, when they minister
the Word of God, is a contradiction.

Answ. 1. This is merely his dictate without proof. 2. The Ministry of Rome,
(he grants is Antichristian) yet they minister the Word of God.

He adds, 2dly, That they stand in that Ministry which they received by
Episcopal Ordination, is their virtue, which for any to disclaim, is to go back
from the service of God; for that Ministry is no other than of the Doctrine,
and Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and a^
this Church and Realm has received the same. --

Answ. 1. It Is true, thus they speak in their Book of Ordination, but these
words imply a contradiction; Christ's Ministry, Administration of Sacraments and
Discipline, and the Church of England are sufficiently remote; hers being
received not from Christ, but Austin the Monk, and the Apostatick Church of
Rome. 2. Their Priests have no Ministry of Discipline, it is reserved in other
hands. 3. That Lord-Bishops are no Officers of the Institution of Christ, but
Antichristian, we have proved; that any should receive from them any Ministry
but what is Antichristian, is the first born of absurdities to imagine. 4. That
to stand in such a Ministry, is to stand in a Ministry of Christ, is, oppositum
in opposito, a contradiction indeed.

We add, 3dly, The greater hopes we have of their goodness, the more ca^telou^
we should be of encouraging them in a false way. --

What Mr. T. answers hereunto, being a mere begging the thing in question, viz.
that their way is the true way of Christ, (the contrary to which we have proved
in the former part of this Discourse) requires not our stay further to consider.

We say further in S. T. 4thly, The goodness of any, as to the main, is no
warrant for any to hold communion with them, or attend upon their teachings;
there are Brethren that walk disorderly, whom it is the duty of Saints to
separate from: that the very best of the Ministers of England do so, will not
be denied, (to all which Mr. T. says nothing.) The incestuous person, 1 Cor.
5. was as to the main, for ought I know, a good man, yet the Corinthians were
not to hold communion with him, till upon his repentance he was again received,
2 Cor. 2. 6.

To which our Animadverter, It cannot well be conceived that he was a good man,
since he committed such a sin as was not named amongst the Gentiles.

Answ. 1. Before his admission into the Church of Corinth, he was by them
thought to be so, else they had not received him. 2. When they excommunicated
him, they well hoped he might be so, for they did it that the Spirit (through
the destruction of the flesh) might be said in the Day of the Lord. 3. The
kind and blessed effect that Sentence had upon him, does not a little
demonstrate as much; for had he not had the Seed of God in him, more probably
he would as others, have been hardened thereby, gone on opposing, blaspheming
God and his Church. 4. The Animadverters reason has no reason in it, for I
know not any security a Child of God has from any particular word of promise,
that he may not fall into the worst of sins, except the sin unto death. 5. That
it would be now the sin of any to mourn, that an Antichristian, drunken
ignorant Minister, from whom (for the most part) profaneness is gone forth
into the Land, are not removed, -- more than it was twenty or thirty years
ago. When Mr. T. and the whole Generation of the People of God almost sought
their removal with Prayers and Tears, I am not able to understand. He cannot be
ignorant that they are the burden and plague of the Nation, the great obstacles
of the work of Reformation in it.

We yet add, 5thly, It Is utterly unlawful to communicate with a devised
Ministry, upon what pretext soever. 6thly, So is it for any to partake in other
men's sins, (as has been proved) but every usurped Ministry is the sin of him
(though never so holy a Person) that exercises it.

In answer to which Mr. T. dictates nothing, but what is noto^iously false, and
has already been replied to. We proceed to the seventh Objection.

Object. 7. But many learned and good men have in days past, and do now hear
the present Ministers.

To which we answer, 1. That the greatest Scholars, and most accomplished for
humane Wisdom, yea visible Holiness, have sometimes been the greatest opposers
of Christ, ignorant of the Will of God, in respect of the truth, and work of
their Generation, -- as the Scribes and Pharisees, -- who opposed Christ, and
the Doctrine of the Gospel preached by him.

Mr. T. answers, 1. Learned and good men amongst Christians are never found the
greatest persecutors and opposers of Christ.

Answ. Nor do we say they are, but that men of Learning an^ visible Holiness
are so. Which Mr. T. knows to be true; many of that complexion have been found
amongst the Papacy (and are) that have poured forth the blood of many millions
of Saints, and opposed the Ways of Christ to the death, and that out of
Conscience (as they thought) to God. So Paul before his Conversion. 2. That the
greatest Scholars have not always been on the Lords side, have been
stupendously ignorant of his Will, he grants. With the rest we are not
concer^ed.

We add, 2dly, That persons of as great holiness and renown for learning, and
all manner of accomplishments, as learned Ainsworth -- have been, and are of
the same apprehension with us in this matter, not to mention the Reformed
Churches who generally renounce the Ministry of the Church of England, not
admitting any by virtue of it, to the charge of souls. What our Animadverter
speaks by way of disvaluation of Cotton-, Ainsworth, redounds to his own
disparagement, their praise is in the Churches. 2. That Mr. Cotton was (at
least in part) of our persuasion in this matter, let the Reader inform himself
from page 111. to the end of his Way of the Churches in New England. 3. Of the
judgment of the Reformed Churches, and Mr. T. his mistake thereabouts we have
already spoken.

We say in S. T. 3dly, To the Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20. If they
speak not according to this Rule, though Angels for knowledge, or holiness,
they are not to be received or heeded: One word from the Lord is of more weight
to hearts made truly tender, than the example of an hundred professors can be.
-- 4. The Apostle has long since determined this case, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye
followers of me as I am of Christ. So far as Saints follow Christ, I may and
ought to follow them, but no further. So that the learning, parts, o^ holiness
of any that attend upon the present Ministers of England, is no warrant for me
so to do. -- All this, he tells us, he likes well: So that he grants this
Objection to be of no value. What he afterward adds, Of resting in some cases
on learned Guides, we have already answered. We proceed to the review of the
8th Objection.

Object. 8. But the Magistrate commands us, and ought we not to obey
Magistrates?

To which we answer, 1. That Magistrates have no power to command in matters of
Instituted Worship where Christ is silent, or to govern in his Church, is
affirmed by many.

What Mr. T. Sect. 12. says of the confession of the Brownists, Art. 39. -- is
altogether impertinent; they speak nothing that is contrary to what is affirmed
by us. What he has said, Chap. 5. is already refuted; should it be granted
that Magistrates may command men* (and, ought therein to be obeyed) to be
present at the true Worship of God, yet till he has disproved wh^t we have
offered to prove the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship to be false and Idolatrous
Worship, the Ministers of the Church of England false and Antichristian, we are
not conce^ned in it. 2. The conformity of the Disciples to the just and
righteous Decrees of Magistrates we said was permitted them, was a mere
supposition for Arguments sake, relating only to things Civil, and therefore is
not at all of our present concern. 3. What he talks of Popish Recusants, and
the Laws of the Land, I am not at all concerned in. Better all the Laws (of
that nature in the world) were evacuated, that one Command of Christ should be
violated.

We add, 2dly, The Commands of Magistrates when contrary to the will and way of
Christ, (as we have proved the hearing the present Ministers to be) are not to
be subjected to, Acts 4. 19, 20. and 5. 29. Dan. 3. 16, 17. and 6. 10. We
remark the Testimony of August. de Ver^. Dom. Ser. 6. in this matter, who was
fully of the same mind with us. Sed timeo inquies -- He tells us plainly, That
such as fear to offend their superiors, should much more fear to offend God
who is greater than all. The Emperors and Monarchs of the World threaten us
with a Prison if we disobey them; The Lord threatens us with Hell upon our
disob^dience to him. To which Mr. T. answers not at all.

The 9th Objection in S. T. is, The Ministers of England are true Gospel
Ministers, for they convert souls; which the Apostle makes the S^al of his
Ministry or Apostleship: Therefore its lawful to hear them.

To which we say, That the conversion of Souls proves not ^ lawful Ministry. 1.
Paul makes it not, 1 Cor* 9. 2. singly a sufficient demonstration of his
Apostleship. -- 2. Many have converted souls that were not Apostles, as
ordinary Ministers, yea Brethren, Women, remarkable Providence; yet who will
say that these last are Apostles or Ministers of the Lord Jesus? 3. Should it
be granted, that Conversion of souls is an Argument of a lawful Ministry, Where
are the Churches, nay where are the particular persons converted by them? -- In
answer to which Mr. T. grants, That Conversion of souls is no certain sign of a
true Gospel Minister; whereby he has discharged this Argument (as
insufficient) from further attendance upon this service. In what follows there
is nothing (but what has already been replied to) in this Sect. that requires
our stay.

The last Objection proposed and answered in S. T. is, Our Ministers are
removed, and we know not where to go to hear; would you have us sit at home
idle?

Answ. 1. Though we are not against any Ordinance of Christ, yet we are afraid
that those that know not how to spend the Lords ^ay without hearing, do too
much Idolize that Ordinance, and never knew what 'twas to spend that day with
him.

Mr. T. adjoyns, That such persons conceive they cannot spend ^he Lords day
without hearing, is not out of any Idolizing that Ordinance of God; but because
it is one duty of sanctifying the Lords day; not only to exercise themselves in
Reading and Prayer at home, for that is every days duty, but also to frequent
the public Assemblies where God is worshipped, -- Heb. 10. 25. Exodus 20. 8.
Acts 20. 7. Rev. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Joh. 20. 26, 29.

Answ. 1. If by Public Assemblies he mean the Assemblies of Swearers,
Drunkards, Adulterers, Idolaters, -- called Christians, where God is worshipped
in a way of man's devising, by an Antichristian, Formal, Superstitious (and it
may be) Drunken Priest, in opposition to the Private Meetings and Assemblies of
the Saints; The frequenting such Assemblies is so far from being that wherein
the sanctifying the Lords Day does consist, that it is a profanation thereof,
being rebellion against that solemn Institution of our Lord Jesus, enjoining
persons to separate from such Assemblies. The Scriptures produced by him
totally evert his Figment; the most of them preaching forth the duty and
practice of the Saints in opposition to such Assemblies. And Rev. 1. 10. John
was alone on the Lords Day, and yet I hope sanctified it according to the will
of God. 2. I cannot but wonder that People (especially men of learning and
reading) should talk so much of Public Assemblies, and Public Ordinances,
when they cannot but know that ever since Christianity had a being in the
world, for the most part, the Assemblies of Pagans, and Antichristians with
their Ordinances and Worship, were public, and the Assemblies of the true
Church and Worship of Christ retired and private. Whence in Rev. 12. 6. (when
you have the Beast and Whore in their Ruff and Gallantry, the whole World
wondering after them, Rev. 13. 3. you have the poor Witnesses of Christ
prophesying in sackcloth, Rev. 11. and the Church flying into the Wilderness, a
state of solitariness and retirement, Rev. 12. 6, 14. Might not the Papists in
the Marian days have pleaded thus against the Protestants? Such Public
Assemblies as Mr. Cotton -- spoke of, viz. The Assemblies of Believers in a
particular Church State, we say are not carelessly or wilfully to be neglected
or forsaken. But what is this to the Parochial Assemblies of England, who are
not such?

Mr. Crofton's Argument cited by him is easily answered; It Is this, Communion
with the Church-visible in Gods solemn Worship, is an essential part of the
sanctification of the Sabbath, an indispensible duty: But Communion with the
English Church, in the Worship by her celebrated, is Communion with the
Church-visible in Gods solemn Worship: Therefore. --

Answ. 1. By the Church-visible he must understand a particular instituted
Church (for with the Universal-Church-Visible, of which some talk, as such, I
cannot have Communion in the celebration of Ordinances) of the appointment of
Christ, by Go^'s solemn Worship, Worship appointed, instituted by him, to be
managed and performed according to his will, for otherwise it is not his
Worship: I^ which sense we grant his Major, Communion with the Church-visible
(i. e. a particular instituted Church of Christ) in Gods solemn Worship, (i. e.
Worship of his own appointment, celebrated in his own way) is an essential part
of the sanctification of the Sabbath, an indispensible duty, (with this
limitation, when and where there is any such Church with whom I may meet.) But
then the Minor is most notoriously false and untrue, because the Church of
England is no such particular instituted Church, as we have proved; the Worship
celebrated by her is not Worship of the appointment of God, managed in his own
way, but of man's devising, performed by Antichristian Officers, as we have
demonstrated.

We say further in S. T. 2dly, You need not sit at home idle, -- you may soon
hear of some or other of the Assemblies of the Saints, whither you may repair
to wait upon the Lord with them. Mr. T. is mistaken that such Assemblies as
these are not in many places to be found. Through the grace of the Lord, it is
for the most part far otherwise than he intimates.

We add, 3dly, Were it, or should it be otherwise, yet better be idle than do
worse, better do nothing than sin against God, encourage others in their evil
deeds. -- Which he confesses to be true upon supposition that public hearing
is a sin, 'twere better be idle than do that. Whether we have manifested it to
be so, let the indifferent Reader judge. --

We add, 4thly, There is no necessity of being idle, if thou know not where
to hear on that day. -- If thou have a sight of thy interest in God, thou may
spend thy time in admiring, magnifying the rich love of the Lord to thee, if
not in getting thy interest cleared up unto thee; in studying thine own heart,
getting sin mortified, grace quickened, strengthened, reaching after communion
with God, getting ready trimmed for the coming of Jesus. -- That any of these
directions are such as weak Christians are not able to make use of, that they
would be dangerous to them, (as Mr. T. speaks) causing them to decay in the
exercise of Godliness, grow barren and lifeless in Prayer, occasioning them to
fall into errors, enthusiastic conceits, to turn Seekers, -- is absurd to
imagine. How far public hearing is required for hallowing the Lords Day, when,
and how, not, we have but now declared, and need not add more.

CHAP. XII.
Sect. 1.
Mr. T. his Arguments for hearing the present Ministers, answered. Some things
are unlawful in which is no sin. There is sin in hearing the present Ministers.
(Nothing relating to instituted Worship, as such, but is necessary.) Against
hearing them lie Exceptions that are not merely extrinsecal but essential to
the duty of hearing. Gods cautions restrain us from hearing them. It Is no
characteristical property of Christ's Sheep so to do, but the contrary. John 8.
27. and 10. 27. considered. Not to hear them is no sign of one that is not of
God. No such prophanness that is condemned in Esau. No refusing the Pearl of
great price. Of the efficaciousness of the Word. We have no ground to expect
the present Ministers preaching should be made effectual to us. The neglect of
which is no occasion or reason of men's condemnation. John 3. 20. opened. They
have not the words of eternal life. John 6. 68. explained. The words of eternal
life, what they import.

MR. T. closes his Theodulia with no fewer than 40 Arguments, Sect. 15.
whereby he endeavors to prove the lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers,
which are briefly to be considered.

Arg. 1. That is lawful in which is no sin. In hearing the present Ministers
preach the Doctrine of the Gospel -- is no sin. Because its no breach of any
Law of Nature, or of the Scriptures, -- and sin is a transgression of the Law;
and where there is no Law there is no transgression, 1 John 3. 4. Romans 4. 13.

Answ. Both Propositions are liable to exception. The Major is not universally
true: There are some things unlawful in which there is no sin per se, as the
eating the Idolothite, which was only per accidens so, in respect of the
offense of the weak brother; and yet utterly unlawful to be done, how much this
concerns the present case we have showed already. 2. The Minor is notoriously
false. 1st, In hearing the present Ministers is sin; it is a violation and
transgression of the Law of Nature, the voice whereof is, That God must be
served and worsh^pped according to the revelation of his will. -- That nothing
be done herein but what he gives direction and commandment about: so say the
Scriptures, as we have proved Chap. 2. Now Mr. T. is not able to produce one
Scripture wherein God commands us to hear them. What he replies hereunto is
frivolous.

He says, 1. That a command is not necessary to prove a thing lawful, but to
prove it a necessary duty.

Answ. But there is nothing relating to Instituted Worship* as such, (of which
we have proved hearing to be a part) that is lawful, but is our necessary duty,
viz. necessary, necessitate praecepti instituting it.

2. That as express command may be showed for hearing them, (as he says) as
for hearing the Congregational Ministers, -- is his mistake. The hearing these
is showed to be a positive duty by command from Christ; -- The other, contrary
to many solemn commands given forth by him, all along this Treatise. So that

His Argument may be Retorted upon himself. -- That which is a breach of the
Law of Nature, and Scripture, moral or positive, in express terms, or by good
consequence, is sinful and unlawful to be practiced. (This Mr. T. grants.) But
such is the hearing the present Ministers (this we have already proved)
Therefore. -- He adds,

Arg. 2. Those Ministers may lawfully be heard, against the hearing of whom lie
no exceptions; but such as are extrinsecal to the duty of hearing, as it is a
part of Gods Worship: But so it is concerning the hearing the present
Ministers. Therefore. --

Answ. 1. We deny his Minor, and to the proof thereof we say, that the duty of
hearing consists not only in this, that we apply our selves to learn the mind
of God, but that we do this lawfully and according to the mind of God: when he
has appointed Officers of his own, and given his Spirit unto his Children to
enable them to communicate his mind and will to the Sons of Men, to imagine
that an attendment upon those to learn the mind of God, whom he has not
deputed to dispense it, (charged us as Antichristian-Officers, persons that
walk disorderly, -- to have nothing to do with, but separate from) is
extrinsecal to the duty of hearing, is a fearful contempt and disvaluation of
the sovereignty and authority of Christ.

His 2d Argument may easily be Retorted upon himself, thus. Those Ministers may
not lawfully be heard, against the hearing of whom ^e exceptions that are not
merely extrinsecal (but essential) to the duty of hearing as it is a part of
Gods Worship: But so it is concerning the hearing the present Ministers. It Is
not extrinsecal, but essential, to the duty of hearing Ministers, that I hear
the mind of God, not from such as act from an Antichristian Call, that walk
disorderly, oppose Christ in his Offices, -- but such as are deputed by him to
dispense it. -- Therefore.

His 3d, Argument is thus formed. That is not unlawful from which Gods cautions
restrain us not: But from hearing the present Ministers Gods cautions restrain
us not, for they only restrain us from hearing such as teach false Doctrine,
Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Mat. 7. 15. Mar. 4. 24.

Answ. 1. We deny his Minor. 1. Every command enjoining us not to attend upon,
have communion with Antichristian Ministers, such as walk disorderly, -- are
cautions against hearing them. As are 2dly, the Scriptures produced by him,
since we prove that they are false Prophets who labor to draw the People off
the pure Institutions of Christ to the putrid Inventions of men.

Whence we argue, 3dly, That is unlawful for us from which Gods cautions
restrain us: But Gods cautions restrain us from hearing the present Ministers,
for they restrain us from having to do with a false Ministry, false Prophets,
who mingle their own Dreams and Humane Inventions with the Word and Truths of
the Lord; which we have proved true of the present Ministers. Therefore. -- He
adds,

Arg. 4. That is not unlawful which may be a duty and characteristical property
of one that is of God, or Christ's Sheep. But to hear the present Ministers,
being supposed to teach the Word of God, and the Voice of Christ, may be a duty
and characteristical property of one that is of God, or Christ's Sheep, John 8.
47. and 10. 27. Therefore. --.

Answ. We deny the minor; the Scriptures produced prove not that it is the duty
-- of one that is of God, -- to hear every one that teaches somewhat of the
Word of God, but only such as teach it according to Christ's appointment, (nor
will Mr. T. say it is, the Devil did so, Women may do so, yet he says they are
not to be heard) much less, that it is the duty of one that is of God to hear
the present Ministers of England who preach Christ's Word from Authority humane,
Antichristian, and that mixed with a multitude of humane Inventions. We may
better argue, that is unlawful which is not a duty and characteristical
property of one that is of God, or Christ's Sheep, but to hear the present
Ministers of England, is not a duty and characteristical property of Christ's
Sheep, (as we have proved:) And have yet to add, 1. They preach not the Word of
God lawfully from Authority in his Name, of which the Scriptures mentioned are
to be understood. 2. They preach the Commandments, traditions of men in the
stead of Gods Word. 3. They hinder, oppose, persecute such as have authority to
preach it. 4. They are the stangers mentioned, John 10. from whom it is the
property of Christ's Sheep to flee. 5. Many of them preach not the Word at all,
nor can they so do. Therefore. -- He adds.

Arg. 5. That may be unlawful which may be a sign of one tha^ is not of God,
nor of Christ's Sheep: But not to hear the present Ministers when they teach the
Word of God, -- may be a sign of one that is not of God, John 8. 47. and 10. 26.

A. This is answered in what was replied to the former Argument. i. The minor
is denied, for the same reasons of our denial of the mi^or in the precedent
Argument. 2. This Patron of charity at once rejects the many thousands of
England, precious in the sight of the Lord, and beloved of him, as persons not
of God, not of Christ's Sheep, because they hear not the present Ministers. 3.
We may more righteously argue; To hear those that pretend to teach the Word of
God, as Ministers, (intermixed with the traditions of men) but are not
commissionated by him, so to do is unlawful, for it is a rejection, and contempt
of Christ's Authority, (who alone has power to appoint his own Officers, by
whom he will communicate his mind and will.) But to hear the present Ministers,
is to hear such as pretend to ^each the Word of God, (intermixed with the
traditions of men) bu^ are not commissionated by him so to do, (as we have
before demonstrated.) Therefore.

Arg. 6. His sixth Argument is thus formed, To refuse to hear the Word of God,
though delivered by the present Ministers, is such pr^phaneness as is condemned
in Esau, Heb. 12. 16. for it is the rejecting or neglecting of an holy thing,
Matthew. 7. 6. therefore it may be unlawful to shun hearing them, and
consequently lawful to hear them.

Answ. 1. Very good! It seems then that all that refuse to hear the present
Ministers, are profane Esaus: this he will have so much ingenuity as to
retract in his next. 2. He supposes that the non-hearing of the Ministers is a
refusing to hear the Word of God, which is a most nefarious and diabolical
accusation. We refuse not to hear the Word of God in the way of his own
appointment, but to comply with and abet a false Antichristian-Ministry. 3. The
People of God conceive it to be one part of their birthright as Men and
Christians, not to be compelled to hear those who come in their own names, in
the name of Antichrist, which they refuse to sell for advantage, in the World,
with profane Esau, and therefore judge it irrational, a contradiction, to be
accused, as if profane, like him, for not d^ing that, upon the account of his
doing whereof, he was branded by the Spirit of the Lord as such. -- 4. They
judge they may more rationally argue, To hear the Word of God as delivered by
the present Ministers is an Esau-like profaneness, (because, 1. it is a
rejection of their birthright, as Men and Christians. 2. It Is a compliance
with, encouragement of those who trample upon the Sovereignty, Authority of
Christ. 3. It Is a departing from the appointments of Christ, to the Ordinances
of Antichrist, which is no small undervaluing of the Grace of Christ, of the
Gospel, whereof Esau's profaneness was a Type.) Therefore it is unlawful to
hear them.

Arg. 7. The seventh Argument advanced by him for this good service, is, The
Word of God is a Pearl of great price, Mat. 7. 6. and 13. 44, 46. Therefore to
be heard and received by whomsoever held forth; and consequently it is folly and
sin to refuse hearing it, because of personal exceptions against the bringer.
--

Answ. 1. We deny the consequence, nor will Mr. T. affirm it, out of the heat
of dispute, to be true; he has asserted the contrary in his Theod. 2. It Is
wisdom, not folly, to refuse to meddle with the Pearl of the Prince, when
brought us by the hands of those from whom he has charged us not to receive
it, who were never authorized by him to bring it to us, especially when it is
to be had from persons of his own authorisement. 3. We have found the present
Ministers such merchandizers for their own profit in the World, that they put
off dross for Gold, and stones for Pearls; at the best, mix it with the dirt
and gravel of the Antichristian City, the traditions of the great Whore, which
they also impose upon us. -- 4. We think we may more justly argue; The Word of
God is a precious Pearl, (Mat. 7. 6. and 13. 44, 46.) therefore they ought not
to hear the present Ministers, who spoil, corrupt it with their traditions, and
thereby offer violence to it; who contemn, despise, tread underfoot much of the
Contents thereof; who huckster, and make merchandise of it; who prefer the
Canon Law of Antichrist before it, so debaseing it to their lusts, and wills of
their Lords and Masters, lest they should partake of the guilt of those
injuries they offer thereunto, whom they see (many of them) more zealous and
nice in the punctual observance of an Edict, or Institution, given forth by
their Masters the Bishops, as bowing the knee, uncovering the head, or the
like, than the Institutions of their Lord Christ. So that we may too truly say
of them as Theodoricus Niemensis once said; As the Priests of the Jews were at
last possessed with that madness, that they cried out, We have no King but
Caesar; So I have a long time feared, and do fear, that our Priests may say, We
have no other King but the Prelate. He adds,

Arg. 8. If the Word of God preached by the present Ministers may be effectual
for that good, which is the end wherefore it is preached, then it ought to be
heard from them, according to James 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1. But the Word of God
preached by the present Ministers may be thus effectual. Therefore.

Answ. 1. If he understand the Major of a may be of possibility, with respect
to the power of God, we deny the consequence of the Major Proposition. God can,
if he please, by the ministration of Angels, good or bad, effect that for which
the Word is preached; but it does not therefore follow that we may attend the
Ministry of these, especially the latter of them. 2. If of a may be of
credibility, with respect to Institution, i. e. I have ground to expect it will
be, by virtue of the promise of God, for the blessing of his own Institution,
and making it effectual for the end intended, we deny his Minor; which he will
be able to make good, when he proves that the preaching the Word of God by the
present Ministers, is a Divine Institution, upon which the Lord has promised
his blessing for the making it effectual for the ends for which he has
instituted the preaching of the Gospel; which we have already disproved. 3.
This Argument may be righteously retorted against himself, That preaching the
Word of God, in which (by virtue of any Institution of the Lord, or promise of
his Blessing and Presence thereupon) I may not expect should be effectual for
that good for which preaching the Word was instituted by him, is not to be
attended. But this is true, with respect to the preaching the Word of God by
the present Ministers. Which will be taken for granted, till what is offered in
this Treatise to prove it, be enervated, and the promise of the Presence and
Blessing of God upon their so doing, as his own Institution be produced. Which
as yet we have not met with. Therefore. -- He goes on,

Arg. 9. That is not unlawful, (lawful he means) the neglect of which may be
the occasion and reason of a man's condemnation. But the neglect of hearing the
present Ministers may be the occasion and reason of a man's condemnation.
Therefore. -- The minor he proves thus; The neglect of coming to the Light, may
be the reason of men's condemnation, John 3. 20. But the neglect of hearing the
present Ministers, is a neglect of coming to the Light, for they hold forth the
Light. Therefore. --

Answ. 1. We deny the minor of both Propositions. The coming to the Light, John
3. 20. is believing in Christ (the true Light, John 1.) of their not so doing
Christ complains, John 5. 40. That the neglect of hearing the present Ministers
should be a refusing to believe in Christ, is not easily demonstrated. 2. There
are others that hold forth the Light (in the Animadverters sense) i. e. preach
the Gospel beside (and at another rate than) the Prelatists and their
Dependan^s, whom if we hear, (by his own Argument) we neglect not to come to
the Light. 3. The present Ministers hold not forth the pure Light of the
Gospel, they obfuscate, darken it by humane Traditions and Ceremonies. -- 4. We
may more justly argue, those Teachers that oppose and hinder the holding forth
the Light, or the fruitful faithful preaching of Gods Word, may be the occasion
and reason of men's condemnation, and so not to be owned and joined with. But
the present Ministers of England do so. Therefore. The Major will not be
denied; the Minor is (for the most part) Mr. T. his own, in his Fermentum
Pharisaeorum, p. 7. and is generally known to be true. I would gladly be
informed how those that are disaffected, adversaries to, and do oppose
fruitful, faithful, and godly preaching, (which Mr. T. affirms the Teachers of
England do) can be said to hold forth the Light. His tenth Argument follows.

Arg. 10. We may go to them as Teachers of us who have the words of eternal
Life, John 6. 68. But the present Ministers, who teach the Gospel of Christ,
have the words of eternal Life, for it contains his words, and is the power of
God to Salvation from the matter of it, Romans 1. 16. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

Answ. 1. By the words of Eternal Life he means, the Doctrine or Matter of the
Gospel, in which sense we deny his Major. That because a man has read the
Scripture^, and got a Systeme of Divinity into his head, (without one drop of
the Spirit, or inward experience of the things he notionally understands)
therefore he is fit to be a Teacher of the Gospel, and must be attended, will
not in have be believed by such as have acquaintance with the Mysteries
thereof. John 6. 68. proves it not, being spoken of Christ, who was in the
bosom of the Father, sent into the World, commissionated by him to preach the
words of eternal Life. 2. That the Gospel, from the matter of it, is the Power
of God to Salvation, I must crave leave to enter my demurrer against; it is the
energie, or powerful working of the Spirit of the Lord with it, which makes it
to be so, (upon the account whereof, the words of Christ are by Peter said to
be (...), the words of eternal Life, which to affirm, that any of the Sons of
Men have as Christ had, to whom the Spirit was given without measure, is little
less than blasphemy) without which the matter of the Gospel, or the
Glorious-Truths contained therein operate not to the salvation of any, for want
whereof it is to some the savor of death unto death, a stumbling block,
foolishness, not profiting them at all. In it lies the whole of its energie and
power, its mightiness to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, is said to be through God, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

Sect. 2.
Arguments for hearing the present Ministers, refuted. Personal qu^lifications
to be heeded in hearing. The case of the Beraeans, Acts 17. 11, 12. examined.
Its impertinency to the matter in hand, manifeste^. The Ministers of England
forbidden to preach in Christ's Name. The weakness of Mr. T. his reasoning from
Luke 9. 49, 50. Mat. 7. 22, 23. discovered. In hearing the Ministers, we hear
not Christ, Luke 10. 16. considered. Of their preaching the Gospel of Peace.
The reception of gifts how to be improved. Of the interest of Saints in
Gospel Ministers. Forbidding men to hear the present Ministers, no glorying in
men: These are no Stewards of the Mysteries of God. --

THE eleventh Argument Mr. T. advances to prove the lawfulness of hearing the
present Ministers is thus formed, If we ought to hear the Word of God as Gods
Word, we ought to hear it at any time from any person, without consideration of
the personal qualifications of them that deliver it. But the Word of God is to
be heard as Gods Word, and not as the words of men, 1 These. 2. 13. Therefore.
--

Answ. We deny the consequence of the first Proposition, That we hear the Word
of God as Gods Word, i. e. with reverence and godly attention, is our duty; of
which the Apostle, 1 These. 2. 13. that in hearing, we ought to have respect to
personal qualifications, we have proved abundantly in this Treatise. He adds,

Arg. 12. They may be right hearers of the Word, who may hear them as the
Beraeans did, Acts 17. 11, 12. But the Beraeans heard the Word of God without
respect to personal qualifications, as examining his Commission to preach, or
the like. Therefore. --

Answ. The Major is denied. 1. Those whom the Beraeans heard were extraordinary
Officers, who confirmed their Calling by Miracles, ours not so, who give no
such evident proof thereof; therefore there is more reason to have respect to
personal qualifications. 2. They were not converted to Christianity, knew
nothing of any personal qualifications was required by the rules thereof, that
they ought to have respect unto; it is otherwise with us: there are personal
qualifications required in the Gospel in persons that go forth authoritatively
to preach it. Which we are to have regard to. 3. They had no just ground of
personal exceptions against the Apostles, as we have against the present
Ministers. 4. There was no Scripture-Law interdicting their hearing the
Apostles, we have produced several Statute-Laws given forth by our Lord and
King, forbidding our hearing the present Ministers. 5. They preached only the
Word of God, these the Traditions of men; of this matter we have already
treated, Chap. 3. Sect. 1. His thirteenth Argument follows.

Arg. 13. They may be heard preach in Christ's Name, who are not to be forbidden
to preach in Christ's Name; but the present Ministers are not to be forbidden to
preach in Christ's Name. Therefore. -- The Minor he proves by a parity of reason
thus, Christ forbad not those who cast out Devils in his Name, yet joined not
with his Disciples, since so doing they did not speak evil of Christ, nor were
against him, but for him, Luke 9. 49, 50. Therefore he would not have the other
forbidden to preach in his Name. --

Answ. We deny his Minor; we have proved the present Ministers are forbidden to
preach in his Name. To the proof thereof we answer. That it does not follow,
that because Christ would not have the person forbid that cast out Devils in
his Name, so to do that, therefore he would not have the Ministers of England
forbid to preach. -- For, 1. there was no previous Election or Call required to
that work, as there is to the authoritative preaching of the Gospel. 2. He cast
out Devils in the Name and Authority of Christ; These men act from the
authority of Antichrist. 3. He was not against Christ; these speak evil of,
oppose, persecute him in his ways and people. 4. By this Argument, for ought I
know, he may as well prove it lawful to hear an unconverted Pagan, if he get
some Sriptures to read to us, for I find not that the person that cast out
Devils was converted to Christianity.

Arg. 14. His fourteenth Argument is thus formed, Their prophesying in Christ's
Name, who were workers of iniquity, is not condemned, but allowed by Christ as
good, Mat. 7. 22, 23. Therefore their teaching in Christ's Name, who are only
supposed to be defective in outward Calling, or faulty in some actions
consistent with Christianity, is to be allowed, and so by consequence the
hearing of them.

Answ. 1. The Major is not proved in the Scripture cited by him; their
prophesying in Christ's Name seems rather to be condemned: They plead this with
Christ for ownings and acceptance; Away, says Christ, I am so far from
thinking that you deserve any thing for that, that I account their very
prophesying in my Name to be a work of iniquity, and you upon the account
thereof workers of iniquity. But, 2. we deny the consequence; it follows not
that though Christ did allow (if he did) their prophesying in his Name, that
therefore the teaching and hearing the present Ministers of England is
allowable. For, 1. though Christ tells them that they are workers of iniquity,
yet they seem to be such close Hypocrites that no body else knew them to be so,
no it seems not they themselves, for they come at the very last to Christ for
ownings and admission. They seem much like to the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.
Many of the present Ministers are visibly wicked and profane. 2. They
prophesied in Christ's Name from a visible authority committed to them by him;
these not so, as we have proved. 3. They visibly owned the Kingship and Lordly
Authority of Christ, these deny it, as we have proved. He adds,

Arg. 15. They may be lawfully heard, in hearing whom we may hear Christ; but
by hearing the present Ministers, who preach the Doctrine of Christ, we hear
Christ. Therefore. -- The reason of the Minor is from the Speech of Christ,
John 7. 16. My Doctrine is not mine, but him that sent me; so the Preachers
Doctrine which he preaches, after Christ, is not his own, but Christ's, who
sent him; as an Ambassadors Message is his Kings, not his own, and by hearing
him deliver it according ^o his Commission, his Master is heard.

Answ. We deny his Minor; which John 7. 16. proves not. He vainly surmizeth, 1.
That every one that preaches the Doctrine of Christ, is sent by Christ, which
we have over and over confuted. 2. That the present Ministers are the
Ambassadors of Christ, Act by virtue of Commission from him, which he should
have proved, not begged, we have evinced the contrary. 3. We may more justly
argue, They only are lawfully to be heard, by hearing whom we hear Christ, (for
he is the great Prophet of the Church, whom we are to hear in all things) but
in hearing the present Ministers, we hear not Christ. Therefore. -- The Major
will be denied; the Minor is evident, partly from the reason given by the
Animadverter, their Doctrine for a great part of it is not Christ's, but their
own; but chiefly, because they are not sent by Christ, upon the account whereof
it is that Christ says, Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me; as is
evident from, v. 1, 2, 3. He proceeds, and says.

Arg. 16. Those that preach the Gospel of Peace, that bring the glad tidings of
good things, are sent to preach, their feet are beautiful, and they are to be
heard, -- Romans 10. 15. But the present Ministers preach the Gospel of Peace. --
Therefore.

Answ. 1. The Major understood universally, is not true, nor will Mr. T. affirm
it to be so. All that preach the Gospel of Peace -- are not sent (i. e. as
Officers are Commissionated by Christ) to preach, nor does the Scripture
produced evince any such thing, but the contrary, viz. that a man cannot (i. e.
authoritative, and by virtue of an Office, Power, lawfully) preach the Gospel
of glad Tidings except he be sent. And how shall they preach except they be
sent, i. e. they cannot authoritative, and lawfully do so. So that, 2. we may
better argue, Those that have no Gospel Mission for the preaching of the
Gospel, and in the stead of preaching thereof, preach the Traditions of men,
are not to be heard as Ministers of the Gospel; But this is true of the present
Ministers. Therefore.

We proceed to the consideration of his seventeenth Argument, the substance
whereof is, Those who have received abilities from Christ to preach the Gospel,
ought to improve those abilities in their so doing, and are therein to be
attended, Mat. 25. 15. Luke 19. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 28, 29. Ephesians. 4. 11. But
the present Ministers have received abilities to preach the Gospel, and ought
to improve their abilities in that work. Therefore. --

Answ. 1. The Major is not absolutely true, It Is the duty of those who have
received gifts from God to improve them, and to be attended in their so doing;
but both the one and the other is to be done lawfully. Because a Friar has
received gifts from God, a Drunkard, Idolater, it does not therefore follow
that he is bound to exercise these gifts in a false Ministry, or that I am
bound to attend upon persons of such a Character in the exercise thereof. 2.
Nor do the Scriptures produced in this Argument, or 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. (in the
following Argument, which is comprehended in this, and requires no other
answer) speak any such thing. They relate to persons in, and of the Kingdom of
Heaven, in a regular Gospel-Church-State, and the improvement of gifts in a
regular, orderly way, according to the appointment of Christ. 3. This Principle
lies at the bottom of this Argument, That gifts received make a lawful
Minister, and we are bound to attend upon such, as such who have received gifts
from God, be they never so wicked and scandalous in their Conversation; which
Mr. T. upon second thoughts will not assert. 4. As to the most of the present
Ministry, the Minor may be righteously denied. They preach not the Gospel, nor
have they received gifts so to do.

His 18th Argument is for substance the same with this, and has received its
Answer. We proceed to his 19th.

Arg. 19. Every Christian has an interest in every Preacher of the Gospel, so
that no Minister is to be accounted as peculiar to any party of Christians, so
as to be impropriated by them, that the ability of every one may be used by
any, though not their proper Minister, nor persons regularly ordained, as is
evident from, 1 Cor. 3. 22. Acts 18. 24, 25, 26. Therefore ^he present
Ministers may be heard by any Saints while they teach the Gospel, though such
irregularities as are objected against them, were granted to be in them, or
their Ministry.

Answ. 1. Every Christian has an Interest in every Gospel Minister, and may
lawfully hear him, is true: But Mr. T. must prove the present Ministers to be
such, else he himself will acknowledge the Argument is invalid. 2. Grant
Apollos was not sent forth to peac^ the Gospel by virtue of Office; he might be
heard as a gifted Brother, which we have proved the present Ministers cannot.
3. It does not follow that because the Saints at Corinth had an Interest in
every Minister: -- Therefore it is lawful for Saints to hear the present
Ministers.

Arg. 20. The sum of his 20th Argument is, Preferring one Minister of the
Gospel -- before another, because of our party and way, is glorying in men,
forbidden by the Apostle 1 Cor. 3. 21. and 4. 6. But to forbid hearing the
present Ministers of England, though Ministers of the Gospel, -- and ^ying*men
to hear those only who are their elected Ministers, is a preferring one
Minister of the Gospel before another. Therefore. --

Answ. We deny his Minor; Because, 1. The Ministers of England are not
Ministers of the Gospel. 2. We tie not persons to hear only those of our own
way, as he calls it. Such as fear God, act not as Ministers of the Gospel from
an Antichristian Call, walk orderly, -- let Saints hear: None as I know of will
interdict them so to do. I am sorry Mr. T. should discover his nakedness so
much, that every Argument almost should be a mere petitio principii, a sorry
begging the thing in question, or build upon some monstrous notorious mista^e,
in the review whereof he will surely be ashamed. Thus fares it with him in his
21th Argument.

Arg. 21. Those Ministers who are the Ministers of Christ, -- who labor among
the Saints and are over them in the Lord, and admonish them that are Elders
that rule well, especially those who labor in the Word and Doctrine, who are
their Rulers or Guides, who speak to them the Word of God, are to be esteemed,
honored, remembered for their works sake, 1 Cor. 4. 1. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5. 13. Heb. 13. 7. and therefore much more are to be heard: But the
present Ministers of England are the Ministers of Christ: -- Therefore.

Answ. The Minor is denied, wherein the Animadverter pitifully beggs u^ to
grant what he should have proved; That the Ministers of England are the
Ministers of Christ, which no one in their right wits will suppose he proves by
this Argument. The Ministers of Christ are Stewards (...) ^he mysteries of God,
who labor in the Word and Doctrine, who ^peak unto us the Word of God: But the
Ministers of England are Stewards of the mysteries of God, -- for besides the
begging of what we shall not grant him; viz. That the Ministers of England are
Stewards of the mysteries of God, which none can be but those who are put into
the Office of Stewardship by the Lord of the Family, which we challenge Mr. T.
or any one for him, to make good with relation to the Ministers of England. It
invelops and wraps up in it this absurdity, That whoever labors in the Word
and Doctrine -- is a Minister of Christ. Of which we have frequently spoken,
and beg Mr. T. for the future not to impose thus crudely upon us without proof.
2. That they are over the People of God in the Lord, i. e. by virtue of Divine
appointment, which we have disproved. 3. That they are Elders, who being only
in and over a particular Church of Christ (as we have proved) they cannot be.
4. That they are Elders who rule well, whereas they have no authority to rule
at all, that is a flower that grows only in their Lord-Bishops Garden,
entrusted mostly in the hands of an Antichristian Officer called a Chancellor.
5. That they labor in the Word and Doctrine, which as touching the generallity
of them is false, who labor only in their Ceremonies and Service Book. 6. That
they are their Rulers and Guides, which they cannot be but by their free
consent (as has been showed) which they never had nor sought after.

Arg. 21. Retorted; It may more justly be Argued, Those Ministers who are not
the Ministers of Christ, nor Stewards of the Mysteries of God, who labor not
among the Saints, nor are over them in the Lord, nor admonish them, who are not
Elders that Rule well, nor labor in the Word and Doctrine, who are not legally
their Rulers and Guides, who speak not to them the pure Word of God, but the
Traditions of men, it is unlawful for Saints to hear: But this is all true
concerning some of the present Ministers, and some what of it concerning all of
them. Therefore. --

What he says of denying the Saints Liberty, -- That it is a sin against the
5th Commandment, is ridiculous, till he has proved them our spiritual Parents.

Sect. 3.
Non-hearing the present Ministers tends not to Schism. (The nature of Schism.
The Schism condemned in the Church of Corinth, what?) It Is not to have the
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons. (The (...), or
accepting persons condemned, Jam. 2. 1. what it is.) It Is not to cause offenses
and divisions, contrary to Romans 12. 4, 5. and 14. 1. and 15. 1. and 16. 17. Nor
making enclosures, co^^^^ to 1 Cor. 14. 36. Phil. 3. 15, 16. explained. The
vanity of Mr. T. his arguings from thence, manifested. The Holy Ghosts
recording the Prophesi^ of Balaam. Of Caiphas, of Infidel Idolatrous Poets, no
grounds for the Saints to hear the present Ministers. The impertinency of 1
These. 5. 20, 21. to his purpose. Nothing can be argued to prove the lawfulness
of hearing them from the Authors concession Chap. 2. Our Reasons against
hearing them, cannot righteously be retorted against our selves. The grounds of
our denying the lawfulness thereof, neither false nor doubtful. The Ministers
of England have not sufficiently proved the truth of their Ministry. Of the
duty of Christians with respect to hearing. The power of the Church over
Ministers. Non-hearing the present Ministers, takes not away the the Christians
Liberty. Is no negative Superstition. Our denial of the lawfulness of hearing
them, no denial of the Kingship of Christ, or usurpation thereof. No hindrance
of the knowledge of Gods Word. No evil consequences or absurdities follow
hereupon.

FOR the lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers, Mr. T. further argues
thus.

Arg. 22. That which tends to Schism amongst Christians, or to a breach of that
peace, unity and love, should be among them who have the same God, Lord,
Spirit, Faith, -- that is the same, or very like Schism among the Corinthians,
or tends to it, and has begotten, or is like to beget the same if not worse
effects among the Christians in England, is to be avoided as a great evil; and
that which tends to peace among them, is a great good to be embraced, 1 These.
5. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26, 27. But the non-hearing the present Ministers of
England tends to Schism amongst Christians. Therefore. --

Answ. We deny his Minor. Non-hearing the present Ministers is not Schism,
tends not to it; is nothing like the Schism amongst the Corinthians. For, 1st,
We were never by our free consent Members of the Church of England. 2dly, It Is
no particular instituted Church of Christ. 3dly, We meet not with them, and
there dispute, side, quarrel, contend when met together for the celebration of
the sam^ numerical Ordinances, as was the case of the Church of Corinth. The
matter of Schism is so clearly stated, our non-concern therein with respect to
our departure from the Church of England, by Dr. Owen in his Treatise of
Schism, that (as Mr. Cawdrey has not) Mr. T. will never be able solidly to
reply thereunto. 4thly, We do nothing in our separating from them, than what
God calls us to, as we have proved. If the disturbance of peace, envyings, --
ensue hereupon, we cannot help it; these things were the frequent attendments
of the Gospel in the first promulgation thereof as is known, whilst we make it
our care to keep the guilt of these things from off us, we are innocent, and
not concerned with the bitter and passionate declamations of persons hereabout.
We may with more evidence of truth argue, That which tends to Schism amongst
the Churches of Christ, or to a breach of the peace, unity and love which
should be among them, which is the same, or much like the Schism that was
amongst the Members of the Church of Corinth, is to be avoided as a great evil:
But the hearing the present Ministers tends to Schism. -- Therefore. -- He
further Argues;

Arg. 23. That which is to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect
of persons, for other reasons than their faith, is sinful and unlawful, Jam. 2.
1. But to hear one that preaches the Faith of Christ, because he is of our
particular Society, or by reason of particular interest, or agreement in
opinion, or any other than the unity of Faith in the Lord Jesus; and to declaim
hearing another that has the same Faith, preaches it, and holds communion
with them that embrace it, or to separate from such. -- (He should have added,
because he is not of our particular Society, or by reason of particular
interest, or non-agreement in opinion) is to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus
with respect of persons. -- Therefore.

Answ. We may grant the whole without the least disadvantage to the cause we
have undertaken the defense of; we refuse not the hearing the present Ministers
because not of our particular Society, -- but for other Reasons, of which
before. 2. The (...), or accepting persons, that is condemned, Jam. 2. 1. is a
respecting persons for their outward condition in the world, as their riches,
honor, -- with the neglect or contempt of others, though equal or better
deserving, for their poverty, or the like; which cannot be charged upon us with
respect to the present Ministers; so that this instance of the Apostle is not
at all to his purpose. He adds;

Arg. 24. To cause offenses and divisions contrary to the Doctrine taught us in
the Scriptures, is sinful and unlawful, Romans 16. 17. But those who teach men
not to hear their Ministers, which preach to them the truth of Gods Word,
because they are not in a Congregational Church, or not Elected, and Ordained,
according to the Rules of such Churches, or because they conform to some things
conceived unwarrantable, which are made the reason^ of unlawfulness to hear the
present Ministers, do cause offenses and divisio^s, contrary to the Doctrine,
Romans 12. 4. 5. and 14. 1. and 15. 1. Therefore. --

Answ. This Argument is bottomed upon many miserable mistakes, the discovery
whereof will expose it to the contempt of all that pass by, for its
insufficiency and weakness, in respect of the end aimed at by it. 1st, We teach
not men, not to hear their own Ministers, but such, as according to the
appointment of Christ, were never such. 2dly, We teach them not to avoid such
as preach the pure Word of God, but suct as corrupt it, intermixing therewith
the leaven of Antichristianism and Superstition, which Mr. T. tells us, in his
Fermentum Pharisae^^um, is a good ground to avoid hearing them. 3dly, We say
not that they are not to be heard merely because not in a Congregational
Church, -- but because we are destitute of any Scripture-Warrant for our so
doing, because they walk disorderly, act from an Antichristian Call. -- That
this is to cause offenses contrary to the Doctrine, Romans 12. 4. and 14. 1. and
15. 1. which forbids the giving offense to weak Believers, by the intempestive
using of our Liberty in things indifferent, is such a frivolous conceit, as
persons may put Mr. T. to the blush upon the review thereof. He argues further;

Arg. 25. Schismatical and arrogant conceits, that the Word of God is from
them as the only right Teachers, or confined to them, as the only persons to
whom it was communicated, and from whom it might be received, is condemned by
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 36. But such conceits and enclosures they have and
make, who deny the present Ministers to be heard, conceiving the separated
Churches and Ministers the only right Churches and Ministers to be heard.
Therefore. --

Answ. 1. We deny the Minor; we make no such enclosures as the Apostle
condemns, which are not what are mentioned by this Animadverter; There were no
Churches of Christ in the world at that day, so much as in Name and pretense,
but such as were separated, these were the right Churches and no other, no
ordinary Ministers but such as were related to, and Ministers of such separated
Churches. This the Apostle cannot be supposed to condemn. But if this be not
that he condemns, What is it? Briefly, 2. The Church of Corinth was one of the
most famous Churches of Christ (upon the account of what is mentioned by the
Apostle, Chap. 12.) at that day in the world, by reason whereof they were apt
enough to be sweld, puffed up against other Churches (that were as equally the
Churches of Christ as they) who had not the excellency of gifts they had. This
the Apostle condemns in them, and gives them to understand that the Word of
God came not out from them, they were not the first Church to whom it was
communicated, and from whom it was transmitted unto others; nor came it unto
them only, i. e. other Churches had received, embraced it as well as they,
therefore they ought not to carry it proudly toward them; which what it makes
against the enclosure our Animadverter mentions, I know not. The Apostle
condemns one Congregational Church for being puffed up against another; therefore
to assert Congregational Churches and Ministers to be the only right Churches
and Ministers, is condemned by him, is such a strange consequence as will never
readily be embraced. But 3. we make not such enclosures; I believe there are
hundreds in England that are not of that way, who have the Spirit of God, and
are deservedly to be attended in their Ministration of the Word of Truth. That
because we deny it lawful to hear the present Ministers we must be necessitated
to deny the hearing of all others, but men of Congregational Principles, is a
supposition as monstrously false and absurd as the former. We give some special
and peculiar grounds of our not hearing those, that can be applied to no other.
He adds.

Arg. 26. The Apostle, Phil. 3. 15, 16. presses such as were perfect or well
instructed in the Christian Doctrine (of liberty from the Mosaical Laws) not to
separate from, but hold Communion with such as were weak in the Faith, and
otherwise minded, that thought Mosaical Laws were yet obligatory. Therefore we
may not separate from Christians and Ministers by reason of diversity of
judgment about Church Government; and Liturgy, and different practice about
Conformity, and Nonconformity to them, which are of less moment than those
differences about Meats and Days. --

Answ. 1. We deny his Consequence; That because it was the duty of Saints to
hold Communion in a true Church State, without altercations about Meats or
Drinks, therefore it is our duty to hold Communion with a false Church and a
false Ministry, our Animadverter can never prove. 2. That the business of
Church Government (wherein the Kingship of Christ in a great measure lies) is
of no more moment than the eating or not eating, about which the contests among
the primitive Believers in the dawning of the Day of the Gospel did in a great
measure lie, he will not easily demonstrate. 3. That the retention for a while
of Mosaical Ceremonies, whilst the Temple was yet standing, to which they were
affixed, should be a greater ground of separation from a true Church of Christ,
then the reception, imbracement of the Liturgy and Ceremonies of Antichrist, in
and by a false Church, and Ministry from it, is as absurd an assertion as ever
dropped from the mouth or pen of so learned a person. And yet fail he in the
proof hereof, this Argument is of no moment. We attend his next.

Arg. 27. The holy Ghost has recorded the prophecy of Balaam, Number. 24. 3, 4.
Of Caiaphas, Joh. 11. 51, 52. Yea the sayings of Infidel. I^olatrous Poets,
Acts 17. 28. 1 Cor. 15. 33. Tit. 3. 12. Therefore it is lawful to hear the
present Ministers.

Answ. Now I confess if he be able to make good this Argument, it will follow,
that we may not attend the Ministry of the present Ministers of England only,
but the very vilest and worst of men. Ye^ I think we may righteously deny his
Consequence, and expect his proof thereof, before we credit it. The reading of
Poets, or citation of them is no part of instituted Worship as I remember,
which we have proved hearing the present Ministers to be. He proceeds,

Arg. 28. The Apostle, 1 These. 5. 20, 21. requires Christians not to despise
prophesyings, but to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. And
the Apostle, 1 John 4. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of God. They make it not sin merely to hear them that are erroneous,
if they try them; they may hear pretenders prophesying if they prove it, much
more those Ministers who preach truth. --

Answ. 1. Prophesyings are not to be despised, all things are to be proved, the
Spirits to be tried, whether they are of God; bu^ all this must be done in his
own way. For persons from hence to take liberty to go to Mass, hear the
Jesuits, frequent the meetings of Ranters, is dangerous and a plain tempting
of God. 2. Why he should accommodate, 1 These. 5. 20. to the preaching of the
present Ministers, and impose it upon us as our duty not to despise
prophesyings, who tells us, page 136. l. 30. That he knows not of any at this
day that have the gift of prophecy, I understand not. 3. It Is abominable
wickedness to violate other commands of Christ, upon the pretext of these
Scriptures, and a plain irrision of Christ; when he has charged us, as we have
proved, to have nothing to do with such a generation, for us, upon pretense of
trying all things, to attend their Ministry and Worship, is abominable
profaneness, not to be justified. 4. There are some things so visibly opposite
to Christ and his ways, that they need no trial in order to a discovery.
Whether drunken ignorant Priests, the shame and contempt of the Nation, be
Ministers of the Gospel? Whether a formal, sapless, self-devised Worship and
Ministry from the Pope and Bawd of Rome be the Worship and Ministry of Christ?
-- are things so palpably and no^oriously foreign to the Scriptures, that a man
need not put them to the trial for satisfaction. He further argues.

Arg. 29. This Author, Chap. 2. allows the hearing gifted Brethren, -- He would
not think it unlawful to hear Parents or Masters catechize, or Readers in the
University, when they read Divinity Lectures. -- Therefore by a like reason
must allow hearing the present Ministers.

Answ. This consequence we deny; there is no parity or likeness of Reason in
it; why we cannot hear them as gifted Brethren, we have manifested, Chap. 2.
There are more reasons against hearing them, than against hearing Parents
catechize, (as their acting from an Antichristian Call --) or Readers in the
University, to which I go not as to a part of instituted Worship, but
School-Exercise. That they are ordained according to the Discipline of the
Church in which they live, is nothing at all for their commendation, except
that Church were a true Church, or the Discipline thereof more different from
the Discipline of Rome than it is.

His thirtieth Argument is not worth the mentioning; That our Arguments may be
retorted upon our selves, is not improbable; any man's Arguments may be so. The
difficulty lies in proving the justness of their retortion; which when he shall
be able to effect,

Erit mihi Magnus Apollo. To dict^te that Ordination by other Ministers,
besides the Elders of their own Congregation, is necessary for the constitution
of a Gospel Ministry; that the Church of England is a true Church, or that
separation from a company of wicked and ungodly persons, is not warrantable by
Scripture, (when we have proved the contrary) is to expose himself to the
pity, or contempt of the judicious.

Arg. 31. The grounds upon which the Author of S. T. and other Separatists,
deny the unlawfulness of hearing the present Ministers, are neither false nor
doubtful. That nothing is to be done in the Worship of God, and
Church Discipline, (relating to it as the Worship of God) without a particular
Institution; we have abundantly before proved.

Arg. 32. That the Ministers of England have proved the truth of their Ministry
against Papists and Separatists; That the Prelates have so opposed Popery, that
were not men resolved never to lay down a calumny they have once taken up, they
would not cry them down as Antichristian, Popish, -- is but what he at present
thinks: They have opposed the person of the Pope, and retained his Laws and
Canons. They oppose the Pope of Rome, and his Conclave, and set up and maintain
the Pope of Canterbury, -- and his Hierarchy, against whom the very Arguments
they use against the Pope ^f Rome directly point.

Arg. 33. The absurdities will follow upon denying to hear the present
Ministers, because not rightly elected, -- or because they use the
Common Prayer Book, or are faulty in their lives, -- are either not such, or
really follow not thereupon.

Answ. 1. Every Christian Reader is able to judge of (at le^st some of) the
Reasons in the S. T. whether they can warrant his not-hearing. 2. He must be
able to judge every Minister he hears, whether he be rightly elected; but this
his judgment may proceed from the information of the Church to which the
Minister is related; or if his Minister, he tries, and judges with the Church
as a Member thereof, which gives not Authority to individual Hearers, (but to
the Church, or rather Christ Jesus, who has entrusted the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven with them) over their Ministers. Much less, 3. must every individual
hearer have power to silence or withdraw from his Min^ster. -- This he has
power to do, and this he ought to do, with respect to the Pastor of that Church
to which he is related, if he knows any sin or evil upon him to admonish him,
and in case of perseverance therein, to take two or three with him, and again
admonish him; and if he remain obstinate, to bring it before the Church, who
have power (if he will not hear them) to depose him: If he be a Pastor of some
other Church, to which he is not as a particular Member related, to bring i^ to
the Elders of that Church, or some Brother of known integrity appertaining
thereunto, who is to observe the same Rules already minded: which would not
introduce oppression upon Ministers, nor will they, if truly Christian, account
the execution of the Righteous Laws of Christ to be so. The Scepter of his
Kingdom is a right Scepter. To compare the corrupt bloody Popish Canons
herewith, is little less than blasphemy. 4. That hereby there should be any
danger of Gospel-M^nisters being exposed to penury, deserted of their Members,
is not likely. 5. That there can be no settled Government in Church or State, if
the stated Ministers, -- according to the present Laws should be deserted or
disobeyed, -- is a false and bloody assertion.

Arg. 34. That such a Plea, as this is made by the Papists for their Recusancy,
we have already answered.

Arg. 35. To this we say, 1. Christ has debarred us from hearing the present
Ministers, (as we have at large proved.) 2. Whilst we press men to an obedience
to the Voice of Christ, we make not men Rabbis, (it has not the least
tendency thereunto) but Christ. Nor are we against hearing any whom Christ in
his Royal Law forbids us not to hear.

Arg. 36. To this we say, Not to hear the present Ministers is no Negative
Superstition, it is built upon Divine Precept, (as we have proved) it occasions
not the neglect of Gods Command, (he beggs the Question whilst he supposes it)
or any duty of love incumbent upon the Saints. It begets not unnecessary
perplexities in men's Spirits, nor puffs them up with conceit of more holiness
than others; nor causes them to be censorious of others. Nor has Mr. T.
proved these things to be so, or the consequent of the Opinion contended for.

The whole of his 37th Argument, That the denying the hearing the present
Ministers is a usurpation of Christ's Regal Office, in putting a Law on the
Consciences of men, arrogating that power which is proper to Christ, James 4.
12. Mat. 23. 4. is a mere calumny; Nor is the Animadverter able to prove what
he says, nor has he so much as attempted so to do. We have demonstrated, that
the non-hearing the present Ministers is no imposition of our own, but a Yoke
of Christ. We forbid not any to hear Preachers of the Gospel, but such as
pretend to be so, and are not.

To his 38th Argument, we answer, By this means the knowledge of the Word of
God is not at all hindered, nor the furthering his Kingdom neglected, but the
contrary. It Is not true, that those who hold the Opinion of not hearing the
present Ministers in public, think it enough if they can teach those of their
own Society, they are willing to instruct others also; which they do as they
have opportunity. That it is seldom by conference that we ins^ill any truths
into others, without somewhat that alienates them from others, and engages
them to our own Society, with diminution of love to others, -- is a most false
suggestion.

His 39th Argument is composed of unproved Dictates; to which we have over and
over answered in this Treatise.

Touching his last Argument, we say in the general, 1. There is not one of the
absurdities, he says, are consequent on the Opinion of non-hearing of the
present Ministers, but is as much the consequent of the Opinion of the
unlawfulness of going to Mass, or hearing a Popish Ministry, were it
established by Law.

2. Particularly; 1. We cannot (considered in their present state, as an
Antichristian Ministry, set up in opposition to the Ministry of Christ) rejoice
in, or pray to God that they may, or praise God for their preaching. 2. It
follows not that it is then better that Barbarism -- spread among the people. --
There is no necessity of the one or the other. Barbarism and rudeness may call
them, their Fathers, or foster-Fathers, since whose return barbarity and
rudeness is broken in like a mighty torrent upon us. Who were the promoters the
Book of Sports, (in days past) a great piece of barbarism and rudeness, Mr. T.
knows. Who are more the encuragers of persons lying at an Alehouse, than their
fudling Priests? who by their practice strengthen the hands of their drunken
Parishioners therein. There are other meetings in most places within a small
compass, whither they may go to hear, so that they need not lie at an Alehouse,
nor sit at home idle. 3. We think the Magistrates do evil to compel people to
hear them. 4. In respect of their Antichristian calling, non-preaching Readers,
and their preaching Ministers are alike tolerable. Their Pedigree is the same,
their opposition to Christ and his People the same. 5. The less they preach, in
respect of their Antichristian standing and Office, the less they sin. Though,
6. they, accounting themselves Ministers of Christ, and receiving wages from
the people to preach to them, -- it is open injustice, and unrighteousness for
them rarely or not at all so to do; as it is Lordly Papal pride, and arrogance
in the Prelates to usurp Authority over those they acco^nt Ministers of the
Gospel, and hinder them from preaching, who, they say, are rightly ordained
thereunto. Of the seeming contradictions Mr. T. has found in some Writings of
J. G. to the Book Entitled, Prelatical Preachers none of Christ's Teachers, I
am not concerned to take notice. Though they might easily be reconciled. And
the Judicious Reader can do it himself. It Is separation from a true Church, and
Gospel Ministry, (not a false Antichristian-Church and Ministry) upon the
account merely of some difference about the subject of Baptism, that he
condemns, which that it rises up in opposition to what is asserted in the
forementioned Treatise, I am not able to discern. If Mr. T. dreams that a man
cannot speak against separation from a true Church, without condemning
separation from a false, he will scarce find his Rival amongst persons of
Learning and Judgment.

CHAP. XIII.
Sect. 1.
Serious advice to Saints that worship with the Nation, and cleave to the
Ministry thereof. The ground of their present practice to be considered. The
thoughts of their hearts in days past. For what Saints then and now suffer
hard things. Their aims and ends in this matter to be pondered, with the
present temper of their Spirit. A solemn Call out of the Parochial Assemblies.
The Renowned Husse his Prophecy touching Reformation.

HAving through Divine Assistance examined, and fully answered what Mr. T. was
pleased to object in his Theodulia against the S. T. I desire the patience of
the Christian Reader for one moment longer, whilst I open my heart in a few
words.

1. To the precious Children of God, who are yet worshipping with the Nation,
and cleaving to the Ministry thereof, would I humbly offer these seven things.

1. Seriously weigh without prejudice, in the balance of the Sanctuary, what
we have been tendering to you in this Treatise, and think not what you read to
be the words of an Enemy; they are the counsels of a Friend, of one who has
through wonderful grace so far learned Christ, that he cannot but love you,
pray for you, should you account him, and use him as an Enemy.

2. Strictly examine by the Scriptures of Truth, the bottom and ground of your
present practice. Where is the word of Institution by Jesus Christ, that
warrants your attending on the present Ministry. Mr. T. has written a large
Treatise thereabout, but is not able to produce one Scripture to warrant your
practice in this matter.

3. Recollect the thoughts of your heart in days past; Should any one have
told you, when you were for a godly, preaching, praying Ministry, for
Gospel-Reformation, that there would a day come when an Episcopal, drunken,
Common Prayer Book, dumb ignorant Clergy should be set over you, to the casting
out of the godly, sober, and judicious, and that you would side with them,
attend their Ministry? would your answer have been other then that of Hazael,
But are we dead Dogs that we should do thus?

4. Remember what it was you^ Brethren lost their Ears, Libertys, Lives in days
past for, what they and you covenanted against, was it not for witnessing
against, utterly to extirpate this present Hierarchy and Worship? Did you not
rejoice in its extirpation? and will you again encourage, or comply with the
building of that you once endeavored to evert and demolish.

5. Consider soberly of your aims and ends in your present attendment upon the
Ministry and Worship of the Nation? Whet^er they are such as you can
comfortably own in the great Day of Assize, that is now ready to spring in upon
the World?

6. Observe the present temper of spirit, whilst attending upon the present
Ministry and Worship; Have you grown in grace? is there not rather a spirit of
declension, formality, deadness, earthiness, seizing you? do you meet with
Christ in the Public Assemblies? Are you not rather with respect to them
forced to say, He is not here, he is risen.

7. Hasten your escape from Parochial National Churches an^ Assemblies, and get
into the Assemblies of his Children, where he hat^ recorded his Name, will meet
with you and bless you. The Vials of written vengeance are ready to be poured
forth upon false Worship and Worshippers. And ere long the subject of our
present contest will be removed. Not an Archbishop, or Lord-Bishop, nor any of
their Hierarchy shall be known in the Nation, or Nations of the World; none
spoken of but with loathing and abhorrency. Their nakedness, insolency, pride
and contrariety to the true interest of Christ, and Nations, shall be so
discovered, that they shall be the hissing and reproach of the People; insomuch
that they shall be ashamed to own their function. I have many times thought of
that Prophecy of John Huss, cited in Foxes Martyrologie, Vol. 1. page 830.
Moreover, says he, hereupon note and mark by the way, That the Church of God
cannot be reduced to her former dignity, or be reformed, before all things
first be made new: The truth whereof is plain by the Temple of Solomon. Like as
the Clergy and Priests, so also ^he People and Laity; or else, unless all such
as be now addict unto avarice, from the least to the most be first reclaimed,
as well the People as the Clergy and Priests. Albeit, as my mind now gives
me, I believe rather the first; that th^n shall arise a new People, formed
after the new man, which is created after God, of the which People, new Clerks
and Priests shall come and be taken, tha^ shall hate covetousness, and the
glory of this Life, hastening to a heavenly conversation; notwithstanding all
these things shall come to pass, and be brought by little and little, in order
of times, dispensed of God for the same purpose. And this God does and will do
for his own goodness, and the riches of his great lo^ganimity and patience,
giving time and space of repentance to them that have long lien in their sins,
to amend and flee from the face of the Lords fury whilst that in like manner,
the carnal People and Priests, successively and in time shall fall away, ^e
consumed with the Moth. But we have a more sure Word of Prophecy, that the
pompous carnal Church and Ministry, the Whore and false Prophet, with all their
retinue, shall be dethroned, and for ever cease to be: And then shall piety
flourish, and the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth as the waters do
the Seas. Then what shame will cover you that have not hearkened to Christ's
voice, though he loudly calls you to come with him from Lebanon, to look from
the top of Amana and Shenir, from the Lions Dens, and Mountains of the
Leopards, that you have not forsaken the Tents of false Worshippers. --

Sect. 2.
Counsel and advice to Saints separated from the carnal worldly Church*

2. TO you that have heard, and obeyed the voice of your Beloved, in separating
from the present Worship and Worshippers, would I also speak a few words.

1. Pray hard for the making the vision p^ain; that you may understand how long
it is to the end of these wonders. The wise shall understand.

2. Wait, watch, and pray for the glorious effusion of the Spirit, according to
the promise of the Father. Antichrist's day is now even run out; not the first
fruits only, but the full harvest of New Covenant glories shall shortly be upon
you.

3. Get on the whole Armor of God, that you may be fitted and fixed to accost
the Prince of darkness, and his Hellish Armado in their next and last attempt
against the Saints, when the Dragon will be wroth, and go about to make war
with the remnant of the Woman's Seed, that keep the Commandments of God, and
have the Testimony of Jesus.

4. Condemn the world and worldly Church by those shines of holiness, and that
heavenly conversation shall be found amongst you.

5. Take heed of degenerating into the Form, mind the power of Christianity and
Godliness: Be not contented to have a Name to Live when Dead. Take heed of the
Temptation of the Day; a Temptation to slumbring, especially considering the
Cry at Midnight (which is a Ministerial voice or outcry) The Bridegroom comes
go ye out to meet him.

6. Press after a Gospel Spirit of Love and Union one with another. Study to be
of one Spirit, of one Mind. Wherein you differ (for want of the same measure of
Light) bear one with another as becomes Brethren of the same Father, Members
of the same Body, pray one for another, and if any one be otherwise minded, God
will reveal this also unto him in due time. Know not one another as Men only,
but as Chr^sti^ns. Let the bottom of your Communion each with other be not the
found^tion of agreement in extrafundamental Principles (which the Spirit of
Antichrist leads to) but blessed satisfaction that you are received, beloved,
begotten again of God, and bear his Image. Study to forget the names of
distinction that have been too much used in days past. Neither Presbyterian,
nor Independent, nor Anabaptist is any thing, but if real Saints, we are all
one in Christ. Remember the Disciples were first called Christians at Antioch.
The departure from Scripture words and appellations, has had no small
influence into that Antichristian Apostasy that has overspread the Nations.
Take heed of animosities and divisions one amongst another. It Is the Devils
grand Maxim, Divide and Impera, Divide and Rule. Bear with and forbear one
another in love. Prefer your peace and edification before private interest.
Methinks such Discourses, with a Pen dipped in Gall, as drop from this A^imadv.
should engage us to make it our study to be of one heart, and one soul, if we
cannot in all things be of one Judgment and Opinion. But whither sail I? It Is
a pleasant Sea, a sweet Theme, the Lord bow the hearts of his People every one
of them to an imbracement of it. I must not expatiate.

7. Hold fast that you have, that no one take your Crown. Yet a little while
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

Sect. 3.
An Appendix, or Felo de se; being a brief but faithful Collection of several
passages in his former Writings, opposite to what is asserted by him in his
Theodulia.

LAstly, to Mr. T. our present Antagonist would I speak a few words by way of
Counsel and advice. I beseech you Sir in the bowels of Christ,

1. With a sober spirit to review your Theodulia, and consider whether you will
be able to justify your undertaking therein. What have you been doing but
sadning the hearts of the righteous, and gladding the hearts of the wicked? Had
it not been better you had let Baal have pleaded for himself, since one had
thrown down his Altar? It may be in your retired thoughts, you now begin to
think so. The design it self was bad; but Sir, how can you review the frame of
spirit, the gall and bitterne^s, the reviling and reproachful language with
which your Book is stuffed from the one end thereof to the other, against the
VVayes and People of Christ, whom you in your Conscience think to be so, and
hold up your face with confidence before God and his People. I had once thought
to have gathered into one heap the several parcels of scurrilous, unsavory,
scandalous and false expressions you were pleased to make use of, but I found
the dunghill would swell so big, and the smell of it might be so offensive,
that after I had made some progress therein, I forbore.

2. Read with seriousness the Reply we have made to the Treatise mentioned: You
see Sir, we have not writ after your Copy, nor rendered reviling for reviling
into your bosom; we have otherwise learned Christ, and commit our Cause to him
that judges righteously. The Lord, the Lord God, his Spirit, Scriptures and
People be judge betwixt us.

3. Read twice ere you Reply once; You know, Sir, whose Motto it was, Festina
lent; sat cito si sat been. Too much haste to oppose Truth, never brings with
it a return of sweetness; every motion and advance against it, though of the
slowest, is too great haste.

4. Pray much for Divine Leadings and Direction before you set upon the work of
making your Reply hereunto, and every step you take in it. And let us discern
you have been much in this duty, by that meek, and Gospel Spirit with which
your next shall be leavened.

5. If you think it of concern, seriously weigh whether this writing of yours
tend to the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy, with its Hierarchy, and the
promoting Reformation according to the Word of God, and the best Reformed
Churches. For Oaths the Land mourns. The Lord grant we may do so too.

Lastly, Review, if you please, the ensuing Collections we have gathered out of
your own Writings, from a cursory view of some of them; which are, if we
mistake not, opposite to what you at present plead for. And if you think meet,
reconcile your self unto your self; and blame not me, Sir, that I thus deal
with you, I do but follow the pattern you have given me, in your dealing with
Mr Baxter formerly, and Mr. John Goodwin of late, after this manner.

Collections out of Mr. T. his Writings.
If this Argument proceed, it will follow there is some National Church amongst
the Gentiles as of old amongst the Jews, which is not to be granted. -- In his
exercitation concerning Infant Baptism, page 21. Institution is the Rule of
exhibiting Worship to God. ibid. page 23. If Institution be the Rule of
Worship, it is necessary that he that shall administer the Worship bind himself
to the Rule, otherwise he will devise Will Worship, and arrogate the Lords
Authority to himself. Surely the Apostle in the business of the Lords Supper
insinuates this; when being about to correct the aberrations of the Corinthians
concerning the Lords Supper, he brings forth these words, 1 Cor. 11. 23. For I
have received of the Lord, -- ibid. page 24.

The use of Sureties in Baptism, and Episcopal Ordination, he asserts to be
Humane Inventions. Ibid. p. 29.

The Common Prayer Book and Hierarchy have no true ground from Christ's
Institution, which alone can acquit it from Will-worspip, Examer. p. 3.
Episcopacy is now found an abuse, ibid. p. 24. I have entered into Covenant to
endeavor a Reformation as well as you, and though I have not had the
happiness, as indeed wanting ability to be employed in that eminent manner you
have been in the promoting of it (in which I rejoice) yet have I in my
affections sincerely desired it, in my intentions truly aimed at it, in my
Prayers heartily sought it, in my Studies constantly minded it, in my
endeavors seriously prosecuted it, for the promoting of it greatly suffered,
a^ having as deep an Interest in it as other men, ibid. page 26. When I
consider how exact a Reformation our Solemn Covenant binds us to endeavor,
ibid. p. 27. It Is a dangerous principle, That in mere positive things we may
frame an addition to Gods Worship. -- They that read the Popish Exp^sitors of
their Rituals do know that this very Principle has brought in Surpli^e,
Purification of Women, -- ibid. p. 29.

If any take upon them to appoint to men's consciences any rite, in whole or in
part, -- it is an high presumption in such against Christ, and against the
Apostles commands to yield to it, Col. 2. 20. Though it has a show of wisdom,
verse. 23. And the Apostles example, Gal. 2. 3, 4, 5. binds us to oppose it,
ibid. page 30. And p. 31. He commends a passage in a Sermon of Mr. Marshals on
2 Chr. 15. 2. Who admires that ever mortal man should dare in Gods Worship, to
meddle any further than the Lord himself has commanded.

For had it been a Will Worship, it had been a sin if they had received it,
(speaking of the Circumcision of the Females) there being no command to do it.
As it had been a sin for a Child to be circumcised before or after the eighth
day, in them that altered or swerved from the appointment of God, ibid. p. 37.
No reason of ours in positive Worship can acquit an action that is performed
from Will Worship, nothing but Gods Will manifest in his Institution -- can do
it, ibid. p. 38. see p. 111, 132. Full Review of the Dispute concerning Infant
Baptism, Sect. 1. P. 2.

Against Prelacy, Holy Days, Surplice, there have been many and just
declamations, Ibid. P. 110. The Superstitious custom of keeping Easter, and
receiving the Communion once a Year on that Day, which I think you will be
ashamed of, p. 119.

Unless you will altar the definition of Will Worship, according to Mat. 15. 9.
in point of Worship, that is excluded which is not expressed. p. 132.

And though all do not join in breaking of bread (speaking concerning the Godly
in Bewdly) some going to that Parson, others declining him as a stranger to the
private Meetings of the Godly, and an adversary to such godly Preachers as they
had gotten for the Chapel, -- went to Mr. B. others being baptized have joined
with me. -- He afterward speaks of Mr. B 's. Book, charging them with Schism,
for Reforming themselves, and afrighting people from their Society, Praecurs.
Sect. 5. p. 10, 11. The Baptized Christians with whom I hold Communion. Full
review of the dispute concerning Baptism, Epist. to the Reader. The Christian
Church consists not of a whole Nation, -- but of so many persons as are called
out of the world by the preaching of the Word, to profess the Faith of Christ,
ibid. p. 221. I think my actions justifiable in celebrating the Lords Supper at
Night as Christ did, and admitting none but Baptized persons after profession
of Faith, ibid. page 239.

Frequenting Church-meetings he makes to be one way of visible owning God,
ibid. p. 268.

That there were some particular visible Churches in which were no Hypocrites,
may be true notwithstanding the Parables, Mat. 13. and 25. or 1 Timothy 3. 15.
compared with 2 Timothy 2. 20. p. 284.

There is not any likelihood that a bare dissembled profession should make such
an external relation to God and his Church, ibid. p. 298.

To confine the term Heathens only to them that are not Christians in Name,
is indeed according to the vulgar speech, but beside the Scripture use, ibid.
p. 261.

We do neither in practice nor opinion maintain such impure Churches of
ignorant and vicious persons as Mr. Bl. and the Presbyterians commonly do,
ibid. p. 262.

The essence of the Church consists in the association, or union of the
Members, -- *which is given by such transeunt fact as whereby God separates
them from others, and unites and incorportes them together, which I call the
Church-call, agreeably to the Scripture, Romans 9. 24, 25, 26. 1 Cor.
2. 24. -- which Church-call now is not by any coercive power of Rulers, but by
the Spirit and preaching the Gospel, ibid. p. 320.

Nor did I join any in Communion, till I saw that those that did their duty in
being Baptized, were rejected, and made odious with Ministers and People,
whereby they were necessitated to join in Communion by themselves, Praecurs.
Sect. 12. p. 48. Because it is manifest, from Acts 2. 41. 46. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2,
3. and 12. 13. Persons were Baptized before they brake bread together,
therefore the taking any without Baptism to the Lords Supper will but
strengthen men in their opinion, that their Infant Sprinkling is sufficient. --
Therefore he sees a nececessity of desisting from that enterpr^se of admitting
persons of different persuasions touching Baptism into their communion, ibid.
p. 49.

The Christian-Church-constitution of Volunteers is better, ibid. Sect. 11.
page 431.

In the Worship of God it was wont to be accounted a certain Rule that Gods
Worship should be observed according to his appointment, and no otherwise, ib.
Sect. 16. p. 66.

My opposing the Bishops began with the soonest. -- And for my non*conformity,
Reasons were given with some of the first. -- I justify not the Ceremonies,
ibid. Sect. 21. p. 89.

It is true our English Prelatical Divines do account Baptism sufficiently
administered that is so done, yea though it were by a Popish Priest, or a
Midwife, ibid. p. 91.

However, for the Tenet, of the Peoples governing by Vote, I know no reason why
they (he speaks of those called Independants) should be called a Sect, rather
than their opposites. The Excommunication which ^he Scripture speaks of, -- is
no where made a part of Government or of the Elders Office, any more than the
Peoples. In Antiquity its apparent out of Cyprian -- That the People had a
great hand in Elections, Excommunications, Absolutions, ibid. p. 93.

No one Country, City, or Tribe together, were gathered by the Apostles or
other Preachers, into the Christian visible Church, but so many of all as the
Lord vouchsafed to call by his Word and Spirit. 1 Cor. 1. 26. -- Not many wise
men, -- Ergo, Not the whole Nation. And afterward to Mr. B. Question, Has he
not commanded to disciple Nations? He answers, Yes, to make Disciples of all
Nations, by preaching the Gospel to every creature, but no where by Civil
Authority to gather a whole City, Country or Tribe, and to draw them into a
National, and City-Covenant together, -- ^bid. Sect. 22. p. 97.

Jeroboams Sacrificing and keeping a Feast at another time th^n God appointed.
Ahaz his forming an Altar after the pattern of that of Damascus, Nadab and
Abihu their offering strange fire, keeping Holy Days to Saints, he condemns as
Will Worship; Full Review of the Dispute conce^. Infant Baptism, p. 3.

1 Pet. 2. 9. -- Which are meant only of the Elect and true Believers of every
Nation, are applied to a National Church, -- consisting of a great part of
either ignorant persons, that know little or nothing of Christianity, or
persecutors of Godliness, profanely despising the Word, and hating the Godly,
ibid. page 27.

God forbad Infants under eight days old to be circumcised, in that he
appointed the eighth day to be Circumcised. Now if this be a forbidding to
Circumcise before (as I acknowledge it is, and so do many Protestant Divines,
as Paraeus, Com. in Genesis 17. 11.) then that is forbidden which is otherwise
than God appointed, ibid. p. 81. And p. 180. He reckons the Cross in Baptism,
amongst Popish usuages, such as Bell*Baptism, Baptizing of Dead persons. --

I said it is a carnal imagination, that the Church of God is like to civil
Corporations, if persons were admitted to it by birth -- nor is it to the
purpose to prove the contrary, that Mr. M. tells me, the Jewish Church was in
the like civil Corporations: for I grant it was the whole Nation -- whereas the
Christian Church has another constitution -- ibid p. 265, 266.

If Christ did say to Judas, that his Body was broken for him, and his Blood
shed, it will be hard to avoid thence the proof of Universal Redemption; I
think it the safe stand most likely tenent that, Judas went out before the Lords
Supper p. 291. ibid. Christ is the Head of the visible Church, in giving them
Officers, outward order, direction -- ibid. p. 294.

But all these are alterd now, the Church is not National, no one High Priest,
Temple, Sanhedrim -- ibid p. 334.

I know that our Army has done so much for the settling the Church as that the
Anti-Prelatists Congregations had been either none, or much oppressed if they
had not broken the force of the opposite party. Nor dare I be so unthankful to
God or them, as not to acknowledge the great Mercy and benefit we at this day
enjoy thereby, however Mr. B. fret at our Liberty and jibe at the Instruments,
ibid. p. 383.

A not commanding is a plain forbidding; Mr. Collings provoc. pro. chapter 5.
Nothing is lawful in the Worship of God, but what we have precept or president
for; which whosoever denies, opens a door to all Idolatry, and Superstition, and
Will Worship in the world, which Mr. T. approves of, ibid p. 408.

Of divine Institution there is no reason can be right, but what is from Gods
own appointment, though it may seem right to us it should be so. In things
positive our reason is deceivable, and Gods appointment is only to be attended,
ibid p. 461.

And now Sir, though I might to these Collections (which are diametrically
opposite to the main principles of your Theodulia, the very basis upon which
that Fabric stands) have added many more, as you well know, yet am I willing
to spare you; not knowing but the Lord may give you to see and bemoan your
evil, in gladding the hearts of the Wicked, and sadning the Righteous, or
confirming them in crooked paths who have turned aside thereunto; which
notwithstanding your natural temper and he^ght of spirit (with which we are
sufficiently acquainted) that will p^o^pt you to say something in a way of
self-justification -- is not impossible for God to do. If you write in Answer
to our Reply, and to the purpose, you shall receive a Return ((...)) in a
spirit of meekness and christianity; If we meet therein wi^h mere dictates,
without tender of proof; impertinent citations of Scriptures, without the least
attempt to minifest their congruity with the assertion they are introduced to
prove; and a parcel of passionate railing expressions, in the stead of the
words which the Wisdom that is from above, and the Spirit of our dear Lord
teaches (which we too often meet with in your Theodulia) you have your Answer.
Farewell.

FINIS.

