The TEMPLE Opened: OR, THE GREAT MYSTERY OF THE Millennium, AND The First
Resurrection, REVEALED: And Found to be Different from all the Accounts that
have been given Thereof by Any who have hitherto wrote on the same Subject.
More Fully and Plainly Opening the Nature of the Death and Resurrection of the
Witnesses, AND The State of the NEW JERUSALEM, Than has ever yet been Done.

Humbly Presented to the KING and PARLIAMENT, By THOMAS BROOKHOVSE.

LONDON, Printed by George Larkin, Jun. And are to be Sold at his House
over against the Hat and Feather upon Addle-Hill; And by J. Whitlock, near
Stationers' Hall. 1696.

To the King.
Great Potentate, under the Administration of JESUS,
THis Address at first may seem an Enthusiastical Strain, but upon farther
perusal it will be found otherwise. Christ being Adult, or of Age, in his
Church, in her Favor gives the Kingdoms of this World to whom he pleases.
During His (or Her) Minority, Satan Usurped the Power, and Let his Whore a
Lease thereof for 1260 Years. But these Expiring, All the Kingdoms of the World
Devolved upon him, as Lord in Chief, Heir of All Things, and Head over All to
the Church. The Time of this Grand Devolution, happened in the Time of our late
Harvest, when He sent a O. C.
Bold Herald to Claim His Right, and to Demand of The Guardians or Two Old
Anointed Ones, their Staves of Authority: These Staves are Power Spiritual and
Temporal, called by the Prophet Beauty and Bands: These the Herald took and Cut
in Sunder before all the People, thereby Cancelling the Old Covenant which God
had made with them. This Public Act was a most Solemn Act of Abolition, and
Abrogated Representatively all the Powers in the World.

The Old Cedar and Vine being thus Lopt, the immediate succeeding Powers were
to be considered no otherwise but as Parents, or Adminicula to the Two New
Branches, or Two New Anointed Ones, represented by the said Prophet by Two
Olive Branches. The Power and Promises belong to These, who are to Minister or
Stand before The LORD of the Whole Earth, under the Dispensation of a New
Covenant: These are foretold by the Man whose Name is the Branch, and Joshua;
The One is to be a King on his Throne, and the Other is to be a Priest upon his
Throne; And the Counsel of Peace is to be betwixt them both.

GREAT SIR,

You are the Man whose Name is the BRANCH: The Tree of Monarchy was Planted in
the East, but was Cut Down in the West, and You are the Branch that grows in
its Room. The Lord of the Universe has Preferred You before all the Kings of
the Earth: His Ship run A-drift, and You are the First Pilot He has Chose to
Steer It. Your Commission is to Drive the Wild Beasts out of His Forest, that
His Flocks may Feed, and lie Down in Safety; And there is no Doubt but He will
Assist You in it

Now since He has Presented You with the First Staff, and Honored You with the
First Fruits of Power, That he would also Honor You with the First Fruits of
His Spirit, and Enable You to perform all His Good Pleasure, Is the Hearty
Prayer of

Your Faithful and Dutiful Subject, THO. BROOKHOUSE.

To the Parliament.
Wise Senators and Faithful Patriots,
GOD having promised to make all things New, is now performing of it: Empire
and the Gospel have finished their Voyage, and are now about to return from
whence they first set out. You have many things of great moment before You, but
that of Time justly challenges a place amongst the first. The Sands of a New
Era are now running, the last Glass of Time being turned: Empire has made us a
Visit, and will stay some Time with us, and we shall measure out Law and Time
to other Nations. We have long gone by a corrupt Reckoning, but all things are
to become New; Time and our Coin seem to be joint Petitioners and beg to be
Regulated together, that one may give Testimony to the other? The Regulation is
not only very Honorable and Profitable, but very Feasible; The Royal Society
would quickly perform it; And when is it more suitable, than when a New Empire
Commences? This Noble Work would perpetuate your Memory till Time should be no
longer. It would also be very Profitable, for there might be put what Price on
the New Ephemeris You pleased; and every Family throughout the Kingdom being
obliged to take one, a vast Sum would be raised for the Kings Use. To say it
would be very Troublesome, is no Argument; an Old House was never pulled down
without trouble and dust: When things are made New, and the House new Built,
all the labor and trouble is compensated. Caesar thought it worth his while to
Correct it, and he took not his Aim amiss, for it has been a Faithful Register
of his Fame: I could wish the King a Partner in the same Reputation. But
whether the present Conjuncture will admit of it or no, I can assure you it
will not be long before it be done: For there is a New Calendar Commenced in
Heaven: Christ's Reign is actually Commenced. The Head of the Image was in the
East, the Feet are in the West; and Here the Stone first falls upon them; and
this is the Reason of all our present Confusions; which will continue till all
the old Building is pulled down. Satan put his Metal four times in the Fire,
and it is yet but a Lump of Dross: But now the Son of God takes the work in
hand, and has appointed You his chief Workmen. That He would give You the
Spirit of Understanding to go through Your present Undertakings, is the Prayer of

Your Devoted Servant, T. B.

To the READER.
Reader,
THe Four Monarchies are but a Copy of the Four Elements, and all th Models of
Power and Policy hitherto used, are no other but Transcript of the Divine
Operations in the first Creation; They answer one another at Face does Face in
a Glass: For as then the WORD by a Fiat spoke the Four Disagreeing Elements
into that Beauty and Order we see them in: So Now, the same WORD (His Name is
called The WORD OF GOD) comes to speak the Ataxy or Irregularities of the Four
Monarchies into such an Harmonious Frame and Model that may Echo to Nature,
and keep time, as it were, with her, in all her Divine and most Excellent
Administrations.

The Four preceding Monarchies were rather Heaps than Buildings: Men piling up
mollia cum duris, sine pondere, habentia pondus; Things of a differing nature
together, so that nothing less could be expected than their downfall; the
Dissimilarity and Disproportion of parts, to such a degree corroding and
fretting the whole substance, as at last to undermine the Foundation, and to
tumble down the whole Frame. But in this Monarchy or Consistency, Bone comes to
its Bone, and Flesh to its Flesh, and all the Similar parts will be fitted and
joined together in such a due and wise Symmetry, that the Building will be as
lasting as Nature her self, of which indeed it is but a Copy.

Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; He is the (...), The Son or Word
of God, the Right Reason and Beauty of the Creation: But Satan is the (...),
the Father of Lies, the Grand Patron of Injustice and Violence, the Chief
Author of Confusion and Irregularity: These two have been at continual Was
since the Creation: But at last the Word gets the Victory, and the last Battle
introduces the quiet and peaceable Reign of the Millennium: The Millennium
Commences before, viz. At the Expiration of the Whores Lease, when all the
Kingdoms of the World devolve on Christ; but there is no Quietness to the
State, though there is to his Church, till after the Great Battle; And Christ,
as all the other Monarchs have done, must Conquer the World before he can Enjoy
it: He finds it overrun with wild Beasts, and his Flocks cannot feed quietly
till He has expelled them; He tells the Usurpers He is Heir, but They reject
and despise his Title; They resolve to continue on the Premises till They be
thrust off. He therefore prepares for War: But after a clear differing manner
from all the other Months: For They made War in Wickedness, He in
Righteousness; They subdue it by Fire and Sword, He only by his Word: Their
Followers were clothed in Steel, and had their Swords in their Hands; but His
only in Fine Linen, with their Swords in their Mouths; They Ride on Red Bloody
Horses; He and His Followers on White ones: His whole Equipage sufficiently
declares what a sort of War He designs to make, in all the Circumstances
thereof Entirely differing from the other.

Satan thought himself of Ability to Rule in Gods Throne, but he has
sufficiently discovered his Inability; for he neither knew aright how to make
Peace or War, how to pull down, or build up. But Christ will instruct the World
in better Methods. The Text says, In Righteousness he does Judge (minister
Peace) and make War: He uses not his Power, but his Spirit; not his Sword, but
his Word: And by This way He subdues the World, and tumbles down Satan from his
Seat like Lightning, who by his ill Conduct had so miserably scorched the Earth.

His way of Fighting is only Preaching, as the Sword in his Mouth does
sufficiently demonstrate. He designs to restore his Gospel by an Army of
Predicators, Clothed in the white Linen of an holy Life. By these he ferments
and levens the whole Earth, and pulls down all the Constitutions thereof.

The Millennium is the Manhood of the World, and all the preceding Governments
are but the Tossings and Tumblings of Childhood and Youth. Christ also being
Adult, or come to his full Stature in his Body the Church, comes to claim the
Government thereof. But this State is rather an Hierarchy than a Monarchy;
Jerusalem and the Bride through the whole Context being put in opposition to
Babylon and the Whore: And the Text says, They shall reign as Priests, which
agrees very well with what our Savior says, That his Kingdom was not of this
World. And when thie Rough Work is over, She is to be Empress of the Universe,
and the Kings of the Earth are to bring their Glory and Honor into her: As in
the preceding Monarchies They trampled upon her, casting Dirt in her Face, now
they are her humble Servants, and bow down before her; and this is because
Christ her Husband Rules and Reigns over them, and they have a more immediate
dependence on Him for their Titles and Soveraignties; He Giving and Disposing
of the Kingdoms of this World to whomsoever He pleases: And besure He will give
no Power to those that Affront her. And though there is no mention made of any
Kings Reigning with Christ during the Millennium, only the Saints; yet without
all doubt there is a Series of Good Kings running through the whole; otherwise
there would be none to bring their Glory into it. But this is certain, that
good and holy Men, the Members of the True Regenerate Church, have the greatest
Title to the Privileges of the Millennium, because they are set in the Front
of it, and are said to reign with Christ; and all other Powers are to hold
their Empire from the Church in Chief, as the Sovereign Spouse. Since Empire
has been so fruitful in its first Voyage, we cannot suppose it absolutely
barren in the Second: But its Children will be more Mansuete in their Return,
participating of the Common Renewed Nature, and so exercise their Power to the
service and good of Christ's Church.

Farewell.
The TEMPLE Opened: OR, The Great Mystery OF THE Millennium, AND The First
Resurrection, REVEALED, etc.
REV. XX. 5. But the rest of the Dead lived not Again until the Thousand Years
were ended: This is the First Resurrection.
BEFORE I can come at the above Words, I must speak something against Christ's
Personal Reign. and a Literal Resurrection of the Saints. John says, I saw the
Souls, etc. and THEY Lived an Reigned with Christ a Thousand Years: This is b^
no means to be understood in a Literal Senc^ but in a Civil; for the Witnesses
were never In their Grave and therefore cannot Rise Out of them: This is a
Mathematical Demonstration, if I can prove these Souls, etc. to be the
Witnesses, which from the preceding parts of the Revelations is plainly
demonstrated they are. This, The Souls, etc. is nothing but a long complex Name
for a complex Body, viz. The New-Risen Witnesses, or Church Regenerate: They
are the same Specific Body of the Numerus Sigillatus, in Chap 7. who running
as it were under ground for 1260 miles, rise up again in Chap. 14. and stand
upon Mount Sion, having their Fathers Name written in their Forehead, so are
called Numerus Conscriptus. And what is this Name of their Father, but the
distinct Character of their Sufferings, which in their passage they underwent
through every Age? This Name is the Characteristick by which they may be known
to be the true Heirs of the Promises; And therefore being now concerted into a
New Body, they bear them in their Forehead, to show their Legitimacy. Satan
being overcome in a Great Battle, who had usurped upon their Rights, and palmed
upon the World a Whorish Church for many Ages, The Whore being turned out of
the Premises, the true Heiress comes to claim her Right; And that she may be
known to be the true Heiress, she puts on her Mothers Clothes: But putting on
her Mothers Apparel, makes only an accidental, and not a substantial
alteration; there is no such Virtue in these Garments as to transubstantiate the
Daughter into the Mother. It Is our great mistake therefore to suppose these to
be the Old Witnesses risen from the Dead, in a literal sense; they are only the
New-risen Witnesses wearing the Livery of the Old; and to show that they are
their Legitimate Offspring, they bear the true Signatures of their Sufferings
in their Foreheads, which they have suffered under the Usurpation of the Whore
in every Age successively. And these Marks confirm and ratify their Claim, and
give then a Passo-porto to enter into the Millennium, which is the promised
Land of the Christians. The Witnesses before stood in naked and unfinished
Lines, in Chiar-oscuro, as the Italians call it: But here they receive their
finishing Strokes, and stand all in their proper Colors, ranged in order
successively in every Age, during the whole time of Satan's Usurpation, who
after his First great Defeat in Constantine's Time, Lived Again, and crept into
Heaven in the Livery of the Church, transforming himself from a dark Angel into
an Angel of Light.

If what I have wrote be considered narrowly, 'twill be deemed altogether as
reasonable to expect that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, etc.
should all rise out of their Graves, and return with their Successors, the
present surviving Jews, into their own Country, as that the suffering Saints
in all Ages should rise out of their Graves, and reign Personally with Christ
in the Millennium. When we give persons or things Names, the Name is usually
adapted to the quality of the person or thing denominated: So here, the Old
Church being brought to Bed of the New-risen Witnesses, they are baptized with
a Name which has respect to the Quality of their suffering Natures. When the
present Jews go into the promised Land, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Reuben,
Simeon, Levi, etc. may be said to go into it, because They go into it, who are
their true and legitimate Offsping: So if the true legitimate Offspring of the
Old Church, the old suffering Saints or Witnesses, enter into and enjoy the
Privileges of the Millennium, they themselves may be truly said to enter and
enjoy it. The Souls, etc. are but Patriarchal Names of the Christian suffering
Tribes, and their Names in their Foreheads distinguishes them from the common
Mass, and incorporates them into a Body or Nation; which Sealed Nation have
suffered as much amongst the Gentiles, nay more, than the Nation of the Jews;
and are and have been as much dispersed throughout the whole Gentile Body.
These are the Sheep of another Fold, and though their Genealogies be not kept so
strict as the Jews on Earth, so as to make them a distinct Nation, yet it is
better and more exactly kept in Heaven, where their Names are as well written,
as the Name of their Fathers on their Forehead here on Earth; And they may have
as great Assurance of entering and enjoying the Privileges of the Millennium,
though at present scattered through the Gentile Body, as the more distinct Body
of Jews, of entering into the promised Land; For their Covenant is sure, having
this Seal, The Lord knows who are his. And when he makes up his Jewels, he
gives a Copy, as it were, of their Genealogies to the Angels, who going through
the four parts of the Earth, look for the Seal of their Sufferings in their
Forehead, and so pick up two of a Tribe, and one of a Family, the whole making
the Regenerate Church, or sealed Nation; which sealed Nation enjoying the
Privileges of the Millennium, as the true and legitimate Offspring of the old
suffering Church, The old suffering Church, or Witnesses themselves, may truly
be said to enjoy them, they enjoying them in their true Offspring; As well as
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. may be said to go home to their own Country,
their present surviving Successors and true Offspring entering into the same.
And though the Text says They, yet this word They, imports no more than St.
Paul's We, when he says, WE shall not all dye, but shall all be changed, etc.
It Is plain that by We, he neither means himself, nor those he wrote to, but the
Saints of the same Piece or Body, which should be alive at the time of the
general Judgment. The Comparison is easy. And though I could say much more, in
confirmation of this Head, in relation to the Consequences, and many
Absurdities, which would arise from a literal Resurrection, yet I will forbear,
thinking what I have said to be enough to convince any reasonable Man.

The next thing to be enquired into, is the Nature of Christ's Reign, which I
deny to be Personal, since he said, when he was leaving the World, And lo I am
with you always to the end of the World; which is plain and manifest must be
meant in a spiritual manner; that we should have his influential, ministerial,
or spiritual presence, but not his personal. And in the end of the Revelations,
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; that is, they invite all to drink of the
Waters, in allusion to the Prophet of old; this plainly indicates that They
were only in being at that time; for had the Bridegroom been come, without all
doubt he would have invited the Guests himself, and not the Bride. It Is plain
He was come only in Spirit, but not in Person; for both before and after this,
in the same Chapter, he says, Lo I come quickly; which would never have been
said, had he been come already: And all this must be understood at the near
expiring of the Jerusalem-state, according to the common Rule of
Interpretation. That he was come by his Spirit influencing the Bride in the
whole Conduct of her Administration, is very plain, since the Text joins the
Spirit and Bride together, saying, The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; but that
he was personally come, there is not the least appearance at all. Further, It
being plainly proved that the Saints rise not literally, His Coming and
Reigning, must be of a piece with their Rising, and therefore not literal. His
Coming must certainly be after a spiritual manner, as is plainly hinted in that
Text, God manifest in the Flesh, justified is the Spirit: Which Spirit will
first be poured out on his Newrisen Witnesses, or Church Regenerate, being his
Body in the Scripture phrase.

But to look a little farther into the Nature of Christ's Reign, I must, with
submission, look first into the Nature of Satan's Reign, who from the beginning
of the Creation has usurped upon his Rights, and been his great Antagonist. Now
I find Satan got into his Temple, and sat in, and defiled his Throne, That is,
in the Heart of Man; for it is said, The Prince of this World rules IN THE
HEARTS of the Children of Disobedience. Now Christ comes and throws him out of
his Throne and Temple, and takes possession of Man's Heart, influencing all his
Words, Thoughts and Actions, bringing every Thought into captivity and to his
obedience: And where should the Remedy come, but where the Disease is? Any
Outward Application would be like brushing a Man's Clothes to cure him of the
Colic; the Plaster ought to be where the Sore is. The Wise Man says, Out of
the Heart proceed the Issues of Life: And a Wiser than Solomon told the
Pharisees, That all Defilements proceeded from within: The Inward Powers being
purified and set to rights, the Outward Powers fall in of course, and so the
whole Creation quickly recovers its Native Beauty: Therefore the first Act of
Sovereignty which Christ will exercise, will be to purify the Heart; there he
begins his Reign of the Millennium. If he should come in Person, and be in the
Air, accompanied with an innumerable Company of Saints and Angels, as some
imagine, Alas, what would this sight do? It would surprise us, and we should
gape for a little while; but it would quickly wear off, for we have the
glorious Body of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all the Beauty of the Creation
without us, but they have but little influence over us; one small Ray of God in
the Heart, is more than all the Outward Aypearances whatsoever. Satan therefore
being a cunning Adversary, when he came to conquer the World, observed the
Heart to be the chief Post, and made his first Attack upon it; and having
conquered it, and placed his Black Guards there, he quickly became Master of
the whole World. But Christ comes to destroy the Works of the Devil, to heal
where he has wounded, and to build up what he has pulled down, and to raise the
Creation out of that confusion in which Satan by a long Mis-rule has put it:
The first Act therefore of his Reign, is to regain the Heart, and that being
secured, all the rest come into due subjection. And this consideration brings
me to my Text.

There has been a continual War fince the Creation, berwixt Christ and Satan;
but in this Book particular mention is made of Three Great Battles, (if the
last may be called one.) In the first Satan is thrown out of Heaven, in the
second he is thrown out of Heaven. Earth, taken Prisoner, and bound; and in the
last he is thrown into Hell: But this last is not so much a Battle, as a Siege
or Assault; Satan, in allusion to Ahaziah, sending some of his Captains of
Fifty to attack the Saints Camp, and Fire comes own from Heaven, and destroys
them all. At the First Battle, (or at least at the Mustering and Raising his
Soldiers) Christ was (...) a White Horse, and at the Second upon a White Horse,
and (...) White-Linnen-Followers; and at or after the last, upon White Cloud.
But before I proceed any further, I must note Christ's Wars are always of a
twofold Nature, by the Word and Sword; the Word first proclaims them, and then
retires into the Rear, and the Sword in the Van leads the Armies was
Lieutenant: As for instance, in this Second Battle: First the Word gets upon
the white Horse, and proclaims the War, raising an Army of
white-Linnen-Followers, which are his own Peculiar Army; And these are nothing
else but Preachers, proclaiming a New Dispensation, as is self-evident by their
Swords being in their Mouths instead of their Hands, and of being clothed in
Fine Linen instead of Steel: And though the Word's Garments are dipped in Blood,
it is of the wicked Soldier's, and not of he own drawing: These I say march at
first in the Van, proclaim the War, and bid Defiance, and then draw off into
the Bear; then comes up the Sword or Lieutenant, or the Angel in the (...), who
is the Champion or Goliath of the Word, who like him, having first summoned the
Fowls of the Air to a Treat, presently fall on upon the Dragon or Satan and his
Armies, and Totally Routs them; and when he has Routed them, then comes up the
Word in the Rear, and compleats the Victory, Preselyting the rest of the World
by Preaching: for the Text says, The Remnant were stain by the Sword of him
that sat upon the Horse, whose Sword proceeded out of his Mouth: It Is plain,
the Angel in the Sun, or Constantine the second, does the Rough Work, and is
the Great Executioner; He levels the Mountains, and forces open the City Gates,
that the King of Glory may come in; the Word is nothing but the Word Preached
(and not a Person as some would have) as is plain by the Sword in his Mouth,
which is the Sword of the Spirit, Not by power or by might, but by my Spirit,
says the Lord of Hosts. Things standing thus, the Forces of Satan, who is
Prince of this World, being Routed, and himself their Generalissimo, taken
Prisoner; he is not ransomed or bailed (since none will be accepted) but sent to
Prison for a Thousand Years: So All the World become the Kingdoms of the ord
and his Christ; who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords: The whole Earth is his
now, as well by Conquest, as by Right of Inheritance; all the Inhabitants of
the Earth become his Vassals, and lie Civilly dead before him.

The whole Race of Mankind are All concluded under Death; their Power and
Dominion which is their Life, not only devolved on him as of Right (the Usurper
being Expulsed) but also by Conquest, by force being taken from them: Now the
first thing this Mighty Conqueror does (as is the custom of Conquerors) He has
a respect to his own Trusty Followers and Servants, who assisted him in his
Conquest; to them therefore in the first place, he says, Rise and Live; That
is, He Invests them first with Power, and they being the first of the Civilly
Dead, which receive any Power, are said, first to Live and Rise; and this is
called, the First Resurrection; which truly and really is so in a double sense,
because they are the first Receivers of Power; and because it is the first time
that ever Holy and Good Men were so Solemnly Advanced, they being to this time
not much better than Civilly Dead, always laboring under the death of
Perfection, Tribulation and Affliction.

Now as to The Rest of the Dead, the Text says, They lived not again, until
the Thousand Years were ended; That is, The (...) of the Conquered, received no
Power (which is Life) till the Thousand Years of Satan's Imprisonment is ended:
as the (...) and Holy Men do Rise and Live in Christ, so the Wicked at dead in
or with Satan, for Imprisonment is a Civil Death; and Christ will let the
defeated, vanquished, or dead crew of Satan, to have no Life or Power whilst
his Saints Reign: and He gives his Saints, the Church Regenerate, or New Risen
Witnesses, a Royal Lease or Pattent of Power for a Thousand Years; and (...)
they may have no Rival, but be undisturbed all the time, (...) their great
Adversaries to their good behavior, during (...) time; and here is the
greatest reason for this immagi^^^^. For after his defeat in the last, (or
rather in the first) (...) by Constantine, this cunning Quack healed his
Wounds, and (...) Again, creeping into Heaven or the power of Empire, in (...)
of the Church, which Power he has Usurped for 1260 (...) therefore sufficient
caution is now taken, by binding him, (...) he Live not Again, as before, and
that he may not palm upon the World any more Whores, laying them like
changlings, in the Brides place; and when Christ grants this Pattent of Power
(...) Bride, he seems to have respect to the time of the Whores (...), for
though it is but for a Thousand Years certain, (...) is a little season
uncertain; it is very probable, this lit^^^ season may be 260 years, to make up
the Thousand 1260, (...) balances the Lease Satan granted the Whore: and the
(...) is said to be loosed after the Thousand years were ended, it (...) not
follow it was just after, and this little season, seems to (...) uncertain,
that Men might always be on their watch (...) prepared for the coming of the
Great Judge: there is a (...) Rom 5. 10, 19. importing, That as by one man's
disobedienoe, sin (...) into the World, and Death by sin; so by the Obedience
of one (...) shall be made Righteons, which is directly applicable to (...)
case for as the world became dead by Satan's Rebellion, so (...) are raised to
life (not all) by Christ's Victory: All Rise (...) for the Text says, The Rest
of the Dead Lived not again, etc. (...) plain without all contradiction, that
the Life and Death (...) hinted, are of a Civil Nature; and that it is only the
Life (...) Death of Power and Dominion: and this Daniel wonderfully confirms,
saying, as to the Rest of the Beasts their Dominion was (...) but their Lives
were prolonged for a season and time: Satan and his crew are overcome, and
their Dominion is taken a^^^ but still, like the conquered Canaanites of old,
they live for season. and time; which plainly implies the Death is not Literal,
this Rest of the Dead, answers to the Rest of the Beasts, exactly: All the
world are supposed to be Dead, those that Rise, are said to Live, and those
that rise not, are said still to be Dead: where Truths are weighty, and have
long been hid, as this has, Tautologies and Repetitions are not only excusable,
but necessary; and therefore yet once more the Pencil shall go over it, least I
should not make good the Title, fully explained: The Rest (the other, or
remaining part, or number of the Vanquished, Slain or Dead) Lived not (received
no Power or Dominion) Again (after their Vanquishment or Death, or) Again,
(received no power or dominion again, as formerly, after their death or defeat
in the first battle in Constantines time) but still lie dead without the life
of Power and Dominion, during the space of a Thousand Years; all which time
Satan, their Generalission, lies in the Ineurabile, (for, Non est medicabile
vulnus, as formerly) but when the Thousand Years are ended, They live Again;
then Satan being loosed, these dispersed Canaanites are headed by him, and
attack the Israelites Camp, and the issue is, Fire comes down from Heaven and
consumes them: These are plain words, as Truth always requires, and I hope
easily to be understood; In the Explaining of things, Eloquence and fine words
are not so much to be consulted, as Perspecuity: When the Thousand Years are
ended, the Wicked Satannical defeated Troops live Again, and receive Power with
Satan for a little season; but till then, They lie Dead: The Text says, But
the rest of the dead lived not AGAIN, until the Thousand Years were ended; This
is the First Resurrection: It Is as plain as the Sun in the Firmament, that this
Resurrection is of a Civil Nature; being only a Resurrection of Power and
Preferment; and that it belongs to Gods Church, or Good and Holy Men, the
Members of the Church Regenerate; and yet in one sense it may seem to be
Litteral; for it is a Ressurrection from a Bloody Violent and Unnatural Death;
for the Dispensers of the Restorative Gospel, are not to be Martyred and
Butchered by Persecuting Emperors: Those (...) are drove off from the Stage,
and a New Series of Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers arise in the going back
of the Em^^^, which will be so far from Persecuting her, as the former, that
they will assist the Church in all her Administrations; and therefore dividing
Death into two parts, Death Violent, and Death Natural; the Church being freed
and delivered from the first, this Deliverance may very well be called, The
First Resurrection; the First Death, is Persecution, Deprivation of Power, and
Death Violent; from these the Church is Freed, and therefore is said to have
her First Resurrection: Death Natural, is the Seund Death; and whosoever shall
so Adorn himself with Holiness, to be a sharer in this First Resurrection, or
to be admitted as a Member into the Church Regenerate, on him the Second Death
shall have no power; that is, the Grave shall have no power ever him, but he
shall Rise to Life Eternal; and in a good measure it may be understood in a
Literal Sense, for whoever are ^ound True Members of this Church Regenerate,
when Christ (...) come to Judge the Quick and the Dead, they shall not Dye, but
be Changed; so in a literal sense, the Second Death has no power over them.

Now should we enquire, How this Life of Power and Dominion now in Christ's
Possession, shall be Shared? The Scriptures are plain; the Text says, And
thou, O Tower of the Flock, to Thee it shall come, even the first Dominion; the
Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem: The rest of the Flock, or
other Christian Nations, shall have Sister like shares; but She as the Heiress,
and Eldest Daughter, shall have the first Dominion: But it must not be forgot
to be observed, That the Privileges of the Millennium, are rather Priestly
than Kingly; and belong more to the Bride, or the Church, then the State: for
the Text says, They shall be Priests of God and of Christ, etc. and in another
place, A Royal Priesthood, a Peculiar People, Zealous of good Works; and it is
said, The Kings of the Earth shall bring their Glory and Honor into the New
Jerusalem; of whose particular way and method of Administration, I could be
very large, but this sheet will not give me leave: As to single persons, if
they would have any share in this Life or Dominion of the Millennium, they must
get themselves clothed in the White Linen of Holiness; for the Text says,
Blessed and Holy are they that have part in this Resurrection, etc. And as for
Nations, They must first help to kill the Bear, and then they may share the
Skin of his Power: and sure I am, at this moment the Ten Kings are just in a
readiness to fall upon the Whore, to eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: the
signal from Heaven is just ready to be given them: Come Lord Jesus, Come
quickly.

But some would willingly know, When the Millennium Commences: I Will therefore
tell them, It will begin with a Septenary-Day of Years, known to the Lord (and
to him that he shall reveagit) in which it shall be neither Day nor Night: but
in the Eveninit shall be Light: This Septenary-Day is betwixt Easter and
Whitsontide, or betwixt the Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the pouring out
of the Spirit from on High, which Invests them with Power, and is the great
confirmation of the New Administration, or of Christ's Reign: It really
Commences at Their Resurrection; for Christ after his Resurrection, said, He
had received all Power both in Heaven and in Earth: but the Charter of Power is
not Ratified and Sealed till the Septenary Day is ended, and that is at
Pentecost, when the whole World will be fully satisfied, and ser to their seal
that God is True: An Infant for the first week, is in a state betwixt Life and
Death, as it were, almost as much Vegetative as Animal; and that is the reason
of this dark day mentioned by the Prophet; for the Body and Life of Christ, is
the grand pattern of all things, both in Heaven and in Earth; the Regenerate
Church, or New Resen Witnesses, are his Body, and they must be conformable to
the Head: whatever circumstances attended the Single Birth in the East, will of
necessity attend the Complex Birth, or New Risen Witnesses ( Inter Iberos) in
the West; this I could make out in the east minute manner, but is not so much
my present business: further confirmation of this dark Septenary Day, is the
Cutting own the Tree of Monarchy; seven times passed over Nebuchad^^^^er before
he would acknowledge (Lew is guarda ti) that the God of Heaven was the only
Sovereign Monarch, and disposes the Kingdoms of this World to whom he pleases:
All this time, Monarchy was as a Beast in its Infantile State, rather Animal
than Rational; during this Septenary Day, there are bands of Iron and Brass
upon the Stumps of the Monarchical Tree, that it shall not grow; the seed is
some time hid in the ground before the blade comes up: and these are the true
reasons of the Darkness of our present day: But in the Evening it shall be
Light: That is, Men may think, that the Corn being hid, is dead; and that the
Tree of Monarchy being cut down, will not sprout again; but when they see the
Blade Rise up, and the Branches sprout out, they are then of another mind; this
enlightens them and makes them acknowledge, that this Darkness was only the
common effect of Nature, which conceives her Children in the dark; the
operations of the Womb, are always in the dark.

But some may ask, Why should Monarchy Expire in the West, and there have a
new Commencement, more than in any other place? This is easily Answered; Empire
is Fellow Traveller with the Sun, and must return with him; The whole Earth
seems to have as great a right and title to Power, as it has to Light; The Sun
never stops till it comes to the West, and Empire accompanies him in all his
Course: The Punicks, the Sons of Cham, put in a Caveat, and would have stopped
this Traveller, inviting him to have lodged in Africa; but they might as well
have stopped the Sun, their Fathers Prophecy and Curse putting in a Bar,
condemning them to perpetual Servility. The Gospel was published in the East,
and is to be restored in the West; otherwise the Sun goes down at Noon: There
is to be a Repassage, or Return, both of Empire and the Gospel; and after some
Refreshments, they will set out very gloriously, and will also have other
Companions of a Royal Family, The Kings of the East, I mean, who are to go back
with them;The Fullness of the Gentiles being come, they are to return home: For
They both together, the Sheep of Both Folds, the Twelve Apostles and Twelve
Tribes, will be concerned in the Administration of the New Jerusalem.

But the pouring out of the Spirit at Pentecost, will be the Sign for them to
return, for this took their Power away in the East, and was the Sign of
Dispersion, and it will give it them again in the West, and be the Sign of
their Reversion (and Conversion too.) The Blood reverts not till it comes to
the Toes, and the Stone fell on the Feet of the Image, and so goes on regularly
breaking to pieces all before it: When there is to be a general Renovation, the
Extreme Parts are the most proper to begin in. But it may easily be discovered
through the whole Economy of this World, God in all his Methods has a respect
to Nature, which like himself is most perfect in all her Operations. Now Nature
circulates, the Light and the Blood circulates, and so ought Empire and the
Gospel: So following Nature, I cannot Err, and therefore do positively conclude
that Empire and the Gospel will set, be cut down, and be dead as it were, and
then rise again in the West And whatsoever things were acted in the East at the
Publication of the Gospel at the Natural Birth, are to be re-acted in the West
at the Restoration of it at the Spiritual Birth, the Birth of the Church
Regenerate, or New-risen Witnesses; because there ought to be a due Analogy
betwixt the Head and the Body. The Birth of the Infant-Church occasions one Day
to be neither clear nor dark, but a sort of Crepusculum; But the Evening of
this Septenary Day is approaching, and the Light shall break forth abundantly.
I have in some private Letters to Friends, proved from uncontestable Arguments
raised from the true and genuine nature of Death and Resurrection, That the
Witnesses are already risen, and that the whole World have been mistaken in the
Nature and Quality of this great Truth, which I am able to make good against
all the Learning in the ^niverse, and design to do it in a little time
publicly.

I have little more to say as to the Subject of the Millennium at present, only
this, This glorious Day dawns with the Loss of (...) to the Wicked, for therein
consists their Power, which must be taken from them, all Power and Dominion
belonging to Jesus Christ. He that has Wisdom, let him calculate: Eight Days
make up the Day of Circumcision, but Seven Days of Weeks betwixt the Pascha and
Pentecost.

What I have writ on this Subject is suited and adapted to the economy of This
World; and whoever calculates Prophecies, if they do not first state and
calculate the Nature of This World, and fit one to the other, they do but
reckon without their Host. God takes particular care to suit all his Changes
and Dispensations to the State of This World: And a literal Resurrection hears
too many Absurdities in the Front, to be consistent therewith. Many have been
the Mistakes of Men about the Milleneium; And at present the subject lies under
such prejudices, that it the very sound of the Name, Men shrug up their
Shoulders, and throw it aside, saying with the old Monks, Graecum est non
parest legi: But this is unmanly, and discovers their Ignorance, Sloth, or
Vice, more than any thing else: Men are unwilling to vex themselves by looking
into a Doctrine which will turn the World upside down, and untwist all the
Constitutions upon Earth: This is a dismal prospect to those that are at ease
in their Possessions, and had rather things should run on in the old corrupt
Account, than to have a New and Just Reckoning: But since these things must of
necessity come to pass, ( for Gods Prophecies are not Poets Fables) they may as
well fend off the Blow by a due Provision, as to increase their Misery by an
unexpected stroke. The Ark is open, and they may enter in if they please, and
prevent being destroyed by the Deluge. This Prophecy now no more remains a
sealed Book; God has opened a door, and no man shall shut it: This Mystery
which has been hid from Ages, is no more a Mystery, being now clearly revealed;
and so it will stand to all Generations. Great and Mavelous are thy Works,
Lord God Almighty; Just and True are they Ways, thou King of Saints: Who shall
not fear and glorify they Name, for Thou only art Holy? All Men shall come and
worship before Thee, for they Works are made manifest.

Of the Death and Resurrection of the WITNESSES.
THe Death and Resurrection of the Witnesses, is a Truth almost of as great
Importance as the Death and Resurrection of our Savior: They being the
Counter-part of that Great Scene: All the Empires in the World are interessed
in this Great Truth; It Is the Pole Star by which they ought to steer; and in
not observing it, they run great hazard of splitting their Vessels: I therefore
take the liberty of addressing my Enquiry into this weighty Affair to our
present Powers, as before; which may give them much Light in all their Counsels
and Consultations. It Is well known what Alterations and Changes the Birth of
our Savior made throughout the World, how it overthrew all the then-existing
Powers upon Earth, and what Method there was used to do it: This is but the
same thing acted over again, in another part of the World; That, by a simple
Birth; and This, by a complex Birth: The same Methods of Conquest will be used,
viz. Nothing but Predication and Vociferation. And we that live at so great a
distance, for us to have the same Scenes renewed, and the same Actions re-acted
amongst us, is a singular kindness from Heaven: Hitherto we have taken things
upon Credit and Hearsay; But now we our selves shall see with our Eyes, and
hear with our Ears the wonderful things of God: To have things brought to our
own Home, is a wonderful Condescension, for which we cannot be too thankful to
Heaven: And since we know on what Rock the Eastern Nations split; This is a
Blazing Beacon for us, and we shall be doubly guilty if we split on the same. I
cannot err in my Enquiry, so long as I take Christ along with me for my Guide:
For He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; The Grand Pattern of all things in
Heaven and in Earth. These Witnesses are his Body, which ought to be
conformable to their Head in all things. Christ says, Except a Man be born
again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Now Christ is a Man, and to
fulfill all Righteousness, He ought to be born again: But our Nicodemus's will
say, How can that be? He is in Heaven, and cannot enter a second time into the
Womb of Mary: It Is true; but He has a Body here below, his Church, which is
himself; and this may be renewed or born again, and ought to be so, before it
can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, or the Millennium, which is a Shadow of
it. We are to come from strength to strength, from an imperfect Dispensation to
a more perfect, until we come to God in Zion. Christ Racks off his Truth from
Vessel to Vessel, till it be perfect Spirits, till Man becomes an Angel, whose
place he is to supply. Now what reason his Church has to be purified and made
clean, is plain; The Sun is coming to the Tropic, her Lord is to make her a
Visit; and she is but in a filthy pickle to recive Him: In her long Voyage from
the East, she has contracted a great many Pollutions, passing through many
polluted Cities and Countries, overwhelmed with Superstion and Idolatry. There
is the greatest reason imaginable that she should wash her self in the Waters
of Purification, that being found without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing,
her Lord may take delight to dwell with her.

In the Scriptures there is mention made of The Times of Refreshing from the
presence os the Lord, and of the Time of Restitution of all things; which can
only be meant of an Accidental Change, and not a Substantial, as some would
have it. The Times of Restitution are Accomplished by Changing all things
chengeable, by making every thing New, which can be Renewed; or in the
Scripture Phrase, by SHAKING those things which can be SHAKEN, that those
things which cannot be shaken may REMAIN.

Now before I can well proceed further, I ought to divide the things of this
World into Two Classes, viz. of Changeable and Unchangeable; and this will tell
me, not only When God has renewed all things according to his Promise, but How;
For his Work will of necessity fall in the Changeable Class, as it has done in
every Dispensation hitherto. Christ in one place is said to come with the
Clouds, which may very well be understood in the Changeable Class, in which all
the Thunders and Tempests are formed; But the Unchangeable Class is the
Firmament, which is to Remain, or not to be moved. And the Instruments He will
use in changing all things changeable, will be the Church Regenerate, or
New-Risen-Witnesses; and this by a New Predication, as Soldiers of the WORD,
with their Swords in their Mouth; Predication and Vociferation are the only
Artillery the Lamb uses to beat down the strong holds of Satan. But as to Those
Two Classes, The Immutable I divide into Seven Heads, and the Mutable into
Five, as follows.

Things Immutable to Remain.
1. Religion, or the Worship of that God which made the World, being an
indispensible Duty, is Immutable: Under this Head I mean the Christian Worship.
2. Truth, Being the Attributes of the Immutable God, are 3. Justice, both
Immutable, and must remain to the end of the World. 4. Power or Government,
without which the World would be a Chaos, and therefore Immutable. 5. Pleasure
and Pain, Being the two great Wheels on which all Humane Actions run: And I can
by no means consent to his opinion, who says, Men must live without Pain in
the Millennium. 6. The Common Effects of things Natural and Moral: As of the
four Elements; That Fire will burn, Water quench, etc. That Industry, Piety,
and Frugality, will advance single Persons, Families, and Kingdoms; and that
Luxury, Sloth, and Profaneness, will always have the contrary Effects: What
accidental Alterations, or differing Effects, the said Causes may at any time
have, come not into this Account, 7. Eating and Drinking, Marrying and Giving
in Marriage, Buying, Selling, Building and Planting, will continue to the End
of the World, Necessity making them Immutable.
These Seven, when the Great Shaking comes, must all Remain, and be of Use and
Practice in the Millennium, whatsoever Dreams some may have to the contrary.

Things Mutable to be Shaken.
1. The Will of Man, and every thing subject thereunto, or that has dependence
thereon, has been, is, and ever will be Changeable. 2. The Opinions of Men, as
to their differing Sentiments and Notions of things, have been, are, and ever
will be Changeable. 3. The Differing Ways amd Modes of Eating, Drinking,
Marrying, and Giving in Marriage, Buying, Selling, Building, Planting, etc. in
all Ages have been, are, and ever will be Changeable. 4. The Outward Forms of
Civil Government, and the Administration of Justice, are Changeable: Witness
all Histories, and all the present Forms now in use. 5. Lastly, The
Circumstantials in Religion, as to the Outward Administration, are Changeable;
of which there needs no proof.
The World being at full Age, it is time it should know its own Constitution.
And that the whole Economy thereof is comprehended under the above Two
Classes, or Twelve Particulars, I think none that has had but a little converse
therein, will deny me. These therefore allowed me for Authentic, I have some
ground to stand upon. And if I can find a Body of Men upon Earth, which have
made these Five Changes; That is, Whose Wills are changed, whose Opinions are
changed; who have made a sober change in Eating, Drinking, Marrying, and Giving
in Marriage, etc. and who have made an absolute and entire change in the
Outward From of Civil and Religious Government; I say, If I can find such a
Body of Men in the whole Christian World, who have made all these Changes, I am
in a fair way of finding my New-Risen-Witnesses; for nothing else can be
changed. And this will extort a Confession from me, That God has fulfilled his
Promises, of making all things new, having changed all things that are
changeable in this World. And it makes not much to have things in their
Perfection; if they are truly begun, and stand upon Perfect New Foundations,
it is enough. Good old Simeon sang the Nunc Dimittis, when he saw Christ only an
Infant: Men cannot suppose that things should receive their Commencement and
Perfection all at once. And the Nature and Progress of the Kingdom of Heaven,
is all along to be observed in our Enquiry: It ought not to be forgotten, that
it is compared to a Grain of Mustard seed, to Leven, to a Stone out of the
Mountain, and to Waters that at first rose no farther than the Ancles; By all
which the gradual Increase and Progression are plainly intimated. Christ, being
a single Man, was the Grain of Mustard Seed; He preached the Word, and
empowered the Disciples, first the Twelve, then the Seventy, to preach the same
through the Towns and Villages; And in this nature, and after this manner, His
Gospel by degrees was Published and Dispersed throughout the World. This is the
Pattern, and after this manner the Gospel will be Restored. One single Man of
the New-Risen-Witnesses will first begin to Preach, and so will be instrumental
in Collecting and Raising a Body of Men, who though simple and ignorant, yet by
the Assistance and Power of the Spirit of Life from God entering in them, will
cast themselves into such an Exquisite Mold and Constitution, that the most
refined Politicians in the World shall not be able to contrive the like. That
the New-Risen-Witnesses will make their Appearance and Progress into the World
after this nature, I think there is no Man will be so disingenuous as to deny
me: because it is so like Gods former Method, and because there is a Necessity
the Body should be conformable to the Head in all things. And further, That
these things ought to be so, it is unanswerably proved by Him that sat upon the
white Horse, followed by Armies clothed in white Linen, with their Swords in
their Mouth, and whose Name was called, The Word of God.

All the Divinity and Philosophy in the World can make nothing else of an Army
so Equipped, but an Army of New Preachers sent forth to Proselite the World to
the Doctrine of the Restoration: To think that any old Model should be pitched
upon for a Pattern, when Christ said, He would make all things New, is a very
inconsiderate and senseless thought: There Is no properer way can possibly be
contrived, then to Raise a New Body of Men out of the mass of the Whole, who
may Leven the whole Lump, and may be as a Pattern or Standard Lifted up for the
Rest to Repair to: Nor is there a more proper way to raise such an Army, than
by Beating up for Volunteers, by a New Predication: This is that Righteous Way
that Christ has pitched upon to make War in, in opposition to those inadequate
and unrighteous ways of all the preceding Monarchies.

I will therefore take it for granted that we have such a Body of Men amongst
us, who have practiced the same Method, and have changed all things changeable
in this World; and are a Body perfectly New in Temporals and Spirituals, in
their whole Rise coming up to the true and genuine Notion of a Resurrection:
And I know not why I may not call them the New-Risen-Witnesses, since they
have so fair and just a Title thereto. And since I have given them this Title,
I ought to deduce it regularly from the True Race of the Old Ones, who can only
give them a Just Claim. It now therefore falls in my way to speak something of
Them.

By the Old Witnesses, I understand, not Two Men, or Two Books nor any single
Church in any particular Nation, but the Body of true and faithful Christians
in all Christian Nations, bearing their Testimony in all Ages, (during the 1260
Years Apostasy) against the Mystery of Iniquity, and the Usurpation of the
Whore of Babylon, on their true Rights. Now the Text says, When they shall
have finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends out of the Bottomless Pit
shall make war against them, and overcome them, and kill them, and their Bodies
shall lie in the street of the Great City, which spiritually is called Sodom
and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified: And they of the People, and
Kindred, and Tongues, and Nations, shall see their dead Bodies three Days and
an half, and shall not suffer their dead Bodies to be put in GRAVES: And they
that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them, and shall make merry, and
shall send Gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that
dwelt upon the Earth. And after three Days and an half, the Spirit of life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon their Feet, and great fear fell upon
them that saw them. And they heard a great voice from Heaven saying, Come up
hither: And they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their Enemies beheld
them: And the same hour there was a great Earthquake, and the Tenth part of the
City fell; and in the Earthquake were slain of Men seven Thousand, and the
Remnant were afrighted, and gave Glory to the God of Heaven.

Now though the Witnesses are already Risen; which the more Judicious may
easily discern, by the Characteristicks before hinted, and so my labor of
Proof might seem to be spared, yet to satisfy others, and to make the Copy
agree with the Original, I find my self obliged to compare them one with the
other in the ensuing Explication: The Time of Harvest (or of finishing their
Testimony) to cut down the whole Earth being Come; There are Two Angels with
Sickles, One is commanded to cut down the Harvest, the other the Vintage: Now
the Corn is always Ripe before the Grapes; and where should the Angel begin the
Harvest but in a Corn Country? We have only Corn England, Scotland and
Ireland; the Grapes are beyond Sea, where the Vintage is to be gathered: It Is
plain therefore, That (...) Angel should begin his Harvest first in these
parts: I think (...) not mention when our Harvest was Gathered in England,
there being now so many on the Premises who helped to get it in By Harvest, is
meant Constitutions Civil and Ecclesiastical, and a Reaping is a Cutting them
down: Now It Is plain, they have been all Cut down in England; as well the Vine
of the Church, as the Cedar of the State: First Monarchy and Episcopacy were
Cut down; then they Returned, and Cut down the Republic and Presbytery, and
all other Models growing on that Stock: These were but Pangs of a New Birth;
and though they now are both upon the Stage, and exist together, yet it is but
upon sufferance; They are but Trespassers upon the Premises; The Promises, the
Power and Government belongs to the New Birth, the Heiress, of which they are
at present but Guardians: An Infant that cannot go, must have some body to look
after it, and who more proper than its own Parents, the Old Witnesses? But they
are certainly civilly extinct; Their Cutting down, and being Reaped, is an
undeniable Symbol of Rejection and Abolition: The Lease of Old Power being
Expired, the Head of Monarchy was Cut off, and the Head of Episcopacy too; and
the Head of the Republic and Presbytery (had they had any) would have been cut
off too; for Heaven designed to show some signal Tokens of Abolition; The House
of Power, and Symbol of the Old Dispensation, was Burned; This was a true Type
of the last Conflagration, but more particularly of the Expiration of the Old
Dispensation: when the Harvest is Cut down, the Stubble is usually Burned. A
New Era Commencing, 'twas fit there should be New Habitations; and God himself
designing to Visit the New Powers, 'twas fit a Purgation by Fire should be
used. There was an Harvest in our Saviors Time, which was nothing else but a
Cutting down all the Constitutions of the World, as the effect has plainly
declared: And this is the Second Harvest and will have the same effects; This
Harvest then being first got in, in these Countries, there was reserved some of
the Good and Best Wheat for Seed, to be thrown into the Ground to raise a New
Crop. This has been done, and it comes up Green and Kindly, and is in a very
Hopeful and Flourishing Condition; not Rising BARE GRAIN, but with a New Body
such as God has been pleased to give it; but of this more hereafter. The Old
Witnesses observing the time of the Beasts power Expiring, made an Attack upon
the Whorish Retinue, and drove them out of all Power and Dominion; This is
THEIR DEATH, and they ought to Dye first, the Time of their end being Come; but
This Retinue returns with New Vigor, and again Assaults the Witnesses, driving
THEM out of all Power and Dominion; This is the Witnesses Death: and there is
great Insulting and Rejoicing over them, because they had Tormented them so
much before; and many Gifts are sent, and much Rejoicing there is at their
Re-settlement: but they who were their Friends, prevailed so much that they
should not be Buried, in hopes they would Revive; the Text says, They suffered
them not to be put in their Graves; this argues their Death was not Literal,
and that the Tree was not pulled up by the Roots, only cut off by the Stumps,
that there might be a new Ingrafting; They lie thus Civilly Dead, expulsed out
of all Employment and Power in the Streets of the Great City, which is
Spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was Crucified: This
City can by no means be meant Rome, as some would have it, for it was never
known that Jerusalem was called Rome, and it is plain Jerusalem is meant hereby.
Now Jerusalem was a Friendly City belonging to Christ's Kindred and Nation, and
so ought this City in which his Body or Witnesses are to be Slain; and no City
in the World can claim such a Title as Land n; being the very shadow of it in a
Line directly drawn, as also does answer the same in all other Respects of
Kindred and Affinity to the Witnesses; and though it be the Chief Protestant
City, yet in a Spiritual Sense ( Rome almost in a Literal) it may be called
(...) and Egypt, nothing hinders this: In this City therefore for Three Days
and a Half, They lie Thrown out of all Power Spiritual and Temporal; and some
of them were really and Literally cast out into the Street; this was in the
last Persecution, just before the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, when
the Spirit of Life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their Feet,
and Great Fear fell upon them which saw them: And they leard a Great Voice from
Heaven saying, Come up hither; and they Ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, and
their Enemies beheld them: This was a grievous sight to their Enemies; they had
taken all care imaginable, not only to kill them, but to keep them dead: But
their Death was their Victory, as of old their Saviors was; for now they rise
again, to the Amazement of them all.

Alas! Their care extended no farther than to the Old Witnesses with whom they
had fought, and who had tormented them so much: And when they see New Witnesses
standing in the Court of Heaven, they stand amazed, as if they had seen a
Spectrum: These we know, and These we know, say they; But who are Ye? These New
Enemies they never dreamed of: There Is no Feeing the Soldiers to say they are
not risen, for they are seen of all the World. These then, as soon as they
appear, being the First Fruits of God and to the Lamb, all other old Fruit
becomes intolerable to Prophecy; A sudden Hurricane arises: And the Text
says, There was a great Earthquake, and the Tenth part of the City sell; and
in the Earthquake was slain of Men Seven Thousand. It should not be of Men,
though this Version is so, this favors a literal Death too much: Other Versions
have it, the Names of Men, or Men of Note: The Latin Version is, Capita Hominum
Septies Mill; which rendered right is, The Heads or Principals of Seven
Thousand Men: But the Greek is nearer to the point, being (...). The NAMES of
Seven Thousand Men; being it is only a Name that is slain, it frees the Text
from a literal interpretation: And every Name is a Captain, and has under him a
Thousand Men. Any one that consults the Originals, will find these things true.
And the rest (but not these) were afrighted, and gave glory to God. What a
Disturbance and Earthquake there was, is well known; caused chiefly by the
Seven Patriarchs Falling; and by their Fall, Seven Thousand of their Party.
These represented the whole Body, as Julian the whole Papal Constitution: And
it is fit there should be a Specimen of all the Condemned and Rejected Powers,
at the Rising of the Witnesses, that they might be Triumphed over, and all Fall
together. The Rest gave Glory to God; That is, they thanked God for their
Deliverance, though others repined and murmured. In this curious Scene, the
Wisdom of God cannot be enough admired. As Idolatrous Julian of old, was
suffered on purpose to make a Three year and half's Parenthesis in the
Christian Empire, that the Jews might build their Temple, and so the Epoche of
its Desolation might be the more Illustrious: So Papal Julian was admitted to
make much the same intercalations, on purpose that the Epoche of the
New-Risen-Witnesses might be the more conspicous. There was none to reach them
an hand, or to call them to Heaven: So God made their greatest Enemies to do
it, even Rome it self: And when he had done this, he had done the business for
which he was raised, and presently flies away like a Whirlwind, being
intolerable to Prophecy: For though the Lion and the Lamb may, the Whore and
the Bride must not lie down together: These things I doubt not, but will be
very satisfactory to many; especially to those who seek for Truth, with a
Resolution not to Reject it when they have Found it. The Scene lying so near, I
know, is a great prejudice to Truth; Things that lie Abroad, and a great way
off, Men sooner believe, than what is done at Home. And therefore they had much
rather these Witnesses should rise in Piedmont, Germany, or France, than in
England: But this cannot be; for the Gospel is the Blood of the World, which
never reverts till it comes to the Toes; and these Nations may be called the
Feet or Toes of the Universe. And these New-Risen-Witnesses are to Convert and
Proselyte the whole World, and therefore the Extreme Parts are the most proper
places to begin in. I know many would have the Witnesses Rise in Piedmont,
Germany and France; but they are under great Mistakes, as to the true and
genuine Nature of Death and Resurrection, as I shall fully, and to the
satisfaction of all the World, make appear, as follows.

All who have wrote upon this Subject hitherto, have supposed a Wounding and a
Healing, an Imprisonment and Releasing, a Deprivation and Restoration of Power,
in the same Numerical and Identical Body of Men, to be a Death and
Resurrection; which, alas! does not rise up to the true nature thereof at all.
Though the Witnesses Death and Resurrection are not natural and literal, yet
they ought to hold a most exact and strict Analogy thereto, and this Analogy
falls exceedingly short thereof. These are only accidental, and not substantial
Mutations in the same Body; and no accidental or circumstantial Mutation will
do the business: No, a Transformation will not do the thing; for no Man will
say Nehuchadnezzar died and rose again. No Increase or Decrease, or any other
accidental Alteration in one and the same subject, can possibly reach the
Height of Death and Resurrection. A repairing an Old House makes it not a New
One. There must be an absolute pulling down to make it Death; and an entire New
Building from the Foundations, to make it a Resurrection. Death makes a
substantial Alteration: It Is a total Dissolution of Parts, a melting down the
Bullion, and not a sodering the piece. In the Resurrection there must be a
substantial Newness. A Body that is said to rise again, must have nothing of
the Old Body in it, but be absolutely New both in substance and circumstance.
And a Body that is said properly and truly to be Dead, must be absolutely
dissolved, and must undergo a circumstantial and substantial Mutation. A Truth
of this weight cannot be made too plain. Now neither the Witnesses in Piedmont,
Germany, France, or any other part of the World whatsoever, (except in England)
have passed such a Test as this. The same Witnesses Persecuted, and then
tolerated; Wounded, and then Healed; Depressed, and then Re-established; does
not come up to the Height of Death and Resurrection: Because these are only
Alterations in the same Body, and the same Body ought not to be in the
Resurrection. The Apostle says, Thou Fool, thou sowest not that Body that
shall be -- The Body is to dye and to be dissolved, and receive an absolute New
Body, New in substance and circumstance, before it can be said to have a
Resurrection: If it rise with its Old Body, it may be said to be altered or
changed, but not risen; it is only BARE GRAIN, an Old House repaired, a Piece
sodered together, but nothing else: There is a vast difference betwixt Corn
raised up, and Corn that is Risen; one implying help, the other none (the Stone
comes out of the Mountain without hands) The one is only Old Corn, though it be
raised from the Ground; but the other is absolutely New. Men have hitherto
called accidental alterations in the same Subject to be a Resurrection, and so
have made their Witnesses rise only BARE GRAIN; but the Grain ought to rot in
the Ground, and receive a New Form and Body, such as God shall please to give
it, before it can be said to have a True Resurrection. This has been done in
England to an Iota, and answered the true and genuine nature of Death and
Resurrection in the most minute circumstances. For the Old Witnesses, and their
Constitution, has been killed, melted or cut down, like the Corn, and some of
it has been cast into the Ground, and it is risen up with a New Body, absolutely
New, both in substance and circumstance; there is nothing of the Old Way or
Method in them; but in Temporals and Spirituals, a Fundamentis, they have all
things New; And the Name of Witness is stamped all over upon them. All the
Nation will witness what I say to be true. I lay stroke upon stroke, because
Men have been miserably mistaken about this Great Truth; and I had rather
undergo some Reflections than not be plain, so weighty a Truth requiring it.

If the French Protestants should be restored to their Lands and Livings, and
be privileged to exercise their Old Methods in Religion, this can never mount
to a Resurrection; and therefore the Learned Jurieu is much mistaken in this
matter, and so are all others who have wrote on this Subject; which the Reader
must of necessity acknowledge, if he impartially peruse what I have wrote.

The liveliest Emblem of Death and Resurrection, which I know of, is a
Silkworm: In its first state it is a crawling Worm of a greenish color; and
the whole business of its Life (which may instruct Christians) is to prepare
for Death; for spinning a Noble Coffin, it dies, laying it self therein; and
after some time, it comes forth of this Mausoleum a perfect New Creature of
Whitish color, with Wings and Legs. The Death and Resurrection of the
Witnesses ought to hold a due Conformity thereto: They ought to be in two
differing States, in two differing distinct Bodies, attended with two clearly
differing Circumstances. The Old Witnesses ought to have no Life, no Power, no
Model or Form at all; but their Constitution is to be absolutely dissolved, and
lie dead, dead, dead: Then the Spirit of Life and Power is to enter into them,
and give them a New Life, Model, and Constitution, perfectly New in substance
and circumstance, in all points and respects differing from the former,

This has not been done yet, in any part of the World, but in England, and here
it has been done, and is lifted up as an Exemplar for all the World to copy
after. What has been done in other places has been only a Field of Corn raised
up, after it has been flatted by some boisterous wind of Persecution; this
amounts not to a Resurrection, it being the same Old Corn, not risen, but
raised. But here our Harvest has been cut down, and our Wheat cast into the
Ground for a New Crop, which we can say is not raised, but risen; one implying
help, the other none; and it cannot be said that ever any one helped our
New-Risen-Witnesses to Rise; It Is purely Gods Work, and is mavelous in our
Eyes.

England is reaped, but woe to the Vintage! Woe to all the Constitutions of the
Earth! For the Angel with his Sickle will cut all down before him: And where he
pulls down, there will he build; and where he reaps, there he will sow: For the
Doctrine of Restoration must be spread over all the World. God has promised he
would make all things New, which He will not do but by pulling down the Old.
Happy England, above all the Nations of the World, who art first visited by the
God of Heaven! England, Scotland and Ireland are the Reubenites, Gadites, and
half Tribe of Manasseh, which first have their Lot in the promised Land on this
side Jordan: But what they did, so must we; We must pass over Jordan: and
assist our Brethren to overthrow the Canaanites, before we can enjoy our
Possessions.

Reading the Revelations through, I observe the True Church or Witnesses to
have several Appellations, and to wear several Suits of Apparel, fitted to the
differing Ages and Circumstances they are in: In Chap. 7. they are The Sealed
Number of one hundred forty four Thousand: In Chap. 11. the Two (...) in
Sackcloth: In Chap. 12. A Woman going into the (...). In Chap: 14. The same
Number of one hundred forty four Thousand, with their Fathers Name written on
their Forehead, standing on ^ount Sion, being delivered out of all their
Calamities: And in Chap. 19. as an Army fighting under their General the Word:
And lastly, in Chap. 20. Every one standing in their proper Colors concerted
into a regular Body of the Church Regenerate, Landed safely in the Millennium.
Thus -- Si liccat parvis componere Magna. Caius goes to his Diversion, to the
East End of an Oblong Pool, where he chooses several smooth Stones, and marks
them with a particular mark, then slides them over the surface of the Water,
where they dive many times by the way, but at last Land on the Western Shore;
where Julius going by, he calls to him aloud to throw him back his Stones,
telling him they have such a particular mark; the which he does. And this is
the state of the Church and Witnesses, before and during the Millennium: For in
their passage they met with many Troubles and Perplexities by the Way; but in
their Return, they are free from all.

OF THE NEW JERUSALEM.
CHRIST taking Possession of the Kingdoms of this World, as Heir and Conqueror
thereof, and the Church being brought to bed of the New-Risen-Witnesses, these
things make such a great Alteration, that there is said to be a New Heaven, and
a New Earth: All things in Church and State receive a New Face: And things are
so turned up-side-down, that This State is called by the Apostle to the
Hebrews, The World to come: But it is not well Translated, for the Original is
not Cosmos, but Oceonimia, which is Dispensation, so ought to be rather
Dispensation to come, of which we speak.

The Millennium does introduce a New Dispensation, but not a New Gospel; by
Dispensation, I understand a Publication of all New Discovered Truths, and an
Errecting up a New Outward Administration suitable thereto. Light and Truth
breaking forth, they ought to be Published; and Children being Born, they must
be Provided for: The New Bride must have a New House built for her; and it was
never known, that a King took the Field, but he had a Royal Tent pitched for
him: 'Twas the custom of the Warriers of old, as soon as their Armies were
Mustered, to Erect a Pavilion for their General, called the Praetorian Tent;
which being pitched in the middle of their Camp, all Commissions and Orders
were Issued out from thence; and the whole Camp Addressed themselves thereto in
all their Affairs of Concern and Moment. The WORD is in the Field, Riding upon
his White Horse, and his Army of White Linen Followers are Mustered; but there
is no Tent Erected for the Lamb; there are Muster-Masters, but no
Quarter Masters, and every one bears his own charge in the War; this ought not
to be: the Apostle says, No man goes to War at his own Charges; it is a
shameful thing that the Generalissimo should lie out in the Field; there was
never any Army yet, but had some Head Quarters.

In all the Dispensations that have hitherto happened, There was some principal
place appointed for God and Religion. Moses built God a Tabernacle and Solomon
a Temple, and it has been the confusion of the World, that Christianity has had
none appointed for it in this last Dispensation. The Christian Dispensators,
having no peculiar Lodgings appointed for Them, fell into the Baudy House of
Rome; and so She that was at First a Pure Virgin, became a Prostitute, and is
now that great Whore of Babylon, which must be turned out of doors to make Room
for the True Bride. This Great Neglect of not making due Provision for Gods
Servants, will cost the World dear; for all that Irregular Building, that Vile
Mixture of the Sons of God with Men, is to be pulled down; and Men must do what
they ought to have done before: They must build a place for the Servants of God
in each Nation, for the Dispensers of his Word to dwell in; and it ought to be
as our Saviors Sepulcher, in which it is said Never yet Man lay. For had the
Spouse layen in such an one before, She had had no occasion of Repentance, and
had not now been called a Church Regenerate. So many Vile Idolators having lain
in Rome, Corrupted her Manners and Conversation, and made her unfit for her
Lords presence. What Irregularities and Confusions there have been in the last
Dispensations, I think will be needless here to enumerate, they being so plain
and self evident to the World, and that the principal cause and occasion of
them, has been what I mentioned, I think is a like manifest. The Dispensation
of Moses was much better than this Last; for he appointed Thirteen Cities for
the Priests, and Forty Eight for the Levites, through all the Tribes of Israel.
The Servants of God were not left to scramble for their Livings, in such a
precarious manner as ours; but had their due Lot of Land allowed them for a
Possession; which indeed was the greatest Due and Justice in the World. And God
appointed Moses to do it. And when they came into the promised Land, they
applied themselves to Joshua and Eleazer: And they spoke unto them at Shiloh in
the Land of Canaan, saying, The Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, to give us
Cities to dwell in, with the Suburbs thereof for our Cattle. The Lord
commanding this thing, not only shows the Justice, but the Fitness and
Properness of it. And I challenge all the Skill and Wisdom of the Universe, to
propose a better Way and Method of Dispensing Gods Word, than what He here does
Himself in this Chapter of the New Jerusalem. There is a River of Life, and a
Tree of Life, in the midst of this City; which no Skill or Learning in the
World can make any thing of, but must of Necessity allow it to be the Gospel,
and the Preachers thereof: And to what purpose can the Twelve Gates serve, but
that the Preachers may go out Twelve times a Years, or every Month, to heal the
Nations? It Is said, The Tree yielded its Fruit every Month, and the Leaves of
the Tree were for the Healing of the Nations, And the Kings of the Earth bring
their Glory and Honor into it. This shows the Millennium to be rather an
Hierarchy than a Monarchy, as I hinted before; And this Constitution of
Circular and Itinerant Predicants, does confirm the same: The Inhabitants of
the City are a Royal Priesthood, a peculiar People zealous of good Works.

But some say, This New Jerusalem is Heaven, because it comes down from above.

The Millennium is the Morning of an Eternal Day, and this Jerusalem-state is a
Type of Heaven, but not Heaven it self, because the Text says plainly it comes
down from Heaven, and therefore cannot be Heaven it self. It is said to come
out of Heaven, because of the Excellency of its Constitution, being contrived
by God himself, and because it is a Copy of the Heavenly Motions, answering it
in all its Circular Revolutions. But if Men consider it right, it is a very
strange Opinion to make all the other Scenes through the whole Prophecy to be
on Earth, and this to be in Heaven; they may as well make Solomon's Temple in
Heaven, as to make this City in Heaven: As his Temple was the Perfection of the
Tabernacle, so this City is the Perfection of the last Tabernaculous
Dispensation of Babylon: The Bride and the Whore are always put in opposition
to one another; and to make one upon Earth, and the other in Heaven, is to go
against the whole current of Scripture-Analogy. This City can be taken no other
way but in a Literal sense: And Men that only Gaze, and speak at Random, may be
surprised; But whoever does soberly and seriously consider of the matter, must
needs Vote for me in this Case: There is such a Torrent of Reason and Justice
on my side, that I cannot well see how any one can withstand it.

All Men will acknowledge that God made This World as a Theater to display his
Glory upon; the Five Empires are no other but Five Acts: And the Altar,
Tabernacle, Temple, Mock City, and True City, are the Five Scenes. Jerusalem is
but the Scene of the Fifth Act, which always is the best: And it is usual in the
Last Act to have all the Actors on the Stage at once; For first, there are the
New-Risen-Witnesses, or Church Regenerate, then the Jews, then the Whore and
her Retinue, and lastly a Set of Idolaters throughout the World; Every one are
to be rewarded according to their Merit. The Witnesses are the principal Actors
in this last Act, and are Risen, but as yet enter not publicly till The Scene
of the New Jerusalem be Drawn; when, The Stone which the Builders rejected,
becomes the Head Stone of the Corner. But I spoke of the Reason and Justice of
the thing; Is it not a most Just thing, that the Lord in Chief, when He comes
to visit the World, should be served with the best Furniture, and lie in the
best Room in his own House? He has had the First Fruits of our Flocks and our
Herds, an Altar for the Earth, a Tabernacle for our Tents; a Temple, for our
Houses; But he has had no City yet: And it is fit he should be presented with
the first Fruits of all the Compositums, as well as of the Simple and Natural
Things on the Earth. The Kings of the Earth have built to themselves many
stately Cities, and called them after their own Name: Says one, Is not this
Great Babylon which I have Built, for the House of the Kingdom, and for the
Honor of my Majesty? And this is the cause which makes the Earth mourn, and
the Hailstones of a Talent (the Bombs) ruin so many Cities. Men build their
own Houses, and neglect Gods. David would not do so; He would not lie in Cedar,
when the Ark of God was in Tents. But now the WORD OF GOD is on his White Horse
in the Fields, and like Jacob, must lay his Head upon a Stone: For He has no
Tent at all. But it is hoped ere long, this thing will be considered by our
David, when the Wars are over, and when God shall give him Peace round about.

Again, Nebuchadnezzar calls Babylon, The House of the Kingdom; Every Kingdom
is to have a House or Principal City in it. Now all the Kingdoms of the World
are become Christ's, and it is the most reasonable thing in the World, that He
should have a House in every Kingdom, as Lord in chief, and Proprietor of the
Whole: This is but a very reasonable Sacrifice to Him, who can enter upon the
whole Premises when He pleases. At this very time He is Sovereign Lord of the
Universe, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and that by a Decree, ordained
Him from Eternity: No Monarch in the World has a Foot of Ground or an Inch of
Power, but what is given by him: He therefore who has received from him the
First Fruits of Power and Empire in England, who has been preferred before all
the Monarchs of the World, being constituted his First Delegate; He, I say, who
has Received First, ought to pay his Homage First; and to Erect such a Monument
of Gratitude, as may be a Pattern to other Nations to all Generations. I speak
not so much of a Glorious City, as a Tent, College, or Tabernacle, to show the
way, and make a beginning: And was it a City, the thing is very feasible; for
if every little Village can rear a Church, sure a whole Nation can quickly
build a City. In this Tent, College, Tabernacle, or City, let there be built,
as for the Prophets of old, a little Apartment for each Prophet, putting a Bed,
a Stool, a Table, and Candlestick there; and a sufficient Number being Annually
chose out of all the Counties by Lot, let them Twelve times a Year issue out,
and heal the Nation: When this is done, Righteousness will quickly cover the
Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea; We shall have no dark Corners, or barren
Mountains, but every thing will be full of Light, and every thing will flourish
and be green, like the Paradise of God. Indeed the Advantages of this most
Excellent Administration, are inexpressible, and is worthy of the Great
Contriver, God Himself. Then we shall know what the New Moons and the Sabbaths
mean; for Earth will Echo to Heaven, and we shall in a manner have a Sun,
Moon, and Stars, here below; keeping due time in their Motions and
Circulations, with them above. What the Sun is in the Heavens, or the Heart in
Man's Body, the same will this City be in every Nation.

But Jerusalem in Palestine is to be the Head, for to Her the great Stream of
Promises belong: The Text says, And Thou, O Tower of the Flock, to Thee it
shall come, even the First Dominion; The Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of
Jerusalem: Jerusalem will be the Royal Seat, or House of Christ Kingdom; for,
The Name of the City shall be, THE LORD IS THERE: That is, He will be there in
a most Glorious manner, but not Personally; His Name is called Wonderful
Counselor: It Is extremely probable his Presence will be there after the manner
he was in the Temple of old, viz. Oracularly.

And since I am come to the City of Ezekiel, it will not be amiss to observe
the position of it, and of the division of the whole Land, which is exactly
like a Man: For there are the Lot of Five Tribes above, and Seven Tribes below,
and the holy Portion for the Priests and Levites in the middle; and this City
in the upper part of the holy Portion answering the Heart exactly, the holy
Portion below answers the Belly and Intrails, which are esteemed holy; And the
Princes Portion lies on both sides the holy Portion, East and West, like two
Arms. to guard and defend it. And it is said, They that serve the City shall
serve it out of all the Tribes of Israel: This seem; but Reasonable, for this
City being the Heart, supplies the whole Body with Salutiferous Juyces. The
Preachers do issue out Twelve times a year to heal them, and there is the
greatest Reason in the World, that the whole Tribes should serve it; by
Administering such Conveniences and Necessaries as are suitable. And that the
Inhabitants of this City are Preachers, though the Text be silent, yet is a thing
without all contradiction: For the Waters that issue out, first to the Ancles,
then to the Knees, then to the Loins, and at last to be like a River not be
passed over; these Waters, I say, do plainly manifest that the Gospel and
Preaching is meant hereby; and their Salutiferous Virtue does confirm the same.
And another Prophet is more apposite to the thing; says he, In that Day,
Living Waters shall go out of Jerusalem, half of them toward the former Sea,
and half of them toward the hinder Sea; in Summer and in Winter shall it be.
Here is the exact Method and Administration pointed at, and the Continuance of
the same, saying, In Summer and in Winter it shall be: Now it is not possible to
spell any thing out of this so clear an Expression, but the Gospel and
Preaching. The Apostle to the Jews, levels the whole of his Discourse to this,
New Dispensation; for, as it were, rejecting the former, he says, Leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto Perfection, not laying
again the Foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God,
of the Doctrine of Baptism, and of Laying on of Hands, and of the Resurrection
of the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment: These all seem to be the matter of the
last Dispensation, and therefore he leaves them, and designs to speak of
something higher, employed by the succeeding Verse, -- And this we will do, if
God permit. And he makes Christ to be the chief Administrator in it; saying,
For unto the Angels he has not put in subjection the World (Dispensation) to
come, of which we speak: And afterward he tells them, But ye are come unto
Mount Zion, and to the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable Company of Angels: To the General Assembly, and Church of the
Firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and
to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect: And to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant; And to the Blood of Sprinkling, which speaks better things than
that of Abel. This City is of a Heavenly Nature, ministering in Spiritual
things, in which the General Assembly of the New-Risen-Witnesses do convene;
The Latin Version is Conventum and Concionem, implying a General Assembly of
Preachers; and their Names being written in Heaven, answers to that Conscript
Number which John mentions stood on Mount Zion, and we cannot suppose that
Heaven is meant thereby. But this, as I have before intimated, for their
Security, in opposition to the Jewish Genealogies which are kept so strictly on
Earth: And for the Ministration of Angels, God has always used them to Minister
to Those which shall be Heirs of Salvation: And no doubt but they will be
employed in a more especial manner in this most happy Dispensation.

This New Jerusalem can by no means be Heaven; for Isaiah after having brought
in God making a New Heaven and a New Earth, he brings in the Children of Israel
building Houses and inhabiting them, and planting Vineyards and eating the
Fruit of them, which are things inconsistent with Heaven: And it is said, The
Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory into it, which they cannot do into
Heaven; For Heaven needs no Glowworms to enlighten it: And to represent any
Church State which is past, there is too much Beauty and Symmetry in it for
that: It must needs therefore presigure something to come. And if it be
objected, It cannot be in a literal sense, because of the Inestimable
Materials: This makes little; for the Richness and Sumptuousness of the
Materials, is not so much to be understood literally, as to set forth that most
admirable Beauty and Harmony it will introduce, and to make it a more proper
Representative of Heaven, of which it is really and truly a Type, and nothing
else. John was set upon a Mountain to see this glorious sight, and he tells us,
It came down from Heaven, and therefore cannot be Heaven it self. He might be
set on a Mountain to see as far as Judea, he being in Patmos; but I rather
think it was to see as far as Britannia, where this happy State should first
dawn, and where the First Pillar in this Temple of God, or of the New
Jerusalem, should be erected; which is a peculiar Promise to the Philadelphian
Church, which we really and in truth have amongst us: Jerusalem in Palestine
will be the Tower of the Flock, or the Cupola of this most Magnificent
Structure; and all other Cittadels will be as Pillars to support the Main
Fabric: It will be like St. Peter's at Rome, and all the rest answering our
Cathedral (...).

Further, John says, He saw no Temple in it; which plainly sets forth the
changing the Temple-Administration for that of a City: And how excellently is
this Dispensation suited to the Age of the World? The World is now Adult, and
come to its Manhood; and what more proper Scenes can we have than Cities, which
are the Discretional and Political parts of her Furniture?

But further, The Body of Jesus Christ is the Grand Pattern of things in Heaven
and in Earth, and were we but well-instructed in our own Frame, we might almost
know any thing: The last expired Dispensation has been only a Fermentation in
the Stomach, or a preparing of the Juyces to convert them into Blood, which
this City-Heart disperses, and makes to circulate through all the Body. The
Circulation of the Blood being found out, the Gospel (which is the Blood of the
World) could not be long a Mystery; and the Blood coming to the Extreme Parts,
reverts, as I hinted before, proving thereby the Church to be Re-born, or the
Witnesses to have their Resurrection in the West. The Increment of Christ's
Natural Body is the Great Rule of all our Dispensation, or Cause of Alterations
of all the Political Affairs in the World: As the Flesh grows, the Politics of
the World change; The Flesh is the Incremental or Changeable Part, and the
Spirit the Firmamental or Immovable Part, being God himself. That common
measure of Prophetic Time, of Time, Times, and Half a Time, has a peculiar
respect to the Age of Christ. And the Three Grand Dispensations by Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, have a peculiar Regard to his Childhood, Youth, and Manhood:
In the dark shadowy Dispensation of the Jews, He was growing in the Womb; and
to Constantine's time a Child; and the last 1260 years, he was a Youth, (and
what Aestuations and Fermentations there are in Youth, is well known; and it is
as well known how Youths are corrupted and imposed upon, who are Heirs to great
Estates.) But now he is Adult, and come to his Manhood, and therefore, as is
usual for Heirs, makes claim to his Estate, which is no less than the whole
World: Hitherto he has been as it were in his Nonage; But Now, as the Apostle
expresses it, his Body the Church is come to the Measure of the Fullness of his
Stature; which is not well Translated, for it is Christi Adulti, in the Latin,
which ought to be rendered of Christ come to his Manhood, or grown a Man.

Before, Other Lords Ruled over his Heritage; But Now, in the Millennium, being
his Manhood, he will Rule Himself: He Now Claims all Power and Authority, and
gives and bestows the Kingdoms of this World to whom he pleases. And whosoever
henceforward Exercises any Power or Authority on Earth, if not delegated by
him, it is either Permission or Usurpation; for all Power and Dominion belongs
to Him. And when Kings come to their Kingdoms, it is usual to prefer some City
before others, for their Residence; Therefore Jerusalem in Palestine is the
place; He will reside and put his Name there; The Text says, The Name of the
City shall be, THE LORD IS THERE. It Is also (speaking Spiritually) usual for
Men who come to Age, to Marry, and take a House; Jerusalem is this House, and
the Church Regenerate is the Bride; and blessed are those that are called to
the Wedding: Says John, Blessed are they which are called to the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb: That is, Blessed are those that are Members of the Church
regenerate; Blessed are those that live in the times of this happy
Administration of the New Jerusalem, for they (if they be Holy) shall be
Sharers of the First Resurrection, or be invested with the First Fruits of his
Power; They shall enter into, and have the Privileges of this Holy City, if
they are clothed in their Wedding Garments, the white Linen of Holiness; but
if not, they must stand without: The Text says, And there shall in no wise
enter into it any thing that Defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination,
or makes a Lie; but they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life: And,
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree
of Life, and may enter in through the Gate into the City: For without are Dogs,
and Sorcerors, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolators, and whosoever
loves and makes a Lie: And all these things are to be understood in a
Literal, as well as in a Spiritual sense; No indigested crude stuff must come
to the Heart, but pure and rarefied Blood.

And what can Men object against this most happy Administration? I know they
will say, It will make strange Alterations, and overturn all their Old
Constitutions in the World: I allow this: It Is said, Old things are passed
away, and behold I make all things New. And Men may thank themselves for this;
for if they had not built with Wood, Hay, and Stubble, it had not been pulled
down; If they had made due Provision for the Infant Bride, she had not turned
Prostitute, and so had now had no occasion to have been washed and purified;
she had been ready long ago, and had not now occasion to make her self ready.
Christ set the World a Blessed Pattern, but they would not follow it. The Text
says, And it came to pass, that He went throughout every City and Village,
preaching and showing the Glad Tidings of the Kingdom of God; and the Twelve
were with him. And another says, And Jesus went about all the Cities and
Villages, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Doctrine of the
Kingdom. This was the way which our Savior took, and had it been continued
hitherto, there had been no need of a New Administration. The Way and Method a
Doctrine was first planted, is the most proper way to preserve it. This way
therefore being used at the Publication, ought to be used at the Restoration.
The running Waters are living and wholesome, but the standing do putrify.

Christ is the Alpha and Omega; The Throne mentioned in the first part of the
Revelations, is nothing else but this New Jerusalem. This Book is the most
exquisite piece of Paint in the World, and were the Painting-Art lost, it might
be found here: The Son of God first draws the Design, then the heavenly Raphael
's and Michael Angelo 's go on, adding Line upon Line, and Stroke upon Stroke,
guided by his Divine Hand, till at last they finish and show this Incomparable
Hierogliphick in its proper colors. By Throne nothing is meant but this City;
And the Prophet Jeremiah does confirm the same, saying, At that time they shall
call Jerusalem The THRONE of the Lord, and all Nations shall be gathered into
it, to the Name of the Lord at Jerusalem. And when the Text says, I saw
Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given unto them; I know not
how to understand any thing else but Cities, where places of Judicature are
usually erected. Nor do I see any Inconvenience to let the Sword of Justice and
the Sword of the Spirit, to make their Monthly Circuits together, that the
Counsel of Peace may be betwixt them both. When the Prophet says, And thou, O
Tower of the Flock, this argues there must be many of them, else they could not
be a Flock. And every holy City in each Nation sending annually their
Representatives to pay their Homage, and receive Instructions there, these make
in Council together The General Assembly of the Firstborn, ( much greater than
that at Nice.) Thus says the Lord of Hosts, It shall come to pass, that there
shall come People, and the Inhabitants of many Cities. And the Inhabitants of
one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the
Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts; I will go also: Yea many People and strong
Nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before
the Lord. And another Text says, That whosoever of all the Families of the
Earth that shall not come up to Jerusalem, upon them there shall be no Rain. We
cannot suppose that the whole Number should come to the Feast of Tabernacles,
but some Representatives from the Regenerate City of each Nation; and these
being in a Body at the Feast of Tabernacles, make up the General Assembly of
the Firstborn. And the Prophet Isaiah says, And it shall come to pass, from
one New Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come
to worship before me, says the Lord. This has a peculiar respect to this most
excellent Economy, in sending out Monthly Preachers out of each National
Regenerate City, which will give birth to Weekly, Monthly, Quarterly, and
Yearly Solemnities, so that this Prophecy will then be fulfilled to an Iota.
These Circular Monthly Preachers, are plainly hinted at in the Texts following.
I have set Watchmen on thy Walls, which shall never hold their peace day nor
night. Thy Watchmen shall lift up the Voice, with the Voice together shall they
sing, for they shall see Eye to Eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion. And
I will set Shepherds over them that shall feed them, and they shall fear no
more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, says the Lord. And I
will give you Pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you with
Knowledge and Understanding. Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the
brink of the River: Now when I had returned, behold there were very many Trees
on the one side and the other: Then said he unto me, These Waters issue out
toward the East Country, and go down into the Desert, and go down into the
Sea, which being brought forth into the Sea, the Waters shall be healed. And it
shall come to pass, that every thing that lives, that moves, whithersoever
the River shall come, shall live; and there shall be a very great multitude of
Fish, because these Waters ( these Preachers) shall come thither, for they
shall be healed; and every thing shall be healed where the River comes: And it
shall come to pass, that the Fishers shall stand upon it from Engedi to
Eneglaim: There shall be a place to spread forth Nets. There Fish shall be
according to their kind, as the Fish of the Great Sea, exceeding many: But the
Miry Places thereof, and the Marshes ( That is, those that will not hear, or
admit of these Preachers) shall not be healed, but given to Salt. And by the
River on the Bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow all Trees
for meat, whose Leaf shall not fade, neither the Fruit thereof he consumed: (
That is, these Preachers shall never fail to make their Monthly Circuits out of
the Cities) it shall bring forth new Fruit according to its Months, because the
Waters issued out of the Sanctuary: And the Fruit thereof shall be for Meat,
and the Leaf thereof for Medicine. This is so full, that there will be no
occasion of quoting that of John, which in a manner is a Repetition of it.
Daniel says in the end of his Prophecy, Many shall run to and fro, and
Knowledge shall be increased: And Zacharia, We have walked to and fro through
the Earth, and behold all the Earth sits still and is at Rest. Were but
these things fixed, then might we very well say, How Beautiful upon the
Mountains are the Feet of him that brings Glad Tidings, that Publishes
Peace, that brings Good Tidings of Good, that Publishes Salvation, that
says unto Zion, Thy God reigns. These things are to be performed and done in
the time of Christ Reign. And these Preachers shall further say, Ho, every one
that thirsts, come ye to the Waters; and he that has no Money, come ye, buy
and eat; yea come, and buy Wine and Milk without Money and without Price. Many
have paid very dear for a Draught of these Waters; but old things are passed
away, and all things are become New. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and
let him that hears say, Come; and let him that is athirst come; and whoever
will, let him take the Waters of Life freely. The Gospel then is to be as free
as the Air, or the Sun Beams: Then will Righteousness cover the Earth as the
Waters cover the Sea: For what dry Mountain will not this constant heavenly
Rain fall upon? What dark Corners can be hid from these ever-shining Lights?
Glorious things are spoken of Thee, O thou City of God! But when these things
come to pass, Men shall say that the Prophets have not told them half of the
Truth. That Pillar of Fire which led the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and
all the former Glory in the Tabernacle and Temple Administration, were but
first Fruits of the Glory which shall be revealed in this City-Administration:
For God shall create upon every Dwelling House of Mount Zion, and upon all her
Assemblies, a Smoke of a Fire by Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by
Night; and upon all the Glory there shall be a Defense. The Sun it self is to
be ashamed, when God reigns in Zion before his Ancients gloriously.

The Political part of this Worlds Economy being screwed up to the Harmonious
Pitch of the Natural, there is a Non-plus-ultra, and we can go no further:
Nature is the utmost Bounds, and is the Handmaid to that Eternal Bliss which is
to be revealed in the presence of God for ever.

The Prophets are so full in their Descriptions of the Glory of this
Administration, that to come up to any tolerable measure of its Commendation, I
must transcribe them all, and then fall far short of it too; For to describe
the Beauty of Nature, is in a manner to describe GOD Himself, who is the
Fountain of it, which is impossible. But there is one of the Prophets put the
Old Dispensation, and the New, in a Balance; his words are these: Before these
Days, there was no hire for Man, nor any hire for Beast; neither was there any
Peace to him that went out or came in, because of Affliction: for I set all Men
every one against his Neighbor. But now I will not be unto the Residue of this
People as in the former Days, says the Lord of Hosts: For the Seed shall be
prosperous, the Vine shall give her Fruit, and the Ground shall give her
Increase, and the Heavens shall give their Dew; And I will cause the Remnant of
this People to enjoy all these things. This is a most gracious Promise; and
that God may be as good as his Word, he binds Satan up all the time of this
Economy; for should he still be loosed, things would go on as formerly, nay
worse; but being overcome in this last Battle, God promises that neither he nor
his crew shall Live Again, as formerly, when Defeated by Constantine; but that
they shall be as Drones without Stings, and lick up the Dust of the Earth, and
lie prostrate at the Feet of the New Jerusalem, or Church Regenerate, for the
whole time of this Dispensation. The Rest of the Dead lived not till the
Thousand Years were ended: Then he and the rest of his impudent Dead Vassals
will attack this City, and Fire comes down from Heaven, and destroys them. But
during his Imprisonment, She Rules as a Queen, and as the Sovereign Empress of
the whole Earth; but in an Hierarchical and Spiritual manner, and not in an
Imperial: For, Christ was a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedeck.

During this Reign, there will be no more Appeals to Rome, but to Jerusalem;
for there the Court of the General Assembly of the First Born, will be held;
every Regenerate City sending yearly their Members to serve in this Heavenly
Parliament: God does not abolish the Old Jewish Priesthood of Aaron, nor the
Babylonish one at Rome, but puts a far better and more Excellent One in their
room; and this the Apostle hints all along in his Treatise or his Epistle on
this Subject to the Jews; he mentions, a Rest to the People of God, which is
nothing else but the Millennium; and HE the Heavenly Melchisedeck, is supreme
Administrator in it, as Aaron was in the Old Dispensation of the Jews: He makes
a Comparison all along betwixt one and the other, and prefers one in a high
degree before the other; by all which it may be plainly understood, Christ's
Reign is after a Spiritual Priestly manner; and if it had not, it had never
been put so much in opposition against the Whore; and as for the Temporal
Power, He delegates that to whom He pleases, and disposes of it so thorough the
whole time of the Millennium; that no King or Potentate in the World, shall be
able to disturb or hurt his True Church: The Bride has a Husband, invested with
all Power in Heaven and in Earth, and is sufficient to maintain her against all
Whorish, Beastly or Satannical Usurpations whatsoever; and He will use all his
power to Cherish and Caress her, to compensate her Sufferings under former
Usurpations during his Minority: He disposes his Power so, that the Kings of
the Earth bring their Glory and Honor, and lay it in her Lap; this is but
their Duty, and as I may say, a Tithe to this Royal Melchisedeck, who to
requite their kind Protection and Kindness to his Spouse, Blesses them, as
Melchisedeck of old did Abraham; and this bringing their Glory and Honor into
it, stands in direct opposition to that Evil Treatment and Barbarous Affronts,
the Kings of the Earth of Old put upon her, who butchered her Servants as Sheep
for the Slaughter; for which vile Indignities, He now takes Revenge, and casts
the Beast and the Whore into the Burning Lake. Men may raise many Mountains of
Difficulties against this New Jerusalem: But hear what God says, Who art thou,
O great Mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a Plain; And He shall
bring forth the Head-Stone thereof with shouting, crying, Grace, Grace. Joshua
is brought in by the Prophet standing before the Angel in filthy Garments, and
Satan at his right Hand; and the filthy Raiment is taken away, and he is
clothed with Priestly Raiments, and a Miter set upon his Head. Joshua here is
the Representative of the Witnesses in Sackcloth, or the Suffering Church in
the Old Dispensation: And Satan seems to be angry that she should be delivered
from his Tyranny; and stands by, and accuses her of all those Backslidings
which he has tempted her to; and, as it were, infers from thence that she is
unworthy to be delivered; But God rebukes him: The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan;
even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: Is not this a Brand
plucked out of the fire? This Rebuke, is that Great Battle fought by the WORD
and Satan, in which Satan is Defeated, and the Virgin-Church Delivered out of
his Clutches, and a Crown or Miter set upon her Head: The Text says; They
Lived and Reigned as Priests with Christ a Thousand Years; That is, all the
time which Satan and his Accomplices lay under the Angels Rebuke.

By this Pair of Witnesses, Zerubbabel and Joshua, is plainly hinted to us how
the Millennium will Commence: Zerubbabel is to overthrow all the Powers or
Mountains of Opposition, and so the Church Regenerate is Delivered, and he is
to assist Joshua in the Establishment of her; for it is said, The Counsel of
Peace is betwixt them hoth. The Text says, That The Man whose Name is The
BRANCH, shall rise out of his Place and build the Temple (or City:) I know not
how to make Christ come from Heaven Personally to build this Temple; I know He
is the Root and Offspring of David, and so may be called a Branch, but all his
Building is of a Spiritual Nature: he builds up his Church Spiritually,
conferring Spiritual Gifts and Graces upon his Master Builders, whom he employs
in the Work: But it is plain, that this Building is to be Material, and
therefore requires a Man upon Earth to do it. I am no Theologue, and if I
should be mistaken, may be excused; but I cannot remember that the NAME of
Branch is attributed peculiarly to Christ any where else in the Bible: The
Angel says, His Name shall be called Jesus; and in another place it is said,
His Name shall be called Emanuel, God with us; and, Wonderful Counselor, etc.
This Text points directly to the Man's NAME, and to the Manner and Circumstance
of his Rising: It says, He shall rise out of his Place, implying an Ascent to
Honor: David rose out of his Place, being but a Shepherd, and he overthrew the
Philistines, and all the Enemies of God's Church round about: And Zerubbabel
rose out of his Place, being but a Thresher, and he cast down Baal's Worship,
and overthrew the Midianites, and settled the People of God in Peace. This Man
the Branch, if he could be found, must be attended with the like Circumstances,
because there is the same business to be done: The Baalitish or Babylonish
Worship is to be thrown down, and the Philistines, and all other Enemies of
God's Church, to be overcome; The Kingdoms of this World becoming the Kingdoms
of the Lord, and of his Christ.

Christ finds the World in great Confusion, and his Church much oppressed, and
therefore wants a Man to overturn his Enemies, and to Deliver his Church from
Oppression: Therefore he raises some Man or other out of his Place, to perform
this, as God did Zerubbabel and David of old.

Now there is a Man risen out of his place, and is already performing this
Great Work; on Him Christ has delegated the First Fruits of his Power in his
Millennian Kingdom: He also rose out of his Place, in another sense, being a
Posthume: His Appellation is also from a thing that grows out of the Earth, or
out of its place. And so it is ordained that He who should be the first
Introducer of the Millennian Kingdom, should not have his Name from a Fierce
Ravenous Creature, by which Beastly Emblems all the preceding Monarchies were
represented, but from a Tree; A Tree, next to the Olive Tree, the only Emblem
of Peace and Prosperity in the World; For the nature of it is such, that it has
always Fruit upon it, either New or Old, and often both together: This happy
Emblem is chosen to represent to us the most flourishing and happy State of the
Millennium; and possibly that this Nation shall never want one to sit upon his
Throne. After the cutting down our Harvest, and the Termination of the Old
Powers, Saul was our first King, who though under great Obligations did
nothing; the last, was only an Intercalation; But this seems to be our David,
that must do the Work.

Now I have brought the Monarchy to a Tree, it will be needless to enlarge more
upon the Name of Branch.

The First Head of the Fifth or Western Monarchy, ought to be a great Hunter,
to drive the wild Boar out of the Vineyard, and chase the Lions, the Leopards,
and Bears, out of the Forest, that the Flocks of God may feed and lie down in
safety. Hitherto these Beasts of Prey have made sad Desolation and Havoc vock
amongst the Lords Heritage: Constantine once drove them out, but they came in
Agatn: But Now the Promise is, They shall not live Again. Great God, when will
this Great Battle come? But come it certainly will, and then these Beasts shall
be for ever driven out. Daniel says, The rest of the Beasts had their DOMINION
taken away; That is, they were civilly killed.

The last Tyrannical Scene of Lions, Leopards and Bears, being withdrawn, the
next is, A Fair and Beautiful Forest; and this comes of course: There are now
no Inhabitants in the Forest of the World, but Trees; the wild Beasts had
driven out the Flocks before; and now They Themselves being driven out, the
Trees only are left. The Millennium enters of course, and a Beautiful Forest
is the first Scene. And then the first Tree that appears, which is to have the
chief Dominion, is The Meinreb or Vitis; The Second is, The Pomerancenbaum, or
Malus Assyria; one is to be the Adminiculum or Pedimentum to the other: This
last with its Golden Fruit introduces the Golden Age. This in behalf of the
Vine is made the first King of the Trees; This has a preference to all the
Trees in the Forest, and has the First Commission of Power granted him from
the Sovereign Lord in Chief, in the First Resurrection of Power.

Which Tree may next be preferred, I cannot tell: All Power being Christ's, He
chooses whom he pleases. But this I can tell, The last in Succession, when
Satan is loosed, must be some Vile Bramble, only fit to be burnt; because,
suggested by Satan, he attempts a Rape upon the Spouse of Christ, the beloved
City; So he and his fellow Brambles are all burned with Fire from Heaven. And
in all probability this New and Last Era will hold Analogy to the last Expired
Monarchies; We shall have the Best Trees first, and the worst at last, as is
intimated by Nebuchadnezzar's Image; Whose Head was of fine Gold, his Breast and
his Arms of Silver, his Belly and his Thighs of Brass, his Legs of Iron, his
Feet part of Iron, and part of Clay.

And if Men should object against this New Emblem of Power, They ought to
consider, the Old Tree of Monarchy being cut down, a New One ought to grow in
its Room. The Beastly Monarchies Expiring, and the Kingdom of the Forest
Entering; the Powers, Civil and Ecclesiastical, are no more to go under the
Emblem of Beasts of Prey, but of Trees, whose Leaves are for Shade and
Protection, and Fruit for Profit and Delight; and therefore most proper to
represent the most Glorious Reign of the Millennium, all whose Officers shall
be Peace, and Exactors Righteousness. But the old Tree being cut down, and the
Stump left in the Ground, there must be some time allowed for another Tree to
grow up, and before it can be a Tree, it must first be a zweig, a Surculus, in
English a Branch: The Old (Vine, the Old Church, or Old Tree of Life and Power
of the Gospel, has been cut down, as also the Old Tree of Power or Monarchy,
and two New Branches sprouts out. These Two Branches grow up together, the
latter being the support and strength of the former, which is tender, and weak,
and needs Assistance; All the World knows the Nature of a young Vine.

And this leads me to the understanding of two Texts which has been hid from
Ages, but now Revealed to the Glory of God in due time: Jer. 23. 5. Behold the
Days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a Righteous BRANCH;
(And a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute Judgment and Justice
upon Earth: In his Days Judah shall be saved, and Isreal shall dwell safely And
this is his Name whereby he shall be called, The LORD our RIGHTEOUSNESS: Zach.
6. 12. Behold the Man whose Name is the BRANCH, and HE shall grow up out of his
Place, And He shall build the Temple of the Lord, even HE ( because there is
two) shall build the Temple of the Lord, and He shall bear the Clory, and shall
sit and rule upon his Throne; And HE shall be a Priest upon his Throne; And the
Counsel of Peace shall be betwixt them BOTH. First there is a Righteous Branch
born to David; this is the Spiritual Birth of Christ in the Church Regenerate,
or his New-Risen-Witnesses: This cannot be himself

Personally, for he says, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches. Then there is a
King which shall reign and prosper, and execute Judgment and Justice upon the
Earth; And in His days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: And
this King shall give the Name, or be Godfather, as it were, to the Righteous
Branch. And as if he should ask what Name? The Spirit seems to make Answer,
This is the Name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Now nothing is more plain and evident, than that the Name of the Lord our
Righteousness, is not the Name of the Man whose Name is the Branch, for they
are plainly Two Names, one is called the Lord, and the other is called the Man.
The Man whose Name is the Branch, is That King which shall reign and prosper,
and execute Judgment and Justice upon Earth; the Text levels directly at his
Name Apellative: Now what King has such an Apellative Name, I leave to the
World to Judge. But if Men shall say they are both one, they very much mistake,
for the Text is plain and express to the contrary, making Two of them, saying,
The Connsel of Peace shall be betwixt them both. The One shall build the Temple
of the Lord, and shall bear the Glory, and sit and Rule upon his Throne; and
the Other shall be a Priest upon his Throne; And the Counfel of Peace shall be
betwixt them both. How the Translators have ordered it, I know not, but the
thing is self-evident, that there is an Hic and Ille in the case, though they
have rendered it He and He. God says He will create a new thing upon Earth, A
Woman shall compass a Man; as this relates to a common birth, it is no new
thing: This compassing a Man, I know may very well be applied to the First
Birth, but more particularly to this Second, this young tender Branch creeping
round, or encircling its Pedimentum, expressed by the Counsel of Peace being
betwixt them both; the State being then the Husband or Guardian to the Church.
But here is something farther intended by the Newness of this thing; It Is not
customary for the Woman to caress the Man, for the Church to be above the
State; But in the Millennium the Church shall rather be uppermost, and
therefore may be said to compass the Man.

But that this King that shall reign and prosper, is not Augutus Caesar, nor
the Righteous Branch, but purely He, the Man whose Name is the Branch, I have
this further to offer: The Angel gave special order what the Name of the First
Birth should be, saying, His Name shall be called JESUS; Now we cannot suppose
the same Birth to have Two Names, therefore the Name of The Lord our
Righteousness, must of necessity be the Name of the Second Birth, the Birth
Spiritual, or of his New-Risen-Body, the Church Regenerate. Again, The Name of
Righteous, speaks so much Sanctity and Holiness, as cannot well be given to a
Temporal Prince. And that This King which shall reign and prosper, is not
Augustus Caesar, is plain, because it says, In his Days Judah shall be saved,
and Israel shall dwell safely: Now all the World knows that in the time of
Augustus Caesar, and the First Birth, the Jews were far from dwelling safely,
they were under Bondage, and after a little while utterly exterminated;
therefore This Name of the Lord our Righteousness must relate to a Second
Birth, in a little time after which, the Jews shall be Saved and return home.

To sum up the whole, Behold, the Days come, says the Lord, that I will raise
unto David, (Christ) a Righteous Branch; And a King shall reign and prosper,
and execute Judgment and Justice upon Earth; and in HIS Days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: This King, etc. seems to come in by a
Parenthesis; as if he should say, The time of the birth of the Righteous Branch
shall be in the Days of such a Kings Reign, in whose Reign Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and then the Parenthesis is shut up, and
the Child's Name given. And when it is said that Kings shall be Nursing-Fathers,
and Queens the Nursing-Mothers of Christ's Church, this supposes Infancy and
Childhood, and is more particularly applicable to the birth of the Church
Regenerate; for when the Old Jewish Church was brought to bed of the Christian,
the Kings were so far from Nursing the Child, that they would have strangled
it: And therefore this Promise must relate to the birth of the Church
Regenerate, or none at all. This Child or Righteous Branch was born in the
First Year of the Reign of the King that began to Reign and Prosper; viz. Anno
1689. And the Time of its being baptized with the Spirit, or Power from on
High, is just at hand, and He is to be its Nursing-Father and Royal Godfather,
and to call it, The Lord our Righteousness; And the Counsel of Peace shall be
betwixt them both.

And so this difficult Text is, by the Grace and Assistance of God, plainly
solved; and the Event thereof, will speedily confirm its Truth: And then Judah
will be saved, and Israel will dwell safely; for as the Former pouring out of
the Spirit did disperse them, This will collect and gather them. The Text is
plain.

Isaiah tells the Jews how long they shall be under Tribulation and Misery,
viz. Until the Spirit be poured on us from on High, and the Wilderness (the
Church in the Wilderness) be a Fruitful Field (be Regenerate) and the Fruitful
Field be counted for a Forest. The Temporal Power is the Forest, which
incloses and guards the Fruitful Field of the Church. When this comes to pass,
which is just at hand, it will confirm and sufficiently ratify what I have
asserted. The blessed Pentecost cannot be far off, it must needs be at the
Door; and I desire all good Men to prepare themselves for it, but especially
the New-Risen-Witnesses, on whom the Great Descent will be. This will Arm all
the World against the Wild Beasts of the Forest, that the Arborical Reign may
be Established. The Church hitherto has been in the Wilderness, but when the
Spirit descends, it will be a Fruitsul Field, and yet will be counted for a
Forest. The Great Descent opens the Fountain, which by a New Predication will
quickly overspread the World. This River shall receive no stop by the way, as
the last. Satan being bound, it shall run over all the High Mountains. Isaiah
says, And there shall be upon every high Mountain, and upon every high Hill,
Rivers and Streams of Waters, in the Day of the Grees Slaughter when the Towers
fall. Christ says, Every Plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be rooted up; and this is the time of rooting up.

But God never pulls down, but he builds up; and where he reaps, he sows: The
falling of these Towers is nothing else but driving the wild Beasts out of the
Forest, an overthrowing the Babylonsh Kings, and their Buildings; and this is
done by the Sword: Then comes the Word, implied by these Waters, and instructs
and informs them in the Ways of the New Dispensation. This is the last
Dispensation, which hitherto was to come. The Text says, We give Thee thanks,
Lord God Almighty, who art, and wast, and at TO COME. This is that World or
Dispensation to come, which the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks of. It therefore
being now come, no more is to be expected.

Four do not bear Record in Heaven, only Three, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit; And God having applied himself to Reclaim Men by Three several Methods,
they can in Reason expect nothing else: And therefore the Text says, He that
is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is Holy, let him be Holy still;
implying thereby, that no more Attempts would be made to reclaim them. The
first Approximation was by Angels, very Terrible, above them; the Second, by
Flesh, more Familiar and Kind, yet without them; the Last, by his Spirit, comes
nearest of all, even within them. This is a most Gracious Approach, and will
leave the whole World without Excuse: Men need not step out of Doors for any
thing, they have all things at home.

In the Propagation of this last Dispensation, there will be no such Martyrdoms
as before, the bloody Beasts are driven out, or chained up; Old things are
passed away, and all things are bcome New. The Martyrdom will lie inward, a
renouncing Self, and the World, and a crucifying the Affections and Lusts.
Nothing henceforward can hurt Gods True Church, for Christ presides over the
Forrestial Kingdoms and makes Kings the Nursing Fathers, and Queens the
Nursing-Mothers thereof: It Is said, The Kings of the Earth shall bring their
Glory and Honor into it.

It Is an amazing thing to observe how tenacious Men are of their Old Models,
thinking that God will build so lasting an Empire as that of his Son, upon such
rotten and weak Foundations; Whereas he has publicly declared to all the
World, that he would make all things New. Let them henceforward think of
nothing else but of being broken to pieces by the Stone out of the Mountain.
The whole Civil and Ecclesiastical World is now in the Crucible, and the Fire
of Gods Wrath will quickly melt it down, and make it ready for a New
Impression. The Angel has his Sword in his Hand, and only wants the Word to
fall on. Christ has granted his Royal Pattent to his Church, it wants only the
Sealing, and the Wax is just now a melting; When it is Sealed, when the Complex
Birth is Circumcised, or the Child Regenerate Baptized (with the Spirit I mean)
Then all the World shall know, That the Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. They are truly and really His now; And
never a Tree in the Forest has any Legal Power, but One; But this World knows
not; But then they shall; And all the Rest shall be found to be Usurpers. Then
woe to Herod! Woe to Zebah and Zalmunnah! For the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon
shall do mighty things. Then the Kingdom of the Forest will enter, and every
Man will be a Soldier to help to kill the wild Beasts: Every Man then shall
understand what is meant by the Man whose Name is the Branch; And shall confess
that God has given him for a Witness to the People, a Leader and Commander to
the People.

I care not to perplex the Reader with Numbers: When the Sun is up, there is no
occasion to ask when he Rises: Yet I could do it very exactly. But this is
another Province.

Before I Conclude, I must desire the following Writers to take particular
notice of what I have wrote.

The One is an Ingenious Man, but more a Philosopher than a Divine: T. Burnet.
He melts down the World Literally, instead of its Civil Frame: This is most
Cruel and Inhospitable: There might have been some better Correction found out,
than to burn Men's Houses about their Ears: and Some Better Entertainment, for
wearied Guests and Strangers, than to fall on them and kill them in their
Lodging; it is not customary to turn men off, before They have said their
Prayers: The Millennium is the Repentance of the world: The Counterpart of a
Voyage: The Reversion of an Estate after an others decease: But He cuts off the
Entail; Sinks the Vessel in the Harbor; kills the weary Traveller, and allows
the Penitent no Benifit of the Clergy. It Is the custom of a Skilful Founder to
Break his Metal before He casts it a new: The Stone out of the Mountain, is
said to break the metal Image of the Four Monarchies to pieces: This Breaking
to pieces, is nothing but the unravelling of all the Constitutions upon Earth:
Now, Had He well considered This, I Believe He would have left us our Good Old
world standing, during the Time of the Millennium: For there is no doubt but It
would Last us much longer were the Heavy weight of Men's Iniquities Swept off.

The Other is more a Divine than a Philosopher; and would have Christ to come
Personally and his Saints with him, T. Beverly.
and to Live and Rule with him in a Heavenly Court over us, in the Air, dureing
a Thousand Years: and to have The Dead-Risen Saints to hold a Corespondence and
Commerce with the Saints that remain alive below upon Earth; as plainly appears
by his Catichism and other of his writings. Now having so plainly and fully
proved The First Resurrection not to be Literal, there needs no more to be said
in Confutation. This Castle in the Air (as He himself makes it) will quickly
vanish. The Man is a Pious and Good Man, and has Great Communications of Light,
But, Humanum est Errare. It Is much more probable, That Christ will appear in an
ORACVLAR manner as in the Temple of old, rather than in a Personal: On This
account He is called Wonderful COVNCELLOR, etc. And The Prophet Says Men shall
Say no more The BVRDEN of The Lord, But what has The Lord ANSWERED. This
plainly Implies That He is to be Sought to for Council and Advice, And although
The Name of The City be, The Lord is There, Yet an Oracular Presence is more
Suitable to Reason, Scripture, and Gods former Methods, than a Personal.

The Last, is (if alive) A Good Philosopher and Divine, M. Jurieu.
But a Bad Mariner (Though at Roterdam) and a worse Husbandman. For He makes
His Vessel to return back, before it comes to its ordained Port: Empire and The
Gospel, ought to Sail to the Extremest Parts before They Return. He makes also
His Witnesses to Rise BARE GRAIN, Whereas it is First to rot in the Ground and
come up with a New Body as The Apostle plainly demonstrates. It Is well known
France is not the Extremest Nation, The Witnesses therefore, could not Rise
There: The Extrusion of the Poor Reffugies was only an Act of Secretion By Him
who has his Fan in his hand, who being unwilling to have the Wheat and Chaff
burned together, dispersed them abroad, not for their Ruin but their Safety;
Sodom could not be destroyed till These Lots were gone out. And Now The Fatal
Day is approaching, The French Tyrant was Raised up, on purpose to be thrown
down, and made Great, that Neighbor of his might be made Greater: But this
runs me on another Subject.

I Freely acknowledge, that what I have wrote on these Subjects is New, But
this gives it a title to Truth, Since all who have hitherto wrote on the Same
Points, have been mistaken. Now if Persons would but lay aside their Prejudices
to Causes and Persons and consider of things sincerely, and impartially, I
doubt not but they would confess, that I have made good The Title, and that
These things will remain no longer a Mystery to all Generations. To God be the
Praise and Glory, who has hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and
Revealed them unto Babes.

See! How The Heaven and Earthly Powers Run back,
This World's The Green, Jerusalem's The Jack,
The Spirit is The Bias, and The NAME
Of Him who is the BRANCH, Begins The Game.
-- Of Time being no Longer.
ANd I saw another Mighty Angel come down from Heaven, etc. This Angel comes on
a Solemn Embassy from the Mighty God, and therefore his Garb is very
magnificent, He is clothed with a Cloud, has a Rainbow on his head, his face is
like the Sun, and his feet as Pillars of Fire: The Great Business of his
Embassy, is to instruct The World in the Great Concern of TIME, and to Commence
a NEW Dispensation, Which is first to be Published throughout the world, and
then TIME is to be no longer. This NEW Dispensation is plainly intimated in the
Commission He gives to John, saying, Thou must Prophecy AGAIN Before Many
People, etc. The Open Book in his hand, is The Book of the OLD Dispensation:
and his Commanding John to eat it up, is the Cancelling of it, and The
Commencing a New One. This Solemn Act of eating it up, lays it up in a safe
place, that Man may come at it at all times, and so renders him inexcusable
before the Great Judge. The King is come himself, The WORD is upon his White
Horse, and though We may regard his Picture in his absence and call it The
King, yet to call The Written Word so in his Presence is something unmannerly.
I have a due value for The Written Word of God, But a much greater for The
(...), or The ETERNAL WORD, The One is The Original, The other is but The Copy.
WORDS Printed or written are but painted, And we have had a great many unhappy
Artists, who have made The Copy very differing from The Original: Some of The
Draughts look more like J -- than Jesus. The True word is only Audible and not
visible: No man yet ever saw words only heard them: Therefore what is written
or Painted in our Books cannot be The True and Real word. Before The Marriage
It Is usual to send The Picture, But when The Bridegroom comes, it is laid aside.
If it be asked, how we shall distinguish? I Answer, The Spirit is our Helper
and The Bride knows Her Lord. But to Return to The Angel: His Drapery is all
Hiroglyphick, and plainly declares, in what part of the world he delivers his
Errand viz, in the West. It Is the Setting Sun of the Gospel which sets under a
Cloud: when The Sun is setting, it is usual to see the Rays dart down on the
Sea and Earth like Pillars of Fire: Before, The Church was allglorious without,
but under This New Dispensation, She is all-glorious with in, Her State is now
inverted: And This Angel coming to proclaim a New Dispensation and to usher in
The Refreshing Times, is Clothed with a Cloud, which is a Symbol both of Change
and Refreshment. The Eastern Sun of Righteousness shining on the Western Cloud
makes The Rainbow, which is a very Comfortable Symbol, and assures us God is
mindful of his Promise, which Promise He Performs by Renewing all The Old
Eastern Images in the west: For the Death, Birth, Resurrection, Ascension, etc.
of Christ are again Renewed in His Witnesses or Church Regenerate: And These
Things being strange to The world are appointed to be Published: John Therefore
is Commanded by The Angel to Prophecy AGAIN.

And He cried with a loud voice as when a Lion roareth. He comes from the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah, and therefore speaks in his Masters Language; But
besides His Embassy being to all the World, should He not cry a loud He would
not be heard. And when He had cried, Seven Thunders uttered their Voices, etc.
Since these Thunders are sealed, I will not be too busy with them, it is
probable they are the Seven years of the Seventh Angels sounding betwixt the
Second and Third Woe, which are a Mystery till the Last Blast. And standing on
The Sea and upon The Earth He lift up his hand and swore by Him That lives for
ever and ever, etc. I Never see The Sun Setting under a Cloud with his Feet
like Pillars of Fire, but it puts me into a Fit of devotion, Thinking of The
Most Solemn Oath of This Angel, which puts a dismal Catastrophe to The World.
The Great God who is Just in all his ways, and Holy in all his works, is
unwilling to surprise The world; and therefore sends a special Message to
Mankind by This Angel, to acquaint them, that after such a Time, TIME should be
no longer; And That He may be Believed, He Confirms it with an Oath, that which
a more Tremendous and Solemn One was never sworn.

Now since He has been so kind to send a Special Ambassador, It Is worth our
while to hear, and consider well of his Message. His Oath is positive and
Indefinite, That TIME should be no longer, BUT, etc. But In The Days of The
voice of The Seventh Angel, when He shall BEGIN to sound, The Mystery of God
should be finished, as He has declared to his Servants The Prophets. Here is
no mention made of Time, Times, and half a Time, as by the Angel in Daniel,
under The sounding of The Sixth Trumpet, But The Death of CRONOS, or TIME
Indefinite, is positively Swore to; and under CRONOS, All The Tempestates, or
Species of Time what soever are comprehended: Having Swore his Death so
solemnly, one would have thought The Angel would presently have fell upon The
Aged Monster, But He gives him a little Respite, coming in with a BUT, or an
Exception, which Semper firmat Regulam; But, Says He, In The Days of the voice
of The Seveath Angel (Reckoning These Days from the very Time) when He shall
Begin to sound, etc. Did I Say He gave him Respite? He gave him none, but
killed Him then, and Raised Him again to life: The Oath flew both Him and his
Issue. TIME, here is of a Complex nature and may rather be suposed a She
Monster, And being Pregnant, The Angel rips open the Belly and lets the Young
live out all their DAYS, which had otherwise perished in The Womb of Their
Parent: But Though These POST HUMES live, yet Their life is only a Reprieve
after Condemnation, for They are not to propagate, Their Death being really
swore to in the Death of their Parent: This BUT, limits their Life, which is
during All The Days under the Sounding of the Seventh Angel.

Some Pious Men amongst us, understand TIME here, in a Relative and Restrictive
sense, affirming that The Angel means no more, than that some of the same
quality or sort should be no longer, than the Beginning of the Angels sounding;
which Interpretation, though acidentally true, yet falls much short of The
Angels Oath, being only a part of his plain indubitable sense: For nothing is
more plain than that the Sense extends it self farther, even to the END of the
Days, and consequently to The END of the world: The Text at the very entrance,
confirms this, making The Hysteron, the Proteron, or Putting The Days before The
Beginning, plainly implying thereby, That we are to include All The days under
The Angels sounding, before his Oath of Time being no longer, can take place:
We cannot suppose, that God would send so Extraordinary in Ambassador to The
world, on such a slight Errand, as to acquaint them, That when The Sixth Hour
was past, it would be Seven a clock, or that The Time under The Sixth Trumpet,
should last no longer than The Beginning of The Seventh; Such a Message would
be very unworthy so Great a Courtier; And was his Business to tell us, That The
Time in the sixth Hour would not be The same for quality, with That in The
Seventh; This would not add much to the Dignity of His Office.

In short, TIME Ends not (as is vulgarly supposed) when The Angel BEGINS to
Sound, But at the Expiration of the whole Days under his Sounding: And the
Angels Chief Errand is to point out to Men The PERIOD of The world, And The END
of Time: And Methinks I hear Him Speaking to The world after This manner. YE
Sons of Men Take Notice, The Old Glass of Time ( viz. of 1260) is just run out;
And I Am Sent to Turn it, And I Here Turn it in The Presence of you All, And do
Swear, By The Living God who Lives for ever and ever, That It shall never be
turned more, But when The Sands are run out, or when The Days of the voice are
Ended, (Reckoning Them from the Beginning of his Sounding, or Tuning of his
Trumpet) Then, The Glass shall be broke, and TIME, (of whatsoever Denomination)
shall never be Measured more, but be swallowed up, in the Great Ocean of
Eternity. Two Things The Reader must Note. First, That That TIME which The
Angel swears the Death of, is of a Simple and indefinite nature: and that The
Time which He Excepts is of a Complex nature, Because there are Days in it.
Secondly, That The Angel is Seven year in sounding viz, Betwixt The Second and
Third Woe. These things being premised Though there may be so me seeming
difficulty when to Commence The Excepted Time, and when it Ends, or Expires:
Yet really, There will be none at all.: For We are to Begin These Excepted
Days, Not when The Angel has sounded or done sounding, But when He Begins to
sound: Not When The Clock has struck all, But at The very First stroke of
Seven: The Text is, (...) Quum futurum est ut Clangat: That is, When He shall
First begin, or be about to begin to sound: The very Tuning his Trumpet, or his
Preparing himself to sound, comes into The Account. It Is usual to say, It Is
Seven a Clock, when it has struck Seven; But This is our Error, For it was
seven at the First stroke: at that very Instant, when The Sixth Hour Lapsed, or
The Second Woe to The True Church Ended. The Reign of a King Commenceth, Not
from the Time of his Proclamation; But, From The Exact Time of His Predecessors
Death. There is no Interregnum, Time being not discontinued: So The Reign of
Christ Commenceth, from the very moment of the Angels Beginning to sound, which
was in The Later part of 1688, When The Witnesses Rose. The Spirit puts an
Emphasis on The word beginning, God being unwilling that Men should be
ignorant, of the Exact Epoche of Christ's Reign: Because it is The Index, which
points out The Final Day of Judgment. Now, In The second Place, How long These
Excepted Days will Last, or when they will Expire, and Time be Finished, is
alike plain, and manifest: For, The Sands In The upper part of the Glass, will
be no longer in running, than in the lower part: The Lease of The Bride, (If The
Indentures be compared) will be found to be cut out of the Same sheet of Time,
with that of the Whores: Now The Whores Lease, was for 1260 Years, or Time,
Time, and half a Time; under the Sounding of the Sixth Angel: And The Brides,
under the Sounding of the Seventh, will be the Same, viz, 1000, for The
Millennium, and 260, for The Little Season, In which, Satan shall be Loosed,
which Balances exactly. Then, Time shall be no longer. The Turning the Last
Glass, or the Angels Beginning to sound, Is the Finishing of time Inchoate, And
Its vacuity, (or Expiration of the 1260 Years,) Is the Finishing of time
Consummate. These things must needs be very plain. The Sounding of the Seventh
Angel, Is the worlds Passing Bell: Judgment then begins, and They are
Destroyed, which destroy the Earth; and in the End are thrown into Hell, when
the Quick and Dead will he judged. These Last 1260 Years being the Dawn of an
Eternal Day to the Godly: But the Dire Crepusculum of an Eternal night to the
Wicked. These Days Began in the Latter part of 1688, But had no Solemn
Commencement 'till An. 1689 'when The Man, whose NAME is The Branch, was
Crowned King. Now, would The Inquisitive know, what the Last Year of the
Seventh Angels Sounding will Issue in: Let me tell them, It Is, very probable
'twill Terminate in a Most Glorious Appearance of Christ, Pouring down the
Spirit from on High, at Pentecost: For, He is Now Considered under the
Following Relations. viz, As the Son of A Great King, or an Heir Adult,
Claiming All the Kingdoms of the Earth: As a Bridegroom, come to marry His
Bride: As a Great General, come to Conquer the World, whose Name is called The
WORD of God: As an High Priest, or Chief Administrator in His Millennian
Kingdom, and Lastly, As a Young Infant in His Church Regenerate The Pouring out
the Spirit (so often promised) may Refer to all These: As He is a King, It Is
the Great Proclamation: As a Bridegroom, It Is The Marriage Supper: It Is the
Sealing His Commission as a Soldier: His Installment as He is an High Priest:
As He is married, it is the Sealing His Bride a Jointure of Power For a Thousand
Years: and as He is an Infant, it is his Babtizing: and Lastly it is the TEMPLE
OPENED, not of which The Plagues do Issue forth, with a Full Commission to
Destroy all His Enemies, who would not have Him to Rule over them.

No Sort of Christians will deny that God has made to Men a Promise of a NEW
COVENANT in the Latter Days: Obliging Himself thereby to write his Law in their
HEARTS, etc. Now, He never makes a NEW Covenant but He Break The OLD one: Nor
is it his Custom ever to Introduce a New, or Cancel an Old one, with out the
Greatest Solemnnity. After what Manner, and with what Solemnity He Broke The
old one; I have plainly hinted in my Preface to the King. The Introduction of
the New one (there being Two SEDE VACANTES by Cancelling the Old one) is but
the Reverse of That: And That It will be Introduced with a Joyous Solemnity, is
The Rational Expectation of all Good Men.

THE END.

