CHRIST IN BELIEVERS THE Hope of GLORY. BEING The Substance of several Sermons,
Preached By The Learned, Laborious and Faithful Servant of Christ Mr. JOHN
BROWN Sometime Minister of the Gospel at Wamphray in Annandale.

Never before Published in English.

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid. Anno 1694.

TO THE READER
Christian Reader,
AMongst the Prejudices, wherewith the Hearts of many of the People of this
Generation are plagued, this is not the smallest or least; that they accept of,
or reject what comes to the public view of the World* more as they affect or
disaffect the Authors, then according to the Worth and Merit of the Thing
published: And are more ready to say, As concerning this Sect, we know that
every where it is spoken against, Then to say, But we desire to hear of thee,
what thou think, Or with the Noble Bereans, to search the Scriptures daily,
whether these Things be so or not.

But Reader, For removing thy Prejudices, know, that the following Sheets
exhibit unto thee, several Precious and Excellent TRUTHS, not to be found
every where so succinctly and yet clearly handled; Which, if thou have any
Spiritual Senses exercised to discern Good and evil, may by the Blessing of
GOD, prove wholesome Food to thy Soul: And if thou had known the Reverend and
Worthy Author, thou could not for his sake, have had the least ground to be
prejudged at any Truth, that ever did come from his Pen. And for thy better
Knowledge of him, he has left some Monuments behind him of his singular Piety
and Learning, which if perused, would no doubt make him great in thy Esteem:
And these Monuments are extant in his Writings, both in Latin and English, in
Polemick and Practical Divinity; Such as his Book, De Causa Dei, contra Anti
Sabbatorios. His Refutation of the Errors of Wolzogius and Velthusius, about
the Right Interpretation of Scripture, and about Church Government, And an
Manuscript entitled, Defensio Ecclesiae Scoticanae, etc. Which was exhibit to
the General Assembly of this Church, Anno 1692. And is not yet published, but
we wait for it, and expect that it shall be of the same Accuracie with the
rest: All these, he has Written in Latin* Moreover he has written excellently
against the Quakers, and made evident the dreadful tendency of their
pestiferous Errors; And for Practical Divinity, let the first and second Part
of The Life of Faith, with his Book entitled, CHRIST the Way, the Truth, and
the Life, be considered, and it shall be evident that he has done great
Service to the Church of GOD, particularly in discovering from the Scriptures,
the right way of making use of CHRIST for sanctification; A little Subject
handled before him, especially in such a plain andclear Method.

But Christian Reader, I would advertise thee, not to look for that
Accurateness of expression in the following Sheets, which may appear in the
Authors other Writings; For they are only some Notes of Sermons preached in the
time of the Authors trouble, at Utrecht, for the most part in his own Chamber;
Which after his Death, came to the hand of the Reverend Mr. James Koolman,
Minister of the Gospel at Sluis in Flanders, and by him were published in
Dutch, as an Appendix to the Dutch Translation of the Authors Book, entitled,
CHRIST the Way, the Truth, and the Life, And now are only translated out of
Dutch, at first intended for the private ^se of some particular Persons, but
afterward by the Solicitations of some, who had the occasion to read them, they
were diligently compared with the Dutch Translation, and committed to the
Press, the Original not being extant, so far as I know, that this present
Translation may be compared with it, and therefore any Defects that may appear
in this little Book, cannot in Justice be ascribed to the Author, but to the
Translators, who yet have used very great Diligence and Faithfulness in what
they have done. And to conclude, I am hopeful that the Reader shall find, that
what pains he shall bestow, upon the perusing of them, shall not be in vain,
they containing so many Soul-Solacing Truths, so clearly proposed, together
with many Pathetick Exhortations, and Soul-Searching Marks of Christians, all
founded upon clear Scripture Testimony, and when perused, he shall say, that
the Report he has heard of them, was not only true, but that the half of what
was true of them, was not reported.

CHRIST THE Hope of Glory IN BELIEVERS, etc.
Coloss. 1.27. To whom God would make known what is the Riches of the Glory of
this Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the Hope of Glory.


THe Apostle having made mention of the Gospel, whereof he was made a Minister,
according to his ordinary Method, cannot supe^ficially pass it over: But as he
counted it his Glory, to be employed in that Glorious Embassage of Preaching*
the Gospel to lost Sinners, Rom 1 16. 1 Timothy 1.12. So he falls out on all
occasions in the commen^ation of that Noble Embassage: And therefore having
made mention of the Gospel, verse. 23.25. before he proceed further, he cannot
but (in thi^ and the foregoing verse) give it some commendatory or praise
worthy Titles, to make it more amiable and acceptable.

What he says th^reof in this 27 Verse may b^ summed up in ^hese few Heads. 1.
That it is a Mystery, not easy to be understood by every one* 2. That it is
merely the Fruit of fre^ Garce and good Pleasure of God, that this Mystery wa^
made known and manifested. 3. That whateve^ outward Discoveries are made
thereof unto al^ within ^he visible Church, yet the more specia^ Mani^estations
and Discoveries thereof, are reserved for, and made manifest unto the Saint^ 4.
That this is a Mystery, which has Glory i^ ^t. 5. That the Glory of this
Mystery is not ordinary: There is in it, The Riches of Glory. 6. Th^^ this is
now made known among the Gentiles. 7. Th^^ the Quintessence, Ki^nel, or the
Riches of the Glory of this Mystery, or the very and or ai^ thereof is. Christ
in you the Hope of Glory.

What we have to say upon this Verse, we sha^^ reduce to these principal Heads.

First, There is a Glory to come, whereof some shall be made partakers.

Secondly, There is an Hope of that Glory, which may be attained in time.

Thirdly, The surest ground and most undoub^^d Mark of that Hope, is, Christ
l^ving and wo^^ing in the Soul.

Fourthly, Here is unfolded a short sum of a the riches of the Glory of the
Mystery of the Gospel, Christinus, the Hope of Glory.

As to the First Head: We see there is a Glory, whereof B^lievers here have an
Hope, and in the expectation whereof they are to live: This through ^he whole
Scripture is sufficiently held forth as that which the real Children of God,
are to meet with; And in the beholding whereof, they are supported and
comforted against all Rancounters ^hey may meet with in a wicked World: But who
can tell what this Glory is? Seeing

1. It does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 Ioh. ^, 2. And notwithstanding
it be much mentioned in Scripture, yet is it not as yet seen; it is as yet an
unseen Glory, hidden for the present from the Eyes of those, who undoubtedly
shall be made partakers of the same.

2. It is called a Glory tha^ shall be revealed, 1 Pet. ^.1 And when shall i^
be revealed? Even when Christ^ Glory shall be revealed, then shall Believers be
glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet 4.13. When Christ who is our Life shall appear,
then shall ye also ^ppear (says the Apostle to the same Colossians, Chap. 3
4.) with him in Glory.

3. It is a Glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans ^.18. So that now it must
be an unseen and super^xcellent Glory; Not an outward show, or a bor^owed
Glance, but an inward Glory, which shall ^e revealed in us.

4. It is such a Glory, which eye has not seen, ^or ear heard* neither has it
entered into the Heart of Man to conc^ive what this foreordained Glory is, Isa.
64 4. 1 Cor 2 9, It were but o^ small value, if M^r^als by their words could
express i^, yea if crea^ed Wisdom could comprehend it, or sufficiently
understand what it is. Le^ the highest s^aring wi^s, that are, propose to
themselves the greatest Glory they can imagine* and let others come after them,
and add to their highest Conceptions, and so on, until there were none mo^e to
add thereunto: And if it were possible the whole Quint^ssence of their united
Conceptions were molten into one Mass, or reduce^ into one comprehensive
Thought, it should com^ short, yea very far short of that Mysterious Glory
which shall be revealed, but hitherto it has no^ ^ntered into the Heart of man
to conceive: How unfi^ are we then to speak of it, being unexpressibly greater
than we can imagine. Nevertheless let us ^eview some Scriptural Expressions
concerning this Glory. As

1. Sometimes it is holden forth, under the Name of a Kingdom, and of a Kingdom
bestowe^ of the Father, Luke 12 29, 32. A Kingdom appointed by Christ, Luke
22.29. And a Heavenl^ Kingdom, whereunto we are preserved, 2 Timothy ^^ 18. And
what greater Glory can Mortals here e^pect then to be Kings, and to be Heirs of
Kingdoms? And O! this a Kingdom of ano^h^^ kind; a Kingdom of Glory, wherein
there is nothing but pure and unmixed Glory: All the Subjects of this Kingdom
are Glorious, all the Exercises are Glorious, all the Air they breath in is
Glorious, the Meat they feed upon, i^ Glorious, all their Garments are Glorious.

2. It is called a Crown, and a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5.4. Kings highly esteem
of their Crown, and the Rights and Pendicles thereof, and will spare no
possible means for the defense of the same* Though notwithstanding of all,
their Crowns may fall from their Heads, and their Right die out, either through
their u^just Purchase, or possessing of the same. But this Crown is a Crown of
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. A Crown incorruptible, 1 Cor 9 25. Kings with all
their Crowns, more then the Beggar, cannot once buy by Death, Psalm. 49.7, 8, 9.
They must return unto the Dust: But this is a Crown of Life, which preserves
from all Deaths, and all its Concomitants, Revel 2.10.

3. They are said to Reign, that is* really to possess their Kingdom, and to
enjoy the Glory of their Greatness: Earthly Kings may be Titular Kings, and no
more, having the Title without the Kingdom; But the Poss^ssors of this Glory,
are truly in possession of the Kingdom of Glory. They Reign, and not only so,
but they Reign with Christ. 2 Timothy 2.12. And that for ever and ever, Revel.
22.5. They sit with Christ on his Throne, as He sits with his Father in his
Throne, Revel. 3 21. O who can unfold the Glory that is in this Glory! that
Believers should not only behold the Glory of Christ, John 17:24. But that also
they should be made partakers with him therein; That He as the Head, and they
as the Members should enjoy the same Glory: How deep and unexpressible is this
Ocean of Glory?

4. This Glory is held forth under the Name o^ an Inheritance, to point forth
the undoubted right which they have thereto through Grace* and the sure
possession, which they shall have thereof i^ due time; It is an Inheritance
amongst all them which are Sanctified, Act. 20.22. And 26.18. A^ Inheritance of
the Saints in Light, Coloss. 1.12. A^ Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and
that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you, 1 Pet. 1 4.5. It is called an
Eternal Inheritance, Heb: 9 15. An Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of
God, Ephesians 5.5.

Further, let us consider, as to this Glory, what other Names, it gets in
Scripture.

1. It is called a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5 4. A Crown of Glory that fades not
away: This is far preferrable to the Crowns of yellow Clay.

2. It is an Eternal Glory, 2 Timothy 2.10. 1 Pet. 5.10. This is Glory that fades
not away, no ways bounded nor confined within the narrow, or short Marches of
time, but stretched out through all the Ages of endless Eternity.

3. It is a Glory wherewith the Saints shall appear wi^h Christ, Coloss. 3 4 I^
shall be his Livery, who is the King of Glory, and the Saints their Livery.

4. It is a vast weight of Glory; therefore the Apostle knows not enough how to
express and demonstrate it, 2 Cor. 4 17. Calling it a far more exceeding and
Eternal weight of Glory; But the Original is more Emphatick, as if we should
thus express it, by one Hyberbole added to another, the one supperlative
expression surpassing the other: It is an Eternal weight of Glory: O how
wonderful! A weight of Glory, who can poise it? An Eternal weight; when shall
the weight thereof be pondered? An transcendant Eternal weight; yea not only
so, but a far more exceeding and transcendant weight of Glory.

5. It is called the Glory of Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians 2.14. For Believers are
made joint Heirs with him, Romans 8.17. It is the Glory, which He ha^h purchased;
The Glory which he is now in possession of; The Glory which He prepares for
His own, Joh. 14 3. The Glory, which He has gotten from the Father, that He
may bestow it on them, Joh. 17.22.

6. It is a Glory, which is the Saints portion; Ephess. 1.18. Coloss. 1.12. Who
must be made meet to be partakers of the same; For without are Dogs, Sorcerers,
Whoremongers, Murderers, Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a Lie,
Revel. 22 15. No Whoremonger nor unclean person, nor Covetous man, who is an
Idolater, has Inheritance^ in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Ephesians 5.5.
Therefore must the H^irs of this Glory be prepared thereunto, Rom 9.23. se^
Revel 21.27.

7. It is a Glory far surpassing all Sufferings whatsomever; they are not once
to be laid in t^^ balance, or compared with the same, Romans ^ 18* For I reckon,
says the Apostle, that the Suff^rings of this present time, are not worthy to
be comp^red with the Glory, which shall be revealed in us. O^ Suff^rings here
are but Light, and for a moment* How can they then be compared with this Glory
in respect of the weightiness thereof, seeing in superlative degree, it is
wholly and exceedingl^ excellent? Or to be compared, in respect of i^
continuance, seeing it is Eternal? What proportion is there between a moment
and Eternity? Not so much as between the tenth part of ^ drop of Water, and the
vast Ocean.

8. It is a Glory that reaches both Soul and Body, even the very lump of
flesh; our Bodies shall be raised in Glory, 1 Cor. 15.43. And Christ Jesus
shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his Glorious
Body: Phil. 3.21.

But if you should ask the Question, what really that Glory is: We must
acknowledge we cannot answer it; it is far, yea very far above our Uptakings,
neither has it ever entered into the heart of man to fathom or take it up; How
can we then express it? O that we had the Faith thereof established in our
Hearts! We might better tell you what that Glory is not, then what it is. Let
us then consider a little, what this Glory does free the Believer from.

1, That Glory shall then freely deliver the Believer from all distress,
Sorrow, Sighing, Pains, Tortures, Stiches, Sickness and Death; There is no Death
in Glory, for it is without end; The weight of that Glory is so sweet and
satisfying, that the Soul, that is loaded therewith, cannot but rejoice
continually, and forget all its Sorrows and Complaints; there is no Sighing
under that burden; For, however it be exceeding weighty, yet it is both able to
bear it self, and support, and bear up the Soul loaded therewith: And the
Ransomed of the Lord shall (...) return; and come to Zion, with Songs and
everlasting joy upon their Heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and fighing shall flee away, Isa. 35.10. In the Heavenly Zion, in that
place of Glory, there is no Mourning to be heard, Isa. ^1.11. That Glory cannot
admit of the least tear amongst the Inhabitants ^here; For the Lord God shall
wipe away Tears from off all faces, Isa 25.8. Revel 7.17. and 21 4. The
Inhabitant of that Land shall not say, I am sick, Isa 33.24.

2. That Glory shall de^iver the Believer from all occasions of Sorrow and
Sadness; no Oppressor nor Persecuter shall breath there; no Object of sorrow
there; no injury shall be done to any there, no scorching Sun there; the Sun
shall not Light upon them, nor any heat, Revel 7 16. Isa. 49.10.

3. That Glory shall deliver the B^liever from all sin, the very Fountain of
all our Miseries; Sin comes not within the Marches of the new Land of Glory;
Corruption may pursue and molest a Child of God, to the very Ports of Glory,
bu^ there they part, never more to meet: There, he shall be in case to cry out,
Victory, Victory! O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory?
The sting of Death is Sin, but Sin shall have no access there.

4. That Glory shall deliver the Believers from all Temptations to sin, whether
from within, o^ from without: No Devils, nor Instruments o^ Devils there, to
molest or tempt us; no inward stirrings of Corruptions there; no Objects to
divert there, no lusting of the Eye, no lusting of the Flesh, nor pride of
Life, shall be there. That Glory secures the Soul, and seats it beyond the
reach of all spiritual Enemi^s: There, shall Believers be as Princes, Rulers
and Conquerors over the World; And there, shall Satan, with all his Devices and
Instrumen^s be utterly routed, and eternally shakled under their feet, and
shall never more be unloosed.

5. That Glory shall deliver us from all Anxieties and Torme^ting perplexi^ies,
whereunto here, we are made liable; no Hunger, Thirst, Cold, Weariness, etc.
there; The Labourer shall Sweat no more there; The burden bearer shall cry no
more, O my back? The poor man shall drudge no more for Bread to his Family, he
shall no more travel over Sea and Land, for Back and Belly, They shall Hunger
no more, neither Thirst any more; and wherefore? For the Lamb, which is in the
midst of the Throne shall ^eed them, and shall lead them into living Fountains
of Waters, Revel 7.16, 17.

6. That Glory shall deliver them from all Darkness of Judgment about their
Duty, and doubtings and questionings concerning their State or Frame, neither
suspecting it as to the present, no^ eve^ ^earing a change therein as to the
future: Glory is Light, and pure Light, neither can it admit of Darkness; the
Light that is there, darkens the Sun; For that City of Glory has no need of
the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, For the Glory of God does Lighten
it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof, Revel. 21.23. There the Bride shines,
for her Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon her. Isa 60.1.

7. That Glory shall deliver the Believer from all sorrowful and heart-breaki^g
Ecclipses and interruptions of the Beams of the Love and Favor of God: Now
Clouds interveens betwixt the Light of Gods Countenance, and the poor Soul,
with many Jealousies, Fears and Terrors, and sometimes real* and sometimes
fancied Desertions, tormenting the Believer, casting him in Fevers and
Distempers, waging War against him, so that he looks out into God, and the
da^es of old, and he is troubled: But there is no Desertion in Glory, no
Clouds, no Night there, Revel. 21 25. Their Su^ shall never set, no Ecclipses
there* They shall dwell in the Light of his Countenance, and drink in Eternally
the Out le^tings of Glory from the unmeasurable and Etternally living Fountain
of Glory, and that without the least interruption; They shall everlastingly ly
in the bosom of God.

8. That Glory shall deliver the Believer from all deadness, formali^y, sinking
under the burden of Duties, upsitting through Discouragements and sloathfulness
in the waye^ of the Lord, and from all such Spiritual Distempers: They shall
serve him there, night and day without wearying or upsitting, Revel 7 15. All
who come to land in Glory, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall
run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not be faint, Isai: 40:31: There
shall that word be fulfilled, He that is feeble among them -- shall be as
David; and the house of David shall be as GOD, as the Angel of the LORD before
them Zech: 12:8:

Thus we have opened some what of that Negative happiness, (may we so call it?)
which holds forth some what of this Glory: But if you ask what positively i^
is, we lose our selves, not being in case to answer it; Nevertheless the
Scriptures makes use of some expressions, whereby we may come to understand
somewhat of that Life of Glory: However many of them are but borrowed from such
enjoyments and exerc^ses as are most pleasant and delectable ^o us here: We
only shall make mention of the most principal ones. As

1* It is a Life of great Joy and Gladness: They shall obtainjoy and gladness,
Isa. 35.10 and 51 8. Then th^s Gladness is great, it shall be an unspeakably
glorious Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. For then they shall see him; seeing the joy, which
now they have, when they love him, whom they see not, and believe on an unseen
Christ, is inexpressible and full of Glory: How much more inexpressibly full of
Glory shall they then be, when they come to embrace him whom their Soul loves;
whom now they enjoy alone by Faith: Spiritual Joy and Gladness in the Holy
Ghost is the very beginings of it in time, Romans 14.17. It is here a Fruit of
the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. It is an exceeding great joy, 1 Pet. 4.13. That when his
Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy: It is an
everlasting joy, ^sa. 35.10. and 51.11. The very earnest thereof here enjoyed,
far surp^steth the laughing joy of the wicked, Psalm. 4 7 It is a peculiar joy,
a rejoicing in the g^adness of his Nation, Psalm. 106.5. Here is Fullness of joy,
Psalm 16.11.

2. It is a Life of clear Sight; we shall know no more in part, but know even
as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. And We shall see him as he ^s, 1 John 3.2. Now we
see darkly through a Gla^s, But then face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. In the Light
of Glory there is no Da^kness. The Soul no sooner enters the threshold of
Glory, but it is delivered from all Damps, Mists, Clouds and Imperfections, and
capacitate more fully and disti^ctly to receive the Outtings of Light
^verlastingly flowing from that Fountain of Light, who dwells In the Light
which no man can approach unto, 1 T^m. 6.16. Not that the Soul shall then be in
case to behold Gods being, whom no man has seen, or ca^ see; He remains for
ever God Invisible, 1 Timothy 1.17. And the Believer a finite Creature, and s^
incapable to behold the Being of God, which is Infinite and Invisible: But they
shall be admitted to such nearness, and enjoy such immediate Manifestations and
Beams flowing from the Fountain of Glory, that it shall be as a se^ing of him
face to face, and a knowing of him as we are known, in comparison of what here
enjoyed: Undoubtedly our Understandin^ though never so deep, shall be there
complea^ly satisfied, and that is enough, and may satis^^^ us.

3. That Glory has a wonderful transfor^ing virtue, as appears from 1 John
3.2. (...) shall be like Him; that is, like unto Christ, (...) whom the Apostle
speaks there, for we sha^^ see him as he is. The discoveries of God in the Land
of Glory, shall transform us, and i^ print in the Soul those Heavenly
Accompli^^ments, which shall make us like unto him. T^^ Divine rays proceeding
from that Object, (...) received by the Soul, shall make it, so far^^ capable,
conformable to the Object, ca^^^ing along with them a transforming Po^^^ and
Virtue: They shall imprint in the Sou^^ lively Copy of the Glorious Communica^^
Virtues, after a more Clear, full, Heavenly (...) visible way, and in a far
greater measure (...) here; Though even here, the Glory of the Lord being seen
as in a Glass, changes the Believer Into the same Image, from Glory to Glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. This is a powerful operative
Glory; a continual refreshing Glory.

4. That Glory fills up the spacious desires and outstretched uptakings of
the Soul; so that the Soul living in Glory can complain of no wants, but is
completely satisfied, Ps. l7.15. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness. Then shall all the corners of the wide and vastly enlarged Soul be
fully satisfied. There shall be no Hunger and Thirst there after wants, for all
shall be enjoyed, what the Soul can desire. This teaches us 1 st. That all the
good to be enjoyed there, shall be real, and not apparent only and imaginary. 2
ly. It shall be a most fit and suitable good; other ways it could never
satisfy; superfluity of Water is satisfying to a Fish, because in its Element;
yet could not be so to man, who lives in another Element. 3 ly. There shall be
no scarcity of that suitable and convenient good, but a fullness that shall
answer all the extended desires of the Soul. 4 ly. That the Soul shall possess
and enjoy this ^ullness, that it may be satisfied therewith, and get all its
wan^s filled up thereby.

5. In that Glory, the Believer is admitted to more close Fellowship with God;
For there they are admitted to stand before the Throne of God, Revel 7.15.
There it is, that they shall fully possess Him as their Portion, and tha^
familiarly; For they ^tand there as Ministers o^ State, attending the Kings own
person; Then behold they H^s Face, and live and do rejoice i^ the Light of his
Countenance day and nigh^ They are made Pillars in the Temple of God* and they
shall go no more out, Rev. 3.12. Glor^ is their House and Element; They could
no^ live without that Glory; They could no^ breath without His Company; He
dwells among them, even He that sits upont the Throne, Revel 7.15. There the
great Tabernacle of God is with men, whereof this Tabernacle enjoyed by them in
the Church Militan^ is but a sm^ll resemblance; There it is, when that word
shall be made good and lively, which we have Revel. 21.3. And I heard a great
voic^ out of Heaven, saying* Behold the Tabernacle (...) God is with men, and
He will dwell with them, an^ they shall be his People, and God himself shall b^
with them, and shall be their God. The Believe^ there lies in the Bosom of
God, there it (...) that They shall see his Face, and his Name shall b^ in
their Foreheads, Revel 22 4.

6. In Glory they shall have near Communion wi^h Jesus Christ their Head, their
Husban^ their Brother, their Lord and King; Then they are with Christ, and
enjoy Him, Phil. 1 23. 2 Cor. 5.8. And that for ever and ever 1 Thessalonians 4.17. He
lives with them, and feed them; The Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne,
shall feed them, and shall lead them, Rev. 7 17. They shall sit with him there,
upon his Throne, Revel. 3.21. There got they the Morning Star, Revel. 2.28.
There do they eat of the hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17. Here the Soul is put to long
for nearness with Christ, and complain of clouds interrupting the Beams of His
Love; But there they shall see Him to their Contentment and Satisfaction; For
they shall be continually with the Lord, and follow the Lamb whithersoever He
goes, Revel. 14.4. There shall the I^habitan^s of Glory be partakers of the
Marriage of the Lamb, Revel. 19 7, 8.

7. In Glory their Work and Employment shall be to serve God and the Lamb, day
and night in his Temple, Revel. 7 15. and 22.3. And to praise Him there each
one, and all of them shall take their Harps and Sing a new Song; saying, thou
art worthy -- For thou wast slain; and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood*
out of every Kindred and Tongue, and People and Nation: And have made us unto
our God Kings and Priests -- And again, Worthy is the Lamb that wast slain to
receive Power, and Riches* and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Blessing, -- And again, Blessi^g, and Glory, and Honor, and Power, be unto Him
that sit^eth upon the ^hrone, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Revel 5 8,
9, 12, 13. There they are admitted to the most honorable Employment
imaginable, to the excellentest and most noble piece of Work, i^ the high Court
of the great King, to a work without end and interruption, or wearying; Their
Harps shall never be mistuned, their Tongue^ never wearied, and their Song
shall never wa^ old, but shall endure new, fresh and delight son^ through out
all the ^ges of Eternity: There is, that they cry wi^h a loud voice, Salvation
(...) our God which sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, R^vel. 7 9, 10.
This is their Song wh^^ stand before the Throne and before the Lamb arrayed
with white Robes, with Palms in their Hands, and they are not alone in this
exercis^ They have the Angels singing with them, eve^ all the Angels that
st^nd, round about the Throne, Saying, Amen Blessing and Glory, (...) Wisdom,
and Thanksgiving, and Honor, a^^ Power and light, be unto our God for ever and
ever Revel 7.11, 12. O what a sweet^est is the^ And what joy and satisfact^on
is ^here in the restless, and ^^^rnally refreshing Exercise, (...) singing
Pr^ise unto God, and the Lamb, an^ in p^oclai^i^g ev^^l^sti^gly their
Experienc^ o^ the unspeaka^le great Favors which the con^^^^^lly e^j^y.

8 In Glory ^he Soul is continually ravishe^ and refreshed through the
continually new an^ fresh Rays and Ou^goings of the Love, (...) Grace and
Favor of God, that fl^weth fo^^ from the Living and Eternal Fountain of all
Satisfaction: There the Inhabitants of Glory e^j^^^ullness in the presence of
God, and Drink of ^he Pleasures that are at his Right Hand for evermore, Psalm.
16, 11. They are abundantly satisfied, and Drunk with the Fatness of that
higher House, and made to Drink of the River of his Pleasures, Psalm 36.8. The
Lamb shall lead them unto living Fountains of Waters, Revel. 7.17. There they
have subst^ntially that Feast of Fat things, a Fe^st of Wines on the Lees, of
Fat things ^ull o^ M^rrow, of Win^s on the Lees excellently refi^ed. For he
will swallow up Death in Victo^y, and the Lord God will wipe away Tears from
all Faces, Isa. 25.6 8.

O! Then ye Expectan^s of Glory, let me lay before you some f^w Duti^s. As 1.
Be astonished ever this wonder^ull^ condiscending Love and free Grace of God,
that has predestinate and called you to such a s^a^e of Glory, who were as
well as others H^irs of Hell. and had forfeited your Right to Glory and
Salvation, as well as they, who shall never taste of the Fruit of that True
that growe^h in the midst of the Paradise of God, and of that Feast of Glory: I
say, stand and a^mi^^ this his free Love, and begin with your Heavenly Work of
Glory here in time. 2 Hold the Faith of this Glory fr^sh in your Souls, and let
your Conversation wi^nes^ to all men, that you believe there is an approaching
Glor^, whereof you are Expectants. 3. Make sure to your selves this Inheritance
of Glory through Fa^^^ in Christ; and hold your Interest clear: vouch the La^b
and his Interest here, that y^^ may live everlastingly wi^h him hereafter.

Be much in the Meditation thereof, and in p^^paring your self thereto: Give
you^ self over Him, who shall make you meet ^o be a par^^ker of the Inheritance
o^ the Saints in Light, Co^ 1.12 5. Fix your Affections upon and Seek thi^
things which are above, where Christ sits at (...) right hand of God, Col. 3
1. And not upon thin^ below: How shall you otherwise eviden^ that you are
Heirs of Glory? Is there such Glorious Inheritance for you above, and ar^ your
Hearts and Affections still below? O How unbeseeming is it to such who have the
hope and expectation of a Crown, to be sti^^gading in their Affections after
Straws. 6 Lay seriously to Heart what you have expressed Philip. 3.20. Let your
Conversation be in Heaven, live as Burgesses of that Glory, as having your
whole Stock and Traffic there. 7. Desire and long to be there, with Christian
Submission; I desire says the Apostle ( Phil. 1.23.) to depart and be with
Christ. 8. Come for^h and take possession of this Life of Glory, by giving up
your selves to serve him, in receiving and enjoying Him by Faith, and by giving
over your selves to be guided and ordered according to His Will. 9 Let your
Faith in Him comfort and support you here in time: And that (1.) Against
Poverty and Wants here; For Glory is coming, which shall more than make them
all up. (2.) Against Reproaches, Shame and Contempt in the World; The Crown of
Glory will recompense all wrongs, and the Garments of Glory will completely
cover all. (3.) Against outward Difficulties and Persecution, especially when
occasioned by steadfast standing for Christ and His Cause, for all these shall
disappear so soon as the Palms are put in thy Hand, and the Triumphant Song in
thy Mo^^h. (4.) Against Sin and a living Body of Death; For Glory Come^h which
shall put an end to it; Sin shall not enter there, it cannot once breath in
that Element of Glory. (5) Against Satan and Temptations, for in Glory, you
shall no more be vexe^ with them, these darts have no Place there. (6.) This
should comfort against your distance from God, and the hidings of his
Countenanc^^ for in Glory, you shall eternally behold His Face, without any
interveening Clouds. (7.) This should comfort against wearying and faggings in
Duty, for that Glory will strengthen you in the work of Glory. (8.) Let this
comfort you against the weakness of Grace, and especially of that of Love,
which shall be perfect in Glory; For Love shall be all there; Faith and Hope
shall there t^ke their farewell of the Believer, as having finished their work.

Secondly, That which we have to mark in this Text, is the Hope, of this Glory:
Which gives us ground to speak of two things: The First is more abstractly and
generally hel^ forth: The Second, more clearly and particularly.

As to the First, which is by way of exclusion, Viz. That however the Believer
has a Righ^ to these great things, By virtue of the promises of GOD in the
Covenant of Grace, an^ the Merits of Jesus Christ the Cautioner; Ye^ here, they
have no Possession of what is purchased or promised; They must wait, and live
a^ those that wait: And not only they but our selv^^ also, which have the first
fruits of the Spirit, eve^ we our selves Groan within our selves, waiting for
the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Body for we are saved by Hope: But
hope that is seen (...) not hope, for what a man se^th, why does he ye^ hope
for? But if we hope for that we see not, that do we with Patience wait f^r it.
Rom: 8.23.24 25 Glory is purchased for them at a dear ra^e to wit, the Blood of
Christ, and promised to to them by the GOD of Truth, who cannot lie*
Nevertheless, while here in time, though now and h^^ a^ the LORD sees good,
they may ge^ some foretaste of that life of Glory, and have best^wed on them
the Earnest of the Inheritance, even the Holy Spirit of promise by whom they
(...) seale^: Yet they must wai^ until the Redem^tion of the Purchased
Possession, Ephesians: 1.13.14 All that is gotten here is but the earnest of what is
to come, and of what is folded up in the promise, which they must follow after
in Faith and hope; Here they wait for that Glory and live in the Faith and
expectation of what is to come: And now abides Faith, Hope, etc. 1 Cor: 13.13.
The Lord sees it good, it should b^ so, for wise and weighty reasons, we shall
offer some few which may satisfy us herein.

1 Reason, That he may attain the praise of his truth and faithfulness; when it
is seen, that such who are no Fools dare nevertheless adventure their Souls and
all their Concernments upon GODs naked word, d^pend thereupon, and Possess
their Souls in patience: and thus live in hope; Yea not only so, but Rejoice in
the hope of the Glory of GOD. Romans 5.2. Though for the present they may have
very little or nothing in hand.

2. Reason, That thereby the several Graces of GODs Spirit may be exercised in
them, as Faith, Patience, longing, etc. Whereof the beliver shall make no use,
when once in possession of Glory: The hope that is seen is no hope, that is,
hope has no more place, when the thing hoped for is seen and po^sessed; And
where hope is in exercise, there is also a patient waiting; all which
acknowledge Faith to be the foundation whereon ^h^y stand; Now is the time and
season ^or these Fruits to grow, for a^ soon as the hoped for Inheritance is
attained these flowers shall no more blo^som in the Garden of the Soul. Now
must we live by Fai^^ and not by Sense, 2 Cor. 5.7. Now is it tha^ they groan
earnestly, desiring to be cloath^^ upon, with their House which is from Heaven
to wit, while they are in this Tabernacle, 2 Cor 5.1, 2, 4. Now abides Faith,
Hope, 1 Cor. l3.13

3. Reason, That they may be prepared an^ made meet for that Glory, and to be
partakers (...) the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1.1^ Glory is no
ordinary Life, neither shall Sinner find a breathing in that Element, they must
b^ changed, washed and prepared before the^ come there: The rough stones win
out of Natures Womb, must be plained and polished before they can be use^ull
Materials for the higher House. Here then, must the Expectants of tha^ Glory,
through the exercise of Faith, Hope, Patience, etc. Be adorned and fitted for
th^^ glorious Habitation. The Children that were (...) stand before the King of
Babylon, were to b^ taugh^ and ^^^^ished wi^h the King^ Meat, a^^ Wine, which
be Drank for the space of th^^^ years, Dan. 1, 3, 4, 5. Far more then are (...)
Attenders o^ Glory, to be prepared, whereb^ they may be fi^ted to stand in the
presence o^ the great King of Glory, and that everlastingly*

4. Reason: Th^^ thereby, Glory may be the sweeter and welcomer unto them, when
th^^ get it, a long expected Crown, is the welcomer when o^^^ined.

5. Reason, That thereby He may have occasion to evidence the Glory of his
Power Truth and Faithfulness, in bringing them at last to the Possession of the
promised Inheritance, after some few years patient waiting, and that
notwithstanding of many difficulties in the way, the deceitfulness of their own
Hearts, the many discouragements, from within and from without, wherewith they
had to Fight.

6. Reason, That the ungodly among whom they live, may be the more inexcusable,
who say in effect, that there is no God, and that he is not to be trusted, That
Glory and Blessedness is but a mere dream and fancy; when they see that
Believers among them, rest on the Faithful word of God, and comfort themselves
in the Hope of Glory, which shall be revealed, and that in the midst of
reproaches, Persecutions, Poverty, Difficulties, etc. And that they will not
let go the hope of that Inheritance, for all the Profit and Pleasures of the
World, or condescend to any thing, which in the least might prejudge that Hope,
no not for the greatest of worldly advantages, Romans 8.18.

But here, take some words of Use along with you. 1. For Caution to such who
now and then win at some Foretastings of this glorious Life of Glory, and
sometimes are admitted to the Kings Banqueting House, and filled with the
Kisses of his Mouth, and Eat of his Aples of Love, and so are brought into the
very Suburbs of Heaven: I would say these things unto them. (1.) Think not that
that life, will always continue, you may now and then have more then ordinary
Dainties, and some days of Feasting; yet remember* that thy Life here is by
Faith, Hope, etc. And not by Sense: But providing that it please the Lord out
of his overflowing Goodness, for his own Glory, to da^dle you on his Knee^ and
to treat you more then ordinary, make i^ welcome; Be not puffed up therewith,
no^ imagine that it will be your ordinary fare, s^ long as here in time: But
rather look that ther^ will be a low ebb, after such a Spring-flood and that
that Table shall yet again be drawn And so prepare your self for your ordinary
portion, remembering, that thy Life here, Is Life of Hope, grounded upon Faith.
(2.) Wh^^ of this sort of extraordinary intertainme^^ you also get, look but on
it as a Pledge or A^les-penny, and endeavor to carry your selv^ as Expectants
of Glory, looking out into tha^ which is to come, and let your desires grow^
the more to complete the Harvest, since the first Fruits are so sweet, be not
satisfied wi^^ what you receive of that nature as if it we^^ your Portion.
Glory is here not in Hand, b^ in Hope to such.

2. Use. To such, who are great Strange to the fore-tastings of Sense, let them
not (...) discouraged. But 1. Be satisfied though the Lord should with hold
from you, these more extraordinary Out-lettings of his Favor, and deal with
thee, otherwise then with some; Remember that your ordinary way of living is a
Life of Hope. 2. Make use of this Hope, which is your Life, to the best
advantage: Exercise thy Faith, and comfort thy self, in the Hope of the Glory
of God: Thus shall you Glorify Him, who has called you to this Hope of his
Kingdom, knowing that ye are saved by Hope, Romans 8.24. And that there is an
Hope said up for you in Heaven, Col. 1.5. Live as those that are begotten again
into a lively Hope, 1 Pet. 1.3.

3. Use. Hereby I do advise all the Godly, who are called to this Hope, that
they so carry themselves before the World, (how little soever they have in
possession) as those that are rich in Hope. Merchants can boast, and hold out a
Port, as if they had much Money in Cash, by reason of the great income of some
rich Cargo, which they are in expectation of, notwithstanding of their being
very empty handed ^or the present: But, as the Riches of Glory, far exceed the
riches of this World; So the expectation and assurance thereof, is infinitely
far beyond that of worldly Riches. O! then, carry your selves in all things,
whatever Gods Dispensations may be toward you, so as becomes those, who are
Expectants of Glory. Let the Hope thereof support your Souls under all
Discouragements. Let no Dispensation^ Loss, Cross, any ways abate your Hope,
(...) make you carry unbeseeming such a Gloriou^ Hope, whereunto you are
called, knowin^ that none of these things can rob you of th^^ great expected
Salvation, or make you miser^able.

4. Use, To suches are yet Strangers to thi^ Hope; I have these few things to
say. 1. Thin^ more then you do on the Life of the Godly, so whatever may be
their condition, here in time yet they have a Crown, and a sure Inheritanc^ and
are Expectants of a Life of Glory, an^ have a well grounded Hope thereof: So
that their Life, however accompanied, with (...) greatest of outward
Calamities, yet far preferable to yours. 2. Covet and long exceeding to be
amongst the number of those; For howeve^ these dews and dropings of Consolation
which sometime, even here, they are enjoyin^ besuch, as the ungodly so long as
they remain (...) can never experimentally understand, yet the are infinitely
below that which is abiding then in the Hope whereof they are called to liv^
Life, Light. Joy, and all is sown for the^ and they and they alone have the
sure and w^ grounded Hope thereof. 3. Judge, who a^ wisest, ye or the Believer;
ye loss for little rousted Gold, worm-eaten Pleasure and vain imaginary Glory,
this rich Prize: A^^ ye live here without Hope, whereas they through a most
noble, Majestic and generous Disposition despise your silly Feckless Portion,
a Compound o^ mere Vanity: And look to an Incorruptible and Substantial Glory,
an incomparable Inheritance, and a Crown of Glory: Neither will quite their
Hope of Glory for all the fancied Satisfaction, the Art of man can squeeze out
of these imaginary Pleasures, Profi^s and Glory of this momentary time. 4.
Behold and be convinced of the reality of Religion: For certainly it can be no
Dream, Fancy, or groundless imagination that makes the Believer so cheerfully
forsake that which you choose for your Portion, and rest satisfied with; and
makes them resolutely and deliberately undergo Shame, Discredit, Poverty,
Persecution, Death and Flames, rather than Act any thing, or cede in the least
Puncti^ilio, that might cut off or ma^r the Hope of what ^hey are expecting.
They are Men as well as others, by nature as wise and careful of their ^ope and
well being, as well as others; Nevertheless, most willing for the Hope that is
set before them, to turn their back on all these things: They are as little
Fantastic or Crack-brain'd as others; yet the very ^ope and expectation of
that Glory, which is ^romised, will support and bear them up under ^urdens,
that would crush twenty ungodly bodies, ^t will make them sing in the midst of
the Fires, (...) as Crowned and sitting in their Chair of Stat^ having only in
hand the Hope of Glory.

Now that, which is clearly held forth b^ these words, The Hope of Glory, is,
that the^ really such a thing amongst the Godly, as the Hope of Glory: It is
true, the unjust man ha^ a Hope, which perishes, Prove. 11.7. Wh^^ they die
their Hope and Expectation perishe^ with them, because it was after the things
below, and these all pass away: And providi^^ it be after the things, which are
above, yet bei^^ the badly bottomed, their Hope is but as the gi^ing up of the
Ghost, or puffing out its breath a^^ perishes, Job. 11.20. Even so has the
H^pocrite a Hope, but it shall perish, Job 8.13. A^ their Trust is as the
Spiders Web, soon brok^ down, and I pray you, What is the Hope of the
H^pocrite, though he has gained, when God takes ^way his Soul? Job. 27.8. But
the hope of the Believer is solid and real; which appears thu^*

First, It is bottomed on a sure and nob^^ ^oundation. As 1. on the Promise and
Oa^^ of God* Heb 6, 17, 18. Wherein God willi^^ more abundantly to show unto
the Heirs of Prom^^ the immulability of his Counsel, confirmed it by (...)
Oath: That by two immutable things, in which was impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge, to (...) ^old upon the
Hope set before us, etc. 2. On the Power of God, who made Abraham to Ho^^
against Hope, Rom 4, 17, 18, 21. He believ^ ^ven God, who quickneth ^he dead,
and calle^ those, which be not as though they were, and being ^ully persuaded
that what he had promised, he was able also to perform; So Heb. 11.18, 19. He
accounted that God was able to raise him up Isaac, even from the dead. 3. On
the continually and really felt experience of the Goodness of God, Romans 5.3, 4.
Knowing that Tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope. See also Lam: 3.21, 4. On the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, as
a public person, having to the uttermost satisfied Justice, and procured a
public Absolviture or Discharge. 1, Pet. 1, 3. They are begotten again unto a
lively Hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead. 5. On Christ's
living in them: As here in the Text, which is no fancy; as we shall afterward
make appear.

Secondly, The Hope of the Believer is a real work of God's Spirit in the Soul;
Therefore He is called the God of Hope, Rom, 15, 13. They abound in Hope,
through the Power of the Holy Ghost. It is God that begets us again into
this Lively Hope 1 Pet: 1, 3. And it is He that gives it. 2 These: 2.16.

Thirdly, It is a Hope carried on in the Soul, through a real work o^ Grace:
God gives us good Hope through Grace. 2 These: 2, 16.

Fourthly, This Hope has a real Object; For Heaven is the Object of their
Hope, Col: 1, 5, For the Hope, which is laid up for you in Heaven. This is the
Hope of their calling, Ephesians: 1, 1^ and 4, 4. Christ is their Hope, the Lord
Ies^^ Christ, which is our Hope. 1 Timothy, 1, 1. They tru^^ in the Lord, and He is
their Hope, Ier: 17. ^ The Psalmist says, Psalm: 71.5. For Thou an^ my Hope O
Lord, Thou art my Trust, from my Youth. The Lord will be the Hope of his People
and the strength of the Children of Israel says, Joe^ chap: 3, 16, And what
further can be required, for the making Hope a real business? What ar^ all the
advantage of the richest incomes in a world, in comparison of this one thing?
And yet that uncertain and petty rent beget^eth hope, which will make the
Merchant, who ventureth thereon, sing and rejoice within himself upon his
expectations: But O! Her^ is the Hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot
lie promised before the world began. Tit: 1, 2.

Fifthly, It is a Hope of real use and advantage to the Believer: It is an
excellent and approven weapon for defending the head: Therefore compared to a
Helmet. Ephesians: 6.17. 1 These: 5.8. It defends the head from all blows, and holds
it up from sinking under temptations, difficulties and discouragements
therefore compared to an Anchor, Heb: 6, 18, 19. Holding fast the Soul, in the
day of storm, and making the Believer undauntedly ride out the same, and boldly
to set head against satan his tentations, falling down upon him, as so many
swelling and raging billows of a tempestuous Sea; And as the blasts of a
terrible tempest, to render him hopeless, and so to quite grips of Christ, and
his expecta^ions of the^ Crown.

S^xtly, This Hope has many real and excel^ent operations on the Soul,
therefore cannot out be real. For 1. This Hope is a fountain of continual
comfort; Therefore we read of the confidence of Hope. Heb: 3.6. And the
Believer must rejoice in Hope. Rom, 12.12. Hope affords matter for a song in
the saddest day; Therefore the Apostle says, Rom: 5.2. We rejoice in hope of
the Glory of God: And not only so, but we glory in Tribulation. v. 3. For what
they hope for is certain, the hope of the Righteous shall be gladeness. Prove:
10.28. Not like the expectation of the wicked which shall perish. 2. Again Hope
is that which quickneth the heart, and encourages the soul: For when the Soul
is ready to sink in discouragements, seeing no appearance of fulfilling the
great things promised, and filled with fears of falling off, and so to loose
the prize. Then Hope will hold up the head, and encourage the sinking Soul, and
thus it is a quickening and enlivening bu^iness, therefore called a lively Hope,
1 Pet: 1.3.3. This Hope is a mean of Salvation; Therefore we are said to be
saved by Hope, Romans 8.24. Faith and Hope are two noble Lackays that never parts
from the Believer, until fairly within the haven of Glory. 4. This Hope
rejoiceth and comfort the Soul under all its losses, troubles and wandring^:
what supported Abraham's heart when he sojourned in the Land of promise, as in
(...) strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isack and Jacob, the heirs
with him of the same promise, But Hope; For it immediately follow^ Heb: 11 9,
10. For he looked for a city, which has fonddations, whose Builder and Maker
is Go^ 5. This Hope sets the Soul a work. to make (...) self ready and meet for
the heavenly Habitation, to continueand go on in Sanctification, and to oppose
and withstand whatever is unbeseeming an expectant of Glory. So that it is of a
purifieing nature. For every man that has thi^ Hope in him, purifieth himself
even as he is pu^^ 1 John: 3.3.6. This Hope humbles, quieteth and ^ully
satisfies the Soul, when disquiete^ and disturbed through the proud and
arrogan^ undervaluings of those, who disdain full^ upbraid them and their
confidence in God Psalm: 42.5, 11. Or through the sad simptoms o^ an angry God,
whereby deep calle^^ unto deep at the noise of his Water-spouts, al^ his waves
and bil^ows going over. v 7* An^ appearing to cast them off. Psalm: 43.3. For
when David is thus exercised, the only thin^ which upholds him is Hope, and
therefore the^ alone cordial, in that lamentable song he stil^ again and again
recommends his soul unto, (...) hope thou in God; And charge his Soul as
high^y irrational, in being cast down and disquiet^d, seeing hope was yet to
the fore. Saying, Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and why art tho^ ^isquieted
in me; hope thou in God, ^or I shall yet ^raise Him, etc. Thus we see that hope
will ^ise up the cast down and disquieted Soul. 7 This hope not only delivers
the Soul from all ^nxieties and fears, but sets it beyond the reach ^hereof, so
that the Believer he sings, tho rot^ing in the grave, even his very dust and
burried flesh or body shall rest in hope* under the dark and cold chambers of
death. Psalm: 16.9. Acts 2.31. Thou shall be se^ure. says, Zopha^, Job: 11.18.
Because there is hope, Hereby it is that the Righteous is said to have hope in
his death, Prove. 1^ 32. When their condition in the eyes of the wicked seem
most desperate and hopeless, even then they have hope, when death the king of
terrors is grapling with them, and burying them in the dust; Even then they
lift up their heads in Hope. 8. Hope gives Confidence and true Christian
Boldness to look Tentations in the Face: Hope makes not ashamed, Romans 5.5. In
these Words, there is an dimunitive manner of speech, for it signifies so
much, as Hope gives great Confidence and Boldness; And wherefore? For the
expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever, Psalm: 9.18. Nor be cut off
Pro: 24.4. There shall be a Reward, David's prayer, Psalm: 119.116. Let me not be
ashamed of my hope: Shall be answered, and in end accomplished. 9. Hope makes
the Soul calm and patient under all persecutions; Therefore Paul mentions the
patience of Hope, to the Thessalonians, These: 1.3. At a ground of his praise on
their behalf.

But it may be asked, if all really and Godl^ have this Hope

I Answer, Yes, more or less, for they are begotten again into this Lively
Hope, 1 Pe^ 1.3. And their Faith and Hope must be i^ GOD, 1 Pet. 1.21. But all
have it not (...) the same Degree and Measure: For 1. Some attain unto the full
assurance of Hope. Heb. ^ 11. Which dispelleth all clouds, and puts the Soul
without the reach of all doubtings or further Questioning of the Matter: But
this is no^ ordinary, but seldom attained. 2. Some a^tain unto a reasonable
Hope, bottomed (...) Faith, as through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures,
they have Hope, Romans 15.^ Their Conscience bearing them Witness, the they have
fled for Refuge to lay hold upon th^^ Hope set before them, Heb: 6.18. They
believe that the Word o^ GOD is sure and u^changeable, and that he cannot deny
himse^^ Hence it is, that they have a firm Hope, which (though without
foretastings and sensible i^fluences of Joy) supports them under all
di^couragements. 3. Some, who have no^ readily come this length, nevertheless
ha^ about ^he posts of Wisdoms door: And tho they can do no more, yet will they
look unto the LORD, and wait upon the GOD of their Salvation, Mic: 7.7. They
know and are assured, tha^ Salvation is no where else to be ^ound, neither will
they seek it any other where, he alone must be the GOD of their Salvation; And
therefore they wait and look out ^or Him, and encourrage themselves with the
Hope of a happy Outgate; My GOD will hear me. They will wait upon the LORD,
that hides His Face, and will look for Him, Isa: 8, 17. Meditating on that
Word, Isa: 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the Earth,
Though they dare not say they have at^ained that Lively Hope, yet they know,
that ^hey are at the right Door, therefore will not give over, but resolves so
long as there is Life or Breath in them, to hang at the cheeks of GOD's gates,
come of it what will. Thus Hope prese^ves the Soul from despair, or giv^ng over
the Cause as desperate, and from say^ng with that wicked king, 2 King: 6.33.
This evil is of the LORD, why should I wait for ^he LORD any longer? 4. Some
being enviro^ed with temptations and thick clouds, may conclude that they are
cast off, and say in their haste, that the LORD has forgotten them, and cast
t^em off; Yea, and say round^y, that there is no Hope, that their Hope is
perished from the LORD, Lam: 3.18. Isa: 40.27. Ezekiel: 37.8. And that they are
cu^ off, Psalm: 31.22. And that all Men are liars. Psalm: 116.10, 11, And with
Job Chap: 17, 15. and 19 10* And where is now my Hope: Mine Hope has he
removed like a tree. Yet notwithstanding of all this, they will not quite nor
sell their Interest, of Christ and Heaven, but reckon it their great
privilege, that they are out of hell, and that GOD renews his Mercys to them
day by day this they recall to mind, therefore have they Hope, Lam: 3.21.

Use. Since there is such a noble and excellent Grace, every way so necessary
and profi^able; Surely it is our great conc^rnment an^ interest to try and
search narrowly, whith^^ we have it or not: Many fancy they have^ true and
lively Hope, and alas! it is but a clatch up and imaginary hope, they die with
a lie i^ their Right Hand. Again others, who have really this Hope in their
Soul, notwithstanding entertain suspicious that all is wrong wit^ them, and
therefore cry out that their Strengt^ and Hope in GOD is departed; Therefore w^
shall speak a word to both. And 1 All have not a True and Lively Hope, who say
the^ have it; There is a generation that is reall^ without Hope, Ephesians: 2.12. Who
yet fancy they have a sure and well grounded Hope^ But the hope of many shall
^erish with themselves; Pro: 11.7. Job. 18.13.14. Al^^ this ill grounded hope,
will not support the Man that has it: What is the hope of the Hypocrite;
though he has gained, when God takes away hisSoul? says Job. chapter 27.8.2. It
must be undoubtedly a sad and lamentable Disappoinment of their Expectations,
many shall meet with, when their Hope shall forsake them, and sink under them
as the broken reed of Egypt; And what more lamentable then to credit the stress
of their immortal Souls in a rotten ^reed, and to fancy when Death shall
come, to Land in Glory, and yet for them and their Hope u^^erly to perish? Oh!
how shall their former Hope, augment their irrecoverable and eternal Misery,
and rende? their condition more lamentable then they had never had such a Hope?
3. Shall not this disappointment occasion great confusion of Faces? Shall it
not fare with them, as with the Troops of ^ema, and the Companies of Sheba, ^o
that they shall be ashamed and con^ounded, because they had hoped, Job 6.19,
20. Many pass now for great Christians, and have a hope they will not quite
with, which shall fill their Faces with con^usion, when they come to see, that
their Hope has been but a mere Dream. 4. Is it not a terrible plague and
judgment, to be so far possessed with blindness, as not only to be ignorant,
where we are, but to drea^ and fancy, that we walk on a sure and even ground;
whereas puffed up with vain presumption, we are walking on the very sides of
the pit, not knowing, but every step may land us in Eternity, and so in
everlasting confusion? Alas! how lamentable is it to see people feeding upon
ashes, and turned aside with a deceitful heart, so that they cannot deliver
their Soul, Nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand, Isa: 44.20.5.
Providing the m^ssing of our hope were of small importance, the matter were not
so great; But to miss and be disappointed of Glory, of Eternal Salvation, of
the Fellowship of GOD Eternally; O how dreadful must that be? how can such a
loss ever be repaired? what can man give for the Redemption of his Soul? Or
what shall h^ give in exchange thereof? what thing imaginable can repair this
irrepairable Loss? 6. Providing this loss could ever be recovered, it were the
more supportable; But when this one Loss and disappointment can never be again
repaired, what a terrible bussiness then, to rest here, in time, on a false
hope, which with them will perish, and give up the Ghost; their being no^
returning again to make amendment of by gone miscarriages. O! Then, should not
every Soul ^eriously consider how greatly it is th^^ Interest to ponder, and
narrowly to examine on what ground their Hope rests.

Now ^or helping such out of their self deceitfulness, who fancy they have the
right Hope and are yet strangers thereto; And for easing such, who cannot be
convinced that their Hop^ is of the right kind; I shall in short, propose some
Marks. whereby the one and and the other may try themselves.

1. Mark, Let every one try how they came by their Hope, that Hope which is
born with us, and has alwise lodged in us, and kept us in peace, since we came
into the World, providing we have no other, cannot be of the right stamp: For
hope is a fruit of the Spirit; For we through the Spirit wait for the Hope of
Righteousness by Faith, Gal: 5 5. There is no abounding in hope, but through
the power of the holy Ghost, Romans 15.13. The strength of nature, or ed^cation
cannot help us here. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and GOD even our Father
must give us good hope through Grace, 2 These: 2.16. This hope is from no
natural extraction, it is of Divine Extract.

2. Mark, True and lively Hope, is ever grounded upon Christ's Righteousness
and Resurrection; Therefore it is a waiting For the hope of Righteousness by
Faith, Gal: 5.5. Awaiting for what is hoped for, through the Righteousness of
christ, or only by virtue of that Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is laid
hold on by Faith; so that the hope of Glory is founded thereon: We are begotten
again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 1
Pet: 1 3. So that the hope, which is not upon Christ, which is not built on his
Death and Resurrection, and upon his imputed Righteousness, but on something
within our selves, be it never so specious or excellent, as an honest heart as
they fancy, outward holiness, blamelessness, victory over corruptions,
singular devotion, or whatever it be of that nature, will be but a^ the giving
up of the Ghost, and come far short of helping or relieving the poor Soul.

3. Mark, True and lively Hope, as it is sounded upon Faith, so they go hand in
hand, together, 1 Pet: 1.21. Who by him do believe in God, that raised him up
from the dead, and gav^ him Glory, that your Hope and Faith might be i^ God.
Hope without Paith laying hold upon ^ crucified Savior, according to the tenor
o^ the Covenant, is but a mere dream: Hope cannot stand, but upon the pillar of
Faith; Therefore the Church first embraces GOD as her Portion, then she wins
to the solid exercise of Hope Lam: 3:24. The Lord is my portion, says my
soul, therefore will I hope in him.

4. Ma^k, Where there is a real Hope o^ Glory, there will be a leaning on GOD,
and committing of our Souls to him for through bearing, through all the
difficulties, Wyndings and turnings in our way: Ou^ hope is continually in GOD,
Psalm. 39.7. Others truste^ in their Riches, they gathered and heaped it u^ But
for David, he says, And now Lord, wh^ wait I for? My hope is in Thee; compared
wi^^ Psalm: 71.5. David on this foundation, press^ to be delivered out of the
hands of the wicked because he had always been his hope; For he says, Thou
art my hope, O Lord God, thou art my trust from my youth; Thus casts he all his
cares and burdens on the LORD, and this was his constant way and continual
practice: He had no other hope, neither acknowledged any other, knowing that he
was happy, that had the GOD of Jacob for his help, and whose hope was in the
LORD his GOD, Psalm: 146.5.

5. Mark, Where there is a Real and Lively Hope of Glory, desires after
bewitching pleasures will grow cold; And now what wait I for? says David,
Psalm: 39.7. My hope is in Thee: He saw nothing in the World worthy his
attendance, for his hope, he had established it on a sure and sufficient
Object; he betook himself not to these, who said who will show us any Good,
Psalm: 4.6. O! When the heart through hope, has fastened it self on GOD, how
little values it all the vanity of a perishing world; The sight of Glory, which
they have through hope, darkens that luster and beauty which others see in the
perishing things of a world, whose eyes being of the same substance with the
world, are earthly.

6. Mark, This true Hope is accompanied with a careful endeavor to keep all
the Commandments of GOD; LORD says David, Psalm: 119.166. I have hoped for thy
Salvation, and done thy Commandments. True hope is an enemy to a careless life,
and is accompanied with tenderness and earnestness: Hope sets the Soul a
running, Act. 26.7. Unto which promise, our twelve Tribes instantly serving GOD
day and night, hope to come.

7. Mark, Hope will sit down down well satisfied on GODS bare Word; As Abraham,
who against hope believed in hope, Rom: 4.18, And how often says David, that
he hoped in GODS Word, Psalm: 119.49.114. Psalm: 130 5. Hope will keep the Soul
in Life, even when all things seems contradicting the very Promises, and to say
it is vain to wait any more.

8. Mark, Hope is a purifying Business, (...) Job: 3.3. It sets the Soul a work
to wash i^self in the Blood of Christ, and makes the Sou^ to labor in the
strength of Jesus to get sin k^lled, the desires of the flesh and mind brought
under, and the Soul sanctified; So that they will wrestle with GOD by Faith in
Prayer, to be made fit to have an Interest of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light.

9. Mark, Hope makes the Soul silent an^ satisfied under great temptations:
David Psalm 38. was under sore trialls, the LORD chastned him, his an w^s^stuck
fast in him, his hand pressed him sore, both Soul and Body did bear the marks,
that GOD was contending with him for sin; Yea, his heart was ove^whelmed within
him, and his streng^h b^ ^ailed him; And eve^ when it was thus with him
inwardly, enemie^ without were seeking his Life, laying snares ^or him, and
seeking his hurt: What was ^t then that quieted and calmed him, at this time,
and made him carry as a man, that hears not, and in whose mouth there are no
reprooffs, but even that which immediately follows; For in thee O Lord do I
hope.

Having laid down these Marks, whe^eby Men may try whither they have an
Interest in this lively Hope or not; So I would advise such who see ground of
fears, because without this lively Hope, seriously to consider, and lay these
following things to heart. As 1. It is required that the Soul through its
dwelling on the thoughts of this so great a Bussiness, be more sensible of, and
affected with the missings of this Grace of Hope: Consider what a miserable
condition the Soul is in, which is without hope in the World, and how
lamentable their case is, who have no other hope, then a hope that will perish,
which will but prove to them as a spiders web, and so faill them in their
greatest need. 2. Be convinced ^erein, that through your self, you shall never
attain unto a lively Hope; You must again be be gotten unto this Hope: It is
wholly and only the Work of GODS Spirit, neither nature, nor any natural
advantages can help you thereto. 3. Let the thoughts of your hopeless
condition, stir you up to self humiliation before the LORD, which is the only
way to be exalted in due time. 4. Foresake all ground of hope i^ your self; So
the poor has hope, Job. 5.16. For whatever it is in your self, you bottom o^
ground your hope upon, it will be sound to be but a ^lippery and ^inful
^oundation; And the more you build thereon, it shall be the wors^ 5. Lay hold
on Christ, as he is offered in the Gospel, and cleave to him by Faith: For Hope
is begotten in the womb of Faith: All hope no^ grounded on Faith and flowing
from it, is bu^ a mere fancy and chimera. 6. Having laid hold on Christ, as
he is offered in the Gospel, and so resting on him for Salvation, wait for the
breathings and influences of the Spirit on the Soul, in the careful and earnest
undertaking and pursuit of the means, that your head may be lifted up thereby
in hope.

For encouradgement thereto, observe these following things. 1. This lively
Hope in the Soul, will calm many storms, and keep the Soul in a^ even and
stayed posture, under sharp and sad dispensations, and the multitude of
shaking^ and changings; It will deliver the Soul from many disquieting fears,
and make the Soul sleep sweetly under them all, and lift up its head above
difficulties, so that it shall be freed from perplexities, or be secure,
because there is hope, Job. 11.18.2. This will encourage to constancy in duty,
notwithstanding of opposition in the way; Hope will never suffer the heart to
sink, it will be a cork to the poor Soul, which will make it swime through the
jaws and gulfs of the greatest opposition, and most insupperable like
difficulties: When other things as so many weights and heavy loads, would bear
down the Soul, Hope will draw and hold it up, that it go not to the ground: Or
in case, the Soul, is at any time over charged and brought under water, as it
were to the ^rink of hell, Hope notwithstanding will recover again the Soul,
out of the very womb of ^ell, and will it make it look out toward the Temple.
3. Hope hardens a man, and makes him prooff against the day of battle; It
encourages and strengthens the Soul; There^y he can run through a troop, for
he knows that his head is secured, well covered and guarded with the helmet of
Hope, the Helmet of Salvation, 1 The^: 5.8. Ephesians: 6.17.4. Hope ^s a strong guard
against temptations: What values a man the great offers of the World, who has a
Lively Hope of Heaven! The fear of death, worldly losses, and the greatest of
^ufferings, will not once shake him who has the Hope of Eternal Life: The hope
of a better Resurrection will make them refuse to accept of a deliverance, upon
unworthy or base ^erms. 5. Hope assures us of Heaven, where^ore we find that
Heaven is often laid out to us by Hope, Ephesians: 1.18. and 4.4. Col: 1.5. Tit:
2.13. Heb: 6.18. It is The Anchor of ^he Soul both sure and steadfast, and which
enters into that within the vail, whether the forerunner is for us entered,
Heb: 6.19, 20.6* Hereto should these words encourage us Psalm* 147 11. The LORD
takes pleasure in them tha^ fear him, in those that hope in his mercy, 7. A^
hope is needful, necessary and useful, while passing through the valley of
sorrow and tear^^ so also, when drawing near the end of our journey, and when
pale death comes to look us i^ the face; For the Righteous has hope in his
death Pro: 14.32. When the hope of the Hypocrite and unrighteous person gives
up the Ghost, and foresaketh him in his greatest strai^ even then will the Hope
of the Righteous comfort and bear up his head; Yea, when death the king of
terrors has done its worst, an^ conveyed the Soul into Eternity; Hope, tho^
may take its leave of the Soul, as having no more service to do it, 1 Cor:
13.13. Yet wi^^ attend the corpse of the Believer to the grave and be a bed unto
his dust, Psalm: 16.9 U^til the morning of the Resurrection dawn.

Again, as to those, who really have the Hope, and yet cannot be convinced
thereon I would say these few things.

1. It is not strange, that such who are begotten again into a Lively Hope, be
now an^ then brought to doubtings, through these (...) such like grounds. As 1.
Because sad no^ strange like dispensations are measured out unto them by GOD:
this makes the Church (...) out, Lam: 3.18. And I said, my strength an^ my hope
is perished from the Lord: See v. 1.2. This occasioned Job also to say, that
his hope was removed like a tree, or rooted out of the ground, Job: 19 8.9,
10.2. Because there is ^ant of growth in Grace and Mortifica^ion, for ^hey hear
that hope is a purifying Grace, and ^hey can find no advancing in that work. 3.
Because they miss the other above mentioned Fruits of a Lively Hope: But

2. Hope, is like to other Graces, not always alike visible, sometimes so
clouded and ^id, that it cannot be easily seen or discovered; And in a very
little, it may appear again, when the cloud and ^hick mist is over, as we ^ee,
Lam: 3.18 There the Church com^lains, that her strength and hope was perish^d
from the Lord, yet she says, a little after, This I recall to my mind,
therefore have I hope. And again v. 26. It is good, that a man should ^oth
hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the lord. The holy Man Job cry^th
out, as one that has no hope, He has destroyed me on every ^^de, and I am
gone, and mine hope has he re^oved like a tree: And nevertheless, before all
is ^one, and he end his reckonings, he get^eth his head lifted up on high, and
hope brings ^im so above, that he triumphs, Chap: 19. ^.25.26, 27. For I know
that my Re^eemer lives, and though after my skin, worms ^estroy this body, yet
in my flesh, shall I see God, etc.

3. Hope (as have other Graces) has its degrees; There is a full assurance of
hope, Heb. 6.11. And there is a weak Hope, that cannot see far, being
accompanied with many doubtings, discouragements, fears, etc, Nevertheless a
weak hope may be a true hope, being on an Evangelical ground: Hope may be
lively, in respect of its root, yet weak and sickly, in respect of its present
frame and operations.

4. It is not therefore safe ^o conclude, that there is no hope, because there
is no full assurance of Hope, or Actual, Lively, Vigorou^, or strong Hope.

5. It were better to make an impartial enquiry, according to the forementioned
Marks; And search and see, if ever you had any thing of a True and Lively Hope
of Glory through CHRIST; And providing you have ever had it* you may then be
confident that the root remains; for the Gifts and Calling of GOD are without
repentance; Romans 11, 29.

Question. But what shall he do, who is brought to suspect all what formerly
has been wrought in his Soul, looking on it all as false work? How I say, shall
such win to any clearness concerning their Hope, or what shall they do for
strengthening of the same?

Answer. Such would lay to heart, and well improve these following
Considerations: As

1. As Hope it self, is the Gift of GOD, and not their own work; So is also the
clear discovery of this Hope in the Soul, his Gift, and a new Gift. The
observation whereof, should make the Soul fix its eye on the Soveraignity and
Freeness of God, who may bestow His Gifts as He will; and depend on God for
Light to ^ee and discern things, which are given him of GOD*

2 As the first lively Acting of Hope, is a fruit of the Spirit of Life, and
flows from the Spirit of Life in them; So all the after actings depend on
continual influences from Heaven. These considerations should humble them under
the impression of an absolute and Sovereign Lord; And should stir them up to
search and see, wherein they have provoked GOD, ^o hold in his Influences, in
the continual outgoings of Hope, and withdraw his Light, whereby they might be
in case to discern the being of Hope in the Soul, even when but w^ak in its
operations.

3. Such are to humble themselves before ^he LORD, in the sense of their
natural frailty and inability; As likewayes of their unrighteousness and
transgressions, whereby they have provoked the LORD to leave them in the dark.

4. They must endeavor to lay to heart, and renew their dependence on GOD,
with up^ightness of heart, and ^o ponde^ ^he Word, and to drink it in, for it
is through patience and comfort of the Scriptures that we have Hope, Rom: 15.4.

5. The life of Hope, will occasion frequent outgoings and renewings of Faith
on the Mediator, receiving him, as offered in the Gospel, and embracing of GOD,
as the alone satisfying and satiating portion in Christ Jesus; For Hope grows
out of the stock of Faith, neither can it be without it* so that whenever the
Soul can say, the Lord is my portion, he may safely conclude, therefore will I
hope: So David charged his Soul to hope in GOD. And why? Because he was the
health of his countenance and his GOD, Psalm: 42: and 43.

6. They must be much on the thoughts o^ GODS Favors bestowed on them; The
thoughts of common mercies being renewed unto them every morning, encourages
the Church to Hope, Lam: 3.22.23, 24. The dispensations of GODS loving kindness
revealed in preserving them, that they are not consumed, and the renewed Fruit
of his Compassion, continually discovered, and seriously considered,
encourages to Hope. Thus laying up as a rich Treasure, the experiences of
these Expressions of GODS Love, and continually living therein, will work up
the Soul to Hope; For Experience works Hope, Rom: 5 4. It is the nourishment
(as it were) of Hope, and when this is a way, hope must become sick and weak;
Whereas the thoughts of GOD^ Mercy discovered through Experiences, is a noble
Cordial and encou^agement to hope: Let Isra^l hope in the Lord, says David,
Psalm: 130.7. And why? For with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous Redemption; That is, all the stores of Power, choice of Methods,
plenty of Means; abundance of ways to save his People out of their troubles,
be what they will, are in JEHOVAH; Then Hope in Him.

7. It were necessary, there were in such, a submissivenss unto GOD, that there
be nothing in them, of a churlish or crabed disposition against the LORD; For
this occasions his further withdrawing of himself, and indrawing of his
Influences, and so to leave us in the dark: It is good therefore to put our
mouths in the dust, if so be, there may be hope, stooping in the dust, and
putting clay in the mouth, for fear, that it speak against GOD^ Dispensations,
Lam: 3.29. with Job. 40.4, 5

8. It were necessary and need^ul in such an occasion, to stand and establish
themselves, in the Faith of GODS Almighty Power, whereby he can work wonders;
The Faith of this helped Abraham to hope against hope, Romans 4. He looked upon
God, as one who quickneth the dead, and therefore he was not discouraged, tho
the matter in all humane probability was hopeless and desperate. A sight o^ our
difficulties in the way, as impossible to be mastered, makes u^ often faint and
conclude, that there is no hope, whereas a right sight of his Power and Al
sufficiency, is an excellent Antidote against the same, Gen: 15.1, 2.

9. Joy and Piece in believing, and cleaving to Christ, according to the
Gospel, as it is a work of the GOD of Peace, so it makes way, not only for to
hope, but to abound in hope, Rom: 15.13.

10. It were good for such, they were continually laying to heart, this great
and necessary duty, to wit, in a constant and continued Tract and way to
foresake all other ground of hope besides GOD, that providing they could not
with confidence say, that their hope was in GOD, yet that they could sincerly
and freely declare that with their will they place^ not their Hope and
Confidence on any thing within themselves; Thus the Soul may have some ground
for winding up its Anchor, tho eve^ under the power of dreadful unbelief.

11. It were good in such occasions, the did not per^mptorly and wickedly cast
at t^^ ground of hope, which other ways they mig^^ find, nor entertain an
obstinate prejudic^ against themselves, but rather lay that we^^ to heart, Heb:
10.35. Cast not away therefo^^ your confidence

The ^hird thing, which we have to spe^^ of, is the ground of Hope. Christ in
you: A^^ these words may be co^si^ered three ways.

First, In themselves, as holding forth great privilege of Believers, in a
near and inward Union with Christ.

Secondly, In so far as they hold forth the ground of this lively Hope.

Thirdly, In so far as they point out the Riches of the Glory of the Gospel,
which is now revealed.

As to the First, Christ in you, These words hold forth the wonderful rich
privilege of Believers, in their Union and Communion with Christ, who is in
them: For Understanding whereof, these following things, are worthy to be
observed. As

1. This Union is one of the greatest Mysteries of the Gospel; However now we
may wonder and admire, not being in case to take it up fully or understand the
same, before we arrive in the Land of Light, where that which is imperfect,
shall be done a way; The Apostle calls it a Mystery, yea, a Great Mystery, Ephesians:
5.32.

2. Though it be a great Mystery, and so above our uptakings; Nevertheless,
that we may understand so much thereof as is needful for our Comfort and Growth
in Grace, let us consider that this Union in Scripture is held forth under
diverse Similitudes.

(1.) Under the Similitude of the Union between Man and Wife in Marriage,
Ephesians: 5.31.32. As Man and Wife become on flesh, so Christ and the Believer
become one Spirit, 1. Cor. 6.16, 17. Therefore he is spoken of, under the name
of a Bridegroom, and the Church is called his Bride through the whole Song of
Solomon, and John tells us Chap. 3.29 That he that has the Bride is the
Bridegr^^m, So we read Revel: 21.9. Of the Bride the Lambs Wife: And as this is
to express the usefulness and advantageousness of Christ to the Believer, and
his Right and Interest in him, with what is his; So it is also to demonstra^e,
as an evidence of the former, the near Vnio^ and Communion, that is be^ween
Christ an^ them, whereby they are made one.

(^) Under the similitude o^ that Union which is between the Root and the
Branches Ioh: 15.1, 5. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches: See also Rom: 11.17.
Which points o^ the absolute necessity of their depending o^ him, for
influences of Life and Strength; An^ the necessity of their living and abidng
in Him by Faith, for that end; And so to suck (...) and sap from Him
continually, it holds forth also their close and inward Union wi^h Him that we
in him are one Tree.

3 Under the similitu^e of that Union, which is between the head and the
members. 1 Co^* 12.12. Therefore the Head of every Man Christ, 1 Cor: 11.3. And
he is the Head of (...) body, Ephesians: 4.15. and 5.23. Col: 1. (...) To show that
all the Influences of Life, wor^ing, motion and feeling, etc. are of him So
that we live, move, and have our being of him; And can do no more without him,
than a body without a Head; And therefore, there must be a near Union betwixt
us and him.

(4) Under the similitude of an Union betwixt the Foundation and the Building,
1 Pet: 2.4.6. The Believer is built on him as lively stones, Christ is the
chief corner stone of that Building, and it is in him, that all the building
fi^ely framed together, grows up into an holy Temple in the Lord; In whom
they also are builded together for ^nhabittation of God through the Spirit,
Ephesians: 2.21, 22. Which manifests that the Believer cannot subsist without him,
more then a house can stand without a foundation; And therefore ^hey must lean
on him, and be firmly united ^o him, other ways they can neither stand nor
^ubsist.

(5.) Under the similitude that is betwixt the Body and the Clothing, or
Armor; The Believer is said to put on the LORD Jesus Christ, Rom: 13.14. For
as many of you, as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal:
3.^7. And he is put on as Cloth to defend from ^he cold, and to cover their
nak^dness, and ^lso for addorning; So also is he pu^ on as Ar^our for defending
us against all spiritual enemies.

(6.) Under the similitude, that is betwixt the Accused and his Advocat,
betwix^ ^he principal Debtor and his Cautione, who are as one person in
Judgment; Therefore it is, that the Believer is blessed with all Spiritual
Blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. Being choosen in him, v. 4. They are crucified
with him, in a legal sense, Gal: 2.20. They are dead with him, Rom: 6 8. Col:
2.20. Buried with him by Baptism unto death, Rom: 6.4. Quickened together, and
raised up together, and made to sit together in Heavenly Places, Ephesians. 2.5.6.
Planted together in the likeness of hi^ Death, and shall be also in the
likeness of his Resurrection, Rom: 6 5. Yea, and their Life is bid with him in
God, Col: 3 3. So are they said to be heirs, and joint heirs with him, Rom:
^.17. All which palpably hold forth a real and legal Union betwixt Christ and
Belivers to their Joy, Comfort, and satisfaction: Christ being their Cautioner,
stands oblidged for them, and answers in Judgment for them, as a Head and
public person appearing for them. As Adam, was in respect of his posterity, so
^his second Adam, this last Adam, as he is called, 1 Cor: 15.45 47. Who is a
quickening Spirit, and Lord of Heaven, he appears as a Head, and public
person, all his Spiritual posterity, he binds and oblidges himself for them, in
a Covanant with GOD; And having satisfi^d ^or them, he is risen from the dead,
and became the first fruits of them that sl^p^; And in him shall all his
Spiritual seed be made alive, v. 22,

(...) 3. This Union is held out to us in some other Expressions, which are
most pathetick and condescending; As when Christ and they are called one seed,
Gal: 3.16. One Body, 1 Cor: 12.13.27. 1 Cor: 6.16.17. And make up one Mystical
Christ, 1 Cor: 12.12.

4. This Union, is inward; It is a mutual inbeing, for as here, he is said to
be in us, and Rom: 8.10. Gal: 2.20. 2 Cor: 13.5. Ephesians: 3.17. So, we are said
to be in him, Rom: 8.1. 1 Cor: 3* 1. 2 Cor: 1.21. and 5.17. and 12.2. Rom:
16.7. Philip: 3.9. and. 4.^1. He in us, and we in him, Ioh: 14.20. O how
wonderful and inconceiveable is this Union.

5. This Union has some likness and resem^lance, with that Union which is
betwixt the ^ather and Christ, Ioh: 17.11.21.22. That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and in thee, and again, that they may be one, even as we
are one.

6. This Union, is not only between Christ and the Souls of Believers, but also
between Christ and their Bodies; For their Bodies are said to be Temples of the
Holy Ghost, 1 Cor: ^.19. And by the virtue of this Union, their dead Bodies,
shall be again raised in the last ^ay: For, if we believe that Jesus died, and
rose ^gain, even so them, which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1
These. 4.14.

7. This Union is not only near and inward, but also durable and lasting;
Therefore, he is no^ only in us, but dwells in us, Ephesians: 3.17. And we are
said to abide in him, Joh: 15 6.7. And as we are dead in Christ, 1 These: 4.14
Rev: 14.13. Even so, in Christ shall we be made alive, 1 Cor: 15.22. And with
him, 1 These: 4.14. So, that death cannot loose that knot, otherwise the hope
and comfor^ of the Believer, which proceeds from thi^ Union, were loose and
unsure; For if in thi^ life only they had hope in Christ, they were of all men
most miserable, 1 Cor: 15.19. with Romans 8.11.

8. As it is excellent, near and inward, so greatly useful; There being no
life, strength working, moving, growth, or fruitfullness without it: -- If any
Man have not the Spirit o^ Christ, he is none of his, Rom: 8.9. Christ Jesus
must be in us, except we be Reprobate^ 2 Cor: 13.5.

9. We must be careful, not to have perverted uptakings of this Union betwixt
Christ and a Believer, or of Christ's In being in a Believer; That is, we are
not to have carnal uptakings thereof; As it were such an Union, as between the
clay and the thing formed thereof, o^ betwixt the vessel, and the water that is
in it, (...) betwix^ things confounded and mixed togethe^ in one: Nor are we to
take it up, in a way an^ ways derogatory thereto; As if it were a substantial
Union, such as there is, among the Persons of the Trinity, or between Christ's
GOD-^had and Manhood: Nor should we think prophanlie of it, as if it were a
mere fancy or notion. But we are so to apprehend it, as a real, tho Mystical,
Mysterious and Spiritual Union, having Real and Spiritual Effects in Life and
Death, and after Death, to wit, Peace with God, Reconciliation, Redemption,
Remission of sins, Justification, Adoption, Approaching to God with Confidence,
Santification, Comfort, Joy in the Holy Ghost, a Joyful Resurrection and
Eternal Glory.

10. As this Union is Spiritual in it self, so ^t is made up through a
Spiritual Bond of Means; For, as it is, through Faith on our part, Ephesians: 3.17.
So through the Spirit on his part, the which is promised in the New Covenant,
Ezekiel: 36 27. Isa: 59 21. Christ has promised to send him, Ioh. 15.26. And he
must abide with us for ever, John. 14.16. Therefore Christ and they are called
one Spirit, 1 Cor: 6.16, 17.

But to come more particularly to the purpose, we shall now point out and
demonstrate, ^n what respect he is to be in the Beli^ver, Christ in you: We may
apprehend Christ to be ^n the Believer, in these respects.

1. As a King in his Kingdom, si^ting upon his Throne, Ruling and Defending it
by his Laws and Statutes, preserving it by his Wisdom from intestine Ruptures,
Divisions and B^oyl^ and by his strength and mighty Power from Outlandish
Invasions; So is Christ's Re^gni^ as Head, Lawgiver, and great Command^ in the
Souls of his People, by h^s Laws a^^ Statutes; So is he said to Reign over the
house (...) Jacob -- Luk: 1.33. with 1 John: 4 4.

2. As the Master of a Family in his ow^ House, where he dwells with
Contentmen^ Ease, Satisfaction, Pleasure and Delight, (...) beholding his
House: Even so, Christ ^wel^ in the Hearts of his People, Ephesians: 3.17 A^^
therefore called his own house, Heb: 3.6. And an habitation of God through the
Spirit, Ephesians: ^ 22. Christ standing before the door, promises to such as will
open to him, to come it Revel: 3.20.

3. Christ is in the Believer, as a Tradseman in his Shop, doing the Work of
his Calling; I say, so is Christ advancing the Work o^ Grace in the Believer,
for beliveth in them Gal: 2.20. And if Christ be in you, the body i^ dead
because of sea, but the Spirit is Life, because of Righteousness, Rom, 8 10. As
the GOD this World, that is the Devil, is and dwel^ in them, to who^ the Gospel
is hid, and wh^ are lost, blinding the minds of them, which believe not, 2 Cor:
4.3 4. And as the prince (...) the power of the air, that evil spirit does wor^
in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians: 2.2^ Even so, Christ having cast out
this strong man, comes to the heart, and takes possession ^hereof, and works
therein, what is well pleasing in his eyes.

4. Like into one in his obtained possession, and in his Garden, deligh^ing
himself in the ^njoyment of what he has gotten and purchased: Even so is
Christ in Believers hav^ng purchased them unto himself, and that with his own
Blood, p^ss^ssing them as his own, and there deligh^e^h he himself as in his
Garden, Song. 6.2 My Beloved is gone down unto his Garden, to the beds of
Spices, to feed in ^he Gardens, and to gather Lillies.

So, that this Expression, Christ in you, holds ^orth. (1) Christ reco0ncilled
with them by Faith; He stands no more at the door knock^ng, but he is let in,
and there is peace betwixt Him and them, he is come in. (2.) Christ's ^nward
Affection to them; He cannot but love them, in whom he dwells and abides; In
whose bosom he lays his head, and in whose Heart he has his Throne. (3)
^hrists ^pecial acknowledging them ^o be his ransom^d Ones; for his peculiar
Treasure, for his House, and constant dwelling Place. (4.) Christ's working in
them, the work of Holy^ess, and drawing in them more and more ^vely Draughts
and Lineaments of his new ^mage, that the new Man of Grace* may be ^tronger and
stronger, and they made more and ^ore conformable to the Prince of their
Salvtion in all the Graces of the Spirit. (5.) Christ's reigning and sweying his
Scepter in the Soul; And that his Laws are obeyed, his Statutes followed, and
that there is no willing subjection to any other Master; That Christ having
cast out the old tyrant and usurper, he is acknowledged as the Alone and Lawful
Sovereign. (6) Christ's resting himself in his Love to them; For where he loves,
there i^ his resting place, there he makes his abode, (7.) Christ's being in
them, as their life, the Fountain and Well spring of all Life and Operations,
Gal: 2.20. (8.) In a word, It holds sorth that Christ is in them, to do in and
for them, to bring them up to Glory, to lead them through difficulties, to
strengthen them against opposition, to comfort them against discouragements,
and to support them under crosses, and so in the end to bring them home.

Question, But how is He in the Believer?

I Answer, He is there, not only as GOD; For so is he over all, neither is he
there merely as Man; For he is so in Heaven, at the Right Hand of the Father,
where he must abide, until the times of restitution of all things, which God
has spoken by the mouth of all his Holy Prophets, since the World began, Acts.
3.21. Bu^ as Mediator, not in Person, but by his Viceroy, and great Lord keeper
of his Room, the Holy Ghost; For he is the Comforter, that shall ever abide
with us; And for whom Christ prayed the Father, and w^^m he was ^o send, Ioh:
14.16, 17.26. Io^: 15.26, and 16.7.13.

Question, But is it by the Spirit himself, that Christ lives and abides in the
Believer; Or is ^t alone by the Graces, Effects and Operations of the Spirit?

Answer, By whatever of the two it be, by this way of Christ's in dwelling, is
every way strong ground of Consolation, and affords solid Joy, and a sure well
grounded Hope of Glory. Notwithstanding, there are several Expressions in
Scripture that seems to plead ^or the Spirit himself. As

1. The Believer is said to be the Temple of God and of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor:
3.16, 17. and 6.19. Which gives to know more than that they have his Graces, as
the design and ground of the Apostles reasoning holds forth, Know ye not that
ye are the Temple of God? And that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any
man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: For the Temple of God as
holy, which Temple ye are. Here three times they are called GODS Temple, And
not only so, but as if the Apostle would further lay forth the business, he
adds, And that the Spirit of GOD dwells in you: All which may be said very
properly of a Person, and more properly than of any work wrought by the Spirit.
To the same purpose the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor: 6.19. What, know ye not, that*
your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of
God -- The Holy Ghost is said to be in them as a Temple.

2. The Spirit is spoken of as a Gift, with a d^fference from his Works and
Effects o^ Grace; -- Because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the Holy Ghost, which is given us, Rom: 5.5. Here is the Grace of Love wrought
by the Holy Ghost; And moreover the Apostle says, that it is by the Holy
Ghost, which is given unto us; So that the Holy Ghost himself is given as a
special Gift, besides that of his Fruit and Operations in the Soul; Compared
with Ezekiel: 36.27. And I will put my Spirit within you.

3. Christ promises to send him in h^^ Room, and mentions him always as a
Person* that he will send to dwell and abide with them, to work in them; ^o
says he, Job. 14.16* 17. And I will pray the Father, and he shall giv^ you
another comforter, that he may abide with yo^ for ever (So that it is the
Comforter himself that he promises here, and not simply h^^ Comforts) And who
is this Comforter? Eve^ the spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive
because it sees him not, neither knows him, b^^ ye know him: And as if this
were not sufficien^ he adds further, for he dwells with yo^ and shall be in
you: And yet further, v. 26. Bu^ the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost whom
the Father will send in my Name, He shall teach you all things -- So that the
Comforter himself as distinguished from his teaching, is promised here, And
Ioh: 15.26. He is also promised as contradistinguished from his Operations, and
testifying o^ Christ.

4. The Believer is said to have the Spirit, So that they belong not to Christ,
who have not have the Spirit of Christ, Rom: 8.9. He is said to dwell in them,
Rom: 8.11. 1 Cor: 3.16. 2 Timothy: 1.14. To be with them Ioh: 14.17. And to be in
them, Rom: 8.11. -- By his Spirit that dwells in you.

5. Not only does the Spirit help our infirmities* which is through Grace; But
the Spirit himself, is said to make intercession for us with groaninos which
cannot be uttered, which a^pears to be somewhat other, that is given them then
the mere Graces of the Spirit; And that because there immediately follows, And
he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, Rom: 8.27.

6. The Believer is said to be sealled with the holy Spirit o^ promise; And he
is the earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians: 1.13, 14. And given as a seal and
Pledge, Ephesians: 4.30. The earnest of the Spirit is given in their hearts, 2 Cor:
1.22 So also 2. Cor: 5.5. which seems to hold out more than his Fruits.

7. Therefore the Believer is commanded not only, not to quench the Spirit,
Ephesians: 5. 19. which may have respect to his Operations, and Indrawings of Grace
in the Soul; But also, not to grieve the Spirit, Ephesians: 4.30. Which seems to
import the dwelling of the Spirit in them.

8. It is by virtue of this Union betwixt the Spirit and the believer, that
their very dust is raised up in the last day; so that God by the Spirit that
dwells in them, shall quicken their mortal bodies, Rom: 8.11. This Spirit
then that dwells in them, must be somewhat else, then his Graces, for by
these, the mortal bodies are not quickened. And he is called the Spirit of Him
that raised up Jesus from the dead,

9. He is said to be sent forth into their Hea^ts, crying Abba Father, Gal: 4.6.

10. David prays expressly, Psalm: 51.11. That the LORD would not take his Holy
Spirit from him.

Use, 1. This is a noble point of Truth, and full of many grounds o^ Comfort:
And how could Believers other ways then rejoice, providing this Union betwixt
Christ and them were believed? Did they know that Christ were in them, keeping
house in them, dweling with them, with joy and satisfaction, would it not make
them sing under all adversity. And that upon a four fold account. 1. Upon the
account of the great Honor which i^ brought to them thereby, even to them, who
formerly were mere cages of unclean spirits, and yet still have much
coorruption abiding in them: That the King of Zion, who is King of kings, LORD
of Lords, Heir of all, the Brightness o^ his Fathers Glory, and the express
Image of his Person, Heb: 1.3. Who is the Image of the invisible GOD, the first
borne of every Creature, Col: 1.15. That he (I say) should come and loege with
them, lodge in their Heart, within their Soul; That he whom the Heaven of
heavens cannot contain, that is High and Lofty, who dwells in Eternity, should
live with such a One, and be united with such: O what incomprehensible Honor
is this! Elizabeth cried once with great admiration, And whence is this to me,
that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? Luke. 1.43. And may not the
Believer with much more admiration cry out, And whence is this to me, that my
Lord himself should come to me? And not only so, but come to me, and dwell and
abide with me? 2. Here is great comfort on the account of profit and advantage:
Have they the Heir of all things, so near to them and with them, living in
them, what can they then want? For if Christ be theirs, all things are theirs,
life, death, things present, and things to come, 1 Cor, 3.22, 23. Has GOD
given Christ, and shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Rom:
^.32. And what can they lack that have all things? what can they want, who have
Him in them, in whom dwells all the fullness of the God head bodily? Col: 2.9.
What want they who have Heaven? And can they want Heaven within them, who have
Christ within them? They are complete in him, Col: 2.10. Which is ^he Head of
all principality and power. 3. Here is comfor upon the account of safety; Who,
or what can harm them, who have preservation or salvation within them? Christ
the Author of Eternal Salvation within them. O what security for them, in whom
he is! What can tribulation or distress, or famine or n^kedness, or peril or
sword do to such? can they separate him, who is become a Habitation for Christ,
from the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus? No, no; can the ship drown
wherein Christ is? Can fire or water, harm a Soul, who is a Habitation for
Christ? What can satan do against Christ's lodging? Can he, or dare he cast it
down? 4. Here is Comfort upon the account of security and tranquillity: For who
can weaken and endamage their right to Glory, that already have begun Glory in
the soul, to wit, Christ the hope of Glory? can satan or the world make such an
one miserable? No, surely; greater is He that is in them, then he that is in
the world, 1 Ioh: 4.4. What surer pledge of Heaven and Salvation, can the soul
have, then a begun possession? What is Heaven, other then a life of Communion
with GOD, in the nearest and strictest degre^? And (...) stricte^ Union can any
have with Christ than to have him in them?

Use, 2 Unbelievers and strangers ^o Christ, may hence gather these princ^pal
Points for their better improvement o^ ^he ^oresaid Truths. 1. Have n^ mean
^hough^s ^f ^he life and state of B^liev^rs; You s^e to what they are ^x^l^ed,
h^wever contemp^able in the eyes of ^he World: despise you such an
incomprehensi^le ^^ch advantage? I^ is no such despic^ble and mean Life as, you
fancy: Have then a higher esteem thereof, if you would be truly Wise. 2.
Again, on the other hand, ponder seriously, what a fearful and m^serable
condi^ion i^ is, wher^in ye are who are strange^s to Christ; And in place of
Christ in you, the H^pe of Glory, ye have satan ^n you, working the w^^ks of
darkness, blinding the mind, left the light of the glorious Gospel ^f Christ,
who is the Image of God, shouuld shine unto you, 2 Cor: 4 4. Being without
Christ, ^o ye have no hope strangers from the Covenants ^f promise, and without
God, Ephesians: 2 21. Without a Leader and Commander, Isa: 55.

Without Protect^on or ^oy, and without ^ll that ^s good. 3 Do no^ only think
on it, ^ut dwell on the thoughts of it, until that your ^earts be wrough^ up to
a real sorrow and ^rief, that ye have been so long in such a con^ition, and
have kept Christ so long at the door, and so have foresaken your own Mercies,
and have loved death rather then life Jonah. 2.8. Prove: 8 36.4. Endeavou^
earnestly to win free of this estate, and to b^ Partakers of this singular and
unspeakable advantage, to have Christ in you. Seek unto to him, who has the
Kings keys, and the k^ys of of David, and that opens and no man shutteh, That
he may put his hand into the hol^ of the lock, and cast open the leaves, and
unbolt the dear of your heart and come in. 5* Whatever ye do, Be careful that
ye w^on^ none of them, Ye see who is near han^ them, and whose House and
Habitation ^hey are: Do them no hurt, left ye bring on you^ selves, the wrath
of him that dwells i^ them.

Use, 3 For Application of these comfortable Truths aright, there are several
Dutie^ required of Believers themselves.

1. They must make use of Christ for Light Counsel and Direction in all their
ways; Seeing ^e is so near unto you, that he is even within you, then make all
your difficulties know^ unto him; Undertake nothing without his Advice:
Believers are to trust in the Lord wit^ all their heart, and in nothing to lean
unt^ their own understanding, acknowledging him in all their ways, and he
shall direct their path^, Pr^: 3 5.6. Thus therefore, as the^ received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so should the^ walk in him, Col. 2.6. Setting him up for their
Pattern and Example, and so walking as be walked in the World, in all Humility,
Pati^nce, Love, Zeal, Holiness and Uprightness, that thereby it may appear that
Christ is in them, and that they are rooted and built up ^n him, and
established in Faith.

2. They must lay to Heart that great Duty of growing in Grace, and bearing
Fruit in him, Ioh. 15.2. That this Union with Christ may appear; For when found
fruitful in him, ^hen it appears that they are united unto a Fruitful and sappy
Root, and that the foun^ain of Life and influences is in them: And on ^his
account are they to be the more diligent in ^hese following Duties. As 1. Live
in the constant and real Convictions of your Impo^ency to do any thing of your
selves, knowing that ye are not sufficient of your selves, to ^hink any thing
as of your selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. ^. Acknowledges that all your sufficiency is in
Christ, through whom ye can do all things, ^hilip. 4.13. Believe his
All Sufficiency and ^eadiness to help and bear through Difficulties, ^ll such,
who will employ him and his Grace. ^. In confidence hereof, go to him for help,
^epend on him for assist^nce, according to the ^romises, lay the weigh^ of the
Duty on him ^y Faith. 4. Lean and rest on him by Faith: and so venture upon
every commanded Duty ^ith uprightness of Heart.

3. The Believer must lay to Heart the Du^y of rejoicing in him, and of
boasting alone in him: And that in these respects. 1. As having all what they
have, in and through, and for him alone: As also all they have to expect for
the making of them completely happy, must run through this Channel, so tha^ the
Believer is alone Complete in him, Col. 2.10.2. Because they will find all
their wants, through Lo^ses, Crosses, Tossings, sharp D^spensations, etc.
Richly made up in Him, in whom Dwells all the fullness of the Godhead Bodily.
Col. 2.9. For He is in the^, 3. Because, that through Him they are brought to
the highest pitch of Honor and Credit imaginable, as having Christ abiding
and dwelling in them. 4. Because that through Him they have the ^urest hope of
seeing God, and of dwelling in Glory eternally; For Christ in them is the hope
of Glory. 5. Because that in Him they have cause to triumph over Death, Hell,
the Grave and Corruption, and over a Body of Death, Romans 7.24, 25. 1 Cor.
15.55.6. Because they have him near at hand, to go to, is all their Needs,
Miseries, Doubts and Questionings, Weakness, etc. He is ever at hand, for he is
in them.

4. Seeing Christ is come so near unto them, that He is in them; so they are to
keep near Communion and Fellowship wi^h him; and that in these following
respects. 1. That they converse with him in their thoughts, separating
themselves from all others, singly to speak with him, adoring and admiring his
Love and Condescendency toward them, and with delight continuing in the
Meditation of his Person, Offices and Mediatory Works, etc. 2. That they be
often speaking with him in Prayer: And thus keeping up a Correspondence with
him, laying out all their wants before him, pouring out their Souls in his
Bosom, going to him on all occasions. 3. That they seek advice of, and consult
him in all Emergents, attempting nothing, without giving him notice first
thereof. 4. That they set him up con^inually as their Pattern, that they may be
Followers of God as dear Children, Ephesians. 5.1. He ha^h left us an example, that
we should follew his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21.5. That they unbosome their whole
Secrets to Him, seeing He is their Heart and bosom Friend, and seeing this is
the real and sure token and demonstration of resting in, and crediting of Him.
6. That ^hey approach unto Him, or unto God through Him, with all Christian
freedom and familia^ity, with an assurance of accep^ance, seeing He is come so
near to the Soul: For in him, We have boldness and access, with confidence by
the Faith of Him, E^hes 3.12. And through Him we ^oth have an access, by one
Spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 2 18.5 Seeing it has pleased Christ, ^o worthy
and excellent a Guest, to take up Lodging in the Souls of Believers, they must
beware of g^ieving Him: We should be loath to let a good Guest go to the door
upon the account of our incivility. Now among other things, these following
will grieve Christ and and provoke him to depart, (2.) In case we have not that
high esteem of Him as we ought; any will soon weary in Company, where affronted
and slighted. (2.) Providing due honor and Respect to him be not entertained
and fostered, notwithstanding of all our forementioned freedom and familiarity
with him: For homliness must not spill good Manners. He is a great King and
Jealous God. A Sen Honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If then I be
a Father, where is mine Honor? And if I be a Master, where is my Fear? says
the Lord of Hosts, etc. Mal. 1.6. (3) Providing we have not strong, hearty, and
sensible desires after him: For as Love and Kindness waxes cold, so Friendship
dries up. His Love i^ strong, and love must be answered with love, otherwise
it turns into Jealousy; He is a jealous Lover; And as his Love has mounted far
above all Love, yea above all the Love of Women, though distilled into one:
Therefore we should carry our selves, as ever sensible hereof, continually
praying that ou^ Hearts might always be directed into ^he Lord of God, 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. And we kept there^^ Jude v. 21. And may abound yet more and more
Phil. 1.9. (4.) Providing we be carnally minded, this will chase him out of the
Soul; Because the Carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8.7. (5.) Providing
we give free access to inward Corruption, that will exceedingly grieve him: For
he is come expr^sly into the Soul, to break that yoke of bondage; And to
deliver the poor Soul from the Tyranny of Sin: And when man willingly subjects
unto his unreconcilable enemies, it is a direct and open declaring, and
proclaiming our unwillingness to intertain him longer in the Soul, and a
seeking these beastly, self and Soul-ruining Lusts and Desires above him: An^
that cannot but grieve him, when he sees Satan's company more prized then his.
(6) Providing we disesteem and undervalue his Doctrine, Leading, Counsel and
Advice, resisting his Motions, and tr^mpling on his Laws; This will make him
weary of his Lodging, when we are not so ready as formerly to do what a Friend
desires us, and when not so willing to take his Advice, and to follow it, then
it is a Symptom, that we are jealous of him, and wearied of his company. (7)
Providing we be lazy and sloathful in Duty: This will grieve the Spirit,
because he is dishonored thereby, and in effect declared to be a dry sapless
Root, when the branches in him are seen without Fruit, notwithstanding o^ all
their fair leaves.

6. Is Christ so affable and gracious, that he takes up lodging in poor Souls?
Then they should heartily welcome him, and let him know so much: And that 1. By
giving him the Throne, and the head of ^he Table, with the best place in the
House, for he is worthy: He is the Lord of Hosts, the Master, the Husband, the
kindly Suitor; Hereby we manifest our high esteem and burning Love toward Him,
as knowing that none is to be compared wi^h him. 2. To make him the more
welcome, we should call in all our scattered Desires and wandering Aff^ction^,
which now are spent and set loose in hunting after the scum of empty shaddowy
Vanities, and g^ther them in, and direct them all toward him* as to the
Center: As being only worthy of a^l Love and Affect^on; for He is altogether
and wholly Lovely, Song 5 16 And the Desire of all Nations, Hag. 2.7 3. We
should to the u^termost of our Power, lay out our selves (...) Him, sparing no
cost nor Labor to pleas^ Him, and to evidence our sincere affections toward
him. 4. We should give him his whole will and Command over us, and over what is
ours; so that all our Power, Wisdom, Will, Conscience, Memory, Affections, etc.
With all the Members of our Body attend his Command; so as he might ever freely
take and dispose of us and ours, according to his good pleasure, without
opposition or gainsaying, whereby he might be the more freely Master of the
House, and freely make us^ of all, according to his Will. 5. We should side
with him against all that would oppose him in our Souls; And by his Au^hority,
and through his Strength, we should put to the door, all that are enemies to
him and his Interest in our Soul^: were it the right eye, or the cutting ^ff of
the right hand, if in opposition to him. 6. We should with cheerfulness and
outstreched Hearts, run in the ways of his Commandments, and do his will with
delight and readiness, and seek to know what might please or displease him,
tha^ the one might be done, and the other eshewed, whatever might follow
thereupon.

7. Has Christ so far honored the poor Believer, as to come under a roof with
him, yea as to come into his Heart, to dwell and abide there; And should they
not s^^k all occasions again to honor him? Namely, 1. They should put the
Crown upon his Head, and behold King Solomon, with the Crown, wherewith his
Mother crowned him, in the day of his Espousals, and in the day of the gladness
of his Heart. 2. They should earnestly and carefully observe all the Precepts
and Ordinances in the Wo^sh^p, whereby he is publickl^ and solemnly served and
honored in the World; This is the honor and open Testimony of Respect he
calls for The sons of Eli, honored him not thus, neither Nadab and Ab^hu, nor
Vzza, nor the Bethshemites, wherefore his fierce anger was powered forth
against them. 3. They should recommend him to the Love and Esteem of others,
speaking good of him in all Companies, laying forth his Beauty and
desireableness at the Bride does, Song. 2. And so engaging and persuading
others to love him. 4. They would so carry themselves, that others that look
upon them, may see a desirable Lovelyness and Beauty in Christianity, That is,
by walking cheerfully in the ways of GOD, that others may not be scarred
therefrom, through their sad and dejected carriage, as if there were no reason
of Joy and Gladness of heart in the Service of GOD, and as is he were an
unkindly and hard Master, whom they serve.

8. Is Christ himself within the Believer, then surely they are called to walk
so, that all that notice them, may distinctly see, and freely say, that such
have not only been with Christ, but that they are continually with him, and he
with them, and that he lodges and lives in their Souls: And for that effect. 1.
They should have a care, that they be not conformed to this world, but
transformed by the renewing of their minds, Rom: 12.2 That it might be
manifest, that they serve another Master, then the world serves, and that they
are moved and led by another Spirit. 2. Their hearts should be lifted up in the
ways of the Lord; As it was with the Heart of that good King, 2 Chronicles: 17.6 3.
Their walk and carriage should be singular, Heavenly and Spiritual, as being
above the World, and the vanities thereof, as having their Hearts and desires
in Heaven, Where Christ sits on the Right Hand of GOD, Col: 3.1. And as
having their Conversation in Heaven, Phil: 3.20. And as it becomes the Gospel,
Phil: 1.27. Having Christ in them, so should they be dead and crucified to the
World. 4. Thus having Christ in them, whose eyes are at a fl^me of fire, who
sees their whole carriage, and knows the frame of their Hearts, they should
endeavor in their whole carriage and walk to be upright and without hypocrisy,
that they may present themselves pleasant before him, who sees the secrets of
of the Heart; For our rejoicing is this, says the Apostle, 2 Cor: 1.12. The
Testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and Godly sincerity, no^ with
fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of GOD, we have had our conversation in the
World, etc. Wherefore laying aside -- all guile and hypocrisies, -- 1 Pet:
2.1.5. They should then make it appear that Christ is in them, by serving him
after a lively manner; So it is not sufficient to follow Duti^s, but to perfo^m
them as living in Christ, or as having Christ, living in them, as having the
Fountain of Life within them, and the Bread of Life; Therefore are they to
present their bodies a living sacrifice unto GOD, Rom: 12.1. And show forth
themselves as lively stones -- built up a Spiritual House, -- 1 Pet: 2 ^5.6.
They must also make this evident by their Zealous way of walking, seeing Christ
has a loathing at lukewarmness, Rev: 3 15:16. That they are Zealous of good
Works, Tit. 2.14.7 Their Christian carriage should fill them with Joy and
Gladness, as delighting themselves in the Law of the LORD, and rejoicing in
serving and pleasing of him. 8. They must walk in the fear of the LORD, and be
in his fear all the day long, and carry themselves circumspectly and tenderly,
as in the sight of Jesus Christ, who is in them, and locketh upon them,
wherever they be, and in whatever they are doing.

9. Is Christ come into their Souls to work his work, then the^ should not
suffer him to be idle, bu^ g^ve him employment: He accounts Employment the
greatest Friendship, and best Reception that we give him; To wit, 1. That he
teach and lead them in the ways of GOD; Thus he getts Employment as a Prophet.
2. That he command and lead them as a King; Wh^reas ^ corruptions diverts from
following the Dicta^es of his Spirit; He is given for a leader and commander to
the People, Isa: 55.4. And for that end, he must be employed. 3. Tha^ he w^sh
them from their da^ly polu^ions, seeing he i^ a fountain opened to the House of
David, and to the ^nhabitants of J^rusalem, for sin and uncleanness, Zach:
13.1. His blood cleanses us from all sin, 1 John: 1.7. And he is faithful, etc:
^: 9.4. That he pray for them as an Advocate with the Father, being a
Propitiation or at^onement for their sins, 1 Ioh: 2.1, 2. -- Seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them, Heb: 7.25 5. That he renew and sanctity
them wholly in Spirit, and Soul, and Body, that he renew them wholly in the
inward Man; So that the new Man of Grace may grow, and corruption may be
brought under. 6. That he strengthen them, with all might, according to his
Glorious power, unto all patience and long s^ffering with Joyfullness Col:
1.11. That he may grant them, according to the riches of his Glory, to be
strengthened with might by his Spirit, in the Inner-man, Ephesians: 3.16. That they
may be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians: 6.18.7 That he
may refresh and enliven the^, when sicking and fainting under fears, weakness,
outbreakings of corruption, hidings of the Lords Face, or such like. 8. In a
wo^d, that he may make them confident of this very thing, that he who has
begun a good work in them, will pe^form it, until the day of Ies^s Christ,
Phil: 1.6. That in him they may perfect their Holiness in the fear of G^D, 2
Cor: 7.1. That so the work may be C^owned to his Glory: That they may be
presented to him, A glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, -- but that
they should be Holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27.

10. Seeing Christ is so near them, that he himself, is in them, so they should
have their retreat to him, in all their difficulties, for help and deliverance:
And that 1. when distempered wi^h doubtings and discouragements an^nt their
State, present frame, or Duties: For with him is the Fountain of Life, and in
his Light shall we see Light, Psalm. 36 9.2. When they are assaulted with
sinking dis^ouragements, so that they cannot stand and subsist under their
burdens: For in him alone, and in the strength of his power, can they be
strengthened: He can make them renew their strength, and mount up with Wings as
Eagles, to run and not be wearied, Isa 40.31, 3. Or when disordered with
outward losses or crosses; For he only can make up all their losses, and fully
satisfy, being an incomparable portion, Ier. 10.16.4. When they are confounded
with fears, whether from the breaking forth of Corruptions, or from the
deceitfulness of their own Heart, the cuningness of Satan, the weakness of
Grace, the accusations of Conscience, etc. Seeing he is a present help upon all
occasions, and easily with a blink of his Countenance, can drive away all these
clouds and grounds of fear.

Having now gi^en some Observations of these words, Christ in you; We come now
to speak of them, in so far as they are the ground of the hope of Glory: And so
they teach us, that Christ in the Soul, is a most sure, clear and certain
ground of a lively hope of Glory, which we shall manifest and confirm with
these Scriptural Reasons.

1. All such in whom Christ is and Lives, He has purchased and bought with his
Blood, Gal. 2.20. Christ lives in me (says he) and then adds, Who loved me,
and gave Himself for me. Such are bought with a price, both Soul and Body, 1
Cor. 6.20. And seeing Christ has bought them so Dear, and taken possession of
them, as of his peculiar Treasure, what is there that can afford ground once to
call in question* or doubt of their Salvation, they are bought unto Glory, and
Glory is purchased unto them, and Christ possesses them as such, and so they
are certain of Glory. 2. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.1. And who are in Christ, the same has Christ in them, as is
clear from what fol^ows in that Text, ver. 9.10.3. That Christ is in the Soul,
says, that however they were once without Christ, yet now are they made ^igh
by the Blood of Christ; Who is our Peace, and has reconciled us unto God,
Ephesians 2.12, 13, 14, 16. Reconciled Souls shall certainly possess Glory. 4.
Christ is called our Life; And our Life is hide with him in God, Col. 3.3, 4.
They then that have him in them, may be ^ssured of Eternal Life. 5. Such in
whom Christ lives, shall be Filled with all the fullness of God, as we see
Ephesians. 3.17, 19. That is, until begun Grace here, be perfected in Glory
hereafter, where we shall be filled fully and completely with the fullness of
God, enjoying his pres^nce in immediate Communion with him, so full as we shall
be able to contain.

Ioh. 17.23, 24.6. Christ is made for all such, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30 How then can they be deprived of
Salvation? 7. Such are the Children of God, as the Apostle says Romans 8. Who
are led by the Spirit, have the Spirit o^ Christ in them, ver. 9, 10, 11. For
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, ver. 14 And
if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ, ver. 17. So
that Christ in them, must be a certain and sure hope of Glory 8. Providing
Christ be in them, then The Spirit is Life (says the Apostle, Romans 8.10.)
Because of Righteousness: That is, their Soul and Spirit is already living, by
virtue of Christ's Righteousness, and the Life of Glory is begun in them,
therefore they shall live the Life of Glory hereafter. 9. These that have
Christ in them they have received Abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of
Righteousness, through Christ living in them; And so shall certainly Reign in
Life by Him, Romans 5.17.10. Such who have Christ in them, they are quickened
together with Him, yea they are raised up together in Heavenly places in Christ
Jesus. Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Christ takes possession in their Name, and they in him,
as their Head and Agent: And so in effect, and in respect of legal Certainty,
they have present possession of Glory; so that Christ in them, must be the
assured hope of Glory.

For further clearing and confirming hereof, observe these following
Considerations. To wit. 1. That Christ's being and living in the Soul, gives us
to know the greatest Love and Respect He has for that Soul: And whom he Loves.
He Loves unto the end, Ioh. 13 1. And what can separate the Soul from his Love,
Romans 8.38, 39.2. Christ's coming into a Soul, intimates his union therewith,
which union is fast, and who can loose it? And being one with him, and united
with him, so they shall be always with him: He has prayed, that they might be
with him, where he is, that they might behold his Glory, Ioh. 17.24. He will
not want his Servants: For where he is, there they must be also, Joh: 12.26.3.
Christ's being in the Soul, holds forth his protection; He ^s in them, to own
and defend them; and who can wrong them whom Christ defends? Whom Christ
defends, the Father defends also, Joh. 10.27, 28, 29, 30. My sheep hear my
voise, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them Eternal Life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
My Father which gave them me, is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck
them out of my Fathers hand. I and my Father are one. 4. Christ is in them,
taking possession of them, as of his own purchase: And who shall, or can take
his Possession over his head? Because greater is He, that is in them, then he
that is in the World, 1 John 4.4.5. He is in them, as fitting and preparing
them for Glory, and Sanctifying and cleansing them, With the washing of Water
by the Word: That He might present them to himself a Glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that they should be Holy and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.6. He is in them by his Spirit, as the pledge
and earnest of Glory, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. 2 Cor. 1.22.7. In a word, that he is in
them, is begun Glory, Glory in the Seed, and in the out-sprouting: He is in
them, working the work of Grace, and that is the foundation of Glory: Here they
have begun Communion with him, and that shall never be broken off, but be
carried on to a more imm^diate, sweet, full, and uninterrupted Fellowship in
Glory; so that Christ in the Believer, can be no other thing then the sure hope
of Glory.

Use 1. This Truth makes way for confuting 1. Papists, who are against
assurance of Salvavation, and who defend and teach, that we are to fear and
doubt all the days of our Lif^* For if Christ in us, be the assured hope of
Glory, then undoubtedly* some of these, in whom Christ dwells attain to this
assurance: For some of them come through Grace to see, that Christ dwells and
abids in them. 2. It is for confutation of Arminians, who lay a sure foundation
for the doubting of Papists, in ^aying, that the Saints may fall away, and that
wholly and finally: But providing that were true, then Christ should not be the
Hope of Glory in the Saints: For, according to that Doctrine, he could be in us
to day, and not tomorrow, and so his being in us, could be no hope of Glory. 3.
It is for confutation of Antimonians, who deny Sanct^fication to be any
evidence of Justification; notwithstanding we see that Christ in Believers, is
a sure and fast ground of the hope of Glory: Now his being in them is through
the work of Sanct^fication. 4. For confu^ing of poor deceived Souls, who build
their Hope of Glory on some other thing. As (1) Upon an imagination that God is
merciful; which can afford them no more ground of the hope of Glory, then to
all living, yea then to Devils. (2) Who build their hope upon their naked fancy
of their good Heart, which is most false, the Heart being Deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked: So is it an undoubted token that Christ is not
in them: For since He i^ Light, so should he discover their deceitfulness unto
them: So that it can never be a ground of Hope, but a sufficient foundation of
a real imagination, and of a dreadful deceit. (3.) Who build their hope upon
their innocence and freedom from scandalous outbreakings; with the Pharisee
Luke 18 Yea a Heathen will pretend more then they. (4) Who build upon their
Civility and Sobriety, which readily they may have through a soft nature and
humor, through good education, and corrupte^ by ends, which may be a ground of
self-deceiving, though never of the hope of Glory. (5.) Who bui^d on ou^ward
diligence and carefulness, after public Worship, wherein a Pharisee may go
beyond them, and which at most but holds forth, that they have a Name they
live, and yet are dead. Dead and formal Worship, is no assured hope of Glory.
(6) Who build on the forsaking some Lusts and former evil practices, to which
they were formerly addicted; whereas notwithstanding Satan may have a sure and
certain Possession of their Soul.

Use 2. This Truth serves to inform us of these two. 1. That the state of
these, who are yet without Christ is very sad, and lamentable: For if without
Christ, they have no hope of Glory: And what have they then, though they had
the World at their disposal, and were swiming in Pleasure^? Alas! they want
that, which might sweeten the want of all other things, to wit, the hope of
Glory. 2. That the condition of those, who have fled to Christ, and have gotten
that noble Guest, Christ in them, is unspeakably happy: For let their outward
Estate be here in the World, what it will, they may Sing in the hope of the
Glory of God; having Christ in them, so they have the assuredest hope of Glory
imaginable: They have Christ, who is the whole Covenant whereby Glory is
ensured: They have him with^n their Souls, who already has given them the
possession of Glory, fitting them to have a Portion in the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light: And who takes possession of them, that he and they may never
more be separate.

Use 3. This Doctrine contains also in it a Reproof. 1. To Unbelievers who
notwithstanding they be wholly without Christ, and his Spirit, nevertheless
dreams and imagins, that they have an undoubted right unto Glory; And so
deceives themselves wi^h a vain and ungrounded hope, that all will be well with
them at last. 2. For reproof to Believers, who have this assured ground of
hope, nevertheless improves it not for their comfort and encouragement: But
holds themselves up with doubtings and scruples concerning their Right and
Inheritance; taking heed to the lying whisperings and temptations of Satan, and
so lives in Terrors, sinful Fears and Unbelief, whereby they wrong and grieve
the noble Spirit, who has taken up quarters in their Soul, even for that end
among others that they might have a lively hope of Glory and thereby be
supported under the pressure of Terrors and Fea^s, strengthened against the
Soul troubling injections, and heart-distur^ing temptations of Satan, and
comforted against all discouragements

Use 4. Th^s Doctrine ^olds out these following Duties to the Unbeliever. As 1.
They ought to Labor to have this Truth, deeply rooted in their Hearts, that
before Christ be in them, they can have no well grounded hope ever to see God
in Glory. 2. That herein they are to be convinced of the necessity of giving
ear unto the Call of the Gospel, and to give obedience thereunto, which is (as
we shall after hear) that we receive Christ, the Prince of Life in our Souls.
3. That therefore there should be nothing so desirable to them, as to have
Christ living and working in their Souls* and to rest on nothing less for a
satisfying ground of the hope of Glory.

Use 5. This Truth holds out unto us, the sure ground of the consolation of
Believers, in whom Christ is: O! what cause of gladness and rejoicing have
they, go as it will with them in the World: For though the World frown upon
them, nevertheles^ they may rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God, what^ver
ground of sorrow, they may otherwise have, as they see how it fares with them
in the World, yet when they look within, and beholds the footsteps of Christ
walking within them, and the Fruits of his living and abiding in them; so may
they raise up themselves with unspeakable and excellent joy.

Objection, But it may be asked, how comes it then, that even such are more
filled with fears and anxieties then others, concerning their Eternal Happiness
and lively hope, and are continually in fears and doubting, possessing their
Life often in sorrow?

Ans. 1. It is one thing to have Christ in us, and another thing to see him in
us; This is a new and different Gift: And God may give the one, when he thinks
good to withold the other. 2. The Lord may thus for wise and holy ends
measure out his Favors: As he is a Sovereign, so he is also wise; he does what
he will, and yet does all in deep Wisdom, for wise and holy ends: The Lord may
have a high and Sovereign hand in this business, and may find ^t necessar, so
to keep them humble, tender, wa^chful and diligent in Duties: For he sees that
readily, did they see how rich they were, they would forget both God and
themselves, not being well ball^ssed to carry such a high Topsail, and that
thus they might come to boast and turn secure, and give too much advantage to
Satan to assault and overcome them. 3. They may read^ly have a sinful h^nd
therein themselves: And that (1) When they give too much heed to the lying
Injections and temptations of Satan: It is not safe to entertain discourse with
such an enemy, who is a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning: He is too great
a Sophist and Disputer for us. (2.) When they give too much way to corruption,
which darkens all, and gives Satan advantage and occasion to accuse of
Hypocrisy, and to allege and say, providing Christ be in you, how is it so and
so? (3) When by the false Injections of Satan, they Nickname the work of
Christ in them, consenting to the reproaches of the enemy, and joining with him
in affording Objections against all the work of Grace in their Soul: And thus
having filled their mind with prejudices against themselves, through the
instigation of Satan, they are not in case, either to receive, or accept of any
right Information concerning their Souls. (4.) It may also f^ll out through
their misunderstanding the true Nature and work of Grace, and of Christ's being
in them, imagining that nothing can be called or reckoned Christ in the Soul,
but an exceeding great out-letting of the Spirit, carrying the Soul over all
difficulties, accompanied with great joy and gladness, and with an eminent and
great degree of Sanctification.

Use 6. This Truth exceedingly calls for a narrow Trial, viz. If Christ be in
us or not: And because it is a material business we shall therefore speak the
more to it. 1. We shall lay forth some false Marks, by which many deceive
themselves, both on the one hand, and on the other. 2. We will give you some
true Marks, where you may judge in this matter,

In speaking to the false Marks, we must have our eye upon two sorts of
Persons, and so speak to the Marks, whereupon each goes to work and deceives
themselves: Some have Christ really dwelling in their Soul, and yet
nevertheless imagine, that it is not so, upon ^uch and such grounds, that they
perceive in themselves, which they judge cannot consist ^ith Christ's living in
them: Others again, have ^ot Christ in them, notwithstanding imagine that he is
in them, by reason of such and such things, which they judge to be real Marks
of ^hrists being in them. And both the one and ^he other, are deceived with
false grounds.

As to the First, viz. Such who have Christ ^eally in them, and nevertheless
will not be ^onvinced thereof: They may mistake on these and the like grounds.

1. Because they are no ways like to these ^aints, whereof the Scriptures make
mention, (...) whom was the Spirit of Christ; Neither like ^ose, who now live,
who have Christ in them: ^s if (forsooth) all were Christians of the ^^me
Magnitude, Age, Strength and Liveli^ess; As if there were not in Christ's
Family, young Children as well as old, young Sentinels, as well as Lively,
Strong and great Warriors, 1 Cor. 3.1. 1 Ioh. 2.13, 14. A Child has real Life,
and is a man, though not a strong and able man; yea the very Child in the
Mothers Belly has real Life; and so many Children in Christ go to Heaven, for
he carries the Lambs i^ his Bosom. Isa 40 11.

2. Because they find not the Operations of the Spirit in them; That is
likewayes no true mark: For he may be in the Soul, and yet may be hide from the
Soul, the Lord judging it fittest it should be so* that he may hide pride from
their eyes, and they (as was said) may be keep'd humble and sobbing all their
days. The Spirit blows where he lists, and after what manner he will.

3. Because they are daily full of Fears and Jealousies, that all is not right
with them: Hence they conclude, that providing Christ were really in them, then
all their Questionings would be done away, and all their clouds scattered, and
they would obtain a full assurance: But this is a mistake, Christ may be, and
Faith in him may be, where this certainty is not, never was, and likely shall
never be, until the Soul come within the view of the Land of Glory: Yea the
Scripture is ^ull of such like Complain^s of the Saints, and of their often
expressing their suspicions: It is the Disease that follows the Royal Blood,
incident to the most Heavenly Spirits; Moses David, Heman, Asaph, Job,
Jeremiah, the Church, Psalm: 120. Lam: 1. and 2. and 3. and 4 And that under the
Church and Saints of the New Testament, as well as the Old, 1 Cor: 10.6. Now
these things were our examples, -- with v. 1.1. 2 Cor: 1 8 9 2 Cor: 2.11 2.
Cor: 7 4, 5, 6. 1 Pet: 1.6, 7. Yea Christ may be there, where the Soul through
the power of temptation pe^emptorly concludes, that he is not in them,
^therwayes woe to not a few.

4. Because Strangers to some sensible and ^omfortable manifestations, which
some win ^t; They see not, neither find they, as with ^ome, the Rays and real
Blinks of his smiling Countenance: But this is no sure Mark; Christ ^ay be,
where these things are not, or other^ayes woe to many poor Souls. These are
^he free outlettings of his Love, wherein the LORD dealls as a Sovereign;
Allowing some ^o come near him, for so ^e thinks fit, and others to stand
farther off, and think it suffici^nt, if but admitted to stand within the
portall ^f his Palace: All Subjects are not Courtiers, ^or all Courtiers alike
high: The Mother will ^ake the one Child, and kiss and dandl^ it upon ^he knee,
and not the other; So Christ takes ^ot all his Children into his Banqueting
house, ^^ither spreads he his Banner of Love over them, in a sensible manne^:
Each one, is not ^ayed with Flaggons, and comforted with Apples; Every one has
not Christ's left hand under their head, and his right hand embracing them: Some
must be satisfied, to want these manifestations, until they ascend into the
Higher House.

5. Because they know not, what it is to have their Hearts lifted up in the
ways of the LORD; They know not what that Joy in the Holy Ghost means, nor
what it is to cheer themselves with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. O is
this sufficient ground to conclude, that Christ is not in them? What a gross
mistake is this? Do all Christians attain to such high Seize? Alas! Some
must be well satisfied to creep to Heaven, and never once get up their back,
until they win within the very ports of Glory: Some in stead of rejoicing,
must carry the tear in their eye, the whole way and never get it washen away,
until that Christ's soft hand, once for all, wash it off, and then they shall
weep no more, being arrived there, where no sorrowing nor sighing shall be
heard, for then sighing and ^orrowing, must flee away.

6. Because their Graces shine not, nor have not that Beauty and Luster, Which
they believed to have had, Providing Christ were in them: Where Faith, Hope
Love etc. is nothing to what it should, or must be, (thin^ they) if Christ were
in them. But they notl^^ not, that there are degrees of Grace: All ar^ not
Saints of the first Magnitude; Each ones Faith, (even true Faith) is not
Assurance: Christ is, where the least grain weight of Grace is; And sometimes
Grace will go in little Room; Christ is, where there is but one smoking Flax,
and but one broken Reed.

7. Because they are not only without Comfort and Joy, but are also full of
terrors, fears and trembling, whereof they imagine they should be free,
providing Christ were in them: Alas, poor Soul, why thinks thou thus! Were it
so as ye imagine, what should have become of excellent Heman, Psalm: 88.15. Who
from his youth up, was afflicted and ready to die, and was distracted with the
Terrors of GOD, which he suffered. What should ye then say of the good King
Hezekiah, who became to chatter like a Cran or a Swallow, and to mourn as a
Dove, Isa: 38.14. And of others whom we could name.

8. Because they see no Grace growing in them, all seems to be going back with
them: I grant, it is most lamentable when it is so, and a case much to be
condolled; Nevertheless, it may readily appear to be so, when really it is not
so; Christ may be, where this grouth in Grace, is neither seen, nor observed;
Yea, Christ may be, where there is a sinful decay for a time, by reason of some
Winter ^lasts and storms, or by reason of some worm, or such like at the root;
Nevertheless, the seed shall remain, and where the seed is, there is Christ, so
that this is but a false Mark.

9. Because they observe so much Hypocrisy in their Actings, undoubtedly say
they, if Christ were in us, it should not be so with us* But as to this, we
should mark, that however, he who has Christ in him, can be no Hypocrite; For
a Hypocrite is such, whose state is without Christ; Nevertheless, he may have
much hypocrisy in him, even as he has more or less of other corruptions;
Every act of hypocrisy, will not say, that that man is a hypocrite; There is
great difference between yellow brass, and Gold that has scumm mixed with it,
the best of our Metals have dross in them: The State of perfection is not here.

10. Because they cannot perform commanded Duties, without opposition and great
fighting: Whereas if Christ were in them (imagine they) their wheels would move
more Lightly: But this is also a mistake, and a perverted rule to judge by; For
in the best that Live, there remains much of the old man, that never rests, But
continually setts it self against every Good motion and work, that is in hand;
so that the good that they would, they cannot get done, But the evil, that they
would not that they are made to do, the Law o^ their members, warring
continually against the ^aw o^ their mind, making them cry Out, Owre ch^d man,
that I am, who shall deliver me, from the Body of this Death! Rom: 7.14, 15.24.

11. Because corruption is not weakened, but as they imagine is on the growing
hand, which could not be, providing Christ were in them: But herein is also a
mistake, the one or other special corruption, may in respect of some
temptation, grow more at one time, than at another, and nevertheless, Grace
under no decay, nor corruption growing in the who^e Body: The leaves will
abundantly fall off ^he Tree, yea, and three times more in the Harvest, than at
another time, and yet be under no decay: Corruption through temptation may be
discovered, while never^heless, neither growing, nor in strength; And at other
times they may be less seen and feared, when most strong and dangerous: An
unseen and quiet devil, may be more hazardous, than a seen and a roaring devil;
Corrup^ions grow^ not always most, when they rage most.

12. Because, sometimes they have gross out-breakings: This is sad I confess,
and lamentable; But therefrom we cannot certainly conclude, that we are without
Christ; For Moses, David, Peter, etc. had their heavy falls, which occasioned
the opening of the mouths of the ungodly.

13. Because, that sometimes they are carried away, with the tide and stream of
their Corruptions, that they see nothing, but a constant course, and a joint
complotting of gross evils: This I aknowlege is a sad condition, and sadly to
be Lamented; Notwithstanding there is no Satisfying ground there form to
conclude Positively, that such a Soul, is certainly without Christ; For we find
Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord; And yet what a
gross outbreakings find we in him, 2 Chr^n: 16. He made Benhadad to break his
league with Baasha; And further to engage him thereto, he committed sacrilege,
and spoiled and plundered the House of the LORD, and he trusted in an arm of
flesh; And put the Prophet in the prison house for faithfully reproving of
him,; And besides at the time, oppre^sed some of the people; And in his
sickness, he sought not to the LORD, bu^ to the Physicians. O! We cannot tell,
beside how many corruptions, Christ will dwell in the Soul: Even such as are
excommunicate for gross scandals, may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1
Cor: 5.5.

14. Because they are troubled with dreadful temptations and blasphemous
injections: But neither can this be a sufficient ground to judge ^uch a Soul to
be without Christ; We know with what temptations the devil set upon Christ
himself; After that he had tempted him, with the foulest Idolatry, To wit, to
worship the devil, then to a tempting of GOD, and a questioning his own God
head, and his right and interest in GOD as his Father: What will he not then
attempt against the poor Followers of Christ? And seeing he so assaulted the
Prince of Salvation, in whom he could find nothing, and that for forty days
together, and then but left him for a time, Mark. 1.13. Luke 4 2.13. Why should
his Followers think it strange, when long troubled with such injections.

15. Because the LORD pursues them in his anger, and in his carriage to them
shows his sore displeasure, and writs their sins on their judgments: This also
is no sound Mark so to conclude; For we know how he carried with David, Psalm:
6. and 38. and 51. And what he did with Job, who said, Chap. 6.4. The arrows of
the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof, drinks up my Spirit: The
terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.

On the other hand, let us see, which are the false grounds, wherein others
deceive themselves, imagining they are in Christ, when there is nothing like it.

1. They have a Pro^ession and a great Name, an Approbation of others, as none
such Christians: But may with the Church of Sardis, have a name that they live,
and yet are dead: Many believed in Christ, whom notwithstanding he would not
commit himself unto, Because he knew all men, Ioh: 2.23.24. The end of the five
foolish Virgins in the parable, Mat: 25. May sufficiently alarm such; For they
were professors, yea great Professors, and acknowledged as such by others, long
waiting P^o^essors, earnestly seeking to enter in, and desirous of oil for
their Lamps, etc. And yet Christ was never in them, for he declared He knew
them not.

2. They are free of scandalous and gross sins, whereunto some Gracious Souls
may be liable: But poor Soul, that may be, and yet Christ not in you: The
Pharisee could say Luk: 18 11. God I thank thee, that I am not as other men
are, extortieners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican Many may escape
the polutions of the world. 2. Pe^: 2.20. And ye^ the letter end be worse with
them then the beginning.

3. They are Civil and honest in all their dealings, no man can charge them for
wronging any by false or cheating means: But this may be, and notwithstanding
Christ never admitted into your Souls: was not the young man such an one? Luke
18 21. who said, All these have I kept from my youth? Many Civilians go to
hell; Civility may pretend somewhat, and go ^ar among men, but it is of a small
account with GOD, where there is no more: Yea, the heathen may exceed many a
Christian, in respect of Civility, and yet they are without Christ.

4. They have always, as they imagine kept a good Conscience, never gone
contrary to unto it, But in every thing they have walked according to the Light
and Dictates of the same: This may seem indeed to be a great length, and yet
nothing to prove that Christ is in their Souls; For many Consciences are deaf
and blind, so that they cannot see far to guide, neither speak out, and many a
ones Conscience is without eyes, and some Consciences are fast a sleep, so that
this can prove but little: These that thought they did GOD good service in
killing the Prophets and Apostles, according to what Christ ^oretold, Ioh: 16.
Had their Consciences going before them; Paul followed his Conscience, when he
persecuted the Church, he acknowledges it, Act: 26.91.10. I verily thought with
my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the Saints, did I
shut up in prison, etc. Again he says, Act: 23.1. -- I have lived in all good
Conscience before God, until this day: Which seems to have respect to his
unconverted State, when out of Zeal, he persecuted the church, Phil: 3.6. And
yet until Christ appeared unto him in ^he way to Damascus, he was a stranger
unto Christ, and Christ not revealled unto him.

5 In many outward things, they are changed and reformed, and in respect of
these they are changed folks: Alas! that may appear to be something, and yet is
nothing to prove that Christ is in the Soul; For Herod was a stranger unto
Christ, notwithstanding he did many things, when he heard John; Mark 6.20.

6. They are careful Followers of the Ordinances, and take pleasure in running
after Duties: This I confess may bear much bulk among Men; But it is said, that
Herod heard John gladly, Mark 6.20. Isaiah speaks of some tha^ sought the LORD
daily, and had delight to know His ways, chap. 58.2. with Ezekiel. 33 31, 32.

7. They are much in Prayer, and think with themselves, that they are very
diligent and serious therein: Neither is this any infallible token that Christ
is in their Souls, For many may cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us, to whom Christ
shall say, I know you not: Matthew: 7.24. And many may ask, and ask a miss. Iam.
4.3. and 25.11.12.

8. They hold with the Good Cause, and with them that suffer for it; I
acknowledge this is much; But this alone will not prove that Christ is in the
Soul; Judas continued long in Christ's company, and many were Christ's Disciples
who in end forsook him, John 6. David had many Valiant Men with him, who fought
with him the battles of the Lord; And Paul makes a supposition of some, that
might give their bodies to be burnt, and yet be without love: 1 Cor. 13 3.

9 They have much knowledge in the mysteries of the Gospel, they can speak much
and illustrate the same by many reasons, yea, they can debate for it, and
Preach thereof, and have many excellent and singular Gifts: This may be, and
yet Christ not in the Soul; Gifts and Graces differ much, Heb 6.4. Read and
observe it, and trust no more to such loose grounds: Shall not many who have
prophesied in the Name of Christ, be shut out of the gates of Heaven? Matthew 7
22.

10. They have strong and earnest desires to be in Heaven, and to do what is
Right: And had not the foolish Virgins, a desire to enter in with the
Bridegroom, when they cried, Lord, Lord, open unto us: Matthew. 25:11. Wished not
Balaam to die the death of the Righteous? Alas! carnal self-seeking desires,
will not prove that Christ is in the Soul.

11. They have many Convictions, upstirrings, and awakenings of Conscience, and
good resolutions following thereupon: Ah! many have had such, who never were
brought to embrace Jesus Christ; There sickness is gone, and they afterward
become more obdured then ever: Convictions may be lively, and die out again,
and terrors break forth, and hold up again, before that the Soul is brought
fully home, and made willing to open unto Christ, and let him in upon his own
terms.

12. They have a good opinion of the Doctrine of the Gospel, as being good and
acceptable news of good tidings and mercy; And have no exceptions against the
conditions of the Gospel offers, they judge them very reasonable, just, and
most worthy to be accepted: But light and Conviction will not say that the
thing is done; At best it is but a tasting of the good word of GOD, Heb: 6 5.

Having discovered some of these false Marks, on the one hand and one the
other; I come now to lay out some Particulars that will give fuller discovery
of the matter; only I must say before hand, that every one, that has Christ
realy in them, cannot alike Distinctly feel and comprehend all these Marks in
them; But some will be in case more to judge of some of them, and some to judge
more of others of them.

1. Mark: Where Christ is, there has been some clear Discoveries of this, that
that Person was without Christ, and of the miserableness of of the estate of
being without Christ; As likewise a weariedness of being longer in that
condition with strong disires to be delivered there from; As also a real,
full, resolute, and peremptory forsaking of all without Christ. I Say first,
There has beenclear convincing Discoverys of Persons being once without
Christ, and of the Lamentableness and misery of that estate: Not that all has
alike great and clear discoveries; But every one in some measure, has this
clear discovery in them: nether say I, that every one is peromptorly to stint
themselves to the same measure and degree of Light here mentioned; But that
really, there must be some measure of light in the Soul, and such a measure as
shall make willing to run out of that estate, and to hearken unto the G^spel.
We must also here, pu^ a d^fference betwixt those Discoveries, and the terrors
that sometimes Accompanies them; Providing the Discoveries be such as drives to
Christ, it is well, be it accompanied with more or less terror. (2.) I say
there ha^ been a weariedness of this their Natural state, with an earnest
disire to be unbound and Delivered, and crying out with those, who were p^icked
in there heart Act. 2. Act 16 Men and Brethren what shall we do to be saved:
And there has never been any thing of this sor^, there has been no in letting
of Christ* (3.) I say there is a real and actual casting off all other things,
Because they cannot serve two Masters; There is a real forsakeing of all hope
of life through our own Righteousness, or of any others whatsomever, But
through Christ alone: what things formerly was account^d gain* they account now
Loss ^or Christ; Yea doubtless they count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus ^hil: 3.7.8 9 So that where there
is a harkering after ou^ own righteousness, or a resting thereon, or any thing
besides him, for righteousness and life, with pleasure and satisfaction, Christ
is not there.

2 Mark: Where Christ is, there is an opening of the heart for him, a real
hearty accepting of consenting to closing with, and laying hold on him, As he
is Offered in the Gospel; A receiving of him upon his own terms freely, and
wholly, and ^or all ends and uses, in order and in respect to Salvation; As the
door is opened, so will he come in. Revel: 3.20. And where it is kept fast
bolted, there is he not entered as yet: Where this opening of the heart, This
cordial Consenting, this soul receiving of the Offered Mediator, is wanting,
Christ is not there. Its true some may have opened unto him, and yet not know
of it, imagining that this opening to, accepting or receiveing of Christ
offered, is some what else, then really it is, and looking out after more
enlargedness of heart to receive him, yet more heartily; they account but
Little of any thing they have yet gotten or attained; Therefore when the heart
has t^uely opened it self for him and at least is realy satisfied that Christ
who is a King, having the key of David open the Door, come in, Live there, and
where the heart cries out earnestly, O! when will He come to me; we may
conclude that Christ is already there.

3. Mark: Where Christ is, there is immediately an emptiness seen in all other
things, and such fullness Discovered and discerned in him, which satisfies and
quiets the Soul, so that it rests therein, as having an All-sufficient portion,
and as fully pleased and contented therewith, because they judge (and indeed
not a miss) that the Lines are fallen to them in Pleasant places, Psalm: 16.
They cry out; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth,
that I desire besides thee: Psalm: 73.25. And they are so satisfied with him,
that they sit down, and call in all their wandering affections and
inclinations, that were scattered upon the mountains of vanity, and brings them
all in to him as the Center; And gives them a new commission to be for ever
again employed in, by, and for him alone.

4. Mark. Where Christ is in the Soul, there they cast their burdens on Him,
and run to with their Doubtings, Troubles, Accidents, Weakness, Accusations,
Failings, Duties, and with all they have to do. The Soul shall have Him even in
its eye a^ All-sufficient, able and willing to help in all Exigencies and
Necessities, and shall look out to Him for that effect.

5. Mark. Where Christ is, there He gets the Heart, for there he lives, Ephesians.
3, 17. So that what ev^^ it b^ that presents its self to the Soul, though never
so taking, yet He has still the precedence, disposing, and chief room, unless
it be for a time, that the Soul may be over poured and carried away with some
l^st or other. These that have Christ in them, they Confess that Jesus is the
Son of God, 1 John: 4.15. And so altogether Matchless: For all such dwell in
Him, and He in them: So that He is unto them White and Ruddy, the chiefest
among ten thousands, Song. ^.10. And whatever is his, is altogether lovely,
ver. 16. For unto them which believes, He is precious, 1 Pet. ^.7. I
acknowledge this love and esteem will not always be the same, nor appear in
the like degree: Nevertheless it is for the most part p^edomining and reigning,
and where these things are not so, it is a sad token that Christ has not as
yet taken up his abode.

6, Mark. Where Christ is, there is a forsaking of all former Lovers, for now
they have changed Masters: They shall say to their former Idols, get you
hence, as if they were so many menstruous clothes, Isa: 30.22. Then they say
with Ephraim, What have we to do any more with Idols Hos: 14 8. For where he
comes, all these must give place to him, as being worthy of all; There old (J)
lives no more, Gal: 2.20. But where the old lovers keep their possession,
where the old idols, the old sins, have the old esteem, and the old service,
and not as yet cast out with loathing and shame, it is not as yet ^ight there:
Christ, when he comes, binds the old man, sets the old Tyrant that possessed
the Soul, out of doors.

7. Mark: Where Christ is, there is a complete change, that word is realy felt
2. Cor: 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: Now is he, as he
were in another world, drawing his breath in another element; They are no more
the folks they were. They that are Christ's, have Crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts, Gal. 5 24. They look on those lusts and affections as
their enemies, and declares themselves enemies against them; wars against them
in root and branch, and against all their motions; whether they be sinful
a^fections, and passions, such as these, whereby the man's Mind does suffer, and
is troubled and affected with; or whether they be sinful lusts, such as these
stirred up by fleshly carnal Baits and Pleasures, as motions to Intemperance,
uncleanness, etc. Now those who are Christ's, are said to cruci^y and put to
death all these, because they have engaged themselves by profession and
Covenant, Sealed in Baptism so to do, Romans 6.3, 4. And have actually begun th^s
wo^k, so that though this Body of corrup^ flesh be in them, yet through the
Spirit, Romans 8.13. And by imitating his Cross, Romans 6 5. They are upon the work
of Mor^ifying it, suppressing the endeavors, and smoothering the ^ffects of
it, Romans 6.12 They resolve now to walk in newness of Life, Romans 6.4. From this
time forth they have a new understanding, renewed in the Spirit of their mind,
no more s^bject to the Dominion of fleshly Lusts, which is enmity against God;
They ^ave a new will, which is now flexible to God^ will and Command, neither
does it now rebel as formerly; They have new Desires, new Inclinations, new
Work, new Ends before ^^em, new Followship, no more Fellows^ip wi^h the
unfruit^ul works of Darkness.

8. Mark. Where Christ is, there is a resting on him for Li^e, and leani^g on
him for Righteousness, Adop^ion, Justification and S^^vation, wi^h ^aul, Phil*
3.9. Who desired to be found i^ him, not having his own Righteousness, which is
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness
which is of GOD by Faith. The Soul in^ends to live through this way alone, to
r^st in, to hide himself in Christ, until (^o speak so) a bitt o^ the Man
cannot be seen, that when he is calle^ for, it may be answered, LORD, I am in
Christ, not having my own Righteousness: -- If Christ be in you (says Paul) --
the Spirit i^ Life, because of R^ghteousness, Rom: 8.30. The Soul resolves
alone to live through this way, through his Righteousness. I^ (...) LORD ^ave
we Righteousness and stren^^^ say they, Isa: 54.24. In the LORD exp^c^ they
only to be Justifi^d and to Glory, ^. 2^

9. Mark, Where Christ is, there is a great (...) to esh^w sin, Joh: 3.6.
Whos^e^er (...) in him sinne^h not: To wit, with that (...) as formerly: They
may be overtaken in a fault, as Gal: 6.1. But ^hey are not w^llingly entangled
again with the yoke of bondage, G^l: ^.1. Som^times they may be carried away
with the stream of a temptation, as David and Peter, yet they give not
themselves willingly and deliberatly over to the will of their Lust^: But even
when corruption has the upper hand, there is a party within them that
protests against that course and usurpation, Rom: 7. That which they do they
would not, and that which they do not, they would willing^y do; The Spirit
warreth against the flesh, Gal: 5.17. Hereby it is, that ^^ey walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom: 8.1.

10. Mark, Where Christ is, there is a real, fast, and resolute care and
endeavor to keep the Commandments of Christ, 1 John: 3.24. And he that keeps
his Commandments, dwells in him, and he in him And again 1 John: 2.5. Hereby
they know, that they are in him, because they keep his word. They will cast at
none of his Laws, but have respect unto all his Commandments, Psalm: 119.6. This
is their work and design, to be conformable in all things to his Law, and their
faillings, are the cause of much sorrow unto them.

11. Mark, In whom Christ is, they live in Love, as in their Element, 1 John:
4.16. And we have known and believed the Love that GOD has to us, GOD is love,
and he that dwells in Love, dwells in GOD, and GOD in him, Also 1 John:
4.13. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him* and he in us, because he has given
us of his Spirit. A humble and condescending Spirit,, a tender and simpathizing
Spirit, a Spirit of Wisdom and counsel, a Spirit o^ Knowledge, and of the Fear
of the LORD: We may see, what for a Spirit it is, that is given unto Christ
without measure, Isa: 11.2. Where it is called the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of
the Fear of the LORD; So that these who have Christ living in them, are more or
less partakers of this Spirit; For they are one Spirit with Christ, their
darkness is in part removed, their pride killed, and they made more conformable
to Christ their Head and Husband.

12. Mark, Who have Christ in them, they walk after the Spirit, Rom: 8.1. That
is, they have a new counselor, a new lea^er to lead them in all their ways,
they walk now in the strength of the LORD, being strong in him, and in the
power of his might, Ephesians: 6.10. They have new principles and new Motives to
their work; They go now to their Duties upon another ground, and for other ends
then formerly, and this is not at some times, at starts and si^s, but in a more
serious, constant and resolute manner; For they walk after the Spirit.

13 Mark, These who have this Spirit of Christ in them, they live by Faith, and
depend upon him for Grace, Strength, I^fluences and Life, that they may s^rve
him in their na^ural, ordinary, and civil Conversations, as well as in their
Christian Life; That they may be for him, and for^his Glory, in all their
eating, drinking, sleeping, walking, within and without house, in their
ordinary calling, work and Employment, as well as in the hearing of the Word,
and in Prayer: The Life which they now live in the flesh, is by Faith, Gal^
2.20.

14 Mark, These that have Christ in them, are of a broken and contri^e Spirit,
they dare not arrogantly look up to GOD, they lyin the d^st, and cry guilty,
glorifying GOD, and taking shame unto themselves: He dwells with him, that is
of a contrite humble Spirit, Isa: 57 15. Such a Heart is his second Throne,
whereas the proud he sees a far off.

15. Mark, Who have Christ in them, they get something of a public Spirit;
That mind is in part in them, which also was in Christ, Phil 2.5. So that they
have a heart to lay out themselves more effectually for Zion then formerly:
Christ's cause, and the Suff^rings of his people lies nearer their heart, then
their own things.

From these Marks, we may try and see, i^ we have ground to think that Christ
is really in us or not.

Now, we come in the Third place, to speak of these words, Christ in you, the
Hope of Glory, n so far as they are the riches of the Glory of this Mystery,
which is now made manifest among the Gentiles; which will lead us to speak of
the first part of the verse, wherein (as we said in the beginning) is a praise
and high commendation of the Gospel on several accounts. As 1. Being a
Mystery. 2. A Mystery that has Glory in it. 3. A Mystery, that has the
Riches of Glory in it. 4. A Mystery now made manifest among the Gentiles. 5.
Tho so, nevertheless the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery is not made
manif^st to all the Gentiles, nay not unto all that hear the Gos^^l, but to the
Saints mentioned verse 26.6. And that according to the good pleasur^ of GOD, T^
whom GOD would make known. 7. So th^^ it is alo^e GOD^ work, to make known this
Mystery For the opening up of this Busines^, we shall first speak a word
concerning every one of these pa^ticulars severally; And then to all jointly,
holding ^his forth, To wit, that Christ in the Believer is the Hope of Glory.

First then, the Gospel is a Mystery, consider it, the Doctrine of the Gospel
is a Divine de^p, Mysterious Truth, therefore it is called the Mystery of the
Gospel, Ephesians: 6.19. we may unde^stand that it is called a Mystery in these
respects,

1. In respect of the first finding of it out; ^he Gospel was not at first
^ound out by men (...) Angels, never could they have fallen upon (...); It went
far above the reach of their capaci^^es to find out the way, how the condemned
^^nner, should again be reconciled unto GOD; ^^is only is the invention of GOD,
therefore (...) is called the Mystery of his will Ephesians: 1.9. (...) Mystery
unto which he gave a being out of ^^s own good will and pleasure, He willed it,
and therefore it was.

^. The Gospel is a Mystery in respect of the disco^ery, and making known
thereof; As no flesh ^ould have found it out, so no flesh could have ^allen on
such a way, until it pleased the LORD ^o make it known; flesh and blood has
not ^evealed it, Math: 16.17. Yea the Angels ^ould not have revealled it for
they were strangers thereunto, and came to the knowledge ^hereof by the Church,
Ephesians: 3.10. By the Churc was the manifold wisdom of GOD (to wit in the mystery
of the Gospel) made known unto the Principalites and powers in Heavenly places;
therefore we hear that the Angels are present in the Assemblies of GOD^ people,
1 Cor: 11.10. and Peter ^els us 1. Pet: 1.12. That ^he Angels are desirou^ to
look into these things, Tim: 3.16. Seen of Angels, giving us to know so much,
They looked up with desire and satisfaction, as seeing something new in Him,
which formerly they had not seen.

3. The Gospel is a Mystery, in respect of the way and manner of its
manifestation. For it was not wholly at once revealed, bu^ by degrees* the more
to hold forth the worth and excelency ^hereof: for first darkly revealed, and
mani^ested to Adam in this, The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the
Serpent. Gen: 3.14 15 Then 2ly It was a little more clearly discov^red unto
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, These we^e the old stock, of Belivers: And this was
also through promises, when the LORD said un^o Abraham, that he should be the
father of many Nations Gen: 15.5 6. And that in hi^, all families of ^he earth
should be blessed, Gen: 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18 Such like pr^m^ses we fi^d
made unto Isaac, Gen: 26 4 And unto Jacob Gen: 28 14. And th^^ was the ver^
Gospel, as Paul declares Gal: 3.8. And Peter, Act. 3.25 3ly. It was yet more
clearly discovered unto Moses, and unto the people, which G^D then separated
for himself, in typs shadows, ^ff^rings ^^d and other figures and legal
ceremonies; all which held forth, the way of Salva^ion through a c^uc^fi^d
Mediator. 4ly. Then was ^his business more clearly discove^ed unto David, ^o
that the good ^h^ngs of the Gospel, are (...) the sure mercies of David Act
13.32, ^3.^4. compared with Psalm. 2 6. Isa: 55.3 Psalm. 16.11.5. After that
Christ is now come, (...) (...) whole business is more fully and distinctly
manifested then ever; In respect of which clearness, the Gospel is now said in
a special way, to be made manifest and revealed, and formerly shut up and kept
secret Rom: 16.25.26. Now to him, that is of Power to stablish you, according
to my Gospel, and the preaching of Iesut Christ, according to the revelation of
the Mystery which was kept secret since the world began, bu^ now is made
manifest, see also Ephesians: 3.3.5. See also the verse that goes before my text
as the subject of this present Treatise Col: 1.26.

4. The Gospel is a Mystery, in resp^ct of the Instruments that reveal i^ GOD
himself first revealed it unto Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And men who had
immedia^e Inspiraions, were employed in this work Now at last his own Son Jesus
Christ is employed in this Embassag^, Heb: 2 3,

5. It is a Mystery, in respect of the persons to whom it is openly publ^sh^d?
It must be a mysterious business, which G^D will not make known to all the
world: This does also hold out the singularity and excellency of the same, that
not every one can m^ke to the knowledge thereof, bu^ only some particular
persons and Nations. GOD revealed the Gospel to few, save Abraham* family in
his day^s; And as he revealed it to the posterity of Jacob; very few of other
Nations were privileged with it; He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes*
and (...) judgments unto Isr^el, He has not dealt so wit any Nation: Psalm.
147*19.20. And so commands Christ, that for a time, his Disciple should not
go into the way of the Gentiles, no^ enter into any City of the Samaritans,
Mat: 10 5. In times past GOD suffered all Nations to wel^ in their own ways
Act. 14.16. And eve^ since the door was opened for the Gentiles the Holy Ghost
would not suffer Paul an^ Timothy to Preach the word in Asia and Bethynia Act.
16.6, 7. So there has been i^ all ages since the days of Christ, many N^tions
living in darkness, without the gloriou^ sunshine of the Gospel: And the
present sta^^ of the Jews, and far more then the greates^ part of the world,
gives evidence thereof. For that part of the world, this day that is
enlightened with the outward administeration of the Gospel, is but very
inconsiderable, in respec^ of the other parts.

6. The Gospel is ^ Mystery in respect o^ the few number of those unto whom it
i^ made known in power and life, seeing many are called, but ^ew are chosen, O!
How great a Mystery is it, even unto many, who ar^ under the outward
administration of the same* The Mystery of this Mystery is only made know^ unto
the Saints, as the verse before our ^ext holds sorth, and Job: 17, 6. Unto the
men, which ^hou gave me. O How few believe the rep^rt, which is revealed in
the Gospel, Isa. 5^*1.

7. The Gospel is a Mystery, In respect of the ^ptaking, or rather defect of
the uptaking of many, even of those, who^ have the re^ort thereof sounding in
their ^at^; how many remain ignorant thereof? Is it not a ^tumbleing block unto
some, as it was unto ^he Jews? And foolishness unto others, as it ^as unto the
Greeks? Cor: 1.23* Therefore ^e see, that not many wise men after the flesh*
^ot many mighty, not many noble are called. But ^OD has chosen the foolish
things of the world, ^o confound the wise, And GOD has chosen ^he weak things
of the world, to confound the things, which are mighty; And base things of the
world, and things which are despised, ^hath GOD chosen, (...) and things which
are not, to bring to nouhge things that are. Cor: 26.27.^8. These things ^re
hid from the wise and prudent, and reveal^d unto babes Mat: 11.2^.

8. It is a Mystery, even in respect of those ^ho are savingly enlightened, ^or
they know ^ut these Mysteri^s, and prophecy in part, 1. ^or: 13. they see now
but through a glass ^arkly 1. Cor 13.12. So, that it remains ^ Mystery, even to
those, who see most of it.

^. It is a Mystery, in respect of the Matter (...) treats of: which will
appear, if we take it up more Generally, or more particuliarly, First More
generally, so it contains a Mystery. 1. It is called the Mystery of the Kingdom
of Heaven Matt: 13.11. Mark. 4.11. Luke 8.10. Here is indeed singular Mysteries
o^ state, whereof few have knowledge or understanding. 2. It is called the
Mystery of Christ Ephesians: 3.4. Because that therein that great Mystery is
revealed, whereof Paul speake^h 1. Tim. 3.16 great is the Mystery of Godlyness,
GOD was manifest in the flesh, Iustifiyed i^ the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world received up unto Glory.
The Mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and his being under the Law, and of his
conception and Birth, of his N^tures, and of the uniting the same in one
Person, of his Offices, fi^tedness for, and exercise of his Offices, of his
Life, Doctrine, sufferings and death, with the concomitans o^ all these, all
which is revealed and known unto us in the Gospel. 3. It is called the Mystery
of GOD, and of the Father, and of Christ, Col: 2.2. As being the Mystery, that
was jointly carried on by the Father and the Son, whereof the foundation was
laid in that old or fundamental con^ract of Covenant of redemption, betwixt the
father, and the Son, concerning man's Salv^tion; And in so (...) the Gospel
makes known unto us, how GOD was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself
2. Cor: 5.19.

Again we take it up more Particularly, and it may be called a Mystery, because
the great Mysteries are folded up therein, and thereby Discovered and brought
to Light, and that in such a Measure of clearness and Revelation as no where
else, or by no other means is to be obtained: These Mysterysare many, we shall
bring them to Three Heads.

The first Principal head, is of such Mysteries, as chi^ly respect men, whereof
we shall name these following. 1. How, or on what conditions is it, that lost
and condemned man, an heir of hell by Nature under the Wrath of GOD, is again
reconciled unto GOD, and united to him, to wit, through Faith in Jesus Christ;
which therefore is called the Mystery of the Faith. 1. Tim: 3.9. This is only
brought to Light through the Gospel. 2. How that the Gentiles, who some^imes
were a far off, without Christ, -- Aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and
strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without GOD in the
world, are now, made nigh by the blood of Christ; And now are no more stranger
and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of
GOD Ephesians: 2.1^.13.17.18.19. and 3.5.6.3. How justice is satisfied, so that the
poor Bankrupts, who had Forfeited their Right to Glory, and banished from the
presence of GOD by Law and Justice, by reason of their breaking of the Law in
Adam, and the Original Corruption of the Heart, and because of their daily
transgressions, are restored again into a State of Friendship, and brought
again into the favor of GOD, and made Heirs of the Kingdom. The Gospel only
brings these Mysteries to Light: For Life and Immortality are brought to Light
through the Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.10, 4. How that Sinners by Nature standing under
the Sentence of the Law, and guilty before GOD, are Justified in the presence
of a Righteous GOD, and are Clothed with a Righteousness which is not their
own, from any thing in themselves, but imputed unto them, and received by
Faith: This is realy the Mystery of Faith, and of the Grace of God that
brings Salvation. Tit. 2.11, And this is Justification by Faith, and through
the Grace of GOD, which the Gospel makes known, and fully reveals; For
therein the Kindness and Love of GOD our Savior toward man appears: Not by
works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to His Mercy He saved
us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost: That being
Justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs according to the hope of
eternal Life. Ti^. 3 4:5, 7.5. How pro^tigate Sinners who have their hearts
full of enmity against GOD, ^eing enemies in their mind by wicked works, Col:
1.21. And who hate Christ and his Father. John. 7.7, and 15.18.23, 24. Are made
willing to lay hold on Christ for their LORD and King, and to take on his yoke
to believe in him, and to rest on him. By the Gospel is only made known, what
is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, according to
the working of his Mighty Power. Ephesians. 1.19. And how the Sinner is convinced,
humbled, broken, and brought off from his vain hope, false grounds, and unsound
imaginations, and persuaded to deny himself and his own Righteousness, and to
flee to Christ, that he may be preserved under the shadow of his Wings from
the tempests and storms of GOD's wrath. This Mystery of Godlyness manifests
unto us, how that Limbs of Satan are married unto Christ as their husband
Ephesians: 5.23.6. How the sinner, being altogether foul and ugly, polluted within
and without, is made meet to be partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light Col: 1.12. And sanctified and cleansed, with the washing of water by the
word, That Christ might present it to himself, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing, but that it should be Holy, and without blemish Ephesians: 5.26.27.
The Gospel only manifests this real Evangelick way of Sanct^fication. 7. How
comes it to pass, that such a wonderful chang is wrought in the creature, who
sometimes was foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lust^ and
pleasures, living in malice, envy, hateful, and hateing one another; How now
they are tame as Lambs, seeking peace with all men, crucified to the World,
dead to the pleasures and vanities which formerly they were drowned; being now
taught to deny ungodlyness and worldly lusts, they live soberly, righteously
and Godly in their present world, Tit: 2.12. The Gospel only Discovers to us,
the right ground of this wonderful change, and lets us see that this is the
fruit of his Reigning, who i^ the R^d out of the stem of Iesse, the girdle of
whose Ioy^^ is righteousness, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins, That
the wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lay down with the
kid, and the calf and the young Lion, and the fa^ling together, and a little
Child shall lead them etc. Isa: 11.1, 5, 6 7.8. How it is, that such as were
the curse of the Law, heirs of hell, under the sentence of condemnation, are
made heirs o^ Glory, have a sure and Covenanted right to Everlasting Salvation;
have the lively hope and certain expectation thereof, and are Coheirs with
Christ, have the same sealed, which he as the head of the Body has. The Gospel
brings this eternal Mystery of love to Light; and makes, the eternal purpose
of GOD, and his decre^ of predestination manifest, whereby he has ordained
unto li^e his Elect through Jesus Christ: here is the Mystery of his will made
known unto us, according to ^is good pleasure, which he had purposed in
himself. Ephesians: 1.9.

The second principal head is, of such Mysteries as relate unto Christ; And
here is a bundle of Mysteries, Revealed and made known by the Gospel, which
shall be matter of wondering ^or the Redeemed through all Eternity. Take but
some few instances, for his Name is Wonderful Isa. 9.6. And he is answerable to
his Name; For he is wholly a wonder And 1 That he became a man, that God is made
man, made flesh, and made manifest in the flesh 1. Tim: 3.16. And dwelt among
us, Joh. 1.14. That the Creator of the ends of the earth, is become a Creature;
how may the Angels stand astonished thereat, that GOD takes on man's Nature,
Uniting it in a personal union with himself? Who can ^each the ground of this
Mystery? And how should we have attained the knowledge thereof, but through the
Gospel? 2. That he should not only take on him man^ Nature, but also take upon
him the form of a servant, though he (being in the form of GOD) thought it no
robbery to be equal with G^D: and yet notwithstanding should make himself of no
reputation, Phil 2 6.7. That he should take upon him our infirmities, and be
made like unto us in all things except sin Heb: 2.17. That he should become
poor as a servant, not having whereupon to lay his head, and being born had no
better intertainment than a manger; And that all the days of his life he was a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; And meeting with many injures and
reproaches from the hands of friends and foes, great and small, from Relations
and others: What a Mystery of love, compassion, tenderness, and Condescendency
is here! 3. That he should be GOD and man in two distinct Natures, and one
person for ever* so that it was realy he who was GOD, that same Person who
suffered all that was laid upon him to suffer; Therefore are we said to be
purchased with his own Blood Act. 20.28. This was the true Emmanuel, GOD with
us Isa, 14.7. Mat: 1.23. Luk: 1.31. And he is GOD and man at this day, and for
ever. 4 That he should come under the Law, who was the great Lawgiver Gal:
4*4. And that he subjected himself unto the commands of the moral Law and to
the Institu^ion of the Ceremonial Law, that he might fulfill all righteousness
Matt ^.15. and 5.17. and might Redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption o^ Sons Gal: 4.5. What a bottomless depths of love
is here! 5. That this Person should come as the Fathers servant, with his
orders and Commission Isa: 53.11. and 42.1* Zech: 3.^, Joh: 6.38. and 10.18. and
15.10. and 17.4. and 20.21. And that he took upon him the Offices of a King,
Priest and Prophet Psalm: 2.6. Heb: 5.5.6.7. and ^.14, 15. Act: 13. -- Luke 18.
-- and alone for our behoove, that he might be a complete Savior. 6 ly. That
He who was all fullness, condescended to receive a fullness as Head and Savior
of His Body, that we all of his fullness might receive, and Grace for Grace,
John 1.16. Thus was He anointed with the Holy Ghost above measure, John 3.34.
Psalm 4 5.7. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col.
2.3. It pleased the Father that in Him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19 Yea
in Him dwells all the fullness of the God ^ead bodily, Col. 2.9. And for that
end, that he might be completely furnished for saving of His people. What could
make known unto us, such a complete ordained Mediator, but this Gospel alone?
7. That he fully and faithfully performed the word, which he undertook;
exercising punctually the Offices, whice he took upon himself, and that he is
still carrying on ^h^ work of these Offices, until he has deliverd up the
Kingdom to GOD, even the Father, Cor: 15.24.8. That he for the carring on of
this work of Redemption, was well satisfied to endure the Cross, dispising the
shame Heb: 12.2.3. etc. To be assaulted with, and tempted of the Devil Ma: 4.1,
2 3 etc. Luk: 4.2. etc. Heb: 4.15. to be persecuted unto death, yea to the
death of the Cross, Isa: 53.9, 10. Yea and to bear the wrath and curse of GOD
Almighty which we had deserved Gal: 2.13. Lu^ 22 44, Isa: 53 5.6, 10. How may
men an^ Angels stand astonished at these Mysteries o^ love that he undertook,
and all for such, unto whom he was never, and can never be obliged* yea even
for his enemies Rom: 5.10.9. Tha^ he as a public person, head and
Representative of the Elect, which were given unto him to be saved, after that
he had remained under the power of Death until the third day Act: 2.24, 25.26.
R^se again from the dead by hi^ own Power Joh: 10 18 And thereby with power
declared himself to be the Son of GOD Rom: 1 4 And that he had satisfied
Justice, having paid the price, and come out of Prison Rom: 8.34. Heb: 2.14.
here are Mysteries full of hope, and soul consolation. 10. That he as head, and
representing his ransomed Ones, should ascend up unto Heaven, triumphing over
principalites and powers leading captivetycaptive, to take possession, in their
Name, and prepare a place for them Heb: 6 20 Ephs: 4.8 Joh 14 3 The Apostles
stood gazing on him, and so do ye lift up your heart^ to gaz^ on him by faith,
and view him in that act, as p^ssing along unto Heaven, as leading sin, hell,
death and devils in triumph at his Chario^ wh^els, when he ascended up on high,
he led captivity captive, then he led captive all our Spiritual enemies, that
would have ruined ensl^ved and captivated us.

Now leading of captives, is always after a complete Victory; And therefore
whereas at His Death, He had conquered them, at His Rising scattered them, now
at His Ascension, He leads them Captive. O what a Mystery of Hope, and of full
Assurance is here! 11. That even when exalted to that high state of Honor,
Power and Majesty, having got a Name, which is above every Name. Phil. 2.9. And
glorified with the Father Himself, with that Glory, which He had wi^h the
Father before the World was Ioh. 17.8. He should not ^orget His poor Members on
Earth, but that He daily now appears in the presence of GOD ^or them Heb. 9,
12.24. and 7.25 Rom 8.34. An^wering all the particular Accusations brought ^n
against them 1 Ioh. 2 1. T^king care, that ^hey and their Performances be
accepted ^phes. 1.6.1 Pet. 2.5. Revel. 8.3. How shall ^e attain unto the
knowledge of these Heart-^omforting Cordials, and Soul-strengthening Mysteries,
but alone through the Gospel? 12. That He by His Word and Spirit should make
real and effectual Application of the good and great Things that are purchased,
by giving them Saving Grace, Repen^ance and Remission of Sins Act. 5.31. and
Faith Tit. 3.5 6. Ephesians. 2.8. 2 Cor. 4.13. Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19. And His Spirit
establishing and strengthe^i^g their Faith Ioh. 14, 16, 17, 26. And bringing
the begun work unto perfection, through the continual I^fluences of His Spirit;
And at l^st ^^owning them with G^ory Psalm. 110.1. 1 Cor* 15.25. Who tho such as
the Eye has not seen nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of
Man to take up Isa. 64.4. 1. Cor. 2, 9* Neither does it yet appear 1 Ioh. 3.2.
Nevertheless is the Revelation of these unknow^ tran^cending Mysteries of
Glory, only mad^ known to us by the Gospel.

The Third principal Point is of these Mysteries, which the Gospel reveal^ to
us of GOD* These are also many, we shall name but a fe^ of them. As 1. His Love
and Goodness i^ finding out a way of Salvation, and for the end sending His own
Son unto the World Well might John say Chap. 3, 16. For God solved the World,
that He gave His only ^egotten (...) that whosoever believes in Him, should
not peris^ but have everlasting Life. For who can say^ express what sort of
Love, or how great the Love was? Heathens without the Church may observe and
see much of His Love, in the common tract of Dispensations, and His Goo^ness
should lead them to Repentance Act 1^ 17. But thereby they can never attain
suc^ length, as to see and understand this Lov^ this everlasting Fountain of
Love. This Lo^^ and Goodness o^ GOD, is only manifested unto Men through the
Gospel Tit. 3.4.2 H^^ Eternal Purpose and Decree of Saving (...) Sinners, in a
way unspeakably, tending to (...) Praise of His glorious Attributes, especia^
of His Justice, Mercy and Wisdom: Nature ^hereat must sing dumb; Nature can
discover nothing how He has chosen some of us in Christ, before the foundation
of the World, having predestined them, unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ, according to the good pleasure of Hes Will: To the Praise of the Glory
of His Grace. Ephesians. 1 4, 5, 6. Only the Gosp^l does this Verse 9. Nature cannot
learn us, how the Children unb^rn, not having as yet done either Good or Evil,
should h^ve it said unto them, the Elder serve the Younger, That the purpose of
God, according to Election, might stand, not of works, but of Him, that
calls. Rom 9 11, 12, 13 3 His Soveraignity is in this matchless Remedy, in
choosing o^ some, and not all, in undertaking for some, and not for others,
sending the glad Tidings of the Gospel to some, and not to others; reaching the
Heart of some through the Preaching of the Gospel, and not of others. 4. His
Justice in pun^shing of Sin, even in His own Son, when standing in the place
and room of Sinners, which is a greater Demonstration of GOD's Justice than
ever could be obta^ned by all the Plagues and Judgments, whereby He has ever
punished the greatest of Sinners Romans 3.21, 22, 25.26.5. His Mercy in pardoning
and passing by Sinners, according to the satisfaction of Christ, and in
accepting such as believe, as Righteous, according to ^he good pleasure of His
Will Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8. Can there be a greater Evidence of Mercy than this? A
grea^^^ cannot be imagined; Therefore the Gospel (...) called the Grace of GOD.
6. His infinite Wisdom is herein discovered, in so ordering the whole work of
our Salvation, that Just^ce should be fully satisfied, and Mercy have place; so
that Mercy and Truth should k^ss ea^h other: This is called His manifold
W^sdom. ^phes 3.10. All Wisdom Ephesians. 1.8.7. H^^ Truth in letting loose all His
Threa^nings upon the Cautioner, when the principal Debtor was spared.

From all which it is more than evident, tha^ the Gospel holds sorth the great
Plot of Salvation more clearly and distinctly, than all ^he works of Creation
and Providence could have done. But

10. The Gospel is called a Mysteey, in respect of the many glorious and
remarkable Effect^ and Fra^s, which it has; whereof we shall give these ^ew
instane^s. 1. By the Gospel, there is a Church gathered out of the World,
which shall stand to the end of the World, in d^spi^e of all ^he O^position,
Men and D^vils shall make against it: What a Mystery o^ Power was here, when a
few Fishers, without the help of Humane Learning and without the ^ssi^tance of
Humane Advantages, through Preaching and continual Su^fering, carried on the
Gospel of Christ; So that it was spread throu^h the world, and continues to
this day, no^withstanding of all the Oppositions that the Gates of He^l can do
against it, through Emperors, higher Pow^^s, with inferior Magistrates, corrupt
Churchmen, etc. who through Subtility and Violence, labored totally to root
out the same. 2. By the Gospel, Men were brought out of themselves to seek
R^ghteousness, and Justification in another; yea in a Crucified and Despised
Mediator, and made willing directly contrary their Nature and deep rooted
Inclination of Heart, which is continually looking out for Help and Delivery in
themselves, to fors^ke their own Righteousness, and all which formerly they
counted Gain, and to fl^e to Christ Jesus for all, and to lay hold on Him
Faith, that only they may be justified in Him. 3. This Gospel learns the Soul
alone to depend on Christ for Help in every Duty, whereunto they a^e called,
and to see their S^reng^h only to be in Him, and in the Streng^h of His Right
Arm O! a (...) My^^ery to ^lesh and Blood. 4. This G^spel m^kes M^n to forsake
all Relations and Interests for Christ. Mat 10.37, 38. Luk 14 26. VVha^ (...)
Mystery of Power must be here? 5. This G^s^^l m^kes M^n to f^rsake their Id^ls,
(...) Bosom sins and Evil^, which formerly ^^ey loved as their liv^s, and to
pl^ck ou^ their ^^ght Eyes, and to cut off their right Hands Mat 5. 29, 30.
Mat. 18 8, 9. Mark. 9.45.6. The Gospel makes a Man suffer all things, and th^^
cheerfully, were it even Death is self for Christ and H^s Truths, and to
forsake all that is de^^ unto him, yea the world. Act. 20 24. Reve. 12.11.

1 Use. Certainly the serious pondering (...) ^hese, Might justly cause us
stand astonishe^* Neither could we forbear from wondering providing we noticed
what wonderful Goodness, Mercy, and infinite Condescendency, i^ herein held
forth, in the Lord's bringing to light these Mysteries, and His keeping up the
fairest and clearest Discoveries thereof for ou^ days; or that orders our time
in the worl^ thus to be, when the Sun of Righteousnes^ with His full and bright
Beams, shines in ou^ ^orizon.

2 Use. The Consideration of the Lord opening up these Mysteries in our days,
ca^^ for great thank^ulness from us. O how should our Hearts praise and magnify
Him, who ha^^ thus brought Life and Immortality into ligh^ The Angels sung when
this Evangelick day fi^^ brake up, and counted it their honor to (...) the
first News thereof to a Company of poo^ Shepherds. Luke 2.10, 11. And the Angel
sa^^ unto them, fear not: for behold I bring you go^^ Tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all peop^^ (...) unto you is born this day, in the City of
David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Luk 2.31 whereupon Anna the
Prophetess gave Thanks likewise unto the Lord* and spoke of Him to all that
looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Mary cried forth, and said, My Soul does
magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior Luke 1.46, 47.
Zacharias* when his Tongue was loosed, spoke and praised God Luk 1 64 And again
Verse 68, 69. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel* ^or He has visited and
redeemed His People, And has raised up a horn of Salvation for us, in the
house of His Servant David, etc.

3 Use. This requires that we should l^ment and weep over the sad condition of
th^se. 1. That have not so much as the outward Revelations of these Mysteries
amongst them, who notwithstanding of all this Light sit in Darkness, and live
in the Land of the shadow of Death. O! Pray for the coming of Christ's
Kingdom, that the People that w^lk i^ Darkness may see a great light, and that
the light may shine upon th^se tha^ dwell in the Land of the shadow of Death
Isa 9 2.2. As also the sad estate of those that hear the outward sound thereof,
bu^ knows no more of the lively Power and Operation of this M^ster^, then there
were no such thing, Whom the God of this World has blinded -- lest the light
of the Glorious Gospel -- should shine unto them. 2 Cor. 4 4.

4 Use This Doctrine requires, (...) we walk sutably under these great M^^cies
p^ovided and purchased unto us, and improve them accordingly: And more
especially. 1. Th^^ we esteem and account highly of this unspeakable Favor,
the Mystery of the Gospel, which is the Grace of God, and the discovery of Life
and Immortality. 2. That we be herein tender and watchful, that we neither do,
nor say any thing, which may be to the Dishonor of th^s Mystery; But that in
all things we walk wo^thy of the Gospel. 3. That we should be Zealous, in
standing up for the Defense o^ this Gospel, which is such a Mystery: we should
be always ready to buy the Truth, and upon no account to sell it. 4. That we
receive the Gospel into our Hearts, believing and welcoming the same; not
judging it enough that we hear the sound thereof, without fi^ding, and
experimentally knowing the lively and strong Effects and Operations of the same
in the Soul. 5. That we in the pre^ching, and ye in the hearing of the Gospel,
continually look upon it, as a Mystery, and therefore should beware of judging
ourselves in a capacity to reach unto the ground of this so great a Depth, or
to measure the sam^ by our scrimp natural Understandings, or sh^llow
Capacities, and so to cast at all, we cannot fathom, or attempt to cast it in
our C^lins and Form. O! indeed a heavy Sin, a bold, daring, and presump^uou^
counterfei^ing of ^h^ King's Coin, and a giv^ng out of our Counterfeit, mixed,
clipped Metal, instead of the K^ng's true Coin. 6. That we, s^e^ng it is a
Mystery, and so far above the reach of our Capacities, should seek unto the
LORD alone for Light; we should go to Him as the Author thereof, and should go
to Christ, who is given for a Light, that this Sun of Righteousness, who is the
real substance of this Mystery, might clear up our Understanding with the Sun
Beams of His light, and make us in some measure to know what the Riches of the
Glory of this Mystery is, and that He might drive away the Clouds of Ignorance
and Prejudices, whereby this light is kept from us; Hereby we should evidence
our believing that this is a Mystery, through our faith^ul and continual
dependence on this Fountain of Light that we may see this Mystery of Light in
His Light.

Of the Glory of this Mystery.
Moreover, there is the Glory of th^s Mystery; For it is a Mystery that has
Glory in it. Therefore it is called a Glorious Gospel, the Glorious Gospel of
Christ 2 Cor. 4.4. 1 Timothy 1.11. Therefore is its Minist^ation mo^e glorious,
than the Ministration of the Law 2 Cor. 3 7, 8. But if the Ministration of
Death, written and engraven in stones was glorious, so that the Children of
Is^^el, could not steadfastly behold the face of Mose^, for the glory of his
Countenance, which Glory was to be done away. How shall not the Ministration of
the Spirit (which is a Gospel Ministration) be rather Glorious? This is the
Ministration of Righteousness, which exceeds in Glory Verse 9. And here is the
excellent Glory Verse. 10. Let us see in what respect, and from what Head this
Gospel is so Glorious.

1. It is Glorious, in respect of the Author o^ the same: GOD is the Author of
it, and all Hi^ works are Glorious; Men nor Angels could never have found out
this way of Salvation through a Crucified Savior; But it is GOD'^ Work, and a
singular pe^ce of Workmanship of His, above all what we see in Scripture;
Therefore it is called, The Glorious Gospel of the Blessed God. 1 Timothy 1.11.

2. The Gospel is Glorious, in respect of the Instruments employed in Preaching
and making known this Mystery: GOD the Father, made the first publication
thereof in Paradise, when He said to our Fore-father, that the Seed o^ the
Woman should bruise the Head of the Serpent, Genesis 3 15 The Son is more
especially made use of, in this work Heb. 1.2. and 2.3. There^or^ c^lled the
Gloriou^ Gospel of Christ 2 Cor 4 4. Also the Holy Ghost is therein employed --
But unto us they did minister the things which are now reported unto you by
them that have preached the Gospel un^^ you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from
Heaven 1 Pet. 1.12. The Angels were employed in this work Luk 2.10, 11, 12. The
great Prophets and Apostles were Messengers of this Gospel 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. It
was their work to publish this great Salvation: So that it must be a glorious
wo^k, wherein such glorious Hands were employed.

3. It is Glorious, in respect of the way, which GOD entered on for the
manifesting and making known this Mystery, and for confirming us in the same;
which is held out in short, Heb. 2.3, 4 How shall we expect if we neglect so
great Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard Him; God also bearing them witness, both
with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to His own will.

4. It is a Glorious Gospel, in respect ^f ^hese who have studied it; not only
many R^ghteous Mat. 13.17. But also many Prophets and Kings Luke 10.24. 1 Pet.
1 10. have desired to see these Mysteries; The Prophets enqui^ed unto, and
searched diligently after this Salvation: And even the Angels themselves have a
holy Curiosity to know what i^ means and herefore they are said to look into
it, or to stoop down with the bowing of the Head, and bending of the Neck, that
they may behold what it is; And they come to the knowledge of i^ by this Gospel
1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians 3 10. This must then be a Glorious Subject, and there must
be some ravishing Glory in this Mystery, which engages these glor^fied
Creatures to pore and lock into it.

5. It cannot be otherways than a Glorious Gospel, seeing even the Feet (tho
suddled with dust) of those that bring good Tidings thereof, are so beautiful
Isa. 52.7. Romans 10.15. Yea it cannot be expressed how lovely and beautiful they
are in the Eyes of those, who are sensible of their necessity of Salvation.

6. It is a Glorious Gospel, in respect that i^ puts a singular glorious
Beauty, on all that it comes near unto; Therefore it is the Glory of a Land to
enjoy it, and where this Gospel is, Glory dwells in that Land Psalm. 85.9. And
where this, or any outward resemblance of the same is, there is Glory;
Therefore when the A^k was taken by the Philistines, the Holy Wife of Phineas,
the Daughter in Law of Eli, cried forth, saying, Glory is departed from Israel.
^ Sam. 4 22. Therefore was it that the Glory of the latter House, should be
greater than the Glory of the former Hag. 2.9. Because Christ should appear
therein with this Glorious Gospel.

7. The Gospel is Glorious, in respect of (...) Su^ject and Matter; It treats
of a ma^chless and glorious Business of that Fair, Amiable and Glorious Branch
of the Lord Isa 4.2 Here is the Branch of that Root o^ Iesse, which is every
way Glorious Isa. 11.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Here is the Revelation of the knowledge
of ^he LORD, ^he knowledge whereof should fill the Earth in the days of the
Gospel, as the Waters cover the Sea Isa. 11.9. Hereby is the Riches of the
Glory of the Lord made known, and therefore it must be a Glorious Business Romans
9 23. And her^ behold we the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor
4.6. The Gospel is as it were the face of Christ; Herein sh^ned His Glory which
the Apostles saw Ioh. 1.14. of Him, who therein is the ^rightness of His
Father's Glory Heb 1.3. Is ^t not a Glorious Business, which brings to ^ight
Life and Immortality, and this is done ^y the Gospel 2 Timothy 1.10. It reveals
Grace, and so is the Gospel Grace Act. ^0.24.

8. It is Glorious in respect that Christ hereby makes His Body and Bride
Glorious unto Himself, for it is by this Word that He sanctifi^th and cleanses
Ephesians 5.26, 27.

9. It is a Glorious Gospel, in respect of the many several Eff^cts and Fruits
which it bring^th sorth, being ^he savor of Life unto Life. As 1. It is the
weapon of our Warfare, which is Mighty through God, To the pulling down of
^^rong holds, casting down of imaginations, and every high thing that exalts
it self, against the ^nowledge of God, and brings into captivity ^very
thought to the obedience of Christ 2 Cor 10.4, 5. Therefore it is called, The
power of God unto Salvation Romans 1.16.2. It has a begetting virtue, it
brings forth Sons an^ Daughters unto GOD, as the Apostle says ^ Cor. 4.15
that He had begotten the Corinthian^ through the Gospel. 3. The Gospel
contains the Conditions and Articles of Peace between GOD and the poor
Sinner, and therefore it is called, The Gospel of Peace, Ephesians 6.15. And it is
the Mean, whereby the miserable Enemy Man, is brought unto another state of
Peace and Reconciliation with GOD; so that he lays off his enmity against GOD,
Hi^ interests and servants, so that thereby the Wolf is made to ly with the
Lamb. 4. The Gospel has an ensuring and establishing power, establishing the
Soul against all Storm^ and Tentations; Therefore says Paul. Now to Him that
is of Power to stablish you, according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus
Christ (according to the Revelation of the Mystery which was kept secret since
the World began -- be Glory -- Rom 16 25, 27.5. The Gospel has a trans^o^ming
and changing power, clothing the Heirs of Hell with begun Glory, and changing
them into the Image of GOD 2 Cor. 3 18. But we all with open face, beholding as
in ^ glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory
to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. 6. In a word, it is the Instrument
of Salvation, and therefore called the Gospel of Salvation Ephesians 1.13. It is
the savor of Life unto Life 2 Cor. 2.16. Before we ^pply this, we shall speak
a little to the other part, to wit, The Riches of Glory.

Of the Riches of Glory.
There is not only a Glory to be seen in the Gospel, but thereis an exceeding
great Excellency of Glory, which points forth the singularness and excellency
thereof. And this will appear,

First, Providing we compare this Glory with other things, which either are but
such in the esteem of Men, or that really have Glory in mu^^ less than that
Glory, which shines forth ^ere.

1. Compare it with that which the Men of this World, ordinarily esteem
Glorious, as greatness of Power and Authority, stately Buildings, many
Servants, great and multiplied Titles o^ Honor, and such like. Alas! what a
poor spectacle is all ^he glittering Glory of this World, which has no reali^y
in it, but consists in a mere imagination, and the mere blossomings of a ^oving
Fancy, and fruit of a light and creazie Brain: Alas! how lean, sober and empty,
is this so called and fancied Glory, wherewith the Children of this World are
so bewitched, taken up with child^sh admiration, eager gaping and hot pursuing
after the same: What is it in comparison of this Glory, which shines in the
Gospel? What is here, that should take up the Soul of Man, that knows what
real Glory is? What can these ou^ward, borrowed, imaginary Garnishin^s do, to
the real amending and felici^ating of a poor immortal Soul? What is here ^or
quie^ing a raging and disordered Conscience? What is here, which can make the
poor Creature sing, when pale Death looks him in the face, and when wrestling
with the King of Terrors? Yea will not the thoughts of all these things,
wherein the Soul formerly boasted, but add to his sorrow, and augment his
grief, now when he sees, he must fors^ke all, and live in darkness eternally?
For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away: his Glory shall no^ descend
after him. Psalm. 49.17. What signifi^^h ^hen the Glory of his House, how great
so^ver it be? What is the Glory of Great Ones, when the Lord kindle^h under the
same, a burning like the burning of a fire, Isa. 10.16. Nebuchadnezzar had a
Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory and Honor, so that all People, Nations and
Languages trembled and fearrd before him: whom he would he slew, and whom he
would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would be put down
Dan 5 18, 19. But a poor lamentable Glory was it, that could not desend him
from the grea^est Misery that ever a King or Prince was brought unto. Verse. 20,
21. But when his heart waes lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was
deposed from his Kingly throne, and they took his Glory from him. And he was
driven from the ^ons of Men, and his Heart was made like the Beasts, and his
dwelling was With thr wild Asses, they fed him with gross, like Oxen, and his
Body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till he knew, that the Most high GOD,
ruled in the Kingdom of Men, and that He appoints over it, whomsoever He
will. See also Isa. 5.14 Therefore Hell or the Grave has enlarged he self,
and opened her mouth without measure, and their glory, and their multitude, and
their pomp, and he that rejoiceth shall descend into it. How vain and empty
then, ^ust that Glory be, which thus dies out with a fi^ by stink? How far
inferior to this rich and excellent Glory?

2. Compare the Gospel Glory, with the great and real Glory of Heaven and
Earth, this piece of Work of the only wise Creator; And it will very far
surmount these in Glory: The noble Fabric of Heaven and Earth, replinished
with such variety of Creatures, carries clear evidences of the glorious Wisdom
and Power of Him, who has made the same out of Nothing, and sustaineth them
continually, by the Word of His Power; For He spoke, and it was done, He
commanded and it stood fast Psalm. 33.9. -- For the Pillars of the Earth are the
Lords, and He has set the World upon them. 1 Samuel 2.8. He has established
them Psalm 89.2. And formed them Psalm 90 2. Who can once look upon this Fabric,
being so curious in all its points and proportions, without observing (...)
singular Glory, which hold forth the Glory of the great Master Builder: Who can
look upon the Heavens* and observe how admirably they are garnished, and
indented with so many glorious shining Creatures, and not fall a wondering at
the rare Building, and its excellent Contrivance? Who can behold the Sea, that
terrible and vast Creature, the dry Land, the Hills, the Valleys, with their
pleasant Rivers, and watery Rivolets, with all their fair and fruitful
Enclosures, the spacious, vast and bowling Wilderness, with all their various,
different and numerous Inhabitants, the Water with its Fishes, the Air above
with its Fowls; And not behold, I say, a special ravishing Glory therein: But
O! what is all ^his Glory in comparison to that Glory, which shines in the
Gospel: The Flowers springs out of ^he Earth, and spreads for^h ^ts Glory, but
suddenly it is cut down and withers, so shall the Heavens and the Earth pass
away, they shall perish, yea all of them shall wax old like a Garment, and as a
Vesture shall they be changed Psalm. 102.26. But this Glory, which shines forth
in the Gospel, is an eve^lasting Glory: Great was the Wisdom of GOD, which
shined forth in creating all things of nothing, but in the G^spel, The manifold
Wisdom of God is ma^e known. Ephesians. 3, 10.

3. Compare the Glory of the Gospel, with the first Covenant made with Adam, in
the state of Innocence, so shall there appear here a singular Glory; I confess
it was a Glorious Business, to see that rational Creature Man, in a Covenant of
Friendship wi^h his Maker; For there was wonderful Condescendency on GOD's
part, in that He came under the Bond of the Covenant, and under Obligations of
a rich Promise unto the Creature, in case of Obedience, which otherwise he was
indebted to his Creator, by virtue of His Creation; And pleasant was it to
behold, the Wheels of the Soul of Man, besmeered with the promise of the rich
Recompense of Reward: But the Glory of the Gospel Covenant da^kens that, as the
rising of the Sun darkeneth the sparkling light of the Stars: Adam if he had
^tood, had never appeared with Christ as a glorious Member of His glorified
mystical Body Col. 3.4. He ha^ never been partaker of that Glory, which Christ
bestows upon His own, which He has of the Father, as the Redeemed now have
Ioh. 17.22. He had never been brought to Glory through Christ, as the Captain
of Salvation made perfect through Suff^rings, as the Saints are now brought
Heb. 2.10 He had never had that relation and interest in Christ, as his elder
Brother, H^ad and Savior, which Believers now have by ve^tue of the New
Covenant: He had never sitten with Christ upon His Throne, as Christ sits
upon His Father Throne; But this unspeakable Concotenat^on of Glory is carried
on through the Covenant of Grace: The Glory which he should have purchased,
should have been but a Glory o^ his own begetting, bought with his poor
inconsiderable sweating and legal payment, but the Glory of the Gospel, is a
Glory, bought wit^ the Life and heart Blood of the E^ernal Son of GOD; The
other had been but a Glory of Law work and of Law-merit; But this is a
matchless Glory, wholly through and through, shining with the Glory of free
Grace: Here appear^ incomprehensible Love, wonderful free Grace inconceivable
Mercy, and a wonderful harmony of Mercy and Judgment. Adam had not sung that
new Song, which the Redeemed now sing in Glory: So that upon infinite accounts,
the Glory of the Gospel, far surmounteth the Glory of the Covenant of Works;
That was unsure, as the event did manifest; This is sure for all the Seed,
being grounded and firmly bottomed on the Faithfulness, established on the
Truth, ensured through the Righteousness, strengthened by the Oa^h of GOD, and
confirmed by the Death of the Testator. etc.

4. Compare the Gospel with the forme^ Administration of the Covenant of Grace,
before Christ's Incarnation, and tho that Administration had its own Glory,
which nevertheless beho^ved to be abolished; yet here is a Glory far more
excellent; A Glory after which in former times, the Prophets searched, and unto
whom it was revealed, they Prophe^ed of this Grace that should come unto you. 1
Pet. ^.10, 12. The first Dispensation was da^k, ^s also the Mysteries were
veiled with Types, ^hadows, Ceremonies and Offerings; Therefor Moses put a
vail over his face, that the Chil^ren of Israel should not steadfastly look to
the end ^f that which is abolished. 2. Cor. 3.13. That Administration in
respect of the Administra^ion of the New Testament, is called the Let^er that
kills, and the ministration of Death written and engraven on Stones, the
Ministra^ion of Condemnation; But this is called the Spirit, the Spirit that
gives Life, and the Ministration of the Spirit, the Ministration of
Righteousness: So that the Glory of the former Ministration, was not once to be
compared with the Glory of the latter Ministration. That was ^ndeed glorious,
so that the Children of Israol could not sted^^stly behold the Face of Moses,
for the Glory of his Countenance, but it was a Glory that was to be done away;
But this is much more glorious, and surpasses far in Glory; For even that
which was made glorious, had no Glory in this repect, by reason of the Glory
that excels 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9 10. Therefore until that that Evangelical
Day began to down and clear up, and Faith, or the great object of Faith Christ
Jesus came unto the World; The Heirs were kept under the Law, shut up unto the
Faith, as in a prison, and held under the strict Discipline of a Pedagogue or
School Master Gal. 3.23, 24, 25. Under the Law, they were Children, differing
nothing from Servants, but were in Bondage, under the Elements of the World,
and they were Tutors and Governors Gal. 4.2, 3. They were under weak and
beggarly Elements Gal. 4.9 But we shall not insist longer here, this being
sufficiently held forth by the Apostle Paul, throughout hi^ whole Epistle to
the Hebrews.

Secondly, Further, that there are Riches in the Glory of the Gospel, will
appear, providing we in the next place take notice of the glorious and
super-excellent Nature of the same. Many things might be brought in for
clearing of this, but we shall satisfy our selve^ with some f^w. As 1. This
rich glorious Nature of the Gospel appears, while it is called, The Power of
God unto Salvation, to every o^^ that believes, to the Jew first, and also to
the Greek Romans 1.16. That noble and sharp-fighted Apostle of the Gentiles saw
such a Riche^ of Glory therein, that how contemp^ible so ever it appeared to
others, whether Jew o^ Gentile, yet with him it had a high esteem, he was not
ashamed of it, that is, he gloried in it, this being a dimunitive menner of
Speech, wherein more is understood, than is expressed* For he descerned it to be
the glorious and nonesuch Instrument of GODs Power to break up Satan's hoof
Quarters in the World, and so to spread out the Kingdom of Jesus Christ;
Whereupon he says 2 Cor. 10.4.5 The weapons of our warefare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds, casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity, every thought to the obedience of Christ.
Justly then might he magnify his Office, whileas he was employed to carry these
Treasures unto the Gentiles Romans 11.13.2. Its Riches appears herein, that the
Gospel is the Cabinet wherein lies, and the Field wherein is to be found, the
most enriching Glory imaginable: It has folded up in it, that really enriching
Pearl, which when the wise Merchant had found, sold all that he had and bought
it; which you may read in that Parable, and which is doubled with very little
alteration Mat. 13.44, 45, 46. Christ the alone enriching Pearl of great Price,
is the whole Matter, the Heart and Marrow of this Gospel; It is wholly employed
about Him, therefore cannot but contain Glory, and Riches of Glory, therefore
it is called, The Word of Christ Col. 3.16.3 It appears herein, because it is
the offering, and the holding forth of the most en^iching and glorious
Marriage, that ever was heard tell of a A Marriage between the lof^ly, high,
holy, glorious and matchless King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and despicable
Sinners, poo^ beggarly Creatures, by Nature Heirs of Hell. It is the word of
Reconciliation containing Articles and Conditions of Peace, between the Holy,
Righteous and Glorious GOD, and sinful self-destroying Sinners, which is
entrusted to the Apostles, and their Successors 2 Cor 5.10, 20. therefore
called the word of Peace. Act. 10.36, 37.4. The Riches of Glory appears herein,
because the Gospel is the outward Call of God; which, when the LORD makes
effectual, He accompanyeth with an inward, powerful, irresistible Calling to
the most glorious things imaginable: It is hereby that the Lord Jesus brings
many Sons unto Glory Heb. 2.10. Hereby do the Elect obtain the Salvation, that
is in Christ Jesus with Eternal Glory. 2 Timothy 2.10. By the Gospel the
Thessalonians were called to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ 2 Thessalonians. 2.14 15. Who can tell what is the hope of this Calling, and
what is the Glory of this Inheritance of the Saints in light: Such as can
discern this, must have the Eyes of their Understanding opened and enlightened
of GOD Ephesians. 1.17, 18. It is a complete rich glorious Kingdom, whereunto Men
are called by the Gospel. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. He calls unto His Kingdom and Glory.
5 It appears herein, that it is the means of discovering the most enriching
glorious, most latent and concerning Secrets: What is better and ^ore
desirable than Life, than true Life and ^mmortality, and this is made manifest
through the Gospel 2 Timothy 1.10. One that is ^ondemned to Die should esteem a
Reprive of ^he Sentence, a rich and glorious Business, ^ho ignorant but that he
might be taken away within few Hours or Days, through some special stroke of
GOD upon him: How much more infinitely worthy and richly excellent is ^his Life,
which is Immortality? And what Riches of Glory, must there be in the Gospel
which brings thi^ into light? 6. It appears ^erein, that the Gospel bring^
Heaven to the Door of the Soul, with all the Glory that is herein; And
therefore called the Word of ^he Kingdom, or the Gospel of the Kingdom Mat.
4.23. and 9 35. and 24.14. And the matter thereof, is to preach the Kingdom of
God Mark. 1.14. Act 20.25. and 28.31. Luke 4.43.9.60. So it is also called, The
Kingdoms of God Luke 10.9 11. Mark. 1.15. and 4.25. And the Kingdom of Heaven
in many of the ^arables Mat. 13. and 20.1. and 22.2. etc.

Thirdly, That there are Riches in the Gospel, appears from the special, rich
and glorious Efficacy of the same; whereof take these few Proofs. 1. The Gospel
has a powerful enlightening virtue, so that these that sit in darkness, come to
see a great light Math. 4.15, 16. Therefore Paul was sent to open the Eyes, and
turn Men from darkness to light Act. 26.11 Where it comes with power, it
discovers the lamentable estate, wherein poor Man is b^ Nature, and discovers
the way of escape 2. It has a propagating and begetting power where it is the
savor o^ Li^e unto Life; I ha^^ begotten you through the Gospel (says Paul to
the Corinthians) 1 Cor. 4.15. Therefore it is calle^ the Word of Life; Phil. 2
16. It quickneth from the Dead; through the powerful operation o^ the Spirit;
we are born again by this Word 1 Pet 1 23. 3. It has a nourishing virtue,
therefore it is called, The sincere Milk of the Word; whereby we grow, even as
the Child grows by the Milk on the Breast: 1 Timothy 2 2. 4. Thereby is the Soul
brought by Faith ^o lay hold on Christ, and so thereby brought into a sure and
safe state; Therefore it is called, The Word of Faith Romans 10 8. And the Word
of Salva^ion Act 13 26. We believe through this word preached by the Apostles
and their Success^rs Ioh 17.20. 5. It has a washing and cleansing virtue; It
is by the word, that Christ sanctifies and cleanses His Church Ephesians 5.26 6.
It has a cu^^ing and piercing virtue; Paul speaking of the Gospel (Heb 4.12.)
says, That the Word of God is quick and powerfu^, and sharper than any two
edged Sword, piercing to the dividing asunder of both Soul and Spirit, and of
the Ioints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts of the Heart: ^n
allusion to the Anatomy of Bodies, or else ^o the cutting up of the Sacrifices,
whether ^hese of the Jews, or as it was used among the Heathens, especially by
the Soothsayers, who ^uriously searched into every inward part as Ezekiel. 21.21.
Look what the Intrals are to a ^harp Sword, or Sacrificers Kni^e, or like
In^turments of Anatom^zing in a ^kilful Hand, ^uch are all the most inward and
secret parts of ^he Heart, even those, which are most difficult to be divided,
unto this Sword in GOD's Hand, when pleased to use it to search the Heart and
Reins, and to discover and bring ^orth to judgment the secrets of them; Not
only is it to ungird and stripe off the outward Clothes of outward and formal
Actions, and so present the Soul naked as Verse. 13. Nor only to flea off all
the Skin, and so to see what lies under it (as the next word, Opened, does
sometimes signify) but further to cut up and cleave to the Back bone (as the
word will bear) that so all the Inwards may appear; And this so curiously
divided and laid asunder, as to see and view a part, what is in each. In a
word, this Sword of the Gospel, when rightly handled, it not only has a
discerning, piercing, penetrating power with it, to come in on the Heart,
discovering its Intents, and striking at the root of Corrup^ions; But it will
humble the proudest Hearts* and quicken the deadest Spirits, and pierce through
the Soul and Conscience of the most obdured; Anatomize an^ lay open their
Thoughts, their Security, Pride* Formality, Hypocrisy, etc. And strike a^ the
root of the Body of Death, to kill it, and be its death; Undoubtedly then,
their cannon but be a singular Riches o^ Glory in this Gospel. 7. As it has
its arise from free Grace, and is the open Proclamation of the Grace of GOD;
And therefore called, The Word of His Grace Act. 20 32. so it builds up such as
receive it, and carries them on until it fairly land them in Glory; for it is
able to save Souls James 1.21.

1 Use. Here we have ground and reason ^o bemoan the state and condition of not
a few People and Persons, to pity them, and from compassion toward them, to
pray for them. As 1. These who never as yet saw this Glory, having never as yet
heard of this glorious Gospel; They may it is true, go beyond others in worldly
Riches, fullness of all things, carnal Prudence and Policy, and have abundance
of Gold, Silver and costly Jewels, and have much outward Pomp and Flourishes:
But alas! nevertheless when they have never heard of Christ, they are but
continuing and sitting in darkness; The Glory of the Lord, has never as yet
shined upon them, the Sun of Righteousness is never risen upon them, with
Healing under His Wings: Miserable and lamentable is their Conditions,
notwithstanding of all their Supe^fluities. O! let us pray, that this glorious
Light, may once break up amon^st them, that the Earth may be filled with the
Glory of ^he Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. 2. We should condole these
Nations, where the Name and outward Knowledge of the Gospel is, and nothing
else; Nothing of the Power, Beauty and Glory of the Gospel of Salvation; But
alas! all is darkened with the fogg and mist of Idolatry, and Superstition, or
of humane Inventions, which vails and darkens the singular Beauty, which is to
be seen in the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, according to the Simplicity of the
Gospel. Oh! have compassion on such, who hasten Judgment on themselves, and
love darkness, rather than light: For what are all the vain Imaginations and
Inventions o^ Men, but a darkning of the glorious Splendor of the Sun of
Righteousness, that He may not sh^ne in His native and superexcellent Glory. 3.
We should commiserate that People, where His Glory did once shine, bu^ seems
now to be robbed thereof, through the Godlessness and Wickedness of Men, being
Instruments of Satan, in whose Soul, the ^ight of this Gospel never shined.
While Satan has employed his Agents to banish the Faithful, who carry this
Torch of Light, and hold up the Glorious Standart of Jesus Christ; These
ungodly Men do what in them is, by their Conclusions, Acts and Deeds, o^
unreasonable Persecution, to banish Christ, His Servants and Gospel out of the
Land. O^ wha^ a loss is it, to be robbed of this Glory, providing we have any
Tenderness or Sympathy as Christians, let us be earnest in Prayer for such. 4.
We should condole such Nation^ and Churches, that have a Name, that they Live,
and yet are Dead, who have only the sound of the Gospel, with a bare and naked
Offer of Jesus Christ: And those, tho they b^ free of Idolatry and
Superstition, which ar^ open Blots and Spots on this Glory, and the free of
outward Persecution, yet great Strangers unto the Riches of the Glory of this
Gospel, S^rangers unto the Power and Operations of the same, having the Name o^
Purity* and G^spel Truths amongst them, but no more; And so are dying and
perishing through an inward decay of Life and Power. The^^ undoub^edly are also
to be lamented over.

2. Use. As on this ground we lament the state of the Churches, so may we take
up ^ Lamentation over the persons who live under the dew and sunshine of the
Gospel, and nevertheless see no Beauty or Glory in the ^ame The Glory the^eof
is hid from their Eyes, an^ they see no Beau^y, nor desireableness, no^ Riches
of Glory in the same, the GOD of th^^ World having blinded their Minds 2 Cor
4.4. They look upon the Gospel, as an artificia^ composed Fable; They set no
worth nor pri^^ upon it as they should; In place of Glory, is a burden whereof
they would willingly be quite; Therefore they improve not the occasion, which
they have for attaining to the knowledge thereof, and for having an Interest in
this Glory: Many are ind^fferent and Gallio like, and in no ways lay the
^^siness to Heart; Others are Heart-enemies to this Glory, and the power
thereof; Many content themselves with the outward Glory, without seeking inward
Heart knowledge of the Riches of Glory, which is to be seen therein.

3 Use. This affords ground of Rebuke, unto several sort of People. As 1. Unto
such, who darken the Glory of this Gospel, with their Errors, Superstitions,
Inventions and false Glosses, and all such, who in any measure darken and cloud
the Simplicity of this Gospel, its Glory and singular Beauty. 2. Such are to be
rebuked, who persecute the very Name and Profession of the Gospel, and all who
adhere to the same, as many do, who (^f possible) would drive it out of the
World. O! what aileth them, and offends them at this Gospel, which is so ^ull
of Glory, and brings Glory in it to poor Soul^? Surely such Men must be
driven on and acted by the Spirit of the Devil, who is an unreconcilable Enemy
unto this Gospel of Glory. 3. It is for rebuke to such, who are Enemies to the
power and purity of the Gospel; who tho they may readily stand for the
profession of it, and own that, yet their Heart rises against the Life and
Power thereof, wherever they discern it; and as a fi^ occasion ^ff^rs them,
they but laugh and mock at all that is more than an outwar^ prof^ssion. Its
true there is a Beau^y and Glory to be seen in the very ou^ward Dispensation of
the Gospel, when performed in Gospel purity; But the more special Glory, with
the Riches of the Glory of the Gospel, l^eth in the power thereof upon the
Soul, leading captive to the obedience of Faith, and bringing them unto
subjection unto Christ; And their Heart rises against that, wherein the Glory
and Power of the same does most signally appear. 4. Such are to be rebuked, who
bring stains and shame, through ^h^ir scandalous Life upon that gloriou^
Gospel, bringing up an evil Report upon the same; And thereby occasioning
Enemies to desp^se and con^emn the same: O! what a da^k Cloud does the
scandalous Lives of Profess^rs, raise over the ^ace of this Sun? This is far
from adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things, which is required
Tit. 2.10 5. Such are to be reproved, who will not s^ffer this Glory, once to
enter their Souls, who c^st no^ up the Door of their Souls, that it may enter
in, and call not to the GOD o^ Glory, that He. Who commanded the light to shine
out of d^rkness, man shine into their Hearts to give the light of the knowledge
of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4.6. But on the
contrary makes themselves hard against it, and refuse to accept of it: As
appears from the following Particulars. (1) They resolve to keep their old way,
whatever be said unto them, they will not alter, they will remain the old Men
and the old Women still. (2) They refuse to subject themselves unto the
Righteousness of GOD, and endeavor to establish a Righteousness of their own;
Now herein lies the Glory of the Gospel, that it breaks us off from that Course
of self-seeking, that we might live and grow up in Him, who is the Head in all
things. (3) They will not submit themselves unto the Conditions of the Gospel
Covenant, nor receive Christ as He is offered in the Gospel. (4) They will not
forsake their old Lovers, and especially that Ash^aroth, that prime Dagon, and
principal Idol Self; Now the power of the Gospel appears herein, that it makes
the Soul put out its right Eye, and cut off the right Hand, and cast away all
its own Righteousness, as so many menstruous Clothes and fil^hy Rags.

4 Use. This requires of us sundry Du^ies. As 1. We ought then to be very
thankful unto GOD, that ever it has pleased Him to tryst us in the time and
^lace of His manifesting this glorious Mystery; What are we better than others,
that have gone before us, or than many that live in other places of the World,
who have never a^ ye^ s^en one blink of Glo^^? Providing we could prise a right
the worth o^ this Treasure, we should see ou^ unspeak^ble and great Obligations
to Thankfulness, (...) as we would be forced to cry forth, What shall we render
unto the Lord for this Benefi^ and infinite Mercy? 2. We should esteem highly
of this Gospel, and priz^ it much, that our despising thereof provoke not the
Lord to remove it; that the Sun might not go down over the Prophets, nor the
day be dark over them Mic. 3.6. And lest He might give us up unto the lusts of
our own Heart, and give us darkness in place of light, for our misprising and
undervaluing the Glory and light of the p^^cious Gospel. 3. We should be much
it P^ayer, to hold the Gospel still in its power and purity amonst us, that it
may shine in the midst of us, in its Glory and Beauty, as the power of GOD unto
Salvation. 4. We should endeavor on all occasions greatly to welcome ^he
Gospel amongst us, and to be ware that we oppose not the Power and Operation^
of the same. O let the Glory thereof shine it our H^arts! And for that effect
let us lay open our selves to the Beams of the same, that they may have free
entry into our Souls: Les us lay aside all prejudices and love to our Idols,
and receive this Light and Glory in love, 5 Let us not be satisfied until that
we see and obtai^ a more clear discovery of the Riches of the Glory of this
Mystery. To wit. (1) That this Gospel discovers to us our Wre^chedness,
Emptyness, Madness, Poverty, Nakedness and every way Undon^n^ss. (2) That it
holds forth unto us the Excellency of Christ, in His Person, Nature, Offices,
Works, and Employments in the World. (3) That it draws Hearts to Him, and from
our selves, and from all other Lovers and Vanities, wherewith heretofore we
have been betwitched. (4) That it unites our Souls to Him through Faith, that
we may live in Him, and He in us, and be one in Him. (5) That it enclineth our
Hearts, unto a swee^ Union with the Gospel Comman^s, and to a living by Faith
in Christ, and to a depending and resting on Him for Salvation, through His
offe^ing of Himself, and through His Media^ory Righteousness offered and hold^n
for^h in the Gosp^l* and impu^ed ^o Believers through Faith. (6) Tha the
Discovery of this Gospel makes us ^^ll in love with Holiness, an^ to work out
our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, leaning on Jesus by Faith, drawing Life
and Power from Him, who is given ^or a Covenant un^o the People, that we might
so g^ow up and bea^ Fru^t in Him, and go from streng^h ^o streng^h in Him,
until we appear be^or^ GOD (...) Zion

5 Use. This requires ^ sel^-searching, whether or not we have ever attained a
sav^ng si^ht of this Glory, the Riches of the Glory of ^his Mystery: And we may
know it by these Mark^ As 1 Mark. The light of the Gospel discover^ a Fullness,
a sensible Fullness, a Soul-satisfy^ng, and a Soul-saving Fullness, and a free
and gracious Fullness in Christ. 2 Mark. The light of the Gospel discovers, I
say, where this glorious Light comes, it discovers sel^* emptiness, self
deceitfulness, and loathsomness. 3 Mark. It takes the Soul captive instantly to
make choice of Christ for all, to esteem of Him above all, as the chief among
ten thousand; And to lay hold on Him, on His own Terms, with Heart and Hand,
and to accept of Him for all our Wants, and for all that we desire, and to rest
fully satisfied and content with Him. 4 Mark. It inclines the Soul sweetly to
employ Christ in all their Needs, to give Him constant employment in all His
Offices, until He bring them home and land them in Glory. 5. Mark. It makes the
Soul, that has a right discovery thereof, fall in love with Holiness, and to
make Conscience of their ways, to walk circu^spectly to the Glory of GOD, and
to the praise and adorning the Gospel Profession, to the engaging of Strangers
unto the ^eceiving of the Gospel. 6. Mark. It will give them a high esteem of
all, even of the smallest Ordinance and Institution of Christ, and make them
careful ^o keep them pure, and to improve them to the right end, and will make
them help to maintain His Cro^^ rights and Privileges. ^s King in His ow^
^^urch, and chief Commander in ^is own House.

-- Among the Gentiles:
These (...) of Glory, (...) things.

1. (...) ^^credible in the beg^^^ing of the (...) the Gentiles should be (...)
Privilege, and exal^ed to (...) Glory: For 1. (...) o^ Christ. (...) the (...)
unto the (...) ordained, (...) first off^^ of the G^spel, (...) to (...) with
an (...) way of (...) Mat. 10.5. (...) who^ are (...) Enemies or (...) cou^^
not only not tolerate, tha^ (...) should be Partakers of that (...) bad to
spr^^^ to (...), the be saved -- 1 These. (...) worl^ neither (...) of Heaven,
(...) further the Apostles themselves notwithstanding of their ample and large
Commission to g^ and Teach and Baptize all Nations. Math. 28* 18, 19. And
notwithstanding they were for that end qualified and furnished, with
extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, yet could hardly be persuaded to Preach
this Word among the Gentiles; For we find that Peter w^^ examined by the rest
of the Apostles, for b^ going unto Cornelius. Act. 11.2, 3.3. The Gentiles were
looked upon with an ill Eye an^ contemned, therefore called Sinners of the
Gentiles. Gal. 2.15. And as without Christ, so aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, a^^ strangers from the Covenants of Promise, havin^ no hope, and
without God in the World. Ephesians.: 12.4. Yea they were accounted Dogs, an^
unworthy to eat of the Childrens Bread* se^ on that ground, Christ seemed to
cast off the poor Cananitish Woman, to whom He answered, I am not sent, but
unto the lost sheep of the House of Israel. Math. 15.

2. Notwithstanding of all this, the Lord so ordered it, that the Gospel got
entranc^ under the Gentiles, while He sent His Apostle^ among them, and blessed
their Labors, amongst them. Act. 13.46. and 14.27. a^^ 15 3, 7.14.15, 17 and
18, 6 Yea the Ie^ rej^cting of the Gospel, occasioned the preaching of the same
under the Gentiles. A^^ 23 46. and 8.6. and the di^^i^^shing of (...) Jews, was
the Riches of the Gentiles. Romans 11.12.

3. Hereby were the Prophecies concerning Christ, and His Kingdom fulfilled;
The Root ^f Iesse must stand for an Ensign to the People, and the Gentiles must
seek into it. Isa. 11.10. and 60.5. His Name must be great among the Gentiles.
Mal. 1.11. And to such, had Christ a Commission to come in an appoin^ed time
Isa. 42.6.49.6. Act 13.47. Luke 1.32. So must He bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles. Isa. 42.1. Math. 12.18. see Romans 15.9, 10, 11.

4. And as this was an eminent Evidence of this Mystery of Wisdom, Love, and
free Grace, which was long kept bide in the Heart of GOD, Ephesians. 3.3, 4, 5 So
was i^ that the Apostles, who for a time, were unsatisfied, therewith at last
held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted Repentance unto Life. Act 11.18. And Paul accounted it his Mercy to
preach among the Gentiles. Ephesians. 3.7, 8. And magn^fied his Office thereby. Rom
11 13. And we find him often glorying therein. 1 Timothy 2.7. 2 Timothy 1.11. Which,
as it should stir up our Hearts to admiration over that wonderful Love and free
Grace of GOD, who has sought after the Gentiles in Clemency and Mercy, who had
been so long debarred; And establ^shed usi^^ the Faith of the great things
promsed unto ^ut in ^he Word, now (...) to see the old Prophesies and (...)
were (...) als^ (...) (...) our un^o (...) p^ay for them, upon (...) g^ven on
their acc^un^, (...) the Lord in due time will accompl^sh; And besides it
should make us lay to Heart ou^ Duty in managing aright t^^ Pri^iledge, in the
thankful acknowledg^ment of the Lord's undeserved Love herein, and by hearty
embracing and welcoming this Offer, and to walk worthy o^ the same, in all holy
Conversation, to the Glory of GOD.

Qu^st. But providing it be asked, Whether all the Gentiles see the Glory, and
know the Richer of the Glory of this Mystery.

I Answer, No: For all have not the p^eaching of the G^spel among them. If it
be ^urther asked, If all th^se, to whom thi^ Gospel is preached, see ^h^s
Glory? I Answer, No. But only the Saints among the Gentiles, as app^ar^ from
Verse 26 This is made manifest to the Saints. Where we see that it is a^^ne ^he
Sain^s, who have obtained Grace to beli^ve this G^spel, and not every one who
hears i^ preached, who d^scern the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery, which
is in the Gospel

For 1. Unto some he preaching of the glad Tidings of the Gospel, is the savor
of Death unto Death. 2 Cor. 2.16. And unto their corrup^ed and prejudicated
Understanding it savours as a dead Carrion, wherein their Souls has no
pleasure, yea it is as Death* so that their rejecting of the Gospel, and their
averseness from it, proves their Death and (...). 2. Unto some it is but
foolishness, as it was unto the Greeks. 1 Cor. 1.23. And matter of Mocking and
Derision, as the Doctrine of the Resurrection, was unto these of Athens Act.
17.32. Many have no better op^nion of the Ambassadors of Christ, who are sent
to preach the Gospel, (...) Fest^s of Paul, Act. 26.24. And of the Believers of
the Gospel, than the Pharisees had of the Multitude Ioh. 7 49.3. Unto some
Christ is a Rock of Offense, and the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, is a
stumbling Block unto them, even as unto the Jews, who stumbled at the stumbling
Stone and rock of Offense. 1 Cor. 1.^3. Rom 9.32, 33. Even as Christ Himself
was for the fall of many, so the preaching of the Gos^el is the occasion of the
ruin of many. 4. Many will not hear the Gospel with Faith, and therefore it
cannot profi^ them, Not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. Heb. 4.2.
Neither will they receive it in Love, nor receive the Love of the Tr^^h. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. And therefore sa^^ ^oe (...) themselves unto the Righteousness of
God, held out unto them therein Romans 10.3. They will not suffer the Word of
Instruction to get any room in their Souls, but they receive this Grace of GOD
in vain, and through unbelief they reject it, they will not obey this form of
Doctrine, nor yield themselves Servants thereunto. 5. The GOD of this World
has so blinded the Minds of them which believe not, that the Light of the
glorious Gospel of of Christ, who is the Image of GOD, cannot shine unto them;
So that they can discern nothing of the Glory of the same. 2 Cor 4.4. And some
blinded by a Judgment from GOD, are therefore no Copartners of this
Revelation. Math. 11.25.6. Some see a glance, some da^k half glimmerings, of
this Glory, but discern not the glory of this Mystery, they get some sight,
which may occasion some little work and operation in them, nevertheless they
continwe strangers unto the true spiritual Glory thereof: For (1) They may see
so much therein, as may engage them to a profession of the same, for a time in
a fair day, when i^ is accompanied with no persecution; But ^ven as the stony
ground having no deepnes^ of Earth, when persecution comes, they immediately
forsake the Gospel, and turn their back upon it. Math. 13. (2) They may readily
see so much in it, as makes them willing^^ to part with somewhat, but not that
in^^ which will make them willing to forsake (...) for Christ; The cares of the
World, does not only choke all again, but creats a mist in their Eyes, which
totally cloudeth and darkneth this Glory (3) They may see that which may
inwardly affect them, as Agrippa to be almost Christians. Act. 26. and no more.
(4) They may readily have some general knowledge of the Letter and outside
thereof, and may be great Doctors and learned Preachers, and nevertheless
wholly strangers unto the Power and Life of the same. (5) Yea they may attain
some resemblance thereof, and as it were some glorious sparklings, such as the
Apostle speaks of, Heb 6.4, 5. But alone unto True Believers, the Lord makes
known and manifests this Glory, and makes them to see the Riches of the
Glory of this Mystery; These see it, to whom He discovers those Secreets
which are kept hid from the wise of the World; They s^e it, who see that Glory,
which changes the Soul, so that thereby, they are changed into the same Image,
from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. 2 Cor. 3.18.

But what is that sight they get, which others are Strangers unto? Ans. 1. They
see a special necessary good, which deeply affects the Heart; Others only win
at some Conceptions, that goes no further, than the Head. 2. They see
something directly applicable unto to their case and condition, and is very
sut^able unto them, where^^ others look on these things, a^ more the
concernment o^ others than themselves. 3. They see the good is co^pleat,
all-sufficient, necessary and satisfying, which is held out in this Gospel, and
therefore they seek not after more, provi^ing they obtain that, they judge
their Lot is fa^len unto them in pleasant places, and that they have goodly
Heritage. 4. They see somewhat of that Soul-ravishing profound Counsel of
Redemption, wherein all the Persons of the Tri^ity are engaged to carry on and
perf^ct the same, and ^^ey see herein such Glory, that it makes them long for
Heaven, that they might obtain a more broad and wide look o^ that divine
mysterious on-carrying of the wa^ of Salva^ion, wherein so much of GOD, and of
His glorious Attribut^^, in such a lofty way does appear. 5. The (...) that
therein, (...) reache^ (...) Soul, and make^h them, that (...) (...) (...) and
soul, giving their (...), as being al^ogether p^ecious (...) Soul satisfying.
6. They see that which makes them (...) willing, and (...) all and ^^ll every
thing, (...) once they (...) invaluable (...) 7. They se^ that Light which has
that pow^^ and force therein, that brings under their irregular love to the
World, and all other Vanities, together with the strong Corruptions that molest
them.

1 Use. It needs then be no strange business, that there are so ^ew, that
highly esteem of this Gospel, and that so many undervalue and contemn it;
seeing there are so few real Saints, who alone can see the glory and singula^
Excell^ncy of this Gospel. Oh! it is a sealled (...), even unto them who (...)
hear it, (...) the ou^ward ^h^ll, and (...) sweet and deli^a^ kirnel (...).

2 Use. Behold here ^he Touchstone, whereby every one must ^^^mine himself,
and judge of Himself, wh^^her (...) be in the Faith or not; This special sight
and discovery is alone peculiar to Believe^s, the Spirit of Light which they
have received in the Gospel, makes them now see another sight than formerly
they could apprehend or understand. O the depth of Wisdom, Power, Love, Grace,
Righteousness and Mercy, which we now daily more and more discover! O what
heavenly and divine Glory shines therein, and ^ha^ in the very meanest of all
Christ's Precepts! Othe^s take but a carnal and general look of th^se
Ordinances, and therefore not so tender nor so zealou^ of them, who can bear
with the mixtures and Inventions of Men amongst them, and can fancy a Beauty,
Decency and Consistency in these Inventions, whereas there is nothing in them
but a vile deformity: And as for the substance of the Gospel, the glad Tidings
of Peace and Reconciliation with GOD, it is unto them an indifferent business
far from being all their Salvation, and all their desire; Their Hearts cannot
embrace the Gospel, as the glorious Manifestation of the Son of GOD, which
brings to Light, Life and Immortality; They see not the Glory of GOD in the
Face of Jesus Christ. Woe then to such, who have not more knowledge of this
Business; Then 1. A literal speculative knowledge of this Glory of GOD, which
pusseth up, and fills the Soul with wind and vanity, and never sinketh deep
into the Soul. 2. A tickling outward Motion, with somewhat of acquired
knowledge, that only affects the person, as the lovely Song of one that has
a pleasant Voice. Ezekiel. 33.32. Their Ears are tickled with the new Tidings of
Salvation, and of a Mediator to preserve them from the Wrath of GOD, and that
is all. 3. Who have no more than some small tastings in the time of a
Communion, or at some other solemn occasion, that taken more on them than
ordinary, but is instantly suffocate, without taking further root. 4. Woe also
to such, that have but some Light that forces to some half works, and to some
raw wishe^, that all might be better, some Flashes of Resolutions and hasty
Undertakings, which occasioneth somewhat that looks like a change, tho ^las!
their Heart in the interim is cleaving to their Abominations, and going out
continually after their Covetousness.

To whom God would make known, etc.
These words may have respect both to the outward manifesting of the Mystery of
this Gospel Truth; As as also to the making known and discovering of this Truth
of the Gospel effectualy on the Heart, which is more especially here to be
understood, because that this Revealed Mystery is calldd, Christ in them, the
Hope of Glory. In respect of both these, the Words hold forth two things:
First, That this Revelation is of GOD. Secondly, That it is an Act of His free
Grace and free Love.

As to the First, to wit, The outward making known of the Gospel (which we
shall pass in a word) We see, that as this Gospel is alone of GOD, Who is the
Author thereof, so the outward publishing of the same depends on His free
Grace and Will, so that he sends it to whom He will, and to whom He will, He
sends it not; see Act. 16.7. The Spirit suffered not Paul, and his Companions
to go unto Bithynta: However Satan and his Instruments may have a hand therein,
nevertheless we are to look mostly to GOD, Who has the chief hand in i^* Who
follows His own Resolution, sending the Gospel, where He has any to bring in
thereby, be it one Soul or more, or to (...) one lost Groat, or one wandering
Sh^^p, which finding incapacitate either to le^d or drive, He takes it on His
Shoulders; rej^ycing. Luk 15.5. Christ went ove^ to the G^da^ens ^or one poor
Soul: Paul (...) charged to abide at (...) the (...) Gospel of Salv^^ion, and
that (...) (...) the publishi^g of (...) time and place, w^er^ (...) Providence
of GOD have ou^ (...) That we abase our selves in (...) be ashamed of our
unsuteable (...) Him, Who has sought us ou^, (...) many Thousands, whereas we
(...) as any, only that He (...) give ^^^vidence of the freeness of His (...)
3. That we walk more (...) benefit, that He (...) the (...), when (...) The
conside^^^ion (...) as to ^ear, (...) the remov^^^ the (...) us, as He (...)
Revel 2.4. Tha^ (...) GOD's Sovereign t^, who singularly in this disposes as
He will: Our carnal Hearts are sometimes ready to rise against Him, and to
wonder wherefore He suffers so many rich Nations to be so long without one Word
of the Gospel of Salvation, and suffers it to remain there, where the People i^
wearied thereof, and would willingly be quite of it; But His Will should answer
all such Objections in us, and settle all such Distempers in our Hearts: We
must be satisfied herein, for He does what He will in Heaven and Earth, and
gives no account of what He does.

As to what relates to the other part, which is here principally to be
understood, we learn. First, That it is GOD alone, Who can make known unto the
Soul the Glory and Riches of this Mystery, and does effectually publish and
reveal it; This requires the revealing of the Arm of the Lord. Isa. 53.1. For
Flesh and Blood cannot do it, but the Father which is in Heaven Math. 16.17.
And the Spirit. Ephesians. 3.5. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
Glory, must give unto us the Spirit of Wisdom, in the knowledge of Him. Ephesians.
1.17. see Verse. 9. Therefore the Spirit is promised for that effect. Ioh.
14.26.1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. Gal. 1.16. This appears further from the natural
state of Mankind, who cannot know these Mysteries without a divine powerful
Revelation and Manifestation of the same in them. For 1. Natural Men are by
Nature blind, without knowledge, lying and living in darkness; And wha^ can
they then discern ^n these M^steries? Revel 3.17. Luk 4.18.1 Pet. 2.9. Act.
26.18. Isa 42.7. They are in darkness, and darkness has blinded their Eyes, 1
Ioh. 2 11. They walk in Darkness, and ly in Da^kness. 1 Ioh. ^.6. 1 Ioh. 2.9
They are of Darkness. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. They are called Darkness it self. Ephesians
5.8. Yea under the power of Darkness. Col. 1.13 2. Therefore they are under a
natural Impotency and Unfi^ness to understand the things of GOD. 1 Cor. 2 14.
The natural Man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. 3. Besides this natural Impotency in the Understanding, to take up
and know these Mysteries, there is also an acquired moral Inability seated in
him, through misunderstanding and prejudice against the Mysteries of GOD: For
it is said of the natural Man, 1 Cor. 2 14 That he receives not the thing of
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; Therefore, was the
Preaching of Christ cruc^fied, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks foolishness. 1 Cor. 1.23.4. Yea the carnal Understanding is enmity
against GOD; It submits not it self to the Law of GOD, neither can it. Romans
8.7, 8. so that there is also a pravity and impotency in their will; Therefore
says Christ, that a corrupt Tree cannot bring sorth good Fruit. Math. 7. The
Ethiopia^ cannon change his Skin. Ier. 13 5. There is an acquired habitual
ave^ssness, through the pravi^y of our Inclinations: By Nature People are so
w^dded and glewed to their Lusts and Idols which they will not ^ors^ks (which
augments their natural Antipathy against the Gospel) so that they are Enemies
in their Minds by wicked works Col. 1.21.6. Besides all this, the Devil, who is
the god of this World, i^ working in them. Ephesians 2.2. who more especially so
blinds the Minds of those who do not believe, that the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of GOD, may not shine unto them. 2 Cor. 4.4.
This needs no ^u^ther evidence, being more than manifest by daily experience;
no preaching will once pick on some; yea Christ Himself preached unto many who
go^ no profit thereby; The great things of GOD's Law, are accounted bu^ a
strange thing by some. Hos. 8. Many have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not.

1 Use. We are hereby called to be established in ^he Faith of this Truth, That
it is only a Divine Power, which can mak^ known unto us and in us the Gospel
Truths; We by Industry and Education, with some ordinary light of the Spirit,
may win to understand the letter of the Gospel; But in respect of the saving
Manifestation of this Mystery, there is a necessity of a real, discriminating,
special, immediate, inward and powerful Operation of the Spirit of GOD in the
Soul, driving away the natural Darkness, and received prejudices, creating
Divine Light in the Mind and Understanding, and so forming in the Soul, a
Spiri^ual Pattern of the glorious Mysteries of the Gospel: For until this
enlightening Operation and Revelation of the Spirit come, all will be to no
purpose.

2. Use. So should we have a loathing and aversion of that dreadful Doctrine,
which says, That this Divine Spiritual Enlightening is not needful, but allege
that moral persuasion, with the outward Revelation is sufficient; whereas none
who has any knowledge of his own Heart can be so stupid, that he should not
see so much of the Darkness of his own Understanding, that no less than a
Divine Power must be exercised and put forth in order to this his Enlightening:
And what does this Opinion else, but signally vilify, and palpably deny the
Divine Mystery of this Revelation, and lamentably blow up the empty Creature
with Pride, Ambition, and a foolish conceit of himself to retain somewhat,
whereby he may (as he ^ancies) be the less obliged to GOD, and may have ground
to thank himself, to sacrifice unto his own Net, and burn incense unto his own
Drag. What a ruining and dreadful Enemy is this opinion, against the exalting
of the Power of GOD's Grace, and against Folks carrying therein with
subordination and dependency on GOD, and against all Prayer unto GOD.

3 Use. However this be only GOD's work, and His powerful work; nevertheless
none ought because of his Impotency and natural Ignorance to account himself
therefore discharged, exeemed or delivered from guilt: For (1) Our natural
Impotency is our Sin. (2) Besides there is ever real opposing and rejecting of
this Light, in all such as are come to the years of discretion, who hear this
Gospel, and a wilful contemning of this Light, which will abundantly stop the
Mouths of every one; And this often appears either by their neglecting of the
Means, or by their negligent and sloathful improving of the same, and their not
using, but misusing of the Light which they have, etc.

4 Use. Notwithstanding this be GOD's work, yet we should not cast off the
Means, for hereby it pleases the Lord to convey Life, and to come with that
Light and enlighten when and where He will; For it ple^sed God by the
foolishness of preaching to save -- 1 Cor. 1.21. And Faith come^h by hearing.
Romans 10.17. And however the Means in themselves can do nothing, yet being
ordained by Him, as it is our duty, so we may have peace in waiting on the ^ree
and glorious King, where He Commands us to wait, and our waiting will sharpen
our desires and longings after that blessed Light; yea when we are disappointed
and cut off in our expectations, even this must serve for the further humbling
and abasing of our selves, and to make us the more earnestly cry out unto Him,
who is the Fountain of Light, that He who has caused the Light to shine out of
Darkness, would shine in our Hearts, in giving us the Light of the knowledge of
the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor 4 6. Our attendance on the
Means should be constant, because we know not, when He may come; It is good to
sow by all Waters, and to sow Morning and Evening, and in our Du^^es alone to
eye Him, knowing that all must come from Him. And albeit there may many
Discou^agements arise to cause us give it over; partly from without, Sa^an
crying, It is in vain to wait any longer, and partly from within, our Hearts,
looking on it as a desperate work; yet this consideration that this Enlightening
is GOD's working, may encourage and set us foreward again; For GOD is a
Sovereign King, free to come when He will, so is He gracious and merciful, and
can and will pass over many Enormities, and much opposition; yea ^urther for
quieting of our Hearts under all Objections whatsomever, this may suffic^, He
is GOD Almigh^y, and unresistible in His workings; He shall work, and who shall
hinder it.

2 dly. Moreover, we should learn from hence, that GOD makes known this
Glorious Mystery to whom He will most freely, without Hyre or Price, it is an
Act of His wonderful free Grace, He would make known etc. not by reason of any
deserving or worth, in us, or by virtue of any pliabliness, or readiness in
those, to whom ^his is made known, or of any necessary connection betwixt the
preparation in them and His Work; But merely from His free Grace and good
Pleasure; for He is found of them that sought Him not Isa. 65.1. Therefore it
is through Faith that we are saved, and Faith is not from our selves, It is the
Gift of God. Ephesians 2.8. And not by the works which we have done, but according
to His Mercy we are saved. Tit 3.5.

1. Use. For Instruction, and this should learn us, 1. To admire this wonder^ul
and undeserved Love toward us in this Mystery, in respect of the very outward
making known of the same to us, when Kingdoms and Nations more preferrable than
we, ly still in Darkness, or have corrupted and undone these Truths by their
Errors. 2 That we with all ^hankfulness heartily acknowledge this Mystery, and
walk humbly under the sense of this undeserved favor. We are to fear the Lord
and His Goodness, as also to meditate what an account we have to give for these
rich Mercies, lest we misimprove the same, and turn His Grace unto Wantonness,
seriously laying to Heart, that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorah in the day of Judgment, than for such, who have had these
Manifestations, and this Light among them, and notwithstanding have desired
Darkness rathe^ than Light.

2. Use. For warning unto such, to whom the Lord in a saving way, has made
known the Riches of Glory, by bringing it into their Soul with power and
efficacy: Namely, 1. They should walk worthy of such Grace and Love, by
carrying themselves humbly before Him, remembering their Nativity and the Rock
from whence they are hewed, that free free Grace may get the Honor of all 2.
They should live in the admiration of this rich and free Grace of GOD: What
were you, or your Fathers House, that GOD should have cast His Eye upon you?
What could He see more in you, than in others, who yet (...) in Darkness,
without these saving Discoveries? 3. They ought to endeavor to commend the
Riches of this Grace and Goodness to others, to speak good of Him, who has
been so good to them. 4. They ought to make use of these Discoveries, which GOD
has given them for the advantage of others, doing their outmost to win others,
and to hold out somewhat of that Light to others, that they may be brought in
thereby.

But I hasten now to the Last Point in this Verse. to wit, That Christ i^ the
Soul is the riches of the Glory of this Mystery made known in the G^spel; Which
is Christ in you, says he. This Truth contains these three Particulars.

First, That a Soul-union wi^h Christ is the first Intention, chief Scope and
D^sign of the Gospel: This principally is intended therein, that Christ may be
near hand and within the Soul. A Second is, That in this Union, consists the
Riches of the Glory of the Gospel, thereby is this Riches made known, and here
is their Center: For the Soul that is in possession of this Union, is likeways
partaker of the Riches of this Glory. Thirdly, That this Union of the Soul with
Christ, or the bringing of Christ unto the Soul, is only the Work of GOD, for
He makes known the Riches of the Glory of the Gospel.

As to the First of these Truths, we are to observe these two Things, 1* That
until ^he Gospel come unto a Soul with power and efficacy, the Soul is without
Christ. 2. That the Gospel is the Instrument of GOD, whereby this Union between
Christ and the Soul is carried on; and this is the end and design thereof.

The First which is here premised, is clear from Ephesians 2.12. before the Gospel
came to the Ephesians, among the Miseries wherein they were, this was the
chief, that as they were without G^D, so also without Christ, when the Gospel
first comes among a People, it finds them fitting in Da^kn^ss, and in the
reg^on and shadow of Death. Mat. 4 16 ^sa. 9 2. And under the power of Satan.
Act 26.18. Therefore it was the principal work of the Apostles, where they came
to preach Christ, Act. 9 20. and 8 5

Use. This being sufficiently clear, we are to lea^n thus to make use of it. As
1. Earnestly to seek after more solid and real Convictions of these T^uths;
Many yet lying in Nature, and before whom the Light of the Gospel has never
shined in its power, dream notwithstanding that they have Christ in them as
well as others, and so deceive their own Souls, and disappoint the great end of
the Gospel. A full conviction hereof, should dispose Folk more earnestly to
give ear unto the preaching of the G^spel. 2. These Fools must not imagine i^
sufficient, that they have the outward Ordinances of the Gospel, and under the
administration of the same: For unless the Gospel do come in power, and in the
evidence of the Spirit unto ^h^m, the^ may nevertheless abide without Christ:
Yea and until they fi^d this in them, they will certainly continue Christless
and Graceless. 3. They are called then to cry unto the Lord, that He would
reveal his Arm in the preaching of the Gospel, that they may not longer
continue in in their s^d and lamentable Condition

The Second is, That this Gospel, and the administration of the same, is the
appointed Means, whereby this spiritual and saving Union, is carried on, and
that this is its princ^pal end and d^sign, appears from these G^ounds.

1 st. Here is the Off^r of this Reconciliation and Union held ^orth, Christ
comes in the preaching of the Gospel; And 1. He tells what is His Father's Mi^d
and Will, namely that they should accept of Him, believe in Him, and let Him
into ^he Soul, for this is the great Commandment and so much called for duty.
Ioh. 6.29 -- This is ^he work of GOD, that ye believe on ^im, whom He has
sent. 1 Ioh. 3.23. And this His Commandment, that we should believe on the Name
of His Son Jesus Christ. 2. He entreats them in His Father's N^me to come, to
open unto Him, that He might come and take up His Habitation with them. Isa
^5.1. Revel 3.20.3 He pr^sses and drives on His Request, Su^e and Desire, with
many Arguments and Motives, as we have evidenced formerly. 4. He removes all
the Difficulties out of the way, by answering all Objections, preventing all
Discouragements. O how full is the Gospel of this! 5. He upb^aids them that
they come not unto Him. Joh. 5.4. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have
Life. 6. He waits patiently, with much Longanimity upon them, ^^newing His
Sute^, Cries and Entreaties. A^ which is palpable in the administration of the
Gospel; whereby appears sufficiently th^^ this Union betwixt Christ and the
Soul, is the great design and end of the Gospel.

2 dly. Herein the Gospel, the Conditions ar^ cleared and laid open, whereupon
this Union must be accomplished; Namely, 1. That w^ forsake all other Lovers,
and be fully satisfied that thereis a separation between us and them; for we
must foresake our Fathers House, providing we will ^ave the King greatly to
take pleasure in us. Psalm 45.10, 11.2. That we receive Him freely without Money
and without P^ice. Isa. 55.1, 2.3. That we receive Him wholly, even as He
offers Himself to be married unto us, that is as a Priest, Prophet and King
for we must receive all of Him, and not ^ part of Him. Joh. 1.12.4. That we
receive Him fully without reserve, absolutely without exception, seeing He is
altogether Lovely, and every way useful and absolutely ne^essary. 5. That we
receive Him for every Work and Employment, for Sanctification as well as
Justification. 6. That we jointly deny our selves, take up His Cross and follow
Him. Mat. 16.24.

3 dly. In this Gospel, we have the Nature of this Union. viz. The indwelling
of Christ manifested unto us: For here is declared, 1. That is indwelling of
Christ, and union with him, mysterious. profound, unsearchable, and
comprehensible, Ephesians: 5.32.2. That is wholly Spiritual, so that they become
^he Spirit, 1 Cor: 6.17. They are made parkers of His Spirit, Rom: 8.9.3. That
it a near and inward Union, so that no Com^^rison can sufficiently demonstrate
it, as we ^^ve heard before. 4. That it is permanent ^^d inviolable, nothing
can make a separati^^ here, Rom: 8.38, 39.5. That it is Glo^^ous and Exceeding
Excellent. 6. That it is very useful and profitable Union, having ^^effably
great and wonderful Advantages, ^oth here and hereafter.

4 In this Gospel we have what Christ did for ^^e carrying on of this Union,
how he is be^^me a Mediator and Cautioner, taking upon ^^m to make peace and
reconciliation* and so (...) satisfy Justice for their sins, How in the
^^lness of time, he has come, and has given a ^^ll and perfect satisfaction
according to his ^ndertaking; how he has purchased of the ^ather all that was
accounted necessary for the ^^rrying on of this Union in respect of the E^^ct;
How he lives forever as an Intercessor, ^^r that end and effect; How he as King
and ^ead of the Church has appointed ordinan^es and Laws; How that he has
blessed them ^^cording to his good pleasure for that Effect; and how he has
sent his Spirit to work up his Chosen to a cheerful receiving of his offer; A^
this, and much more is made known in the Gospel.

5. Here is held forth and cleared, what is required on our part, in respect of
obtainin^ possession, and to be possessed of this Noble Spirit, and to win at
this Union: Namely, 1. Tha^ we forsake all our Righteousness, with al^ other
Idols and lovers, which poss^s^ our So^l^ 2. That we acknowledge and be
convinced o^ our own inability, and natural unwillingnes^ to open unto him. 3.
That we attend on the means appointed, and on him in the mean^ 4. That we lay a
side all prejudices. 5. Tha^ we lay our selves open to his approaches. 6. That
we cry and long after him, and his company so as we can.

6. Here in this Gospel is made known, tha^ this opening of the heart for
Christ, is a wo^^ above nature, and that Christ is the Au^ho^ and finisher of
Faith, Heb. 12.1, 2. And that no man can come until the Father draw him. Ioh.
6.44.

7. Here is also discovered that notwithstanding ^he LORD wonderful in Council,
mighty indeed, has thought good through the foolishness of Preaching to save
those that believe, (...) Cor. 1.21. And to make use of Plan^ers an^ waterers,
albeit neither of them can do good, providing he give not the increase. 1 Cor.
3* 5, 6, 7. And therefore has he sent Labour^rs to his Vine-yeard to labor
and work there, ^o that they are Laborers together with GOD Cor. 3.8, 9. He
sends his servants, as so ^any Amb^ssadors to Court a Bride for Christ. ^ Cor.
5.20, and 11, 2. Therefore they ^ome in their Masters Name, and lay forth ^he
Articles of agreement and reconciliation, and he himself must and will through
his Spirit ^etermine and perswad unto an opening.

Use, From all that is said appears that the Gospel and the preaching of the
same is the ^eans appointed of GOD, for this end, and that it is the chief and
grand design of the preached Gospel to work up the Soul into this Un^on with
Christ, and make the heart to open, that the King of Glory may enter in: Which
should incite to these things. 1. To a high es^eemation of the Gospel, as being
such a noble mean ordained for such an excellent end; To account highly of it,
(I say) and of such who are appointed to carry these glad tidings of the great
Salvation, and to ha^ken unto it and them, as such noble means of Gods
appointment. 2 That we may have this end before us in the Administration of the
Gospel; The Ministers should so preach it, and the People should so hear it, as
a mean ordained for that end, and never to rest s^ti^fied, or much less to
think all is well, until this end be first attained, to wit, that Christ be
formed in the Soul: O! it were desirable to see that the Ministers in
preaching of the Gospel were (as it were) traveiling (...) Birth to obtain this
end, Gal. 4.19.3. That (...) lament the estate of such who miss this glorio^^
gospel, and of those who have but the sound of t^^ Gospel without the power
thereof. 4. That (...) be thankful for this inesteemable priviledg^ and so be
sensible of the same, and be care^^^ that we provoke not God to remove this
adva^tagious and most useful Candlestick. 5. That (...) have compassion on
those who are desperat^ wicked, that they are so wearied of this prec^ous
Gospel, that they hate, oppose, ruin, y^^ persecute the same: O what a misery
is th^^ for Poor Souls to forsake their own unspea^able riches.

The third thing is, that this Union, to wit^ Christ in the Soul, is the riches
of the Glory (...) this Gospel Mystery; And this appears. 1. In th^^ it is the
principal and chief business, which the Infinitely wise GOD had before him in
the Eternal Counsel of his will, to work out by the dispensation. 2. The LORD
who is the Autho^ of this Gospel, is thereby Gloryfied in his Glorious
Attributes, Christ exalted and made (...) see the travel of his Soul, and the
pleasure o^ the LORD prosper in his hand, and the great design therein
principally intended next the Glory of GOD, to wit, the Eternal compact between
GOD and the Mediator, is then begun (...) be accomplished. 3. All the Draughts
of the Glorious Gospel, terminate here as in a Cente^ 4. Then begins ^he
Soul to kn^w what are the excellen^ Riches of the (...) of Love, Grace and
w^sd^m, that are brough^ to light throug^t the G^spel, then, and not until
then, begin ^hey to be part^k^rs thereof.

Use, This serves to set us all a wo^k to a serious enquiry and trial, if the
Gospel has had these noble Fruits in us, which may be known from what has
been formerly mentioned of Christ his being in the Soul: And we are never to
think we see or know any thing of the R^ches of the Gospel, (how great soever a
measure of kn^wledge otherwise we may have attain^d, or be partake^s of) un^il
this Union be wrought; and prov^ding this be wrought, then we may well sit down
contented, what ever other things we want, as having now in thi^ Union the
whole Riches of the G^spel, as in a Treasure laid up in our Souls. O what a
condition must this b^*

The last thing i^, that thi^ Fruit of the Gospel, and ^his sh^rt compend of
the Riches of its Glory; is of GOD, and wrough^ by Him, He makes i^ known, and
the reason is clear; ^or, 1. Man by nature hates Christ, will no^ welcome Him,
much less let Him in to dwell in the Soul; they hate both Him and His Father,
Ioh. 15 24 2ly. The l^gh^ which must discover this enmity, together wi^h the
misery that accompanies their estate, who are without Christ, is Divine;
these Saving discoveries are only attainable through a divine supernatural
illuminati^^* Now it is GOD alone that opens the eyes of the blind. 3ly. As
it is GOD alone that takes away the natural blindnes^ of the understanding,
and sends Divine Light into the Soul; so must He guard off, and remove the
natural pravity of the will, and do away the stony heart, and make his people
willing; after this manner must He open the heart, as He opened the heart of
Lydia, Acts 16.14.4ly. Even so must GOD by His immediate powerful Grace
effectually work the consen^ unto the offer made in the Gospel; And how ever
this work of the LORD be powerful and irresistible, overcoming all opposition
from without and within, nevertheless it is without force and violence; For
though He draw, yet He draws with the cords of Men and Bonds of love,
strongly convincing, making the Soul effectually to submit and give it self
over, seeing the heart is in his hand, He can turn it whether He will; as He
pouers in Grace, so He makes the Soul willing.

1. Use. This should serve to teach those who are made partakers of this Union,
to know whom they have to thank for it, and who should have the praise and the
honor of this noble and glorious Work, and make them far from thinking or
saying, that they themselves have made the difference, or from offering
sacrifice unto their own net* in respect o^ his Grace.

2, Use. This should also learn others, where the right door is* whereunto they
must betake themselves O! poor Souls look to him, and to him alone, and wait at
the Posts of his door, forsaking your own strength, and despairing in and of
your selves.

FINIS.

