THE REASONS OF THE New Convert's TAKING THE OATHS TO THE Present Government.
By the Author of the Reasons of Mr. Bay's Conversion. In a Dialogue.

-- Multa in Homine
Signa insunt, ex quibus confectura facile fit,
Duo, cum idem faciunt, saepe ut possis dicere*
Hoc licet Impune facere Huic, Illi non licet,
Non quod dissimilis res sit, sed quod qui facit.
Ter. -- Uxori nubere nolo meae. Mart. London, Printed in the Year 1691.

The Preface to the READER.
THere needs nothing more be said concerning the following Dialogue, then that
it was written about a Month ago, as several Gentlemen in Town know very well;
and that it had been then Published, but for a particular Reason, that is, not
perhaps so very convenient to be told. The Author is not so great a Fool, as to
imagine that a little fair Language in the Preface will make any sensible
Reader think the better of his Performance; only he begs* leave to acquaint him
with the occasion of Printing it at this time; especially when so many People
of such different Opinions and Characters in the World, have appeared on the
same Subject before him.

Last Week there came abroad a certain Poem called the Weesils, which several
Persons were at first pleased to lay at my door, though now they are satisfied
it was done by another Hand; the Author of it having since thought fit to own
it publicly, and so to take care, that whatever Reputation or Scandal was to
be gotten from such an undertaking, might not be carried away by a Stranger.
However a certain nameless Rascal about the Town upon no better a ground, than
the common Report, which yet the Fellow owns to be a common Liar, charges me
with Writing it: And though in the beginning of his Libel, he cants about the
Gates of Mercy being always open, and that excellent Rule of not doing to
others, what what we would not have done to our selves, yet before he had fully
informed himself of his Man, or the merits of the cause, he very honestly
recommends it to the pious care of the Doctors Relations to get me knocked in
the head for abusing his Lady; and at last tells the World that I am as proper
a Person as any is in the three Kingdoms to be shown at Chirurgeons-Hall. I am
sorry for the Reader's sake, that this Malicious Wretch is of too mean and
sordid a Character for me take him into my consideration; for otherwise, the
Scriber might expect to receive a small cast of my old Office; and I assure him
he should find to his own cost the heaviness of my hand, if I were in humor to
give my self the trouble of Ierking him. However before we part, I must tell
him, that I have no reason as yet to be so weary of my life, as to desire to be
deified after Andrew Marvel's manner: Nor are my obligations to the City
Physicians so very great, but that I could be content to see all of them
Hanged, before they should ever come to learn Anatamy at the expense of my
Tabernacle. If I must be sent to another World, I think it is but reasonable
that it should be for something of my own, and not for the merits of another
man; and therefore for this reason I was resolved to publish the ensuing
Dialogue. What served to confirm me further in my resolution to print it, was
because it having been transcribed by several hands contrary to promise and
without my own consent, it could not fail one time or other to steal abroad;
and according to the common Apology that we Authors use to make in such cases,
I was not willing, that what was designed as a Satyr upon other men, should
turn to be a Satyr upon my self.

I hope none of our Dissenters are so vain as to imagine that I would ever
contribute to make them merry at the charges of any Member of the Established
Church; If they please to turn over two or three leaves, I don't question but
they will be sensible enough, that I designed no such matter; and to say the
truth, if a man may guess at the hearts of a People by their Pamphlets and
Coffee-house Conversation, one has all the reason in the World to conclude that
they will preserve the honor of Monarchy under this Reign, much after the same
ra^e as they consulted the Security of the Protestant Religion under the last.

I was always of opinion, that nothing in the World is so ridiculous as a
feeble, impotent Satyr, and that consideration perhaps has carried me sometimes
into such heats as I will not pretend to excuse, tho it is easy enough to
observe that I have often avoided to pursue my Reflections, even where there
was a plausible occasion to do it. It Is as impossible now to retract what is
done upon this score, as it would be foolish to implore the Reader's Candor to
forgive it: But however as this is the first time I ever meddled with so nice a
subject, so it is likely to be the last.

The Reasons of the New Convert's taking the Oaths to the Present Government.
In a Dialogue between Timothy, and Freeman.

Tim. Who's that, my old Friend Mr. Freeman, e Comitatu Bucks? It Is the very
same, I Will e'ne go and renew my Acquaintance with him. Dear Sir, your Humble
Servant; how have you done this many a fair day, and how long have you been in
Town?


Freeman. But just come out of the Coach, as you may perceive, where it has
been my misfortune to do Penance all the way, in such intolerable Company, as
never any Man was plagued with; Men of no Sense or Reason, yet Mighty
Politicians, and ten times more troublesome.


Tim. Than Damnation Burgess, when he is answering Cases of Conscience, or
Millington at an Auction, or a Scotch-man upon an occasional Sermon: But
prithee who had you got with you?


Freem. There was a venerable old Gentleman, that by the Courtesy of the late
Reign, was made a Justice of Peace; and he was declaiming perpetually upon the
Puissance and Heroical Virtues of Louis le Grand, whom he fancied to be as
irresistible at the Calvinist Divines make God's Grace. Then there was a Leash
of Country Attorneys, who took a great deal of care I heartily thank 'em, to
stun me all the way with their damned unintelligible Law-cases, which I had no
more a mind to understand, than I have to learn, either the modern notions of
Government, or the modern Systems of Theology. Lastly, to complete my Misery,
we had an ancient sage Matron in the Coach, and she with Tears in her Eyes,
railed very devoutly at the lewdness of the present Age, occasioned by the
Non-Resistance Doctrine of some Divines; I thank God, says she, I never
practiced it since I was Fourteen: And then she fell as severely upon the
Miscarriages of the late Fornicating Admiral (as she called him,) as a She
Tarpaulin, who has lost her only Husband in the Engagement.


Tim. A very pretty Consort In Faith. So I don't question but what between the
Politics of the Justice, and the Impertinence of your Lawyers, and the pious
Ejaculations of your Female Companion, you found your self as uneasy, as a
blundering Cit amongst the Verse-repeating Beaux of Wills Coffee-house, or the
Chairman of a Committee amongst his Herd of Country Petitioners. But setting
this Business aside, prithee tell me how thou have done this long while, for
unless I am mistaken, it is above three Years since we saw you last in Town.


Freem. Why truly Tim. I live after my old laudable Custom still; sometimes I
divert my self with a cheerful Bottle, and sometimes, pass away an Hour or two
with an honest old Author; for to say the truth, your new Gentlemen scarce
deserve a Reading. I pay my Taxes without repining; do what good I oan amongst
my Neighbors, never trouble my self with other Men's business; and though the
Duty I owe to their present Majesty's will not permit me to talk so
scandalously and disrespectfully of the two late Reigns, as some Hotheaded
Sots have done, yet I am as well satisfied with the present Establishment, and
as Zealous for the prosperity of Old England, as the forwardest Courtier, who
has made his Fortune by the Revolution, and consequently is obliged to stand up
for it as well upon the score of his interest as his choice. Thus I have
answered your Question, and now prithee let me know what News you have in Town.


Tim. A right Country Gentleman's Question In Faith, for the first thing he
generally asks you is, What is the News? As the Country Ladies when they come
up to Town, enquire in the first place, Which is the newest Play or Lampoon?
Which is the Topping Mistress of the Court, or the most fashionable Suit of
Ribbons at the Exchange? Well then to satisfy your Curiosity, you must know
that there has lately happened a very remarkable Change or Conversion, (call it
which you please) of a certain Person here in Town which no Body could ever
have imagined or expected; and now I leave it to you, to conjecture what it is.


Freem. A Conversion, and that a very remarkable one too! Why then I fancy.
Tim. that your Friend Mr. Bay's is returned to his Primitive Church.


Tim. Nay the Lord knows, which is Mr. Bay's Primitive Church; but prithee why
do thou trouble thy head about a Poet's Religion? for as we say, a Beggar is
never out of his way, so a Poet is never out of his Religion.


Freem. Well then, a discarded Jacobite Captain turned an humble retailer of
wicked Bottl'd Ale and Brandy; the Discarded Recter of Exeter, turned a Friend
of Athanasius; or the never to be forgotten Apostate turned a Defender of
Passive Obedience?


Tim. No.


Freem. A Physician turned a Zealous Expounder of the Bible; or a Sworn Friend
to Scoth-Cloth, reconciled to Lawn-Sleeves; Or a City Usurer turned a Refunder
of his ill-gotten Estate?


Tim. No.


Freem. A Son of Slaughter at White-Chappel converted to the observation of
Fish-days; or an old inveterate Republican turned a stiff Assertor of Monarchy?


Tim. No, but you had best consult Mr. Ferguson to resolve your last Question.


Freem. Is Dr. Oats reformed from his usual way of raskalling people, and
returned to the use of his Memory and good Manners on the sudden, or has that
bloody Sweare^ refused to take the new Oaths?


Tim. Why don't you know, that in a late Auction of Paintings there was a
Picture of the Dr's to be seen, where he was represented like a Blackamore with
a Glocestershire Parliament Man a washing him, in order to make him rectus in
Curia, by the same token that it was called, the Labor in vain?


Freem. Is the Red-fac'd Chaplain-maker of Whitehal reconciled to the choice of
honest Divines and renounced taking money for places. Or have any of the topping
Sons of Schism by the Bribe of a good Deanery or Bishopric been converted to
the Liturgy?


Tim. No, no, but hark you Friend of mine you had best have a care what you
say. Sons of Schism? Why, I tell you every man amongst them disowns the word,
and say, that thanks to the new Laws, they are as much an established Church,
as you know which was.


Freem. Is there then no difference between tolerating and establishing? After
this rate* the Bear-Garden and Playhouse may all in good time pretend to be
established Parliamentary Assemblies -- But to go on; Is there any of the New
Interpreters of Daniel and the Apocalypse converted to Sense and Reason? Or any
of the Modern Comprehension-men converted to a good Opinion of the poor
suffering Ceremonies of the Church?


Tim. No, not a single Man among 'em as far as I can hear.


Freem. To conclude then: Is the Vicar near Charing Cross convinced there is not
so much Bawdry in the Service of Matrimony as without it? Is any noted S^^^^ian
turned a Friend to Faith? Or any of the good people of Doctors-Commons to
unlicenc^d Marriges? Is a (...) ^arlon turned a friend to Cleanliness? Any
Court-(...) ^^nen, and no backbiting; any litigious Attorney to (...) And
Arbitrations? Any thrice married Widow to impotence? Any of the Town Critics
to Modesty? Or lastly, any Alderman that was begotten on a Bulk, to Heraldry
and Pedigrees?


Tim. No, you have not hit the point after all.


Freem. Why then the Devil take me, if I am able to guess what is the matter.
To pursue this point any further, I find, would be as endless a piece of
trouble, as to reckon up all the dull, stupid, senseless passages on the
Conference at the Brasiers shop in Long-Acre, or in Sh-dwel's Panegyricks; or
to give you a List of all Dr. Pain's pretended Reasons for Alterations, or all
the Similies in the Plain Dealer. Therefore let me once for all entreat you
dear Tim. to put me out of my pain, and let me know what mighty business it is
you have to communicate.


Tim. Prepare then with Reverence and Attention to receive what I am going
about to deliver for; give me leave to tell you Sir, now we are nose inter nose
the saying is, it is the most surprising, unexpected piece of News you ever
heard in all your Life.


Freem. Lord! what a deal of insignificant flourish and preparation is here to
usher in, it may be, but a foolish story at last? Why, by and by th^^ wilt
persuade me, that the Monument last week took a pair of Oars to go and plead
the Cities Cause against the Orphans at the King's Bench, or that the two old
pastboard Giants at Guildhal have laid their Heads together to confute. Baker's
Chronicle, or Wood's Oxford Antiquities.


Tim. Nay, Sir, since I find you begin to be somewhat must and all that, like
Father Teague in the Play, when the outside of the door was put upon him, I am
resolved to ease you of your trouble immediately. Know then for a certain
truth, that one of the most celebrated Divines we have in Town (I must not give
my self the trouble to name him to you) who has silenced the Papists,
confounded the Independants, lately mauled the Anti-trinitarians, and by his
zealous performances for Passive Obedience, has made little Atwood pass for a
great Author; has at last upon mature consideration, and after a Year and halfs
chewing the Cud upon the matter --.


Freem. Done what I prithee.


Tim. Why, faced about to the right, and taken the Swear.


Freem. And is all your mighty News, which you prefaced with so much show and
Ceremony, come to this sorry issue at last? Parturiunt Montes, nascetur
ridiculus Mus. To be plain with you, I am not at all surprised at what you have
told me, I have heard of it before; but because I hate to be behind hand with
you, or any body else, in lieu of your Domestic News, I Will acquaint you with a
very remarkable Foreign Story.


Tim. With all my heart, begin as soon as you please.


Freem. A certain Dutch Grammarian, (no matter for his Name or Place of abode)
in his Commentaries upon Suetonius's Lives of the Twelve Caesar's, when he comes
to take the Emperor Domitian to task, who you know took a strange pleasure in
dragooning Prince Belzebub's Subjects, meaning the Flies, out of their Lives
and Fortunes with his Royal Needle.


Tim. Very well, I understand you.


Freem. Wonders, in the name of God, how the Emperor could ever find in his
heart to butcher the poor Flies (in the Pedant's Dutch Latin, called Vespas,)
after so barbarou a manner, since his own natural Father's Name was Vespasian.


Tim. A very pretty edifying Story this, as I take it.


Freem. At last he concludes with this observable Sentence, Ingens est hoc
profecto Mysterium, nec facile explicandum.


Tim. So Sir I am your very humble Servant; but you will infinitely oblige me
however, if you will be pleased to think of making an application to your Story.


Freem. Why then I must tell thee Tim* in plain downright English, that I
wonder full as much, as the Dutchman did at (...) above mentioned Passage, that
thou should ever have the assurance to (...) the Dr's Conversion, as thou
call it, upon (...) for such a strange piece of News: For to give you my
Sen^^^^^^ (...) for all upon this occasion, I rather wonder that it was so late
before he reconciled himself to the Government, than that he was prevailed with
to do it at all.


Tim. Nay, now I perceive you are in the humor of maintaining Paradoxes; for
though you seem to make so slight of this News, yet give me leave to tell you,
it has been matter of astonishment almost to every Body here about the Town.
But may a Man be so happy as to hear you produce any Reasons for what you have
said?


Freem. Ay, with all my Heart. You must know then that several worthy Persons
whom I could name to you, if there were any necessity for it, came immediately
after the Revolution, to advise with the Doctor in that exigence of affairs.
Some of 'em he dissuaded from taking the Oaths, and without question furnished
'em with his own Reasons for his Dissenting from the Government in that
particular, and I don't hear that he ever sent for 'em to come in with him; but
when others came to consult him about the very same business, he was pleased to
say, that he would prescribe to no Bodies Conscience but his own; and so
dismissed them with bidding them use* their own discretion in the matter.


Tim. Well, and what of all this?


Freem. Why, say I, any Man who could deliver himself so ambiguously upon a
Question that so nearly concerned the security of the Government, and the
welfare as well as the Honor of the Established Church, either looked upon it
not to be a thing of that importance, as it really is, or else had not fully
determined his Sentiments either to the lawfulness or unlawfulness of it. I am
of opinion, that nothing but the fear of incurring the guilt of Perjury, could
excuse any Man from giving the Government so reasonable a satisfaction, as the
taking the Oaths amounted to. Now that the Doctor was, not fully persuaded in
his Conscience that there was any Perjury in such a Compliance, is very
apparent as I think, from his advising the Gentlemen to make use of their own
Discretion; which he would never have done, if he had really believed that so
black and scandalous and Cowardly a sin, would be the necessary Consequence of
it.


Tim. Well then, Granting all you have said to be true, what advantage do you
intend to make of it?


Freem. That the Doctor considered the taking of the Oaths to be only an
indifferent thing, and no more, which a Man might either do or not do, at his
own pleasure; for otherwise it had been his Duty to dissuade all Persons who
came to be advised by him, from Swearing. Now Tim, pray tell me what miracle is
it for a Man to part with his opinion about an indifferent thing, when there is
nothing but scandal and poverty to be had in maintaining it still, and so much
Interest and advantage to balance him to the contrary side?


Tim. To say the truth, there is no extraordinary Miracle in such a case. But
then I would have you consider, dear Friend of mine, that the Doctor's
Circumstances were perhaps clearly different from the Gentlemen's that came to
consult him; and consequently what might be either lawful or expedient for them
to do, might not be so lawful, at least so reputable for himself.


Freem. Let me desire thee honest Tim to explain thy self a little farther
about this same business.


Tim. You know to what heights, or rather extremities the Doctor has all along
carried the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; you know how stiffly and zealously
he has asserted the Ius Divinum of Monarchy; and with what assiduity and pains
he has combated the other Party; who fell upon different schemes and notions of
Government. And therefore imagining that several passages in the late
Revolution could not be well reconciled to what he had formerly preached, what
wonder is it, if he could not at that time prevail with himself, to give his
Assent?


Freem. Nay, if that Reason is worth a Farthing, it holds as well now as it did
the last Year.


Tim. Prithee let me alone for a while, and afterward say what you please --
But then this Cafe, as I told you before, seems only particular to the Dr. for
the other Gentlemen perhaps never preached or printed those Doctrins, which the
Dr. has, or perhaps never believed a Syllable of 'em, as is evident some of
their Brethren never did, who in several Treatises and Sermons that have been
published since the Abdication, pretend to assert abundance of things, that
were not so very current Doctrine in the two late Reigns. And so the Dr. might
excusably enough leave 'em to use their own discretion in the matter, since if
they complied with the Government it would contradict nothing which they
formerly preached or believed. What may be the reason do you think why the
Fanatics are so loyally affected to their present Majesty's; and were so
easily brought over to renounce the last? All the World knows what a great deal
of dutiful care they took to lull asleep the late King with their Addressing
Opiates, and sacrificing their Lives and Fortunes to him, whenever he should
have an occasion to make use of them. And yet among so numerous a Herd, unless
a very few, and those incognito, none have scrupled to take the Oaths, although
you know they are a People that understand how to make the best of a Scruple of
any men breathing. Their Democratick Principles are still the same, and their
Sincerity to this Government has no better a foundation than what they
pretended for the last. Therefore in short the business is this, besides the
interest they perceived in crying up their Loyalty now, our last turn of
Affairs could not but be very acceptable to those persons, who all along placed
the Sovereign Power in the multitude; and made their Princes upon every
Transgression and Maladministration in the State accountable to the People.


Freeman. As for what concerns the Fanatics I readily own. But then the other
part of your Discourse, Tim. is not so well grounded as it ought to be. You say
the Dr. might refuse to take the Oaths, because in doing so, he must run
counter to several Principles, which he had formerly justified and asserted*
Now if this be true, he is as much obliged at this present moment to dissent
from the Government, as at first. You say likewise that the Case of those
Gentlemen, who consulted him about taking the Oaths, is very different from
his; but this I take neither to be satisfactory nor solid. The Question is,
whether what the Dr. has formerly preached or written, is the true Doctrine of
the Church of England or no? If it is not, I am of opinion he is bound to make a
solemn Retractation of it; and if it is, it obliged his Brethren, who came to
advise him, equally with himself, although they never preached it, or publicly
justified it in Print. For instance, here are two Clergymen, one of 'em
preaches against Oppression and Covetousness once a Month at least, and perhaps
has appeared in a Term-Catalogue upon that Subject; the other, we'll say, never
meddled with the point in all his Life: and yet you will never conclude I suppose,
that the latter has more pretense and plea to cheat the Poor, and trouble his
Parish for a single Tithe-Pig than the former. After all, Tim. you seem to make
the Dr's dissent rather to proceed from a nicety of Honor than a Principle of
Conscience; for which piece of Service, I believe, he will never return you his
thanks: Now I wonder in my heart, that you should lay so great a stress upon
that point, or admire to see one single Man be prevailed with at last to make a
sacrifice of his Honor, (if even so much as his honor be concerned) when you
see so many thousand People in the World, that make no scruple at all of
sacrificing their Conscience.


Tim. But prithee would not you have a man be careful to preserve his Character
and Reputation in the World, and study to give as little scandal as may be?


Freem. Ay without question, tho as the World goes, I don't think a Man' Honor
and Reputation are worth the while to be maintained at the expense of starving
for 'em, and some people I could name to you, would scarce put that dangerous
compliment upon their Religion, as to suffer any severe extremities for its
sake. Besides, now you talk of Scandal, I question whether the Dr. has not
given a great deal more Scandal by his late compliance with the Oaths, then
then his former dissenting from 'em. Before he was generally considered as a
person of Conscience and Honor, and now perhaps abundance of ill-natured
People will allow him a share of neither. And what may serve to confirm 'em in
such an opinion, is that the Dr's Conscience, which has for this long while
lived among the Laywers, has not been so uniform (if I may use the expression)
as you imagine it first sight to be, or I could have wished it had been.


Tim. I would desire to know how you make that out, Noble Sir?


Freem. I call that an Uniform Conscience, Tim, which proceeds regularly in all
its Actions, and never does any thing in contradiction to its own Principles.
Now let us see whether the Dr's conduct since our new Establishment of affairs
can endure the left of this definition. Most Men will agree that the reason why
the Dr. refused the Oaths, must be, because he apprehended it was sinful to
take them; so then if the Dr. at the same time when he judged the taking the
Oaths to be Sinful, nevertheless submitted to do another thing, which was
tantamount to taking 'em, how can you or any man else excuse him from acting
quite contrary to his own principle?


Tim. This is very true, I own, but however it is not enough to say so, unless
you can prove it.


Freem. I was in good hopes you would never give me the trouble to prove so
plain a point. Did you never hear then, that when some of the Doctor's Council
had found out a Loop-hole for him in the Act of Parliament to enable him to
Preach at his Lecture in St. Dunstans', how he Prayed very heartily for both
their Majesty's by Name, when at the same time he could not prevail with his
Conscience to Swear to 'em.


Tim. Why prithee man, every Body in the Town knows that. The truth on it is,
People discoursed very differently upon that occasion; but all his Friends, who
at that time seemed to justify his Proceedings, were agreed that it was a
different thing to pray for a Person, and swear Allegiance to a Person; for you
know the Apostle commands us, to pray for all men, but he no where commands us
to swear to all Men.


Freem. This is a very miserable pitiful shift, as I take it, when it comes to
be narrowly examined; for prithee tell me, honest Tim, what is it to swear
Allegiance to any Prince?


Tim. To acknowledge in the presence of God Almighty, that the Prince to whom I
swear, has a Lawful Title to the Throne he possesses; and consequently to my
fidelity and Service, as far as the respective constitution of the Government,
where I live commands it.


Freem. Well then, and is not praying for a Prince, and recommending him in all
his acknowledged Titles to the protection of God Almighty, the very same thing
in effect with Swearing to him? I am sure it is, if your heart goes along with
your words; and a Church, as far as I understood the matter, is none of the
fittest Places in the World for a man to prevaricate in. Besides Tim, there is
this remarkable difference between Swearing to a Prince, and praying for him,
that you may perhaps have occasion to swear to him but once in your life, and
that before very few Witnesses; whereas you are obliged to do the other once a
Week at least, in the face of a very numerous and Solemn Assembly.


Tim. But how do you know, Dear Friend, but this very same case which looks so
intricate and perplexed at first sight, may be made to appear plausible enough
with the help of two or three of the Doctors Distinctions?


Freem. Nay let* me conjecture you, Tim, to overwhelm me with no Distinctions
as you love me; for the case is so very plain and obvious, that it will not
admit of any. I am certain that, where there are two Controverted Titles, if my
Conscience would not give me leave to Swear to a Prince, my Conscience would
never permit me to pray for him publicly; and I am as sure, that if I could
prevail with my Conscience to pray for him under the Title he assumes, and
which this Person once controverted,) I should never make any scruple of
Swearing to him. The Apostle you tell me, commands us to pray for all Men. So
we do, and for my own part I can pray very heartily for the Grand Seignior, the
Cham of Tartary, or the Great Mogul without any remorse; but at the same time I
can never pray for any of the aforesaid Monarchs as King of England, and so
forth; or if I could, why then as I told you before Tim, I should make no
question of testifying my acknowledgment of them by an Oath.


Tim. That may be your Conscience perhaps, but it were as ^^reasonable to think
that all People are acted by the same Conscience, as to imagine that all People
pursue the same end, or think the same things, or are influenced by the same
Motives. You see several Hundreds of Men flock every Sunday to Church, yet one
man goes there to pick a Pocket, a Second to make an assignation with a Girl, a
third to take a comfortable Nap, and a Fourth perhaps to hear Dr. Sh^^
contradict himself. Thus every man has his particular aim or design, and so it
is in the business of Conscience; a thousand men may do the same thing, and
pretend their Conscience is interested in the doing of it, and yet every
particular man's Conscience may proceed upon a different motive or salvo. As
for an instance, let us examine the Case of swearing to this present
Government. The Dissenters, of all sects and denominations, do it to be
revenged on the Monarchy, and Passive Obedience; for, though the Protestant
Religion is the Word with them now, it is not to be imagined, that those
people, who showed so small a Concern for it in the late Reign, should heartily
entertain any affectionate regard for its welfare in this. It would be too
tedious a business to examine the grounds upon which all the rest have gone;
yet you may be pleased to observe, that as all of them have embarked their
Conscience, more or less, in this affair, so generally speaking, every man's
Conscience goes a different way to work; for Conscience is a very intricate
thing, and oftentimes is influenced by very unaccountable considerations.


Freeman, That Observation of yours is very true, and I could cite several
famous modern Examples, to prove the truth of it, but shall at present only
content my self with one of ancient standing. Is it not a strange thing, that
Pythagoras, who had the reputation of a wise and learned Philosopher, should
ever make it a matter of Conscience to refuse the eating of Beans; or that any
of his Disciples should arrive to that prodigious degree of stupidity, as to be
Confessors for that sottish, unthinking, Bean-renouncing Doctrine? And yet we
have one of their Names upon Record, who chose to undergo the punishment of the
Rack, rather than gratify the curiosity of a certain Tyrant so far, as to
acquaint him with the true reason why Pythagoras forbad so innocent a Food, and
at last very heroically bit off his Tongue, lest the extremity of his torment
should oblige him to part with so profound a secret. Here was an odd whimsical
sort of a Conscience, with a witniss; and I believe you will find it a hard task
to meet with a Conscience in any of the Conventicles about the Town, that would
suffer so much for its lawful Prince, as this poor fellow suffered for a Bean,
and is very like the Conscience of a certain person, who never saw his
Cathedral, and yet took that care of his Diocese, as to prohibit 'em the eating
of black Puddings, because it seemed to contradict St. Paul's Admonition about
Blood. But all this while, honest Tim, as I take it, we have discoursed besides
our matter, therefore to return to our first subject again, prithee tell me how
the Dr's Conversion relishes with you here in the City.


Tim. Why you know there are store of malicious people in all Communities in
the World, and these are hardly to be pleased. Indeed, as for the generality of
the established Church, they are well enough satisfied with his new
Acquaintance with the Oaths, and don't at all question, but that as he had
leisure and retirement enough to study the point, so he has at last complied
upon very solid substantial grounds.


Freeman. Well, but the Dissenters, I hope, are very well satisfied with his
coming over to us. They seem, you know, upon all occasions to be very zealous
and affectionate to their present Majesty's, by the same token, that by their
good will they could be content to have all the Gentlemen in the Kingdom hanged
out of the way, or De-witted, who refuse to acknowledge them by taking the
Oaths. Therefore, I should think, it must needs rejoice the Hearts of all these
worthy Patriots, to see a person of the Doctor's Learning and Character, lay
aside his former prejudices to our settlement, and voluntarily own it.


Tim. No, no, you are quite mistaken; the Dissenters are Masters of too good
Memories, to be ever guilty of any Charity toward a Man, who had the boldness
to touch the Copyhold of the Schism. They rail at him ten times more furiously
than ever they did, and challenge him, if he dares, to reconcile his present
compliance with his old musty Notions of Passive Obedience; and then they say,
they will get Enroclydon Baxter, or one of the Poultry Divines, to reconcile
Transubstantiation to his Preservative against Popery.


Freeman. But are they all so inveterate? What, not one single man amongst the
whole Herd, that congratulates the Government for the great Happiness of his
Reduction?


Tim. The only man I hear of, who has been pleased to testify his Joy for this
occasion, is that learned son of Socinus, Mr. Thomas F -- rm -- n by name: He
pretends, that the Doctor has effectually answered all his other Treatises, by
taking the Oaths, excepting his late Book against the Anti-Trinitarians, and he
comforts himself, that the Doctor will all in due time ruin the reputation of
that piece; for, says he, the Dr. has got such a pretty way of answering his
own Books, that it is a thousand pitties any one else should take the trouble
out of his hands. Nay, I am informed (continues he) that when he took the
Oaths, he desired to be sworn upon the Naked Gospel.


Freeman. It Is strange me thinks that the Dissenters should be angry with the
Dr. for what he has done: if their Zeal for the Government is real and sincere,
which it is a Sin for us in the Country to question, I wonder why they should
quarrel with him upon this score, since the influence of his Example, for all
they know, may be serviceable to reduce the rest of his Brethren, who at
present dissent from us.


Tim. That does not signify a farthing; for, besides their particular pique
against the Dr. as he is a Member of the Established Church, they would have
neither him, nor any one else who is not of their party, be thought Loyal: For
all their former Bellowings and Cries against the Illegality of Monopolies, yet
at present they would willingly engross all the little Honesty and Loyalty that
is left in the Nation, into their own hands; though, by the By, their Loyalty
is compounded of such cross, surly, ill-natured Ingredients, and is such an odd
awkward sort of Loyalty, that for all I can see to the contrary, no Prince in
Christendom is likely to be the better for it.


Freem. A Dissenter's Loyalty is like the officiousness of a Rock at play, who
only lends you Money in order to your ruin. I pray Heaven it proves of long
continuance, but for my own part, I am afraid it will last no longer, than they
find their Religion (I mean their Interest) concerned in it.


Tim. More than all this, they will tell you, that we owe the Sunshine of the
Gospel, and all the other Blessings of the late Revolution, entirely to their
Discretion and State-principles; and, that if these impracticable Doctrines of
the Church of England, concerning the Civil Magistrate, had taken place, we had
by this time been utterly overwhelmed with Popery and Slavery.


Freem. Why this is ten times over a more fulsome Plea than their pretensions
to Loyalty. They preserve the Protestant Religion? Where, or how? or in what
Reign, that we may see it registered in our Almanacks? I am sure they have
contributed in all their pious Endeavors to make the Reformation as scandalous
and despicable, as any of the Fathers of the Society could have done. They
preserved it after a fine rate, by their universal silence in the late Reign,
and their little, low, abject applications to Popery; and now, when the Enemy
is beaten out of the field, they make a great pother with a few Gleanings out
of our own Authors, and pretend the Victory is owing to their Assistance and
Conduct.


Tim. Nay, the Dissenters have not been wanting, even in this Reign, to do the
Protestant Religion all the good service they can. One of the Tribe, in his
Modest Enquiry, as he called it, very modestly advised the Rabble to knock all
the Clergymen in the Head. And another nameless Rascal, in his Reflections upon
the Miscarriages of our Navy, that are printed by one of those godly wholesale
Dealers in Scandal, those scruple-selling Vermin of the Poultry, has this
remarkable passage, viz. That there is more Virtue and Honor to be found among
the Rabble than the Gentry: Rabble is likewise the word with their dear
Brethren in Scotland, and you may guess what a brave Religion we shall have of
it at last, if we follow these blessed methods, and suffer it to be modeled
and fitted to the Inclinations of our judicious Rabble.


Freem. Why prithee Tim, you need not give your self the trouble, at this time
of day, to acquaint me with any of the laudable Qualities of the Dissenters,
and especially of their Levites, as for instance, either with their wit, which
never appears but in their Similes, and in interpreting the Prophets; or with
their Charity, which is never extended beyond their own party; or with their
Modesty, which is never visible, but when they wink in the Pulpit; or with
their Sincerity, which never appears, but when they own themselves in their
Prayers to be a pack of the damnedst Rogues in the World; or with their
Learning, which never goes beyond a Dutch System, and a little Herauldry; or
with their Sobriety, which is never admitted to keep them company at their
pious Friday Entertainments; or with their Loyalty, which was * ever shown but
by their promising to lend this King more Money than they could raise, and
abusing the two last reigns; or lastly, with their Zeal against Popery, which
is never to be proved, but by their continual Endeavors to undermine the
Established Church. -- But let me conjure you, dear Tim, to drop this nauseous
fulsom subject, for, as I hope for mercy, I am as weary of it, as a
Presbyterian Splitter of Cases is weary of a poor Brother; that constantly
comes every Sunday with his dozen troublesome Scruples, to be resolved, sub
forma pauperis.


Tim. Thus you see, Sir, with what contempt and aversion the Dissenters in Town
entertain the story of the Dr's Conversion; now give me leave to add a word or
two more concerning them, and then I Will have done. You very well observe, that
they pretend to have abundance of Zeal for Their present Majesty's, so they do,
and if you will take their own words for it, they will tell you, that no body keeps
the Fasts, and Thanksgiving days with that Devotion as themselves have done.
But for all this, dear Friend of mine, they are angry to see the number of the
Kings Subjects increased, and if they see a Church-of- England-man come over to
the Government, they immediately call him all the Rogues and Rascals in the
World: the Reason is plain, they would willingly have His Majesty served by none
but themselves, and then they don't question, to reduce the French King, and
demolish Popery in due time. Besides, if all the Church-of- England-men had
taken the Oaths, they had lost their dearly beloved Topic of railing at them,
and I dare swear (so well am I acquainted with a Dissenter's tenderness) they would
rather sacrifice all the Princes in the Universe, than lose the precious
opportunity of libelling and railing. You are infinitely mistaken, if you
imagine, that the Bishops would find better Quarter from the Fanatics, if they
should ever take the Oaths; no, no, they pray, with all their Hearts, that they
may refuse the doing of it still, for then they are in hopes to see their Order
abolished, and their Revenues divided amongst the Saints, i. e. their old
Oliverian Leases come in play again: Of all which expectations they would be
miserably disappointed, if those immortal Patriots could prevail with
themselves to comply.


Freem. I don't pity the Dr. however, for being used after this unmerciful
rate, by those Sons of Schism; for, if it were my own case, I should rather
choose to put that sanctified Generation to the expense of a little scandal, for
my sake, than a little flattery; and rather accept of their Reproaches, which
are excellent in their kind, than of their I^s^^ce, which is the nastiest
coursest stuff in the World. It Is well enough with him, so long as his own
Brethren are satisfied, as you have before informed me, with the Honesty of his
proceedings; or* if they were not at first, I don't question, but the Reasons
he has published for his own defense, carry so much strength and solidity wi^h
'^m, as to satisfy all the reasonable part of Mankind as to that particular.


Tim. Why there you are mistaken, dear Friend of mine; for though the Dr* has
con^escended to acquaint the World in public with the Reasons of his
Conversion, yet he has not been so happy as to satisfy all People.


Freem. Who could ever expect that? It Is an impossible thing you know to do it;
but however I am glad the Dr. has published his Reasons, for otherwise I should
have bin a little angry with him. For, could he dissent from the Government
above a year and half, and by his Example hinder so many Country Parsons from
taking the Oaths, and keeping their Livings, and yet refuse the World so
slender a satisfaction, as to let 'em see the motives of his Change? I ever
thought, that so inconsiderable a piece of trouble was due to his own
Reputation and Credit, as well as the farther instruction of his younger
Brethren of the Clergy, who I am afraid little considered the merits of the
Cause, but rather what a brave thing it was to be thought of the Dr's Company,
and embarked in the Dr's Quarrel, and now have nothing else left 'em to do,
but to starve with as much decency as they can, and to curse the expensiveness
of their Vanity and Loyalty.


Tim. All this you and I cannot possibly help, and therefore it is a great piece
of Nonsense for us to talk of it any longer, only thus much I must add, That in
my opinion too, the Dr. lay under all the Obligations in the World, to make the
true Occasions of his late Reconcilement public. It Is a Debt which was due to
the Interest he now espouses, no less then the Party he has forsaken, some of
which, as you say, the Temptation of being thought of his Acquaintance or
Judgment, has reduced to their present mortifying necessities. And therefore
this being so necessary a Debt, as well in regard to himself, as the rest of
the World, I always persuade my self, that the Dr. would take care to acquit it
as soon as ever he has got his Reasons ready.


Freem. Got his Reasons ready do you say? That Is a Jest with all my heart, as
if a man of the Drs learning and experience in the world, after so long a time
too, to examine all the niceties of the Case, could suffer himself to be
engaged in an affair, to which he formerly expressed so incurable an aversion,
without having his Reasons ready by him. Nothing but either pride (which I
would be loath to suspect in a person of his mortified Character) or the
weakness of his Cause could engage him to act only on the Defensive part. It Is
a hundred to one, but a man's Adversary may say something or other, which will
lie a little obnoxious to Censure and Exception; so it is but falling without
any more ado, upon the Authors blind side, and the business is soon over. There
are a thousand ways for a man of any tolerable discretion to put by his Enemy's
Thrust when he is attacqued; nay, it is possible too he may come off with the
better on it, especially if the man he has to dealt with, plays open, and lies
unguarded in any part. And therefore if this had been the Dr's policy, I should
have thought the worse of his skill in Polemies, as long as I lived. I remember
I was once in a Coffee-house in the Country, where we happened to be talking of
the Dr's coming over to the Government; and a Gentleman in the room was pleased
to say, he was of opinion, That the Doctor had got his Reasons ready, much
after the same rate as a Country Innkeeper, whom he knew, got a poor fellow's
Porcupine ready.


Tim. Prithee what story is that, for, to the best of my knowledge, I never
heard of it before?


Freem. Nay, the story is entertaining enough, that I can assure you, and
perhaps will deserve your attention. You must understand then, that a certain
Fellow, here about the Town, who gets a sorry livelihood by carrying some
outlandish Beasts about the Country with him, and showing 'em for pence a piece
to the people, had by chance brought a Porcupine, the only support he had left
him in the World, to an Inn where this Gentleman was acquainted; the next
morning he calls the Innkeeper to him, and thus accosts him: 'Landlord, says
he, I must beg one favor of you, and that 'is* to get my Porcupine and Room
ready by Eleven of the 'Clock precisely, and in the mean time I Will step into
the Town, to see what company I can pick up.


Tim. Very well, sir, pray proceed.


Freem. Away goes the Fellow into the Town, and for a while stares about him,
to observe all the Curiosities of the place; toward Ten, he makes a solemn
proclamation of his Porcupine, and so musters up as much company as he thought
would defray the Expenses of the Show for that time, and carries 'em to his Inn.


Tim. Well, I mightily long to hear the issue of your Foreupine.


Freem. When the Fellow was got into his Room at the Inn, he knocks for the
Landlord, and asks him whether he had got his Porcupine ready? Ay sir, that I
have replies the Landlord, I hate to be worse than my word to any man, but I
must desire you, sir; that you will be pleased to tell me what Sauce you will have
for him.


Tim. Why, what a Devil did he mean by that question?


Freem. You shall hear. Cries the Master of the Porcupine, You Rascal, what do
you intend by asking me what Sauce I Would have for him? Nay, no harm in the
World, says the man of the House; you ordered me to get the Porcupine ready for
you by Eleven, and so I have, for I gave directions to the Maid to put him in
the pot immediately; but sir, says he, I never boiled a Porcupine in my Life
before, and therefore must once more request you to let me know what Sauce your
Worship will order for him.


Tim. The poor fellow without question looked very simply upon the matter, to
hear his Livelihood was boiled away so unluckily in one morning. And now to
come close to you, noble Friend of mine, Was it the Opinion of your Gentleman
then, that the Dr's Reasons were boiled away like the Strowler's Porcupine, so
that there was no procuring a sight of any of them? You see how much he was
mistaken in his Judgment. The Dr. (as I have told you) has been pleased to
oblige the World with his Reasons; you may have them at any Bookseller's Shop
in Town, but I cannot forbear to tell you, that there was never any Book since
the days of the Hind and Panther, or the Letter to a Dissenter, that has been
so universally pelted as this; Lawyers and Divin^s, Iacobites and Williamites,
though they agreed in nothing else, yet they have all of 'em agreed to mawl
this unfortunate Book. Nay some of our City Prentices and puny Scriblers have
had the hardiness to tilt against it, only to make experiment of their Talents,
as Schoolboys use to try their Knives, by running them up to the Hilts in a
hot Bag-pudding.


Freem. Say you so Tim? It Is, I confess, somewhat odd, but who can help it.
Come then, since the Dr. has had such ill luck with his Reasons, and you and I
have no other business now upon our hands, prithee let us invent some plausible
specious Reasons for his Conversion, they will help to pass away the other Bottle,
and the other hour, well enough, and perhaps they will serve to amuse the World, and
entertain the Reader, as well as some of his own.


Tim. No sir, I desire you to excuse your humble Servant as to this Affair;
I Will never invent any Reasons for another man, not I, I promise you, he may
even do it himself if he pleases; it is a very ungrateful performance let me
tell you, and generally the person whom you intend to oblige by this kind of
Office, will hold himself as little beholden to you, as a man in the state of
Cuckoldom, for giving him four and fifty Reasons to support himself under his
Afflictions: But what will serve the turn full as well, to put off half an hour
or so of Conversation, I will acquaint you with the several reasons, that
people here in Town, of all sorts and parties, have already assigned for his
Conversion. At the same time I must tell you, that as I don't believe them
altogether my self, so I would never oblige you or any man besides to place any
great assurance in the truth of them.


Freem. Come then honest Tim, and begin as soon as you will, for I can assure
you, 'twill be no small diversion to your Friend here, who is just come out of
the Country.


Tim. Nay, sir, not altogether so fast, I beseech you. I design my self a
little more sport and pastime than you imagine, and since you have so admirable
a talent at conjecturing, etc. I am resolved to keep your hand in play, and put
you to the trouble of guessing what they are.


Freem. Well then, since you will have it so, I Will dispatch them out of hand; but
however, before I make any trial of my noble Faculty, I must desire you to
remember, how that at the beginning of our Conference, when you told me of the
Dr's Conversion, I looked upon it as no Miracle, and that for these two
following weighty reasons. In the first place, because when some Gentlemen came
to advise with him about that matter, he civilly referred them to their own
discretion, which I supposed he would never have done, if he had been fully
satisfied, that the taking the Oaths was a Sin, or had looked upon it to be any
thing more than an indifferent Action. In the next place, because the Dr. had
long ago prayed for Their present Majesty's; which is virtually, and in effect,
the same thing with swearing to them; and if it is a Sin to swear to a Prince,
where the Title is controverted, and under dispute, I am sure it must be the
very same thing to pray for him. Now then Tim, since I was so bold as to make
the Dr*s Conversion no miracle at all, you are not to expect that I should
assign any miraculous Reasons for it but only such as are frequent and common
in the World; so I will begin with that which ever since the Creation of the
World has had a mighty influence upon men of all Countries, and Degrees, and
Religions. The greater part of Mankind, and especially our Dissenters at home,
love to christen it by the name of Conscience, but for my part, the best
English word I think we have for it, is INTEREST. What think you of this now?


Tim. To say the truth, there are abundance of ill-affected men about the Town,
that have trumped that unlucky Card upon the Dr. but for my part, I don't
believe it had any great share in his Reconciliation to the Government.
Therefore you had best guess again.


Freem. Nay, but prithee consider, dear Tim, what a lovely charming thing this
same Interest is, before we shut our hands of it: it has all the ear-marks of
Love, and Love, you know, works little less than Miracles. It conquers the
Young, and the Old are not able to withstand its Almightyship: it makes those
that can see, as blind as so many Beetles, and as for those that are blind, why
it is the best Oculist in the World, and recovers their Eyesight to all intents
and purposes.


Tim. No, no, all this shall not pass upon me I Will assure you.


Freem. Have a care Tim, I advise you, what you say against Five hundred pounds
per annum, name it you Rogue with fear and reverence, and fall down upon your
knees when you hear it mentioned in Company; Five hundred pounds a year is not
to be spoken scandalously of, honest Tim, it will buy a Coach and a pair of
Sunday-horses; it will purchase Petticoats and Commodes, the Polyglot and
Councils, and half the Non-Resistance in Christendom, with abundance of other
fine things, too tedious to be reckoned up.


Tim. Thou keep as great a pother here with thy Interest, as a scribbling
Courtier with his last Lampoon, or a School-philosopher with his newest set of
Distinctions, or what is equally as impertinent as a Country Fiddler with his
newest set of Tunes. But I can tell you for your comfort, that if you do not
guess better at your second Essay, than you have done at your first, you are
not in any great probability of finding out the Secret.


Freem. To proceed then, is the Dr. brought to a better Opinion of the
Abdication, or does he go altogether upon the merits of Forefaulture?


Tim. No, I suppose he does not, for if he does, the Lord have mercy, say I,
upon all his poor Passive Obedience.


Freem. Why other people, Tim, have store of Passive Obedience about them, as
well as the Dr. and yet they don't apprehend that it is a farthing the worse, or
that they have broke it at all. Suppose Tim you should find occasion, for
Reasons best known to your self, to remove a Bag of your Money from one
Goldsmith to another of better Reputation, would you not break that fellows
Head, who should have the impudence to tell you, you had broke your sum? Even
so in the business of Passive Obedience, the Dr. and some of his Brethren, have
only transferred it from K. James's hands, who, you know, is broke and ruined,
and a Statute of Bankrupt has passed against in Parliament, to K. William, who
can give them better Security for it: and Passive Obedience, I can tell you,
will be as acceptable to any Prince in Europe, at a good sum of Money to a
Banker.


Tim. Well, but this is not the point still, so try again.


Freem. Is the Dr. then reconciled to us by that verse in the Psalms; The Earth
is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof.


Tim. Why No is the word still; for I suppose, that that Text proves more than
the Question, and besides would serve a John of Leyden's turn as well as any
ones else.


Freem. But where there is a plain Conquest and an honest Cause, as well as a
legal Title to support the Conquest, that I believe cannot fail to make a
Convert. Come tell me now, have I hitupon the true reason or no?


Tim. For your satisfaction, sir, you are come pretty nigh the point, or else
some of the Dr's Friends have misinformed me as to this particular; though to
say the truth, this reason was every* whit as good all the last year, as it is
at this present moment, and I don't see that the reduction of Ireland has made
it the better.


Freem. Now we talk of Ireland, what say you, if the Dr. was resolved to hold
out till the taking of Dublin, and to surrender himself immediately when the
place was surrendered.


Tim. All as I can say to the Question, is, That the Dr. then may be retaken
from us again; for alas, sir, all the World can tell you* that Dublin is a
place of no considerable strength, and cannot hold out long against any Enemy,
especially if he have a Female friend in the Garrison. -- But, sir, you have
not as yet had the good fortune to light upon the most material motive, that
makes the greatest bustle about the Town, therefore once more make use of your
divining faculty.


Freem. No, I heartily thank thee, dear Tim, I shall pump my imagination no
more for the matter; I think I have drudged long enough in all conscience to
find it out and to employ my brains backward and forward any longer upon this
occasion, would be as wise a piece of trouble, as to lie waking all the night
in ones Bed, only to hear how the City-Weatherglasses, the Watchmen, vary every
hour, in their bellowing out of Rain, Frost, and Moonshine. Why, prithee Tim,
what do thou take me for, a Prophet, or a Conjurer?


Tim. For neither I swear; but tell me seriously, do thou not know what thing
it is that baffles Heroes, spoils Divines, turns the greatest Princes into
Milksops, makes Admirals lower their bloody Flags, and in fine, breaks all
Obligations, and governs all Mankind?


Freem. Why Interest I told you.


Tim. And what does Interest, mere Interest only do all this?


Freem. Why then it is Conscience, I say.


Tim. Conscience do you say? why just now Conscience, you told me, was but
another English word for Interest. And does nothing but bare Conscience (which
Adoniram Byfield of blessed Memory, defined to be a Cat-skin pouch to put Money
in) or bare Interest do all these fine things, which I just now mentioned to
you.


Freem. Why then it is a Coach and six Horses I tell you, and nothing in the
World else that I can fancy; for, you know, a Coach and Six, was Bishop
Parker's best Body of Divinity.


Tim. Worse and worse faith. And does a Coach and six Horses baffle Heroes,
spoil Divines, and make Milksops of Princes? Come, consider I say once more
upon the point, for it is impossible to miss it.


Freem. No Tim, pray excuse me; you see I have no tolerarable luck at guessing
to day; and besides, to tell you the truth, I hate this slavish pi^ce of
Drudgery, as heartily as Sir Will. Tem -- in his last Essays tells us, he hates
good* honest Drollery, as a Bookseller hates an un-selling Author, or a
Jacobite Printer does a surly Messenger of the Press.


Tim. Say you so sir? Nay, then I am resolved to lay it out so open to you,
that you must of necessity perceive it. Do not thou understand the meaning of
the Ital^an proverb, Piu tira un pelo di donna, che cento carra ^i bo^i.


Freem. Not I Tim, I no more understand the difference between Italian and
Arabic, than that learned Protestant Critic Mr. Rymer knows the difference
between the name of Callimachus and Epimenides.


Tim. Come then, were thou ever married, my honest friend? Ha! what say thou;


Freem. No sir, I bless Providence for it.


Tim. Not married say you? poor Rogue, thou art unacquainted I perceive with
the damned persecution of a Curtain-Lecture. Oh! dull, dull still; I cannot
imagine how to cure this stupidity of thine, thou art ten times duller than one
of Sh -- dwell's men of sense, or a Simile without a Sting, or an Expounder of
the Revelations, at the finding out stolen Silver-Spoons, or an old dozed fellow
of a House at the ingenious sport of Questions and Commands.


Freem. Why, I cannot help all this, Tim; if my stars made me so, it was their
fault, not mine.


Tim. Once more then I Will endeavor to relieve the weakness of thy
Apprehension, therefore listen to the following Rhimes about Adam and Eve.

When Eve the Fruit had tasted,
She to her Husband basted,
And chuck'd him on the Chin-a;
Dear Bud (quoth she) come taste this Fruit,
'Twill finely with your palate suit,
To eat it is no sin-a.
Do thou now comprehend my Meaning?


Freem. No, 'saith Tim, I am in the dark still; you have made me no wiser with
your dull story of Adam and Eve, than you would make a Cheapside Tradesman, by
telling him, that an Obstacle is an Impediment; or a walking Oxford-Dun, that
Motion is an Action from the Terminus a Quo of his Habitation, to the Terminus
ad quem of the Refectory.


Tim. Nay then, I am sensible thou art full as slow of Apprehension as the
famous Ierry Blackacre in the Play. I have but one trick left to bring you to it
at last, and if that fail, I must even serve thee as a stale City-wife serves
her dull rustic Prentice, when she has a mind to make him understand her
virtuous inclinations; that is, I must needs name the thing to thee in plain
downright broad English. But listen prithee:

As moody Job, in shirtless case,
With Collyflowers all over his Face,
Did on the Dunghill languish,
His Spouse thus whispers in his Ear;
Swear Husband, as you love me, Swear;
'Twill case you of your anguish.

Freem. Oh ho! now I begin to smell a Rat; your meaning is, That the Dr. has
been brought to swear at last through the virtue of a few Conjugal
Solicitations; is it not so, Tim?


Tim. Of a few Conjugal Solicitations do you say? No, I am afraid there were
abundance of them used in the present case. -- Well, dear Friend of mine, not
to be tedious with you, I must tell you, that you have made a shift at last to
hit my meaning. However, I would not have you report this matter as from me,
though I can safely wash my hands from the Guilt of inventing it, and all the
Town will do me the Justice, to own, that it is a common Story, and no more a
Secret than the Mole on the Rector of Exeter's Foot. Besides, you are desired
not to lay too great a stress upon the truth of it, but to follow that Advice,
which the Dr. you know gave upon another account, and so to make use of your
own Discretion.


Farewell.
FINIS.

