AN VNERRABLE CHURCH OR NONE BEING A REJOINDER TO THE UNERRING UNERRABLE CHVRCH
Against DR Andrew Sall's Repley entitled The Catholic Apostolic Church of
England.

Written by J. S. and dedicated to the most illustrious Prince, James Duke of
Ormond, etc.

He presented to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any
such thing. Ephesians. 5. 27.

Anno 1678.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
AFter twelve full months that this Treatise leyes by, ready for the print, it
comes to light; too late in the Authors opinion; better late than never, in the
judgment of others; and some perhaps will say, better never; each one as he
fancies; but the book, which is a Debtor Sapientibus and Insipientibus, to
the Wise and foolish; goes near hand to please both: to the foolish who would
not have it come out; it is some satisfaction, that its come out so late; to the
Wise, who so earnestly desired it, it is a satisfaction, that it comes out, tho
later than they expected it. They who liked the former Treatise, probably will
not mislike this: the blind with ignorance or prejudice will like neither. As
it has met with a foreign Printer who understands not the language, so it may
unluckily meet some Homely Reader who understands not the sense of it; the First
has been so ingenuous as to confess his Erratas, and give you a Catalogue of
them in the end of the book; but I do much fear^ the second will not be so
humble, as to acknowledge his Ignorance: Pardon the first, and Pray for the
second.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE James, Duke, Marquis, and Earl of Ormond,
Earl of Brecknock and Ossery, Viscount Thurles, Baron of Arklow, Lord of the
Regalities and Liberties of the County Palatin of Tipperary; Chancellor of the
Universities of Oxford and Dublin, Lord Lieutenant General, and General
Governor of his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of
Sommerset, the Cities of Bath and Wells, Lord heigh Steward of his Majesty's
Household, one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council, of his Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
MAY it please your Grace,
The Catholic Religion has been twice charged with foul crimes and errors,
before the supreme Tribunal of our Nation, in two distinct books, presented by
my Antagonist to his Excellency the Earl of Essex; It Is just I put in my
answer before the same Tribunal, which I humbly present to your Grace: and tho
I may not expect a favorable doom for the cause I defend, from so vigorous a
stickler of the Church of England, as your Grace has in all occasions appeared;
yet I may expect a check of the affront cast by my Adversary upon your noble
Predecessor the Earl of Essex, and upon your Grac's own Person; I accused him
of impiety in having passed his sentence of eternal damnation against his
Mecoenas, the Earl of Essex's Ancestors, who almost all dyed in the Roman
Catholic Religion, in which, he says, there is no Salvation: in his Reply he
denies that execrable Position to have dropped from his pen; but in the 2. Chap.
of this Treatise I prove evidently it did, and that it follows unavoidably out
of his Principles; does not the Author of such a Position deserve your Grac's
frown? And tho your generous contempt of the Envious of your glory, may forgive
him the injury he does to your own Person; but, may it please your Grace, you
will permit us to be deeply concerned for the wrong of so eminent a person,
who, by the general acclamation of our Realm, is the Darling of the Commons,
the Ornament of our Peers, the Cabinet of our Sovereign, the Oracle of the
State, and so prime a Pillar of the Protestant Church (worthy to be of a
better.) One of the glories of your most illustrious Family, May it please your
Grace, is to have had in it a Saint of so incomparable a courage in the defense
of Gods cause; of so undaunted a constancy in persecutions and adversities, as
S. Thomas Arch Bishop of Canterbury, by surnam Becket; in whose kindred the
Butlers of Ireland did ever yet religiously glory; the world revered him as a
most renowned Saint, which name he purchased with the price of his blood; My
Adversary blots your Grac's Scutchon, by effacing out of your family this
glorious Saint; he was he says, no Real Saint; he was but only a Titular one;
your Saints, says he, are but Titular Saints, who purchased their Titles by
public authority, as Earls and Lords do theirs page 228.

Nor is this the only injury he does your Grace; the world was persuaded your
Religion was Protestancy, and nothing else but Protestancy; and I believe your
Grace would esteem it an affront, to say your Religion is Quakerie or
Presbitery; but Dr. Sall is so kind to your Grace, as to give it you in print;
for he prefixes this Title to his 12. Chap. against N. N. The large extent of
Christian Religion professed in the Church of England; and there runs upon all
the Sects of the world, Lutheranism, Presbitery, Hugonotism, etc. and says all
are the Christian Religion professed in the Church of England. Your Grac's
Religion is the Christian Religion of the Church of England; and the Christian
Religion professed in the Church of England, says our Doctor, is Presbitery,
Quakerie Lutheranism and all other Sects; consider, may it please your Grace
what a Religion my Adversary gives you, One and the Same Religion with the
Quakers, Seekers, Mukhultonians. No Protestant in England will deny he is In,
and Of a Fallible Church; but no Protestant in England, I believe, will,
acknowledge he is of a Falls Church, actually plunged in horrid errors; but if
the Religion of the Church of England be one and the same with all those
Christian Sects, which profess contradictorily opposite Tenets, it must be a
falls Church, and deeply plunged in innumerable errors.

May it please your grace, if the Protestant Church be such as my Adversary
setts it forth, I wish you out of it with all my soul; and because I know its
not much better, what ever dress, he or any other may give it, Pardon me, May
it please your Grace, that without any If or And I wish you in that which is
the only true and Saving Church; that as your Grace is the Best of subjects,
you may be the best of Christians, and for an earthly Transitory Dukedom,
which coms short to your vnparallell'd Merits, you may enjoy an everlasting
Diadem, which is the constant Prayer of,

May it please Your Grace. Your most Dutiful and obedient Servant. J. S.

THE PREFACE.
THe plausible outside and fair cunning dress of I. S. his discourse in his
Unerring Vnerrable Church, says our Dr in the first Page of his Repley, has
put him to the trouble of searching into its hidden diseases by Incisions and
Dissections of Anatomy: he has spared us this labor I thank him, the distemper
of his discourse appears so visibly in its exterior parts that we need no
Incisions or dissections to lay it open: but since he has played the part of a
Surgeon, let him give me leave to act that of a Physician and present him a
Doss of Pills, which shall have nothing of bitterness, but what Truth carries
with it to ill tempered Pallats. Those rude expressions, Scurrilous, Impudent,
Liar, Impostor, Profligatly bold, and such flourishs (wherewith his book is
thick set) become very well the cause he defends, which is of no better Alloy;
yet it cannot but surprise me, to see him promise in his printed sermon such a
gentle temper, challenging only to a sober exchange of Scripture and reason;
and in his late book I find him so peevish and boisterous, that he yields to
none of his Reformed Writers in their acustomed style; but Alas! he who broke
thofe sacred ties which he had to God and his Church; its not to be admired he
infringes bonds of a smaler seyse: I confess I am apt to believe this coin is
not of our Drs stamping; nor yet of any school man of that noble Universitie of
Oxford, as some do imagine; doubtless it must have bin fetched from Billingsgate;
but our Dr is to be Blamed for permitting a book so filthily worded to be
published in his name, without any thing that might be a bait to the attention
of an ingenious Reader, but injuries, tales of Popes, Friars, parities of
turnips, rotten apples, and Spanish Proverbs, saluting Modesty a far of in his
13. Page; Pardon me, o Sacred Laws of Modesty, and this complement being made,
he bids Modesty A Dieu, and no more news of it in all his book, but rattles
and scolds beyond measure without any thing that relishs a scholar, or an
answer to his Antagonist; but some little words here and there (like few grains
of corn in a heap of chafe) without any connection, or sense, either to enervat
his Adversari's arguments or establish his own Doctrine; that you would think
it is some old book made to some other intent, and a new Title given it, for to
make it an answer to his Adversaries.

And this is the strain of Protestant Writers, the unhappiness of their cause,
and the goodness of ours being such that they cannot better their own, nor
worse ours, but by passion in lieu of reason, and invectives and calumnies,
instead of solid arguments; in which art the two late Champions which Ireland
has given to the Church of England, Dr Egan and Dr Sall, do so excel, that
none but the first could parallel the second: and I cannot but admire the
particular study which Dr Sall seems to make of tredding the footsteps of the
other, as if he did strive, to copy out his actions; Dr Egan cast of his habit
and became a Protestant; Dr Sall soon after did as much; Dr Egan goes to
England to reap the benefit of his change in Religion; Dr Sall runs after him
to do the like; Dr Egan preachs and prints his sermon, Dr Sall must do no less;
Dr Egan takes the degree of Bachiller in the Universitie of Oxford; Dr Sall
must have that of Doctor in the College of Dublin; Dr Egan styles himself
Confessor General of Ireland; Dr Sall think's Irish Titles to be too mean, and
fetchs them from Spain, Lector of Moral Theology in the Royal College of
Salamanca etc. God bless the couple; its no small glory and comfort for the
Church of England to have got them, and I wonder why they begin to be weary of
them.

But tho he be very bitter all along in his book, in no where does his
irascible faculty appear so sharp edged as in the defense of his imaginary
Titles of Professor of Divinity in Tudela and Palencia in Spain; Lector of
Moral Divinity in the Royal College of Salamanca; Professor of Controversies
in the Irish College of Salamanca: He will prove me a Liar, and a Profligatly
bold Impostor for disputing him these Titles; and how? marry by an Epigram made
to his praise by a Prince; By Testimonial Letters of the great credit he had in
Spain; by a Letter of a Venerable Prelat written in his commendation, and by a
License under the Inquisitor General's hand for to read prohibited books, in
quality of a Lector of Controversies in the Irish College. I beseech you good
Reader ask him has he kept the testimonial letters of his Priestly Ordination;
it is a thousand to one if he has not lost them; but the testimonial letters of
his great credit and empty Titles he has carefully preserved. But that you may
see how far he is from proving me a Liar, and a Profligatly bold Impostor;
remember, I pray, what he advanced in his printed, Sermon and observe what his
testimonial letters import.

In his Sermon he told us he was Professor of Controversies in the Irish
College and his Auditory were Spaniards, french and Irish: will not any who
reads this, and knows not the Drs humor, conceive that this Professorship of
Controversies was some public employment, attended by so great an Auditory? I
replied there was no professor of Controversies in the Irish College with
Spanish and french Auditors; and this I do again auerr, and will prove it; for
I do not deny but that either he, who is there in the office of Rector, or some
other Jesuit who lives with him, (commonly he is alone) has the Title and name
of Lector of Controversies; but this is but an empty Title, (as the Duke of
Lorrain is called King of Jerusalem,) and never yet had any other exercise, but
to teach half a douzen lads, Collegians of the College; and this very slender
exercise itself, it has it but very seldom; but never yet was it seen, or
permitted that any extern Schoolars either Spaniards, french, or Irish should
enter into the College to be taught: as I write this I receive a letter from
the Rector of the Irish College of Salamanca, a Man of credit for his virtue
and learning; he writes thus in answer to my letter. Some time there has bin in
this College the Title of Professor of Controversies, but a mere Title without
any exercise, because the employment of that Person, was only to repass and
expound to the youth of the College, their Dictats, which they write in
school; nor was it ever permitted that any extern scholar should com into the
College to be taught, but only the Domestic Scholars of the house: sometimes
perhaps, he that was in that employment did read some lesson out of Bellarmin
or Becan, which Mr Sall might have don; but as for to have bin Professor of
Moral Divinity in the Royal College of this town; there is no such thing; for
there was never yet any Professor of Moral Divinity in it: as for to be Lector
of Divinity in Tudela and Palencia; in Tudela there never was any Divinity
taught; but there is there a Master of Cases of Conscience, whose Auditory
never exceeds the number of four or five, and commonly he has none: in Palencia
there is no Divinity taught that ever I could hear of. Thus goes the letter from
the Irish College of Salamanca, and you may see, that Dr Sall's censure
against I S. of Profligat boldeness and a Liar, has more of good English than
of truth and common civility.

His testimonial letters of his great credit prove just nothing; for Example, a
Prince forsooth made an Epigram in his praise; suppose that be true; what then?
do not we all know the privileges of Poets and Painters? a Prelat banished,
meets him in Pa^plona in Spain, and expecting he might be of some service or
comfort unto him in that strange Country, he writes in his commendation, what
he would have him write, and he thought might avail for to stop him there;
what does all that amount unto? That the Prelat was desirous to have a friend
and Country man in that City; and seeing him teaching Divinity, without any
further examine believed him a brave man: His license under the Inquisitor
General's hand for reading heretical books as being Professor of Controversies;
proves, at most, that he had that Title; but says nothing of the exercise of
it; which was no more but to be a Pedagogue, as we have said, to half a douzen
Collegians, and says nothing of the Spanish and french Auditorie: Our Dr tells
us there are Several Jesuits now living in Ireland, who were Students in
Divinity, when he was a Professor of Moral Theology and Controversies in
Salamanca, who did see him sit with the other Lectors of Divinity examining
yearly their sufficiency for promotion. Never did man speak less truth and
with more courage; had not misfortune frustrated, or at least delayed our
hopes, of seeing that witty Treatise entitled Haudkins Letters, the product of
an exquisit judgment, and of a no less learned man; we should have an exact and
pleasant account of the Dr^'s great employment and credit in spain: but since
he has cited some Jesuits now living in Ireland for spectators of his glory in
Salamanca; I will declare what they depose, and I have that satisfaction of
their truth and sincerity, that I am sure they would not for any passion
either impose upon me, or diminish of any man's credit: two of them knew him in
Salamanca, and so far from shouldering with the Lectors of Divinity in the
Royal College, that his credit did not reach to be thought worthy, to carry
their books; never was he of so much credit as to be either invited or
permitted to argue, as much as in their Domestic Theses; never was there any
Moral Divinity taught in the Royal College; nor Controversies in the Irish
College but as we mentioned before; never was he a Coexaminator with the other
Lectors of Divinity, but in one occasion, that some Lectors of Divinity being
absent in the time of examen, they honored the Charge of Rector of the Irish
College which he had, by calling him to be one of the Examinators: and if of
this little accidentarie substitution he be so full, as to reckon himself among
the Examinators, and to cope with the Lectors of Divinity of that Royal
College; likly, if at any time, some one did consult him in a case of
Conscience, when he was in Salamanca is all the ground he has, for to call
himself, Lector of Moral Theology in the Royal College; and by this Rule, if
he has heard any on's Confession in spain, he might have called himself
Confessor General of Spain with as much reason as his friend Egan styles
himself Confessor General of Ireland.

But will you see how this man, who so mightily magnifies himself, speaks of
others; not well, to be sure; for self admirers, are ordinarily despisers of
others: in his 5. chap. he touchs that ridiculous Consecration of his first
Protestant Bishops at the Nags-head Tavern in Cheapside, and says, it is a
slanderous fable invented by Papists, long since refuted, and lately revived by
a Person of a great calling, to his shame and confusion; being convicted of
impostures by B. Bramhal: And dare you, Dr, to charge a Person of so great a
calling with impostures? a Person of so known honor and reputation, with shame
and confusion? if, to have given signal testimonies of his Duty to his exiled
Sovereign in the most renowned Courts of the world; if, to have the whole Royal
family for Panegyrists of his Loyalty and good services, be a shame; you may
accuse him of it: if, to have had Rome and Portugal for admirers of his Wit and
learning; if, to have given to the world many learned Treatises; if, to have
been the only man named in the last proclamation for the banishment of Prelates
and Regulars be a confusion, and not a proof of his merit, that he was singl'd
out, as the David of our Camp; if this be a confusion, you may charge him with
it: if to be honored and esteemed by the best of Catholics and Protestants; and
hated by none, but by the worse of both, be a shame and confusion; you may
charge him with it: if to have been esteemed and aplauded in the Community,
whereof he was once a Member, and from which nothing, but an indispensable
necessity of the Church, and king's service could separate him; which he no
sooner performed, and the Charge he now has, was offered him; but he
religiously sacrificed that Eminent charge in the hands of the superior to God,
earnestly asking to return to that Community; which was denied most prudently,
because it was known his Eminent Talents would shine with more lust to the
glory of God, and benefit of the Church in that great employment, than in a
private life; if you call this a shame and confusion, you may charge him with
it; but to call his convincing discourse of the Nullity of your Clergy, his
shame and confusion, and your B. Bramhal's weak Repley a conviction of his
impostures, is to betray your judgment, to be an injust balance of what is
honorable, glorious, judicious and witty.

And truly you have given no small testimony of this, in that great Title you
give your Book; The Catholic Apostolic Church and faith of England: as you
hope to be saved, Dr, did not you laugh, when you were writing that Title; if
the frights of a biased conscience can permit you to laugh? when first I
viewed it, and met in the Frontispice of the book, The Theater of Oxford, I
thought it was a Comedy acted in that Universitie; but since that he will have
it pass for a serious discourse of Religion, we must demonstrat how ill
qualified his Church is for to carry so glorious a Title; and tho this has
been sufficiently evidenc't in my former Treatise, and my arguments in no wise
answered; yet I will again so enforce the truth in this Rejoinder, that my
impartial Reader will I hope be convinced that the Roman Catholic Religion: is
the true Catholic, Apostolic Religion; and that Christ has no Church on earth,
if there be not an Unerring Unerrable Church, and as I, to shun a tedious
repetition of what I formerly said, do omit the strong arguments of my former
book, which convincingly prove the points here handled; so I hope my Reader for
to be fully satisfied, will not be content with reading this Treatise, but will
also cast an eye upon the former: As neither passion nor prejudice has any
share in my intention, so I hope my Reader will lay both aside in the perusal
of my endeavors, which aim at nothing but his spiritual advantage, as being

His friend in C. J.

THE INTRODUCTION CONTAINING SOME FEW Reflections Upon the first Part of Doctor
Sall's Book in answer to his Adversary N. N.
THE Doctor has divided his Book into two Parts; the first against N. N. the
second against J. S. and tho I am directly concerned in the second; yet it
might be unkindly taken by my Reader, that I should let the first pass
untouched. I do most profundly reuere the eminent pen of N. N and am
sufficiently persuaded he wants not my concurrence for to answer Doctor Sall;
but I am no less convinced by the experience I have of his ciuility, that he
will pardon me, that I satisfy the public expectation (as I am informed) with
this bries discourse, while himself prepares a more acomplisht confutation of
his Antagonist in a compleater work: for I do not intend an exact Anatomy of
his whole discourse; but some few reflections upon the chief heads of it; yet such
as will, I hope, sufficiently refute his errors, disclose his forgery and
insincerity, and help my Reader to a more perfect understanding of what I
discourse in my Book: therefore I premiss these Reflections by way of an
Introduction to my Treatise.

In his 2. Chapt: against N. N. he pretends to prove the Church and faith of
England to be Catholic Apostolic, and discourses thus: Whatever Church that
faith is professed in, which was taught in the first called Catholic
Apostolic Church; that Church and faith is trvly Catholic Apostostolic: In the
Church of England that faith is taught and believed; because, says he, the
faith taught in that ancient Church is contained in the Apostles Creed, and in
those of the four first General Councils, and the Church of England professes
and belieues all the cont^nts of those creeds; therefore the Church and faith
of England is truly Catholic Apostolic: for, says he page: 17. if the contents
of those Creeds were sufficient to gain the name of Catholic Apostolic to the
Ancient Church, first so called; why should not they be sufficient to make a
Church Catholic Apostolic in all other ages.

The weakness of this discourse is evidenc't by a clear instance. In the
Apostles days, when there was no creed but theirs, the faith then taught was
the system of Articles contained in that creed; the Church was then Catholic
Apostolic by believing the contents of it; in what ever Church that Doctrine and
faith was taught, that Church was truly Catholic Apostolic; but when in
succeeding ages the four first General Councils delivered their Creeds and
declared some Verities opposed by Heretics; to be revealed Truths; then for to
be a Catholic Apostolic Church, it was not sufficient to believe the contents
of the Apostles Creed, but it was needful to believe the contents of the four
Councils Creeds: Observe I pray Reader, that all Heretics will prove their own
Church to be Catholic Apostolic by our Doctors discourse, for (say the Arrians,
Nestorians and Pelagians) we believe the contents of the Apostles creed, which
alone, before any Council of Nice, Constantinople, etc. gained the name of
Catholic Apostolic to the Church in the Apostles days; and say they, indeed it
must appeur strange (they are your own wonds page: 17.) to any impartial man
that the system of Articles contained in that Creed, which gained the name of
Catholic Apostolic to the Church, first so called in the Apostles days, should
not be sufficient to make a Church Catholic in all times. This is your
argument, Doctor which the Arrians, Pelagians, and Nestoria^s borrow from you
to prove their Churchs and faiths to be Catholic and Apostolic, as well as
yours: does it prove them to be such, or not? if not; nor does it prove your
Church to be Catholic Apostolic: you must answer them, as we answer you; that
in the Apostles days until the four first General Councils, the system of
Articles contained in the Apostles Creed was sufficient to give the name of
Catholic Apostolic to the Church which believed them; but when afterward the
Church by its General Councils declared other Verities opposed by Heretics, to
be revealed Truths; then for to gain the name of Catholic Apostolic Church, it
was not sufficient to believe the contents of the Apostles Creed, but it was
requisite also to believe those Verities declared by the Councils to be revealed
Truths, tho not expressed in the Apostles Creed: even so we say to you; tho
the Apostles and four first General Councils creeds were once sufficient to
give the name of Catholic Apostolic; but after that new declarations were made
of other Verities by succeeding Councils; for to gain the name of Catholic
Apostolic, its not sufficient to believe the contents of those Creeds but that
we must belleve all verities proposed to us by the Church in succeeding ages
and Councils to be revealed Truths: And this our Doctor cannot gainsay, for
page 60. he confesses that Inferior Verities are not contained in the Creeds;
and yet are to be explicitly believed whenever we are ascertained that they
are revealed Truths.

In the 8. Chapt. of the Venerring Vnerrable Church, and in the 9th. Chapt. of
this Treatise I prove the Doctrine of Protestancy (as condistinct from
Catholicism) to be but mere Probable Doctrine; (Read I pray those Chapters) but
its evident that the Doctrine contained in those Creeds, nor the Doctrine
believed by the Ancient Church, which gained it the name of Catholic Apostolic,
is not Probable Doctrine; therefore its evident that the Protestant Doctrine, as
condistinct from Catholecism, is neiher contained in those Creeds nor was
believed by the Ancient Catholic Apostolic Church. The Ancient Church believed
S. Peter and his successors supremacy, as I will prove in the 14. chap. of this
Treatise; they believed the Canon of Scripture (whither this, or that; it
matters not for the present) they believed the Sacrements) if two, or seven I
will not dispute now) their Matter, form, and effects; you believe Figurative
Presence; the Kings supremacy; Communion in both Kinds; and not a syllable of
all these in the Creeds; how can you then, affirm that all the Doctrine believed
by the Ancient Church first called Catholic Apostolic, is contained in the
Creeds?

In his 3. c. there is nothing worth the taking notice of, but two gross
calumnies; the one that Bellarmin l. 3. de Ecclesia. c. 20. (and that book has
but 17 chapt) teachs, that to be a member of the Church, it is sufficient to
profess exteriourly, without any interior Assent, the Popish Doctrine and
supremacy: the second is against two Popes, Paul the fourth, and Pius the
fourth; that they should have offered to Queen Elizabeth to ratify the
Reformation, if she did own their Supremacy, and them to be the Authors of the
Reformation: such a ridiculous story could never be better couched than in our
Doctor's book. Yes indeed; the Pope would become a Protestant to currie favor
with Queen Elizabeth and make the Emperor, the Kings of Spain, and France, and
all Catholic Princes his Enemies? the Pope would become a Protestant, for to get
a Bishopric, or Pension from Queen Elizabeth (for this is all he could expect,
if perhaps he did not expect to marry her) and forfeit his Popedom; for a Pope
who becoms an Heretic loses his Dignity and reuenews: and can it sink into any
man's brains but of Dr. Sall, that an Italian would make such an exchange?

His 4th. chap. has as little of substance as his 3d. some few fragments of
Suarez his Doctrine, without any answer, but, How. can Suarez make this out
etc. Suarez proves irresistably that the Protestant faith, where with they
believe the contents of the Creeds, is no Divin faith for true Catholic
Apostolic faith, must be an infallible undoubted Assent; Protestants can have
no such, whereas they have no undoubted infallible Motive or ground to rest
their assent upon, as I have largely and conuincingly proved in the Unerring
Vnerrable Church and in the 10. chap. of this Treatise.

From the 5th. to his 12. chap. he rambles upon the valid and legal Ordinatioe
of his Protestant Clergy and will not allow that Pageant of the Nags-ead
Consecration; a ridiculous forgery he says invented by Papists: but before we
enter into a nearer inspection of this matter, we will premiss two things;
first; that for a true and valid Consecration of a Bishop, besides the Form, or
words of Consecration pronounced by the Ordainers; Imposition of true Bishops
hands is requisite essentially; and if this be wanting the Ordination is quite
Null; secondly it is requisite to tell you the passage of the Nags-head Tavern;
it was thus.

Queen Elizabeth, to maintain by sacrilege the Royal Diadem, which by
injustice she usurped against the undoubted Right of the family of the Stuarts;
recalled the Reformation, which Queen Mary had banished from the land; and
pereiving the Prelatic Portie of it, was the mosl useful for her ends; she
resolved to have Bishops, and named for that dignity, Parker, Horn, Grindal
Ievvel, Scory and others: No Protestant Bishops Bishops o^f Henry the VIII. and
Edward the VI. were then alive; that spurious Race of Prelacy having ended in
Ridley and Latimer, executed in Queen Mary's time for Heresy and Treason: and
our new elected Bishops were Non plust for to be consecrated; because no
Catholic Bishop would undertake it: their first address was to Richard Creagh.
Lord Primat of Armagh, then Prisoner in the Tower of London, offering him his
release if he did lay his hands on them; but he religiously preferred an
innocent imprisonment to so criminal a liberty. Then they addressed themselves
to B: Landaff, a Walsh B: who at their first on set, gave some marks of
flexibility; but Bonner B: of London threatening to excommunicat him if he
attempted any such thing in his Diocese; he would not yield to their
importunity; they lead him to the Nags-head Tauern at Cheapside in London, with
a design to put him in a merry humor, and thereby to persuade him: but they
came short of their expectation. Scory, a resolut blade, nothing danted at this
repuls, resolved not to let slip a Bishopric for want of Popish Ceremonies:
what, quoth he? do they think we cannot be Bishops if we be not greased?
(alluding to the Chrism, where with Bishops are anointed.) and commanding
Parker and his Camerades to kneel, bid them; Get up lord Bishorps of England:
and this was that famous Consecration of the Nags-head Tauern in Cheapside;
without any other Keys but those of a Tavern, nor any Chrism but a glass of
Wine. This is no new story, like that of Mr Mason's forged Registers; Mr Neale
a professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford, who forfeited his chair
for not taking the Oath of supremacy, was an eye wittness of the whole Passage,
and related it to several Bishops: Bonner and other Catholic Bishops then
living related it to Kellison, Persons, Holyvvood, Champney, Reynolds, Harding,
Stapleton, and other Catholic Writers, who immediately published it in print and
cried out against the Nullity of Parker and his Associats Ordination, as
appears in their Books, and particularly in the Nullity of the Protestant
Church and Clergy, writ by the Author of that most learned and solid Treatise
of Religion and government.

Now we will demonstrat that this passage is true, and no invention of Papists
as our Doctor pretends; and that the Protestant Bishops were not other wise
ordained, than as is related. For we may without offense, and ought to believe
that Parker, Horn, and their other Associats, in their Ordination acted
conformably to the Laws and Statuts of the land; to the Acts of Parliament; to
the Doctrine generally professed by the Drs. of the Reformation; to their own
Bible, and 39. Articles of England; is it a calumny, or is it vnlykly that they
did? But in that Ordination, tho ridiculous it be in itself, and you confess it
to be, there is nothing (the circumstance of a Tavern excepted) but what is
warranted positiuely, and conformable to all those: observe Reader that if that
Ordination was in a Tavern (which the Author of the Nullity of the Protestant
Clergy convincingly proves) is not material for our present Controversy; the
Choking bit is not that; but if that Consecration was performed without any
imposition of true Bishops hands, only by virtue of the Queens letters Patents,
and Election; and this I will prove by the Acts of Parliaments, by the Doctrine
of the Church and State, by the Protestant Bible and by their 39. Articles of
England.

That there is no other Priesthood in the law of Grace but Baptism; that all
Christians as well Women as Men are Priests and equally empowered. For to
administer the Sacraments and to exercise Spiritual functions; this Doctrine I
say sprung up with the Reformation, and was generally taught and practiced by
the reformed Brethren, grounded upon that text of S. Peter 1. 2. Christ made us
all a holy nation, a Royal Priesthood, and Priests to his father. Whosoever is
a Christian, says Luther l. de capt. Babyl. let him believe we are all
equally Priests; that we have all the same power for to administer the
Sacraments. Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, and many other Reformed Writers, quoted by
Brierly tract. 2. c. 2. sec. 10. deliver the same Doctrine: this Doctrine was
commonly taught ad practiced in king Henry the VIII. and Edward the VI. time;
for tho Henry the VIII. was no Protestant, yet his passion against the Pope was
so outragions, that he permitted this Doctrine to be preached and practiced; and
in his and king Edwards time, Latimer, Ridley, and Barlovv without any
consecration by imposition of Bishops hands, exercised the functions of
Bishops, and sat in Parliament in that quality; and Fox in his Martirol page
1064. relates that when Latimer and Ridly were sentenced to death, in Queen
Mari's time; Doctor Brooks Bishop of Gloucester, who degraded them, declared
they were degraded of their Priesthood, and not of their Episcopacy, because
they had not been duly and truly consecrated.

Nor was this the practice and Doctrine of the first Reformers only, but also of
the whole Protestant Church, declared in their 39. Articles, which is the
stress of the whole Protestant Religion, and the Creed of their Church: Crammer
and his Associats in ^ings Edwards time composed them; in the 25. Article they
declare five of the Sacraments, (whereof Holy Oder is one) to be none, as having
no visible sign, and consequently no imposition of hands, instituted by Christ
for their administration: and in the 23. Article they deny any Caracter of
Priesthood (and consequently of Episcopacy) but Baptism, and that the office of
Priesthood is common to all Christians. But Parker and his Camerades newly
consecrated Bishops by Virtue of the Queens Letters Patents and Election,
judging that Crammer had not sufficicienly declared the sufficiency of the
Prince or Magistrates Election for Episcopal Consecration, and the vselessness
of imposition of Bishops hands, they assembled together the year 1562. and set
out a new Impression of the 39. Articles, and corrected the 25th. wording it
thus: Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation,
Penance, Order, Matrimony and Extrem-Vnction, are not to be counted Sacrements
of the Gospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt follovving of
the Apostles; parily are but states of life allowed in Scripture, but yet have
not the nature of Sacraments, as Baptism and the lords supper, for that they
have not any visible sign or Ceremony (observe ordained by Christ. You see
that not only the first Reformers and Drs. of the Church of England, but that
the first Protestant Bishops and 39. Articles or Greed of their Church declare
that no visible sign or Ceremony, consequently no imposition of Bishops hands
was instituted by Christ, or is needful for Episcopal Consecration, It Is also
the Doctrine of their Reformed Bible; for Parker, Horn, Ievvel and the rest, not
contented to correct the 39. Articles, corrected also the Bible; theyset out a
new translation of it that very year 1562. interpreting the word Kirotonia
which S. Hierom and all Ancient Drs. interpreted Imposition of Hands; they
turned it, Ordination by Election to make good, that the Princes Election was
sufficient without any Imposition of Bishops hands; and this Interpretation
held until king James his time, then the true letter was restored to the Bible
and Imposition of hands put in.

Now it remains we show that this Ordination by Election without any
Imposition of hands, is warranted by the laws of the Land and Acts of
Parliament; which if we do evidence, our Doctor is much to be blamed for
saying that Ordination of Parker and his Camerades at the Nags-head Tavern was
ridiculous, and incredible; for what can there be more Credible, than that
Parker and his Associats did, in their Ordination, conform themselves to the
Laws of the kingdom, to the Doctrine of their Bible, Church and 39. Articles?
and how can Dr Sall or any Protestant say, an Ordination that is conformable to
all these, is ridiculous. But to the point: Be pleased to read the Stat. 8.
Eliz. 1. its thus: And by the same Act and Statut there is given to the Queen,
her heirs etc full povv^rand authority by Letters Patents under the great seal
of England from time to time to assign, name and authorize such Persons or
Person, as she and they shall think convenient and meet for to exercise use,
occupy and execute under her Heighness all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences and authority in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical power or Jurisdiction within this Realm. You see by this Statut
that the Queen might have authorized Scory Couerdale or any private Person or
Persons, for to ordain Bishops: why then do you say its incredible that these
Blades, should in virtue of the Queen's letters Patents only, have consecrated
one an other?

But hear yet the Queens Commission to ratify and confirm that which you call
ridiculous Consecration, dispensing with any defect in them or any of them in
their State, condition and faculty: We do supply by our Soueraign and Royal
Authority, if any thing be, or shall be wanting in these things which ye are
to do by our commands, either in your selves or any of you, or in your
condition state or faculty which by the statuts of this our kingdom, or by the
laws of the Church are required or necessary; the time and necessity of affairs
exacting this. And if you will know what thing was this which was wanting in
the Persons commissioned by the Queen for to Consecrat Parker; what necessity
of time and affairs obliged her to dispense in these things; read Holywood de
inuestiganda Christi Ecclesia, and you will be satisfied; he relates that Dr
Alabaster asked Mr Brancrof^ B. of London in the beginning of king James his
reign how his first Protestant Bishop Parker was ordained and by whom?
Brancroft answered, I hope in case of Necessity a Priest may be sufficient for
to ordain a Bishop; granting tacitly thereby, that Parkers Consecrators were
no Bishops but Priests; and there was a necessity as the Queen herself
confesses of making use of a Priest for ordaining; because there was no Bishop
who would consecrat him: by this you may see what was wanting in the state and
condition of Parkers Consecrators, and what was the necessity of time and
affairs which forced the Queen to dispense with them. And because that
immediately after this consecration of Parker and his Companions in the
Nags-head Tavern, some exclaimed against the Validity of it, becauseit was don
without Bishops, the Queen for to silence all such exceptions, and allay all
doubts, declares in the same Statut.

And further for to avoid all ambiguities and questions that might be objected
against the lawful consecrations, inuestings, and Confirmations of said
ArchBishops and Bishops (that is to say Parker and his fellows) her heighness in
her Letters Patents under the great seal of England directed to any
ArchBishop, Bishop, or others (observe the word Others, that is to say neither
ArchBishop nor Bishop) for the consecration, inuesting, and confirming of any
Person elected to the office or dignity of Archbishop or Bishop, has not only
used such words and sentences, as are acustomed to be used by king Henry and
Edward, her Majesty's father and Brother, in their like letter Patents made for
such causes; but also has used and put in her Majesti's letters Patents many
other words and clauses whereby her Majesty by her supreme Authority has
dispensed with all causes, doubts, or any imperfection or desability that can
or in any way may be objected against the same, as by her Majesty's letter
Patents remaining of Record more plainly may be seen.

Lay prejudice aside, and quando animositatem qua teneris Viceris, tunc
Veritatem poteris tenere, qua vincaris; S. Agust. l. 6. cont. Jul. c. 2. lay
says the saint unto you, that animositie and prejudice aside which possesses
you, and you will possess the Truth, which is Victorious against you; for if
passion does not pinfold your reason you cannot but see in these Statuts; first
that the Parliament professes a power in the Queen for to authorize not only
ArchBishops and Bishops, but Others, who are neither, for to Consecrat Ordain
and inuest Bishops; secondly you see the Queen in her commission did dispense
in the inability and incapacity of the Consecrators by her supreme Power; which
incapacity the Commission says was in their state and condition: can it be
denied but that they were by their State and condition enable and incapable?
and wherefore? but because they were not Bishops;

Against such clear evidences of the Nullity of your first Protestant Bishops
Ordination; and of the truth of the Nags-head story, our Dr Brings nothing, tho
he keeps a great bustle in many Pages, but Mr Francis Masons Records, which
relate the place time, circumstances, and names of the Consecrators of Parker,
who were Barlow Hodkings, Scory and Couerdale, who by Imposition of hands
ordained Parker in Lambeth Chapel: but to say nothing, if those Consecrators
were themselves true Bishops, I will show that those Masonian Registers are
forged, and as falls, as their Prelatic Ordination is Null: for, Parker's
Ordination was the year 1559. as those Registers do relate; not only Mr Neale;
an eye witness of that passage exclaimed against the Nullity of it, but Bishop
Bonner ad many other Catholics both of our Clergy and layetie; whereupon those
Statuts of Parliament were made to silence them, Harding Champney Fitsimons,
Holywood and other Writers, printing against it, challenged Parker and Jewel to
name the place and Persons by whom they were ordained; We say to you Mr Jewel
(says Harding in Confut. Apol. printed an. 1566. and to each of your
Companions, show us the Register of your Bishops; show vt the letters of your
Orders; but Orders; you have not; for who could give you that, of all your new
Ministers, which themselves had not This was the challenge; this was the clamor
of our Authors; thus they pressed those new mock Bishops Parker and his
Camerades to name their Ordainers; that their Ordainers were no Bishops, and
consequently could make none: If any snch as Masons Registers were then extant,
relating the Pomp of Ceremonies, the concurs of Nobility at Lambeth
Consecration, why were not those Registers produced then? was there any thing
more obuions than to produce them, and by them, silence, and confound our
Writers, and assert the credit of the Protestant Church, which stood at the
stake? But not a word did Parker, Jewel, Horn or any other Protestant Writer
speak of those post-dated, enchanted Records; nor did ever any Catholic hear
of them, until the year 1613. that is 54. years after Parkers Consecration: do
not these Registers think you, smell strongly of forgerie?

Our Dr tells us, that in all prudence we are to rely, as to matter of fact,
upon the public Records of the kingdom; its very true Dr, when the Records are
not justly suspected, and carry, such visible marks of forgerie. But good Dr,
stand to that Principle, that, as to matter of fact we are to rely on the
public Records of the Kingdom. And which do you judge to be the most authentic
and public Record? Mason's Registers, which, as they lay hid for 54. years (if
any there were) in a private man's hands; so they might have been easily
corrupted ad changed? or the Statuts and Acts of Parliament, which are kept
with the care and vigilance we all know from corruption? there is no man of
common sense but will rely with more satisfaction upon these second: see then
what Masons Records say; that Parker was consecrated by true Bishops: and what
say the Statuts of Parliament? that his Consecrators were defective, enable,
and incapable by their state, condition and faculty, for to ordain. Masons
Record import that the Consecrators needed no dispensation from the Queen, for
to consecrat Parker, because he was ordained by true Bishops: the Acts of
Parliament import that they did need a dispensation; and that tho Queen did
dispense with them in their State and Condition. Which of these two will you
believe, Masons Records, or the Statuts of Parliament?

Our Dr says these Records were shown to diverse of our Churchmen the year
1614. yes; but why not the year 1600. and the other years upwards un till
Parkers Ordination, when they were so earnestly called for by our Writers?
because they were not then hatched: he says those Churchmen, after having
perused and examined those Records, judged them to be true; and what then? that
proves not the truth of your Registers, but their sincerity; for men of
sincerity and honor are slow in believing such a horrid forgery, until they
see good proofs for it: and tho they had judged them to be true, what does
their opinion signify, who lived 54. years after, against the testimony of Mr
Neale who was an eye witness of the passage; against the testimony of B. Bonner
who lived then, and in London; against the testimony of so many illustrious
Writers, who immediately writ against it, challenged to produce their Records
and letters of their Otders, and were never answered? you know it is a
sacrilege to reordain a Priest or Bishop duly consecrated; you know also it is
our practice to ordain such of your Ministers as are converted, and will be
Priested; and would B. Bonner, would Mr Neale, Harding, Kellisson Fitssimons
and the rest of our Catholic Prelates, and Authors, who lived in Parkers time,
and suffered so much for their Religion and conscience, induce the whole
Church, by misinformation and impostures to ordain your Ministers converted had
they not assurance that your Parker and Associats Ordination was Null and
ridiculous.

Nor are we Roman Catholics only who plead against this Nullity: Remember
that in the long Parliament, the Bishops were excluded out of the house of
Lords; and an Independent Lord made a speech to prove that exclusion to be
just, because the Protestant Bishops were no true Bishops for want of
Ordination. Remember the Puritans reproach against your Church, that the
profane Order and consecration of Protestant Bishops had its beginning in a
corner: Do they allude think you to the Chapel of Lambeth* or to the Nags-head
Tavern? look with an impartial eye upon this whole discourse, and if passion
does not prodigiously blind you, you will confess, the Nags-head story to be no
more ridiculous than true; your Consecration to have been without any
imposition of hands; and consequently Null; and whereas all your Prelates derive
their caracter from Parker and his Associats, your Clergy is but a Mockery, and
your Bishops but laymen with Rockets.

But our Dr is resolved to be quits with us, since that we have made his
Bishops Leymen, he will not rest till he dethrones our Popes: Not one true Pope
does he grant us since Gregory the XIII. The Elections of all the subsequent
were quite Null: this is a rare and new discovery: but he says it is not new;
for he says it was made long since by a learned pen, a Roman Catholic, (he
does not name him) who presented a book to king James, and by him to the rest
of the Christian Princes, showing the necessity of gathering a Council against
Paul the V. the Nullity of whose Election, and of his Predecessors he pretends
to prove; and our Dr makes it a convincing argument of the strength and truth
of this book, that it was never answered by any of our Church; and I think its
rather a concluding argument of the Nonsense and frivolousness of the book (if
any such book was) that no Catholic Author did think it worth his labor to
answer it: and if that book did make out, or with any appeerance of reason did
show the Nullity of the Elections of thoses Popes, and particularly of Paul the
V. then living, I know none to whom it would be more wellcom than to some
ambitious Cardinal, who in hopes of getting the Tiara for himself would
patronize and publish it: But when, notwithstanding the many enemies the Popes
have in England, to advance any thing that might be to his desadvantage, we
see, that that book was in its first birth so little applauded, that it never
deserved to peep out of England, for ought we know; that it never deserved any
answer from Catholics, nor yet to have been in any great Vogue among
Protestants; this indeed is sufficient to persuade us, that the book, if any
such has been, had as little of substance, as the author of it had of wit and
Religion.

For was the man in his Wits, or what an opinion did he expect could the world
have of his Religion, who went to a Ptotestant king for to have a Council
conuen'd against the Pope? could it sink into his brains, if he had any, that a
Protestant Prince could be so fit an instrument for that undertaking; as the
Emperor, the kings of France and Spain, or some Catholic Monarch? This is the
Book, and this book and Author is the warrant our Dr gives you for all the
clutter he keeps in many leaves he spends in proving the Nullity, forsooth, of
our Popes; and if the book itself deserved no answer, much less do the
fragments of it copied out by Dr Sall deserve any.

To his 12th. Chap. he prefixes this Title; The Vast extent of Christian
Religion Professed in the Church of England; and in four long Chapters he runs
upon the Sects in England, Holland France, Poland, Russia, and what part not of
Europe; nay he reckons up all the Schismatic's of Greece, and all these he
says, are of the Religion professed in the Church of England. And is not the
Religion of the Church of England a monstrous Body that is composed of so many
members, and so deformed? be a Presbiteran be a Lutheran, be a Quaker, be a
Seeker, be what you will, so you be not a Roman Catholic; you are of the
Religion of the Church of England. Read I pray the first Chapter of this
Treatise where I prove out of the Drs. own Concessions that these Sects are
Heresies; read also the 8. Chap. of my former Treatise of the Unerring
Vnerrable Church, where I convincingly proved that since the Roman Catholic
faith is a true saving faith, as the Church of England confesses; and that
there is but one saving faith as S. Paul says; any Church of faith which
differs from her in any Article or Doctrine, even those which ye call Inferior
Truths, must be an Heretical and heterodox Church and faith, which if you had
well read, Dr, and understood well, you would not have troubled us again with
this ridiculous Doctrine, of salvation in any Christian Society; or you should
have been so just to your Adversary as to answer to his discourse upon that
subject; but I see you designedly step aside wheneuer you find yourself
Nonplust.

When I read this Paradox of our Dr I jndged the Catholic and Protestant Church
to be perfectedly represented in the two Women contesting about the living
Child before Solomon; she who was the true Mother would not have the Child
divided, but to live entire and undivided; she who was not the true Mother
would have him divided and shared betwixt both: Solomon adjudged the Child to
her who would not consent to that inhuman division; she was the true Mother:
This is our case; the Controversy is, which is the true Religion and faith; the
Catholic Church cannot endure to hear of any division of the Church and faith
of Christ into many opposite Sects; she will have but one Congregation
unanimously professing One Doctrine, One Lyturgy, Rites and Ceremonies; The
Protestant Church by the mouth of Dr Sall, and other Writers cry out, Dividatur
Infans; neither ye Catholics alone, nor we Protestants only, nor any
Congrcgation separatly from the other, is the Church and faith of Christ; each
must have ashare; the faith of Christ is divided betwixt us: Is not the
Catholic Church think you to be judged the true Mother of the faithful, which
detests this Barbarous division of the faith of Christ into so many Sects? and
are not Sectaries to be esteemed Tyrants, who rent and tear it into so many
pieces?

But I cannot omit a notorious calumny of our Dr. in his 12. chapt. where
magnifying the great power and extent of his Protestant Religion in several
kingdoms, he coms to speak of France; In France says he, those of the Religion
have 70 towns with Garrisons of soldiers governed by Nobles and Gentlemen of
the Protestant Religion: they have 800 Ministers who retain Pension out of the
public Finance and are so dispersed throughout the kingdom, that in the
Principalites of Orange and Poitou, allmosl all the inhabitants; a in Gascony
the one half; in Languedoc Normandy and the Western Provinces a strong party
professes the Protestant Religion; besides the Castles and forts belonging to
the Duke of Bullon, Count of Naual, Duke of Trimoulle Monsiour de Chastillon,
Mareshal de Diguiers, Duke de Sully and others. When I read this piece of
Romance in our Drs. book I turned presently to the frontispice of it, to see in
what year it was printed, for I suspected it might have been in king Henry the
fourth's time, when indeed the Hugonots were powerful; but finding it was
printed the year 1676. I admired the Authors Boldness, and insincerity in
beguiling his Reader.

For not one town, garrison, fort, or Castle, have the Hugonots in France this
day; not one Minister which retains Pension out of the Finance but lives by the
gratuity and alms of their Flock, as our Clergy in Ireland: It is true the
Hugonots are more numerous in the Province of Poitou, than in any other in
France, but to say, that almost all the Inhabitans are Hugonots; its agreat
imposture: I declare what I see, and what I hear from french men as well
Catholics as Hugonots, that there is not one Hugonot for a hundred Catholics in
that Province; about Nyort, S. Maixance, Fontenee, Lucinian, and all along from
Poitiers to Rochel, the most part of the Gentry who live in the Country are
Hugonots; but of the common People and the Inhabitants of the towns, the
Catholics are incomparably more numerous: The Dukes of Bullon, Rouan, Trimoulle
etc. which he reckons as Hugonots, are all Roman Catholics; nay for our Drs.
comfort, let him know, that there is not one, of the Prime families of France
this day a Hugonot exceptone, that is the Count de Russte, a Cadet of the house
of Rochfoucaut: Of the Nobility of the second rank, there are some; neither is
there any Hugonot this day in France of any Vogue, either in the Court, Army,
or civil government except Mareshal de Zumbert, who is no French man. By this
you may judge what little credit our Dr deserves in what he tells us of the
vast power, and extent of his Brethren Sectaries in Poland, Transiluania Russia
etc.

He most grossly abuses his Reader in telling him the Greek Church agrees with
Protestants in opposing Transubstantiation Purgatory etc. against Rome; for in
Luthers time, when Jeremy the Patriark of Constantinople understood that Luther
boasted, his Doctrine was professed by the Greek Church; the said Patriark
assembled a Council of the Greek Prelates, and solemnly protested against, and
condemned Luthers Errors; declared they believed Transubstantiation, Purgarory,
Prayers to Saints etc. as Rome did: and the Acts and Decrees of this Council
were printed and published by the Patriark himself, whose book is extant in many
Libraries in France, and elsewhere: and about ten years agon by occasion of a
dispute betwixt Monsieur Arnaud, and Monsieur Claude a Hugonot Minister; the
Minister obstinatly auerring, that the Greek Church and other Schismatics in
the Turkish Dominions denied Transubstantiation and other Catholic Tenets;
Monsieur Arnaud procured by means of the french Ambassador in Constantinople an
authentic public Declaration from the Patriark and Prelates of the Greek Church
and other Schismatics, declaring Unanimously their belief of Transubstantiation
and other Tenets of the Church of Rome, which Declaration is common in France,
to be read in Monsieur Arnaud's book De la Perpetuite de la Foy etc. so that
tho the Grecians be Schismatics, its apparent their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation Purgatory and other Tenets controverted betwixt us and
Protestants, is the same with that of Rome.

From his 16th. Chap. to the end of his first part he has nothing worthy of any
Reflection but a discourse of Transubstantiation, which we will examine in our
15. and 16. Chapt. He runs much upon the vnlawfullness of Subjects raising
Arms against their Prince; and I wish he could print this Doctrine deeply in
his fellow Sectaries hearts; but he will not persuade them so important a truth
(as I will prove in the II Chapt. until the Church of England gives her
Professors an other Rule of faith, and not Scripture arbitrarily interpreted,
believed and practiced as each one understands it, without any submission to a
supreme Pastor from whom we must receive the true sense of it. Now it is time
we examine his discourse against J. S.

CHAPTER I.
A SVRVEY OF THE DOCTORS Dedicatory to the Earl of Essex; Sectari's Dissension
in faith, The Reformers, Reformation and Reformed Brethren briefly described.
ALL Christian Sects, says our Doctor to his Mecaenas are joined with the
Church of England; they have all but one and the same faith; and that faith
professed by that lovely Company is the Primitive Catholic Apostolic faith;
they differ says he Chap. 12. against N. N. only in Rites and Ceremonies; and
there is not one of these Sects but is as different from the other, and exclaim
against one an other as much as against Popery: ask the Presbiterians what they
think of Protestancie? they say, its Popery in English; ask the Quakers their
opinion of them both? they are Limbs of Satan: ask the Anabaptists what they
judge of all three? they are Children of Perdition.

But I pray Dr what is the faith of the Church of England as to the Canon of
Scripture? it belieues S Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistles of James
and Jude, the second and third of S. John, and the 2. of S. Peter to be true
Canonical Scripture; and what is the Lutherans of Germani's faith as to this
point? that they are not Canonical: and is this difference but in Rites and
Ceremonies? does not the Protestant Church believe the Adoration of the
consecrated Host, and the use and prayers before Images to be downright
Idolatry; and Lutherans say its not? and do you make but a Ceremony of
Idolatry? does not the Protestant Church believe the firgurative only Presence
of Christ's Body in the Sacrament; and the Lutherans believe the Real presence,
which you say is an Error inconsistent with Salvation? and is this but a
Ceremony? or will God condemn men for a mere Ceremony? does not the Church of
England believe the Necessity of both kinds in the Communion, and the Hugonots
of France in their Ecclesiastical Discipline chapter 12. art. 7. deny it, and say it
may for just reasons be given in bread alone? This is no Ceremonial difference
betwixt your Church and ours; for its, you say, one of our Errors inconsistent
with salvation; and why it should be a Ceremonial business betwixt Protestants
and Hugonots I know not: Nor are the Protestant Bishops of England so prodigal
of their Ecclesiastical reuenews as to say that Episcopacy is but a Ceremony
which they believe to be de Iure Divino and the Presbiterians deny it: see you
Reader with what appearance of truth our Dr can say that the Church of England
and the other Sects are joined in one faith.

O! but, says he chapter 12. against N. N. they all agree in the chief heads and
fundamental points of Christianity; and what be they? Blessed be God, that
inspired to our good Dr to tell us what be those fundamental points and chief
Articles wherein Protestant Writers do so often tell us that all must agree for
to have true faith; and that all other points are but inferior Truths, Rites
and Ceremonies: Our Dr then tells us the chief heads and fundamental points of
Christianity necessary to Salvarion; The Holy Scripture; the sacred Trinity,
the Person of the Son of God, God and man; The Providence of God, sin, free
will, the Law, the Gospel, Justification by Christ; faith in his name;
Regeneration; The Catholic Church, and supreme head of it, Christ; The
Sacraments, their number and use; The state of Souls after death; the
Resurrection and life Etetnal; these are the chief heads and Substantial points
and in these all the Reformed Churchs agree with that of England, says our Dr
in that 12. Chapt. against N. N.

But my Reader will not I hope be so easily persuaded of this aggreement
betwixt these Sectaries, even in these Chief heads and fundamental points: for
the Protestants believe S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews and the other Epistles
mentioned but now, to be Canonical Scripture; the Lutherans utterly deny them:
The Lutherans in the Conference of Lypsia, the Magdeburgenses, and the Lutheran
Divins in the Conference of Ratisbon believe Seven Sacraments; nor do they
agree in the use of the Sacraments for the Hugonots of France as I observed,
believe the Lords supper may be taken in one kind, the Church of England
belieues it must necessarily be taken in both; in their Doctrine of Gods
Providence they are all also far asunder; for not only the Gomarists in Holland
following the Doctrine of Calvin, but also many Hugonot Churchs in France
believe that antecedently to any good or bad work of man, God has created and
absolutely Decreed some men to be eternally damned and others to be saved; the
Church of England, the Arminians in Holland and many Hugonots of France deny
this cruel decree in God, and believe none is damn'ed by Gods absolut Will and
decree, but for his fins. You see Reader how the Church of England and other
Sectaries are at ears not only in Rites and Ceremonies; not only in Inferior
and not Fundamental Articles, but even in those which our Dr himself calls the
chief points, and Fundamental Heads of Christianity: How can our Dr say they
are all joined in one faith? or how can he say the faith professed in the
Church of England and in the other Sects is the Catholic Apostolic faith; if he
will not say that one Apostle taught and believed two Sacraments as the
Protestants do; and an other Apostle Seven Sacraments as the Lutherans of
Lypsia and Ratisbon did; one Apostle taught that such Epistles were Canonical
Scripture; and an other believed they were not.

But Dr do not you confess that the Church of England differs from Lutherans,
Presbiterians and other Sects in inferior and not Fundamental Verities? and no
true Protestant of England who understands well his Catechism will say that
Protestants and Catholics differ in more than in Inferior Verities; what
greater Union then can you pretend with Lutherans and other Sectaries than with
us Catholics? moreover Doctor you say that errors against these inferior
Verities are inconsistent with salvation if ignorance does not excuse them;
your Brethren Sectaries therefore will be as Deep in hell as Catholics, Because
they hold errors against your Inferior Verities as well as Catholics; and if
they have ignorance it must be gross, Wilful and obstinatly blind, as that of
Papists because they have the Scripture which you say, plainly declares your
Doctrine to any that is not wilfully and obstinatly blind: lastly Dr you say in
your Dedicatory that the true nature of Heresy consists in Doctrine opposite to
Scripture: but all the Doctrine that Lutherans, Presbiterians etc. hold in
opposition to your Doctrine of England, is quite and plainly opposite to
Scripture; because you tell us a thousand times over both in your Sermon, and
in your Book that your Doctrine of Protestancy, figurative Presence, Communion
in both kinds two Sacraments etc. is plainly setdown, and seen in Scripture to
any that is not wilfully blind; therefore the rest of Sectaries, (who deny
your inferior Verities) faith and Religion is plain Heresy: behold Reader the
faith and Religion wherein the Church of England and the rest of Sectaries are
joined.

Our Dr goes on in his Dedicatory Epistle, and tells his Mecaenas that the
Protestant Curhch and other Sectaries are Reformed Churches; that the faith of
the Church of Rome was once praised throughout the World; its his and the
Reformed Churches wish, he says, that we may return to our primitive luster
and join heart and hand with them to the edification and increase of
Christianity; But they being so separated and divided in Doctrine among
themselves as we have showen; its impossible for us to join with them until
they agree among themselves, and tell us with which of them shall we join; for
with whatever Sect of them we join, we shall have all the rest on our backs,
and so never be at rest: the Presbiterians will never consent that we join
with Protestants; nor the Protestants will never condescend that we ioyn with
Lutherans; and so Dr Sall's Wish that we join with the Reformed Churches is
ridiculous.

Nor is it less ridiculous to call his Sects Reformed Churches. Observe Reader
who be those they call Reformers; who be they, that are called Reformed
Brethren, and what is that they call Reformation; and you will confess no Names
were ever more abused. As for the first and Chief Reformers, the Author of that
learned Treatise of Religion and Gouerument, in his first book, and N. N. in
his Doleful fall of Andrew Sall gives you an exact description of them; Dr
Sall very wisely declins their vindication from the wicked life N. N. says
they lead; for he says the Reformation may be very good in itself, tho Luther
and some other Reformers were naught; as in the Apostolical College, says he
there was a Judas; it is very true Dr, but if all the Apostolical College was
but a pack of Iudases, and not one honest man among them; could any man in his
wits be persuaded to believe their Doctrine was from God? this is your case Dr,
we defy you to name as much as one among your first Reformers, who was as much
as an honest man; do you name Luther? he was an Apostat Friar, learned his
Doctrine against Mass, prayers to saints etc. from the Devil with whom he was
frequently conversant as himself confesses to. 7. Wittemb. an. 1558 de Missa
Privata fol. 228. and to. 6. Germ. Ien. lib. de Missa angulari. Do you name
Calvin? he was a sodomit burnt in the shoulder for that crime at Noyon, lived a
continual Scandal to the world at Geneue, and dyed a horror to nature as his
own bosom friend Bolseck relates in his life: do you name Beza? a man
prostituted to lust and sensuality as the same Bolseck who knew him relates:
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius Carolostadius, Goodman, Jacobus Andreas were of the
same stamp. Neither were your first Reformers of England of a better alloy;
Cranmer a mere contemporiser who married and unmarried Henry the VIII. as often
as he pleased; in his time he writ a Treatise in favor of Transubstantiation,
for to please his Prince; and in king Edward the VI. time Zuinglianism being
the swaying Religion, he altered his note, and writ an other Treatise against
Transubstantiation; Zuinglianism he professed until he was sentenced to death
for heresy and Treason by Queen Mary; then in hopes to save his life he
declared for the Catholic Religion, but seeing the sentence was not repealed,
he renounced again this and dyed a Zuinglian. Ochinus of a Capuchin became a
Reformer, and so good an one, that he ran further and became a Jew. Martin
Bucer, of a Dominican Friar became a Lutheran, of a Lutheran became a
Zuinglian; he became again a Lutheran, and returned again to be a Zuinglian:
Hooper and Rogers both runagat Monks; Couerdale an Augustine Friar; Bale a
Carmelit; Peter Martyr a Chanon Regular, all married, and these were your
Reformers, judge you what the Reformation could be; and tell us Dr can you name
any one of this company that was famous for his Virtue, Miracles, or holy
conversation; nay any that was an honest man.

And you will be no less surprised Reader when you consider what kind of men
are called Reformed Brethren; Monks friars and Priests, as we have lately seen
run from the Catholic Church to Protestancy; and why? because Popery is full of
Errors forsooth; Transubstantiation, Images, Purgatory, etc. and out of a
tender conscience and love of Truth they forsake these errors, and
snperstitious practices of Rome. Very well; let us suppose those Articles of
Popery are Errors, and many practices of the Church of Rome are Superstitions
and against Gods Word; let us commend and praise you for renouncing those
Errors: but why do you renounce and lay by, other practices, Doctrins, ad
Devoirs to which you were obliged by Vow in the Catholic Church, and which in
the judgment of all the Church of England are Holy, commendable and conformable
to the Word of God? Be it so, let Purgatory be against Gods Word; renounce it;
but its not against Gods Word to fast from flesh in lent and other days, your
Common Prayer Book commands it; Why then do not you, Friar, who obliged
yourself under sin to fast the greatest part of the year from flesh, why do you
lay a side this practice? you renounced but the errors of Popery contrary to
the Word of God; this is none: let Transubstantiation be an error; renounce it;
but its no error, nor contrary to Gods Word to say your Office, your Matins
and Lauds; to discipline your self sometimes in the week; to live in poverty
without any rents or reuenews; to live in Chastity; these practices are no
Errors nor Superstitions; why do you forsake them? let Prayers to Saints and
before Images be Idolatry; sorsake them, if you will be mad; but its no error
nor profane or Superstitious practice, but the Counsel of Christ and the
Practice of his Saints to forsake richs, lands, estates, Honors and dignities
for Christ his sake and live in poverty and humility for his love; this you
vowed to do when you were a Roman Catholic; why do not you keep that part of
Popery; If the king and Parliament did enact (and it would be Much to the
credit of the Protestant Church, it were enacted) that there should be a house
in some Country town wherein all Monks and Friars who become Protestants should
live together in Community under Obedience to some Superior as they did in the
Catholic Church, (this is not against Scripture,) that none should be permitted
to eat flesh in lent nor fasting days, but fast as they did in their
respective Orders (nor is this against Scripture) that none should be permitted
to have any Ecclesiastical Benefice nor any Rents, but live upon the charity of
the People as they did when they were Catholics (nor is this against Scripture)
that none should be permitted to marry, nor to wear but mean attire (nor is
this against Scripture) that all of them should be obliged to say their Divin
Office, or a number of spalms equivalent to it every day, and Discipline
themselves sometimes in the week as they were acustomed or obliged to do in
their Orders; in such acase indeed we might think that such as revolted from
the Catholics and became Protestants were moved by devotion and a tenderness of
Conscience, and they might with some appearance of truth be called Reformed
Brethren; But that a company of Friars should run from the retirement of their
convents to the court and houses of great ones, from poverty and beggary to
look for Benefices and rents; from fasting, and other austerities to which they
are obliged, to eat and drink and cherish their flesh; casting aside their
Breviaries and Meditations, and marrying; what half witted man in the world
will call such men Reformed men but rather men prostituted to licentiousness
and bankrupts in Honesty.

By this discourse you may perceive how little or rather nothing the Protestant
Church has for to deserve that plausible name of Reformation; no name in the
world more vnbecoming it: for a Reformation is a change of a large life into a
strict one; its a Profession of a more austere life, and of more moderation
than formerly was: how then can Protestancy be called a Reformation of the
Catholic Religion; put the case in Luther, Calvin, and the rest of Priests and
Friars who change the Catholic for the Protestant Religion: its evident by what
I said and by what the world sees, they leave a narrow, strict, and austere
manner of life, for a more easy large and pleasant one; for in the Catholic
they were obliged under sin to say their Breviary every day; to fast the
greatest part of the year, to several austerities of rising at midnight to the
Quyre, of Discipline and hairecloths; never to marry, never to have any rents
but live in poverty, to live under Obedience of their Superiors with a total
submission of their Wills to his; they were obliged to confess their sins to a
Priest, to submit their judgments in matters of Religion to the Pastor of the
Church, to obey the Precepts of the Church. This manner of life is it which
they vere obliged to lead in the Catholic Religion: And they forsook this for
Protestancy, where they are not bound to any Breviary, nor other Prayers under
sin; where they can without a remors of conscience make good cheer all the
year; where they can marry and get a good Portion and an Ecclesiastical
Benefice besides; where they are not obliged to confess, nor obey any
Commandments of the Church (none obliges them in conscience;) where they may
believe whateuer they judge is the Doctrine and sense of Scripture, let their
Pastors and Church believe what they list: who can deny but this exchange of
life is from an austere to a large, from a rigid to a more easy, from a strict
to a more pleasant life: and is this it we call Reformation? In the Catholic
Church we can have but one faith; we are obliged to profess one and the same
Doctrine, practice Uniformly the same Rites and Ceremonies; in the Reformation
you have many different faiths; you may with a safe conscience profess what
Doctrine you please, either the Lutheran, Presbiterian, Calvinian etc. for what
ever of them you believe you will be still of the Reformation. And can this be
called a Reformation? which destroies unity, rents the Flock into so many
Sects, and gives us such liberty to believe as we fancy?

Perhaps our Dr may answer that Protestancy is a Reformation of the Doctrine of
Popery, because this swarms with many Errors; but what is Doctrine for, but for
to reform our lives? and how can that be a Reformation of Doctrine, which leads
to such a corruption of Manners?

II. CHAPTER.
THAT THE DOCTOR HAS IN HIS Sermon passed his sentence of Damnation against our
Saints; he retracts this Sentence in his Book; but cannot in his Principles.
OUR Doctor in his two first Chapters against J. S. pretends to cast that
impious position from his door. That in the Catholic Religion there is no
salvation; he says we may; and when he says, salvation may be had in our
Catholic Church, any man would think he intended to grant a grater capacity for
salvation in our Religion, than in Turcism, or Paganism; but not a jot greater:
for if you ask him how a Roman Catholic can be saved, our Tenets being as he
says, inconsistent with salvation; he answers that by Ignorance or Repentance,
and auers very positiuely that Protestants allow no salvation in Popery, if
either of these two does not protect us: and so much capacity for salvation,
the Roman Catholics, who are accused by him and his fellows to be uncharitable
for denying salvation out of their Church, do grant to Pagans and Turks; it
being the Doctrine of most learned Divins, for not believing the Bible to be
Gods Word, for not believing the Sacraments, nay nor the Incarnation and
Passion of Christ, a man will not be damned, if he has invincible ignorance of
these Mysteries, or Repentance of his Errors: and this is that great charity of
Protestants beyond Catholics, when they say that Roman Catholics may be saved
in their Religion; that is to say, that they are in as great a capacity for
salvation as Pagans and Turks.

He scrues up the peggs of his indignation against me for making him author of
that wicked Position, That in the Roman Catholic Church a man cannot be saved,
and to prove him the Author of it, there needs no more, than to hear him
speak: Page 116. of his Sermon he says, No learned Protestant does allow the
Popish Religion generally and absoluty speaking to be a secure way of
salvation; for all do agree that many of their Tenets and practices are
inconsistent with salvation; tho ignorance may happily excuse some of the Simple
sort, but not such as know, or with due care and enquiry may know their Errors.
Now you shall see him, like the Dogs head in the pot as in the post-signs,
struggling to get out, and cannot: Many of their Tenets says he, are
inconsistent with salvation; and is not this, as much as to say in good
English, that we cannot be saved? But he ads that Ignorance may save some of
the simple sors; by your favor he does not say absolutely that ignorance may
save even some of the simple sort; Happily it may, says he, that is to say,
perhaps it may; nothing Sure as to that: Tenets inconsistent with salvation
absolutely block us the entrance into heaven, if ignorance does not desobstruct
it; and its not certain that ignorance can do it, Happily it may, says our
Doctor so that if Catholics do not renounce their Errors by repentance, it is a
thousand to one, if any of them ever goes to Heaven.

And observe he does not say this Ignorance it self will^, as much as Happily
excuse all Catholics; No but some; and what some? of the simple sort, but not
learned men, who know, or with due care and enquiry may know their errors;
shutting up heavens gates to all wise men; ignorance will not excuse them: How
Dr? but some of the simple sort? have you made no Prouiso for that noble Prince,
who made the Epigram in your praise? or will you rank him among the simple
sort, for beiug so simple as to make an Epigram in your praise? No Prouiso for
so many Earls, Lords and Persons of heigh quality your own bosom friends with
whom you were so conversant and familiar? no Proviso for Bernard, Aquinas,
Bonaventure and other Saints, Pillars of the Church, and Eagles of the Schools?
had I not reason, Reader, to say our Dr denied Salvation in the Catholic
Church, first because he grants no greater Capacity For salvation in her, than
in Turcism and Paganism; secondly because it appears by his own words that all
wise and learned Catholics are excluded by him from salvation, whereas he says
that nothing but ignorance can save some of the simple sort; thirdly because he
does not grant it to be an assured Verity that ignorance may excuse some of the
simple sort it self: Happily it may, and no more but so. And is it not a pretty
thing to see our Dr of so squeamish a stomach, as not to endure that
proposition should be fathered on him That there is no salvation in the
CatholicChurch: My good friend what do you drive at in your whole Sermon and
new book, but to prove we are Idolaters for our Adoration of the consecrated
Host, Images and Prayers to Saints? and will you boggle at saying Idolaters
cannot be saved?

You have heard our Dr say our Tenets are inconsistent with salvation; and
nothing but Ignorance can excuse their Professors from damnation; and this
saving Ignorance he granted it only to some of the simple sort in his printed
sermon; but not at all to such as know, or with due care and enquiry may know
their Errors: and being aduertis'd by J. S. what an impious thing it was to
pass his sentence of damnation against S. Thomas of Aquin, S. Bernard and the
rest of our learned Drs and Saints; he retracts in his book what he advanced in
his sermon, and says that saving Ignorance reachs also to learned men, to
Aquinas, Bernard, and others; they were he says ignorant, and by their
ignorance they were saved: see you Reader what streights our Dr is put into;
either to say that Aquinas, Bernard, Scotus, Bonaue^ture, and our Saints and
Drs were damned knaves, or Ignorant Coxcoms; and to cast such an affront upon
two, the learnedest Schools in the world, Thomists and Scotists, as to say
their Masters were two ignorant Dolts. Who can pretend to know if such men,
esteemed the Oracles of the world, were ignorant? or who can expect to ouercom
his ignorance, if the ignorance of such men was invincible, after so much time
spent by them in reading and studying the Scripture, fathers, and Councils: but
Ignorant they must have been says Dr Sall, or they never went to heaven: and
the mischief is that he does not grant them Ignorance itself; for tho he says
they were Ignorant and saved through Ignorance, yet I will evidence out of the
Church of England, and the Drs own Principles, they could not have invincible
Ignorance; consequently that acording our Dr and his Churchs Principles they
must have bin unavoidably damned.

Our Dr page 9. of his Reply gives us the Definition of Invincible Ignorance;
Its such as one cannot remedy by means obvious to him acording his state and
condition. He therefore who has the means obuious to him acording his state and
condition of life for to remedy his Ignorance, and remains still ignorant; his
Ignorance cannot be called Invincible, but Supin and gross, because he does not
make use of those Means obuious unto him; But Aquinas, Bernard and all our
learned Saints and Doctors had the sufficient and necessary Mcans obuious to
them for to remedy their Ignorance; for they had the Scripture which our Dr
says page 29. of his sermon, and also often in his book, abounds with all
heavenly light and clearly sets down the Protestant Tenets to all those who are
not wilfully blind. If therefore they were Ignorant, their ignorance was not
invincible; they did not use the means they had, they did not search with due
care and enquiry, and Ignorance will not excuse, says our Dr, those who Know,
or with due care and enquiry may Know the truth. Is it not by Scripture alone
that Luther and Calvin espied out the Errors of Rome? is it not by Scripture,
Councils and fathers our Dr says, himself was convinced of the truth of
Protestancy? S. Thomas Aquinas, Bernard and the rest of our Drs and Saints had
the Scripture Councils and fathers and studied them more than Dr Sall; they had
therefore the Means obuious to their state and condition for to remedy their
Ignorance; it was not therefore invincible.

I doubt if any but our Dr would utter such a Paradox, and I am sure none would
prove it more ridiculously; Aquinas says, he page 8. and the rest were
invincibly ignorant, because the errors of the Church of Rome were not so many
in his time as now; they increased daily; they were not so known and cleared
in the crucible of public opposition; none dared to check them, and so they
kept credit; they began to be in use in his time or some what before and were
not opposed. Was there ever such a wild ramble of talk, and such a heap of
untruths coucht in so few lines? we must not attempt to retort him by the
testimony of any Catholic Doctor, for he will say they are all Ignorant as
Aquinas; but I hope he will give credit to his own illuminated Brethren Humfry
in Jesuit. par. 2. rat. 5. Caron in Cronol. l. 4. page 567. Osiand. in Epit.
Cent. 6. witness, that S. Gregory Pope and Austin the Monk (our Dr will say
they were also Ignorant) brought into England Mass, Purgatory,
Transubstantiation Prayers to Saints, Indulgences and the rest of our Catholic
Tenets about the year 600. was this but In, or but Somewhat before Aquinas his
time, woe lived the year 1270? Osiander Cent. 8. witnesses that Venerable Bede
who lived the year 730, was plunged in all the points of Popery wherein we now
differ: Perkins in Exposit. Symb. page 266. acknowledges that
Transubstantiation and other Popish Heresies were spread over the world the year
900. and Fox Acts and Monum. page 1121. says, it was an Article of faith the
year 1060. and Berengarius condemned an Heretic for denying it; was all this
but In or a little before Aquinas his time? But where was the Drs Memory or
ingenuity when he spoke thus? is it not the uniform saying of Calvin and all
Heteredox Writers that the Church of Rome fell into the Errors they accuse us
of, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Prayers, to Saints, Indulgences etc. some say
the first 300. years, others the first 500. others the first 600. and our Dr
has the courage to tell us they began but In or somewhat before Aquinas his time?

To say our Tenets were not examined nor publicly opposed, nor arguments and
books against them permitted to come to our sight, is a gross ignorance of the
transactions of ages: did not Berengarius as your own Fox acknowledges, and
before him the Bishop of Sans, and many others, their Abettors, publicly
oppose and write against Transubstantiation? did not Aetius condemned by S.
Augustine, Vigilantius condemned by S. Hierom, the Henricians condemued by S.
Bernard, the Witcleffians and Hussits condemned by the whole Church, publikly
oppose Transubstantiation, Prayers to Saints, Veneration of Relics, Purgatory,
Communion in one Kind etc. and do not you yourself confess. chap. 20. against
J. S. that Scotus, Durand and Ocham did examine narrowly and found great
difficulties against Transubstantiation yet believed it? where have you or your
Camerades better arguments against our Tenets than your Predecessors Heretics
have, and you find in Bellarmin, Peron, Becan and our Catholic Writers; but
suppose S. Thomas Aquinas and the rest of our Saints and Drs had no other Books
nor arguments againsts our Tenets but the Bible, Conncils, and Fathers; do not
you say that the Bible alone plainly convinces our Errors, and abounds with
heavenly light to such as are not wilfully blind; they had the Bible, you
cannot deny it; why then did they not find out our errors? or how could their
ignorance be invincible?

Let any Impartial Reader judge if I have been injust to our Dr in saying that
its his opinion, and a necessary sequel from his Principles, that all our
Saints and learned Doctors who dyed in the Profession of our Tenets
(inconsistent, he says, with Salvation) are damned: the Position is impious;
but must be sustained by him; for he leaves no manner of means for salvation in
the profession of our Tenets but Invincible Ignorance; this, I proved they
could not have had, both by reason and by the Drs own Principles; because they
had sufficient means obuious to them acording their state and condition, for to
remedy their ignorance, and they did not; therefore their ignorance was not
invincible, and they were unavoidably damned.

III. CHAPTER.
SEVERAL OTHER ATTACKS OF our Doctor against the Saints: the Protestant
Calendar of Saints examined.
I Found Aquinas and others, styled by the name of Saints in our Drs. Sermon;
and rejoiced to see him retain that respect for their glorious memory; but it
soon repented him of his devotion; he learned in Oxford that was not the true
Reformed language; the purer Brethren Anabaptists, Presbiterians and Quakers
judge it to be Popish; and the Dr. to give them satisfaction for the scandal
they might have taken at his style; corrects it in his new Book: he was not in
earnest, he says, when he called them Saints; it is but an Honorarie title, as
the Compiler of London Gazets calls the Popes, his Holiness.

In the Conclusion of the Unerring Vnerrable Church I argued, that any wise man
tender of his salvation ought to choose that Church where many Saints eminent
for their Virtue and glorious for their Miracles lived and dyed, rather than
that, where never any man was known eminent for either; as you would choose to
study in a school, where many men eminent for learning were educated, rather
than in a school where no learned man was ever known: Hence I concluded the
Catholic Church ought to be chusen before the Protestant; whereas in that we
reckon so many eminently holy and miraculous Saints and Drs, Aquinas, Bernard,
Bonaventure, Gregory Austin etc. and in this none was ever heard of: Our Doctor
answers, our Saints are only Titular ones, no Real Saints; they purchased their
Titles (says he page 228.) by public Authority as Dukes and Earls do theirs.
Is not this a respectfull Child of Gods Church? who pulls down the Pillars of
Christianity, and strips them of the honor exhibited to them by the Orthodox
world.

I pray Reader if you chance to see him before he reads this book, ask him his
opinion of those Saints recorded in his Protestant Calendar prefixed to the
Common Prayer book: are they also but Titular only and no Real Saints? was it
by their merits they purchased their Titles, or by public Authority as Dukes
and Earls did theirs? if this second; ask him what public authority was that?
if a Popish authority; how com the Church of England to profane their calendar
with the foorberie of Rome, and propose to the respect at least, if not
adoration of the flock a company of fellows who are no Real Saints, and place
them in the same Catalogue with Christ, his Mother and the Apostles; and the
calendar being ordained only for to eternise the memory of men Eminent in
Santitie and virtue, and justly reputed Saints by the Church, how com they to
stuff it with men who are not real but Titular only Saints: if it was a
Protestant public Authority? and Vos in eadem damnatione est is. Are ye also
guilty of that foul practice, as through a vain ostentation of your Churchs
holiness to put in your calendar a company of falsely reputed Saints, who are
but Titular ones, and Honorarily called so, as the London Gazet calls the Pope,
his Holiness? Are the Saints recorded in the Protestant Calendar truly and
Really Saints, or not? if they be not, what a ridiculous thing was it to put
them there, more than Cromwell, or Arrius, or Luther; if they were, I Will prove
they were Saints of our Church, and consequently prove your Position, that our
Saints are only Titular and no Real Saints, to be impious.

You have in the Month of March in your Calendar, S. Gregory Pope who lived
the year 600. and brought into England, as I related out of your own
Historians, Mass, Purgatory, Transubstantiation etc. if he was not a Papist,
there is none in Rome; and he is a Saint of your Calendar, and ye have no
Titular only, but real Saints, as you say page 228. you have in the same month
S. Benedict Monk, who lived the year 540; famous for his Monachism, austerity
of life, and Religious order: can the Protestants challenge him to be theirs,
who hate Monachism as the Devil hates Holy Water. You have in the same month in
your Calendar (but in ours, its the fifth of January) S. Edward king of the
Saxons who lived the year 1066. Ancient Cronicles bear witness of his devotion
to S. Peter and S. John, his vow of Chastity, his vow of pilgrimage to Rome and
the dispensation of this vow granted by the Pope; and the Monastery of
Winsmester he built for the Benedictian Friars: was this a Ptotestant Saint
think you? yet he must be a real Saint, because he is in your Calendar.

You have in the month of April S. Richard Bishop of Chichester, who lived the
year 1255. he was consecrated Bishop by the Pope himself against all the
endeavors of king Richard, who sent his Ambassador to Rome to ^hinder his
consecration; and the king was obliged by the Pope to put him in possession of
his Bishopric: all this smells strongly of Popery: I pray tell us, why was he
put in your Calendar? was it because he was a Bishop? and why were not Cranmer,
Ridley and Latimer, put there; because he was of an other mold; an Eminent, and
not only a Titular Saint.

You have in your Calendar in the month of May S. Dunstan ArchBishop of
Canterbury who lived the year 988. when there was no Protestant, nor any thing
like it, he went to Rome to get his Pall from the Pope, which sufficiently
evidences he was no Protestant; and a Real Saint he must be, or why should he
be put in your Calendar. You have in the same month S. Anstin Monk, Apostle of
England, sent by S Gregory to preach the Doctrine which now you persecut

You have in the month of June S. Boniface B. and M. who lived the year 754. he
was no Martyr of Fox's Calendar; nor did he shed his blood for Lutheranism or
Protestancy.

You have in the month of September S. Gyles an Abbot of a Monastery and a
Priest: it was his good luck he dyed the year 550. for had he lived till the
Reformation he had forfeited many hundred Marks, and his Monastery too, for
the many Masses he said; he lived much in the exercise of corporal austerities,
feeding commonly on roots and herbs; lodged many years in a Cave, without any
bed but the bare ground; this Saint is nothing like a Child of the Reformation.

You have in the month of November S. Leonard Confessor who lived the year
559. built a Chapel to the honor of the B. Virgin and consecrated an Altar in
it to S. Remigius; these practices sufficiently evidence he was no Protestant;
and his being recorded in your Calendar, marks he was a Real Saint, for in your
Calendar there is no other. You have in the same month S. Brice Bishop; Nephew
to S. Martin and a Catholic he must have bin; whereas, being banished from his
Bishopric he had his recours to the Pope for to be reinstalld.

You have also in the same month S. Hugh Arch Bishop of Canterbury a Carthusian
Friar who lived the year 1200. a notorious Papist; not only because he was a
Carthusian; but because he was so austere in his manner of living and
mortificacions, that being made a Bishop he would never eat flesh, and even at
his dying hour had no other bed, but the bare ground whereon he caused himself
to be laid, wrapped in a hair cloth and ashes.

I know the Nativity of our gracious Soueraign is mentioned in your Calendar
for to mind us to pray for his long and happy life; also Gounpounder Treason
day, for to give God thanks, for the Preservation of the king and Parliament
against that horrid plot, but why those Saints should be recorded in your
Calendar, but for having bin men of Eminent and known Holiness, and for our
example and encouragement to the imitation of their Virtues, you never can
tell; it would be therefore an impiety in you to deny they were true and real
Saints, and it would be want of sense and judgment in you to deny they were of
the Roman Catholic Church, for how can the Protestants challenge, Carthusians,
Monks, Abbots, Bishops consecrated by the Pope, and appealing to him in their
greeuances, to be of theirs.

Now if you will act the part of a Defender of your Church, (and the credit of
it, depends of your good success heerin) you must show us, some Saints, or one
Saint of known publicly reputed Holiness of life and conversation, who
cofessedly was a Protestant, and whom we cannot with any appearance of reason
deny to be yours; as you cannot deny those Monks, Abbots, Carthusians etc.
named in your calendar to be ours: you say Friars Monks and Abbots are
superstitious Bigots, and foorbs; for all that, there have been some of that
Profession so honest men, as to have deserved a place in your calendar; which
is a manifest proof, that the Tenor of life which they professed is not
superstitious, nor the Tenets of Religion they believed, are not errors
inconsistent with salvation: I pray show us any one Minister or Bishop of the
Protestant Church, since the beginning of the Reformation; show us any of the
Image breakers, ryflers of Monasteries, Persecutors of Priests and Friars,
believers of Figurative Presence, Scoffers of Indulgences and Purgatory (this
is Protestancy) that was so honest a man as to have deserved a place in your
calendar: and if you can show none; then the prudent Reader will judge my
discourse to be good that any wise man tender of his salvation ought to live and
dye in the Catholic Church, where many Eminent and illustrious Saints have bin;
rather than in the Protestant, where never any was known.

But our reckoning is not at an end Dr; you remember that old charge against
your Reformation, never yet answered; that your Separation from the Catholic
Church was a Spiritual Rebellion, a formal schism: your answer is that the
Schism is Causally ours; that by our Idolatry, and many other errors, we
forced you to separat from us; That we separated from the Doctrine of Christ,
and therefore you separated from us. But all this appears to be an idle talk
without any sense; for, Eminent Saints, glorious for their virtues, Holiness
and Miracles, are not to be found, but in the Profession of the true faith of
Christ; if therefore in our Church such Saints of known Sanctity be found; its
a manifest and undeniable proof, that the true faith of Christ is in our
Church: Now I ask you and your Camerades; when did our Church separat from the
Doctrine of Christ? some of you say, in the first 300. years; others of you say,
that about the first 600. This appears to be manifestly falls; for in the
ensuing ages all along until the year 1255. (then Richard Bishop of Chichester
lived) there were Eminent Saints of known and renowned Holiness and Miracles
in our Church; (for all those forementioned Saints recorded in your calendar
were ours as I have proved) therefore the true faith and Doctrine of Christ
continued still in our Church, and your Schism is not causally ours, but
without any cause yours.

And truly whateuer you may say of your Separation; I cannot imagine how your
Church or you will excuse your Oversight in prefixing that calendar to your
Common prayer book: I do not think there could be a more shameful reproach to
your Church: Quakers were never so tempted to swear, that this calendar smells
more of a Popisn Conspiracy than Gunpounder Treason day; they will never
believe but that some Papist had a hand in making it; for can he be a Child of
the Reformation, who pur Gregory Pope, and Austin the Monk in Our Reformed
Calendar, for being the first who brought Popery into England; and left out
Luther, Calvin, Peter Martyr and others who first preached the Reformation? can
he be a Reformed Child, who put Benedict, and Austin Monks and Hugh a
Carthusian Friar in our Reformed calendar, and in the mean time we hang men in
Tyburn for following their Profession, and Tenor of life: Either the
Reformation had any one Eminent Saint since its first rise, or not? if it had;
why have not you put him in your calendar? if it had not? had it not been more
to the credit of your Church, to have made no calendar; than by making one,
give fo public a testimony to the world, how poor your Church is of Saints,
that to furnish your calendar you must borrow them out of our Breviary: besides
Dr, even for the Reformation of particular Cities, and Provinces, God makes
use of Holy men, of an exemplar life; and to say that God should have entrusted
the Reformation of the whole Church, to a company of turbulent Spirits, and not
as much as one man in the whole company to be of Eminent Holiness, nor exemplar
life: its against the grain of Man's reason to believe it.

Our Dr not content to attack the Titles of our Saints; coms with a fresh
charge against their manner of life: for I argued in the Conclusion of the
Unerring Vnerrable Church, that Christ's Counsels, of forsaking lands, estates,
and means, and embracing poverty; was commended, preached, and practiced in
our Chutch, witness the many Religious Orders, where several Persons have
forsaken their plentiful estates; and no such Doctrine was ever preached or
practiced in the Protestant Church; also Christ's Counsel (recommended to us by
S. Paul's Doctrine and example) of corporal Austerities, Disciplins hairecloths,
sleeping on the bare ground, rising at midnight to sing Psalms in God's praise,
etc. was and is practiced frequently by all sexes and ages in our Church; and
what Minister or Protestant was ever heard of that ryses at midnight to sing
Gods praises; that disciplins himself, etc. Hence I concluded, that to be the
Church of Christ, which followed his Counsels, and consequently the Catholic to
be Christ's Church. Our Dr answers like a good Christian, that our corporal
Austerities and mortifications are like to them of Pagans and Heathens, tending
to the destruction of Body and Soul; that the Protestants use corporal
austerities, but discreetly: that our Austerities are desperate and indiscreet.
And what Christian will hear with patience, Christian Austerities undertaken
for the love of God, and practiced by the greatest Saints of the Church; to be
lykned by Dr Sall, to the Austerities of Pagans, to be condemned as destructive
to Body and Soul? The Austerity of the great Baptist, so much commended in the
Gospel, exceeds far that of our Monks and Friars; and if theirs be
destructive to Body and Soul, the great Baptist is undone: the Austerity and
Mortifications of David surpassed far, that of our Monks, Friars and Nuns; and
if these have destroyed their bodies and Souls by their Mortifications; if
their Austerities be indiscreet and desperate; if they be like the austerities
of Pagans: in what a condition will David be?

Henceforth I hope, he will not pretend that S. Benedict was a Protestant (tho
in his calendar) but a Catholic or a Pagan, for rising at midnight to the Quire
to sing Gods Praises as David did; for his many indiscreet and desperate
austerities like them of Pagans; to which he obliged his Monks by the Rules of
his Order. S. Gyles also mentioned in the Protestant calendar must have bin a
Papist or a Pagan; so indiscreet and desperate he was in his austerities
destructive to body and soul, sleeping on the bare ground for many years,
feeding on herbs and roots; no Protestant was ever so indiscreet. To conclude,
none who forsook silks and sattins for a poor habit; good cheer for a poor
portion; pomp and vanity for a retired and austere life as the great Baptist
did, and innumerable of our Church; none I say of them were Protestants, they
are not so indiscreet and desperate: Dr Sall indeed was once so indiscreet, as
to have undertaken this course of life; but now in his old age, he is become
wise, and has changed his habit for good attire; his scant and poor fare, for
good cheer; his religious retirement for a court; his poverty for Rents; his
religious humiliation for a Deanery (which they say he has) his Obedience to
Superiors, for a full possession of his own Will; his austerities and
mortifications, for more pleasure and satisfaction than cuer he had; and this
is the Discretion of Protestants, and the way to Salvation.

IV. CHAPTER.
OUR DOCTOR'S CONFVSED DISCOURSE of our Rule of faith: a Parallel of
Protestants and Ancient Heretics.
HE perceived the main Controversy whereof the resolution of all others depend,
to be that of our Rule of faith, and the necessity of a living Judge for to
determine our doubts in Religion: therefore I so carefully handled this point in
my former Treatise and with strength of reason and Scripture proved, that
Scripture alone, without an infallible living Interpreter was not our Rule of
faith. But my Antagonist, resolved to continue, rather than to end wrangling,
hand les this question so superficially and so confus-edly that he does but
hint at it here and there in several Chapters; nor can we fixedly perceive
what Rule of faith he establishs for himself. For Now, he says Scripture alone
is his Rule; then he lays that aside, and sets up the Apostles, and four first
General Councils Creeds; again he waves that, and brings in a third Rule;
that is to say for fundamental points necessary to salvation, the Apostles Creed
alone; and for points not fundamental or inferior Truths the Word of God,
whether Written that is the Bible; or unwritten that is Tradition: thus he hops
from branch to branch much indeed to his credit; for when others find it a
sufficient task to hit on one Rule of faith; his wit is so fertile as to find
three, but his luck is naught that none is good.

His first Rule is Scripture alone; this he asserts page 29. of his Sermon and
page 24. against I. S. in his new book; and what is to be admired in so fertile
a Wit, that he could not hit on any proof for so considerable a point, whereof
the resolution of so many Controversies depends, but that only Text of S. Paul
2. Tim. 3. Holy Scripture is able to make us wise unto salvation, that the man
of God etc. out of which he concludes page 29. of his Sermon, that Scripture
alone is sufficient; abounding with all heavenly light for instruction to those
who are not wilfully blind; and this alone, and nothing else of Scripture or
reason he answers to my two long Chapters against the sufficiency of Scripture
for our Rule of faith: and tho I proved in my former Treatise, by many
instances, that this Text of S. Paul does not prove the sufficiency of
Scripture; I have no other answer from him, but that I am a Twice Impious
Sophister; that I mend the text instead of interpreting it; that I give the
Apostle the lie: truly his mistake is in some measure pardonable; for the
Apostle was once called Saul; our Dr happily, mistook Saul for Sall; and thought
I corrected the text of Saul the Apostle, when I checked the inference from it,
of Sall the Apostat.

I answered the Apostle did not say Scripture alone was able for to instruct
us; and besides the many proofs I delivered for this in the Unerring Vnerrable
Church; I do now again prove it: for its manifest Sctipture cannot instruct us
to salvation, if it be not rightly understood; its also manifest that the true
understanding of Scripture is not had with assurance, without an infallible
Interpreter; for says S. Peter 2. Epist. 1. 20. No Prophecy of Scripture,
(that is to say assured interpretation) is of any private interpretation; for
Prophecies came not in old times from the Will of men, but the holy men of God
spoke as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost. Therefore its manifest that
Scripture alone, interpreted by private Persons, and without an Infallible
Interpreter is not able to instruct us to salvation. He replies its ridiculous
to say, Scripture is able, if Scripture alone be not able; as it would be
ridiculous, says he, to say you are able to carry two hundred weight; and
when you com to the trial you must have a horse to help you: And by this
Dialect, we must affirm the Dr was not able to answer J. S. his book, because
when he came to the trial, he must go to Oxford for Englih; nor must we say he
is able to read, because without spectacles he cannot; and it will be
ridiculous to say you can make a voyage to England, if you cannot go alone
without ship and seamen. Pray Sr. was the Apostle ridiculous when he said Men
are saved by Hope Romans 8. 24. for its evident his meaning was not that Hope
alone can save us: was he ridiculous when he said we are justified by faith;
for its apparent that faith alone does not justify us: and why should it be
ridiculously said by him that Scripture is sufficient for to instruct us, tho
Scripture alone be not sufficient? O but, say you, in other places the Apostle
says we must have charity and other Virtues; and thence it appears his
meaning was not that Hope alone, and faith alone can save us; and so do I say,
the Apostle in other places bids us hold Traditions, and the Scripture in
several places bids us consult in our doubts, and hear the Church; consequently
S. Paul when he said Scripture was able to instruct us, his meanning was not
that Scripture alone was able.

Wise men have more than one string to their bow; our Dr foreseeing this Rule
of faith was not sufficient; sets up an other, which is the Apostles Creed
alone: page 10 against N. N. and page 60. against J. S. Points necessary to
salvation, says he, and to the constitution of a true Church are those
contained in the Apostles Creed, which is a Summarie of Articles, that those
sacred fountains of Christianity thought fit and sufficient to be proposed to
all men, and necessary to be believed explicitly. After having thus magnified
the sufficiency of the Apostles Creed alone; in the same place against N. N. he
alters his note, and will not have it alone to be a sufficient Rule of our
faith, but jointly with the Creeds of the four first General Councils; and as
he wavers in his Doctrine, so his proof is absurd, which coms but to this; That
it is strange any man not blinded with partiality should imagine the Apostles
entrusted to preach saving Doctrine to all the World should not have given
sufficient notice of it in the system of Articles they left unto us: that those
Venerable fathers of the purer ages of Christianity congregated in the four
first General Councils should give us but a Diminut account of Catholic belief.

But Sr if the Apostles Creed alone contains all necessary Articles to
salvation, as the first part of your discourse pretends, what need had you to ad
the Creeds of the four Councils as a part of your Rule of faith? and if the
Creeds of the Councils contain any thing necessary to salvation, which is not
expressed in the Apostles Creed; then that of the Apostles alone is not a
sufficient Rule: I pray Dr is this a good discourse, Christ entrusted to teach
us to salvation preached a Sermon to his disciples Math 18. therefore all
instruction, and Articles neccssary for our salvation is expressed in that
Sermon; surely you will say this is a very frivolous and Silly discourse; give
me leave to say so much of yours, which is this; The Apostles and Councils
entrusted to teach us to salvation, delivered us these Creeds; therefore all
Articles and instruction necessary to salvation are contained in them.

Moreover, when you say that those Creeds of the Apostles and Councils contain
all necessary points to salvation to be explicitly believed, and are a
sufficient Rule of faith; Do you mean, that to be saved it is necessary to
believe explicitly all the contents of those Creeds? what sort of men do you
speak of? if of Persons who never had any instruction, you require too much;
for no Divin will stick to grant that men, even after the promulgation of the
Gospel may be saved, believing explicitly the Mysteries of the Trinity,
Incarnation, and Passion of Christ for our Redemption, tho they should ignore
explicitly other Articles expressed in the Creeds: if you speak of Persons
sufficiently instructed in Christian Religion; we must know, how far they are
instructed; if only of the contents of those Creeds; then indeed it is
sufficient to their salvation to believe the contents of those Creeds, and no
more is requisite to be believed explicitly; but if they be instructed also of
other Verities, which you call inferior Truths, as Infants Baptism, Episcopacy,
Communion in one kind, the Canon of Scripture, and two Sacraments; then indeed
tho these Verities be not contained explicitly in them Creeds, its needful to
salvation to believe them explicitly; and I hope I need no more proof to
convince you of this truth, than your own concessions; for page 60. you say,
that these inferior Verities are of equal objective certainty with fundamental
Verities and are to be believed explicitly when they are sufficiently proposed
to us to be revealed Truths: you cannot deny but that those inferior Verities
are sufficienrly proposed to you and to your Church; for you say they are
clearly contained in Scripture; you engage to prove them by Gods Written Word;
in so much that you say its an error inconsistent with salvation to deny them;
therefore whateuer you may say of Pagans or ill instructed Christians, its
evident in your Principles that you and your Church are obliged to believe
explicitly those inferior Truths, because they are sufficiently proposed unto
you to be revealed Truths; but not one of those Truths is explicitly contained
in the Creeds; therefore all points of necessary explicit belief to your, and
your Church's salvation are not explicitly contained in the Creeds.

Mistake me not Dr, the question is not what may be a sufficient Rule of faith
to Persons who are not well instructed; who never heard, but little of
Religion: I have, and do again grant that the Creeds contain all points of
necessary explicit belief to the salvation of such Persons, who have bin
instructed of no more, but what is contained in them, nay I say more, that in
regard of some Persons who never heard of those Creeds, and were instructed only
of the Mystery of the Trinity, Incarnation and Passion of Christ; those Creeds
contain more than is necessary to be explicitly believed by them: But the
question is, what is a sufficient Rule containing all points of necessary
explicit Belief to your Church and ours, which abound with light and
instruction to faith? whether the Creeds alone contain all points which your
Church is obliged under pain of damnation to believe explicitly? and its
evident they do not; for you say you are obliged to believe explicitly those
Inferior Truths, because they are sufficiently proposed to you to be Revealed;
its an error inconsistent with salvation to deny them, you say; and yet they
are not expressed in the Creeds: therefore the Creeds are not a sufficient Rule
of faith to you and your Church.

I have in my former Treatise evidenc't the insufficiency of Scripture alone
without an infallible Interpreter for to regulat our faith; and because our Dr
does boast much of the conformity of his Church in Doctrine with the first and
purest ages, I will briefly show, their Conformity with the first and impurest
Heretics; for who regulat their faith by one and the same Rule; tho they may
differ in some material points of Doctrine, they have one and the same faith. The
Ancient Heretics would have no Rule of faith but Scripture; and that, not as
interpreted by the Church, but as each one understood it; what they found,
acording their best understanding in Scripture; that they believed; what they
did not find expressed there, they rejected; tho the Councils or Church did
teach it. These things are not found in Scripture (said the Arrians disputing
against the Consubstantiality of the son of God with the father) and what is
not read there we reject. Athan. in Epist. de Syn. Arm. and Seleu. If you
bring Scripture (said Maximinus to S. Augustine) we will listen unto you; but
these Words which are not in Scripture we do not value. In what Scripture are
two Natures of Christ mentioned (says Eutyches) we follow nothing but
Scripture, and care not what exposition of it the Church gives. Let us believe
what we read in Scripture (say the Pelagians) and what we do not read in it,
let us not believe it. This was the precincts of Ancient Heretics belief;
Scripture alone, their Rule of faith; thus they trampled the authority of the
Church, for to vent their fancies without curb.

If you read the Doctrine and books of our Modern Sectaries, you will suspect a
Transmigration of souls; and that the old Heretics are com again upon the
stage to act of the new, in the persons of Luther, Calvin, etc. what they have
already don in former ages. Our Rule of faith, says Luther l. de Ser. Arb. and
to. 2. Wittem: is but Scripture as each one interprets it; we receive nothing
but Scripture. We are not to submit our judgments to the Decisions of Synods
or Councils (says Calvin, l. 4. Instit. c. 9.) if after having examined
Scripture, we do not find their interpretation and Doctrine to be according the
Word of God. Its needless (says Barlow, in Defens. Religionis Protest page
199.) that either Pope or Council, Man or Angel should teach us; the Spirit
Working in our hearts and the Scriptures are to each one assured Interpreters
Our Rule of faith is Scripture, as each Person of sound judgment in the Church
understands it: says the Church of England in the 39. Art. Did ever any egg
resemble more an other, than our Sectaries do the Ancient Heretics in their
Rule of faith? so far from agreeing with the first and purest ages, that the
Primitive fathers expressly denied Scripture alone to be our sufficient Rule of
faith; which I will prove with some few passages; it would be tedious to relate
many.

S. Denis Areop. de Eccles. Hier. c. 1. says Some things have been recorded in
Holy Writ; other heigher and more sublime Mysteries, our holy Leaders and
Masters, have from hand to hand, by preaching and Doctrine without any written
Word delivered to Posterity. So far he was from believing Scripture alone
contained all necessary points to salvation; that he says the most sublime
mysteries are not contained in them: and of this sentiment is also S. Chrysostom.
Ho. 1. in Act. Of the mysteries of the Trinity and Divin Nature of Christ, the
Apostles writ but very little and again S. Chrysostom. ad 1am. These. c. 2. orat.
4. It Is clear the Apostles did not deliver all their Doctrine in writing, but
many points without any Writing, which also are to be believed Origin lib. 2.
cont. Celsum, S Basil l. de Spir. Sancto. c. 27. and Eusebius. Demonstr. Evang. l.
1. c. 6. expressly teach, that the Apostles did purposely omit to write plainly
of the most excellent and heigh Mysteries of our Religion, contented to teach
them lightly, because the Vulgar sort was not capable of such sublime Doctrine,
and therefore committed them to the Pastors of the Church to be declared more
particularly, as occasion required and time permitted: Epiph. Haeresi 61.
says, All things cannot be taken from Scripture; the Apostles have declared
some things by writing, and some by Tradition. Of the Nature, form, Matter, and
effects of the Sacraments, (Points without doubt of necessary belief to
salvation) we know so little, that they are known to us, only by Tradition,
as S. Augustine observed lib. 1. de Fide and Oper. c. 9. upon the passage of the
Eunuch baptized by Philip, The Evangelist signified all things were fullfilled
in that action; which tho for brevity's sake they are sylenc'd in Scripture;
we know by Tradition they ought to have bin don.

And will our Dr persuade us, that Scripture alone is sufficient for our
instruction to salvation, against such emphatical expressions of the Ancient
fathers? No; he has a greater respect for them; tho he has hitherto so eagerly
asserted the sufficiency of Scripture alone; then of the Apostles Creed alone;
then again of the Apostles Creed jointly with those of the four first Councils;
now he quits these engagements, and runs upon an other as desperate.

V. CHAPTER.
OUR DOCTOR'S THIRD RVLE OF FAITH, Tradition as described by Lirine^sis: his
Opinion of the true Church.
Page 84. he resolves his faith into its vltimat Motive whereon it rests: I
believe, says he, the son of God was made Man, because I find it in Scripture
(observe he says, because I find it, not because the Church finds it,) I
believe what is written in Scripture because its the Infallible Word of God; I
believe its the Word of God because the Apostles preaching it, did confirm it
by many Miracles; and finally, that they confirmed it with Miracles; I believe
it in force of Universal Tradition, according the celebrated notion of it
delivered by Lirinensis, Quod vbique, quod semper, quod apud omnes est
creditum, what was allwaies, in all places and by all men believed, that is to
be taken for Universal Tradition.

The vltimat motive therefore of his faith, and Rule of his Belief is Universal
Tradition, as we have heard him describe it; To this, (says he page 29.) we
are resolved to stand, or fall, as well for discerning the Canon of Scripture,
as for Understanding the truc sense of it. A Dieu henceforward S. Paul's text,
and so many pages of good English unfortunately spent to defend the sufficiency
of Scripture alone for our Rule of faith: now our Dr has pitched upon an other;
he will believe no Scripture, no sense of Scripture; no revealed Truth, but
what is warranted by this Apostolic Lirinensis (as he understands it)
Tradition; that is to say, but what is believed in all places, in all times and
by all Christians: whatever was denied in any time, in any place, or by any
Christians, our Dr will not believe it, no, he will sooner hang; because it is not
of Apostolic Tradition; and hence it follows, as you shall see that you may
hide all our Doctor's faith in a Nut's shell.

For if he will believe nothing that was denied in any time and by any
Christians, he must not believe S Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, James and
Judes Epistles, nor the second and third of S. John, nor the second of S.
Peter, because all are denied by the Lutherans the Older Brethren of the
Reformation: nor must he believe the Old Testament, denied by the Valentinians
and Manicheans; nor the Ghospels because they were denied by the Marcionists,
all as Good Christians, as our Sectaries: finally as I have shown in the 2.
Chap. of the Unerring Vnerrable Church, hardly any part of Scripture but was
denied in some time, some place and by some Christians. Nor must he believe
figurative Prefence denied by Luther and his sect; nor the king's spiritual
supremacy, denied by Calvin, as I have proved in my former Treatise; nor
Episcopacy denied by the Presbiterians; also hardly any sense of Scripture but
was denied by some Christians, and in some time; and consequently if he will
believe no Scripture nor sense of Scripture, but what is believed by all
Christians, in all times and places, his faith will shrink to the bulk of a
grain of Mustard, and Protestants may expect he will with it, move mountains,
and work other Miracles in confirmation of their new Religion.

But we are not to quarrel with our Dr for this ridiculous Rule of faith for
discerning Scripture and the true sense of it; in quality of a Defender of his
Church, he could do no less, whereas the 6. Article of the 39 of England speaks
thus In the name of holy Scriptures we understand those Canonical books of the
old and new Testament of whose authority there never was any doubt in the
Church, and by the word Church they mean, as the Doctor, the whole Conhregation
of Christians: so that whatever Book the Lutherans, Valentinians, Calvinists,
Ebionits, or Marcionists ever doubted of (and hardly any but they did) must be
utterly denied to be Canonical.

Our Doctor's mistake springs from the misunderstanding of that Notion of
Apostolical Tradition, delivered by Lirinensis: if it be rightly understood,
its a true Notion, and may be a good Rule of faith* the true meaning of it is;
that what was believed in all times, and places; by all Orthodox Christians
sufficiently instructed, is of Apostolical Tradition, and nothing is of
Apostolic Tradition, that was denied at any time or place, by any Orthodox
Christians sufficiently instructed: for if a Doctrine was, or was not believed
or denied by Hetherodox Christians, or heretics, matters not a pin for to be of
Apostolic Tradition; What is Apostolic Tradition but the Depositum of Christ's
pure Doctrine delivered by the Apostles to their successors; and for to know
which is Christ's true Doctrine, we must not go to Heretics, Turks, or Pagans.
Let our Rule of faith then be Apostolical Tradition; now it remains we
distinguish true Apostolical Tradition from what is not such;

The Apostles delivered all Christian Verities either in their Written Word,
which is Scripture; or their unwritten Word, which is Tradition; The succeeding
ages began to doubt, if this or that was the Apostles Written Word; that is to
say, if this or that was true Canonical Scripture; so also they began to doubt,
and do this day doubt, if this or that Doctrine, or unwritten Word, be
Apostolical Tradition: And by what test did the Ancient Fathers distinguish
Apostolical Written Word, from not Apostolical? and Apostolical unwritten Word,
or Tradition? S. Augustine l. 3. conr. Cresc. discerns the Apostolical Written
Word, or Scripture from not Scripture by the judgment of the Church; Evangel^o
non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae commoveret authoritas. I would not believe the
Ghospel to be such, if the authority of the Church did not move me: where, by
the Church, he did not mean all Christians; for he knew that as well in his own
time, as in precedent ages, many Christians denied some parts of the true Canon;
but he meant the true Orthodox part of Christianity: And by what test did the
Ancient Fathers discern the Apostolical unwritten Word, or Tradition, from not
Apostolical? by the testimony of the Church also; for in S. Cyprian's time, he
and his Abettors held that Rebaptization of Heretics, was of Apostolical
Tradition; S. August. l. de Bapt. cont Donat. says it was not; and how does he
prove it was not? by the Authority of the Church: Multa non inveniuntur in
Scriptura, etc. Many things are not found in the writings of the Apostles, nor
in ihe Councils of their Successors, but because they were observed by the
Church they are believed to be delivered by the Apostles. He did not believe
the Validity of Heretics Baptism to be of Apostolical Tradition, because it was
believed in all times and by all Christians, (for he knew it was denied by S.
Cyprian and many others) but because it was believed by the Church, to which
(says S. Augustine) S. Cyprian, without doubt would have submitted, had he
lived to hear the judgment of the Church upon the Controversy. Our Dr
therefore, since he has pitched upon Apostolical Tradition for to be his Rule of
faith; for to know what Apostolical Tradition is; and if this or that Doctrine
be truly of Apostolical Tradition, must go to the Infallible Church for to be
assured; and if he does not he will never rest satisfied, nor the controversy
be ended: which appears in controversies betwixt the Protestants and other
Sectaries; for Protestants say Episcopacy is of Apostolical Tradition;
Presbiterians say its not; Lutherans say its of Apostolical Tradition to adore
the Consecrated Host; Protestants say its not: That the Epistle of S. Paul to
the Hebrews is Canonical Scripture, Protestants say its Apostolical Tradition;
Lutherans say it is not: I pray Dr when will ye decide these Controversies?
when will ye agre^ among yourselves? never whylst the world is world, until
ye com to some Infallible living Judge (which is the Church) to whom it
apertains to declare which is the Apostolical Written Word, or Scripture; and
which not: which is the Apostolical unwritten Word or Tradition; and which not.

It Is therefore I ptoued in the Unerring Vnerrable Church, Chap. 4. the
Necessity of a living Infallible Judge, and that to be the Catholic Church, for
to instruct us as well in this as in other doubts of Religion: but our Dr
cannot endure this arrogance and pride of ours. appropriating to ourselves the
name of Catholic and Ox^hodox, excluding all other Christian Societies from any
share of that, Title: No says he you are but a part of the Church, and a
corrupt one of the Church Universal, which is composed of all Christian
Societies: this is our Drs opinion of the true Catholic Church, declared in the
first part against N. N. 12 Chapt. and often in several Chapters of his second
part against J. S. Nor did this Paradox drop first from out Dr; Dr Morton in
his book of the kingdom of Israel page 91. says, The Arian Church is to be
esteemed a true Church because it holds the substance of Christian Religion,
which is faith in Jesus Christ son of God, and Redeemer of the world: and again
in his 4 Chap. whose Title is, Heretics are Members of the true Church he
speaks thus; whosoever belieues in Jesus Christ, tho by wickedness of life, or
heresy in Doctrine he should err, he is still a member of the Church.

It was neither Wit nor maiice that put our Dr upon such a desperate engagement
but want of memory; for had he remembered many propositions advanced by himself,
he would not have overthrown them all by this one. Page 63. he tells us
Protestants are Members of the Catholic Church; hecause they received that
dignity in their Baptism, and it is not lost but by formal Heresy or
Infidelity: Therefore by Heresy that dignity is lost, and Heretics are not
membes of the Church: Now I ask you what do you call a formal Heresy? you
answer in your Dedicatory Epistle to my Lord of Essex; that it is an obstinat
adhesion to a Doctrine opposite to Scripture: But all Christian Societies
distinct from yours, and whose Tenets are opposite to yours, hold obstinatly and
wilfully Doctrins opposite to Scripture; for you say often, that your Tenets
are plainly set down, and their Errors clearly convinced by Scripture, which
abounds with heavenly light to all those who are not wilfully obtinat;
therefore all those Congrations are guilty of formal Heresy and consequently
are not Members of the Catholic Church.

Again; had our Dr remembered what he said in his 10. Chapt. answering to my
syllogism in Ferio, that the true Church of God is obiectevely Infallible;
that is to say cannot teach any Doctrine obiectiuely falls; certainly he would
never have said, Christ's Church is composed of all those Christian Societies:
because the Tenets of those Congregations are contradictorily opposite;
Lutherans hold Real Presence; Calvinists deny it; Lutherans hold that S. Paul's
Epistles to the Hebrews is not Canonical; Protestants say it is etc. therefore
some of those congregations do hold Doctrins Objectiuely falls; therefore some of
them are not the true Catholic Church, nor any patt of it; for he confesses the
true Catholic Church cannot teach any Doctrine objectiuely falls. The Catholic
Church also as he acknowledges is the Pillar of Truth, and its clear, that
those Christian Societies taken all together, are not the Pillar of Truth,
being guilty of so many errors.

Lastly it is evident, and our Dr will not deny it, that any congregation which
holds fundamental errors against the chief and prime Articles of Christianity,
is no part of the Catholic Church: its no less evident that some of these
Christian Societies hold Errors not only against Infertor Verities but also
against the Fundamental and chief Articles of Christianity, as I have proved in
the Introduction of this book and as your own Brethren the Lutheran Writers do
expressly confess, as you may read in Brierlie trac. 2. c 2. sect. 10. sub 13.
read Samuel Huberinus (a Lutheran) his book, whose Title is An ti^hesis
Lutheranae and Calvinisticae Doctrinae in praecipui fidei Articulis; the
Contradiction of Lutherans and Calvinists in the chief Articles of faith. Read
Conradus de Theol. Calvin. l. 1. art. 18. The Calvinists have passed so far, as
to bring in doubt, no small number of chief Articles of Christian faith; the
omnipotency of God; the Personal Union of the two Natures in Christ; the
Communication of names in the Blessed Trinity; the glorious Body of Christ; his
Ascension; the difference of Sacraments, of the old and new Testament; the
force and efficacy of Grace; the Prerogative of Infants born of Infidels, the
Lords supper, and Predestination: in all these (which our Dr will not deny to
be chief and Fundamental Articles of Religion) the Lutherans and Calvinists
disagree; and therefore the same Conradus writ three books of the
irreconcilable difference betwixt Lutherans and Calvinists, and in his second
book: art. 13. says, nos negamus inter nos and Calvinistas in Doctrinae
fundamento esse consensum; Wce deny any agreement betwixt us and Calvinists in
Fundamental Articles: and therefore Stancarus a Lutheran, l. cont. Calvin:
advertises his Reader; Beware Christian Reader of the Books of Calvin,
especially in the Articles of the B. Trinity; the Incarnation, and Mediation of
Christ; the Sacrament of Baptism and Predestination; for that they contain
impious Doctrine, and Arian Blasphemies. And in his book cont. Minist Genu.
says, that the Church of Geneva and Zurich are Arians: and Nauserus, who of a
Calvinist becam an Arian, and of an Arian became a Turk in his Epistle ad
Gerlachium a Protestant Preacher, says. I know none of our age who becam an
Arian, who was not first a Calvinist; if you will shun Arianism, you must
beware of Calvinism: Go now Doctor and tell us, that your Sects agree in all
the chief and Fundamental Articles of Religion; Go and tell us, that all these
Sects so monstruously divided, compose the Catholic Church.

VI. CHAPTER.
MY ARGVMENTS FOR THE NECESSITY of a living Infallible Judge of Controversies,
and that to be the Church, unanswered.
IN my former Treatise I argued thus; either 'its lawful to each one to follow
that sense of Scripture which bona Fide, after mature consideration and prayers
to God, he thinks to be the sense of the text; and if so all the world, tho at
ears for their different Tenets, are in a good Religion; and the General
Councils have bin rash in condemning Arius, Nestorius etc. because all
Heresiarcks and Heretics will say (and why should not we believe them) that
they judge in their Conscience before God, their own sense of Scripture is the
true: Or God has required of us, that we should all believe and profess one
only sense of Scripture; that, and no other, which he has revealed; and if so;
certainly he has appointed and commissioned some supreme Authority for to teach
us what sense of Scripture is that which he will have us believe; and we are
bound to acquiesce and yield to that supreme authority, tho the sense he
proposes, may not seem to our private judgment to be the best: for if God has
not appointed such an Authority, how shall I know, which of the different
senses given to the text, is that which God has revealed: and if we be not
obliged in conscience to obey that Authority, and believe the sense proposed by
it; then I may, and so may every other, without any scruple reject that sense,
and each one hold his own, and so there will be no imaginable way for us to be
of one and the same faith. This supreme Authority I proved to be the Church,
and I have no answer from my Dr to all my discourse but a very civil complement
page 29. he says; if he thinks Scripture is not sufficient for to decide our
Controversies, we will admit with S. Augustine, the Authority of the Church,
and Tradition as expounded by Lirinensis: But this compliance to my discourse
signifies nothing, if by Church and Tradition, he Understands all Christian
Societies; for if we must believe no sense of the text but what they all agree
in, we must believe none at all. I proved by convincing arguments that this
Teaching and Proposing Church must be the Roman Catholic Church; and my Dr
answers, that Iam a fool as the great Turk for calling himself king of kings:
assuredly this is a short and smart method of answering, had Bellarmin and
stillingfleet discovered this method of anfwering, they might have reduced
their great books to a few sheets of paper.

I proved our obligation of submitting to the Doctrine of this supreme
Authority; because Christ laid his commands, not only upon the Apostles, but
also upon their successors in succeeding ages, of preaching, teaching and
ruling the flock; and laid his commands on the flock not only of the Apostles
days, but on the flock of all succeeding ages, of hearing, believing, and
obeying their Pastors and Leaders, for to be conveyed all into one faith: Our
Dr answers in the tone of a grave man; What he ads of Obedience due from the
flock to their Pastors, is right, speaking of each flock in regard of their
ordinary lawful Pastors: This restriction, speaKing of their ordinary lawful
Pastors, was foisted in for some mischief: doubtless it was to absolve the flock
of England from any Obedience to the Pope.

But Pray Dr when Luther and his merry Companions began to vent their
Novelties, was there not a Church extant, and consequently Ordinary and lawful
Pastors, to whom they owed Obedience? were they not obliged to obey those
Ordinary lawful Pastors, and acquiesce to their Doctrine as Christ commands us
by S. Paul, that we live in Unity of faith and not be carried away with every
wind of Doctrine? were they not then, Schismatics, for not submitting to those
lawful Pastors? this obligation of submitting to that Authority descended to
the Lutherans; for that Church and Authority which he was obliged to obey is
still the same; and has still the right of exacting obedience from the flock;
consequently the Lutherans are Schismatics for not submitting to it: and if the
Lutherans be guilty, the Church of England is no less; because you were then
under the same Authotity and ordinary Pastors, to which you owed Obedience, and
therefore you are obliged to return.

It was to eneruat this discourse that my Antagonist inserted that word, that
each particular flock owes obedience to their lawful Ordinary Pastors;
pretending that the Church or flock of England owes Obedience only to the
Pastors of England; that as the king in each kingdom is the head of the Church
so the Pastors of each kingdom are the lawful Ordinary Pastors in that kingdom
to whom the flock owes Obedience; the flock of England must obey the Pastots of
England; the flock of France, the Pastors of France and so of the rest. And if
you ask what way imaginable is there then, to keep us in Unity of faith; for it
may happen that the Pastors of England, France, and Spain may deliver different
Doctrins; the one believe the Divinity of Christ, the other deny it; the one
believe the true Canon of Scripture and the other deny it: this may, and does
happen; in this case all the flock of these kingdoms are obliged to have one
and the same faith: which Pastors must they believe? does reason or Scripture
oblige the flock of Spain to believe the Pastors of France? or that of France
the Pastors of England? No: why then in this case you have nothing to answer,
but that each flock is bound to obey their own Ordinary Domestic Pastors, and
so be all of three different Religions one from an other; or that there is one
Pastor above them all, to which as well the flock as the Pastors are bound to
submit, and obey.

And this we will prove out of the Church of England: for, in Ireland as there
is in each Parish a Pastor to watch over the flock; so there is in each
Bishopric a Bishop to rule the subordinat Pastors; in each Province there is
an ArchBishop whose care is to keep Unity of Doctrine and Discipline among the
Bishops; in the kingdom there is a Primat who has a supreme Jurisdiction over
all the Pastors and Prelates. Now as Controversies may arrise betwixt the
Pastors of one kingdom, so there may betwixt the Pastors of different Nations;
why therefore, as besides Scripture and Christ our invisible head you admit a
supreme visible head over all the Pastors of each kingdom, will not you grant a
visible Universal Pastor over all the flock of Christ and over all the Pastors
of different Nations, for to keep them in Unity of Doctrine: for if you read the
Scripture, you shall not find that Christ should have made any mention of any
particular Pastor for each particular flock; but he made mention of One supreme
Pastor for to govern his whole flock, Vnum Ouile and Vnus Pastor: this One
flock which Christ spoke of, certainly is composed of all the particular flocks
of diverse kingdoms; therefore that one Pastor, which he spoke of is the Pastor
of all kingdoms.

The Church of England, and our Dr page 60. tells us Inferior or Not
fundamental Truths implicitly contained in Scripture, are of so great
consequence to our salvation, that it is a damnable error to deny them; that
all Nations are obliged to believe them when they are sufficiently proposed to
us, to be revealed Truths; surely these Truths were revealed that they might be
proposed to, and believed by all Nations: therefore God has appointed some
Authority in the Church for to propose unto all Nations, and oblige them all to
believe those Truths proposed by that Authority: there must be therefore some
Authority which has a power over all Nations; but the Pastors of any particular
kingdom are not empowered to oblige the flock of an other kingdom; therefore
there must be one Pastor who has Authority and power over all. Nor will it be a
satisfactory answer to say that God gave the Scripture to all Nations, whereby
to learn all Truth; first because besides Scripture, its needful that in each
particular kingdom there be one supreme Pastor, who has authority over all the
Pastors of that kingdom, as we have discoursed but now; so likewise besides
Scripture there must be one supreme Pastor, whose charge is to teach and rule
all Pastors of all Nations; for Christ gave his commission for to teach certain
Truths of Religion to all Nations; Ite, praedicate Evangelium Omni creaturae,
in Vniversum mundum; as therefore for to teach Particular kingdoms, you grant
besides Scripture, one Supreme Pastor in that kingdom; why not one Supreme
Pastor over all kingdoms? Secondly, its not a Scripture or a Written book which
Christ gave to teach; (for as I obserucd in my former Treatise, Christ gave no
Scripture, nor any Commission to his Apostles to write it;) but Living Pastors
and teachers: thirdly I have proved and its evident that Scripture does not
contain all Truths which all Nations are obliged to believe: lastly because the
true Canon itself of Scripture is doubted of by many Nations: there must be
then a supreme Authority for to answer to this doubt, to whom all Nations are
obliged to acquiesce. This supreme Authority was believed by the Christian
World to be in the Pope and Council before Luther and Calvin's revolt, to this
Authority they gave obedience then, and now they deny it; they are therefore
guilty of Schism, and bound to return to that Obedience.

I proved in my former Treatise of this subject that it was the practice of
Gods Church in all ages, when ever any Controversy in Religion arrised betwixt
two Parties; it was never determined by their altercations, disputes and
Interpretations of the Text; but the question was deuolued to the Church
convened in a General Council, to which both Parties were obliged to submit,
and he esteemed an Heretic who would not acquiesce to the Decision of the
Council: That no Apellation nor Protestation against the Council under pretense
of being a Party, or of being of the contrary Doctrine to the Person accused,
was admitted; but he was obliged to submit his Doctrine to the judgment of the
Council. I proved also at large that this was the practice of the Reformed
Church, in the Synods of Dordrect and Delph in Holland; where Arminius
protested against the Synod, as being a Party because it was composed for the
most part of Gomarists: but the Synod declared him a Schismatic, if he did not
wave his Apellation, and submit himself to its Judgment in that Controversy,
and declared itself to be the competent Judge in that cause. I inferred hence,
the obligation of Luther and the whole Reformation that he ought to have
submitted himself to the Church convened in the Council of Trent, to which the
Decision of the Controversies apertained. My good Dr answers page 31. that the
Pope and Council of Trent, were the Party accused; that Luther nor the
Reformation did not therefore, nor ought not to submit unto them: this was the
answer of Arminius to Dordrect. And Dordrect judged him to be a Schismatic for
so answering; this was the answer of Arius and all Heretics against the
Councils who condemned them; and they were judged Schismatics for not
submitting; and must not our Doctor also be judged a Schismatic with his Master
Luther, if they do not wave this Protestation.

VII. CHAPTER.
OUR DOCTOR'S DESINGENVITY IN HIS Replies to my Discourse of Church
Infallibility.
AFter I had proved the Necessity of a Living Judge of Controversies, and it
to be the Church; and for to avoid all Cauils I purposely advertised, I did not
speak of the Pope alone; because his Infallibility was no Article of faith but
a school question denied by many Catholics, and affirmed by many; I declared I
would speak only of the Infallibility of the Church, both Diffusive, and
Representative, in the Pope and Council together: and because our Dr objected
our Catholics were divided in the Doctrine of Church Infallibility, and quoted
Turrecremat, Alfonsus a Castro, and Aquinas to have said, that even the Pope
and Council jointly could err materially; I answered that our Article of faith
was, that they could not err neither formally nor materially in Doctrine of
faith and manners; and challenged him to show me any one Orthodox Doctor which
ever said the contrary; and that Turrecremat, Aquinas and Alfonsus a Castro
only said they could err materially in matter of fact, but not of Doctrine: I
have for Reply from my Dr: that those Authors say, the Pope and Council
jointly can err materially; and no squint eyed man but sees this is an
impertinent answer, whereas my challenge was, to show any Dr who says they can
err materially in Doctrine.

But what does he answer to my argument for the Infallibility of the Church
Diffusive, or Representative? a story of a mile long, of Clermont College and
Sorbonists; the one defending in public Theses; and the other impugning the
Infallibility of the Pope alone without a Council: And what is all this to our
question in hand? for our question was of the Infallibility of the Pope and
Council jointly: did not I grant in my 7. Chapt. that many Catholics denied,
and many asserted the Popes Infallibility, and therefore I said it was but a
School question, and I would not speak of it, but of the Infallibility of the
Pope and Council jointly? you are desingenuous Dr: and decline the question:
but I must not complain; you are very kind to me: you are afraid that my
Brethren of Clermont will take it ^ill I deny the Infallibility of the Pope
alone to be an Article of faith: for how will the Jansenists be esteemed
Heretics, whereas they were condemned by the Pope alone, without any Council,
and its no Article of faith the Pope is Infallible? I thank you for your
kindness; but your fear is pannick: for its not only the Church Representative
in the Pope and Council is Infallible; but also the Church Diffusive, as it
comprehends all the Pastors and Prelates; and Jansenism was not only condemned
by Innocent the X. and Alexander the VII. but their Sentence was aproued by the
Universal Church Diffusive and so Jansenism is as legally condemned as
Protestancy.

But is it possible Dr that we have forgot the Controversy of the Infallibility
of the Church, which was the question in debate? and fallen into that of the
Pop's infallibility which is quite out of our road? not one argument or text
does he bring to prove the fallibilitie of the Church, but that thredbare
syllogism which I answered in my former Treatise: Infallibility said he in his
Sermon (and is not ashamed to say it again in his new book) is an Attribut
proper to God; but it is a formal blasphemy, says S. Thomas Aquinas to give
Gods proper Attributs to any creature; therefore its a blasphemy to say the
Church is infallible. The sexton of his Parish of Swoords would have saved him
his voyage to Oxford for this argument and the answer of it; for doubtless he
knows the Apostles and Prophets were infallible, and consequently there is a
vast difference betwixt Gods Attribut of Infallibility and that which is given
to Creatures. I answered him that Intrinsic Infallibility by nature and proper
Perfection, is Gods Attribut, it being impossible to him in any case or
supposition to deceive or be deceived: This is not challenged by the Church of
Rome; she is infallible only by Gods Protection who has promised not to suffer
her to teach or embrace any Error; the Apostles were thus infallible, and the
Church in fundamental points, as Protestants confess; and where is there any
thing like a blasphemy in this? or where is our Dr^'s sincerity in not taking
notice of, or replying against this answer, and repeating again his old
syllogism as if no answer had been given to it?

But he lets fly some Queries against us; first, if God can lend his Attribut
of Omnipotency to his Creatures? and thence concludes he cannot give his
Infallibility: but the good Man is mistaken in thinking we pretend that God
gives his Infallibility to his Church; its not his Attribut of Infallibility
he gives; but his promiss of not suffering her to err in Doctrine of faith and
Manners, as he did to the Apostles: Dr can you deny, but that he gave this kind
of infallibility to the Apostles? and dare you say he gave them his
Omnipotency? His second Quaere if it be not a damnable arrogance to parallel
the Church with the Apostles, Gods sacred Organs, as all the world
acknowledges? hold Dr; not all the World, for the greatest Oracles of your
Reformation (and by this my Reader will see what a pretty Reformation our Dr
has choosen) say they were not only fallible, but they actually and foulie
erred in what they writ and taught. Zuinglius to 2. cont. Cataph. fol. 10. Its
a great ignorance to believe any infallible authority in the Ghospels and
Epistles of the Apostles: Clebitius a learned Scribe of the Reformation, Vict.
Verit. ar. 5. Lukes relation of Christ's Passion is not true, because it does
not agree with that of Matthew and Mark, and more credit is to be given to two,
than to one. Luther your grand Reformer to. 5. Wittemb. printed. an. 1554. and
Epist. ad Gal. c. 1. says that Peter lived and taught extra Verbum Dei, beyond
the Word of God: and again l. de Captivit. Babyl. c. de Extr. Vnct. says S.
James spoke foolishly of extreme Unction, Calvin your Reformed Apostle says
(in Cap. 2. ad Gal. that Peter added to the Schism of the Church, and overthrow
of Christian Liberty and Christ's Grace. Whitaker a Hector of your Church de
Eccl. cont. Bellarm. Contr. 2. ques. 4. says its evident that after the
descent of the Holy Ghost, the whole Church even the Apostles erred; and that
Peter erred not only in manners but in Doctrine.

Now Dr tell us that all the World reueres the Apostles as Gods Oracles; had
you said indeed that all the Orthodox World bear that respect unto them, we
would believe you; but when you hear Drs of your own Reformation speak as I
have related, and many more of them speak as ill, whom I omit for brevity sake,
you need not be proud of your good opinion of the Apostles, nor accuse me of
insolence and damnable arrogance for parallelling the Church in the point of
Infallibility with them: if it be insolence in me so to do, S. Gregory was as
insolent as I: I Embrace, said he, the four first General Councils, as the four
Ghospels. Parallelling the Church of the four first ages with the Evangelists
in the certainty of their Doctrine; and truly by all I can perceive of your
opinion this censure of damnable arrogance reachs to yourself as much as to me;
for you parallel the Church with the Apostles; all the Prerogative you grant
to the Apostles is, that they are Gods Unerring Oracles; I have with particular
reflection observed and cannot find in your whole book that you should have
called the Apostles Infallible Orales, but page 36. you say they are Unerring
Oracles: also page 15. you call the Church Unerring; Not properly Infallible,
say you, but by the assistance of the H. Ghost, shall not err in fundamental
points; and elss where you call her Unerring Oracle: the same Prerogative of
certainty and sted fastness in Truth which you grant to the Apostles, you give
it to the Church, and no more, nor no less: see you, may I say that you are
damnably arrogant in parallelling the Church with the Apostles.

But we must not let pass this word Unerring, newly coined by our Adversaries
for to escape the force of our Catholic Arguments for Infallibility; they will
not grant the Church, nor the Apostles, for ought we can see by our Dr to be
Infallible or Vnerrable; but they say the Church is Unerring: and if by the
word Unerring they understand any thing under Vnerrable so as to say the Church
and Apostles are not Infallible or Vnerrable, we will demonstrat their impiety
and damnable arrogance; and that the Apostles and Church are not only Unerring
that is to say, will not err; but also Vnerrable, that is to say cannot err. For
the Apostles were not only Unerring, but also Vnerrable in what they writ;
other wise Scripture would not be Gods Infallible Word: and who can deny but
that they were as infallible in what they taught verbally, as in what they
writ? whereas S. Paul says Gal. 1. 8. that the word he preached to them, was
not of man, but of God. The same we must say of the Church: first because no
text of Scripture does warrant the Infallibility of the Apostles (as we have
showed in my former Treatise and will appear in the next ensuing Chapter) that
does not also warrant the Infallibility of the Church: Secondly you grant the
Church is Gods Unerring Oracle, that by the assistance of Gods H. Spirit it
will not err: I ask; is this a revealed Truth, that God has promised that
Assistance to his Church, or not? if it be not revealed; why do you believe it?
or what warrant have you for to say it? if it be revealed; then the Church is
infallible as we pretend: for all the Infallibility we claim for our Church,
is that God has Promised in Holy Writ, to lead the Church into all truth, so as
never to suffer her to err; which promiss being made its as impossible the
Church should err; as it is that Gods promiss should fail.

In his 3. Chap. he rallies pleasantly turning one of my Arguments into
ridicule: I. S. says he, seems not to be very strong in the belief of
Infallibility, because all the proof he gives for to persuade his Brethren to
his belief is an imaginary comfort they have in believing their Church, which
guides them, to be infallible, which comfort says he, must be grounded, not
upon the real existence of that infallibility, but upon a strong appr^hension
or belief of it, tho it be not extant; and to give some plausible appearance to
this calumny, he chops my discourse and relates the one half of my words: but
that my Reader may judge if my argument be as ridiculous, as my Antagonist is
desingenuous, I will propose my discourse which was thus: If we consider the
testimonies of Scripture, the consent of ages, the multitude of Universities,
Drs and fathers, which teach Infallibility; its as likely (to say no more) that
you are mistaken in believing Church Fallibility, as that I am mistaken in
believing Infallibility: as to the truth therefore of this Doctrine you have no
more assurance of the truth of your Tenet than I have of mine: thus far we are
equal: but I have a huge advantage in believing the Doctrine of Infallibility
which you cannot have in believing fallibility; for faith is our road to
salvation, you travel in one faith or road, I travel in an other, we are
doubtful of the road; my advantage is, that I am guided by a Church which I
firmly believe and am fully assured is infallible, cannot err, cannot be
mistaken, cannot bias me: I am like a Traveller, who tho he does not know the
road, he is fully persuaded, and without the least doubt that his guide who
undertakes to lead him is so knowing in the way that he cannot miss it; the
Traveller goes on in his journey, follows his guide, his mind is at rest, he is
fully satisfied, and has not the least fear of being biased: so a Catholic
being fully persuaded and believing the Infallibility of his Church, lives with
a quiet mind free from doubts and fear of going astray because he is persuaded
the Church which guides him cannot err; and tho really the Tavellers guide were
not so thoroughly acquainted with the road, but that he may stray, yet the
Traveller being fully persuaded that he cannot; travells with satisfaction
without any fear or doubt.

But if a Traveller did not know the road, and were persuaded that the guide
which leads him, is not so expert but that he may go astray; truly he must be
allwaies fearful, dubious, and without rest of mind, doubtful if he goes
well, or if he be by ass'd. So it is with the Protestant in his faith which is
the road to, Salvation he knows not the way well; he is guided by a Church,
which he belieues may err in the road, ought not he to live and walk in
continual fear? Hence I inferred that any wise man ought to choose the Doctrine
of Infallibility before that of fallibility: for in believing Infallibility he
does not hazard his salvation, because in the actual Profession of our Roman
Tenets a man may be saved, say the Protestants; secondly because in the belief
of fallibilitie it is as likely the Protestants are deceived, as the Catholics
in believing Infallibility: the Catholics run no greater hazard of believing an
untruth, than the Protestants; it may be (the Protestant will say) there is no
such thing really, as Infallibility; and so the Catholics will be deceived. And
it may be, says the Catholic to the Protestant, there is no such thing as
fallibility, and so you will be deceived: and since I hazard nothing by it, and
I am as likely to believe a true Doctrine as you; why will not I choose the
Tenet of Infallibility, which gives me rest of mind without any doubt or fear
in the full assurance of the truth I profess; rather than your Tenet of
fallibility, which leaves you doubtful and suspense if what you believe, be
true or falls; if the road you walk in, be the right road or no? Let my Reader
be judge if this discourse be so ridiculous, as Dr Sall thought to represent it;

To my argument for Church Infallibility, drawn from her long Possession of
that prerogative, never denied to her but by known Heretics; therefore not to
be denied to her now without evident proof, of her being an unjust possessor,
whereas possession of 1500. years is a weighty argument in all Commonwealths to
maintain the Possessors, if evident proofs be not produced to prove him an in
just usurper: My Dr answers that here I prepare a Sanctuary for Robbers and
Thieves; and that what was Lawful in the beginning, by continuance of time
grows not to be lawful; and without any more, passes by, without proving (as
he ought to have don) that our Church is a Robber or Thief of this prerogative;
and that in progress of time her possession was forfeited, which in the
beginning was lawful: He tells us in his 25. chapt. that a Possessor may be
questioned for his Title; and if he does not prove it must forfeit his
possession: We answer; our Title is this, that our Church in the bnginning was
settled in the possession of Christ's true Doctrine; (for the Protestants
acknowledge, she we once the true Church,) that Christ promised her the
conduct of his assisting spirit until the Consummation of the world, and that
the gates of Hell should not prevail against her. By virtue of this promiss
she continued her possession by your acknowledgment, for many ages: she was
attackt by several Heretics from time to time, accusing her to have fallen from
the truth: she was honorably discharged by General Councils, and never yet
condemned by any; but her Title approved and her possession continued. Now our
Dr starts up to question this so ancient and so often approved a Title: must he
not bring evident proofs against her, or be hissed out of Court like a wrangler.

VIII. CHAPTER.
HIS ANSWERS TO THE TEXTS alleged for Church Infallibility examined.
NOt a word of answer have I from my Dr to all the texts of Scripture, which I
alleged for Church Infallibility, but what replies I made my self against
them, and I answered: and his answers are two; the first, that what texts
import the assurance of Gods infallible spirit, are not appliable to the
Church, but only to the Apostles; which answer I refuted in a full and large
Chapt. proving that the Church even in succeeding ages to the Apostles was and
is still infallible and not a syllable does my Dr answer to this Chapter: and
its to be admired the Dr should give this answer, if he were not so much
acustomed to co^tradict himself; for he says the Church, is God's Unerring
Oracle through the Assistance of God's spirit; this he cannot know but by some
texts of Scripture; therefore those texts are appliable, and if they prove
infallibility; they prove that of the Chuch: but let us hear some of those
texts; the first is that of Math. 16. upon his Rock (meaning Peter) I will build
my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. What Church is
that which Christ built upon Peter? is it the Apostles alone? or his Universal
Church, which was to continue in succeeding Ages after them? if the Apostles;
then you must acknowledge (and that Protestants will be loath to do) that Peter
is the foundation, head, and chief of the Apostles, that their faith is
grounded upon him: If the Church Universal, which was to continue in
succeeding ages? then the text is appliable to the Church, and by it we are
assured, that the gates of Hell, that is to say Error or Heresy, shall not
prevail against her; which is to be infallible.

An other Text Jo. 14. If you ask any thing in my name I will do it; and I will
pray the father; and he will give you an other Comforter that will abide with
you for ever, even the spirit of Truth. Three things are promised by this Text:
and all three appliable to the Church in all ages, as well as to the Apostles:
the first is; If you ask any thing in my name I will do it. This promiss
undoubtedly relates to the whole Church, and it were ridiculous and erroneous
to say that it was made to the Apostles and to none else. The second; If you
lone me keep my Commandments; was this said to the Apostles alone? was the
observance of the Commandments required only of them in testimony of their
love? The third; and I will pray my father, and he will give you an other
Comforter who will abide with you for ever, even the spirit of Truth. If these
words be appliable to the Church, its evident the text proves the
Infallibility of the Church, as convincingly as that of the Apostles; And that
those words are appliable to the Church, it seems undoubted since that the
precedent words of the same text are appliable to her; particularly that the
later words import the Comforter's abiding for ever which cannot be said of the
Apostles own persons, who were not to be for ever;

The third Text Mat. 28. Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the name of
the father son and H. Ghost; lo I am with you until the Consummation of the
world. Blindness it self cannot but see that this text proves Infallibility,
and is appliable to the Church, for, whom is he to be with, until the
Consummation of the World? with those to whom he gave his commission for to
Baptize, Teach and preach: and who were they to whom Christ gave this
Commission? not only to the Apostles; but to the Church in succeeding ages;
therefore this text is appliable; and the Promiss of Christ's aboade until the
Consummation of the world was made, not only to the Apostles, but to the Church
which succeeds in all ages: Nor will you escape the force of this text, by
saying the abode of God's spirit promised to the Church until the consummation
of the world, was only conditional, if they lived in God's love and observance
of his Commandments; because it would follow, that the Commission also given
them in the same text of preaching, Baptizing and teaching was only
conditional, if they lived in Gods love, and observance of his commandments;
and so none could exercise those functions, but when he is in the state of
Grace.

And what is to be admired is, that our Dr brings no kind of proof, for to
prove that these texts are not appliable to the Church, but his word, and a
little quillet which weighs as little as his word: for I quoted a text out of
S. John. 15. When ^he Paraclet shall come whom I will send from my father unto
you even the spirit of truth; he will give testimony of me, and ye will give
test^monie. From which text I argued thus: the witnesses appointed by Christ to
give testimony of him and his Doctrine were the spirit of God, and the Church;
the testimony proceeds from both jointly, from the Paraclet inwardly inspiring,
and the Church outwardly declaring; therefore this testimony is infalliblie
true: No, quoth our Dr the texts relate only to the Apostles; and not at all to
the Church: no man in his senses will say otherwise: and why so? Because, says
he, the Apostles only and not the Church, were with Christ since the beginning,
and the text in its last words says they were to give testimony of him, who
were with him from the beginning, which last words of the text, he says, I
fraudulently left out, and corrupted the text: Reader I Will be judged by you if
our Dr has not lost his senses as well as his reason; Only the Apostles he
sates, were the witnesses appointed by Christ for to give testimony of Christ,
because they alone were with him from the beginning, No man in his senses will
say other wise. Therefore the Church of England gives no testimony of Christ
nor his Doctrine, because she was not with Christ from the beginning; Nor S.
Paul was with Christ from the beginning; nor the four first General Councils;
nor a word of the new testament. Therefore none of them were competent
witnesses for to give testimony of Christ or his Doctrine; No man in his senses
will say they were. And by this you may see it was neither fraud nor
deprauation of the text made me omit those last words of the text, but because
they did not concern the controversy in hand. And this little quillet is all
the answer we have from him to prove those texts are not appliable to the
Church.

If our Dr did contradict but in the end of his book what he said in the
beginning of it; it would be pardonable; but to tell us in his 7. Chapt. that
the texts importing Infallibility are not at all appliable to the Church: and
then again in the self sam Chapt. to tell us they are appliable to the Church
conditionally if she be in God's love and grace; argues a mighty want of
memory: but just now he said, No man in his sense could apply those texts to
the Church: the man, surely, has lost his senses; for page 44. of that Chap. he
says those texts relate to the Church, and were pronounced by Christ in her
favor, but still conditionally that she continue in Gods love and grace: and
because the Church has failed in this condition by the many crimes of her
Pastors and Prelates; she has forfeited the conduct of Gods assisting Spirit of
Truth, and is no more infallible.

From this Paradox it follows that those Promises were also Conditional in
regard of the Apostles; for neither Scripture, nor any thing but a groundless
fancy can persuade, that those Promises were Absolut in regard of the One; and
Conditional only in regard of the other: read the Texts and you shall see it:
and whereas in the Apostles time there were many and grieveous sinners in the
Church, (tho they were Saints themselves) it follows that the Church in their
time did forfeit her Infallibility because she was not in the love of God, and
observance of his Commandments. Secondly it follows the Church now has not the
Assistance of Gods spirit in fundamental Points, and so she is fallible in
them; which Protestants will not say: thirdly it follows the four first General
Councils had not that assistance, which is contrary* to the Doctrine of the
Church of England.

But let us prove directly the absurdity of this conditional Promiss: This
Proposition is now absolutely true, and independently of any condition; The
Church is the Pillar and foundation of Truth; notwithstanding the sins of
Pastors and Prelates, this proposition is true; as Dr Sall himself confesses as
well in his Sermon, as in his Book: also he says in his 15. page against J. S.
that the Church, tho it be not properly infallible yet it shall not err in
fundamental Doctrine, because the Church Universal has, and is to have the
assistance of the Holy Ghost: therefore the Church now, notwithstanding all the
sins and transgressions of our Pastors and prelates, has the Assistance of Gods
infallible spirit; for if you take the Church separatly from the Assistance of
Gods spirit; it is not, nor can it be called The Pillar of Truth: since
therefore it is now truly the Pillar of Truth notwithstanding all our sins; it
has now the Assistance of Gods spirit notwithstanding our sins; therefore that
Assistance of Gods spirit was not promised Conditionally.

And what is execrable to be said (as I observed in my former Treatise) is,
that if Gods promiss of his assisting infallible spirit, be only conditional,
we cannot be sure that the Ghospels are infallible: for if the Evangelists
when they writ them were not in the state of Grace, they had not the assistance
of Gods infallible spirit; as the Dr says; and in the principles of the Church
of England nothing assures us that they were in the state of Grace then; for
Protestants will take nothing for sure but what is expressed in Scripture; and
no text of Scripture mentions their being then in the state of Grace:
consequently nothing assures us that the Ghospels are infallible. Our Dr rings
a great peale of insolent impiety against me for this execrable Position,
That nothing assures us the Evangelists were in the state of Grace; the censure
of insolent impiety is most deservedly past; but its not pardonable, that the
Dr should lay it at my door, the Position not being mine, but an unavoidable
sequel out of his Church's Principles.

As it is an unavoidable sequel out of their Principles, that we are assured
the Ghospels are not infallible, because the Evangelists in the principles of
the Protestant Church were not in the state of Grace; whereas it is the
Protestant Doctrine, that it is impossible to keep Gods Commandments. Here our Dr
will dash out my brains, (if rattling can do it) for so great a Calumny: he
never heard any Protestant utter so desperate a Position. Happily he did not; he
is but a young Protestant. But Dr do not you tell us in your 12. Chapt. against
N. N. that the Religion of England is the same with the Religion of your
sectaries in Holland, and France? and do not you know that the Rigid Calvinist,
and the Gomarists of Holland do believe Gods Commandments to be impossible? in
case you do not; read the Acts of the Synod of Dordrect; read Luther to. 1.
Edit. Jen. page 46. Call. Harm. Evang. in Luc. c. 10. and in Math. c. 22. and
lib. 2. Instit. c. 7. read W^lle^ in Synop. Papis. page 564. O! but say you
the Protestants of England detest this Doctrine: I answer that they do, and they
do not: they do, because in their Cathecisms and in most of their Authors they
deny it: They do not; because they and you with them embrace the Calvinists,
Gomarists and others who believe this abominable Tenet, to be your Brethren of
one and the same Religion with you; that their faith and belief is a saving
faith: and is not this, as much as to approve that Doctrine as Orthodox and
tolerable?

But Dr did you never read the 39. Articles of the Church of England? did not
you meet in the 6. Art. and in your Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England
page 103. that the Rule of faith of the Church of England is, Scripture as each
Person of sound judgment in the Church understands it: if this be your rule of
faith, you will never give a more exact definition of your Protestant Doctrine than
this; Whatever any of sound judgment in your Church interprets to be contained
in Scripture: Luther, Calvin, Willet, Gomarus and his Disciples, were men of
sound judgment and of your Church, (for you say all Christian societies are of
one Church;) and they all teach the Impossibility of Gods Commandments to be
contained in Scripture; therefore this is the Doctrine of the Protestant
Church: I confess Protestants in England deny it; but I say they must and ought
to believe it, or change their Rule of faith and 39. Articles.

IX. CHAPTER.
MY SYLLOGISM IN FERIO, PROVING the Protestant Church, not to be the Church nor
any part of the Church of Christ, vindicated and enforced against Doctor Sall.
IUndertook to prove in the 8. Chap. of my former Treatise that the Protestant
Church is not the Church of Christ nor any part of it, because it does not
teach his Doctrine; and no Church can be called the Church of Christ further
than it teachs his Doctrine: That Protestancy or Doctrine of the Protestant
Church, as it is condistinct from Catholecism, or the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, is not the Doctrine of Christ nor any part of it, I proved it with this
syllogism in Ferio. No fallible Doctrine is the Doctrine nor any part of the
Doctrine of Christ; but Protestancy as it is condistinct from Catholecism,
(that is to say the Doctrine wherein they differ from us, and for which they
separated from us) is altogether fallible Doctrine; therefore Protestancy is not
the Doctrine nor any part of the Doctrine of Christ. That Protestancy is
altogether fallible Doctrine, I proved it; because the Doctrine wherein
Protestants differ from us, is altogether of Inferior Verities, of Points not
fundamental; This, no ingenuos Protestant will stick to grant; for its the
express confession of Protestants, that Catholics and Protestans agree in
fundamental points; and therefore they pretend we are all of one Religion as
to the substance, and that we may be saved in our Religion, because our Errors
are only in Inferior and not fundamental Doctrine, which shocks not the
foundation of Religion; But the Doctrine of Inferior Verities, and Points not
fundamental is altogether fallible Doctrine; Nor will any Protestant deny this
Proposition who understands well the Doctrine of his Church; for its the
constant Doctrine of Protestants, and Dr Sall himself says it page 15. against
J. S. that the Church cannot err in fundamental points of faith, but that it
may and has erred in points not fundamental or Inferior Truths. Therefore
Protestancie or the Doctrine wherein Protestants differ from us is but fallible
Doctrine, and consequently not the Doctrine of Christ.

It Is a pitiful thing to see how my poor Dr is entangled in this argument:
his first, and best answer is to say my Thesis is Insolent, and a big promising
Title; but if his answer be not good, it will prove as performing as it is
promising: let us hear his answer: He will have us premiss (says he) that
Protestants allow Papists not to err in points fundamental. What shufling, and
ambiguous terms be these? He will have us premiss; what? do you think I beg
that of you as a favor? is it not your own acknowledgement in your Dedicatory
Epistle to the Earl of Essex, that the Church of Rome was once the true Church?
is it not also your acknowledgement page 15. that the true Church is to have
the continual assistance of the Holy Ghost for not to err in fundamental points
of Religion? do not you acknowledge in the beginning of your book that Roman
Catholics may be saved in their Religion? and can any be saved in the
profession of fundamental errors? I proved in my former treatise that almost
all your sectaries confess rhis truth, and it is the constant Doctrine of the
Church of England.

He goes on, but quite out of the Road, and tells us, that fundamental points
are those which are contained in the Creed; and this is nothing to our purpose;
for to answer my argument, it matters not a pin's head to know where the
fundamental points are contained; or what they are; what avails us, is to know
that the Doctrine wherein you differ from us, is only the Doctrine of, not
fundamental points: after his long rambling he comes at last to my syllogism:
He grants the Major proposition, that no fallible Doctrine is the Doctrine of
Christ; he denies the Minor, that Protestancy is all fallible Doctrine: to the
second Syllogism he, gives me for granted (and no thanks to him for it) that
Protestancy, or Doctrine wherein they differ from us is altogether of points not
fundamental; but the Minor stings him, that the Doctrine of points not
fundamental is fallible Doctrine; stop here, says he, and an eternal stop
should be put to your tongue: but what will it avail you to stop my tongue, if
you do not cut of my fingars? and why must my poor tongue be stopped? because he
says it is a formal blasphemy to say the Doctrine of points not fundamental, or
Inferior Truths is fallible: Indeed? and why is it a blasphemy? because quoth
he, it is to say the Word of God is fallible, for inferior Verities are
implicitly contained in God's Written Word and Tradition. Stop here Dr and an
eternal stop should be put to your Logic: my Argument is this; Inferior
Verities are fallible Doctrine and therefore not the Word of God, nor to be
found in Scripture; and you answer me, Inferior Verities are infallible Doctrine
because they are Gods Word contained in Scripture: is this your Logic? to give
your Conclusion in debate, for a reason? you challenge me to acknowledge often
in my book, that points not fundamental are Inferior Verities contained in the
Word of God: for shame Dr; you impose upon me, and deceive your Reader; you
shall not find any such acknowledgment in all my book; nay page 147. of the
Unerring Vnerrable Church, I deny any distinction of fundamental and not
fundamental points in our Catholic Principles'; because any Doctrine which is
sufficiently proposed to us to be a revealed Truth, is to us a fundamental
point of necessary belief to salvation; and whatever Doctrine is not
sufficiently proposed to be a revealed Truth, is neither a fundamental, or not
fundamental point of faith.

But let us see how did I prove the Doctrine of points not fundamental and
inferior Truths to be fallible Doctrine; for in this consists the force of my
argument: I proved it by the Protestants own Principles, for the Church, say
they, can err, and has erred in the Doctrine of points not fundamental;
therefore the Doctrine of points not fundamental is fallible; consequently not
the Doctrine of Christ: Observe Reader, that my Consequence is not, as the Dr
disingenuously draws it The Church can err in teaching points not fundamental,
therefore points not fundamental are in themselves fallible. No, that is not my
consequence; but thus: The true Church may err in teaching points not
fundamental; therefore the Doctrine or teaching (mark I say the Doctrine, not the
points themselves) of those points not fundamental, is fallible and
consequently not the Doctrine of Christ: for that a Doctrine may be truly called
the Doctrine of Christ, its not enough that the points delivered and proposed be
in themselves objectively true, but that the proposal, teaching and deliverance
of them by the Instructor or Teacher be infallibly true; because our Act of
faith or assent to Christ's Doctrine is infallibly true, and this infallible
assurance of it, is not bottomed only on the objective real truth of the points
proposed, but on the Authority of the Proponent or Teacher; its therefore
requisite he be infallible in teaching.

And that you may see howfar he is com short of answering my syllogism, I will
show you how he plainly grants all that I pretended to prove by it: for as well
in his 10. Chapt. where he prete^ds to answer it, as in his 4. Chapt. he
distinguishes Subjective and Objective Infallibility; and tho he mumbles like
one that is ashamed or a fraid to speak; yet he gives us to understand, that
the Church is Objectively infallible, that is to say the Verities and Tenets she
teachs, whether fundamental or not fundamental, are certainly and infallibly
true; but the Church is subjectively fallible; that is to say the Teaching,
delivering and proposing of those Verities by the Church, is fallible: and this
is a downright concession of all I pretend; for I never pretended by my
syllogism to prove that the Tenets, or points delivered are objectively
fallible or falls; but that the Teachers in delivering them, their proposing and
Doctrine of them, is fallible; and before we pass further, My Dr will not take
it ill, tho I be but a Master of Grammar, as he says, to give him a piece of
instruction which he wants: that distinction he makes of Objective and
Subjective Infallibility is very improper, and relishes nothing of a schoolma^
for the Objects in themselves are not fallible or infallible, Probable or
Evident; we do not say This is a Probable stone, or this is a fallible horse:
those terms are not appliable to the objects a part rei; but to the Vital
intellectual Acts of our mind, which tend to the Objects: only the propositions
or Acts of our understanding which we elicit on the Objects, are said to be
fallible, infallible, probable, or improbable; and so our Drs distinction of
Objective and Subjective infallibility, is pure non sense.

But since it has been our Drs bad luck to hit on this distinction, we will
make it serve for to better our cause; he grants therefore that the Church is
subiectively fallible: I Will propose him an other syllogism and it shall be in
Ferio, for I see he is unlucky in that figure and Mode: No Church Subiectively
fallible, that is to say in teaching and delivering her Doctrine, is the Church
of Christ; But the Protestant Church, as our Dr confesses now, and I hope will
remember it next year, is subiectively fallible in teaching her Doctrine;
therefore the Protestant Church is not the Church of Christ. I prove the Major
proposition: The Church of God is to be believed before an Angel, who would
teach us the contrary Doctrine to what she delivers, as S. Paul says Gal. 1.
8. But if the Church were fallible in teaching, we ought to believe an Angel
rather than the Church: therefore the Church is not subjectively fallible. That
an Angel is to be believed before any fallible Church, it is manifest: for that
Church subiectively fallible must not have the assistance of Gods infallible
spirit in teaching; if it were guided by Gods spirit when it teachs it could
not err; it must be a congregation of men, left to their own wisdom and
prudence for to deliver what they judge to be the best Doctrine: and who doubts
but that an Angels judgment, which is of so sublime and piercing an
understanding, incomparably surpassing all human intellects, is to be preferred
before the opinion of all congregations of men?

By the way let me ask my Adversary; Is his Church fallible subiectively in
teaching fundamental points? probably he will say, No, for page 15. he tells
us, the Church is to have the assistance of the Holy Ghost in fundamental
points: It is subjectively fallible therefore only in teaching Not fundamental
and Inferior Truths; which is the Doctrine wherein Protestants differ from us;
therefore the Church of England has not the assistance of the Holy Ghost in
teaching what Doctrine she differs in from us (for to be fallible in teaching,
and not to have the Assistance of the Holy Ghost in teaching, is the same
thing) therefore the Church of England does not teach the Doctrine of Christ
when she teachs Inferior truths; now it remains, that our Dr tell us, by what
spirit is his Church guided and inspired in teaching Inferior Truths wherein
they differ, and for which they have separated from us; if she be not inspired
and guided by the spirit of God?

I prove again that Major proposition, tbat no Church Subiectiuely fallible is
the Church of Christ; The Church of Christ essentially requires not only Divin
Verities objectiuely infallible, but Teachers infallible in teaching,
proposing, and delivering them to us; I prove it; for, the Word of God, as Dr
Sall himself says, is Written; (which is Scripture) and Unwritten (that is
Tradition) both are of equal infallibility; God's Written Word is not only
infallible obiectively in the Verities it contains; but also subiectively in
the Recital, Relation, and rehears of them to us; otherwise what respect would
there be due of us to Scripture, more than to any other profane book, which
would contain those Verities; or to our Cathecisms, and Commentaries upon
Scripture: therefore Gods Unwritten Word, or Tradition is not only obiectively
infallible in the Verities it contains; but also subiectiuely infallible in the
Relation, teaching and proposing of those Verities unto us; this Relation,
proposal and deliverance of these Verities is the Doctrine of the Church, which
hands them from age to age to Posterity; therefore the true Church is not only
Obiectiuely, but also Subiectiuely infallible.

X. CHAPTER.
PROTESTANT FAITH, NOT DIVIN: a Survey of the Reformation's sense and letter of
Scripture, not able to convert any to Christianity.
ANcient fathers and Divins were so deeply persuaded of the absolut and
infallible certainty of Divin faith, that it was the common Maxim among them,
Scientia plus habet luminis, sed fides plus habet firmitatis and adhaesionis:
Science has more of light and perspicuitie, but faith has more certainty and
assurance; for, all the certainty that Science has, is grounded upon
Principles of Nature; and that of faith upon Divin Authority, which surmounts
the certainty and assurance that Nature can give: that Protestants have not
this certainty in their faith, I proved it in my former Treatise, bccause they
rest their faith upon Scripture as interpreted by them, and tho Scripture,
rightly understood be infallibly true, yet Scripture as interpreted by them,
can have no more assurance than the fallible interpretation of them who
interpret it: I proposed my syllogism thus: He who can err relying upon a
Principle, can never be sure he does not err, while he relies on that Principle
only, and upon no other: but Protestants relying on Scripture as interpreted by
them, comparing one text with an other, may err (for they confess the Church
may err in the interpretation of Scripture) and they will not bottom their
faith upon any other but Scripture, as interpreted by them comparing one text
with an other: therefore Protestants can never be sure they do not err; their
faith therefore has no absolut infallible assurance.

Our Dr answers in his 4. Chap. and in several other places of his book; We
have for security of our faith, Gods infallible Word, clearly containing all
necessary points to salvation and a good life; We have also in the general
Tradition of the Church, a full and sufficient certainty that God has revealed
these Verities. But how full is that assurance? how great is that certainty you
have, that God revealed (for example) his Son's Incarnation? We have a moral
certainty, says he, which joined with an absolut certainty, that whatever God
revealed, is true; makes up all the certainty a pious and prudent Believer
ought to desire: I am much mistaken if I will not evidence, that our Dr has not
a crumm of Divin faith: for here is his Belief; He has Absolut infallible
certainty that Christ's Incarnation is true, if God revealed it; and this is no
faith, but mere Science: He has no Absolut infallible certainty that God
revealed the Incarnation; he has but Moral certainty of it; so that the act of
faith wherewith he believes the Incarnation, is but Morally certain; but a faith
only Morally certain is no Divin faith; for take Moral certainty in it is
highest pitch you can imagine, it implies a possibility of being falls; for
example, that there is a kingdom extant called England, from which we departed
but three days ago; is so morally certain, that it excludes all reasonable
doubts of it is being true; yet in effect its possible there may be no such
kingdom, but drowned all in water: so that Moral certainty, tho it excludes
all reasonable doubts of its objects existence; yet it does not assure us that
the object cannot be otherwise than as it affirms; but an act of Divin faith is
of a heigher certainty, for it not only assures us of its object's being so,
but that it cannot be otherwise; it not only excludes all doubts of its objects
not being; but it excludes all thoughts of judging the object can be otherwise
than as it represents it to be: what is Morally certain is true, and can in
effect be falls; what is of Divin faith is true, and cannot be falls: therefore
what is only morally certain is not Divin faith. That an Act of faith is not
only true, but that it cannot be falls; it is lamentable that blind passion, and
a desperate engagement in an error has hurried men so far as to doubt of it:
what man's heart will not tremble to think it may be falls, that the son of God
became man, that he dyed for us, finally that all the mysteries of our
Religion may be fables? yet all is so, if faith be but Morally certain; for
what is only Morally certain may be falls.

And to what purpose do you and your Church so earnestly pretend God's
infallible Word for to warrant your faith? your Reformation has from the
beginning rejected Traditions as being human inventions, Fathers, Councils,
consent of ages, nothing will serve you for a test of faith, but Scripture,
Gods Infallible Word; and what to do? if your faith be only Morally certain;
would not a ground only Morally certain suffice for to rest it on? what needs
an infallible ground for a fallible Act, if that infallible ground does not
communicate its Infallibility to the Act? either it gives to the Act all the
assurance it can give it, or not? if not; what is it good for, more than a
fallible ground? if it does, therefore it makes the Act absolutely infallible.

And if your faith be only morally certain, and your Church and Religion
fallible; I commend the prudence of your Church in never having attempted the
conversion of Pagans and Heathens: for its impossible any wise man should
embrace your Religion, if it were proposed unto him in the colors we have
seen you set it out, in these precedent Chapters: Imagine two Reformed Preachers
did go from England with their Bible to convert the king of China, and let them
preach to him, what we have heard our Dr say hitherto: Sr We are absolutely
sure that whateuer God has revealed is true; Our faith and Religion is ground
upon this book, which we believe to be the pure Word of God, and all the
contents of it are infalliblie and absolutely true; because they were revealed
by him; yet it is not absolutely certain, they were revealed by him; but we are
Morally certain of it, and therefore we believe them; this book says, our God
is one in Nature and three in Persons; and the second Person of the Trinity
became Man, dyed for us upon a cross, and arose again from death; of all this
we are only Morally certain, and we firmly believe it. This second Person God
and Man, established a Church on earth wherein his Doctrine and faith should be
taught, whereof his Apostles were the chief Masters; he gave to this Church in
his Apostles time; his infallible Spirit for to lead and conduct her into all
truth; but soon after the Apostles time, he withdrew from the Church his
Infallible Spirit, and she fell into many erroneous Doctrins; and now we have
no other guide to direct us, but this Bible; the sense of it is very doubtful,
but we are certain, that sense of it which we hold is the true sense; and of
this we have only Moral certainty: and tho it be obscure and the sense of it
so doubtful, that many sects of Christians differ from us, and understand it
in a quite contrary sense to that which we hold; we will admit no judge for
to allay these doubts and decide these Controversies but the Bible it self:
There is a kind of people among us, which they call the Popish Church; which
was the Church established by the son of God, and was once a pure and Orthodox
Church; But Martin Luther a learned man, arrose and found that the Doctrine
professed by this Church for many hundred years before, was erroneous; our
kingdom of England followed his example, and we do not approve either the
Doctrine of that Church; nor that of Luther; we have made a new Reformation of
both; there are many other sects in England who have sprung from us, and are,
as so many Reformations of our Church; but our Doctrine is the best of all, and
of this we are Morally certain, In the Popish Church there have been in all
ages many men esteemed by the world of eminent sanctity, and holy life and
conversation, which has gained the^ the name of Saints throughout the world;
we say they were all hypocrites and no true Saints; and we do confess
ourselves never had any man of publikly known Sanctity, esteemed so by the
common vogue of Christians; in that Church there has been in past ages, and in
these last ages since we are in the world many Miracles, and supernatural
signs wrought by the Professors of her Doctrine, in confirmation of her Tenets;
and the wysest men and greatest of the world, have been eyewitnesses of many of
them, and judged them to be true Miracles, and recorded them in their books for
such; but we say they were no true Miracles, and that since the Apostles time
there has been none; it is certain no Miracle was ever wrought in our Church:
there have been very many in that Church in all precedent ages, who were
esteemed the Oracles of their times in learning, and whose Books are highly
esteemed by us; and we say they were Ignorant Souls, because they taught the
Popish Tenets contrary to ours. This is our faith and Religion which we are
com to preach unto you, and of all this faith, and all that we believe, we
have only Moral certainty: if you believe our faith and Tenets God has
promised, you shall be saved; and perhaps you may not be saved, for its but
Morally certain that God has made any such promiss; and what is only Morally
certain may be falls: if you do not believe our Doctrine, but the quite contrary
you may also be saved, for we are so charitable as to believe that all the
other Christian Sects who hold quite contrary Tenets to ours, may be faued; all
is but Morally certain; all may be falls.

Now let my Reader consider if all this be not pure Protestant Doctrine, and
what we have heard Dr Sall say in the precedent Chapters; and let him judge if
the king would not be surprised at the boldness of these men in obtruding such
a faith upon him, and would answer them; my friends, you confess you have but
Moral certainty of the truth of what Doctrine you deliver; and what is but only
morally certain, implies a possibility of being falls; therefore possibly all
you have said, may be falls Doctrine, and why would you have me change my
Religion for yours, which for ought you and I know, may be wors than my own:
you say that whatever God has revealed is absolutely and infallibly true; I do,
and did ever believe the same; you say it is morally certain he revealed all the
contents of your book, I say also its morally certain he revealed all the
Tenets of my Religion; If God has withdrawn the conduct of his infallible
Spirit from the Church, and that the Popish Church has fallen into so many
Errors, you may also fall into as many; and I would com to be in as bad a
condition in your Church, as I am in, in my own Religion: I see no proof you
have of the truth of your Doctrine; nor any encouragement for to embrace it, not
any proof, for the Bible which you so much esteem, is challenged by your fellow
sectaries and by your Popish Church as well as by you, and what have you,
befides your bare word for to prove your sense of it, is better than that of
your fellows? particularly that you confess I may be saved by believing their
sense of it, as well as by believing yours: and if your God has left no Judge
to decide your Controversies, and who by a definitive Sentence should declare,
which is the true sense of it; it is a mark that he is equally pleased with any
sense that is given and believed of it; or if; he intended to oblige all to be
of one sense and meaning of that Bible, he must have appointed some judge for to
declare what sense is that: neither do I see any encouragement you give me to
embrace your Religion; for its no commendation of it beyond the Popish Church,
which you have forsaken, to tell me that you never had any Miracles, and that
the Popish had; which tho you say, they were no true Miracles; yet you confess
many esteemed by yourselves to have been eminent men in learning, and esteemed
by your forefathers to have been no less eminent in sanctity; that these men I
say have judged them to be true Miracles; and why should not I believe their
opinion before yours: finally since you acknowledge there is but Moral
certainty, both of the truth of your Religion, and of salvation in the belief
of those Truths; what is only Morally certain, may be falls, and so all your
Doctrine and Religion may be a mere cheat.

Now you shall see Reader how impossible it is to persuade any Pagan to
Christianity, or any Christian to piety by the Letter of Scripture which the
Reformation uses: you must know, that the Reformation thought it needful to
reform the Letter of Scripture, as well as the sense of it; and purge the Bible
of some words * which smelt as they judged, of Popery; and substitute in their
place new terms; for examble instead of Priests, they put Elders; for Church
they put Synagogue; for Holy Ghost, put Holy Wind; for Christ, Anointed; for
Our Lord and Masster, Baal and rayn; for Baptism, Washing; for Soul Carcas; for
Grave, Hell; for Sacrament Secret; for Altar, Table; for Beelzebub, Lord of a
fly; for Angels, Messengers: this famous exchange of terms, you shall find in
their Ancient Bibles, particularly of Queen Elizabeth and before her time; now
they are ashamed of them, as Doctor Harding observes, who discourses wittily
upon this subject thus.

Let a Preacher speak to his congregation in the old Catholic terms of the
Bible thus; I that am a Priest, placed in the Church by the Holy Ghost, for the
feeding of your souls, do denounce unto you in the name of Christ our Lord and
Master, that if you be not regenerated by Baptism; and prepared for the
Sacrament of the Altar, you shall be condemned body and soul into hell, and
your portion shall be with the Devil, I say with Beelzebub and his Angels. This
speech indeed has good sense and might make some impression in the Auditory. But
if our Dr. steps into a Pulpit, and speaks in the new coined terms of the
Reformation; I who am your Elder placed in the Synagogue by the Holy Wind, for
the feeding of your Carcasses, do denounce unto you in the name of our
Anointed, Baal and rayn; that if you be not regenerated by Washing. and
prepared for the secret of the Table, you Shall be condemned body and Carcass
to the Grave, and your portion shall be with the Lord of a fly, and his
Messengers. Would not the Auditory think, our Dr raved; and in lieu of
compunction, burst out into laughter? by this you may see how impossible it is
for the Reformation to convert any Pagan to Christianity, or Christan to piety,
if they use their own sense and language of Scripture.

XI. CHAPTER.
OUR DOCTORS REFLECTIONS AGAINST my Resolution of faith, a Check of his impiety
against the Miracles of our Church.
FRom page 177. to page 184. I resolved my faith thus: I believe the mystery
of the Trinity, because God revealed it; I believe God revealed it, because
the Church by which God speaks, tells us he revealed it; If you ask why I
believe God speaks by the Church; I answer, because the Church it self, by
which God speaks, says he speaks by her; and I am bound to believe he speaks
hy her, as she says, because he credits her with so many Miracles, which make
it evidently credible he speaks by her; see if you please this Resolution
proved at large in the place quoted: My Antagonist says it has as many
Circles, as it has words; but not one Circle does he as much as attempt to
show, like a Physician who would tell you are dangerously sick, but not mention
any disease you have, nor prescribe you any remedy: He fancies I contradict my
self, making Miracles some time the vltimat reason of believing the Church: and
sometime saying they are not a sufficient motive of the credibilitie of her
Doctrine. But I need no more proof to convince him of a mistake, but my Readers
labor in reading the place I cited above, of my former Treatise; there I
expressly say, (and in nowhere any thing to the contrary) that Miracles cannot
be the Motive of our faith; because if they be absolutely evident, they cannot
be the Motive of our faith; which of its own nature is obscure; if they be
Morally evident Miracles, they cannot be a Motive of faith, because its Motive
must be infalliblie true.

My Dr read in the last line of my Resolution, the word Miracle; and without
any more reflection, believed I gave Miracles for a motive of our faith: but
there I distinguish two Motives, as my Reader may see; the first is, of my Act
of faith, why I believe God speaks by the Church; and this I say is nothing
else, but because the Church itself, by which God speaks, tells us that he
speaks by her: the second Motive is of my obligation of believing this truth,
and my judgment of its Credibility; and this I say, are the Miracles wrought by
the Church; for these make it evidently credible to us, that God speaks by
her, as she says, and when such Miracles intervene, we are obliged to believe
God speaks by her: Our Adversary says this distinction of Motives, the one
for our Act of faith; and the other for our Judgment of Credibility and
obligation of believing, is but a patch to cover the incoherencie of my
Doctrine, and needless for any thing else; for the same reason which makes me
believe, makes the faith credible, and shows me my obligation of believing.
This is pretty good English, but very bad Divinity; for before we elicit the
Act of faith, the judgment of its credibility must precede, and our obligation
of believing must be made known to us; the Motive therefore of this
Credibilitie and obligation, is different from the Motive of the Act itself;
for after that this Motive of Credibilitie is assented unto, and our Obligation
acknowledged, the Act of faith may be denied, through willfullness and
Obstinacy; and thus men become Heretics: but our Dr does not love to diue into
these subtilities; its to flay a flea, he says.

Now you shall see a new discovery of the Church of Romes impiety made by my
Antagonist in my Resolution of faith: page 184. I said, the chief and last
motive, whereon our faith does rest is the Word of God speaking to us by the
Church; the Church I say, by which God actually speaks unto us in this present
age; for we do not believe because God did speak by the Church in the 1. 2.
and 3. age, but because he speaks now unto us by her, as he did to the
primitive Christians in those ages. A plain confession, quoth the Dr of the
guilt of the Church of Rome: they exclude the primitive Church of the three
first ages, from being the Mistress of our faith, and substitute the corrupt
Church of this age; and here he rattles at the Pope and Rome. For my part, I
see no discovery here, but of his disingenuitie, shutting his eyes that he
might not see; for I say, that God speaks to us by the Church of this present
age, as he did speak to the primitive Christians by the Church of the first
ages; where then do I exclude the Primitive Church from being the Mistress of
our faith; the Church in the primitive ages was the Mistress and Oracle, by
which God spoke in those ages; the Church in this present age is the Oracle by
which he speaks to us, the Church in all ages is the same, and speaks but the
same; but it is not enough for us in this age that the Church spoke this
Doctrine, but we must have the testimony of the Church of this age, that this
is the Doctrine that was taught by the Church in those former ages, for to
confound Heretics and Nouellers, who deny our Doctrine was taught in the
primitive ages; and this is the reason, why I have said, that the motive of our
faith is the Word of God speaking by the Church, not in the 1. 2. and 3. age,
but in this age; for it would little avail us for our faith, that God spoke by
his Church in those ages, if the Church of this age did not ascertain us that
the Church then did speak, as nowshe does

An othet scruple troubles our Dr that I should say we are bound to believe
God speaks by the Church, because he credits her with Miracles; and vhere be
those Miracles, says he, wrought by the Council of Trent, which make it
credible to me that God speaks by it? if a Council were convened now, to
condemn Iansenism, I must believe God speaks by the Church in that Council;
and are you sure to find Miracles at hand, as soon as the Council is joined?
Our Dr rallies merrily; let us follow his mode and help him to sport; Do not
you pretend, that your Protestant Doctrine delivered in this age is evidently
credible by the Miracles of the Apostles, and the old Testament? so you would
persuade us page 56. have you any Miracles of this age to credit it? had the
Parliament Miracles at hand, cut and dry, when it framed the 39. Articles? No;
you say your Doctrine of this age is the same which was taught by the Apostles;
and its sufficiently credited by the Miracles, you say, which the Apostles and
Moses wrought, when they preached it: pray Dr take the like answer from us: our
Doctrine delivered by the Council of Trent, of Transubstantiation, Purgatory
etc. is the same which S. Bernard, Bonaventure, Gregory, S. Austin, preached
and Confirmed with Miracles; what obligation then has Gods Providence; or what
Title has our curiosity for to expect new Miracles for the confirmation of the
same Doctrine? besides Dr rhat the Doctrine of the Council of Trent was preached
in this our age, by that great Apostle of the Indies S. Francis Xaverius; and
confirmed by him with innumerable Miracles; pray show us but one Miracle
wrought in this, or any of the precedent ages in confirmation of yours. Three
things I proved in my former Treatise; first that Miracles are uncontrolled
proofs of the Infallibility of the Church's Doctrine; it being impossible rath
God should confirm the least untruth by a Miracle: secondly I related some
Miracles related by S. Augustine, S. Bernard, Godfredus, John Hierosolimitanus;
and believed by them to be true Miracles: thirdly I proved our obligation of
believing them to have been true Miracles. Our Dr^'s first answer is; Let not
I. S. expect from me to bestow my time in examining the truth of his Miracles:
and ought not any man to expect it? you confess page 56. Miracles are a most
congruous way and a strong proof of the true Church; when I allege therefore
this congruous way and strong proof for my Tenets; ought not you to bestow your
time in weakenning them, rather than in scolding and railing?

His second answer is that all our Miracles are but a stock of Romances; I
guest we should have this short answer; and therefore I did not only relate
some Miracles, but proved convincingly they were true Miracles, and that no man
in his senses could deny them to be such; if my Antagonist had remembered the
duty of a Disputant, he should have endeauored to invalid my proofs, and not be
contented to tell us they are but Romances; Can any man in his wits deny, but
that S. Augustine, S. Bernard, S. Gregory and many Ancient fathers of the
Church had as good Wits as Dr Sall? they could therefore discern betwixt a
Miracle and a Romance as well as he; they relate the Miracles produced by me in
the Unerring Vnerrable Church; they were eye witnesses of some of them; they
judged them to be true Miracles and recorded them in their books for such:
which will you believe Reader, Dr Sall who says they were Romances: or those
Saints, who say they were Miracles? I desired our Dr that he should tell us, by
what art did he and his Church come to know, those Miracles were not true ones;
for its strange that S. Augustine and other Saints and learned men who lived
when they were wrought, did not discern it; and our Dr after so many years has
found out they were but fourberies? sure he must be a conjurer; but not a
syllable does our Dr answer; ipse dixit, they are Romances, and there is all: I
asked would not he be esteemed a mad man, who would say there was no such man
in the word as Julius Caesar, of which truth we have no other assurance, but
the testimony of Heathen Writers; S. Augustine and our other Saints, are as
credible witnesses, I hope, as they; if therefore they tell us they have seen
Miracles wrought, is it not great obstinacy in our Dr to deny them, and say
they are all Romances.

Is this the man who professes so much Veneration to the fathers of the Church,
to make them Romance Writers? fourbs, who recorded strange passages which never
happened; or fools who knew not to distinguish them from a Legerdemain? when
we hear such an irreverence against the Pillars of Christianity, and the
works judged by them to be Miracles, irreligiously paralleled with the
wonders related by Valerius Maximus and Titus Livius in confirmation of their
Heathenish superstition, what can we say but with S. Augustine l. de Vtil.
credendi c. 18 Nisi pietas and pax mentis accedat, de fide nihil pro^sus
intelligi potest: where the Will is not piously inclined, and the heart free
from prejudice, nothing can be understood of faith: Excaecavit eos malitia
eorum, (says God Sap 2. and nescierunt Sacramenta Dei, their passion pinfolds
their reason, and they cannot see the sacred mysteries of our Religion; Our
Devotion to them is Hypocrisy; our Austerity of life, is Heathenish excess of
rigor; our Images are Idols; our Sacraments are human inventions; our Miracles
are Romances; our Indulgences, Processions, and Lyturgie are but superstitions:
this is the humor of our age to scoff and ieer; to turn into ridicule, and
against reason, what their reason cannot grapple. Since our Dr is become of this
humor let him, with his merry companions scoffers of Miracles, prepare sport
for this, which he will call a Romance, and S. Aug. reckons as a Miracle l. 22.
de Civit. Dei cap. 4. Apoore Man, says S. Aug. named Florentius, having lost
his cloak and having no moneys to buy one, betook himself to the 20. Martirs
whose Memory (says he) was with us very famous, and prayed to them with a
loud voice, asking a Cloak of them; some yongmen, who were present, ieered the
godly man's simplicity, as if he did expect moneys from the Saints; probably
our Dr will keep them company in their merriment: the poor man departed,
betook himself to the sea side to walk, and found agreat fish on the shore; he
took it and sold it; the Person who bought it opening its belly found in it a
gold ring, and hearing what had happend to the good man, gave him the ring,
saying, behold how the 20. Martirs do cloth thee; If our Dr will read more
Romances of this kind, let him read Nazian. l. 11. de obitu Gorgoniae; S. Nilus
Epist. ad Athan. S. Cyprian in Sermon. de Lapsis; Chrysostom. de Sacerd. l. 6. and
Theodoret c. 8. de Graecis Affect.

Our Doctor's last answer to my proof of Miracles for the truth of our Tenets,
is that he accepts willingly a trial of our Religion by Miracles: Very good;
courageously Dr; let us see, produce your Miracles, We have, says he page 56.
in favor of our belief all the Miracles recorded in the Old and new Testament.
But to whom do you speak Dr? if you speak to a Pagan, he will reply, as you
do to us against our Miracles; that the Miracles of the Old, and new testament,
prove no more the truth of your Religion than the Wonders related by Valerius
Maximus prove the truth of Paganism; if you speak to us Catholics, we ask
you; what right have you to those Miracles more than Arians, Nestorians or
Pelagians? and who will not laugh to hear the Miracles of the Old testament,
or those of the new, alleged to prove Protestancy: yes indeed; Moses his
miraculous fasting for 40. days, and the great Baptists miraculous austeritie
of life and fasting from wine and strong liquor; was to prove the Protestant
Tenet of not fasting; Elisaeus his raising the dead, by the touch of his bones,
was to prove the Protestant Doctrine against the Veneration of Saints Relics;
the Miracles of the Ark of the testament (God's Image as Calvin himself calls
it) were directly to credit the Protestants contempt of Images; Christ turned
the Water into Wine for to prove he could not turn the bread in the supper into
his body; and that miraculous punishment of Ananias and Zaphira struck dead at
S. Peter's feet, for retaining a part of their goods, which by vow they had
consecrated to God's service; was to prove the Protestant Tenet and practice,
that friars, who have made a solemn vow of Poverty, may break that vow, and
look for Rents and Benefices in the Protestant Church. Can any thing appear
more ridiculous, than to pretend these Miracles were wrought to prove
Protestant Doctrine?

XII. CHAPTER.
IF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE ROMAN Catholic Religion, be inconsistent with
Subject's Loyalty to their Prince?
THe Pulpits in England did ring for a long time with bitter invectives against
Popish Idolatry; against the Pope as an Antichrist; against Rome as the whore
of Babylon: these were for a time our Adversari's grand charge^ scare-crows for
to stricke popular souls into a fear and hatred of our Religion; the wyser
sort perceiving the weakness of it, and that Roman Catholics are not so deuoid
of common sense, as to adore Images, and Saints as God; nor the Pope so
monstruously wicked, as to be an Antichrist; they relent in this attack, and
speak but lowly of it in corners, and vulgar ears in so much that Dr
Stillingfleet is blamed by his greatest friends for engaging his pen in that
calumny, now hissed at by all sober Protestants. Now the calumny in Vogue is
that our Catholic Religion is not consistent with the safety of Sovereigns;
that our Obedience to a foreign spiritual father, cannot be matched with that
which we ow to our Prince; that if the Pope be our supreme head in Spiritual
affairs, we must have two Sovereigns in one kingdom; that we allow Popes may
vnthrone kings, and consequently kings are but Tenants at Will to him. This is
the firebrand which has kindled the combustions of our kingdoms; this pretext
of securing our Loyalty by an oath of Supremacy, made our Princes, against
their innate benignity, severe to their best deserving Subjects; drowned our
land in subjects blood, and rendered our kingdoms and government odious to
neighboring Princes, who secure their peace and safety in the due obedience
of their Subjects without oaths or other oppressions of their consciences.

We must then disabuse the World by examining, how far are the Principles of
Protestancie consistent with the safety of Princes, and Loyalty of Subjects;
and demonstrat that those of our Catholic Religion are incomparably more; that
tho Protestants be in effect as Loyal Subjects as any others; its that aw which
Nature has printed in the hearts of Subjects to be so; Its common honesty and
reason leads them to be so. The Tenets of their Religion lead them to the
contrary. For to know what is the Doctrine of the Church of England, we are not
to be said by Dr Sall, Dr Stillingfleet, or other particular Drs who contradict
one an other, and themselves at every turning of a leaf; We are to see the
Rule of faith Unanimously received by the whole Reformation; and by it to judge
what Doctrine they profess: the Rule of faith and fundamental Principle whereon
the whole Reformation rests, is expressed in the 6. Art. of the 39, of England;
Our Rule of faith is nothing else but Scripture as each person of sound judgment
in the Church understands it. Luther looked upon this Rule, (and he was a
Person of sound judgment, you will say) and delivered his Doctrine upon it thus,
Tom. 2. Germ. de saecul. Potest. and tom. 7. Wittemb. fol. 327. Among
Christians none ought to be a Magistrate, all are equal, none superior but Jesus
Christ. Zuinglius read this Rule, and delivered his Doctrine to. 6. in Expl.
Art. fol. 82. Kings ought to be deposed by their Subjects, if they do not
govern well: Calvin read this Rule, and delivered his judgment in Dan. c. 6.
ver. 22. Kings if they be sinners forfeit their power; ought to he scorned
rather than obeyed: Beza, Fox, Knox, Bucanan, and others of the first
Reformers, defended by Scripture, as they interpreted it, that it is lawful
for Subjects to raise arms against, and deprive their Prince of his kingdom and
life, if he does not establish the Reformation; read Bryerly's Apology trac.
3. sect. 2. and that you may not want Domestic Abbettors of this execrable
Doctrine read the Trial of the Regicides where you will find in the Trial of
Parson Peter's innumerable texts of Scripture, which in several Sermons he
preached, for to exasperat the people against the authority and life of their
king; read the Hue and Cry of Judge Cook proving by Scripture and reason the
justice of that vnparallell'd Murder of our gracious king: was not this the
general Doctrine of all England in those days; and I appeal to the consciences
of your Brethren of the Scotch Kirk, if there be any pure Brother among them,
that is not persuaded, (tho he may be so wise as not to say it) that the Scotch
did very well and like good Christians, when they entered into England with the
Bible in one hand, and the sword in the other, for to assert Presbitery,
against the kings design of establishing Protestancy.

And, do not tell us that these Doctors and Incendiaries were not Protestants,
but Lutherans, Presbiterians and Calvinists; for, first you have been so kind
to them, and to all other Sectaries, as to say they all have one and the same
faith professed in the Church of England; this is their faith and Doctrine; you
must not then desown it; secondly, call them by what name you will; you have
one, and the self same Rule of faith with them, Scripture as each Person of
sound judgment in the Church interprets it: this is the Rule of Protestancy as
well as of Presbitery and Lutheranism; put the case (and this is not any thing
impossible) that a zealous Protestant of sound judgment, did interpret
Scripture as Parson Peeters and Judge Cook did; he will teach and act as they
did; and remain still a true Protestant, and act nothing against the principles
of Protestancy for he acts acording Scripture as he interprets it, and this is
his Rule of faith.

Is it not confessedly your Protestant Doctrine, that Scripture alone as each
Person of sound judgment interprets it, is your Rule of faith; that each Person
is lycenc't by Scripture it self to read Scripture, to judge of the sense of
it, to hold and follow that sense of it, which in his conscience he thinks to
be true; that none is obliged to believe any sense of Scripture against his own
judgment; there is not a word in all this but the cream of Protestancie: take
away the arbitrary interpretation of Scripture, and oblige men to follow and
believe what sense of it is proposed to them by the Councils, King, state
Bishops or Pastors and down falls Protestancy, and the whole Reformation; it is
the spiritual birthright of any Protestant to believe and act as he understands
Scripture; which being true, as Ptotestants must confess, its apparent, no
Prince can have security of his kingdom or life in the Principles of
Protestancy; for what hinders but that we may have again in England, (as we
had Cromwell' in the year 40.) a bold ambitious Subject with a Parson Peeters,
and Judge Cook of each side? the multitude is still capable of any impression;
let them speak to the Multitude, that Popery has crept into the Protestant
Church; that the luster of the Gospel is clouded with superstitious Rites and
Ceremonies; that the Bishops and Ministers have degenerated from the purity of
the Reformation; and all this they think to be true by Scripture as
Presbiterians and Quakers do: what then if these Zelots did persuade the
Multitude to demand a Reformation of these abuses; an extirpation of
Popish-like Ceremonies; and if they could not get it by fair means, to rise in
arms and get it by the edge of their swords, and persuade them not to be
amused by king or state, Bishops or Ministers; that the birthright of a
Protestant was, not to be constrained in their consciences, but to have free
liberty for to serve and worship God; not as others will prescribe, but as we
think in our Conscience the Scripture does warrant; and then would cite as many
texts of Scripture as Parson Peeters, Calvin, Knox and Zuinglius did, and
understand them as they did (this has happened once, and why not again and
again) that kings must be constrained by force of arms, if need be, to
establish the Reformation, to give liberty of Conscience, to banish Popery and
superstitions: what say you Dr in this case? here is a multitude who are
persuaded by Scripture as they understand it, that your Church is superstitious
and erroneous; they are persuaded also by Scripture as they understand it, and
as it is expounded to them by your best Doctors, that it is lawful for them to
take arms against their king for to reform your Church: can they raise arms or
not? if not, then you must change your Rule of faith and deny that Principle,
whereupon Protestancy and all the Reformation is cemented; That it is lawful
for each one to believe, and act as he understands and interprets Scripture; if
you say it is lawful for him to raise arms against his king, because he
understands by Scripture that he is bound in this occasion to do it? behold a
Rebellion warranted by the Doctrine and Principles of your Reformation; and may
be every year raised; for we shall never want in a commonwealth, a giddie
multitude, an ambitions spirit to head them for to fish in troubled waters, and
deluded souls who misunderstand the Word of God: and what assurance can there
be of Subjects Loyalty, or of the Princes safety in such Principles? This is
undoubtedly true, that an Arbitrarie interpretation of Scripture, and liberty
for to believe what we judge is the true meaning of it, is the essence and
foundation not only of Protestancy but of all the Reformation: this is also no
less certain, that wherever that Arbitrary interpretation is permitted, and
liberty assumed for to believe what your own judgment suggests unto you to be
the sense and meaning of Scripture, a Prince can never be sure of the Obedience
of his Subjects; for they can, at any time and often have, interpreted
Scripture to his disadvantage under some falls pretext of piety and Religion:
therefore its undoubted that the Principles of Protestancie is not consistent
with the safety of Sovereigns and obedience of Subjects.

No sooner was this Arbitrary Interpretation of Scripture set up, and liberty
for believing what each one thought to be the true sense of Scripture, but you
dethroned the Pope; Scripture as interpreted by you, was a sufficient warrant
to you for so doing; and I do not see why may not you make it a sufficient
warrant for to dethrone your Spiritual Head of England, as you did with Charles
the first: and pretend you as much difference as you will, betwixt your selves
and the Scotch Kirk, but in this you agree, that your Rule of faith is the same
which they have; Scripture as ye understand it; neither are you more
infallible in the Interpretation of it than they; as therefore they judged by
Scripture, that they ought not to receive that Uniformity of Rites and
Ceremonies, with the Church of England, and that subordinatio^ to Pastors and
Prelates, which king Charles the first endeauored to bring them into; and
entered into England with a powerful Army for to assert their Evangelical
Liberty; why may it not be allwaies feared that you may do the like when the
Spirit moves you?

Now let us see if our Catholic Doctrine be so inconsistent with Loyalty; I say
our Doctrine; for the sinister practices of some of our Church, is not to be
imputed to the Church, but to their malice: all you can say of our Doctrine is,
that we believe Popes may absolve subjects of their allegiance to their
Prince, and deprive him of his kingdom: and what Power do you grant to the
Protestant Church? Was it not the Protestant Church which excluded Quee^ Marie,
the true Heiress of the Crown, and raised the Lady Jean Gray to the throne? was
it not the Protestant Church representative in the Parliament, which excluded
Queen Marie of Scotland and the family of the Stuarts, and substituted Queen
Elizabeth; and what for? but to exclude Popery, and establish the Reformation?
was it not the Protestant Church representative in the Parliament, which
deposed King Charles and substituted Cromwell; and was it not one of the chief
causes against him that he was (as they apprehended) inclined to Popery?) thus
you raise your Reformation upon the ruin of the Popes, and fanaticism upon the
ruin of kings) and was it not the fear of the like effects from the same
Principles of deposing Princes not favorable to the Reformation, which obliged
our prudent Statesmen to make it a heinous crime, to say the king's a Papist or
inclined to Popery? did all the Popes for 1600. years depose so many Princes in
England, as your Reformation has in one age? or did England ever see in 6. ages
of Popery, so many insurrecctions, private conspiracies, such frequent attempts,
such open Rebellions against Regal authority, as we have seen in one age of
Protestancy? what then do you talk to us of the power of deposing Princes in
the Pope, when we see a more illimitated power assumed by yourselves, and so
frequently exercised?

In our Catholic Doctrine only the Pope has that power, not of deposing Princes,
but of declaring them to be ipso facto deposed as Divins say; in case they
should force their subjects to embrace his error; but in our Protestant
Principles, there is n'ere a Protestant in England but has it; for whereas you all
have by the principles of your Religion, the liberty of reading and
interpreting Scripture, and following with a safe conscience what sense of it
you think to be true; if a Protestant judges by Scripture that Protestancy, as
now it is professed, has any mixture of Popery; if the spirit moves him to
demand a reformation of the Church, he wants but a seasonable occasion and
power for to ask it of the king, and if he will not grant it; to oblige him by
force of arms to do it: moreover this power of deposing Princes belongs not to
the Pope, as our Divins say, only because the Prince is an Heretic, provided he
does not pretend to force his subjects to his Error; and this being so,
certainly our Doctrine is far less favorable to the Pope, than to secular
Princes, for a Pope if he becoms an heretic, tho he never should endeavor to
pervert others, he is ipso facto deposed from his Papacy. Finally if the Popes
power were so dangerous as our Adversaries blow in their Proselites ears,
certainly Catholic Princes, who are as tender of their safety and Authority as
Protestants; would be more jealous of his supremacy than they are: and by the
way let me advertise my Reader, how much our Adversaries do injure the Frencb,
in saying they deny this power in the Pope; its most falls, for tho they may
pretend by the Privileges of the Gallican Church, to be exempted from that
Power; but the Power they do not deny; but all disputes of that point are
severely prohibited.

XIII. CHAPTER.
THE OATH OF SVPREMACIE Unlawful; and not needful nor sufficient for the
security of our Princ's Interest.
THe Protestants themselves who so vigorously press this oath upon us, more for
hopes of getting the goods and employments of them who refuse it, than for any
devotion to their Religion or safety of the king, are ashamed to believe it
lawful in the genuin and natural signification of it; but do give it a far
different sense from that which the words of the Oath import, and their Acts of
Parliament and Oath of Homage, exhibited by their Bishops in their
Consecration, give it. For the Oath imports in the general apprehension of
Protestants the kings supreme spiritual supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs, as
we believe it in the Pope; which implies a Power in the king (as in the Pope
duly elected and consecrated we believe) for to consecrat Bishops and
Priests, for to administer the Sacraments, preach, and all other Ecclesiastical
functions; for if the king be supreme Head of the Church, as we believe the
Pope to be; it is from the king, as their spiritual Head, and the fountain of
all Spiritual Jurisdiction, that the Bishops and the rest of the Clergy, must
derive their Character, their Jurisdiction, and their power for administering
the Sacraments; and if they derive it from him, he must have it in himself; for
none can give to an other, that which he has not. That the king should have any
such Power in himself, it appears so ridiculous to the Protestants themselves
to utter it, that none will dare say it; and therefore they give other
different senses to the Oath, nor do they agree well among themselves in what
sense it is to be understood; but when they tender the Oath to the people, and
force them to take it, they never trouble themselves to mollify it with any
interpretation, but we must take it, understand it as we please.

That the true sense and meaning of the Oath is to believe the spiritual
supremacy of the king, as we have declared it, and which the very Protestants
themselves this day judge to be ridiculous; it appears by the very Words of the
Oath; and tho by crooked and far fetched interpretations, some Doctors may give
it a more myld and tolerable sense, yet the Oath must be judged unlawful,
because the genuin, natural and common sense of the words, is unlawful, and
heterodox; secondly because the sense of the Oath intended by the Church of
England which exacts it, is not that myld and passable sense which this or that
private Dr gives it; the Church of England intends by that Oath to persuade us
the Spiritual Supremacy and power of the king for to consecrat Bishops, give
Spiritual Jurisdiction, authority and power for to administer the Sacraments,
and exercise other Ecclesiastical functions; and that this is the sense
intended in the Oath by the Church of England, it evidently appears; first, by
their Statuts and Acts of Parliament which I cited in the Introduction to this
Treatise, which I pray read; secondly by the Oath of Homage which Protestant
Bishops take in their Consecration, confessing that they derive their Episcopal
and Spiritual Jurisdiction wholly and solely from the king. Thirdly I have
proved in the Introduction that all the Spiritual Jurisdiction, and Episcopal
Character your Church has, is derived from Queen Elizabeth: fourthly king Henry
the VIII. who was the first that usurped this supremacy, which now you pretend;
made Cromwell, a Layman, his Vicar General in Spiritualibus, and exercised that
office by the authority derived from him; and king James dispensed with
ArchBishop Abbots in the Irregularity he incurred by killing a man; lastly if
by that Oath the Church of England intended only an assurance of our Allegiance
to our king, and intended nothing prejudicious to our faith, why would not they
be content with an Oath of Allegiance worded without offense to our
Consciences: and it cannot be denied but that the Church of England intended by
that Oath, we should acknowledge that supremacy to be in the king which we
Catholics do believe to be in the Pope, and thereby deny any Spiritual
Supremacy in the Pope; it also intended we should believe that Supremacy to be
in the king, which king Henry the VIII. assumed to himself; and this was no
other than that supremacy as we expounded, for to Consecrat, give power to
cthers to consecrat, invest and Confirm Bishops, Administer Sacraments, etc.

Now that such a supremacy cannot be attributed to any secular Prince, is a
point so often, so solidly, and so largely proved by innumerable of our
Authors, and not only the texts, and examples of Primitive Princes quoted by Dr
Sall in his 17. Cap. but all that the Protestant Writers have said for
themselves in this point, so clearly answered and refuted, that it would be a
loss of time to me and to my Reader to answer my Antagonists little trivial
objections; and repeat again what has been so often said, and is so known even
to vulgar Readers; particularly that as I have said, no Protestant of judgment
will now pretend that kind of supremacy in the king: Calvin says they were
madmen who flattered the king of England so far as to raise him to that
supremacy; Presbiterians, Anabaptists, Quakers, Independents, and the rest of
your sectaries in England and out of England utterly disclaim it, and will not
take that Oath; and only Roman Catholics are persecuted, and punished with loss
of employments, goods and estates for not taking it.

My Antagonist in his 17 Chapter brings some texts of S. Paul and some sentences of
S. Bernard, and S. Chrysostom to prove this supremacy; and whoever reads them
in the places quoted by him, will plainly see, they only prove that we ought
to obey, and submit to the heigher power and authority under which we are; and
this none does or can deny; but what has that to do with our Controversy? for
those passages quoted by my Adversary, do neither distinguish Powers (and my
Dr I hope will not be so senseless, as to deny there are several powers under
which we are, and to all which we are obliged to obey) nor do they determine
or declare, wherein those distinct Powers are: there is no doubt but that we
are obliged to obey all Powers under which we are, beccause all Power is
constituted, derived and ordained by God; but if our Dr will be said by S.
Bernard. S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine and the ancient fathers, he will see in my
next ensuing Chapter that the supreme Spiritual Power, is in S. Peter and his
successors; and as he believes S. Bernard when he reprehends the disorders of
the Roman Court, which he does in that 42. Epist. quoted by our Dr and in
several other places, I hope he will believe him also when he says, as we
shall see that the Pope is the supreme Pastor Prince and chief of all the
Bishops: and my Reader will see in my ensuing Chapter, how much my Dr is to be
blamed for discovering his ignorance, when he says in his 15. Chapt. that we
shall never find in Ecclesiastical History any mention of any claim S. Peter
should have of any power over S. James in Jerusalem, S. Andrew in Achaia or any
other of the Apostles in their respective Provinces, and that none of those
More worthy first Bishops of Rome for five hundred years did pretend to any
supremacy.

But before we proceed to the proof of our Drs ignorance in this point, we
must see, if this Oath of supremacy be needful, and sufficient for our
sovereigns safety; not needful, whereas we see all other Sovereigns, as well
CathoIies as Protestants, judge themselves secure without any such Oath from
their subjects: and when we are ready to give to our Prince as much security
of our fidelity, as any subjects of the world, give to their respective
Sovereigns, why should our consciences be oppressed with an oath of supremacy
repugnant to our faith; or our peace disturbed by Remonstrances and oaths
against the Popes indirect Temporal Power, obtruded upon us by turbulent
spirits; whereas such Oaths are altogether needless for the securing of subjects
in their Loyalty, as will appear by this discourse: wherein I would have my
Reader observe that I do not pretend to prove that any such Power is in the
Pope, as I let it pass in my former Treatise, so I do now; but I intend to
prove, that tho such a Power were granted to be in the Pope, neither the Oath
of supremacy, nor that Remonstrance or Oath disclaiming that indirect Temporal
Power in the Pope above Princes, is needful nor sufficient to secure the
subjects in their Obedience.

For suppose there is such a Power in the Pope; where leyes the danger to the
Prince who has the affection of his subjects? in the exercise of that Power,
you will say, if the Pope should absolve us from our Allegiance, and command us
under pain of Excommunication not to obey him, and to rise in arms against him:
but I will demonstrat, its a case Morally impossible, and a Metaphisical case,
as the schools speak, that subjects may be obliged to obey any such command or
fear any such Excommunications, but may lawfully and conscientiously resist,
and pay their Obedience to their Sovereign; for its a Principle unanimously
received by Moral Divins, that no Ecclesiastical precept obliges in conscience,
if in said Obedience we hazard our life, our fortunes, or our honor; for
example the Church commands us to fast in Lent; you are sick; you cannot fast
without a notable prejudice to your health; you are not obliged; the Church
commands you to hear Mass on sundaies; yo^ cannot without hazarding your life
because you are sick; without hazarding your estate by reason of a Persecution;
you are not obliged: Now, the Pop's command and excommunication against our
Obedience to our Prince, is but an Etclesiastical Precept at most; therefore it
cannot oblige subjects with the hazard of their lyves* fortunes, or honor; but
it is morally impossible but that they should hazard all three, if they should
deny Obedience and resist their Sovereign; for such a disobedience or
insurrection must cast them into a war, or a most evident danger of a war,
where all is exposed, therefore it is a Metaphisical case and Morally impossible
that subjects can be obliged by any command or censure of the Pope to deny
obedience to their Prince: Say then what you please of that Power; many learned
Diuins convincingly prove, it annoyes not the safety of Princes; the very
Heterodox Sovereigns do not care for it: nor are ye who take it esteemed
better Subjects, than they who refuse it.

But you reply; tho Subjects be not obliged to obey such Commands and Censures
of the Pope, yet they may lawfully obey them; and so the Prince must depend of
the Subjects courtesy; for being lycenc't once by the Pope, nothing is wanting
to the execution but their Will and pleasure:

To this our Divins do commonly answer, that for to secure Subjects that they
May not, the way is not to force upon them an Oath disavowing the Power in the
Pope; but an Oath of never co^curring to the exercise of that Power, if any he
had; that is to say, of never taking arms, or denying Obedience to their Prince
upon any command or Censure of the Pope: which Oath, as it does not affirm or
deny any Power in the Pope (let the Divins dispute it out) so it rids
Consciences from Scruples of swearing, what they do not know to be true or
falls; and secures them from any Fact, or exercise of it prejudicious to their
Prince; which, and the many signal testimonies of the Loyalty of his Catholic
Subjects; and their willingness to give his Majesty any pledge of their
fidelity which does not shock their consciences, would abundantly satisfy our
clement Prince and prudent statesmen, if some ouer-busy spirits did not trouble
our rest; which trouble the Irish indeed did suffer, as the Dr says in his 16.
Chap. not from his Majesty, nor from his Grace his Lieutenant, (who most
judiciously approved the satisfaction which was offered him by Persons of
known loyalty, honor and learning in a conference had with them, Mr Peter
Walsh being present) but from some who were too too officious and unreasonable
in pressing Oaths upon Catholic and Irish subjects, as if for being Catholics
and Irish we must be suspected above all others of disloyalty: but say you
again, if such a Power be granted in the Pope: he may declare a Prince deposed,
and expose his kingdom to any foreign Prince who is pleased to invade it: I
answer: if that should be; how can any Oath whatsoever of subjects hinder that
a foreign Prince shall not invade our Prince? is it because we swear the
Pope has no such Power, that the foreign Prince will desist from invading, if
the fancy takes him? what our Divins pretend, is to show, that the Oath of
supremacy is needless to secure Subjects in their Loyalty.

Now I will show that as that Oath of supremacy is needless, so it is not
sufficient to secure Subjects in their Loyalty; and this I will show in the
Principles and practice of the Church of England and Dr Sall: Our Dr has made a
Solemn Vow or Oath of Poverty obliging himself never to have any Rents or
revenews; also a Solemn Vow of never pretending or accepting any
Ecclesiastical Dignity; he made other Vows of Chastity, Obedience etc. Now
he says, those Vows or Oaths do not oblige him: and why? because says he page
181. against N. N. I made a former Vow of Religious Obedience in my Baptism to
God; if I find the later Vow made to the Pope, not to consist with the
compliance of the former made to God, then I must stand to the former made to
God, and rescind the later made to the Pope. And just so may any Protestant, or
Child of the Reformation say, after taking the Oath of supremacy: for as we
proved in our 12. Chapt. their Rule of faith being Scripture as each Person of
sound judgment understands it; after swearing the Oath of Supremacy, if you
read and study the Scripture, and the Spirit, or your ignorance moves you to
understand by the text, that the Rites, Ceremonies and practices of the
Protestant Church are degenerated into Popery,) as Presbiterians, Anabaptists,
and Quakers judge) and you pass further, and meet some texts as Zuinglius,
Calvin, Parson Peeters, and Beza did, and interpret them, that you ought to
demand a Reformation of those abuses, and in case of a repuls, to raise arms
against the king and force him to it; then you will say that in your Baptism
you made a vow of Obedience and Religion to God, according his Word; that your
Oath of supremacy does not consist with the compliance of this former; and that
you must rescind the later and stand to the former; what then does your Oath of
supremacy signify in the Protestant Religion?

Lastly this Oath is not advantageous, but destructive to the Government; for
it being made the distinctive sign of Loyalty, and none being admitted to the
king's Service in Civil or military employments, but such as will take it; his
Majesty is deprived of many stout and gallant subjects who are not permitted
to serve him, because they will not strain their Consciences with an Oath: And
besides the offices of trust in the kingdom being open to those who are ready
to take an oath, and there being men in all times and commonwealths who will
never stick to take an oath, for to advance their fortune; the places of trust
will com to the hands of those prostituted consciences; who, as they sold their
faith for their interest, will betray their trust and king when any good
bargain presents: and who does not see how destructive this is to the
government? Innumerable experiences show us, particularly since the year 40.
who were the more faithful to the king; the Catholics who refused the Oath,
but never drew sword against him; or the Protestants who freely took it, and
fought against him.

XIV. CHAPTER.
THE POPES SVPREMACY ASSERTED.
ALl the combustions and dismal contentions of our kingdoms for a whole age did
proceed from the Pop's pretension to supremacy, says our Dr: All Dr? The
combustions of England, when Dudley Duke of Northumberland beheaded Seamor the
Protector; poisoned the young king; raised the Lady Iean Gray to the throne; and
married her to his son; was all this (and the Tragical circumstances which
acompanied it) because the Pope did pretend to supremacy? or was it not rather
an effect of Protestancie which Dudley endeavored to establish, for to raise
his family upon the oppression of the true Monarch? Was the Murder of king
James in Scotland, and the violence of her subjects against Queen Marie? was
the imprisonment and death of that Queen by Queen Elizabeth; because the Pope
pretended to supremacy? or was it not an effectof Queen Elizabeth's ambition
of securing herself in the Crown, and excluding the family of the Stuarts? was
it because the Pope would be head of the Church, that the Parliament rebelled
the year 40. against the king? It was not any alteration of Ceremonies, or
language in Divin Service (says he) which minister'd fuel to this fatal
fire, all would have been granted by the Pope if we did own his supremacy;
and not one word of proof of all these hallucinations, but that one Twisden (a
chimaera for ought the world knows) should have said the Pope offered to
condescend with Queen Elizabeth in all points of the Reformation, if she did
but own his supremacy, to which, see my answer in the Introduction.

He pursues his invective against the Pop's supremacy and tells us S. Gregory
detested and disclaimed the Title of Universal Bishop, which he says, is a
commendation of his Modesty, and a check of the unlimited ambition of the
Popes of Rome. Its true S. Gregory, lib. 4. Epist. 32. 34. 36. and 38. writes
against that name of Universal Bishop, but not in his 4th. book, 60. and 67.
Epist. as my Adversary cites, for that book has but 57. Epistles; and what S.
Gregory condemns is not the name, but the sense and meaning, in which John
that ambitious Patriarck of Constantinople usurped it: for it may have two
meanings; the one is, the Chief and first Bishop, supreme in Power and
Jurisdiction, Chief Governor of the Church; in this sense S. Gregory did not
condemn it: the second meaning of that name is, to be the Universal Bishop of
the Church, that is to say the only Bishop of the Church; so as that the rest of
the Bishops are not properly Bishops, but administrators or Vicars under him:
In this sense did John the Patriark of Constantinople assume that name, and S.
Gregory did check his ambition, as appears in his 7th. book Epist. 71. Hoc in
totius Ecclesiae injuriam and omnium, etc. In this he injures the whole Church,
and despises you all, for if one be the Universal Bishop, as he understands it,
then none of you all is a Bishop. Again l. 4. Epist 38. Despectis fratribus,
appetit solus Episcopus vocari: Despising his Brethren he ambitions to be
called the only Bishop. You know very well Dr that the Pope does not pretend to
be called, and that we do not call him Universal Bishop in this sense, as if
he did pretend to be, or we should be so senseless as to say, he is the only
Bishop in the Church; and the rest of the Bishops are not truly and properly
Bishops.

But in the sense that the Pope assumes that name, that is to say to be the
chief Bishop in power and Jurisdiction above the rest, the supreme Governor of
the Church, S Gregory did never blame, nor condemn it; nay l. 7. Epist. 65.
speaking of the Sea of Rome he says, In saying he is subject to the Sea of
Rome, I know no Bishop but is subject to it, and S. Leo Epist. 48. calls the
Chair of Peter, the Seat of the Universal Church; and S. Gregory l. 4. Epist.
32. says, and Dr Sall confesses, that the name of Universal Bishop was offered
by the Council of Chalcedon Act. 3. and Act. 16. to Leo Pope; this was one of
the four first General Councils, which our Dr reveres for a Holy and sacred
Council; and must consequently confess, that that name of Universal Bishop,
which it offered to Leo, was Orthodox and lawful; or that the Council erred
foully and irreligiously in offering it: Its true as S Gregory says. The
Popes before him did not assume, but refuse and detest that name, but that was
because it was an odious name, by reason of the sense in which John the
Patriark, and others did assume it; therefore they would not use it: not
because it was not just and lawful in the true sense meaned by the Church.

And if we can prove that S. Peter was the chief in power and authority above
the Apostles, the supreme in Jurisdiction; there is no difficulty in believing
that his Successors are the chief and supreme in Power and Authority above the
other Bishops. Our Dr says page 31. he does not read that Peter should have
any Authority above Andrew in Achaia, or Thomas in the Indies, or the other
Apostles in their respective Provinces and this proves no more, but that either
his Library is ill furnished with books, or that he does not study, nay nor
read carefully the Bible: of all the Texts it affords, I will produce but
three with the glosses of some fathers upon them.

In two several occasions, Christ speaks particularly of the power he was to
give the Apostles for to tie and untie: the first, Math 16. he speaks to Peter
alone, tibi dabo claves regni caelorum, quodcunque ligaveris super terram, erit
ligatum and in caelis, quodcunque solveris super terram, erit solutum and in
caelis. To thee I will give the keys of the Kingdom of the Heavens; whatsoever
you shall bind on earth shall be bound in the Heavens; whatsoever you shall
unbind on earth shall be unbound in the Heavens. Again speaking of this power
he was to give to his Apostles, Math. 18. he says, whatever ye shall bind on
earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatever ye shall bind on earth shall be
bound in Heaven, and whatever ye shall unbind on earth, shall be unbound in
Heaven: Origin Hom. 6. in Math. observes the great difference expressed in this
text betwixt Peter and the rest of the Apostles. Non modica differentia est,
quod Petro datae sunt claves non vnius caeli, sed multorum cae^orum; and quae
ligata sunt super terram, ess^nt ligata non in vno tantum caelo, sed in omnibus
caelis; ad eos autem qui multi sunt ligatores and solutores in terra, sic dicit
vt soluant and alligent, non in caelis, sicut Petrus, sed in vno caelo, quia
non sunt in tanta perfectione sicut Petrus, vt alligent and soluant in omnibus
caelis. It Is no small difference that to Peter are given the keys, not of one
heaven but of many, and that what is bound on earth (by him) should be bound
not in one heaven, but in all the heavens. But to the rest, who are binders and
vnbinders on earth he says, that they can tie or untie, not in all the heavens
as Peter, but in one heaven; because they have not that power that Peter to tie
and untie in all the heavens. For the cleerer understanding of this passage, S.
Gregory tells us Hom. 12. in Evang. Per regnum caelorum in sacro eloquio
praesentis temporis Ecclesia designatur: by the Kingdom of the Heavens, is
understood in Scripture, this militant Church on earth. Its a kingdom, composed
of many heavens, that is to say, many Churches: now Origen's observation clearly
convinces Peter's supremacy for he had the Power of tying and untying in all
the Heavens; that is to say in all the Churches, his Jurisdiction reached to
all; each of the other Apostles had a power of binding and unbinding in vno
caelo tantum, in one heaven, only, in one Church but not in all: S. Hierom and
S. Augustine observed that when Christ speaks to S. Peter and gives him the
Power Math. 16. he gives him the keys, tibi dabo claves; but when he gives the
Power to all the Apostles Math. 18. no keys are mentioned, Soli Petro, says
S. Aug. in Ps. 108. dictum est, tibi dabo claves, etc. quia figuram gerebat
Ecclesiae, propter primatum Apostolatus, totius Ecclesiae gerebat Personam: to
Peter alone it was said to thee I will give the keys etc. because he
represented the Church; for the primacy of his Apostleship he represented the
whole Church, It Is very true all the Apostles and the whole Church teceived the
keys, says S. Hierom, l. cont. Jouin. Cuncti Apostoli Claves acceperunt; but
says S. August. tract. 24 in Joan. Tota Ecclesia accepit in Petro, they all
received the keys in Peter, as being the chief and Prince of all; they all
have the Power of tying and untying, but they must call to Peter for the keys.

The second Text Luc. 5. Duc in altum and laxate retia; Lanch out into the
Deep, and let your nets drop for a draught. S. Ambrose observes Soli Petro
dicitur, Duc; omnibus imperatur vt laxent retia: to Peter only it is said lanch
out and lead the boat; all are commanded to drop the nets: all must work and
labor, Peter alone must govern the boat: hence it is, that S. Hierom having
said l. cont. Jouin. Super omnes Apostolos ex aequo fortitudo Ecclesiae
solidatur; that the strength of the Church is equally founded upon all the
Apostles; he ads immediately in the same place (which our Adversaries
fraudulently let pass in silence) Tamen inter duodecem Vnus eligitur, vt Capite
constituto s^hismatis tolleretur occasio; but among the twelve one is chosen,
that a Head and chief being pointed, all ocasion of schism might be avoided:
and that you might not suspect that Peter was ordained the Head and Chief, only
of the rest of the Church, but not of the Apostles; hear S. Greg. l. 4. Epist.
38. Certe Petrus Apostolus primum membrum Vniversalis Ecclesiae est; Paulus.
Andreas, Ioannes, quid aliud, nisi singularium plebium capita sunt, and tamen
sub vno capite (scilicet Petro) omnes membra sunt Ecclesiae. Truly Peter is
the chief member of the Church Universal, Paul, Andrew, John, what are they,
but heads of particular flocks, and they are all but members of the Church,
under one head, which head is S. Peter, says S. Greg. again l. 4. Epist. 32.
Omnium Apostoloru^ Principi Petro Vniversalis Ecclesiae cura commissa est;
Peter, the Prince of the Apostles to whom the care of the Universal Church was
committed. Also S. Cyprian. l. de Unit. Eccl. having said, Omnes Apostoli pari
consortio praediti sunt and honoris and dignitatis: the Apostles were equally
endowed with power and honor; he added immediately (which our Adversaries also
disingenuously omit) sed exordium ab Vnitate proficiscitur, Petro Primatus
datur, vt vna Christi Ecclesia and vna Cathedra monstretur; but the beginning
springs from Unity, the Primacy is given to Peter, to denote the Unity of
Christ's Church, and the Unity of the Chair, and S. Cyprian himself says, as
we will see immediately, that by denying this Unity and Primacy, we run into
heresies and schisms.

The third Text Luc. 22. I have prayed for thee Peter, that they faith may not
fail, and you being converted, confirm they Brethren. He gawe Peter the charge
of strengthening his Brethren in their temptations, and hence Theophil.
commenting upon this text concludes that he made him the Chief head of the
Apostles; Manifestus Verborum sensus est, quod cum te discipulorum Principem
fecerim tu cum post negationem fleveris and resipueris, confirma fratres tuos;
hoc te decet qui post me Ecclesiae Petra and fundamentum es. The sense of the
text (says he) is clear; that whereas I made you Prince of the Disciples, when
you have lamented your Denial, strengthen your Brethren; this becoms you, who
are after me, the Rock and fundation of the Church. S. Augustine is no less
express in his gloss upon that text, Sermon, 124 de Tem. Totius corporis morbum
in ipso Capite curat Ecclesiae; in ipso componit omnium membrorum sanitatem. He
heales the disease of the whole in the very head of the Church; in him he
places the health of all the members: Behold how distinctly he calls him the
Head of the whole Church; and admire the bad luck of our good Dr that he could
not meet, he says, any mention in the Primitive fathers of the first five
hnndred years of Peter's suptemacy over Andrew in Achaia, Thomas in Indies, or
the rest of the Apostles: if but now, that we have furnished him with these
passages, he did open his eyes to the light of Truth; if he did read Chrysostom.
Hom. 55. in Math. he would find Peter called the Top of the Apostolical
College; and again hom. 87. in Joan. Petrus os est Apostolorum, totius cae^us
vertex, and Magister Orbis, qui Iacobum Hierosolimis praeposuit. Peter is the
Mouth of the Apostles, the Top of the Apostolical College, the Master of the
world who made James Bishop of Jerusalem; and again, hom. 3. in Act. commending
Peter's modesty, that tho he was the chief and superior of the Apostles, yet
he would not alone, without the approbation and consent of the rest, choose
Mathias to the Apostleship, quid, says he, an non licebat illi soli eligere?
licebat quidem; and maxim licebat; verum id non fecit; nihil authoritate sola,
nihil cum imperio. Could not he alone choose Mathias? yes he could; but he would
not; nothing by his proper Authority; nothing by command; let our Dr read
Optatus l. 2. cont. Parmenianum. Omnium Apostolorum Caput Petrus Romae Sedit,
vt in illa vna Cathedra, vnitas ab omnibus servaretur, ne caeteri Apostoli
singulas Cathedras sibi quisque defenderet. Peter the head of all the Apostles,
sits at Rome, that in that one Chair, Unity should be kept by all; least that
each of the rest of the Apostles, should claim each of their cbaires proper to
themselves, without any subordination to their head. And because our Dr
flatters himself with the persuasion of S. Bernard's judgment against S.
Peter's Supremacy, let him read the Saint l. 2. de Consid. ad Eug. Tu quis
es? Summus Sacerdos, Pontifex magnus, tu Princeps Episcoporum, tu haeres
Apostolorum, tu primatu Abel, gubernatu Noe, Patriarchatu Abraham, ordine
Melchisedech, dignitate Aaron, Authoritate Moses, Iudicatu Samuel, Potestate
Petrus, Unction Christus: tu es cui claves traditae, cui oues creditae sunt;
sunt quid^m and alij coeli Ianitores and gregum Pastores, sed tu tanto
gloriosius, quanto differentius, vtrumque prae caeteris nomen haereditasti:
habent illi sibi assignatos greges, singuli singulos, tibi Vniversi crediti,
Vni Vnus; nec modo ovium, sed and pastorum tu vnus omnium, Pastor. Who are you?
(says S. Bernard to Eugenius Pope) You are the great Priest; the Heigh Bishop,
the Prince of Bishops, the heir of the Apostles, by Primacy Abel, by
government Noe, by Patriarchship Abraham, by Order Melchisedech, by Dignity
Aaron, by Authority Moses, by Judicature Samuel, by Power Peter, by Unction
Christ: to you the keys were given, to you the sheep were committed: here are
also other Porters of Heaven and Pastors of the flock; but you with so much the
more excellency, by how much the more differently above all others you possess
those names: they have their flocks appointed for them; each one his own
particular flock; to thee all are delivered, one flock to one; nor are you only
the Pastor of the sheep, but you are the only and sole Pastor of all the
Pastors: and a little beneath; Aliorum potestas certis arctatur limitibus, tua
extenditur and in ipsos qui potestatem super alios acceperunt. The power of
others is confined within certain bonds, but your power reachs over those who
have power above others.

And that nothing may be wanting for a full conviction of this truth, hear S.
Hierom in Dial. ad Lucif. proving the necessity of this Papal Supremacy; Nisi
supereminens quaedam, etc. if there be not a supereminent and supreme
authority in the Church, there will be as many schisms in the Church, as there
are Priests: and tho you may attribut that confused distraction of sectaries in
England and elsewhere to other causes; but S. Cyprian l. 1. Epist. 30. gives you
the genuin reason of it; Non aliunde na^ae sunt haereses, aut orta schismata,
quam quia non agnoscun^ vnum Vice-Christi ad tempus Iudicem, cui Vniversa
fraternitas obtemperet. Heresies and schisms, have no other source, but because
they do not acknowledge one Judge Vicegerent of Christ to which all the flock
should obey. Judge you now Reader with what truth our Dr says that no mention
is made by antiquity of S. Peter's supremacy which has been so clearly
delivered as I have showen, by Origin, Cyprian, S. August. Ambrose, Hierom,
Chrysostom, Bernard, Theofilact, and Optatus; and to whose judgment will you
stick, either of such Oracles who teach Peter's supremacy, or of a Luther, a
Calvin, a Beza, who to live without curb, rebelled against Authority; see
which you will prefer; or the unanimous consent of ages upward to the Apostles;
or this our last age distracted by Mushrom sectaries; see with whom you will
believe; with the Universities and innumerable Drs and fathers of the past and
this present age, or with a handful of obscure and unknown people.

XV. CHAPTER.
MY SYLLOGISMS FOR TRANSVBST ANtiation enforced against the Doctor and the
Doctrine proved against his sense and Reason.
I proposed a syllogism in my former Treatise page 188. for our Tenet of
Transubstantiation, grounded upon the text of S. Luke 22. Take eat this is my
body which is given for you: the text denotes, he gave to them somewhat to eat;
I proved it was his real Body; for; He gave to them to eat, what he gave for
them; the Text says it, take eat this is my body which is given for you; but
he gave for them his real body; therefore he gave to them his Real body: for as
I advertised, the Text makes no difference betwixt what he gave To them, and
what he gave for them: by what principles then must we interpret the text, and
say that what he gave to them was a figure only, and what he gave for them was
his Real body? will it not be as lawful to Marcion to interpret the text as to
you, and say that as the text in the first part imports only a figurative body
given to them; so in the second part it imports but a figurative body given for
them.

His answer is that my argument is not worth a rush; that with a piece of his
Logic he will prove it a paralogism; and raises such a thick mist of
scholastical terms so often repeated in few lines, that I defy you read his
discourse and your head not to ache: after a great deal of tittle tattle against
the form of my syllogism; the vpshot of his answer is, that tho the text does
not distinguish betwixt what Christ gave To us in the supper, and what he gave
for us yet our eyes do distinguish betwixt both, for we see what he gave to us,
was but Bread, and what he gave for us on the Cross was an Organic Body. This
answer I did forsee and replied against it in my former Treatise; but not a
syllable does my Antagonist answer against my replies, as if I had made none.

But its well he has attempted to say somewhat; he confesses plainly the text
makes no difference betwixt what he gave to his disciples in the supper and
what he was to give for them upon the cross; our eyes he says distinguish
betwixt both; because they did see but bread in the supper; and they did see an
Organic body, upon the cross. Very well: I pray Dr, the night that Christ was
at the supper, when he took the bread and uttered those words, take eat* this
is my Body which is given for you. Did the Apostles see with their eyes that
night Christ's Organic Body given for us upon the cross! No, for he was not
then crucified: What did they believe then, that Christ would give To them to
eat? the figure only of his Body says our Dr, real bread; because their eyes
did see but bread: and what did they believe then, that Christ would give for
them on the cross? an Organic Body says he; why so? for the text as you
confess, makes no distinction betwixt what he gave To them, and For them; our
eyes you say make the distinction; then, in the night of the supper their eyes
did not see his Organic Body on the cross; how could they therefore distinguish
then, what he gave to them to eat, from that he was to give for them on the
cross; O but say you, the next day after they did see his Organic Body for them
upon the cross: its true; but I speak of the supper the night before; then, as
they believed that Christ's Body was given To them, because Christ said, take
eat so they believed at the same time his body would be given for them on the
cross, because he said in the same text, which is given for you; and my
difficulty is, since they did believe that the body given to them, was only a
figurative body, by what Principle did they distinguish that the body which
would be given for them was an Organic Body? for by virtue of the text, as you
confess, they could not Distinguish there two different bodies; nor by their
eyes, because they did not see the Organic Body on the cross.

The like may be said of Abraham, Isaac, and the ancient Patriarks; they
believed that Christ would give his Body to us in the supper, and for us on the
cross; doubtless these Mysteries were revealed to them: did they believe it was
a figurative only body was given to us in the supper, and an Organic real body
on the cross? by what principle did they make this distinction of what was
given To us, from what was given for us? not by any text or supernatural
revelation; for sure you will not say he spoke to them of the Ancient law in
more express and emphatic terms, than to those of the law of Grace; nor by
their eyes or senses, for they did not see Christ in the supper, nor on the
cross: you must conclude then, that either they believed his figurative only
Body was to be in the supper and on the cross; or that his true real and
substantial Body was to be in both.

It Is a gallant resolution of our Dr in his page 116. Sr says he, we are
ready to captivat our senses and reason to faith in God wheresoever we find him
to declare his will unto us, without any further examine: but hang the Good town
of Swords, whose Parish makes him break^ this resolution: I pray Dr answer me
to a question I proposed to you page 144. of the Unerring Vnerrable Church,
which you dropped under the table like a naughty card; but I Will tak it up: Can
you deny but that God might, if he were pleased, turn the substance of the
bread into his flesh and blood, and give us his true and real Body under the
accidents of bread? as he turned the Water into wine, and as our stomach turns
the Victuals we eat into our flesh and blood? you will not deny, but that he
might, if he were pleased: If Christ were really intended to do it; and to give
us his real true body under the accidents of bread, how could he declare his
intention in cleerer expressions than taking bread, and saying, take eat this
is my body, truly my flesh; what cleerer expression can any man expect in a
serious conversation betwixt honest men? He spoke then, as if really he
intended to give us his real body under the accidents of bread; for if he had
really intended it, he could not speak otherwise: Can you then doubt, but that
Gods Will is sufficiently declared unto you in this point? and yet you will not
captivat your senses nor reason; you will not, notwithstanding the plain and
clear sense of Gods Word, believe it is his true body, because your eyes and
taste find its bread^ and is not this to captivat Gods Word to your senses
rather than to captivat your senses to his Word; when you contradict the plain
natural sense of his Words, because your senses and reason contradict it?

Let us hear how sar is the Dr from the faith of the Ancient Fathers of the
Church, and from their submission to Gods word in this ineffable mystery: S
Chrysostom. speaks thus Hom. 60. ad Pop. Ant. Let us obey God in all things, and
not gainsay him, tho what he says contradicts our senses and imaginations; let
his Word obtain more credit from us, than our thoughts and sight: let us not
consider only what leyes before our eyes, but hold fast to his Word; for his
Words are infallible and our senses are easy to be deceived: his words never
fail, but our senses frequentlie mistake; because therefore he says, this is
my Body, let us obey believe and behold him with the eyes of our Understanding.
And again in the same place; What Pastor feeds his flock with his own blood?
but he feeds us with his own proper blood. S. Cyril is no less express in
excluding our senses from being Judges in this Mystery Orat. 4. Cath. do not
look on this as naked bread, for it is the Body and blood of Christ himself,
and although sense does suggest unto thee that this is bread, yet let faith
confirm thee: do not judge of it by they taste, but know and hold for certain,
that this bread which is seen of us, is no bread, though the taste judges it to
be bread, but the body of Christ; and the wine which seems to our taste to be
wine, is no wine but the blood of Christ. S. Epiph. in Acor. circa Medium
speaks of this Mystery, We see its neither equal, nor like in proportion to
his flesh, but yet because he was pleased to say through grace, this is my
flesh, every one believes, notwithstanding what we see, for his saying; and
every one who believes not, it is his very true Body, falls from Grace.
Thus the ancient fathers captivated their senses to faith, notwihstanding the
evidence of their eyes: And not only the example of the Fathers, but several
passages of Scripture manifestly prove, that we must believe the plain and
natural sense of the word of God, against the evidence of our eyes; as S.
Joseph believed his Spouse the B. Virgin to be a Virgin upon the testimony of
the Angel, against the evidence of his eyes, which did see in her the marks of
a Woman. Tobias also did see in his fellow Traveller but the Accidents of a
human nature, yet against the evidence of his sense which did see nothing but a
man; he believed him to be a Spirit: so also tho our eyes see nothing but bread
in the consecrated Host, yet we believe against the evidence of sense, that it
is no bread but the Body of Christ, because the words of Christ, This is my
Body, is of a more infallible assurance than our eyes and other senses.

But says our Dr this Mystery is quite repugnant to human reason; because
thence it would follow, that Christ's Body would be at one time in as many
different places, as there are consecrated hosts; and reason shows a Body
cannot be at one time, but in one place. If he had read carefully S. Paul's l.
Epistle to the Corint. chap 15. this difficulty would not have startled him:
there the Apostle distinguishes two kind of Bodies (or rather one and the same
body in two different states and conditions) a spiritual, and an earthly
natural body, which two bodies are not substantially different, or two
different substances, but one and the same body under different qualities and
accidents; for he says, this our natural corruptible Body shall be changed in
the Resurrection of the dead; into a spiritual body that is to say purified from
earthly qualities; it shall be spiritualised, and become immortal, impassible
and adorned with spiritual qualities. Our Dr knows well that a spiritual
substance can be in many places, and sometimes in a smal^ space, sometimes in a
greater, as our soul is wholly in each part of our Body: allow therefore (which
is false) that this our earthly corruptible body may not be in many places, but
when it is spiritualised and has changed its earthly natural qualities into
spiritual qualities, and become as it were a spiritual, immortal impassible
incorruptible substance, as glorious bodies are, why may it not have that
quality and capacity, as spirits have, of being in many places; and being
sometime in a great, sometime in a small place: and therefore we say that
Christ's body by virtue of its spiritual qualities, because it is spiritualized
as glorious bodies are, may be in many places; even as the Body of Christ
entered into the Cenacle the doors being shut, whether that was by the chinks
of the door or the keye hole, or penetrating the door; this is no less
repugnant to reason, and to the exigence of a natural earthly Massive Body,
than to be in many places; and how did that happen? S. Epiph answers Haer. 64.
Our Savior rised from the dead, not taking an other body, but the self same
body, which he had, changing it into a spiritual subtilitie, or spiritualizing
it, by which he entered the door being shut. He who entered, says S. Ambrose l.
10. c. 24 in Luc. had a true real body; how then did he enter the door being
shut? by the qualities of a spirit which he received in his Resurrection; the
body is sown a natural, corruptible, earthly body; it rises a spiritual,
heavenly incorruptible one. By these Principles of Scripture and consent of
ancient Fathers, we can also understand, that tho these our natural, earthly
corruptible bodies, cannot be at one time in many places; yet glorious bodies,
being spiritualized, by virtue of their spiritual endowments, may be in many
places, as spiritual substances are.

An other repugnance against reason our Dr pretends in this mystery, that the
accidents of bread would exist without their substance to support them: yet we
have several examples in Scripture of the existence of Accidents without their
Substances: first the taste of all victuals was in the Manna, and our Dr will
not pretend the substa^ces of all victuals were there: secondly Tobias did see
visibly the Accidents of a human nature in his fellow Travaller; and Scripture
assures us he was no man, but an Angel: thirdly Scripture tells us the Apostles
did see the Accidents of a Pigeon in Jordan; and the substance of a Pigeon was
not there to support them; the Israelits Exodus 13. did see a Pillar of a cloud,
which lead them by day, and a Pillar of fire which lead them by night, and
there was no substance either of a cloud or of fire, but only the Accidents:
and why may not the accidents of bread be in the Sacrament, tho their substance
be not there to support them?

It Is time we examine our Dr^'s answer to my second syllogism: he says he can
reckon as many vices in it as in my first; but what was expected was, not to
tell us what he could do, but to point out those vices: it was upon that
passage of John, 6. when Christ said, my flesh is truly meat my blood is truly
drink; the Jews repleyed, this saying is hard, how can this man give us his
flesh to be eaten: I proposed two syllogisms, the first was thus; The Jews
thought impossible what Christ affirmed; but what the Jews thought to be
impossible, was that he should give his true flesh to be eaten; for no man ever
yet apprehended any impossibility in giving the figure of his body to be
eaten; especially the Jews, who eat yearly the Paschal lamb, which they
believed to be the figure of Christ; therefore what Christ affirmed, was that
he would give his true and real flesh. My Adversary very civily lets this
syllogism pass in silence. And any man would think its a pinching argument.

My second syllogism upon that passage was; A damnable unbeliever is he who
denies a Truth, sufficiently proposed to him to be revealed; for tho a man may
be an Unbeliever for denying a Truth, but not a Damnable one, if it be not
sufficiently proposed to him to be revealed: but the Jews in this occasion are
called damnable unbelievers, and what they denied, was a real fleshy eating of
Christ's flesh, as Catholics believe it: therefore Christ sufficiently proposed
a real fleshy eating of his body, as we believe it: My Adversary quarrels with
the Minor of the second proposition, which he conceits to be a paralogism
because he says its composed of two different propositions: but this is but a
poor shift to divert his Reader, and draw breath; for the sense of the Minor
appears to any half eyed man to be this, The Jews were called damnable
unbelievers, because they denied the fleshy eating of Christ's body: what say
you to this Proposition Dr? He denies it, and this is the whole and sole answer
we have from our Dr a naked denial, without giving any textor reason, why; but
tells us they were called damnable unbelievers not for denying the fleshy
eating of his Body, but because they misunderstood Christ, and did not
understand that he spoke only of his figurative flesh. But the non sense of
this answer is threefold; first for to be a damnable unbeliever it is necessary
to deny a truth, as our Dr himself confesses, and as all the world must
confess; but the Jews did not deny the figurative Presence, for our Dr himself,
both in his printed sermon and in his Book, page 115. says that they did not
aprehend that Christ at all spoke of his figurative Presence, but of his real
fleshy Presence; and how could they deny or affirm, what they did not as much
as dream was spoken of? secondly to be a Damnable unbeliever, The truth must be
sufficiently proposed to the deniers; and our Dr himself acknowledges that
nothing of a figurative Presence was sufficiently proposed to them; whereas he
acknowledges, that they did not apprehend that Christ should have spoken of his
figurative Presence, but of a real fleshy eating of his body; Christ's meaning
therefore was not sufficiently declared unto them; how could they therefore be
damnable unbelievers: thirdly he says They did misaprehend Christ's Words, and
did not understand him to have spoken of his figurative Presence. And is it
therefore they must be called damnable unbelievers, because they did not
understand what Christ said? will you call your Auditorie damned Heretics
because they do not understand you when you preach? to call a man a Dolt or a
dull headed fellow, because he does not understand, may pass; but we are all in
a sad condition, if we must be called damnable unbelievers because we do not
understand a Preacher or Teacher: I pray Reader consider this discourse, the
Jews are called unbelievers; therefore they must have denied some revealed
Truths, but they denied no other but the real fleshy eating of Christ's body,
for the Dr himself says, they understood Christ did speak of that, and of
nothing else; therefore they are damnable unbelievers for denying the fleshy
eating of Christ's body.

For to prove that Christ spoke of the figure of his flesh, our Dr brings not a
syllable of Scripture but that text which he cited in his Sermon and I answered
in my former Treatise The flesh profits nothing, it is the Spirit that
quickneth; my Words are Spirit and life. He says Christ gave them to
understand by these words, that he was to give them a figure of his Body, and
that it was a check for understanding him to have spoken of his true and real
flesh: and if you will not believe this upon his bare word, you may choose, for
he will give you no other ptoof: But that you may know how much our Dr is
mistaken, you must know that the Capharnits, to whom Christ spoke, did not
understand the Doctrine which S. Paul delivered us; that this our natural
earthly sensual body, should in the Resurrection rise spiritualized,
incorruptible, purified, and refined from our material earthly qualities; and
should be incorruptible as spirits, Agil as spirits, invisible as spirits, able
to abridge it self to a narrow, or enlarge itself to a great space as spirits:
the Capharnits understood nothing of this, but imagined the body could not be
otherwise, than as we see it with its material earthly qualities; and when they
heard Christ say he would give them his flesh to eat^, they conceived he meant
his Body as they did see it under those earthly material qualities, and that he
would cut it in morsels and give it to them: this carnal sensual manner of
understanding is what Christ checked; the flesh profits nothing, that is to say
according their carnal sensual imagination of it; that they ought to understand
him spiritually; that his flesh should be given in a spiritual way: Hear S.
August. upon this subject to. 9. tract. 27. in Joan. What means the flesh
profite^h nothing? it profits nothing as they (the Capharnits) understood it;
for they understood it, as one cuts it in morsels when the Body is dead, or as
it is sold in the Butcher's stall, and not as it is spiritualized: Again S.
August. in Ps. 18. Our savior has given us to eat the same flesh, which was
born of the Virgin, wherein he conversed with us on earth, but in a spiritual
manner. S. Chrysostom. is no less express Hom 24. in 6. Joan. How does be flesh
profit nothing, without which none can have life? observe that this is not said
of Christ's ^rue flesh, but of their (Capharnits) fleshly sensual understanding
of his words.

I expected to meet in my Adversari's book some text of Scripture directly
proving his figurative Presence, that he had not alleged in his Sermon; but
our Dt is a Spaniard, he sticks to his old fashion, nothing of new will you
hardly find in any of the points he treats, but what he said before in his
Sermon: he cites again S. Paul calling the bread after its consecration, Brea^;
and takes no notice of the answer I gave him in my former Treatise, that when a
thing is converted into an other, it often retains the name of what it was; as
The bl^nd see, the lame walk etc. after they recovered their sight and limbs,
they are so called, because they were so: and because the texts are sometimes to
be understood in a Metaphorical sense sometimes in a literal, I gave a rule for
to distinguish the one from the other: when a word is equivocal bearing two
significations; putting it in a proposition, its determined to signify that
sense of which, and of no other, the Predicat can be verified: as the word Man,
is indifferent to signify a true real Man or a painted one, put it in a
Proposition, A Man is a rational creature; there it is determined to signify a
true real Man, because of him only, the Predicat, Rational crea^ure, can be
verified: The word Bread also is indifferent to signify true material bread,
or bread only in appearance: will you know which sense it bears in S. Paul's
discourse? see what Predicats are said of that bread; The bread which I shall
give is my flesh for the life of the world, this Predicat flesh which I shall
give for the life of the world cannot be said of true material bread; therefore
that bread which S. Paul speaks of, is not true Material bread: Christ says
he is a Vine, a Lamb put them in propositions; Christ is the true vine, which
yields fruit to life everlasting; the lamb which takes away the sins of the
world; these Predicats cannot he verified of a material vine and lamb:
therefore they must be taken in a Metaphorical sense. Our Dr without doubt
would have been so kind as to have advertised us, if he had found this Rule did
faulter; but tho he nibbles at it, he cannot weaken it.

XVI. CHAPTER.
TRANSVBSTANTIATION PROVED by the consent of Fathers.
NOt one of the first Reformers but exclaimed against the Ancient Fathers as
Fautors of Popery, carried away with the deluge of errors which ouerflowed the
whole Church this they preached and printed, toxicating the brains of their
Proselites with the contempt of Fathers and undervalue of their authority, not
only in the first beginning of the Reformation, but for some years after: but
Posterity, as men reclaimed from a Phrensy, began to think, how heathenish a
crime it was to pull down the Pillars of Christianity; and particularly the
Church of England feeling the attacks of the Presbiterians against Episcopacy,
and some practices of theirs; for which they can show no other warrant but
Tradition, began to revere the authority of the ancient Fathers, but so
fraudulently, that where they seem to drop any word which favors them, they are
brave men; but show them whole Treatises in favor of our Catholic Tenets; they
were blind, and carried away with the errors of their time: Who but Augustine?
the greatest Dr of the Church, when he calls the Eucharist a Sign of Christ's
body, (tho not as they pretend;) but produce his book, De cura pro Mortuis
where he vigorously proves Purgatory; show his express words, for Prayers to
Saints, and the Miracles of our Church which he relates; he was, they say,
deceived by his Mother Monica, and hurried away by the errors of his time: S.
Bernard was, they say, a most Holy Orthodox Saint, when he bitterly checks the
Pomp and Vanity of the Court of Rome; but when he praises Monachism, teachs
Purgatory, preaches Transubstantiation; he was Ignorant, says Dr Sall, he was
foully deceived: S. Gregory the great, was an incomparable man, when he spoke
against John the Patriark of Constantinople, for usurping the Title of
Universal Bishop; but tell them that he brought Popery into England, Mass.
Purgatory etc. Fox says, he is in hell for his pains.

Now you are to observe, Reader, that the ancient Fathers, sometimes designedly
spoke ob^urely of the Mysteries of our Religion, and particularly of the holy
Eucharist; specially when they did speak in presence of Pagans and
Cathecumens; because, they not being received into the Church, nor sufficiently
instructed, might be surprised and deterred from following Christ by the
sublimitie of this Mystery: as the Capharnits were, when it was proposed to
them: this we know by Theod. quoted by Dr Sall, Dial. 2, where speaking of
this Mystery he says; Non oporte^ haec aperte dicere; est enim verosimile
ad^sse aliquos Initiatos: its not expedient to speak more openly of these
things, for probably there may be some Cathecumens present. S. Augustine, in
psalm. 109. says the same, and Sermon 46. de Verb. Dom. and our Dr and his fellow
wranglers take an advantage from hence, snatching some of their obscure tetms,
and gleaning here and there some little fragments, dismembered from their clear
words, and from the end and scope of their discourse as will appear by few
examples; My Antagonist cites Theodoret Dial. 2. and Gelasius Pope de Duab.
Nature. who say The symbols are not chan^ed in their nature, but abide in their
proper substance, figure, and form and are touched and seen as before. Here our
Dr stops, and very disingenuously omits the immediately following words of
Theodoret; Those mystical signs are understood to be, what they are made to be,
and hey are believed and adored as being those things which h^y are believed to
be. Could any man who professes to speak obscurely, speaks in cleerer terms?
he says they are believed and adored as being what they are made to be: if
they are made to be a figure only of Christ's body, they are not ^o be adored
in the Protestant Doctrine, which denies the adoration of Images: they are not
changed he says, but abide in their nature substance, form and figure, and yet
he says hey are made to be an object of our Adoration; certainly the Physical
true substance of bread is no object of Adoration; they are touched and seen as
before; and the true substance of bread is not touched or seen; only the
Accidents of created substances are the Objects of our senses: whence it
appears, that by Nature, Substance, Figure, and Form Theodoret understands the
Accidents of bread which remain in the consecrated host in their proper nature
as before; and the Nature of a thing may be called it is substance.

By the way, take notice, that our Dr in his printed Sermon impugning our Tenet
of Infallibility, directed his arrows at the Infallibility of the Pope alone: I
advertised him, this was not our Tenet of faith, but a school question; that
our Article of faith was, the Infallibility of the Pope and Council jointly,
and of the Church diffusive: In his 3. and 5. Chapt. of his book he railes at
me, that I impose upon him in saying he should have spoken of the Pope alone;
It Is an intolerable cavil, says he of I S. to say, I shoul speak of the Pope
alone's Infallibility; a gross misunderstanding of my meaning, for which I gave
no ground in my Writings: I speak of the Infallibility of the Pope and Party
following him, whether congregated or dispers^d. Have you heard him protest,
that when he impugns our Tenet of Infallibility, he does not mean, nor speak of
that of the Pope alone? Hear him again reproach our Religion and faith as
ridiculous, for believing the Infallibility of the Pope alone; (tho he knows,
as it appears by his former words, this is not our Article of faith, nor bottom
whereupon we^ rest our faith.) Chap. 19 after having cited Gelasius his
sentence, that the Substance and nature of bread and wine remains in the
consecrated Elements, as if, for being the judgment of a Pope, we must yield
because we believe him Infallible; Will you find a way sa^es he, for to
decline such a sentenc^? Yes Dr three ways; first you must prove against
Bellar. Baron. and several others, that he was a Pope; secondly you must prove
he delivered that Doctrine after his installment, and not before he was made
Pope; thirdly you must prove he delivered that Doctrine ex Cathedra; that is to
say as Master and Pastor of the Church, proposing to the flock what they ought
to believe; for a Pope who speaks his private sentiments, as a particular
Doctor, may err: Moreover Dr tho the Pope alone were infallible, and tho the
Pope and Council jointly be infallible; what they say only occasionally and
transiently in their Decrees is not infallibly true; for tho their Decrees in
matters of Doctrine be true, but the reasons, arguments, and similitudes by
which they expound their Doctrine, are not infallible Verities; and if you have
read Gelasius, or if you be at leisure to read him; you will find that the
Subject and scope of his discourse, was of the Two Natures of Christ, proving it
against Euthyces and Nestorius, and that he spoke of the Mystery of the
Consecrated Bread transiently, as a parity or similitude by which he pretends
to prove the existence of both Natures, Divin and Human, in Christ: lastly,
suppose the words of Gelasius prove evidently the substance of bread to remain
in the Sacrament; what are you the nearer to prove your figurative Presence?
for the Lutherans will grant the bread is there; but that Christ's body is also
there, together with the bread, as both Natures, human and Divin, are in Christ

And to show you our Drs disingenuitie and fraud, hear him conclude his 19
Chapt. Conclude Reader from this passage of G^lasius what hopes we may have of
peace, and end of Controversies, by allowing the Pope to be infallible, when
the clear and plain words of a Pope are subject to such misconstructions:
giving his Reader to understand, that we^ bottom our faith on the Infallibility
of the Pope alone, and make him only, the infallible Judge to decide our
Controversies ^ and this our Dr says, after all his Protestations, that when
he impugns and rebukes our Doctrine of Infallibility, he does not speak of, or
mean that of the Pope alone; as if we had not plainly declared that our
Catholic Tenet is not of the Infallibility of the Pope alone, but jointly with
the Council.

He cites S. Augustine also who often calls the Eucharist a sign and type of
Christ's Body; It Is true he does; but it is no less true that he did not mean
the Eucharist was a pure and only sign; but a Sign, and the thing signified:
the Body of Christ in the Eucharist, is a sign of itself as it was on the
cross; and, that this was S. Augustins meaning, our Dr could not doubt often,
had he read S. Augustine in Psalm. 33. where glossing upon the words of the
Prophet He was carried in his own hands, he says, We do not find that this
was literally verified of David, but we find it literally verified of Christ,
when, he said, this is my Body, he carried his Body in his hands. S. Augustine,
as you see, says, that text, this is my Body, must be understood literally,
and was literally verified of Christ, when he pronounced it; but if what Christ
carried then in his hands was a pure, and only a sign of his body, the text
would not be literally verified of him; it is not his body he would carry in
his hand, but a sign of his Body: nor would S. Augustine have said, as we^
quoted him in the precedent Chapter, that our Savior gave us to ea^^ the sam
flesh which was born of he Virgin, and wherein he conversed with us on earth:
But where our adversary sounds a perfect Victory against us, is in the
passage of S. Augustine in Psalm. 38. You must understand Spiritually, what I
said; you shall not eat this body which you see, nor drink this blood which
shall be spilt by those who will crucify me; I have recommended unto you a
Sacrament which (spiritually understood) will give life; it is needful it be
celebrated visibily; but it must he understood spiritually: take these words of
the Saint separatly from the scope and end of his discourse, and they may
startle you: but if you consider that, as I have related above, he checked the
sensual material understanding of the Capharnits, who judged Christ intended
his Body to be eaten under those material earthly qualities as it appeared to
their eyes, S. Augustine meant nothing else but to rectify their error, telling
them they were not to eat that flesh and blood of Christ which they did see, as
they did see it under those accidents and qualities; but in a spiritual manner,
as glorious bodies exist, as we^ declared in the precedent Chapter; and that S.
Augustine did not think of denying Christ's true and real flesh should be given,
it appears, whereas he says, he would give us the same fl^esh to eat, which was
born of the Virgin, and wherein he conversed with us on earth.

Our Dr cites also Dionisius Syrus, upon the first Chap. of S. John translated
into English by Dr Loftus; affirming the Word was made flesh without any change
in the Divinity, as the bread is changed into the Body of Christ without any
change in its nature: the Translator I honor for his learning and erudition;
the works of Dionisius Syrus I have not seen, but allow he has spoken as he is
translated; first this, and all you have hitherto said, Favors Luthers opinion
of Consubstantiation, more than the Protestant Doctrine of Figurative Presence;
for all you have said proves only, that the substance of bread remains; but how
do you prove against Luther or against us, that the Body of Christ is not
substantially and really there? if Dionisius Syrus be of so great weight with
you, you must say, that as the Word of God being made flesh; both natures and
substances remain in Christ; of flesh, and of the Divinity, so when the bread
is made the Body of Christ, there must remain both natures and Substances of
Christ's* body and the bread, in the Sacrament; and this is Luthers Doctrine,
nothing a kin to the figurative Presence of England: Secondly what do you talk
to us of a Dionisius Syrus, or of Gelasius, an unknown Author? put both, and
more of their rank, if you can get them, in one balance; and put S. Augustine,
S. Chrisostom, S. Ambros, S. Cyprian, S. Hierom, and the rest of the known,
renowned, and most illustrious Doctors and Pillars of Christianity in an other;
and tell me which of them weighs most? read S. Ambrose l. 4. de Sacram. c. 4.
You will say my bread is usual bread; No, this bread which is bread before the
Sacramental Words, when the consecra^ion is performed, of bread is made the
flesh of Christ; and to prevent our Adversaries cauil of a figurative flesh, he
says l. 6. de Sacram. c. 1. as our Lord Jesus Christ is the true son of God,
not as men are by grace, but as the son of the substance of his father; so, it
is his very true flesh, as himself has said, and his very true blood we eat
and drink: I do not wonder that Calvin wished, (as they say he did) that the
Devil had struck the pen out of S. Ambrose his hand when he was writing of this
Mystery; for there can be nothing more clear against his figurative Presence:
and again l. de Initiandis c. 9. he says the bread is changed into the Body of
Christ, as Moses his rod was turned into a serpent, as the waters of Egypt
were turned into blood; and the water into wine in the Marriage of Cana of
Galilee, the word of God which made of nothing, that to be, which was not; can
not it change that which was, to be that which it was not before? Face these
words of S. Ambrose with those of Dionisius Syrus and see which of both is of
most credit in the Christian world, Ambrose or Dionisius:

And if you think Ambrose does not outweigh him, add S. Cyprian, sermon. de Coen.
Dn^i; The bread which our Lord gave to his disciples was changed, not in
appearance but in nature, and by the Omnipotency of his Word was made flesh.
Eusebius. Emiss. Sermon. de Corp. Dn^i, The invisible Pri^st Ch^^st, do^s change by
his invisible power the visible creatures to the substance of h^^ Body and
blood: when the visible creatures are put upon the altar, before the invocation
of the Holy Ghost for to bless them, the substance of bread and wine is there;
but after the consecration, the Body and blood of Christ; we must judge of this
Host not by our senses, or exterior appearance, but by our faith. S. Hierom.
in Epist. ad Hebr. quaest. 20. Let us understand that the bread which Christ
gave to his Disciples, is the body of Christ; Moses did not give the true
hread (yet he gave the Manna, which was a figure of Christ) but Christ gave it;
Christ himself is the guest and the banquet; he himself is he who eats, and is
eaten, Add to these the testimonies of S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, S. Cyril,
and S. Epiph. which I produced in the precedent, and I will produce in the next
ensuing Chapter; and pretend not for some half sentences picked here and there
out of some Ancient Fathers work, and wrested to a crooked sense which they
never thought of; pretend not I say, that the Ancient Fathers do favor your
Error; it would be more ingenuity in you to say, as your Ancestors, the first
Reformers said, that the Ancient Fathers were blind, and carried away with our
Popish superstitions; and as you forsook the Church with them, to renounce to
the Fathers as they did.

XVII. CHAPTER.
THE ADORATION OF THE HOST; and Communion in one Kind.
There Is no need of an Antagonist for to contradict our Dr. for in every chapter
almost, he contradicts himself; in the perclose of his 20. chap. he blends up
two contradictorie propositions in one paragragh; I do not ignore nor doubt,
says he, that if your Doctrine of Christ's personal presence in the consecrated
Host be true, there is as much reason for to adore such an Host as to adore
Christ himself, both being the same thing in such a supposition: then again he
ads, It Is an intolerable boldness to say, the matter standing as now it does,
doubtful and controverted, there is as much reason to adore Christ in the
consecrated Host, as there is for adoring him in his own person, since that for
adoring Christ we have an express command, but no command of adoring Christ in
the Sacramental bread even supposing him to be corporally present there. You
see how in one breath the Dr says we are obliged to adore the consecrated
Host supposing Christ to be there personally present, and that yet supposing
him to be there personally present we^ are not obliged to adore him: But the
reason he gives why we^ are not obliged to adore him, tho he should be there
personally present, is very pretty; because says he, that for adoring Christ
in his own person we^ have a positive command, but we have no command for
adoring him in the consecrated Host, tho he should be there personally present:
as if the general command of adoring Christ in flesh, did not reach for to
oblige us to adore him wheresoever he is really present in flesh; doubtless he
must say the three kings were intolerably bold for adoring him in the Manger,
because there was no particular command of adoring him in a manger; But Dr, is
there any particular command of not adoring Christ in the Host, tho he should
be there personally present? No; and will not a general command of adoring him
in flesh personally present oblige us to adore him, wheresoever he be
personally present, if there be not a particular command excluding such and
such cases where he must not be adored? If the Blessed Trinity did appear to
you in the shape of three young men, as happened to Abraham, and that you were
assured by a revelation it was the Blessed Trinity, would not you in virtue of
the General Command of adoring the Trinity, hold yourself obliged to adore it,
tho there be no particular command of adoring it under the shape of a man? The
general command laid upon us of having no commerce nor dealing with the Devil,
does it not oblige us not to have any commerce nor dealing with him if he
should appear unto us in the shape of a great black Dog; tho there be no
particular command, forbidding any communication with him in that shape?

But says he, it is an intolerable boldness to adore him in the Host, the case
standing as it does doubtful and controverted if he be there or not; because
we expose ourselves to a manifest danger of committing material Idolatry at
least; Just as if you did say when the Arians denied the Divinity of Christ,
it was intolerable boldness in the Council of Nice to adore Christ as God, the
matter being doubtful and controverted: you mistake in your supposition Sr,
we^ are not doubtful, your doubts, denial, or controversies creat no doubt nor
scruple in us; we are certainly assured that Christ is there really present,
and we pity your Obstinacy in denying so assured a Tenet; and we^ fear not
the hazard of a material Idolatry, even in case that the Host were not duly
consecrated for want of intention in the Priest for to consecrat, or because he
is no true Priest, or what other defect you please: I had reason to say Dr,
that you did not well understand our Doctrine, and I may say now you do not
understand what material Idolatry is, when you say, that it might happen that
the Priest should not have an intention of consecrating, and then the Host
would not be consecrated, and our Adoration of such an Host would be a Material
Idolatry; and to this danger we are, you say, daily exposed. I beseech you D if
ever you write again, do your Reader the justice as to repley against your
Adversari's answers to your arguments; you proposed this argument in your
Sermon, and I plainly refuted it, by showing you had as much reason to doubt of
the Christianity of all the world, and of the truth of your Protestant Clergy,
for tho you do not make your Baptism or Ordination to depend of the intention
of the Minister, yet you make them depend of other essential requisits, and you
have no greater assurance of those requisits to have been applied, than we have
of the Intention of the Priest in the Consecration of the Host.

And suppose that the Priest in effect had not an intention, but that the Host
remains unconsecrated, we are not as much as materially Idolaters for adoring
it; for Idolatry whether Material or formal is when adoration is given to a
Creature falsely believed to be God; the Pagans are Idolaters, for adoring the
Sun, and the Israelits for adoring the Golden Calf, which Sun and Calf they
believed to be a Sun and a Calf, and yet a God; for they never pretended that
the Sun and Calf ceased to be such, and were converted into invisible Deities;
but they attributed Divinity to them, remaining in their proper Being of a Sun
and a Calf: for to make us therefore either formally or Materially Idolaters,
you must prove that our Adoration is given to bread; remaining bread, and
falsely believed by us to be God; and if you say so, you widely mistake our
Doctrine and practice: for as your own Dr Tailor says in his Liber^te of
Prophesying, c. 20. and your Dr Thorndick, in his Just weights* c. 19. our
Adoration is so far from being directed to bread, that we believe the Object
we^ adore is no bread, but God; Our Will goes by adoration to the Object, as it
is in our Understanding, and in our Understanding its no bread but God; we^ do
not adore bread believed to be God, but we^ adore God, believed to be no bread:
where then leyes the danger of our material Idolatry in adoring the Host
consecrated? because it remains unconsecrated bread? but we do not adore what
it remains to be, but what we believe it is made by due consecration.

And that you may see how rash you were in your censure of Intolerable boldness
for adoring the consecrated Host, pray hear S. Augustine who says in Psalm. 98.
speaking of the footstool of our Lord, That footstool is the flesh of Christ,
wherein he walked on earth, and which he gave us to eat, no man eats that
flesh, who first has not adored it, and we do not only, not sin in adoring
it; but we sin in not adoring it. S. Ambrose l. 3. de Spir. Sancto, we adore
the flesh of Christ in the mysteries, which the Apostles adored in Christ our
Lord: S. Chrysos. hom. 24. in 1. ad Corin. The wisemen adored Christ in the
Manger; let us imitate them we see him not in the Manger, but on the Altar.
Had these Saints any special command for adoring Christ in the consecrated
Host? no, but the general command of adoring him in flesh, and they believed
his flesh to be there: and if they were not intolerably rash and bold for
adoring it, why will you condemn us?

In the Unerring Vnerrable Church I have proved at large the sufficiency of one
kind in the Communion, by Scripture, reason, and authority of fathers; and
whereas I find nothing in my Adversaries repley that either weakens my discourse,
or strengthens his own Tenet it is better to remit my Reader to what I have said
there, than to weary his patience with a tedious Tatalogie: only I must
advertise, that it is strange a Church of England man, should say the Cup is so
indispensably requisite by Christ's Institution, that it cannot upon any
consideration be retrencht; so our Dr says page 136. condemning the Council of
Constance for Pretending any reason for ordaining the bread alone should be
taken; This is sufficient to me, says he, that the Council should pretend any
reason for inverting the Institution of Christ, which ordained also the Cup
should be taken: Is it not strange I say* that a Church of England man should
speak so? after that the Statut of 1. Edward VI. goes thus; We command that
the Sacrament be commonly taken in both kinds, if necessity does not require
otherwise: Do not those words of the Statute Commonly, and, if necessity does
not require otherwise import that sometime for just reasons and necessity, we^
may be dispensed with, and receive in one kind? nor is it only the Church of
England by its Head king Edward, has declared this, but also the Church of
France in their Ecclesiastical Discipline printed at Saumur 12. Chap. Art. 7.
says thus, The Minister must give the bread in the supper to them who cannot
drink the wine, provided it be not for contempt. And tho the Lutheran Church
use both kinds in the Communion, yet Luther plainly declares, it might be taken
in one, and that its an indifferent thing: l. de Capt. Babil. c. de Euch. They
sin not, says he, who receive in one kind only, seeing Christ has not
commanded to use both: and again Epist. and Bohaem. in declar. Euch. and Sermon.
de Euch* although it were an excellent thing to use both kinds in the
Eucharist, and Christ has commanded nothing in this point as necessary; it
were better to follow peace and Unity, than to contest about the kinds.
Melancton also has expressly the same Doctrine in Consil. Theol. ad Marchionem
Elect. de vsu vtriusque partis, page 141.

I appeal now to any prudent vnprejudic'd man's judgment, who is in the wrong,
Dr Sall, or I: the Dr says, the Cup is of Divin institution so indispensablie
needful that it cannot for any reason be omitted, and blames the Council of
Constance for pretending a just reason for retrenching it and the Dr has of his
side the Church of England, as now it is; I say, the Cup is not indispensably
requisite for the integrity of the Communion; that Christ has left it arbitrary
to the Church, to give either the bread alone, or the bread and cup together;
as time and necessity shall require; and I have on my side not only the whole
Catholic Church, but even Luther and Melancton, and the Church of England in
king Edwards time, and the Church of France this day; for tho the Hugonots
vulgarly are in that persuasion, I know not by what charm, that both kinds are
needful; yet their Ecclesiastical Discipline, as I quoted, plainly sets down
they may for just reasons receive in one kind; have I not think you the
advantage above the Dr? I pray read my former Trearise, where you shall find
this Tenet solidly proved by Scripture and reason.

XVIII. CHAPTER.
IMAGE WORSHIP NO IDOLATRY.
IF you consider the undertaking, or the proofs of the undertakers, in no where
will you find the Protestants more unjust, than in their charge of Idolatry
against us for the worship of Images: for Idolatry being the adoration of a
creature as God; or the Image of a falls God; can there be any thing more unjust
than to charge us with that sin, who plainly avow Images are but creatures and
no God; who look upon them, as the Images of the only God of Heaven and earth,
and of Jesus Christ who is no falls, but a true God; we ask nothing of them;
we^ place not our hopes in them, but we^ ask of, and place our hope in him whom
they represent. Where is there any thing of Idolatry in this? or what can there
be more conformable to reason, than that we^ should honor the picture of God,
whom we^ adore; as the picture of the king is honored above that of any
subject; and there is none but will think the injury or honor don to his
picture, for being his representation, to be an injury against his own Person:
This charge is also injust, because the Protestants allow salvation in the
Catholic Church, and the actual profession of its Tenets, if ignorance does not
excuse us; and how can salvation be allowed in the actual profession of
Idolatry; or ignorance be pretended amidst so much of Christianity and light
of the Ghospel? It Is also injust because we are no more guilty in this Tenet,
than Lutherans who revere Images as much as we; nay no more than Protestants,
who as I have observed in my former Treatise, religiously respect the Lords
supper which they say, is but a figure or Image of Christ's Body: which S. Paul
recommends 1. Cor. 11. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread and drink of that cup, for he who eats or drinks it unworthily eats and
drinks damnation to himself not discerning the body of the Lord he is guil^ie
of the body and blood of our Lord. You see what an honor what a respect, what a
purity of heart, you are to have, and you yourselves confess you must have,
for to receive that which you say is but a figure, and an Image of Christ's
body, and a representation of his Passion.

My Dr is put to his shifts by this argument, and most desperately says there
is no sign nor insinuation of adoration, to be given to the Communion bread, in
that text of S. Paul; its a work of my fancy he says, no discovery of common
sense. My God? how much a Polemical animositie blinds a man? Is there any
Protestant in England so impious, take him out of the heat of a Polemical
discourse, but will say the Consecrated bread is to be worshipped? or is there
any, but Dr Sall, who will say there is no sign or insinnuaof that whorship in
those words of S. Paul? that purity of mind, that scrutiny of our defects, that
cleanlyness of heart which he enjoins, is not this an insinuation and sign of
the reverence wherewith we ought to aproach to that Mystery? and is not that
reverence a worship, and honor we pay to that bread? and why because in
receiving it unworthily, we dishonor the body of Christ: Christ therefore is
dishonored in his figure; we deserve damnation by dishonoring it; and why are
we damned, but for our injury to Christ? we are guilty of the body of
Christ; is it not an evident sequel out of this, that the injury, dishonor
and irreverence don to Christ's figure (which you say is the Communion bread)
is don to Christ's own Person? why will you then deny that God is honored or
dishonored in his picture?

We have heard S. Augustine, S. Ambrose S. Chrysostom in the next precedent
Chapter say, that the consecrated Host is to be adored, and that it is a sin
says S. Augustine not to adore it; cast an eye back on the words of these
Saints in the former Chapter, whylst I ask my Dr what does he believe to be in
the Communion bread? if the true an real flesh of Christ, that those Saints
would have us adore, then he must acknowledge Transubstantiation, if it be but
Bread representing figuratively Christ's Body, what they would have us adore;
then he must confess, its no Idolatry to adore the figure and Image of Christ.

Our Dr after his acustomed fashion, does but repeat what he said in his Sermon
against this Tenet, and takes no notice of what I answered: he tells us God
commanded in Exodus, Thou shall not make to thee any graven Image-thou shall
not bow down they self to them: and where is there any mention here of not
worshipping Images? for the letter of the text is, not to make any graven
Image; and if the making of an Image be Idolatry or adoration, you are no less
guilty than we; the text says thou shall not bow they self to them; Josue
and the Israelits did so to the Ark, as you acknowledge, and you do it to the
Image of our Prince, and so we are all Idolaters. But says he, when the
Israelits did look on the Serpent in the Desert, and were thereby healed; and
when Iosue and the Israelits fell down on their faces before the Ark, they did
not adore it, otherwise when we^ pray before the Bible and an Altar we^ must
adore them: was there ever the like Childishness? He does not understand, or at
least will not understand my discourse upon those passages; which is this: It Is
manifestly declared in Scripture that the brazen Serpent was erected upon a
Pole by Gods command, and it appears Jo. 3. 14. that this Serpent was an Image
of Christ Crucified, S. Aug. de Pecc. Mort l. 1. 32. exaltatus Serpens est mors
Christi; hence it follows that it is not against Gods commandment to make Images
of Christ; secondly its apparent that when the Israelits looking on this
Serpent were healed, they came before it, and looked on it with respect,
reverence, and devotion, being the instrument which God used to heal^ them; and
tho the vulgar sort of the people were perhaps ignorant of the mystery
represented by that Serpent elevated upon a heigh Pole; doubtless Moses and
the learned of the people did know it was a representation of Christ upon the
cross, by whom man kind should be healed from the venom of the infernal
serpent, as all the interpreters say: so that an ingenuous Reader will not
doubt, but that that Serpent was worshipped and devoutly revered by the wounded
Israelits, as now we Catholics do revere and worship a Crucifix: all this was
don by Gods command; whereby its manifest that the worship of Christ's Image; our
access and prayers to him before his Image; and our belief, that Christ by his
Images, before which we pray, does confer many blessings upon us, as God did
upon the Jews by the brazen Serpent) is not idolatrous superstition or against
Gods command; moreover that God should have commanded kings. 18. that Serpent
to be broken by Ezechias, when the people passed the bonds of devotion, to
adore it as God, and not as the Image of God, convinces plainly that what God
forbids in the first Commandment, is the Adoration of Images or Similitudes as
Gods; for whilst the people looked upon it as Gods Image, their devotion was
permitted, and rewarded by God with miraculous cures; but when they looked upon
it as a God; then God was angry, and commanded it to be destroyed.

This and the example of the Ark (which all Interpreters declare to be God's
Image) before which Josue and the people did prostrat themselves reverently on
the ground; and which David honored with processions and many other marks of
devotion, demonstrats the use of Images not to be forbid den by God, nor to be
Superstitious or Idolatrous in us; and your little quillet is ridiculous; then
say you, when we look on a Church; or the Bible, or the Altar we adore it:
certainly Dr you will not be so impious, as to deny, that there is a special
reverence due to a Church, more than to an other house, because it is
particularly dedicated to Gods service; and a particular Veneration for the
Bible, because it contains the History of Christ's Passion and Divin Truths,
more than for Titus Livius, or Lucius Florus; and why will not you have a
greater reverence for the Image of God, and his Saints, for being their
representation, than you have for the kings picture and chair of state before
which you dare not be covered in the chamber of Presence. O but say you this is
no adoration: ^pish Dr what a Childish cauil is this; It Is a religious
veneration, respect, honor and worship which we exhibit to the Image for being
a representation of God; call it adoration, or not; this we understand by
Adoration: what do you call, your being bare headed before the king? will not
you call it a worship and reverence to the king? and what will you call your
being bare headed in the Chamber of Presence, before his picture and chair of
state? you must call it a worship also, and reverence given to the picture and
chair for the kings sake which they represent: even so your bowing on your
knees to God, your offering donaries to him, your processions for his sake do
not you call this worship, an adoration of God; so likewise your kneeling,
praying, and other marks of devotion before an Image, is a worship and
adoration of the Image, for being the Image and type of God.

You are tedious in telling us again that Azor, Vasq. and our Schoolmen say,
Images of God and the Saints must be adored with the same degree of adoration,
that the Saints are adored with, and so Images of God must be adored Cultu
Latriae, which is Idolatry: but whoeuer reads our School Divins, will find
that they who say Images must be adored with the same adoration that is given
to their Prototipes, Latria to Christ's Image, hyperdulia to the B. Virgins
Image, and Dulia to Saints Images, they plainly and distinctly distinguish a
Relative and an Absolut Adoration; and say that the same adoration which is
given to the Prototype must be given to the type, but differently; to the
Prototype an Absolut adoration; to the Type, a relative; so God is adored with
an absolut Latria, that is to say for his own sake; his Image is to be adored
with a Relative Latria, that is to say not for its self, but for the relation it
has to God, in as much as it is his representation. The adoration of Latria
given to God, as an absolut source of all goodness and an infinite Deytie, is
given to none but to him; to his Image we give a greater adoration, respect,
and honor, than to the Image of the B. Virgin or Saints, because it is a
representation of God; and this we call a Relative Latria: and when our Doctrine
apears to be so innocent, and our practice in our adoration of Images, is so
clearly declared by our Councils and Schoolmen; its vnbecoming any man of honor
and sincerity to be nibbling at our words, and wresting them to malicious
senses, and little spanish Proverbs and Idle stories of abuses that he has seen
in Spain or read in Ludovicus Vives, in Polydorus Virgilius and Cassander,
which serve but to give the Printer work, and render the Author ridiculous: yes
indeed Polydorus Virgilius, and Cassander and Ludovicus Vives must be believed,
when they tell us some abuses of the vulgar people in the adoration of Images;
and S. Augustine, S. Bernard, S. Gregory, S Damian, and other Saints and
Doctors of the Church, must not be credited, when they tell us many Miracles
wrought in defense of the worship of Images: O but says our Dr our adoration
of Images obstructs the Conversion of Pagans: for how will they be dissuaded
from adoring stocks and stones, by us, who do the same? and will not his Reader
laugh, to see Protestants so much concerned for the Conversion of Pagans? a
people who never sent one Preacher to convert Infidels: but Dr we see,
notwithstanding your opinion of our Image Worship, God has even in this our age
converted many Pagans, and kingdoms of Infidels by our Image-Worshippers, and
he never made use of your Image Breakers to convert any one Pagan.

In his 15. Chapt. he pretends to prove that it is not only Idolatry to adore
an Image as God, but to adore God in an Image, or by an Image; Give that
Worship, says he, what name you please, to worship them at all, is a formal
transgression against Gods precept: this, he says, and no other, was the
Idolatry of the Jews; not for that they did believe the Calf was God, for who
can believe, they were so destitut of Common sense as to judge that Image, made
before their own face, and of their own Gold, was a true God? their Idolatry
then did consist in adoring the Calf as God's Image, or adoring God in that
Image: the like he says of the Pagans, such wise clear sighted men, as many of
them were, did never imagine the stocks and stones which they adored to be true
Deities, but Images of the true God which he proves they adored by that text of
S. Paul Acts. 17. whom you ignorantly worship, him I declare unto you. Whence
its apparent the Idolatry of the Israelits and Pagans did not consist* says
he, in worshipping falls Gods, but in worshipping God in an Image against God's
Ordinance; and this is our guilt, and we are all Idolaters.

But Abulensis, Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and above all the Scripture will
comfort us against our Drs discourse; for Chrysostom. hom. 5. de Poenit. speaking
of the Israelits Idolatry says; After the people had heard those word^, I am
they Lord they God, they made a Calf, they rejected God, they did not
acknowledge him to be their God: and as if he had foreseen our Adversaries
difficulty, how could such wise men be so senseless, as to believe a Calf made
by themselves to be a God; he proposes this question in the same place; If they
were Gods, why did they say Make; how could those be Gods which are made? he
answers, Sic malitia excaecans sibi ipsi repugnat, and seipsam extinguit; so
blind is malice, that it contradicts itself, and refutes itself: it was a
contradiction, to be a God, and to be made; but their malice pinfolded their
reason, that they owned both those contradictions in their Calf: Abulensis
speaks to the same purpose in Exodus c. 32. q. 3. and S. August. in psalm. 133.
says, the wiser sort of Pagans adored Idols as the Vulgar did; but did not
believe they were God's, but Images and Symbols of what they believed to be
Gods; and in the same place declares, what they believed to be Gods; They give
this interpretation of their Images; by the Image Tellus, they signified the
Earth; by the Image Neptunus, the Sea; by that of Juno, the Air; by that of
Vulcan, the fire: and if you Urge against them; tha^ then they worship Bodies
for Gods, the Earth, the Sea etc. they answer they do not worship the Bodies
themselves, sed quae illis regendis praesident numina; but the Deities and
Spirits, which govern them bodies: and in psalm. 69. he proves these Spirits
were Devils: But Scripture speaks yet more plainly, Deuteronomy 32. 15. They forsook
the true God, they sacrificed to the Devils not to God; to Gods they knew not,
to n^w Gods, that came newly up, they forsook the true God who made them.

By this you may see how much our Dr is mistaken in saying the Israelits and
Heathens Idolatry consisted, not in adoring Images of falls Gods, but the true
God in an Image; for if you read S. Paul's speech to the Athenians Act. 17 24.
you will find two things, first that they had some confused knowledge of an only
and ^rue Deity, which appears by their Altar consecrated Ignoto Deo to the
unknown God: but this knowledge was so confused and erroneous, that they
believed this unknown God was like Gold or sylver or stones, and the very text
of S. Paul supposes they were in this opinion for he argues thus, God who made
the world and all things therein etc. therefore we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like to Gold or sylver or slo^e graven by Art or man's d^vice: and
therefore they were Idolaters because they adored a God which they conceited to
be as created things: Secondly it is apparent that besides this unknown God,
they adored also other Gods; for of them as of other Heathens S. Paul said Romans
1. 22. that the invisible God being known by the Visible creatures which are
made, They changed the glory of the immortal God into an Image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds and four footed beasts, they changed the truth of
God into a lie, and worshipped and served the Creatures more than the Creator.
Their Idolatry did consist in that they adored these Creatures, Gold, sylver,
birds, four footed beasts etc. not as Gods, for the wiser Heathens were not so
senseless as to believe they were Gods; nor as Images of one, true, invisible
God, as Christians believe, for you shall not find among the Ancient
Philosophers any, who says they adored One God; but as Images of falls Gods,
who truly were but Devils or debauch wicked men, who caused themselves to he
adored: and this is evident, not only by the testimony of S. Augustine which I
have quoted, but also by the testimony of Arnobius contr. Gent. l. 6. where
you may read the answer of the Heathen Philosophers to Arnobius checking them
for adoring stocks and stones: You err, say they, O Arnobius in what you
affirm; for we do not think the matter of brass, sylver, and gold to be God
and adorable Deities of themselves: No we are wiser than so; but we honor and
worship the Gods or Deities in those sacred Statues, whom the Virtue of sacred
Dedication has brought into them, and made to dwell in those Images made by
Art: You see Reader, what the Heathens adored; they adored the Images not for
themselves or any Deity they should have of themselves; but for the Gods or
Deities, which by Sacred Dedication were brought to lodge in them; and S.
Augustine l. 8. de Civit. Dei c. 23. tells you, that Sacred Dedication was
Magical incantation, by which the Devils or wicked men's souls were ^vocated,
and obliged to live in those Statues. Judge you Reader what has this to do with
our Worship of Images; and how far our Dr coms short of proving that the
Adoration of the true God in an Image is Idolatry.

He percloses his 25. chapt. with an exclamation against our Church, for giving
adoration of Latria to Jmages, which error and Jdolatrous practice he says has
crept so much among our Vulgar people, and is countenanced by our learned men,
rhat it would strick a horror to you, if you did know the sinful absurdity of
it: and J do admire but it stricks a horror to our Drs. conscience, to beguile
his Reader with such foul misrepresentatio^s of our Doctrine, and with such
wilful falsifications of our words and meaning; whereas he knows in his heart,
our Adoration of Latria given to Christ's Image, is but Relative, not resting
in it, nor for its sake, but passing to the Prototype which we adore in it: as
the honor don to the Kings Chair of state, passes to the kings person, the
reverence we have for the Bible, and the name of Jesus; that David had to the
Ark; the Israelits to the Brazen Serpent (before their Idolatry) passes to God
represented in them: for to prove us grieveously Idolaters, you bring that Hymn
of the Church to the Cross

O Crux ave spes unica,
Hoc Passionis tempore,
Auge pijs justitiam,
Reisque dona veniam.
And if this convinces us of Idolatry, what will you say of S. Augustine, who
speaks to the cross thus, Sermon. in Parasc. Crux nobis totius causa
Beatitudinis est: haec nos a caecitate liberat erroris: haec a tenebris
reddidit luci: haec alienos Deo conjunxit: haec discordiae amputatio est: haec
bonorum omnium abunda largitio, etc. The Cross is the cause of all our bliss;
this cross frees us from blindness of error: it brought us from darkness to
light: it is it which cuts of all discord; it is it which units those who are
strayed, to God; its the source of all goodness. Know then Dr. that we are no
more Idolaters in adoring the cross, than S. Augustine and innumerable other
Saints whose words would be tedious to rehearsc.

JHS.

XIX. CHAPTER.
ADORATION, AND INVOCATION OF Saints, no Idolatry.
OUr Dr often charges us with Idolatry for our Adoration of the Consecrated
Host, for our Adoration of Images, and for our Adoration of Saints: to the two
first parts of this accusation we have answered; it remains we prove the
Adoration of Saints to be no crime: and I cannot better prove it than by a Text
which our Adversaries frequently bring for to prove the vnlawfullness of this
practice: when the Angel Revel. 19. appeared to S. John, the Apostle fell flat
on the ground for to adore him; the Angel forbid him, saying he was his fellow
servant: if the Adoration of an Angel or Saint be Idolatry; therefore the
Apostle was an Jdolater; nay which is wors, a relaps Jdolater; for again he
fell on the ground to adore the Angel chapter 22. and the Angel prohibited him the
second time: hence its manifest, that either the Apostle fell twice into
Jdolatrie or that adoration of Angels, and Saints is none: but say you why did
the Angel forbid him? J answer, out of his respect to Human nature, since his
Lord and king had assumed it: this reason S. Greg. gives, Hom. 8. in Evang.
Ante Redemptor is adventum, Angeli adorantur and iacent; and postmodum adorari
refugiunt; quod naturam nostram quam prius despexerant, postquam illam supra se
assumptam conspiciunt, prostratam sibi videre pertimescunt. Before the coming
of Christ, the Angels received adoration from men; but after he took our
Nature, they would not see prostrated before them, that Nature which was
exalted above them. Or if this reason does not please you; its sufficient to my
purpose to prove, he did not prohibit it because it was Jdolatrie; for if you
say the Angel did judge it to be Idolatry, I say the Apostle did judge it was
not; and in our instruction for God's Worship and Religion, we are to believe
the Apostle, rather than the Angel according the advice of S. Paul Gal. 1. 8.
tho an Angel from Heaven should preach un to you an other Ghospel, than that
which we have preached, let him be accursed.

The Invocation of Saints I have proved in the Unerring Vnerrable Church by
several Passages of Scripture, convincing that Saints departed from this life
know our affairs on earth, that they pray for us; that many have received
favors and blessings by their intercession: I pray Reader read my discourse
there, and spare me the labor of repeating it; and you will admire the courage
of my Adversary who complains, as if he had justice and reason on his side,
that I do not answer his arguments upon this subject; and not one argument does
he bring either in his Sermon, or book, but that text of S. Peter Act. 4. that
there is no salvation in any other but Jesus Christ; nor any other name under
Heaven given among men whereby we may be saved: where he concludes, we cannot
ask the mediation of Saints, without robbing Christ of his prerogative of
Mediatorship. Jt's not pardonable in him to repeat again, what has been so
clearly answered, as my Reader may see in my former Trea^ise: in hopes we may
never any more hear of this thread bare story, let him take this syllogism: We
believe the Unity of Christ's Deyty, as much as the Unity of his Mediatorship:
but its not against our belief of his Deity, to call the Saints, as well of
Heaven, as of earth Gods; for David calls all Just men Gods: I say ye are all
Gods, and the sons of the heighest all, therefore its not against our belief of
his Mediatorship, that we should call the Saints, as well in heaven, as on
earth, our Mediators: and who does not see the weakness of our Drs discourse;
for if because Christ is our only Mediator, we must not ask the prayers of the
Saints in heaven; neither must we ask any Mediator on earth, which is evidently
against the practice of all congregations; for we ask one an other to pray for
us: But how come this argument to prove, (says our Dr) as I. S. pretends, that
we must not ask the prayers of the Saints on earth. Did ever Logician make the
like Quere? do not you pretend by the text, that Christ is our only Mediator
because there is no other name under Heaven (that's to say on earth) where by we
may be saved? if therefore the text proves any thing against the mediation of
Saints, it proves against the mediation of the Saints under heaven, that is to
say on earth. We acknowledge, as I have said in my former Treatise, Christ to
be our only Mediator by Redemption, because he alone did, and was able by his
death to reconcile us to God, and redeem us; but he is not our only Mediator by
intercession, because others pray for us; tho he in a far more excellent degree.

He perceived it seems the weakness of this charge, and quits it; and runs all
along upon an other point, proving our excess in our devotion and worship of
Saints; and all he brings to prove it, is reduced to three heads, and all three
have not one dram of brains; the first is his Prudence, that for ought we know
many of those we esteem Saints, are wicked and damned wretchs; therefore we
must not pray to any Saint: I hope he does not mean the B. Virgin, nor the
Apostles, nor S. Augustine, S. Hierom, and such others; let him therefore give
us leave to pray to them; and let him point out what Saint is he, of those whom
we worship, of whose Santitie we have not as much assurance; as we have of S.
Augustine and S. Hierom; and then we will not worship them: but to say we must
pray to none: because some reputed Saints are not such; is as much as if you did
say, we must not esteem and honor any men on earth for their great Virtue and
learning, because some reputed to be Virtuous and learned, are but Hypocrites and
Idiots. The second excess is that we build more Churches to Saints than to God;
and he will not take our answer, that what Churchs we build to the Saints, we
build them to God, because its for his sake we honor the Saints: for says he,
if a king did constitut his Son Solicitor general for his Subjects, it would
not be well taken by the king, that the Subjects should make their application
to the Servants in Court, neglecting their application to the Prince: but Dr
what if the king were disposed to honor, not only his son, but also the
Servants at Court for his Son's sake (if any man serves me, my father will
honor him Jo. 12.) if he decreed to grant whatever his son would ask, for his
Subjects, and not only what himself would ask, but what any of the Servants in
Court would ask in his name: certainly the power of the son would be the
greater.

The third excess is, that we call the B. Virgin our Savioress, our
Redeemeress; desperate expressions he says, against the text of S. Peter which
says, there is no name under heaven whereby we can be saved, but that of Jesus
Christ: These indeed are desperate expressions in the meaning you take them, but
not in the meaning our Church gives them: if you go to the Dictionarie, or the
Grammar to look for the sense of those words, you may render our Doctrine and
practice ridicule; but if you go to the Church, and be informed in what sense
she takes them, you will find they are religious: God calls Moses the God of
Pharao; if you take the word in its proper and usual signification, its a
blasphemy, whereof I hope you will not accuse God: David calls the Just, Gods
and the Sons of the Heighest; a desperate expression if you take the words in
their gramatical sense, but religious, if you take them in David's meaning: The
great Baptist was not the Light, but a witness of the Light, says the
Evangelist; Christ was the true Light for to illuminat the world; yet Christ
himself calls his servants the light of the world; is this a desperate
expression? Christ is the only foundation of the Church, says S. Paul, yet in
Revel: c. 21. we read the twelve Apostles are the twelve foundations of the
City of God: you will not stick to say Christ is the only Mediator and
reconciliator of Man with God, as S. Paul says; and yet Wisd. c. 4. Noe is
called not only Reconciliator, but the Reconciliation betwixt God and man: And
you must acknowledge these expressions are not desperate in the sense and
meaning of those who uttered them, tho in a gramatical sense they may be: so
you must confess the expression of Savioress, Redeemeress etc. are Catholic
and Religious in the sense of the Church, which is not any other, but that the
B. Virgin is the chief instrument after Christ for our Redemption: Do we call
her Redeemeress? we speak with S. Cyril, Hom. cont. Nest. By thee Holy Mother
of God, all creatures that worshipped Idols have been converted to the
knowledge of truth: praise be to thee, O Holy Trinity; praise be to thee also
o B. Virgin. Do we call her, Queen of Heaven, glory and happiness of mankind?
we speak with Greg. Nazian. in Trag. Chris. Mor. to. 2. page 298. You who are
justly seated above all the celeslial Hierarchies, Queen, Mistress, and
happiness of human kind. Do we say, Hail B. Virgin thou alone have destroyed
all Heresies, we have heard S. Cyril say as much: seek not then, Dr by your
bug-bears of desperate expressions, to beat us from our Devotion to her; we
speak with the Prophet David, we speak with the Ancient Fathers of the
Church, we speak with God himself.

And it is but a piece of your accustomed confidence to say, that in the first
ages there was no mention of this worship of Saints: you have heard S. Cyril,
and Greg. Nazian. hear yet S. Augustine cont. faustum, l. 20. c. 21. Faustus
checks us for honoring the memory of our Martirs, saying we change God, into
Idols: but we Christians do celebrat the memory of our Martirs with religious
solemnity, for to stir us up to their imitation; for to partake of their
merits, and for to be helped by their prayers; but so as that we do not offer
sacrifice to the Martirs; but to the God of Martirs in memory of them. S.
Ambrose de viduis l. 4. speaking of S. Peter and S. Andrew's prayer for their
Mother in law; What then they did for her, by reason of their kindred, now they
can do for us, and for all, we must pray to the Saints, we must pray to the
Martirs, from whom we may expect protection and favor, having with us the
pledges of their bodies, they can pray for the remission of our sins; the
Martirs of God are our Protectors, and spectators of our lyves and actions. S.
Vict Utic. l. 3. de Persec. Vand. having prayed to the Angels to represent unto
God the miseries of Africa, he addresses his Prayers to the Saints. Pray,
Patriarks from whose seed the Church Springs, which now is persecuted; pray, o
Prophets who see the Church of whom you prophesied, now so distressed;
intercede, O Apostles for that Church which you established by your labors; and
in particular O Peter, pray for that flock which your Master recommended to
you. Nay our Dr in the end of his chapter quotes the testimony of Origin
contr. Cells. l. 5. and says, that by Origen's words it appears, how Angels do
assist us, and pray for us; the testimony of Origin ends thus (it would be
tedious to repeat it wholly) when men pray unto God, many thousands of the
sacred powers pray together with them uncalled for; and our Dr very wittily
picks up that word, uncalled for, and argues thence, that the Angels and Saints
do indeed pray for us, but that we must not ask them to do so; because, they
pray for us uncalled for; if you call to them to pray for you, you will spoil
all, if you believe our Dr; but believe S. Gregory rather, who aduises you to
pray unto, and call the Saints to assist you; speaking of the last Judgment; In
illo conventu causa nostra discutitur, and tamen nos patronos modo non
requirimus, quos tunc defensores habeamus; adsunt defensores nostri Sancti
Martires; rogari volunt, and quaerunt vt quaerantur: hos ergo adjutores vestris
orationibus quaerite; hos protectores vestri reatus invenite, quia ne punire
peccatores debeat, rogari vult and ipse qui judicat. Hom. 32. in Evang. In that
great meeting our cause will be examined and we^ do not now seek Patrons, who
then may defend us: the Holy Martyrs are our Protectors; they desire to be
entreated; they ask, that they may be asked; ask them therefore to assist your
prayers; procure they intercede for your sins, sor he who is to be the judge of
sinners, desires he be prayed not to punish them.

XX. CHAPTER.
PVRGATORIE AND INDVLGENCES.
I Thought I had don my Dr a kindness in asserting a Purgatory in the other
life, where he might be so happy as to soiourn a while; for he may go further,
and speed worse. But he has met some what in my former discourse upon this point
that has nettl'd him; for he powers out such a deluge of injuries against me,
that you would think he dipped his pen in Gall. No, he will not hear speak of a
Purgatory; he is resolved not to stop or stand in the road; if God will not
have Heauen's gates open for him at his departure from this life, he will take up
his lodging in hell. Let not I. S says he, expect to put me of with stratagems
of schooleboyes, I must keep him to the point: the point is whether the
testimonies of Scripture alleged by your Church be convincing proofs of the
existence of a Purgatory: This indeed is to speak like a Master; but you will
see he will com of like a school boy: what is the Point Dr? whether the texts
alleged by our Church be convincing proofs of Purgatory: I told you, how he
would com of: what? we^ loudly profess that our Rule of faith is not Scripture
alone; that tho there were no convincing text of Scripture, yet we are obliged
to believe Purgatory upon the testimony of our infallible Church interpreting
Scripture; and yet you will tell us the Point is, if our text alleged be
convincing? No Dr, you have mistaken the point; The point is, why you forsook
the Catholic Church and became a Protestant? you say, for our Errors, whereof
Purgatory is one; you undertook in your Sermon to prove these Errors by plain
and clear Scripture: let me keep you to the point Dr; let us see your clear and
plain texts denying Purgatory: you whose Rule of faith is Scripture alone,
which, you say, clearly shows our Errors; you are to be demanded clear and
plain texts to prove there is no Purgatory: but we are not to be challenged to
produce convincing texts, because our Rule of faith is not Scripture alone; but
Scripture as interpreted by the Church; so its sufficient for us to produce a
text, which the Church interprets to import the existence of a Purgatory.

You have quite sweru'd from the point Dr, the point was to show by convincing
texts, that there is no other receptacle of souls in the other world but
Heaven and Hell of the damned, as you say, grounded upon that text, where the
Tree falls there it shall remain: for I proved convincingly there is an other
place, by S. Peter 1. Epist. 7. 19 speaking of Christ's descent into hell, he
says; Dead in flesh, and quickened in Spirit he descended to the Spirits which
were detained in prison (there was a Prison therefore, where Spirits were
detained) to preach unto them (certainly it was not to the damned souls he went
to preach) which he released, leading Captivity Captive, says S. Paul. Ephesians.
4. 8. (sure it was not the damned souls he released) why did not you answer to
this text Dr? you clapped it under deck, because it was the Point, and it you
resolved not to touch. The point also was, to examine if after the sin is
forgiven, either by Confession, or perfect Contrition; the sinner remains still
liable to Gods justice for some temporal punishment; and in case he died before
he discharged that debt, if there was not a prison in the other world, where
the soul should be detained until it paid to the last farthing; this I proved
by the Gospel, and several passages of Scripture: why did not you answer? no it
was a naughty card that spoiled your game, you dropped it aside, and to divert
your Reader, you make Heaven a Receptacle of souls actually polluted with
sins, saying, that with their infamous sins they may enter thither; and bring
no proof for this paradox, quite opposite to the text, and sentiments of all the
Christian world, but a passage of Origin which you foully misinterpret. The
point was to examine the true sense of the Article of our Creed He descended
into Hell; what Hell was that? the Grave as some of your fraternity absurdly
interpret; or the Hell of the damned, as Calvin and many of your authentic
Catechisms interpreted, saying he suffered the pains of the damned; or some part
of Hell where souls were detained in prison expecting their ^edemption: you
pretend to fob us of with a tale of a tub, that some say, that Article was not
in the Creed in the first four hundred years; I will not dispute this point,
because it matters not if it was or not; since that now it is, and owned by us,
as well as by you; then you would render my discourse insignificant, as if my
argument were, He descended into Hell, therefore there is a Purgatory, which
consequence you say is ridiculous; and so it is indeed; but it is of your own
making, you shall not find it in J. S. His consequence goes thus; He descended
into Hell, according our Creed, to preach to those who were in prison,
according S. Peter; to release them; leading Captivity Captive according S.
Paul; therefore there is a Prison in Hell, where souls were in restraint;
where Christ preached; whence he released captives: is this the Hell of the
damned think you? and if it be a third place, distinct from Heaven and Hell of
the damned, what will become of your Doctrine, which denies Purgatory, chiesly
because say you the Tree must fall to either of those two places? This was the
point you should have stuck unto Dr and not to rattle at J. S. and keep a
bustle about the texts of Scripture which he quoted, and which the reader will
clearly see you have not answered, if he faces your replies with my discourse
upon them.

And tho, as I said, we had no convincing text for this, or our other Tenets;
our Doctrine stands unshaken upon the testimony of our Church, and upon the
unanimous consent of precedent ages: we are in possession of this Doctrine
these 1600. years; our long possession sufficiently credits our Doctrine; you
are Aggressors, you must bring evident proofs against us; as Defendants; its
our duty but to answer to your allegations: But my Dr replies, that they are
Defendants of their liberty; that we are Actors who invade their liberty and
impose upon them Doctrins which are not in the Word of God: ye Defendants, Dr
and not Actors? who were born but yesterday, who pusht us out of our Churchs
and estates for our Doctrine: you say we invade your liberty can you have any
liberty for not believing a Doctrine whereof the world was possessed for so many
ages? It Is you who invade our Liberty, by forcing upon us the belief of two
Sacraments, a figurative presence, etc. never yet known in the Orthodox
Church, and we must stand for our Liberty, until you produce Gods Word to
prove it: but the Ancient possession of our Doctrine is sufficient to maintain
us in it; and you can have no liberty for to deny it, until you prove the
possession to be injust: you say our possession may by questioned, and if we do
not prove our, Title our possession will be forfeited: And if we should forfeit
our Possession, I would gladly know, what are Protestants the nearer to prove
theirs to be the true Church or Doctrine? The Arrians and Pelagians will have as
good a claim to it as you: But Dr we have already proved our Title: we were
once put in possession of the true Doctrine by Christ: this is our Title, and
this you confess because you say we were once the true Church: now its your
duty to prove we fell from that Doctrine, and until you prove this evidently
our Possession is just, and our Doctrine must be believed.

You are much pleased with that Scholastical subtilitie, that prayers for the
dead (which you allow to be commendable) may be made for other ends, than for
to draw Souls out of the fire of Purgatory; because say you, that God
forseeing the prayers which in future times will be made for persons deceased,
as he is infinitely liberal and good, may anticipat the reward of those prayers,
to the benefit of the Persons prayed for; by giving them a good death; And our
Dr according his old mode says not a word of my answer to this discourse,
which my Reader, if he reads my former Treatise, will find to be satisfactorie
and solid; it would be tedious to repeat it: but let me ask one question of my
Adversary: does he seriously believe, that the Jews knew this school
subtilitie? they prayed for the dead, as I have proved, and certainly they knew
not that quillet; but their practice was regulated by their belief, that
souls depart from this life often times with sins, which must be expiated in
the other world, which the very Text signifies vt a p^ccatis solvantur. Nor is
it credible, that the practice of the Church for so many ages should be
grounded on so weak a bottom, as that subtilitie of some few Modern Divins,
which probably may be falls. I do not see what this school subtility may be good
for, but for to comfort our Dr^'s conscience in a scruple which he ought to
have; for ifhe believes there is no Purgatory from whence souls may be released,
then he is obliged in conscience to restore all the moneys he received why lst
he lived in the Catholic Church, for to pray for souls in Purgatory and their
release from thence; for, his being of a persuasion that there was a purgatory
when he received the moneys, does not excuse him now from the obligation of
restitution, since he is convinced there is none; but I do fear our Dr will not
be soon persuaded to restore that money; probably he will tell us the Persons
he prayed for, got a good death by his Prayers.

But to strick the nail in the head, we will prove that Prayers for the dead
have been practiced by the Church and Ancient Fathers directly for this end, to
draw Souls our of the sire of Purgatory: S. Gregory in Psalm. 3. Poenit.
Scio futurum esse etc. I know that after this life some will be cleansed by the
fire of Purgatory; others will be eternally damned. And in Psalm. 1. post
mortem carnis alij aeternis deputantur suplicijs, alij ad vitam per ignem
^ranseunt purgationis: after the death of our body, some are deputed to eternal
torments; some to life, do pass by the fire of purgatory. Again S. Greg. Dial.
l. 4. c. 39. for some small faul^s we must believe there is a purging fire,
before the day of judgment: And after having reckoned some small venial sins,
he ads, quae cuncta etiam post mortcm gravant, si adhuc in hac vita positis,
non fuerunt relaxata. All which are a load upon the soul even after death, if
they be not forgiven while we are in this life. And again Dial. l. 4. c. 25.
Sunt quorumdam Iustorum animae, quae a caelesti regno, quibusdam adhuc
mansionibus differuntnr, in quo dilationis damno, quid aliud innuitur, nisi
quod de perfecta justitia aliquid minus habuerunt: Some Souls there are of
Just men, which are kept out of heaven for a time in certain habit ations; by
which punishment of delay, what is signified, but that somewhat was wanting to
them, to be persectly Just. Theodoret in Schol. Graecis in 1. Corint. 3. Hunc
Purgatorium ignem etc. We believe this purging fire, wherein the soul departed
will be tried and purged as Gold in the fournace. S. Greg. Niss. Orat. pro
mortuis: Vel in praesenti vita etc. Man must be cleansed in this life; or after
his death must be purged by the fournace of purgatory fire: S. August. in
Psalm. 39. and l. 2. de Civit. Dei. c. 16. etc. 24. and in several other places
speaks expressly of the fire of Purgatory after this life, through which the
souls departed must pass to be cleansed: hear him l. 1. de Genesis cont. Manich.
c. 20. Qui forte agrum, etc. He that has not cultivated his field in this
world; in the other life must go either to the fire of Purgatory, or to the
fire of Hell. Now Dr remember that page 182. you grant with Origin, that Souls
departing carry with them some stains of sins and notes of infamy; you will
have me believe with Origin, as you say, (but Origin in his words which you
quote says no such thing) that the Souls carry these stains and notes of
infamy with them to Heaven; expressly against the Word of God, who says, no
polluted thing shall enter thither: let the Reader judge if it be not more
just, more reasonable, and more suitable to the opinion all Christians have of
Gods aversion to the least sin; and of the purity and cleanness of that
Heavenly City, that I should believe, S. Aug. S. Gregor. Theodoret, and
innumerable other Fathers, which, to shun tediousness, I pass in silence, who
affirm, that those souls which carry with them stains and sins to the other
life, must be cleansed and purged by a purging fire before they can enter into
Heaven; than to believe Origin (tho he should say it, as he does not) who says
they will carry those stains and sins with them thither.

From Purgatory he coms to attack our Tenet of Indulgences; and that you may
see with how little justice, I will declare briefly our Doctrine in this point:
first it is an unquestionable Verity, that any one, of the many penal works
performed by Christ, was sufficient for the Redemption of this, and many other
worlds, one drop of his blood was of infinite merit; whence it appears, that by
the great heap of satisfactorie and penal works, which he exercised in this
world, he exhibited an infinitely greater satisfaction for our redemption than
was needful: also it is apparent, that the many penal works of the B. Virgin,
of the Apostles and innumerable other Saints, were a greater satisfaction for
their sins and imperfections, than was needful to expiat them and satisfy
Gods justice; and this we learn by Job's words c. 6 v. 2. V^inam appenderentur
peccata mea quibus iram merui; and calamitas quam patior in statera, quasi
arena maris haec gravior appareret. O! that my sins for which I deserved anger
and the calamity which I suffer, were weighed in a balance; as the sands of
the Sea, this (my calamity) would appear greater. Of these superabundant
satisfactions of Christ and Saints works, we say there is a treasure in the
Church; for certainly those works, though needless for the Workers, are not
without value and esteem in Gods sight; and are not fruitless to the Church;
for that Article of our Creed, the Communion of Saints, imports that the
faithful do partake, and benefit by the good works one of an other; Particeps
ego sum timentium te, and custodientium mandata tua, says the Prophet David
Ps. 118. I am a partaker of the works of those who fear you, and keep your
Commandments; and so we must say, that those superabundant satisfactorie penal
works of Christ and his Saints, are a treasure of the Church, whereof the
faithful do partake: And thus we expound how they partake of it: Tho the sin,
whether Mortal or Venial, be remitted by Confession, or Contrition; yet a
temporal punishment remains due of the sinner to Gods Justice, which I proved
by Scripture and reason in my former Treatise, for the Penitent must not only
satisfy the penance enjoined by the Confessor, but we are exhorted to other
penal works and pennances for to satisfy for our sins: and therefore by the
Ancient Canons of the Church, great and severe penances were imposed, according
the quality of the sin; some of seven years penance; others of more; others
of less: these penal works the Penitents must perform; or some other must
perform them for him, if he be not in a capacity to do it; because Gods
justice must be satisfied, who as he mercifully remits the eternal pains due
for our sins, by virtue of the Sacraments, so he requires a temporal punishment
for to satisfy his justice: This satisfaction may be made either by the
Penitent himself, by exercising as much penal works in this life, or suffering
in Purgatory, as much as is due of him for to satisfy Gods justice; Or by
offering to God, and applying to that Penitent, as much of the treasure of
Christ, and Saints satisfaction and penal works as he owes.

This then we call Indulgence, A remisson of the temporal pains due of man to
God's justice, through the merits and satisfactions of Christ and his Saints
applied to him. Which Indulgence and application of those merits and
satisfaction, we say is in the power of the Pope; for those superabundant
satisfactions and penal works of Christ and his Saints, being a treasure of the
Church, and appliable to the use and benefit of the faithful, as we have
discoursed; to whom should the distribution, of that treasure belong, but to
the Prince, Chief Steeward, and Governor of the Church; to him to whom the
keys were given to open and lock, to bind and unbind? Nor are these
Indulgences appliable only to the living, but also to the Souls departed; for,
as when one is in prison for a debt, for to get out, and the creditor to be
indemnified, the Prisoner must pay the debt out of his own purse, or some one
must pay it for him: so when a soul departs this life, either with Venial sins
only, or without having don penance sufficient for the mortal sins forgiven
him by the Sacrament; he must pay to Gods justice the temporal Punishment which
he ows, and this is don either by Satispassion suffering the pains of
Purgatory for a certain time; or by the suffrages and penal works of the
Living which they apply to him; or by Indulgence, applying from the treasure of
the Church, that is of the superabundant Satisfaction of Christ and his Saints,
as much as will answer to the pains which they are to suffer there.

It Is certain, the Pope must have a cause, and as some say proportionable to the
quantity of the Indulgence he grants; for want of which, the grant would be
null; which gives occasion to our Adversaries to snarle, as our Dr Sall does,
against the profusness of the Pope, for granting Plenary Indulgences for every
triflle, as they say: but in this they speak immodestly, and temerariously;
first because it is an intolerable arrogance in Subjects to expostulat against
their Prince, and accuse him of prodigality, when he expends the treasure of
the kingdom to the advantage of his Subjects, because forsooth they do not
co^ceive nor know, whether the Princes design be advantageous or not: its the
Duty of a subject to believe the king has just reasons to do what he does, if
the contrary does not evidently appear: so its our duty to believe the Pope
has a just cause for granting Indulgences, when he grants them; for tho the
motive he has, may seem to you or to me to be but small and insufficient; yet
it may be in itself weighty and great: and at least we are in charity obliged
to believe, that he thinks the cause he has, is just and proportionable to his
grant; and that his intention is not, said Indulgence should be valuable
further than as the causes deserves it.

Our Drs reflection, that these grants are a powerful means to facilitat sins,
is vulgar, and answered in my former Treatise, where I showed how the
Protestant Principles do much more facilitat them, whereas they require no more
for to be cleans'd of them, but a Lord have mercy upon me betwixt the sinner
and God; when to the contrary for a good Confession, so many things are
required by us; and for obtaining Indulgences, besides Confession and
Communion; alms, prayers, and other pious exercises: all the Dr has besides in
his discourse of Indulgences, is but rallery, and sport upon our Divisions of
Indulgences, and a Bull of Indulgences, granted by Clement the X. which he has
translated into English, lykely to oblige the Coffie house Master, with a
subject of merriment for his Customers: and it may be feared, that in time our
Dr may give his profane Reader more sport; for if, as Ochinus, of a Capuchin
Friar became a Reformed, and from the Reformation passed to be a Jew, and
several other revolted Priests and Friars, of Calvinists, became Turks and
Jews; if I say our Dr should chance, as he renounced the Catholic faith, to
renounce also Protestancy for Paganism or Judaism, he will as easily ieer the
practices and Doctrine of Christianity, as now he does them of Popery.

XXI. CHAPTER.
A BRIEF SVRVEY OF HIS FOUR LAST Chapters.
IN his 31. Chap. of prayers in an unknown language, he points his arrows so
vnfixedly, that we^ know not what he would be at; sometimes he would have it to
be absolutely needful, the Lyturgie should be in a language understood by the
people; least they may answer Amen to a knave, who would utter blasphemies: and
not a syllable does he answer to my reply, that if the Lyturgie must be in a
language understood by the Auditory; then the Dutch, and French, who do not
understand English, must not go to the Protestant Lyturgie; and the Deaf, and
such as are at so great a distance from the Minister, as not to hear him, must
quit the Congregation; nay if the Minister does not understand the psalms,
through the intricatness of their Phrases (and but few Ministers do) he must
return home and some of the neighbors, more learned than he, must officiat for
him.

Sometimes he pretends only a greater advantage and Spiritual comfort of the
flock, for the increase of devotion in praying in a known language; but the
way for to prove this, would be to convince the world, that Protestants are
more devout than Roman Catholics; and I thank God the world is convinced of the
contrary: there is nothing more sure, than that the frequent use of prayers, is a
mark and sign of devotion in praying; there is none more assiduous in praying,
than he who feels spiritual comfort, and consolation in them; he who finds but
tepidity and coolness, prays but seldom: now, it is visible, our Catholic
Church prays a hundred fold more than yours: you meet in your Churchs but upon
Sundaies, and some other od days in the year; the other days of the week, your
Churchs are shut up; or if open, they serve but for a walking place, or for
boys to play at Ball: and if in some few Cities, a few Churchs are open, (and
they are but very few) for Wednesday and friday prayers, your congregations are
so thin, that there is hardly any to answer Amen to the Minister; Our
Congregations are numerous every day in the week, our Churchs very many
constantly open, frequently assisted, not only by a multitude of the Clergy,
especially in the Cathedral Churchs, and Convents of Friars and Nuns, morning
and Evening, and at midnight singing Gods praises; but by a numerous multitude
of our Layety: is not the Pomp and Majesty of Divin service in our Church, our
frequent Processions, our many holy days, a mark that we pray more frequently
than you? and a frequent custom of praying, being a visible mark of devotion,
as I have said; its Visible our Church and flock has more devotion in Latin,
than yours in English.

I proved prayers in any language to be lawful in itself; because the intent
of nature when we speak, is that the hearer may understand us; when we pray,
God is our Hearer, and not the congregation; its to him we speak; and whereas
he understands all languages, we may pray in any: Our Dr fancies, that this
argument proves directly against me; because, says he, the Lyturgy is an
exchange of speech betwixt God and his people; he speaks to them in the
Epistle, Ghospel and psalms; and the people are the Hearers; they speak to God
in prayers, and thanks giving: Gods speech therefore must be in a language
understood by the people who are the Hearers: But Sr tho the Ghospel, Epistles,
and psalms be Gods speech to the people, I hope you will not say, its a prayer
of God to the people; to what purpose then do you bring this instance? for the
question now debated is, If Prayers must be in a known language: But says he,
tho it be not a Prayer of God to the people, its an exhortation of his, and I
confess, with S. Paul, that the exhortations to the people must be in a
language known to them because they are the hearers: Neither in this do you
hit right Dr; God is not the immediate instructor of the people; he instructs
and exhorts us by the Ministers and Pastors of the Church; the Gospel
therefore, Epistle, lessons, and psalms in the Lyturgie, are not properly Gods
exhortation to the Congregation, but a subject and matter for the Pastor or
Minister for an exhortation to the people; and for to prove this its enough,
that besides the Lyturgy, you have in your Churchs, Sermons and exhortations
when you meet on the Sabbath day; its needless therefore the Epistle, Gospel,
lessons, and Psalms be in a known language, because they are not intended in
the Lyturgy for an immediate exhortation to the people; but for a Subject or
argument for the Minister to exhort upon: its evident they are a part of the
Lyturgy, which is a prayer of the people to God; the peoples prayer as we
proved may be in any language; because God, who is the Hearer, understands any:
therefore the Epistle, Ghospel, lessons and psalms may be in any language the
Church pleases. And it is presumption in any private Person, as Luther and Sall,
or in any particular Province or Congregation, to alter the language prescribed
by the Church under pretense of a spiritual advantage or increase of devotion;
the Church, and not any private Person or Gongregation, being the guide and
Mistress which God has appointed, as we have proved, for to teach us, what
rites, ceremonies and manner of Worship we are to serve him with: but our Dr
says, its an absurd thing, that J. S. should pretend we should submit our
judgments in this to the Church, our present business, quoth he, being to check
the abuses of the Church: and just so will the Presbiterians and Quakers
answer, its a ridiculous thing in the Protestants to ask them to conform
themselves with the Church of England, because their business is, to check the
abuses of that Church.

In his 32. Chap. he pretends to prove its cruelty to forbid our common people
from reading Scripture, and magnifies the happiness his flock reapes from the
contrary practice; and says not a word to this purpose, but what I refuted in
my former Treatise: but alas! the lamentable effects of this arbitrary reading
and interpretation of Scripture, are but too visible; and he might have better
called it the spark of Hell fire, which kindled and conserves the combustions
of our Church and state, than our Obedience to the Pope: his vulgar reproach of
our Divisions and distinctions of Rites and Ceremonies, among Dominicans,
Franciscans, and Jesuits, is not worth the taking notice of; it was want of
matter for to fill his Chapter made him stoop to so trivial an instance.

His attempt in his 33. chapt. against the Immaculat Conception of the B.
Virgin, is no more, than what he said in his Sermon and I refuted in my former
Treatise: The words of S. Augustine quoted by me to prove the obligation of
confessing, not only every sin we are guilty of, but the circumstances of
time, place, and quality of the Persons, with whom we commit them, starrles
him: he will not believe I have the least tincture of a Divin, or that I am
acquainted, or was ever bred among learned men of the Roman Church; and very
resolutly says, that our Divins teach, its not the duty of a penitent to
confess the circumstances of time, place and quality of the persons, wherein and
where with the sin was committed: and no man of judgment will ever ask a better
proof for to believe, that our Doctor never was a Professor of Moral Divinity,
nor that he ever read any of their works, or if he did, that he had not the
memory of a Chick to retain what he read: for he might have met in Alexan. 3.
p. q. 32. art 2. Anton. 2. p. tit. 9. c. 7. Rosel. Verbo Confessio. n. 7. and
in several other ancient Authors, that a sin committed in the Sabbath day,
takes a particular malice against the Virtue of Religion, from the circumstance
of the time: because its a profanation of a day consecrated to the Worship of
God; and ought to be specified in Confession: this Doctrine is now absolet: but
as to the circumstances of the place and quality of the Persons, it has been
allwaies, and is still the Doctrine of all Divins, that there is an obligation
of Confessing them; It Is theft to steal out of a Merchants shop; but its a
sacrilege to steal out of a Church; nor will you satisfy the duty of a
Penitent by saying you stole; if you do not mention that you stole out of a
Church. Its Murder to kill, but if you kill a Priest, its a sacrilege, and
you must express it in your Confession: but I do not wonder our Dr should not
minch, nor chaw these distinctions of sins and circumstances; since he is become
of the Church of England, acustomed for so many years, to plunge its hands in
the blood of the Clergy, and ryfle Altars and Churchs, without any distinction
of Persons, or places.

His 34. Chapt. is a Spring tide of injuries which in small showers he povred
out against me in every chapter of his book; to which my answer will be
silence, and that patience to which Christians are obliged by the example of
him who being brought as a sheep to the slaughter, was dumb before his shearers
and opened not his mouth. He flatters himself with the opinion of some Divins of
his Church, who say, the Vows he made of Poverty, Obedience, and Chastity in
the Roman Church, nor the Precepts of that Church do not oblige him now, since
he is a Protestant; and the same he says page 181. against J. E. in his first
part against N. N. and for this he gives two reasons; first he says, he has
demonstrated evidently he cannot keep those Vows and Precepts of the Church of
Rome, without infringing them of God, because they are opposite: But in the
first Chapter of this Treatise I have shown this to be falls; for there is no
Divin Precept commanding us to have a good Parish to have Rents, honors and
dignities: since therefore you have made a solemn vow of having no Rents, no
Honors, no Parish, but to live in poverty; how can you say this vow does not
oblige you? with what Divine precept is the compliance of this vow inconsistent?
allow the Precept of the Church of hearing Mass does not oblige you, because in
it we adore the Host; allow also your vow of Chastity, is not consistent with
S. Paul's counsel of marrying, rather than to burn; because you may find by
experience you cannot contain; but against what Divin precept or counsel is it,
to say your Divin Office, Matins and Lauds every day? why do not you obey this
Precept of the Church? with what Divin Precept is the fast of lent, the fast of
fridaies and Saturdaies inconsistent? why do not you observe these Precepts of
the Church? particularly that your own Protestant Common Prayer book exhorts
you to these fasts.

His second reason, because those vows he made, and his Obedience to those
Precepts, were grounded upon a blind Obedience to the Pope of Rome, including a
disobedience to Gods laws; and consequently the vows are Null: But I have
showen his vows, and those Precepts include no disobedience to God's law: and I
will show, tho he made those vows under the Pope, yet now, forsaking the Pope,
he must stick to the vows: for I ask you Dr, are not you still bound to the
Duties of a Priest (whateuer that duty be) tho it be under the Popes Obedience
you received your Priest hood? are not you, I say, still a Priest? can you
disown your caracter, because you received it under the Pope? and why can you
disown your other obligations contracted under the Pope; if you cannot show
they are inconsistent with Gods Laws? you were under the Obedience of the Pope,
it is true, when you made a vow of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience; but it is
not the Pope commanded you to make them; it was a free voluntary act of your
own, and therefore whether you live under the Popes Obedience or not, you
remain still obliged, as you remain still a Priest and with the obligations of
a Priest.

Remember that Passage of Ananias and Saphira Act. 5. they sold their lands,
they sacrificed the price of it at the Apostles feet to God; it was by no
Command of S. Peter; it was a voluntary free action of their own; this
oblation (whether it vas a vow of poverty or not) obliged them in conscience,
and they transgressed against the holy Ghost, by detaining a part of that which
they had sacrificed to God: whether Peter, under whom they lived when they made
this oblation, was Pope or not; supreme h^ad or not of the Church; the
sacrifice and oblation they made, obliged them in conscience; for it was a
voluntary free action of their own; therefore they sinned in transgressing
against it: this case is as like yours, as you can paint one: whether the Pope,
under whom you lived, when you made a solemn vow of poverty, of chastity and
obedience, a solemn vow of never admitting any dignity or honor in the Church;
whether I say, the Pope was supreme head of the Church or not; that excuses you
not; you made that sacrifice of your self to God, you made those vows, not by
constraint or command of the Pope; it was your own voluntary free action; it
obliges you still, let the Pope be what he wilI: listen now Dr to S. Gregory
l. 1. Epistol. 33. writing to Venantius an Apostat, who forsook his Convent and
religious life to become Chancellor of Italy: Ananias pecunias Deo vouerat,
quas post, diabolica fraud victus, substraxit; sed qua morte mulctatus est,
s^is; si ergo ille mortis periculo dignus fuit, qui ^os quos dederat nummos Deo
abstulit; considera quanio periculo in divino judicio dignus eris, qui non
nummos, sed teipsum Deo omnipotenti, cui sub Monachali habitu te devoveras
substraxisti? consider a judicium Dei, quid mereatur, qui semetipsum Deo vovit,
continuoque mundi desiderijs irretitus, mentitus est quod vovit. Ananias
sacrificed his money to God, which he afterward, ouercom by Satan's instigation,
stole from God; but you know with what death he was punished; and if he, who
took from God the moneys he sacrificed unto him, deserved such a death, in what
a dangerous condition will you be before the tribunal of God; who have
withdrawn from God, not your moneys, but yourself, after you had consecrated
yourself unto him in a Monastical life? consider Gods judgment: what he
deserves, who has consecrated himself to God, and ensnared by worldly desires,
h^s disa vowed what he h^s vowed. Change but Sall for Venantius and Chancellor
of Italy, for Parson of Swords; and S. Gregory's words come pat to our Dr.

THE CONCLUSION.
DOctor had you begun the carrier you are now in, fifty years agon, it would
be still criminal in you, but less admired by the world; but now in your
crawling years, to abandon yourself to your liberty, when you cannot enjoy it
but for so short a time; to indulge your passions in the Autumn of your days,
which you curbed in the Spring of your life; to prostitute yourself to
transitory pleasures, when you stand with one foot in the grave, at the brim
of eternity; to faune at the world in such an age, when men are despised by
the world; never could Satan have beguiled you in a worse time, nor you have
changed your religion to less of worldly advantage. Had you intended in this
change of Religion to better your life and secure your salvation, as you
pretend to persuade us, you might answer, that they who came to the Vyneyard at
the eleaventh hour, were as well rewarded, as they who entered at the third
hour; but Alas? you have too much of reason for to believe you could better
yourself; and too much of judgment for to think any man can believe this was
your aim: I appeal to the know ledge of any impartial man; if there be any
among you of less edification, of less conscience and honor, than those, who of
Priests and Friars, become Protestants; and if they become not more debauch and
riotous libertins, than formerly they were. What man of them can you produce,
who by his exchange of religion became more devout, more reformed in his life,
and more given to Meditations, prayers, and other religious exercises, and
austerities of life than before? and you will tell us, it is to reform your
life, and secure your salvation you have quitted your religious Order, and
become a Protestant?

You exhort me to consider the miserable condition we are in, dazzled with the
splendour of the Roman Grandeur, and baited with the strong allurements of it,
deceiving the world with colors of Sanctity, when ambition and avarice is the
Primum Mobile of all our actions, and the Soul which animates all our motions.
I pray Sr, what share of this Grandeur and worldly allurements had you, when
you were of your former Profession? or have the Cartusians, Capuchins, and
other religious orders of both sexes now? was it to increase the worldly Pomp
of the Italian court; was it ambition or avarice that moved so many Noble men
and women of rich estates, to quit their plentiful life, their honors and
dignities, their numerous retinue of Servants, sacrificed all at the feet of
Christ's Cross, and consecrated themselves to a religious Cell, to a life of
continual mortification, of Disciplins, hair-cloths, fasting, assiduous duties
of a Quyre, and begging their food from door to door? had they left their own
estates and gone to Rome to be Popes or Cardinals, you might suspect the purity
of their intentions; but to say it was Ambition, Avarice, and allurements of
worldly pleasures carried them to be Carthusians, Capuchins, Nuns, etc. is to
make them worse than mad men: I pray was it ambition that moved you when you
made a vow never to pretend or accept any Dignity? or may not we judge it was
ambition moved you to infringe that vow, and pretend and have the Dignity of
Dean of S. Patrick's Church (if you be Dean, as they say) was it avarice that
moved you, when you made a solemn vow of poverty, and never to have any Rents
or revenues? or was it not avarice that moved you to break this vow, and accept
a good Parish and rents as they say you have?

I pray tell ingenuously, what worldly allurements had you to continue in the
Profession you were of for so many years in Ireland? you may say perhaps, you
had great allurements in spain to be of that profession; the great credit, and
impolyments of honor, you say you had, might have been an allurement unto you;
but what allurements had you for to continue in that profession in Ireland for
so many years? your allurements was poverty, having no other subsistence but
the charity and alms of the people; no other exercise of your great (as you
imagined) Talents, but to preach sometimes and teach the Catechism, commonly to
poor people; wandering up and down to friends houses, to pick up a liuelyhood;
sometimes wellcom, and sometimes not; to fare at other men's tables, sometimes ill,
and sometimes well; sometimes decently clad and sometimes your poverty not
affording you to be so: your allurements besides this, was to say your Breviary
daily for about an hours time; an hours meditation or mental prayer every
morning; besides other devotions which you were obliged by your Rules to
perform; to fast in Lent, Fridaies and Saturdaies, and glad to hit sometimes on
bread and milk or butter; other corporal austerities, if you satisfied your
duty; continual fear of imprisonment or banishment; an abnegation of your own
Will to the conduct of your Superiors command against your inclinations; these
were the allurements you had to be of that Religion; see whether ambition or
avarice could have a share in the choice of such a life and Religion: you tell
me you will never again return to that Religion; that you will continue in
Protestancy; and truly if nothing but Ambition, Avarice and worldly allurements
govern you actions, your are far better where you are, and will do very ill to
return where you were; the allurements are strong for your continuance in
Protestancie; you have a good Parish with good rents, and Judas betrayed his
Master for a smaler interest; instead of milk and eggs on fasting days, you
have a good piece of beef and better cheer, and are not beholding to your
neighbors, (if you please) for you may have a table of your own; you have
neither Breviary, nor beads nor meditation nor Mass to trouble your rest, but
may sleep eat and drink at will and pleasure, and instead of an auditorie of
poor people, you can preach in Christ Church, and have access to great ones:
these indeed are strong (but earthly) allurements to keep you in Protestancy,
and bid a figg for Popery.

But I beseech you once more, good Dr, reflect if this be the life you are
obliged by your Vows to lead? consider if by your three solemn Vows, of
poverty, you have not sacrificed your riches to God, protesting you would
never have any; if by your vow of Obedience you have not sacrificed your Will
to God, giving it wholly to the conduct of your Superior; if by the Vow of
Chastity you have not consecrated your body to God denying it worldly
pleasures; and consider, how your present life is a violation of all these
three Vows; of poverty by the Parish and rents you enjoy and are disposed to
receive more if you can get it; of Obedience, by substracting your self from
your Superiors conduct, and living at your will; of Chastity, if not by
marrying, by holding marriage is lawful for you: and after these
Considerations, listen to S. Basil. in Regul. Interrog. 14. Si postquam intra
reliquorum Fratrum Societatem admissus est, factam a se jam professionem
resciderit, is perinde aspici debet, vt qui in Deum peccaverit, cui solemni se
voto obligavit: etenim qui semel seipsum Deo devouit; is, si ad aliud vitae
genus transierit, sacrilegij se crimine obstrinxit, vtpote qui seipsum Deo, cui
se consecraverat subterfuratus est. He who after being received into the
community of the rest of the Brethren, shall rescind the profession he has
made, is to be looked upon as a transgressor against God, to whom he has
obliged himself by Vow: for he who has consecrated himself to God, if after, he
should pass into an other Kind of life; he is guil^ie of sacrilege, as having
stolen from God, what he had consecrated unto him. O! Dr should not your heart
tremble at these words? you have rescinded the profession you made; you have
consecrated your self to God, and have forsaken that, and past to an other kind
of life; that Parish, those Rents, that liberty, that pleasure you enjoy are
stolen, and robbed from God to whom you consecrated them by solemn Vows;
restore them again o Doctor returning to that poverty, Obedience and Chastity
which you Vowed; if, as a frail man, you fell; arrise as a Christian, Humanum
est cadere, Christianum resipiscere, Diabolicum perseverare; Hell was not
created for sin if repented, but for obstinacy in our transgression; nor was
Heaven created for the innocent only; but for the penitent sinner.

Lift up your eyes to the top of a Pillar thirty foot heigh; there you shall
see that Miracle of Christian austeritie Simon Stellites, fasting without any
manner of food 28 Lents in imitation of Christ; having no shelter against the
storms of Winter, or heat of Summer, but his constancy; his body covered with a
rude haire-cloth, his bed but the bare top of the Pillar, and his flesh
battered daily with disciplins to bloodshed: look upon Antonie the Abbot, shut
up in a cave for the space of twenty years; feeding on bread and water;
sleeping on the bare ground; clad with beast's Skins, and searching all
occasions of mortifieing his flesh: Consider S. Benedict and S. Francis, the
one wallowing himself in thornie bushes, the other in heaps of snow for to
ouercom impure thoughts, which assaulted them: look on S. Francis Xaverius in
the hospital, washing the Ulcers and Soars of the Sick, and drinking the water
wherewith he had washed them; to check the loathsomness which his body conceived
at that filthred. Consider S. Louis Gonzaga Surrounded in Court with many
allurements of impuritie; and for to preserve his soul unspotted, how he
girded his sides with wheels of spurs to curb his flesh; To be brief look into
the Convents of both Sexes, their Cells ring with the Echo of their
disciplins; their beds afford more pain than ease to their tired bodies; their
food serves for to live, to suffer more; their life is a continued distribution
of the day into several hours of spiritual exercises: is it Avarice, is it
Ambition, is it allurements of worldly pleasures, is it for to increase the
Roman splendour and Grandeur think you that men live so in the Catholic
Religion; as if it had been the Italian Policy that prescribed that sort of
life, and not Jesus Christ: is not this retirement from the world; this
abdication of wordlie Pomp and vanity; this humiliation and renunciation of
honors, estates and riches; this austeritie of life, and mortification of our
passions recommended to us in the Gospel, preached by S. Paul, practiced by
David, the great Baptist, the Apostles and the eminent Saints of Christianity?

Read what the Ghospel relater of the course fare, of the gross attire, of
the great retirement of S. John Baptist; Omni naturae necessitate superata
(says Chrysostom. in cap. 11. Math. Hom. 38.) mirabile quoddam iter peregit:
semper in Hymnis, semper in or ationibus fuit; nulli hominum, antequam ad
Baptizandum accederet, sed soli Deo sua semper offerebat colloquia: non lacte
nutritus: non lecto susceptus, non tecto, non alia re humana vsus est. Having
ouercom all the want and exigencies of Nature, he walked in a most admirable
course of life: he lived always in Hymns and prayers (is not this like the
Quyres of our Churchs and religious orders)? he had no conversation with men,
but all with God alone, (is not this the religious retirement of our Monks and
Nuns?) He did not feed on Milk (nor wine or strong liquor, but wild Honnie and
Locusts) nor did he sleep on a bed, nor dwelled under any roof, nor did use,
what men commonly use. (Is not this the austeritie of life, the mortifications
and pennances of our Church, which you call desperate and indiscreet austerities
destructive to Body and Soul?) Read the Haire-cloths of David, his eating of
ashes with his bread, his fasting, his rising at midnight to sing psalms, and
the like Austerities commended by Scripture in several others; and let the
Impartial Reader judge, if the Tenor of life professed by our Religious Orders,
if the corporal mortifications and austerities, of Disciplins, of hairecloths,
of our Quyres, of sleeping on the bare ground, of course attires, of poor and
scant fare, practiced frequently in our Church by all ages and sexes, be not
more conformable to what Scripture praises, to what Christ and his Apostles
recommended, to what the Saints of the new and old Testament practiced; than
the Tenor of life, Doctrine, and practice of the Protestant Church.

Summon now your reason Dr, and ask your own conscience, if you be not guilty
of as many sins and imperfections, as those Saints; and conclude if they did so
much to expiat their sins, what you ought to do? ask if you be not as prone to
temptations, and as weak to resist them as they were; and if they, to prevent
temptations, did so much; how com you to forsake that profession wherein you
might and were obliged to imitat them? ask, if you have a greater claim to
heaven, than they had? and resolve for to purchase heaven, to do more, and
return to your devoir; since that they, for to purchase it have don so much? or
conclude, that Christ, when he said the kingdom of heaven suffers force, and
the violent shall carry it, he spoke to them, and not to you: their lot is
eternal consolation in the other life, because here they mourned and wept in
penance: their lot is everlasting fullsomness, because here they suffered
hunger and thirst: their Souls are now in a height of glory, because their
Bodies were here in the depth of affliction; We may parallel the Body and
Soul to two scales; the one scale will never rise, if the other does not fall;
if this mounts, the other will sink: that the soul may rise, the Body must
fall; if the Body be kept high, the soul will fall low; witness the soul of
the Rich Glutton burning in the depth of hell; epulabatur quotidie splendide;
his body was kept high; the sequel was, sepul^us est in inferno: his soul was
buried in hell: see Dr in what degree your body was kept, by the state of
religious life you professed; you for sooke that state; you have raised your
Body to a great hight; fear, least it may be said of you some day, sepultus est
in inferno.

For Man's life is often termed in holy Writ, a Dream; and it is remarkable,
that after a merry pleasant dream, we awake with sorrow and sadness; but after
a heavy sad dream we awake with joy and content: satius est amara somniare quam
dulcia, says Petrarchus, amari enim somnij exitus dulcis est, and dulcis
amarus? Its better have a sad bitter dream, than a sweet pleasant one; because
the sequel of a sweet dream is bitter; of a bitter one, is sweetness: You
dream that your Spouse is treacherously snatched out of your bed, and murdered
before your face; you cry out, Murder; you awake, but with joy, that all was
but a dream; you dream you have hit on a great purse of Gold for to relieve
your wants; you rejoice; you awake, but with sorrow, that your content was but
a dream: Joseph dreamed the Sun, Moon, and Stars, prostrated at his feet, did
adore him; he awakes from this dreamed felicity, and meets a check from his
Father, persecution from his brethren, slavery from the Madianits, and
imprisonment from Putiphar; what a heap of sorrow followed his pleasant dream.
Our life is but a dream, Dr, from which we will awake in the other world by
death; we will awak to sorrow or content, according the quality of our dream:
see what life you have forsaken, which by your profession you ought to have
lead; a life of religious poverty, living by charity and alms, and often
wanting; of religious Obedience and Chastity; a life of penance and
austeritie, of fasting, prayers, persecutions, afflictions, this was a sad
dream from which, if you had continued it, you might have expected to awake in
the other life with joy: see what life you lead in the Protestant Church? it is
a merry pleasant dream, plenty of money; liberty without any check, good attire,
well lodged, no obligation of fasting, of other mortifications, of a Breviary;
a iouial dream; but fear that you may awake in the other life to eternal grief
and sorrow, and you may say with the Debauched mentioned Sap. 5 What has the
pride of our life auailed us, or the abundance of our riches profited us; do
not hazard eternity for a time, and a real felicity for a dreamed happiness.

FINIS.
ERRATA CORRIGENDA.
Page 4. lin. 6. appeur. Read appear. lin. 7. wonds. R. words. p. 6. l. 19.
Sacrements. R. Sacraments. p. 8. l. 17. Ordinatioe. R. Ordination. l. 19.
Nagsead. R. Nags-head. p. 9. l. 10. pereiving. R. perceiving l. 11. Portie. R.
Party. p. 13. l. 14. outragions. R. outrageous. l. 21. iu. R. in. p. 15. l. 4.
Sacrements. R. Sacraments. p. 21. l. 23. vt. R. us. p. 22. l. 4. snch. R. such.
l. 9. obvions. R. obvious. p. 23. l. 6. ad. R. and. l. 23 ^ho. R. the p. 26. l.
10. leymen. R. laymen. p. 27. l. 6. thoses. R. those. p. 30. l. 1. indged. R.
judged. l. 2. perfectedly. R. perfectly. p. 38. l. 25. firgurative. R.
figurative. p. 50. l. 9. spalms. R. psalms. p. 55. l. 26. absoluty. R.
absolutely. p. 69 l. 8. Winsmester. R. Westminster. p 70. l. 8. Anstin R.
Austin. p. 102. l. 5. out. R. our. l. 17. maiice. R. malice. p. 103. l. 13
obtinat. R. obstinat. l. 14. Congrations. R. Congregations. l. 20. obieteuely.
R. obiectiuely. p. 104. l. 5. patt. R. part. p. 105. l. 1. praecipui. R.
praecipuis. p. 131 l. 1. bnginning. R beginning. p. 133. l. 2. chuch. R.
church. l. 4. his. R. this p. 134. l. 7. lone R. love. p. 160 l. 5. ground. R.
grounded. p. 245. l. 18. obcurely. R. obscurely. p. 246. l. 27. speaks. R.
speak. p. 266. l. 20. Trearise. R. Treatise. page 304. l. 26. our. R. out.


