A Brief REMONSTRANCE Of the Grand Grievances and Oppressions Suffered by Sir
William Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar, Knts, deceased; As also by their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Creditors.

Humbly Represented to Both Houses of PARLIAMENT, Prorogued to 21. October 1680.

Faithfully Collected out of several Courts of Record, Orders of Council, and
Treaties of Peace and Common Alliance.

With several REMARKS thereupon, For the Improvement of Navigation, Trade, and
Commerce.

By JOHN BROWN of London, Gent.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.

To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON Knt, Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON, And to the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS PLAYER Knt: William Love, and
Thomas Pilkington Esqs MEMBERS of PARLIAMENT, Chosen for the Honorable City of
LONDON.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
IT IS agreed by all Divines, Philosophers, and Lawyers, that every Man has a
Right to hold and enjoy those things, which he has Righteously obtained; even
as the first Occupants of Lands, retain a Real Interest, and Property by a
Natural and civil Possession. But the Hollanders, and Zealanders, of late,
would persuade Sovereign Princes, and their Ministers, to make no difference
between Reason of State, and common Right; In whose Provinces, the Sovereign
Power resting in the Common People; their Deputies were so bold, in the infancy
of their State, soon after King James had delivered their cautionary Towns, and
quitted a great Sum of Money due to the Crown of England, and persuaded the
French King to discharge a greater; That they at all times afterward, refused
to settle any Regulation of Commerce and Navigation in the East Indies, and the
Whale-Fishing, (the proper Discovery of the Russia Merchants;) but gave Laws
concerning the old English Draperies, Banishing all Died and Dressed Clothes,
disputing the Tare of the rest, after they had invited the Merchant
Adventurers, successively to Middleburgh, Delfe, and Rotterdam, with
privileges, (since taken away) yet some of the said Company, are now Resident
in Dort.

The People of Holland, Zealand and Friezland, having also incroached upon the
Rights of Fisheries, on the Coasts of England, Scotland, and Ireland; Denying
any Tribute, although Spain and France at the same time purchased License, by
Treaty, or Special Commission, Sir DUDLEY CARLETON Demanded satisfaction, and a
regulation in those points in the year 1618. And also for reducing their Coyns
to such a Standard, that might hinder the Transporting of English Gold and
Silver out of His Majesty's Dominions. The Prince of Orange, (their General,)
after many Debates, then told the Ambassador Carleton, that the Deputies of the
several Cities in Holland, Zealand, and Freizland, durst not touch upon those
things, especially that concerning Fisheries; there being in those three
Maritine Provinces, one Hundred and fifty thousand People, and upwards; that
had their Livelihoods, and Dependencies upon the Fisheries on the
British-Coasts; but desired him to Write to Secretary NAUNTON, to move the
King, that those Rights of Fisheries might be redeemed and Purchased, for a Sum
of Money; King James being unwilling to treat upon those terms, all the Debates
rested re in facta; What inestimable loss and Damages the Crown of England, and
the Subjects thereof; (and more particularly the City of London,) have suffered
in the premises, is fit for a Parliament to inquire after; whereby they may
find what is become of all the old broad Gold, abased in Holland, and
afterward bought up again for the English East India Company.

The main Scope of this following Remonstrance, is to give Your Honors an
Exact account of the matters of Fact, wherein those two Worthy Persons Sir
William Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar were so grieved and oppressed; (that had
been so necessary and serviceable to the Crown and Kingdom of England,) and
after them, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Creditors; there wants
no Vouchers within the Walls of this City, to make Evident to the World, the
truth of every Paragraph herein, that calls Aloud for Relief from the Justice
of a Parliament.

The several Abstracts of the following Cases, being of High Import, to the
Honor and Interest of the King and Kingdom, may easily invite every Person
that is a Lover of his Country, to a through perusal thereof; and even to
Gratify himself, with some Remarks not Vulgarly known; Obliging thereby,

Right Honorable, And Right Worshipfnl, Your most Obedient and Humble Servant,
JOHN BROWN.

A Brief Remonstrance of the grand Grievances and Oppressions suffered, by Sir
William Courten and Sir. Paul Pyndar Knts. deceased: As also by their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Creditors; with several Remarks thereupon;
Humbly represented to both Houses of Parliament, Prorogued to the 21 of October
1680.
THAT upon confidence and expectation of Protection and Preservation of their
Lives, Liberties and Estates, with the quiet enjoyment of the Protestant
Religion, under the Government of Queen Elizabeth and Her Successors. Many
Worthy persons, related to Sr. William Courten, transported Themselves and
their Families, out of Flanders, Brabant, and the other Spanish Netherlands;
amongst whom, the Father and Mother of Sr. William Courten arrived in England,
from Menen in Flanders, An. 1567.
in the year 1567. And having remitted their Moneys and other Effects from
beyond the Seas, exercised the Trade of Merchandising in Silks and Linen,
during their Lives in the City of London, and left two Sons and a Daughter,
named William, Peter, and Margaret Courten, unto whom they gave plentiful
Estates.

Sr. William Courten, being the eldest Son, intermarried with the Daughter and
Heir of Peter Cromeling, a Linen-Merchant, of Coutrick in Flanders, who left a
personal Estate of sixty Thousand Pounds Sterling to his said Daughter;
provided, that fifty Thousand Pounds thereof should be laid out in Lands, in
the Kingdom of England, and settled upon Peter Courten his Grandchild, begotten
of his said Daughter, by the said Sr. William, which settlement was made
accordingly; And the said Peter afterward* (being made a Barronet) married
with the Lord Stannop's Daughter, but died without Issue, and left the Estate
to Sr. William Courten, his Father.

In the Year 1606 Sr. William Courten, Peter Courten his brother, An. 1606.
and John Moncy of London, Merchant (who married the said Margaret Courten,
Widow of Matthias Boudaen) entered into a Trade of Partnership, with a joint
Stock, two parts whereof belonged to Sir William Courten, and to the said Peter
Courten and John Moncy, each a fourth part. This Trade in Company was carried
on for 24 years together, to several parts of the World, wherein they returned
yearly 200000 l. Sterling and upwards, (Communibus Annis,) in the Linen Trade,
Italian Trade, Barbary Trade, French Trade, and Whale-Fishing, upon their Joint
Stock aforesaid; An. 1630.
then Peter Courten, in the year 1630 (being lately Knighted in England) dyed
at Middleburgh in Zealand, where he lived, and had gotten the greatest part of
the effects abroad into his hands, and left Peter Boudaen, Son of the said
Matthias, his Executor. And in the year following, John Moncy transported
himself from London to Zealand, to settle the Accounts of the Company, where he
died, in the year 1631, at the House of the said Peter Boudaen, before the
Accounts were finished, and left Sir William Courten and Peter Bondaen his
Excecutors, An. 1631.
liable to pay the Debts of the Company, due upon Bonds to diverse persons in
England, Flanders, and Brabant, which were many and great.

Sir William Courten, by his second Wife the Daughter of Mr. Moses Tryan, had
one Son and three Daughters, named William, Hester, Mary, and Ann, who were
married into several Noble and Worthy Families, (viz.) Hester intermarried with
Sir Edward Littleton of Pilleton-Hall, in the County of Stafford Barronet; Ann
intermarried with Essex Deverux of Leigh-Court* in the County of Worcester Esquire
after his decease, with Sir Richard Knightly of Fausely in the County of
Northampton; Mary intermarried with Anthony Earl of Kent; and William, the Son
and Heir, intermarried with the Lady Catherine, Daughter of John late Earl of
Bridgewater.

After the decease of the two Partners aforesaid, (both free Denizons of
England) Sir William Courten endeavored to settle the said Accounts, and to
call home the effects of his Estate out of the hands of Peter Boudaen Merchant
at Middleburgh, which could not be done by any means, during the Life of Sir
William Courten, the Magistrates of Middleburgh having protected him from the
ordinary course of Justice, as they have done his Sons and Heirs ever since, in
several Suits depending, to the Damage of Courten and his Creditors, the Sum of
123460 l. Sterling and upwards, as by the Balance of the Books kept by Mr.
John Moncy in England, appears.

Sir Peter Courten and the said Peter Boudaen having qualified themselves to be
Directors of the East and West India Companies, by purchasing many great
original Actions in the Chambers at Middleburgh in Zealand, with the very
individual Moneys gotten into their hands, out of the proper Estates of Sir
William Courten and his Creditors. The Magistrates of Holland and Zealand
holding it for a Maxim, that it would be of bad consequence to their State, if
they did not protect Strangers and their Goods against all other Foreign
Invasions whatsoever.

The like Protection the States of Holland have given to Jacob Pergens of
Amsterdam, by express Orders to the Courts of Judicature at Amsterdam, and the
Hague, that they should refuse Englishmen all the ways of Justice, upon
several Actions depending against the said Pergens, for Moneys gotten into his
Possession upon several Trusts, Letters of Attorney, and private Contracts with
William Courten Esquire amounting to 15000 l. Sterling and upwards; Even for which
the said Pergens, by his own Covenant had contracted to be accountable to the
said Courten, or his Assigns.

This Jacob Pergens was born at Cologne in Germany, bred up in London, and made
a free Denizon of England, then, upon his marriage with the Sister of Peter
Boudaen became a Burgher of Middleburgh, afterward an Inhabitant at Amsterdam,
and one of the Directors of the West India Company there, who claims sometimes
the privilege of an Englishman, at other times of a German; and, as occasion
offers, he claims the privilege of a Zealander, and often times of a Citizen
and Free-Burger of Amsterdam: and when he is impleaded at any other place, his
Exceptions are, That he ought not to be sued in any place, but only before his
Competent Judges of Amsterdam, where the Courts of Justice are closed up
against all Englishmen that prosecute their rights against him.

Sir William Courten, in his particular Trade (distinct from the Company)
having received several wrongs and injuries by the Spaniards, procured Letters
of Mart or Reprizals, in the second year of the late King Charles, to do
himself Right and Justic; and sent forth Captain John Powel, and Henry Powel
his Brother, with two Frigates, well fitted and equipped into the West Indies,
who having discovered the Island of Barbados not inhabited by any people
whatsoever, landed there, and made a survey of the Soil and Situation; and at
their return persuaded Sir William Courten to fortify and settle Plantations
upon the said Island; who did, at his own proper Costs and Charges, expend the
Sum of 28000 l. Sterling in Building, An. 1632.
Plantations, and Transporting Men, Women, and Servants. And being in quiet
possession for the space of two years, he procured a Grant under the Great Seal
of England, Tertio Caroli primi, to the Earl of Pembroke and his certain
Deputies; for the Government thereof according to the Laws of England, which
subjected the same to the Dominion of the King, but the Freehold and Soil, by
the Law and Original of all Propriety, was rested in Sir William Courten and
his Heirs for ever. Nevertheless, James late Earl of Carlisle, by color of a
pretended Grant, as Lord Proprietor of the Caribee Islands, in the year 1628,
with his Accomplices, Subjects of England, enters the said Island by force of
Arms, and dispossessed the said Sir William Courten, his Servants and Planters
of their Fortifications, Houses, and Plantations, and do still continue the
possession thereof, against all Justice and common Right; many Families having
raised themselves by the Fruits and profits of the said Island, out of the
ruins of Sir William Courten and his Creditors:

In the year 1632 Sir William Courten having procured several Fishermen and
their Families out of Holland and Zealand, as also Net-makers and
Ship-Carpenters, for building Herring-Busses and Dogger-Boats. They were made
free Denizens of England, and dwelt in diverse Towns adjacent to the Sea. Then
several joint Stocks were raised, for encouraging the Herring-Fishing and
Cod-Fishing upon the English Coasts. Whereupon the Hollanders and Zealanders,
under hand, got Letters of Mart from the Spaniards, and took the said English
Busses and Doggers, and procured them to be confiscated at Oast-End and
Dunkirk, under pretense they were Dutch Effects: And oftentimes fishing in
company with the English, would in the Night time cast great Stones into their
Nets, and spoil their whole Voyages for that season; by which indirect
practices the English were so discouraged, that after the loss of above 50000
l. Sterling and upwards in the Enterprise (as appears by the Accounts of Sir
William Courten and the other Treasurers) the whole undertaking was laid aside
in Companies, to the great Damage and Dishonor of the King and Kingdom.

That the late King Charles, An. 1635.
in the 11th. year of his Reign, together with several Lords of the Council,
persuaded the said Sir William Courten to undertake Trading Voyages to China
and Iapan; and for that purpose, granted him, and others in Company with him, a
new Charter for an East India Trade, in the year 1635. Then Sir Paul Pyndar,
being a man of a public Spirit, was moved by the King to furnish and advance
the Sum of 36000 l. to Sir William Courten in the first Expedition; for which
he had assignments upon several Ships. The Hollanders then finding that it
might hinder their Commerce, obstructed them in the said Voyages, under
pretense that they traded with the Portugals, their Enemies. But before any of
the said Ships returned, Sir William Courten died, upon whose Foundation the
East India Company of England afterward take their times, steps, Measures of
Trade, and Correspondence.

Sir William Courten, in his Lifetime, having contracted many great Debts,
concerning his several undertakings and ways of Traffic aforesaid; left his
only Son and Heir William Courten, his sole Executor, obliging him upon his
Deathbed to preserve his Credit at home and abroad, especially to prosecute
the East India Trade; But soon after the News of Sir William Courten's Death
was spread in the Low Countries, the East India Company of the Netherlands by
Force and Fraud used all the Stratagems possible to ruin Mr. Courten's Trading
Voyages. And after the loss of the two Ships, Dragon and Catherine richly Laden
from China and Iapan. The Officers of the Dutch East India Company in the
beginning of the year 1643, and in the midst of the disorders in England took
advantage, when the King could not protect his Subjects abroad, to spoil Mr
Courten and his Partners of other Ships, Goods, and Merchandise in those remote
parts of India.

But the Constitutions of these times, for the space of 20 years, from 1640. to
1660. rendered Mr. Courten, Sir Paul Pyndar, and their Associates, so obnoxious
to the Powers in being, that Mr. Courten was forced out of England, and died in
his Exile; The others remained passive until the King's most happy
Restoration, who then for 4 years together, earnestly solicited, both at home
and abroad, upon the Kings Recommendation, and Order of the Council Table for
restitution and reparation for the spoils and depredations of the two Ships,
Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bonadventura, without effect. Notwithstanding a
Worthy Member of the Commons in Parliament had a considerable Sum of Money
deposited in his hands, in trust to be placed in Holland, to procure an
honorable Composition from the States, or the East India Company of the
Netherlands, which was not done. (yet this worthy Member does not only refuse
to refund the Money, but being sued in Chancery for it, sometimes insists upon
the Privilege of a Parliament; and at other times pleads the Statuts of
Limitations.) Then a Grant passed under the Seal of England, of common Right,
in due form of Law, for Satisfaction and Indemnity of the persons interested
and injured. An Authentic Copy whereof hereafter follows.

A Copy of the Letters Paetents for Reprisals against the States General, and
their Subjects, (Enrolled in Chancery,) for Satisfaction of 151612 l. Sterling,
with Costs and Damages.
CHARLES the Second by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Christian People to whom
these presents shall come, Greeting: Whereas our loving Subject William Courten
Esquire Deceased, and his Partners Anno 1643. by the depredation and hostile Act of
one Geland, Commander in chief of two Ships belocging co the East India Company
of the Netherlands, was between Goa and Maccao in the Streights of Malacca,
deprived, and most injuriously spoiled of a Ship named the Bona Esperanza, and
of her Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, and all the Goods and Lading in her, upon
a very hopeful Trading Uoyage to China, which were carried to Batavia, and
there all de facto without due Process of Law confiscated; And that also in the
same Year another Ship of our said Subject, called the Henry Bonadventura being
come on ground near the Island Mauritius, was there both Ship and Goods seized
upon by some of the Officers and Ministers, and others under the Command of the
said East India Company, and utterly detained from the right Owners. And
whereas the said William Courten, and his Assigns in his Life time, used all
possible endeavors to recover the said Ships and Goods, and to procure further
Justice against the Malefactors, and yet could obtain no Restitution or
Satisfaction, whereby they became to be much distressed, and utterly undone in
their Estate and Credit: And that thereupon, and upon the most humble
supplication and Adresses of Francis Earl of Shrewsbury, and William Courten
Esquire Grandson, and Heir of the said Sir William deceased, Sir John Ayton and
Sir Edmond Turnor Knights, George Carew and Charles Whitaker Esqs on the behalf
of themselves and diverse others Interested in the said two Ships Bona
Esperanza, and Henry Bonadventure, and in the Estates of the said Sir William
Courten deceased, Sir Edward Littleton Baronett, and Sir Paul Pyndar Knight
deceased; that We would take their Case into Our Princely Consideration. We out
of a just Sense We then had, and still have of their unjust sufferings in that
business, both by Our own Letters under Our Sign Manual to the States General
of the United Provinces, and by Sir George Downing Knight and Baronet Our Envoy
Extraordinary, to whom We gave special Command so to do; required satisfaction
to be made according to the rules of Justice, and the Amity and good
correspondence which We then desired to conserve with them firm and inviolable.
And whereas after several Addresses made to the said States General by Our said
Envoy, and nothing granted effectual for Relief of our said Subjects, (whom We
take Our selves in Honor and Justice, concerned to be satisfied and repaid,)
We lately commanded the said Sir George Downing to intimate and signify to the
said States, that We expected their final Answer concerning satisfaction to be
made for the said Ships and Goods by a time then prefixed, and since elapsed;
that We might so govern Our selves thereupon, that Our aforesaid Subjects might
be relieved according to Right and Justice; And yet no satisfactory Answer has
been given, so that We cannot but apprehend it to be, not only a fruitless
endeavor, but a prostituting of Our Honor and Dignity, to make further
Application after so many denyals and flightings. And whereas John Exton Doctor
of Laws, Judge of our High Admiralty Court of England, upon Our Command, to
certify to Us the value of the Losses and Damages sustained by the said William
Courten and Partners, whose Interests is now vested in Our Loving Subjects Sir
Edmond Turnor Knight, and George Carew Esquire and Partners, has upon full
Examination, and Proofs thereof made by Witnesses in Our High Court of
Admiralty, reported and certified under his Hand, that the same do amount to
the sum of One Hundred Fifty One Thousand Six Hundred and Twelve Pounds.

Now Know Ye, That for a full restitution to be made to them for their Ships,
Goods and Merchandises; of which the said William Courten, and the Assigns of
the said William Courten and Partners, were so despoiled as aforesaid, with all
such Costs and Charges as they shall be at for the recovery of the same; We by
the Advice of our Privy Cotucil have thought fit, and by these presents do
grant License and Authority under our great Seal of England, unto Our said
Subjects Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, for, and on the behalf of themselves, and other Persons interessed
as aforesaid, to equip, victual, furnish, and to set to Sea from time to time,
such and so many Ships and Pinaces as they shall think fit. Provided always
that there be an entry made and recorded in the Admiralty Court of the Names of
all Ships and Uessels, and of their Burden and Ammunition, and for how long
time they are victualled; And also of the Name of the Commander thereof, before
the same or any of them be set forth to Sea; And with the said Ships and
Pinaces by force of Arms to set upon, take and apprehend any of the Ships,
Goods, Moneys and Merchandises of the said States General, or any of their
Subjects, inhabiting within any their Domainions or Territories wheresoever the
same shall be found, and not in any Port or Harbor in England or Ireland,
unless they be the Ships and Goods, of the Parties that did the wrong. And the
said Ships, Goods, Moneys and Merchandises, being so taken and brought into
some Port of Our Realms and Dominions, an Inventory thereof shall be taken by
Authority of Our Court of Admiralty, and Judgment shall be given in Our Court
of Admiralty by the Judge or Judges thereof, for the time being, upon proofs
made before him, or them, that the said Ships, Goods, Wares, Merchandises, or
Money, did belong to the States General, or any of their Subjects as aforesaid.
That they shall be lawful prize to the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and George
Carew, their Exetutors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid, to retain and
keep in their or any of their Possessions: and to make sale, and dispose
thereof in open Market or howsoever else, to their and every of their best
Advantage and Benefit, in as ample manner as at any time heretofore has been
accustomed by way of Reprisal, and to have and enjoy the same as lawful Prize,
and as their own proper Goods, so that neither Captain, Master, nor any of the
Company, that shall serve in his own Person, or shall promote and advance the
said enterprise in manner and form aforesaid, shall in any manner of wise be
reputed or challenged for an Offender against any of Our Laws. And that also it
shall be lawful for all manner of persons as well Our Subjects, as any other to
buy the said Ships, Goods and Merchandises so taken, and apprehended by the
said Captains, Masters and others, and adjudged as aforesaid, without any
damage, loss hinderance trouble or molestation, or encumbrance to befall the
said Buyers, or any of them, in as ample and lawful manner, as if the Ships,
Goods, Wares and Merchandise, had been come and gotten by the lawful Traffic
of Merchants, or of just prizes in the time of open War. Provided always that
all Ships, Goods, and Merchandises, taken by virtue of this Our Commission
shall be kept in safety, and no part of them wasted, spoiled, or diminished, or
the Bulk thereof broken, until Judgment have first past as aforesaid. That
they are the Ships and Merchandises of the States General or some of their
Subjects aforesaid. And if by color of this our Commission, there shall be
taken any Ships, Goods, or Merchandises of any of our loving Subjects, or the
Subjects of any Prince, or State in good League, or Amity with us (except the
States General) or their Subjects as aforesaid, and the Goods therein laden,
and imbezelled or diminished, or the bulk thereof broken in any place before
they shall be adjudged to belong to the States General, or some of their
Subjects as aforesaid. That then this Commission shall be of no sufficient
Authority to take the said Ships, Goods, and Merchandises, or to warrant, or
save harmless such as shall receive, buy, or intermeddle therein, but that the
prizes so taken, and the said Ship of War, shall be confiscated to Our use. And
further We do hereby declare that it is Our Will and Pleasure, that this Our
Commission shall remain in full force and power, to all intents and purposes,
until the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid, shall by virtue thereof have by
force of Arms apprehended, taken, seized, recovered, and received from the said
States General, or their Subjects, One hundred fifty one thousand six hundred
and twelve pounds according to the Appraisement to be made by sufficient
Appraisers upon Oath nominated and authorized in Our said Court of Admirally,
of all such Ships, Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, as shall be taken from the
said States General, or any of their Subjects, by virtue of this Commission, or
shall otherwise receive satisfaction of the Debt aforesaid, by Composition to
be made between those of the East India Company of the Netherlands, and the
said Sir Edmond Turnor, and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns as aforesaid, Notwithstanding it so happen, the present difference
between Us, and the States General depending upon general Reprisals, may be
agreed and composed, and that in the interim a Peace and good Correspondence
may be renewed between Us and the said States General; In which case
nevertheless, it is Our will and pleasure, that in the execution of this Our
Commission no violence shall be done to the Persons of the said Subjects of the
said States General; but only in case of resistance, and that after in cold
blood, the Subjects of the said States General, if hurt or wounded shall be
used with all convenient office of humanity and kindness. And further Our Will
and Pleasure is, that although it shall happen that all hostility between Us,
and the States General and Our respective Subjects shall cease, yet this Our
Commission shall remain, and be in full force and power, to the said Sir Edmond
Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as
aforesaid, by virtue thereof to apprehend, take, and seize by force and Arms,
so many more of the said Ships and Goods of the States General, or any of their
said Subjects, as besides the said sum before mentioned shall countervail,
satisfy, and pay all such Costs and Charges as the said Sir Edmond Turnor and
George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns as aforesaid, shall
from time to time make proof to have disbursed and paid toward the equipping,
manning, paying, furnishing, and victualling of the said Ships so licensed and
Authorized as aforesaid, by this Our said Commission to be equipped, manned,
furnished, and victualled by the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid for the purpose aforesaid.
And Our Will and pleasure is, and We de hereby require Our Judge or Judges of
Our High Court of Admiralty, for the time being, and all other Officers of the
Admiralty, and all other Our Judge, or Judges, Officers, Ministers, and
Subjects whatsoever to be aiding and assisting to the said Sir Edmond Turnor
and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, as aforesaid,
in all points in the due Exectuion of this Our Royal Commission, and to proceed
to adjudication, and adjudge all Ships, Merchandises, Moneys, and Goods by
virtue hereof to be taken and proved to belong to the said States General, or
any of their Subjects, to be lawful prize to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and
George Carew, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, as aforesaid,
according to our Princely intention, hereby signified and expressed, and to
take care that this Our Royal Commission be duly executed, and favorably
interpreted and construed in all respects, to the benefit and best advantage of
the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, as aforesaid. In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters
to be made Patents. Witness Our self at Westminster the 19. day of May, in the
17. Year of Our Reign.

Per ip'm Regem.

It is to be considered, that upon some Spoils and Depredations done by the
West India Company of Holland, to the English, upon the Coast of Guinny,
whereby the Affrican Company suffered great Damages and Affronts, (the King
and His Royal Highness the Duke of York, having particular shares and
proportions therein,) for want of Satisfaction, and Reparation. In conclusion,
General Reprizals were Proclaimed against the States and their Subjects, before
this grant aforesaid passed, for Particular and Special Reprizals in Courtens
Case; although it was in agitation some years before. Yet after all this, the
Proprietors Applied themselves respectively to the States, and Directors of the
East India Company, to accomodate that Affair, rather then to put the said
Grant into Execution, and when nothing would prevail; several Commissions in
the year 1666. were Assigned to Captain Edward Lucy, Nicholas Carew, John
Holmes, Edward Manning, Tyrence Byrne, and other Captains and Commanders, who
brought in several Ships and their Ladings as Prize; but in regard the
Hollanders Traded under the Colors and Trusts of the Swedes, Hamburgers,
Flemmings, Breamers, Dantzickers, Lubeckers, and other Nations in Common amity
with England; the Ships and Goods so brought in, were most of them claimed by
several Agents from the Subjects of those Nations, or the Residents of those
Princes and States, whereupon they were restored by the Judge of the Admiralty;
so that there was not bona fide Fifteen Hundred Pounds recovered, as by the
Register in the Court of Admiralty appears, before a Proclimation Issued forth
on the 10th. of August 1666. to suspend the Execution of the said Letters
Patents, under pretense of Misdemeanors in the Captains, with an Order of the
Council Table of the same Date, to Commit the said George Carew, who granted
the said Commissions; although neither of the said Captains, nor the said Carew
were ever Summoned, or Questioned judicially, to answer any charge against them.

Then the Proprietors, and Persons interested, Presented their Petition to His
Majesty, to have some satisfaction for the present, out of the Prizes taken
from the East India Company of Holland, and others by the Kings Ships; but
answer was given, that they were to be disposed for other Services; the War
being Proclaimed for General Reprizals, and that the Petitionors might resort
to their own special Grant, in a more seasonable time, the Seamen being wanting
for the Kings Ships.

Then some of the most considerable Creditors, made several inspections into
His Majesty's Speeches, and Orders, of both Houses, in relation to the War
against Holland. A very remarkable one, being delivered by the Earl of
Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, with his Speech made
to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and worthy Citizens of London, at a Common Hall on
Tuesday the 1. of December, 1664. (viz,)

Die Veneris, 25. November 1664:
Ordered by the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, that the thanks of both Houses of Parliament, be given unto the City
of London, for their forwardness in Assisting His Majesty; and in Particular,
for Furnishing Him with several great Sums of Money, toward His preparations,
for the Honor, Safety, and Trade of this Nation.

And more Especially well weighed several Periods, of His Majesty's Speech to
both Houses of Parliament, on the 24th. of November 1664. as follows. (viz.)

Mr. Speaker,
ANd you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I know not whether it be worth My
pains, to endeavor to remove a vile Jealousy, which some ill Men scatter
abroad, and which I am sure will never sinck into the breast of any Man who is
worthy to sit upon your Benches; that when you have given me a Noble and
proportionable Supply, for the support of a War, I may be induced by some evil
Councelors, (for they will be thought to think very respectively of my own
Person,) to make a sudden Peace, and get all that Money for my own private
occasions.

But let me tell you, and you may be most confident of it, that when I am
compelled to enter into a War, for the Protection, Honor, and Benefit of my
Subjects; I will (God Willing) not make a Peace, but upon the obtaining and
securing those ends, for which the War is entered into; and when that can be
done, no good Man will be sorry for the determination of it.

WHereupon the Commons of England acknowledging, (in the Preamble of their
Acts) with all humility and thankfulness to His Majesty, for his abundant care
in their preservation at Sea, and of the great Charge necessary for the defense
thereof, Granted at several times, Five Millions, Four Hundred and Four
Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty Pounds Eleven Shillings and Eight Pence; for
Extraordinary Supplies toward the Wars, out of which his Royal Highness the
Duke of York, had the Sum of One Hundred, and Twenty Thousand, Nine Hundred and
Two Pounds, Fifteen Shillings and Eight Pence, a Months Tax, for his Heroic
courage at Sea, against the Hollanders.

Upon this consideration, the said Creditors, and those intrested in the
Letters Patents, for the special Reprizals, applied themselves, again in
season, and out of season, to His Majesty and the Council, for some
Reparations, out of the Imbeazilments of the Prizes taken by the Kings Ships,
from the Dutch, or out of the Moneys given by Parliament; but answer was made,
that His Majesty had done for the Petitioners already, all what the Law
required, and so they might rest satisfied therewith, the Debt being stated and
ascertained by a Grant for reparation under the Great Seal of England.

Afterward in the Month of June 1667. Preparations being made for a Treaty of
Peace, and common Alliance at Breda, the Creditors and Proprietors, concerned
in the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bonadventura, applied themselves to the King,
and Ambassadors Extroardinary on both sides; as also unto the Directors of the
East India Company of the Netherlands, that satisfaction might be given in that
singular Case of Courten, to take away the continual Claim and Execution so
intailed by the Especial Grant, under the Great Seal of England, that would
perpetually be incumbant upon the States General, and the East India Company of
the Netherlands, until Restitution be made; then John de Wit the Pensionarie of
Holland, (who offered Four Hundred Thousand Guilders in the year 1663.) had the
Confidence to send the draught of the following Articles (inter alia) in
contempt of the King and Kingdom, pretending the States had subdued the
Parliament, by the surprise at Chattam.

An Abstract of Five Select Articles of the Treaty at BREDA.
3. Also that all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, and Losses, sustained on either
side by the King and the States, or their Subjects, during this War or at any
time before, upon any cause or pretense whatsoever, be totally Expunged and
Buried in Oblivion.

4. Moreover that all Ships, Goods, and Movables, which at any time before had
come into the Power of either Party, or their Subjects, should remain to the
present Posssessors thereof, without any Compensation or Restitution for the
same, and without any Exception of place, time, or things.

5. Moreover, that all Actions, Suits, and Pretentions whatsoever, for the same
should remain void, obliterated, and disanuled, and nothing moved thereupon
hereafter.

8: Its also agreed, that under the aforesaid Renuntiation and Stipulation, all
Letters of Marque; Reprisals, and Countermarque, General, and Particular, ought
to be comprehended, and revoked, by virtue of that Article accordingly,
notwithstanding any Grant, to the contrary.

23. That in case it happen during this Friendship and Alliance, that any thing
shall be done to the contrary, nevertheless the Alliance shall not be Broken,
but continue in Force, only those particular Persons shall be punished, that
shall do any thing against the Treaty.

The words in the Articles being set down so general, that might admit of
forced interpretations, beyond the Common intendment of the Ambassadors, and
other Ministers of State. Applications were made to John de Wit, chief Minister
at the Hague, by the Advocates and other Agents of Courtens Creditors; who told
him that a great care ought to be had, of particular and private Men's Debts,
and Interests; and especially a tender respect to the Kings Honor and
Reputation; And finally that as the Articles were penned, and sent to Breda,
they were repugnant to the Laws of God, and Mankind, and particularly against
the Laws and Statutes of England; yet de Wit was so puffed up with Pride and
Insolence, that he would give no other answer then this; Valeat ut Valere
potest, and so the Articles were Signed accordingly, on the 21. of July, 1667.
Old style.

Note that such words are without any president, and were never used in any
former Treaty in the World, nor mentioned in any Article of the other Treaties
with France, or Denmark, made at the same time in Breda, but were Couched in by
John de Wit, as if he had a design and purpose, that the Hollanders and
Zealanders should swallow up all Debts, Accounts, and sunis of Money of
Englishmen; gotten into the Banks of Amsterdam and Middleburgh, upon any cause
or pretense whatsoever.

The Treaty of Commerce, and Common Alliance being so concluded; It is very
remarkable and worthy of your Observation, what followed within few Years
after; upon the 10th. of August Old style. Behold the judgment of God
Almighty, in his Providence concerning the said John de Wit, (that so worded
and writ the Articles of the said Treaty,) and Cornelius de Wit his Brother
Burgomaster of Dort, Plenipotentiary in the Surprise at Chattam, during the
said Treaty.

Their Tongues were cut out of their Heads, 10. August 1672. Old style.
and their Fingers cut off their Hands, and their Lungs pulled out of their
Bodies by their own Subjects in the Hague; even in the view and presence of the
said George Carew, who was then a Prisoner there, Committed by the States of
Holland, under pretense of a Spy, but escaped the danger, and had been
formerly, (at the instance of some common claimers of Dutch Goods) committed at
London, by Order of the Council, on the 10th. of August 1666. as aforesaid; and
the Letters Patents for 151612 l. and Damages, on the same day ordered to be
suspended.

In the Year 1671. the Treary at Breda, being declared void by the King and
Council, and another War Proclaimed for General Reprizals. The Proprietors of
the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bonadventura made fresh application to the King
and Council, for public relief against the States, (a Common Wealth sensible,
neither of Conscience nor Honor) in Courtens Case; whereupon it was referred
to a select Commitee of the Lords of the Council, who reported their opinion,
under their Hands in terminis, as follows, (viz.)

In obedience to your Majesty's Order in Council, Referrees, Lord Arlington,
Lord Ashley, Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Secretary Trevor, Sir John Duncomb,
on the 22. of March 1671. We Humbly represent to your Majesty, that the Debt
and Damages of those Petitioners, being stated under the Great Seal of England,
whereby its granted by your Majesty, that 151612 l. with all Costs and Charges
shall be Reprized. We further humbly represent to your Majesty, that by the
Treaty at Breda, all reparations were extinguished, and cut off. Yet since that
time the States General of the Netherlands, have not only been refractory in
the performance of any agreement concluded on, but also have committed many
violences and depredations, whereby they have wholly canceled the obligations
of all past Treaties and Agreements, and left your Majesty and your Subjects
as free in all Justice and Equity, as if they never had been made. And
therefore we humbly presume, to report our opinions to your Majesty, that it is
now but just and seasonable, for your Majesty to insist upon reparations, for
the Debt and Damages aforesaid.

In pursuance whereof, His Majesty on the 7th. of July 1672. sent his Lettes
under his Sign Manual (to omit no time) to his Plenipotentiaries then at
Vtrecht, to require entire and full satisfaction and reparations of the States
General, in the singular Case of Courten, expressing with great zeal and
earnestness, that his care in that case, should be to protect his Subjects in
their just rights, as well as to Assist them in the recovery thereof.
Afterward by express Order of the Council Board, Instructions were given to
the Lords Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries at Cologne, to that end and
purpose.

The States then underhand appealed, by their Printed Papers, to the Subjects
of England, for a separate Peace, in that juncture when they were almost
brought upon their Knees, and would not condescend to any agreement at Cologne,
but sent a Letter to the King, by the Spanish Ambassador, unto whom they had
given a procuration, with instructions to make up such a sudden Peace with the
King; whereupon His Majesty made this Speech following to both House of
Parliament, on the 24th. of January, 1673. Old style.

The Kings Speech.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
AT the beginning of this Session, I told you as I thought I had reason to do;
that the States General had not yet made Me any Proposals, which could be
imagined, with intent to conclude, but only to amuse.

To avoid this Imputation, they have now sent Me a Letter by the Spanish
Ambassador, offering Me some Terms of Peace, upon conditions formally Drawn up,
and in a more desent Style then before.

It is upon this, that I desire your Speedy Advice; For if you shall find the
Terms, such as may be embraced, your Advice will have great weight with Me; and
if you find them Defective; I hope you will give Me your Advice and Assistance,
how to get better Terms,

Upon the whole Matter, I doubt not but you will have a care of My Honor, and
the Honor and safety of the Nation, which are now so deeply concerned.

The Substance of the Overtures in the said Letter, being communicated to both
Houses of Parliament; were as follows, (viz.)

THat the States General, and their Subjects, should acknowledge the Kings
Dominion and Sovereignty of the Seas, by striking to the Kings Ships, as was
Proposed.

That a regulation of Trade should be settled and adjusted in the East Indies,
by a certain number of Commissioners, to be appointed of Each side, and a
Treaty Marine also settled by the said Commissioners within a certain time to
be prefixed.

That Eight Hundred Thousand Pattacoons should be paid to his Majesty, at four
equal payments; the first upon ratifying the said Treaty; and the other by
three Yearly payments.

That the Queen Regent of Spain, should be Guarrantee, for the performance of
the said Articles.

Whereupon both Houses of Parliament Adressed themselves severally to the King,
to accept of the said Overtures for a Peace with the States, separate from
France, which were drawn into formal Articles, wherein this Seventh Article was
Interlarded, concerning the Memorable Treaty at BREDA, (viz.)

VII. Quod tractatus Bredae conclusus Anno; Domini 1667. Sicut Etiam omnes alii
precedentes trastatus per illum tractatum confirmari renoventur, and maneant in
plena vi ac vigore, in quantum presenti tractatui nullaetinus contradicunt.

But as to the Freedom and Advantage of Fishing upon the English Coast, (a
Royalty so inherent to the Crown of England, that His Majesty cannot Sell, or
Depart withal unto Strangers,) the Hollanders Say, was thrown into the Bargain
Gratis, upon the account of the Prince of Orange, so long as he shall enjoy the
Offices of Stat-holder, Lord High Admiral, General, and other Offices, and
Honors of his Ancestors.

This last Treaty being Concluded, Ratified, and Published, the Interested in
the Bona Esperanza, and Bonadventura, Addressed themselves, both to the King,
and the States General, respectively, to be paid and satisfied out of the
Pattacoons, Protesting, otherwise that they should be necessitated to put their
Letters Patents into Execution, to Levy and Reprize their Debt and Damages
aforesaid.

The Proprietors were in good hopes, they should not meet with any difficulty
in attaining their ends, when they found the Treaty Signed by five Principal
Ministers of State, on the Kings side, (viz.) H. Finch, C. S. Latimer, Ormond,
Arlington, and H. Coventry; For that the Warrant and Proceedings, concerning
the said Patent passed through the Lord Arlington's Office, when he was
Secretary of State, and directed to Sir Heneage Finch, to prepare the Bill when
he was Solicitor General, in the time that the Lord Roberts kept the
Privy Seal, and had been debated by H. Coventry, when he was Ambassador at
Breda, and the Pattacoons left to the disposing of Latimer Lord High Treasurer
of England, who knew the Kings Honor and Reputation lay at stake with His
Subjects, concerning that Affair.

But yet nevertheless, a 4th. Part of the said Pattacoons, were presently
Assigned to be paid to Alderman Backwel, for other Services, and the Six
hundred thousand remaining, were transferred by the said Latimers advice, (and
another Minister of State, much admired in Holland) to the Prince of Orange,
for old Debts due to his Father and Grandfather, from the late King, (as is
pretended) and no care taken to satisfy the said 151612 l. with Damage, either
by his Majesty; or the States but left in statu quo, under all those
circumstances aforesaid.

Wereupon Diverse of the Creditors finding there Rights, Liberties, and
Properties Invaded; first, strictly Examined the several Treaties, and then
reduced their Case into two Questions, as follows, and took the Advice of
several most Learned Lawyers thereupon, (viz.)

1: Whether the Letters Patents for Reprizals beforementioned at large, in
Folio 4, 5. and the Powers and Authority thereby granted, can be Revoked,
Repealed, or the Execution thereof Suspended by Proclamation. Scire facias,
Supersedeas, Articles of Peace, or any way whatsoever, before Satisfaction and
Reparation should be had or made, for the said 151612 l. to the Persons
Interested and Injured, or not.

2 Whether any particular Debts, due from the Subjects of the States General,
to Sir William Courten, or Sir Paul Pyndar, their Executors; Administrators, or
Assigns, by Bills of Exchange, Bonds, Accounts, Covenants, or other private
Contracts in Trade, were Released or Discharged, by the said Articles of the
Treaty at Breda, recited in Folio 7. or were ever intended to be Comprised, or
Comprehended, within the said Articles, or not.

Answer to the First Question.

OUR Forefathers were so careful of Merchants Rights and Properties, and so
Provident for the Maintenance and Encouragement of Navigation, and Commerce;
that in all Cases of Spoils and Depredations, whereupon any Offenses, Injuries,
Damages, or Losses, at any time happened to the Subjects of England, at Sea,
the Injured applied themselves for present Relief to the Writ; Register of
Writs 126.
de arresto facto super bonis mercatorum alienigenium pro transgr. facta
mercatoribus Angliae; and the words Recited in the Writ, are for that the
Offense is done, contra Legem and Rationem, and not contra pacem.

In those days the Persons and Gods of Merchants Strangers, were Arrested in
England, for the Offenses and Injuries committed, by the Subjects of the Prince
or State, unto whom they belonged that did the Damage. Whereupon the Subjects
belonging to the Maritine Provinces, under the Duke of Bourgundy, and diverse
parts of France, coming to the Staple and Mart Towns in England, made great
complaints to the King and Council, of grievous pressures upon them, by
suffering in English Ports and Harbors, for the Offenses of other Men.

In consequence whereof an Act of Parliament, passed in their favor, 27. Edw.
3. Statute 2 Chap. 17 That the Rigor of those Writs should be taken away, and
in liew thereof, in all Cases of Spoils, the Subjects of England should for
their Relief have the Law of Marque, without Fraud or Delay, therefore to
prevent the failer of Justice, such Letters were to be granted Effectually;
otherwise liberty would be taken to commit the greatest Injuries and Offenses
whatsoever, unpunishable, to the prejudice of all Commerce, and Humane Society.

Justinian agrees herewith in his Book de jure Not.

And Grotius says that the later Lawyers calls it the Right of Reprizals, the
Saxons and old English Withernam, and the French Letters of Marque.

In several Countries they are asked of the Judges, and by the Common Law of
England, they were used to be asked of the King, but the Subjects finding many
Delays, and great Expenses in those proceedings, to their vast prejudice by
Secretaries of State.

Upon the Complaints of the Commons of England in Parliament, an Act passed in
the 4th. Year of Henry the 5th. whereby a remedy was provided, for their more
speedy Relief, in all Cases of Spoils, and Depredations, against Leagues,
Amities, Truces, and safe Conducts, the parties grieved, having liberty thereby
to Address themselves to the Keeper of the Privy Seal for the time being, for
Letters of Request, who (upon Manifest proofs and Evidence, of the wrong
appearing) shall grant Letters of Request, in due form (if so required) for
Restitution and Reparations, from the parties that did the Injury, (that is to
say, from the Prince, State, or Supreme Power) which if not made in a
convenient time prefixed, that then the Lord Chancellor of England, shall make
to the party grieved, Letters of Marque or Reprizals, under the Great Seal of
England, in due form of Law; And by a Statute in the 14th. Edw. 4th. It was
Enacted, Established, and Confirmed, that all Statutes, and Ordinances against
Offenses, Injuries, Damages, and Losses, done by Breakers of Leagues, Amities,
Truces, and safe Conducts, shall be in full Force and Effect.

By which Statute Law (wherein every Subject of England has an Interest,) the
Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Chancellor are bound to grant the said Letters
Respectively. Ex Officio, of Common right, they being upon their Oaths to do
their Office Justly; otherwise it would be a Uiolation of their trust.

And therefore without Satisfaction and Reparations first had, and obtained in
the Case of Courten for the Debt of 151612 l. and Damages, the Chancellor
cannot legally pass any Act, Supersedeas or Proclamation under the Great Seal
of England. to Revoke or make void the said Letters Patents, or to suspend the
Execution thereof, (being the effect and fruit of several Acts of Parliament,
for Relief of particular Subjects, that were Spoiled and Injured, against
Leagues of Common Amity and Truces.) Whereas in the High Court of Chancery, his
Lordship cannot Relieve any Person whatsoever, Stranger or Denizon against a
Statute Law.

Grotius and the Learned Seldom agree, that after a Depredation Committed by
the Subjects of one Nation, to those of another; and that the Damage has been
Stated, and Letters of Request Issued forth, and Justice denied or delayed,
that Immediately such Damage becomes a National Debt, to the particular Persons
Injured; and by the Laws of Nations it ought to be recovered and Paid;
therefore Remedy is provided, by the Laws and Statutes of England accordingly.

When an Authority passes by the Kings Grant, to such injured Persons of
Common Right, coupled with an interest, to Levy and Recover the Debt and
Damages, when once the Power is Granted (as the Law directs,) the same cannot
by any subsequent Act of the King, be Bound or Suspended, without satisfaction
to the Parties Grieved, and the reason is plain, because such a Grant and
Execution upon it, is no Breach of Peace, or common Alliance, between Princes
and States. And it is against the Honor and Interest of the King, both at Home
And Abroad; to diminish his own Prerogative, and Royal Grant, (before
satisfaction obtained) the Patent being published for a President, in several
Languages amongst all the Neighboring Nations.

Answer to the Second Question.

THat the private Interest of the Subjects of either side, upon Debts,
Accounts, Covenants, or any civil Contract, in Merchandising upon the Land,
cannot be in any Measure comprised, or comprehended within any Article of the
Treaty at Breda, under the notion of Offenses, Injuries, Damages and Losses.
Therefore they cannot fall under that Construction, or forced Interpretation of
those Words; which were intended naturally to Arise from Spoils and
Depredations, terms that ought to have been used in the said Articles; but that
the transgressors would Pallitate, Spoils, and Depredations, by the names of
Losses, Injuries, and Damages; and the two Subsequent Articles being relative
to the third, having a Dependence upon the said Offenses, Injuries, Damages,
and Losses, no particular or private Debt, and Damage, can fall under that
construction; otherwise all English-mens Money in Holland, and Consequently all
Dutch men's Money in England; gotten into the Hands of Bankers on either side,
might have been confiscated. But the Wars being Proclaimed for General
Reprizals, between the King and States; particular Men Traded each with other,
notwithstanding.

It was therefore an Apparent Breach of the Laws, of Common Amity, and of the
Alliance, with the Crown of England, for the States of Holland, on the 10th. of
September 1676. to send their Express Order in Writing to the ordinary Courts
of Judicature in Amsterdam, and the Hague; interdicting, and Prohibiting the
Judges from Granting any Process, or doing any Justice against Jacob Pergens,
at the Suit of several Englishmen for Debts, due upon Bills, Bonds, and
Covenants, for repayment of Moneys gotten into his Hands, under several trusts.

After this Solemn Debate and Resolution upon those two Points in Question were
over; a grand Objection was raised by the Civil Lawyers then Present, which was
Answered as follows in Order.

Obj. THat a Sovereign Prince having the power of Peace and War in his Hands,
being the Sole Arbiter thereof, may make use of a private Interest, for the
public Necessity, as Sole Legislator in such Cases.

Answ. St. Augustine says, that all Humane Laws are Righteous Decrees, agreeing
with the Natural and Eternal Law, and that there is no Law Just, or Legitimate,
except it agree with them both. All Power being confined within the Bounds of
Equity and Reason; there is no Plea or Bar to be allowed against the Law of
Nature, which is Immutable.

It Is Granted, that God Almighty having trusted Sovereign Princes with the
Government, for the Protection and Preservation of their Subjects, in their
Goods and Properties. It if be just, the Supreme Power, has sufficient
Authority to Restrain any particular Man's Right, for every Man's Good; yet it
was ever found most reasonable in all Ages, that when a private Interest was
Sacrifized for a Common good, a recompense was made for the private Damages,
out of the public Purse.

Cicero, Tertullian, and other most Learned Authors, do all agree in this
point. Verum etsi nostrae tempore necessitatis Patriae confer debeamus, tamen
jure naturae congrui ut Communis salus, Communis utilitas periculum, non unius
duntaxat aut alterius, sed Communibus impensis, jacturis periculisque
comparetur.

BY the Law of Nature, if a Sovereign Prince and State, enter into a Contract
one with the other, upon certain Conditions; the Contract is viod, if the
Conditions are not performed.

To clear this point, we need not go far for Presidents; the King of Great
Britain, having declared both the former Treaties, (in the year 1662. and
1667.) With the States General to be void upon that account: The States having
been refractory in the performance of Agreements concerning Poleroon, and in
making reparation for other matters; As even the Treaty at Breda, was
Pronounced null and void, upon the like score about Surrinam, etc.

Whereby it appears, that Carew's Right and Demand, was not abolished, or
extinguished; (although seemingly suspended,) which was revived by the Supreme
Power, and Legislator, the Original Grant remaining Extant upon Record in the
Rolls, to be put into Execution, when opportunity best serves; until
satisfaction and reparation shall be made, by the one means, or the other.

Now I must Beg your Honors further Patience and Pardon; to show your Honors
who are the most Competent Judges, that the States General and their Subjects,
have not only been Refractory, in the Performance of the 8th. and 9th. Articles
agreed upon, in the last Treaty; but possitively Broke the first and fifth
Article of the Treaty Marine; Signed at London the 1st. of December 1674. By
the Commissioners following. (viz.)

Thomas Culpeper, George Downing, Richard Ford, William Thompson, John Iollife,
and John Buckworth, on the Behalf of the King of Great Britain. And John
Corver, George Sautyn, Samuel Beger, And: Van Vossen, P. Duvelaer, M.
Michielson, on the Behalf of the States General.
IT being agreed by the 8. and 9. Articles, between the King, and the States
General, on the 9. of February 1674. New style, that six Commissioners were to
be named on each side, to settle and conclude upon a Regulation, and Adjustment
of Trade, and Commerce in the East Indies; as also upon a Treaty Marine, in all
parts of the World; as by the two several Articles hereafter follows in Latin,
taken from the Original, appears.

VIII.
QUod Tractatus Marinus Hagae-Comitis inter parts utrasque Anno Domini 1668.
conclusus coninuetur pro spatio novem mensium, post hujus praesentis Tractatus
publicationem, nisi per subsequentem Tractatum aliter provisum fuerit, interea
autem ut consideratio novi super hac re Tractatus ad eosdem Commissarios
referatur, ad quo^ commercium per Indias Orientales in Articulo proxime
sequenti referetur. Quod si tales Commissarii intra tres menses post primum
congressum suum in novum Tractatum Marinum ex voto non consenserint, tunc res
illa quoque ad Arbitrium ac dispositionem Serenissimae Dom. Reginae Regentis
Hispaniae referetur, eodem plane modo, quo Commercii Orientalis regulatio ad
Majestatis suae arbitratione in dicto Articulo proxime sequenti referetur.

IX.
EO quod a mutua and non turbata commercii ac navigationis liberate non solum
opulentia, sed pax etiam utriusque nationis summopere pendet, nihil magis curae
esse debet utrique parti, quam justa and aequa commerce regulatio, and
praecipue in Indiis Orientalibus, and tamen quia res est maximi momenti and
multum temporis requiret ut firmi ac duraturi Articuli ad satisfactionem and
securitatem subditorum utriusque Partis conficiantur; Cum tamen languens and
poene intermoriens plerarumque Europae regionum conditio non minus quam duarum
partium in hoc bello implicatarum ad properam hujus Tractatus conclusionem
anhelet, supramemoratus Serenissimus Dominus Magnae Britanniae Rex votis and
desideriis praedictorum Ordinum Generalium accedere dignatur, ut ejusdem
consideratio aequali numero Commissariorum ab utraque part nominandorum
referatur, eisdem Ordinibus Generalibus spondentibus, ut illi, quos ipsi
nominaverint Londinum mittantur ad tractandum cum illis quos Majestas sua
Britannica pariter a part sua deputaverit, idque intra spatium trium mensium
post hujus Tractatus Publicationem; Numerus item Commissariorum utrimque
nominandorum sex erit personarum; sin autem post tres menses quam congressi
fuerint eorum conatus non tam feliciter suecesserint, ut Tractatus inde
concludatur, capita inter eos controversa ad arbitrationem Serenissimae Dominae
Reginae Regentis Aispaniae referentur: quae undecim Commissarios nominabit, Et
quodcunque major eorum pars determinaverit in differentiis non prius compositis
id utramque partem obligabit, proviso semper quod judicium suum declarent intra
spatium sex mensium a die quo primum congredientur, quod etiam intra spatium
erit trium mensium quostquam Serenissima Domina Reginae Regens Pispaniae
praedictum arbitrium in se susceperit:

Those Regulations and Adjustments of Trade, and Comerce in the East Indies,
and the Treaty for settling Navigation, in all other parts of the World; were
to have been determined and concluded, within three Months after the Treaty,
Signed by the Marquis Del Fresno, on the behalf of the States, on the 9th. of
February 1674. as aforesaid; But the Dutch Commissioners were Wrangeling, and
making their Friends with the Unrighteous Mamon, until the first of December
1674. complete 9 Months, and 19 Days; and yet in all that time did not any
thing concerning the Regulation agreed upon, in relation to the East-Iidies,
but left that Affair re infecta; and as to the Treaty Marine they made several
Articles, most of them relating to contra bando Gods, but as to the first, and
the fifth Articles, contained in the said Treaty Marine; whereby the Subjects
of England were to enjoy the Freedom and Privilege of Navigations, to all
parts of the Spanish Dominions, and else where, the States have absolutely
denied the English Ships any Freedom in their passage to Antwerp through the
Shield, contrary to the Words and Letters of the said Treaty, which are as
follows, viz.

Article I.
THat it shall and may be lawful, for all and every the Subjects of the Most
Serene and Mighty Prince, the King of Great Britain aforesaid, with all Freedom
and Safety, to Sail, Trade, and Exercise any manner of Traffic in all those
Kingdoms, Countries, and Estates, which are, or at any time hereafter shall be
in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with His said Majesty; So that they shall not be
any ways hindered or molested in their Navigation or Trade, by the Military
Forces, nor by the Ships of War, or any other kind of Uessels whatsoever,
belonging either to the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United
Netherlands, or to their Subjects, upon Occasion or Pretense of any Hostility
or Difference which now is, or shall hereafter happen between the said Lords
the States General, and any Princes or People whatsoever, in Peace, Amity, or
Neutrality with His said Majesty.

Article V.
AND that all manner of Differences and Contentions on both sides by Sea or
Land, may from henceforth Cease, and be utterly Extinguished: It is Agreed,
That all Ships and Uessels whatsoever, belonging to the Subjects of His said
Majesty, entering, or being entered into any Road or Port under the obedience of
the Lords the States, and purposing to pass from thence, shall be only obliged
is show unto the Offices acting in the Ports of the said States, or to the
Captains of the States Ships; or of Private Men of War (if any happen there to
be) their Passport, commonly called a Sea-brief, nor shall any Money be exacted
from them for the same.

AFter the Treaty Marine was concluded, diverse English Ships Sailing directly
from several Ports of England for Antwerp, were stopped by a Man of War, lying
over against the Fort at Lillo, some of them being Laden with New Castle Coals,
(although the Masters offered to pay what Tolls or Customs were reasonable, but
all would not serve their turn,) the Ships were forced to go back again to
Flushing, or Roterdam, and there to unlade and pay the Duties of those Ports,
besides all petty Charges, and then constrained to lade them in small
Dutch-Roats, and to pay them Freight at their own Prices, besides other Charges
at Lillo, and also at the Spanish Fort of St. Mary, to the intolerable Expense
and Burden of His Majesty's Subjects, although the River ought to be free by
the very Words of Stipulation, in the said Treaty Marine; for all English Ships
of any Burden, being one of the best Navigable Rivers in the World; A Ship
Laden with 400 Tunn of Goods, being passable to the Port of Antwerp at low
Water. In this River the Dutch Seamen were lately so bold, to Attaque a Vessel
wherein Sir Lyonel Ienkins coming from Nimegen, was Imbarqued for England,
from the City of Antwerp, presuming to demand Custom for Goods therein, as of
all other Ships passing through that Navigable River.

So that all the Material Demands in Agitation at Cologne Anno 1673, viz: the
regulation of Trade in the East Indies, settling the Freedom of Navigation in
Europe, the Arrears for Fishing upon the English Coast, and ascertaining a
settled Revenue, to the Crown out of every Buss and Dogger Boat for that
liberty hereafter, and even the Reparations for Courtens Debts, and Damages,
remains in sttatu quo, unsettled; The States of Holland falsely pretending, that
their Friends in the House of Commons would not have those points insisted upon
by the King.

In the Year 1677. Several of the Proprietors, Creditors, and others
Interested, made fresh Applications to the King and Council, to be Heard, and
Relieved in the Premises, and their former Complaints. Whereupon these two
following Orders of the Councel-Table were made.

At the Court at White Hall the 24th. of July 1677.
By the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of His Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council.
UPon the humble Petition of Thomas Kynaston Merchant, George Porter Esquire Son
and Heir of Endimion Porter Esquire and Thomas Tounsend Esquire Adventurers in the
joint stock with Sir William Courten, to the East Indies, George Carew Esquire
Administrator of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pindar, Charles Earl of
Shrewsbury, Sir Thomas Meers Rt. Executor of Sir Erasmus de la Fountain Rt.
deceased, George Cole, Thomas Coppin, and Charles Whitaker. Esqs on the behalf
of themselves and others, with many Orphans and Widows, Creditors of Sir
William Courten, and his Son, and Sir Edward Littleton, and the late Earl of
Bridgewater deceased. Praying that they may be heard at this Board, upon their
former Petition, setting forth their great losses and damages, sustained by the
East India Company of the Netherlands, by reason of their violent Depredation,
upon the two Ships, the Bona Esperanza, and the Henry Bonadventura. His Majesty
was pleased to appoint Wednesday the 10th. of October next, for hearing the
Petitioners by themselves, or their Council Learned, upon the matter of their
said former Petition. At which time all Parties concerned are to give their
attendance.

JOHN NICHOLAS.

At the Court at White Hall the 24th. of July 1677.
By the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of His Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council.
UPon the Humble Petition of George Carew Esquire Administrator of the Goods and
Chattels of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar, Sir Thomas Meers, Knight.
Executor of Sir Erasmus de la Fountain, Thomas Coppin, Gilberd Crouch, and
William Hinton Esquire Valentina Bazilla Loyd, Executrix of Sir Peter Vanloar, and
Elizabeth Bartlet Widows, Mark Fletcher, and Thomas Carter Merchants, on the
behalf of themselves and many Hundreds of His Majesty's Subjects of England
herein concerned, setting forth the Sinister Practices used by Peter Boudaen of
Middleburgh Merchant: Nephew and sole Executor of Sir Peter Courten, in
Possessing himself of the Estate, Real and Personal of the said Sir Peter;
avoiding to come to any Account for the same, and obstructing the ordinary
Court of Justice during his life, as his Sons and Heirs have since done;
whereby the due Administration of Justice has been often denied, and the
Judicial Acts and Decrees of the Prerogative Court, and High Court of Chancery
in this Kingdom, slighted and contemned in the ordinary Courts of Judicature in
Holland, and Zealand; Whereby Order from the States in the year 1676. Justice
was positively denied the Petitioners to the great Oppression of them, and of
many Orphans and Widows, claiming the Effects, and Sir William Courten's Estate
and his Sons, as also of Mr. John Moncy's and Sir Paul Pyndars, gotten into the
Hands of the said Boudaen Pergens, and others, Inhabitants of Amsterdam, and
Middelburgh, to the value of two hundred and fifty thousand pounds. And
therefore praying that speedy satisfaction may be required from the Ambassador
Extraordinary of the States General, or that Commissioners on either side may
be forthwith named to inspect the Accounts, between both Parties, and determine
the same according to Right. His Majesty was pleased to appoint Wednesday the
10th. of October next, for hearing the Petitioners at the Board, concerning
this business; at which time the Parties concerned, are to give their
attendance, and bring their Council Learned, if they please.

JOHN NICHOLAS.

AFter two of the Petitioners, with a Friend of theirs, Addressed themselves to
Mons. Van Beuninghen the Dutch Ambassador, at his House in Westminster, with
Authentic Copies of the said Orders, under the Seal of the Office; Desiring
that his Excellency would take notice thereof, and make any defense at the
Council Table, by his Advocates if he pleased; Whereupon after he and his
Secretary had perused the same, his Excellency toar the Orders in Pieces, and
gave the Petitioners very Menacing Language, and so parted out of his
Antichamber.

Then some of the Creditors, who thought they had done a kindness to the
Ambassador, by sending him timely notice, caused the said Order of Council to
be Printed, with the Embssadors Deportment underneath, and sent him the same in
a Letter; who thereupon gave in a long Memorial on the 12th. of September 1677.
in French to the King, Complaining that three Persons had highly Affronted him,
by leaving a Citation with him, to appear before the Council Table, on the
10th. of October following; Alleging in his said Memorial, that it was a
proceeding of a very high nature, (the most Injurious violation of the Respects
to the most Sacred Laws of Nations) and prayed Reparations proportionable to
the Grandeur of so outrageous and public Offense; And moreover, that His
Majesty would oblige the Interested Persons, to wave all their said demands, as
Mortified and Extinguished pretenses,

It was a grand Mistake in his Excellency, after all his Rodomontadoes to call
Copies of Orders of Council Citations, who should have understood better,
(being bred an Advocate,) that the Council Board was no Court of Judicature;
and that Citations could not Issue from that Board.

Yet without the least Summons, Sir Joseph Williamson, one of the Principal
Secretaries of State for the time being, gave a warrant to a Messenger, who
with a Constable and a Smith, on the 4th. of October 1677. Broke open Mr.
Carew's Chamber and Study doors, in his absence, and took away what Papers and
Writings they pleased; and afterward Seized upon Mr. Carew himself, who was
Committed to the Gate House by another Warrant, Signed by the Earl of Danby,
Sir Joseph Williamson and others, on the 24th. of October 1677. and there
detained from all his own private Affairs, all the whole Michaelmas-Term; The
Judges of the King's Bench Bar refusing to take Bail, which was ready in Court,
upon the return of several Writs of Habeas Corpus, but still the said Carew was
Re-manded back into Custody at the instance of the Kings Attorney General, and
Solicitor General; until he should comply with the said Ambassador's desires;
who by his Secretary demanded, that the said Carew should acquit all his
pretenses whatsoever, in a most Solemn manner; as appeared by the Affidavit of
Mr. Robert Ayleway, the Copy whereof hereafter follows.

A perfect Copy of Mr. Ayleway's Affidavit.
RObert Ayleway of London Gentleman, makes Oath, that he, this Deponent,
Adressed himself, with two several Petitions from George Carew Esquire the Copies
whereof are hereunto annexed, and are true Copies, as he this Deponent
believed, the one to the King and Council on the 9th. Instant November, and the
other to the Dutch Ambassador on the 10th. Instant, both Importing the said
Carew's Liberty, out of his Restraint in the Gate House. And this Deponent as
to the first, he delivered it into the Kings own hand, at the Council Board;
Whereupon it was Ordered the same Evening, that Mr. Carew should be discharged
upon the Ambassadors Certificate that he is satisfied, or to that effect; then
this Deponent delivered the other Petition to the said Ambassadors Secretary
the next day following, who Read the said Petition, and said it was well, and
told the Deponent that he would show his Excellency the said Petition, and
speak to him about it, and this Deponent should receive his Answer thereupon
the next day at White Hall, if this Deponent would meet him there, which he
this Deponent accordingly did, and after some Conference and Debate of the
matter, the said Secretary told him, this Deponent, in the presence of Mr.
Robert Coke, and other Gentlemen, that his Excellency was not satisfied; And
now the said Carew must lie in Prison, until he has satisfied the World, that
he has abused the States, and that he has no Title to any such Pretentions;
and that his Excellency expected that Mr. Carew should quit his Pretentions in
such an Extraordinary and Solemn manner, that there should never be the least
mention made of them again, and repeated the same several times over, or words
to that effect. And at last, said, I might be assured that it was Expected, and
would be insisted upon; so that it was in vain to make any further application,
unless he would, ( meaning Mr. Carew) quit his Pretentions.

Robert Ayleway.
Jurat: 13 Die Novembris 1677. Coram me.

William Wild.



SO the said Carew was continued in Prison, until he was forced to Subscribe a
Paper drawn by Mr. Secretary Williamson, worded to this Effect, that the said
Carew had caused the said Ambassador to be cited by two Orders of the
Councel-Board, and also caused the said Orders to be Printed without License,
for which he asks his Excellency Pardon; upon which he was Discharged, paying
Sergeant Dike his Fees.

Afterward the said Paper was caused to be Printed, and most Scandalously
fixed upon the Exchange and White-Hall-Gate, pretending to vindicate the Dutch
Ambassador; who got neither Credit nor Honor by this Transaction, from any
Intelligible Persons, either upon the Exchange, or even amongst the Dutch
Congregations in London, and elsewhere in England.

In this Juncture of time, the Creditors and Petitioners could not be heard at
Councel-Board, upon the said two Orders; A new Alliance by a Marriage being in
agitation, between the Prince of Orange, and the Lady Mary, the Duke of Yorks
Daughter, which was promoted and effected by the Earl of Danby's procurement,
(as the Author of the Impartial State of the Earl of Danby's Case Affirms) for
Rooting out the French Interest at Court, and securing the Protestant Religion.

Then a small Memorial in writing, of the Services of Sir William Courten, and
Sir Paul Pyndar, for the Crown of England, was delivered into His Majesty's own
Hand, and several Lords of the Council Table; but not to lay any stress upon
that, (as to the Merrits of the Foreign Causes, in the two Orders of Council)
being Honorary Engagements upon the Crown, and Incumbant upon the King, his
Heirs and Successors, for Debts, contracted, for Diamonds, and other Jewels of
the Crown; as also for vast Sums of Money, after the return of Sir Paul Pyndar
from Constantinople; where he had served King James, and the Turkey Company,
Eleven Years, as Ambassador to the Grand Seigneur, and much improved the Levant
Trade; which Debts are still owing, yet nothing would procure so much as a
Conference, or the least Overture of any satisfaction or reparation for the
Bona Esperanza, etc.

The States General having made Peace with France, and in a Common Alliance
with their Confederats at Algiers; The Creditors and Proprietors concerned in
the Letters Patents for Reprizals aforesaid, in the Month of April 1680.
Looking upon it then a very seasonable opportunity to repair themselves, the
Dutch being at Peace with all the World, (a season that no Common Claymours
could appear.) Whereupon they resolved to Equipp, and set forth three several
Ships and Pynaces, in pursuance of the Authority granted, as aforesaid, and to
that end and purpose concluded upon the Ships Names, the Commanders, viz.
Captain Compton, Gwyther, Captain Reger Hawkshead, and Captain Thomas Wood,
with their number of Men, Guns, and Victualling, and entered the same in the
Admiralty accordingly.

Captain Tyrence Byrne, being appointed for one Ship; while he was fitting
himself with Men and Ammunition, the Sails were taken away by an Officer,
pretending he had a lawful Warrant for the same, from the Lords of the
Admiralty; as also to Arrest Richard Chapel Master of the Ship, who was forced
to give Bayl, to answer a Charge as a Criminal; And the said George Carew,
having a Summons from Sir Lyonel Ienkins to appear at the Councel-Board on the
11th, of May 1680. He appeared, and delivered this Petition following, into the
hands of the Right Honorable John Earl of Radnor, Lord President of the
Council.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of His most Honorable
Privy Council.
The Humble Petition of George Carew Esquire Administrator of the Goods and
Chattels of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar Kts. Deceased; with their
Wills annexed, and Thomas Coppin Esquire on the behalf of themselves, and diverse
others, Interested and Concerned.
Shows,
THat in Pursuance of two several Orders of the Council Board, Dated the 24th.
of July 1677. Your Petitioners, and other Proprietors Interested, have often
attended with their Council Learned in the Law, to be heard concerning relief
for the matters therein contained according to Justice, and Common Right;
Humbly Praying that the Ambassador of the States General, Resident in England,
might have notice thereof, to make what Defense he could by his Advocates, or
others, against your Petitioners just Complaints; but to this day your
Petitioners could not be heard, although several times were Assigned for that
purpose.

Your Petitioners do therefore most Humbly Pray, that Your Majesty would be
most Graciously pleased to appoint a Peremptory Day, that your Petitioners may
be heard at the Council Board, and that the Dutch Ambassador may have notice
thereof, from one of the Principal Secretaries of State, with Copies of the
said Orders, to make what Defense he can, by his Advocates or others, if he
please, that Right may be done according to the Merits of the Cause.

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc. George Carew. Thomas Coppin.

THe said Petition being Ordered to be Read, and Sir Philip Lloyd Clerk of the
Council, having Read the same accordingly, on the 12th. day of May 1680. The
Lord High Chancellor was pleased to tell Mr. Carew that he should not be
heard, but that He and others, that offered to put the said Letters Pattents,
or any Commissions derived from thence, in Execution, should be Hanged as
Pirates.

And notwithstanding, the said George Carew informed the Councel-Board, that
two or three Ships were out upon the Coast of Spain, and other parts; in
Pursuance of certain Articles and Agreements, between him and the Creditors;
yet nothing would prevail for a hearing upon the Petition, or upon the former
Order of Council aforesaid; but this new Order was made Ex part, upon a
Memorial given in by the Dutch Ambassador (stuffed with Impertinent falsities) as
follows.

At the Court at White Hall the 12th. of May 1680.
Present.
The Kings most Excellent Majesty. His Highness Prince Rupert. Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury. Lord Chancellor. Lord President. Duke of Albemarle. Marquess of
Worcester. Earl of Ossory. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of Bridgwater Earl of
Sunderland. Earl of Essex. Earl of Bathe. Lord Bishop of London. Mr. Hide. Lord
Chief Justice North. Mr. Finch. Mr. Secretary Ienkins. Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer. Sir Thomas Chicheley. Mr. Godolphin.
THis day a Memorial presented to His Majesty by his Excellency the Ambassador
Extraordinary from the States General of the United Provinces, was read in
Council, setting forth, how that according to Information given upon Oath, Sir
Edward Graves Knt. and George Carew Esquire were Equipping and Arming a small
Frigate called the Mary, under the Command of Tyrence Byrne, to be employed
against the Subjects of the States General; and particularly to surprise and
seize the Ship called the Emperor, wherein a part of the said Lord Ambassadors
Equippage was Imbarqued in order to his return to his own Country; which
Equipping and Arming was by color of a Commission or Letter of Reprizal,
bearing date the 29th. of May, in the 17th. year of His Majesty's Reign that
now is, and granted in favor of the Creditors of Sir William Courten, and
others; And praying that the said Letters of Reprizals might be Revoked; His
Majesty considering that the said Commission was Suspended by His Majesty's
Proclamation, bearing Date the 10th. of August 1666. for diverse great and
notable Misdemeanors committed in Execution thereof, and that by the Treaty of
Peace and Alliance, made with the States General of the United Provinces at
Breda, the 21 of July 1667. It is agreed that all Suits and Pretentions, that
the Subjects of His Majesty or the States General, might, or could move or
prosecute one against another, for any matter or thing before the Date of the
said Treaty, shall remain void, Obliterated and Disanulled; and that all
Letters of Reprizal, Marque, or Countermarque, both general and particular are
by the said Treaty Inhibited and Revoaked; which said Treaty was restored in
its former Uigour, and Confirmed by a Subsequent Treaty made at Westminster in
the Month of February 167/3/4. By which Treaties all Letters and Commissions of
Reprizal, are entirely Revoaked and Annulled. His Majesty likewise foreseeing
of what Mischievous Consequence it would be to all his Loving Subjects, if the
States General upon the Execution of the said Letters of Reprizal (contrary to
the meaning of the said Treaties, and after the anulling of them by the same,)
should Grant Letters of Countermarque against the said Subjects, and their
Goods, to the hindering of Commerce, and the Ruin and Damage of many
particular Men, although unconcerned in the Case of such Reprizal. His Majesty
does therefore hereby Order Sir Creswel Levins His Majesty's Attorney General,
to prepare the Draught of a Supersedeas to pass the Great Seal of England,
whereby the said Letters of Reprizal may be in due form of Law Superseded,
Revoked, and Declared to be void, and Determined, to all effects and purposes
whatsoever; to the end the States General may rest satisfied of his Majesty's
care to have his Treaties duly executed, and that it be made known, and may
appear of Record to all his Loving Subjects, that the said Letters of Reprizal
are Revoaked, and Declared void; to the end also that none may hereafter
presume to Act by virtue thereof; and if any do that, they may be proceeded
against as Pirates, acting without Commission, and as Infractors of the Peace
and Alliance, between His Majesty, and the States General.

A true Copy Ex. FRANCIS GUYN.

IT may be remarqued from hence, what Dangerous consequences would attend the
Subjects of England, in their Estates and Properties, if such an Order of the
Councel-Table, should be of force to Supersede a Judicial Grant upon Record,
under the Great Seal of England without a Scire facias, or hearing the Parties,
or to Discharge and Release particular Mens-Rights and Interests, in the Hands
of Foreigners upon private, and Land-Contracts in Trade and Commerce, without
any Restitution or Satisfaction for the same; Under such presidents no Man can
be safe.

It Is very remarkable, that civil Actions and Pretenses, for several Matters
and Things, were not Obliterated, or made void by the Treaty at Breda, as
appears by several Presidents of both sides in the Courts of Judicature, at the
Hague, Amsterdam, and Middleburgh, (viz.) By the cause in the Supreme Court of
Judicature, between James Boeve and the Heirs of Peter Boudaen, depending many
years before the Treaty at Breda; and prosecuted several years after to a
Definitive Sentence; and by other actions in Zealand that had long depended
before the Treaty in the Zerick-sea, which were prosecuted afterward, by Sir
William Lower, John Monson, and Roger Ravon who obtained several Sentences and
Executions thereupon: The like at Amsterdam at the Suit of Sir Richard Ford,
upon Actions for Assurance, depending before and after the Treaty; Likewise
upon several Actions depending at Midleburgh, against Peter Boudean and his
Heirs, at the Suit of George Carew, upon Merchants accounts as aforesaid, and
Legacies; whereupon Boudaens Exceptions were overruled by the Magistrates and
Judges there, in the year 1675. and Sentence given, that the Defendants
Boudaens should positively Answer to several Charges, in the said Plaintiff
Carew's Bill, which they had delayed so many years together.

And by a later President in Amsterdam, upon two several Actions brought
against George Carew, in the year 1676. at the Suit of Paulus Buys an Advocate,
and Arnold Vingbooms, a Proctor of the said City. Buys for 113 Gilders and a 11
Stivers, and Vingbooms, for 51 Gilders and 18 Stivers, for Fees and Salaries,
in a Cause Renvoyed from the Hague, (depending many years before the Treaty
against Jacob Pergens upon an obligation for 3000 l. Lent by Sir William
Courten) unto which Actions of Buys, and Vingbooms, the said Carew having
appeared by Alexander Rynd his Proctrr: The Escheevens or Judges there, viz.

Mr. David de Wilhem, Hendrick Becker. Mr. Cornelis Cloeck. Joan Appelman: Mr.
Everart Scott de Jonge. Dr. Dirk Boelensz. Lieve van Loon. Jan van Dijck. Mr.
Jacob Popta.
GAVE Sentence against the said Carew, for the said Moneys and Costs, which
were Levied by Execution upon the said Carew accordingly, as by the Proceedings
in the said Court at Amsterdam appears. Notwithstanding at the same time the
said Judges were daily Solicited to Pronounce Sentence against the said
Pergens, in the Original Action (which they refused to do,) upon the said
Obligation; in which Cause the said Fees and Salories, were recovered by Buys
and Vingbooms, and also upon his Covenant for 5500. Sterling, with Damages in
another Action brought in the same year 1676. against the said Pergens, by Mark
Fletcher Merchant, for Moneys received by Pergens in trust for Mr. Courten and
his Assigns, but the said Judges possitively denied to pronounce any Sentence
thereupon; in regard the States of Holland, (at Pergen his request,) had by
Express Order as aforesaid, Dated the 10th. of September 1676. Peremptorily
Prohibited them from doing any Justice therein, Alleging, that moving upon the
said Actions, and Pretenses, were public Breaches of the Peace, concluded in
the year 1667. and 1674, And so the said causes remained in Statu quo ever
since upon the said Extrajudicial Order. The said Boudaens having also taken
advantage thereof, contrary to all Equity, Reason, and good Conscience; and
even to the Presidents of their own Courts of Justice: Which were no small
Reflections upon the great Interest of His Majesty's Honor, and the Reputation
of his Kingdoms and Dominions, being taken notice of by all Foreign Ministers
at the Hague, and Merchants of other Nations, Resident in Amsterdam.

It Is remarkable that the greatest Ministers of State, are subject to gross
Errors and Mistakes; for that in the first Proclamation Dated the 10th. of
August 1666. Mentioned in the Order aforesaid; it is recited in the said
Proclamation, that diverse great and Notable Misdemeanors were committed by Sir
Edmond Turnor, and George Carew, and their Assigns; And in the Month of
September following, by an Order of the Council Board, Sir Edmond Turnor was
Cleared, as a Person never Acting in the said Commission, his name being used
only in Trust, and that Mr. Carew as Administrator and Assignee of Sir William
Courten and others, solely prosecuted that Affair; and so Sir Edmond Turnors
Innocence appeared, upon hearing the matters of Fact, contained in his
Petition; And after they had Proclaimed him Guilty, (without calling him to
Answer for himself,) it was Published in the London Gazet, for an unadvized
Resolution; or a hasty Mistake.

Memorandum, That Sir Ieffery Palmer who was Directed to make a Draught of the
said Proclamation; refused to do it, so then Sir Heneage Finch, Solicitor
General (for the time being) very Readily and Officiously did the same.

Some further Reasons and Arguments, Offered in Defense of the Administrators,
Assignees, and Creditors of Sir WILLIAM COURTEN, and Sir PAUL PYNDAR.
QUeen Elizabeth gave it in Charge to all her Ministers of State, that they
should have a care of Her Honor, which She held as a Jewel so Incomparable,
that nothing was esteemed more sacred in Her Eyes, then Her Honor and
Reputation. If any Person should now question the Legallity, the Justice, or
the Equity of the Kings Grant, under those Conditions and Limitations in the
Letters Patents for Reprizals contained; they would not only Arraign the Wisdom
and Judgment of the most Reverend and Learned Ministers and Officers of State,
and Trust in the Kingdom, under whose hands the Grant Passed; but lessen the
Kings Prerogative-Royal, in the Protection of his Subjects.

The Acts of Parliament expressly Declaring, that the Injured Persons shall
have the Law of Marque without Fraud or delay; the Hollanders, Zealanders and
other Merchants Strangers, having Complained of the old Law; and craved
Exemptions from the Writ in the Register following in these words.

REX Ballivis villae de Lenn. Episcopi salutem, Register of Writs 129.
Ex gravi querela dilecti nobis S. accepimus, De arrests facto super bonis
mercatorum alienigenium pro transfacta mercatoribus Angliae.
quod cum ipse nuper apud C. partibus de Spinia in villa de C. causa
Mercandisandi moram traxisset, and Bona and Cattalla ad valentiam centum
librarum emisset. I. and T. and alii malefactores dictae Villae mercatores de
dictis partibus de S. praefatum S. apud dictam Villam de S. vi and armis
ceperunt and imprisonaverunt and bona and cattalla sua praedicta ab eo
abstulerunt, and alia, etc. ei intulerunt
contra legem and rationem, in ipsius S. damnum non modicum and depauperationem
manifestam. Et licet idem S. adsumptus non modicos penes Dominos partium
illarum fuerit prosecutus pro justitia super transgressionibus praedictis
habend. ipse tamen non potest Justitiam inde obtinere, sicut per quosdam fide
dignos, qui tunc temporis in dictis partibus extiterunt, coram nobis est
testificatum, super quo nobis supplicavit ut sibi de remedio providere
faciamus. Nos ad testimonium praedictum considerationem habentes, nec non
injuriore de pauperationi ipsius S. compatientes in hac part; vobis mandamus,
sicut alias mandavimus, quod corpora praedictorum T. and I. si ipsi seu eorum
aliquis in praedicta villa de Lenn: inventi fuerint, nec non bona and cattalla,
ad valencia quadraginta librarum quam citius ibidem inventa fuerint arrestari,
and sub arresto salvo custodiri fac quousque praedicto S. de transgressione
praedicta, ac de damnis and de perditis quae occasion praedicta sustinuit,
fuerit satisfactum. Mandavimus etiam, ballivis villarum magnae Yernemouth, quod
ipsi ad valentiam quadraginta librarum de bonis and cattalis praedictorum T.
and I. ac ceterorum praenominatorum una corporibus eorundem quam citius in
ballivis suis inventi fuerint arrestari, and sub arresto hujusmodi custodiri
faciant, quosque praedicto S. de transgressione and damnis, ac de perditis
praedictis in forma praedicto fuerit satisfactum. T,etc.

THe Ancient Laws of England, in the Case of Spoils, were grounded upon right
reason; for that every English Man, living here in an Island, had not Moneys to
right himself against Forraigners, in their own Country, so often as they would
take advantage by Injuring them to make their own Markets; neither could an
English Man expect to find Justice abroad without delay, where the Offenders
(for the most part) were Parties and, Judges themselves.

But when the Persons, or Goods of Merchants Strangers, were once Arrested, or
Attached here, they would find means suddenly to Retaliate their Damages at
home, upon the Offenders: Even as at this time, if a Fisher Man should be
attaqued at Sea, for the East India Companies (...) in the Towns of Holland and
Zealand, would quickly make the East India Company, or their Directors in the
Chambers at Amsterdam and Middleburgh Refund their Damages; or otherwise they
would Dde Wit them, or pull down their Houses in that Popular, and Tumultuous
Government.

Now I appeal to all unbiassed and impartial Men, whether Judicial Grants under
the Great Seal of England, made pursuant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm,
obtained by such steps and measures mentioned in the body of the Grant, for
Reprizing the 151612l. with Damages, ought not to have the effect of the Law,
by Seizing the value or by Composition; Notwithstanding any such Extrajudicial
Acts or Proclamations, and pretended Supersedeas. The Laws of England having so
secured the Distinct Rights, and Properties of the Subjects, that it is not in
the Kings Power, by any Act of State (unless by Parliament) to dispose of His
Subjects Goods.

Or whether there was any necessity, (the Dutch Ambassador the Here Van Leuven
Affirming that the 800000 Pattacones were given, to take off the durable Grant
for Reprizals by which the Hollanders were bound) That three parts of the
Pattacones should be Assigned to the Prince of Orange for old Debts; and no
part to the Proprietors of the Bona Espranza; nor for the Great Diamonds, Sold
to the late King by Sir Paul Pyndar, (not yet paid for) Pawned by the late
Queen, for half the value in Amsterdam. Jure naturae equam est neminem cum
alterius detrimento and injuria fieri locupletiorem.

There lies a necessity upon the Creditors, to let the World know quod defertur
non auferter; and that both Nations concerned, may remember they did not only
Smart, but Bleed for the Iniquity and Ingratitude of the times, wherein the
Grieved and Oppressed could find no Relief.

It is necessary also to remember that Sir Albertus Joachimy the Dutch
Ambassador, Resident in Ordinary in England Anno. 1644. Had notice given him of
the Monition out of the High Court of Admiralty, fixed upon the Exchange; that
several Persons were upon Examination in perpetuam rei memoriam, to prove the
Spoils and Damages of the Bona Esperanza, with the loss of diverse Mariners
Lives; but the said Ambassador would make no defense therein, but suffered
Judgment pro confesso by default.

Although Felony be Pardonable by the Prince, the Trover is not, even as in
the Case of Murder, but not the appeal; The Subject has a natural liberty at
his own Suit to take his remedy, otherwise all Right and Property might be
Destroyed.

It Is Granted, that the King may by His Prerogative, make a necessary Garrison
in time of War, in any of His Subjects Houses, Castles, and Lands, for the
Common Defense, and Protection of His People (making compensation.) But a great
Lawyer and Privy Councellor, would affirm, that the King having the Power, of
Peace and War, may Grant away a Subjects Castle, or other his Freeholds in a
public Treaty, without any Satisfaction or Price, which is against the Law of
property; and not warrantable by any Reason of State.

Conclusion.
When I Consider the sorrows and sufferings of the said George Carew, and
James Bo'evc in Holland, and Zealand; whereof I was an Eye witness. I cannot
mention their names in England, without Grief and Wonder; finding them Groaning
under Troubles and Oppressions at home, in ascerting their Rights and
Properties, (like true Englishmen) who I am Confident at the same time, would
Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes for the Crown of England.

The Case of the Bona Esperanza being prosecuted from the Year 1644. to 1664.
Reduced to a certainty under a Grant for Reparation in the Year following,
could not be violated without a Breach of Trust, yet suddenly Suspended for
Reason of State; The King wanting Seamen in the Summer, and the Dukes
Privateers, Seamen in the Winter. In more seasonable times the Creditors were
obstructed by Seizures, Arrests, Proclamations, Orders of Council,
Imprisonments, and pretended Supersedeas's; all against the known Laws and
Liberties of the Subjects, while the Proprietors of the Bona Esperanza, during
all those Arbitrary Prosecutions against them, had not the least Overture for
their Reparation? or once admitted to a hearing at the Council Table for their
Relief; After Mr. Carew had to my own knowledge Expended Six thousand pounds
and upwards, in the said Cause; having at this time all his Estate in London
and Richmond, Mortgaged to Sir James Butler of Lincolns Inn, and Thomas Coleman
Esquire for 4500 l. Sterling, and had paid Interest for the like Sum, ever since
the Year 1668. to Mr. John Holwerthy, Mr. Letton, Mr. John Foche, Edward
Holmewood, and others, Eminently known in the City of London.

The Estates of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar, being Indebted 7000
l. to the said Carew, in right of his first Wife, the only Daughter of Mr.
William Walton a Turkey Merchant; whose cause with the others Interested and
Concerned, being now brought home to this Parliament for Justice; they cannot
despair of a seasonable Redress according to the measure and nature or then
Grievances and Opressions.

I must not omit therefore in this Conclusion, to give a short Abstract of the
most Arbitrary and unjust Sentence, Pronounced in the Court of Admiralty in
England for 1800 l. Damages against Sir Edmond Turnor, George Carew, Tyrence
Birne, and Jonathan Frost, at the instance of Jacob Neitz, and others, which
was confirmed by the Judges Delegates, and Adjuncts, in Hillary Term 1678.

The Case and unjust Sentence upon it.
IN the Year 1665. Admiral de Ruiter having taken an old Fly Boat, of 200. Tun,
Dutch Built named the Mary of Bristol, belonging to several Merchants of that
City, bound homewards from Barbados, with Sugars, Cotton, Indigo, etc. The
said Ship and Goods so taken, were Condemned by the Admiralty Court in
Amsterdam, as free Prize to the States.

In the Year 1666. The said Ship being set forth from Amsterdam to Sea, by the
name of the Godileive of Brugit; under the Color of Jacob Neitz, Andreas
Vanden Bogaerd, Michael Vander Plancken, Merchants of Brugis, and others, as
owners upon a Voyage to France for Wine, Brandy, and Salt. Captain Tyrence
Byrne Commander of a small Frigate named the Royal, having a Commission from the
said George Carew, persuant to the Letters Patents aforesaid, for Reprizals
against the Dutch, Seized the said Ship near Port-land Bayin the Month of July
1666. Laden with Wine Salt and other Goods from France, bound for Amsterdam as
by the Bills of Lading appeared.

The Master and Seamen being Examined by Mr. Exton the Mayor, and other
Magistrates of Chichester, upon a Commission sent by Mr. Suckling, out of the
Admiralty Court, at the instance of Jonathan Frost, part owner of the Royal
Frigate, the whole Ships Company confessed themselves to be Hollanders, and
Zealanders Born, that the Ship was taken by de Ruiter under the circumstances
aforesaid, and that they were bound for Amsterdam, the Goods being Assigned to
Merchents there. Whereupon Sir Lyonell Ienkins decreed, that there was good
cause of Seizure, and condemned the pietended owners of the said Ship Godileive
in Expenses but in regard one Peter Gerrard a Frenchman appeared by Mr.
Francklin his Proctor, and claymed the said Ship and Goods, in the names of the
said Jacob Neitz and others, the King of Spains Subjects, the Judge Ordered and
decreed, that upon payment of the Costs aforesaid, and giving Bayl to abide the
Sentence of the Court, upon hearing the Cause; that then the Ship and Goods
should be delivered to the Claymors, (unto which the Captors Consented;) But
Gerrard refusing to do the same; Arrested the Captain in an Action of 1000 l.
Valuing the Ship and Goods at that rate, and the Captain being committed
thereupon to the Marshalsea, gave sufficient Bayl to the liking of the said
Gerrard, and his Proctor; who neglected to proceed thereupon; But upon new
examinations of the Master and Seamen, Exparte, procured a sentence for
discharging the said Ship and Goods, and a Writ of Restitution, whereupon the
Vicadmiral and the Customhouse-waitors, (in whose Custody they were) delivered
the same accordingly.

Then finding some Imbezelements of the Salt and Wine in the Port of
Chichester, and other Damages by lying so long in dispute (through their own
default,) Gerrard and Francklin, depending the Process against Byrne, Exhibited
a Lybel jointly against Sir Edmond Turnor, George Carew, Tyrence Byrne, and
Jonathan Frost, in the names of Jacob Neitz and the other Claymors, and
Procured an Arbitrary and unjust sentence against them all, for 1800 l.
Damages, in spoiling their Voyage; and Imbezealing their Goods; From which
Sentence Sir Edmond Turnor, and George Carew appealed by themselves to the King
in the High Court of Chancery.

Whereupon the Lord Keeper Bridgeman, appointed the Lord Chief Justice
Rainsford, Judge Wild, Judge Windham, and Baron Littleton, (as adjuncts) with
Sir Richard Lloyd, Sir Timetly Baldwin, Sir Edward Low, Dr. Pinfold, Dr.
Trumbal, Dr. Digby, and Dr. Briggs, or a Competent number of them by Commission
to re-hear and determine the same; But the Judges upon several debates, being
divided in their opinions, Concerning the Law of England, in Cases of Personal
Injuries; and that Turnor and Carew ought not to suffer for the Trespass of
another; the Case depended undetermined until the Year 1678. Then one Peter
Victorine appeared for the Claymors ( Peter Gerrard being run away,) and
procured the Commission to be renewed by the Lord High Chancellor, who
appointed the Lord Chief Justice North (who had denied a Prohibition in the
Case) in the room of Justice Rainsford; And said the Cause of appeal being
appointed to be heard at Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane, on the 16th. of March
1678.

Sir Francis Winnington, Sir Thomas Exton, Mr. Thursby, and Mr. Molloy, being
of Council for the said Turnor and Carew, insisted (as the truth was) that no
proof appeared in all the Process transmitted against them; and that upon the
said Neitz vander Plancken, etc. Their own showing, the Imbezelements were done
in the Port of Chichester after the Capture, which was in the body of the
County of Sussex, and therefore Tryable at the Common Law by Jury; the
Admiralty having no Jurisdiction therein (several Statutes in the time of King
Ric. 2. Edw. 3. and Hen. 4. Expressly forbidding those Encroachments upon the
Common Law of England.) Yet the Lord Chief Justice North overruled all that
was offered, and confirmed the said unjust and Arbitrary Sentence, and Signed
the same; whereupon Judge Wild and the rest followed, and did the like. The
Sentence and Confirmation being brought ready drawn, and Engrossed in
Parchment, by the said Francklin, for that end and purpose, who caused the said
Judges to Admonish the said Carew, being then present, to pay the said 1800
l.Cum Expencis, before the first day of Easter Term following; against which
Sentence, Confirmation, and Admonition, the said Carew protested openly before
the said Judges, as Erroneous, Arbitrary, and unjust; and also appealed to the
last Parliament for a nullity thereof; As also for Caution for his Costs and
Charges unjustly sustained and to be sustained therein,) to be given by Mr.
Foot a Merchant in Rood Lane, and Mr. Hungerford, who after Victrine Died
Insolvent, appeared for the said Claymors; and Likewise for satisfaction of 500
l. with Interest from Mr. William Walker a Gouldsmith, detained in his hands
from the said Carew, ever since the 24th. of June 1669. under pretense of being
obliged to the said Peter Gerrard upon the said Carews Appeal from the first
Sentence. But the Parliament being Dissolved, the whole matter depends in statu
quo, for Redress according to the Judgment of Parliament, the Justice and
Equity of the Nation.

FINIS.

