Christ, the Way, and the Truth, and the Life. OR, A Short Discourse.

Pointing forth the way of making use of Christ for justification, and
especially and more particularly, for Sanctification in all its parts, from
JOHAN. XIV: Verse. VI. Wherein several cases of conscience are briefly answered,
chiefly touching Sanctification.

By JOHN BROWN. Preacher of the Gospel.



ROTTERDAM.

Printed by H. G. for John Cairns, book seller in Edinburgh, and are to be sold
there 1677.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO The Right Honorable and Religious Lady, The Lady
STRATHNAVER
MADAM.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the building
fitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord; as it ought to
be the principal concearne of all, who have not sitten down on this side of
Jordan, to satisfy their souls, (once created for, and in their own nature
requireing* in order to satifaction, Spiritual, immortal and incorruptible
substance), with husks prepared for beasts, to be built in and upon this corner
stone, for an habitation of God, through the Spirit: So it ought to be the
maine design and work of such, as would be approven of God, as faithful
laborers and coworkers with God, to be following the example of him, who
determined not to know any thing, among those he wrote unto, save Jesus Christ
and him crucified. O! this noble, heart-ravishing, soul-satisfying mysterious
theme, Jesus Christ crucified, the short compend of that uncontrovertibly great
mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen
of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up
into glory: wherein are things the Angels desire to look into, or with vehement
desire bend (as it were) their necks, and bow down their heads to look and peep
into (as the word used, 1 Pet. 1: 12. imports) is a Subject for angelical
heads to pry into; for the most indefatigable, and industrious Spirits, to be
occupied about. The searching into and studying of this one Truth, in reference
to a closeing with it, as our life, is an infallible mark of a soul divinely
enlightened, and endued with spiritual and heavenly wisdom; for though it be
unto the jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; yet unto
them, who are called, it is Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God,
because the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is
stronger then men. O! what depths of the manifold wisdom of God are there in
this mystery? The more it is preached, known and believed aright, the more is
it understood, to be beyond understanding, and to be what it is, a mystery.
Did ever any Preacher or believer, get a broad look of this boundless ocean,
wherein infinite Wisdom, Love that passes all understanding, Grace without all
dimensions, justice that is admirable and tremenduous, and God in his glorious
Properties, Condescensions, high and noble Designs, and in all his Perfections
and Virtues, flow over all banks; or were they ever admitted to a prospect
hereof in the face of Jesus Christ; and were not made to cry out, O the depth
and height, the breadth and length! O the inconceivable, and incomprehensible,
boundlesness of all infinitely transcendent perfections? Did ever any with
serious diligence, as knowing their life lay in it, study this mysterious
Theme, and were not, in full conviction of soul, made to say, the more they
promoved in this study, and the more they descended in their diveings into this
depth, or soared upward in their mounting speculations in this height, they
found it the more an unsearchable mystery? The study of other Themes (which
Alas! many, who think it below them to be happy, are too much occupied in) when
it has wasted the spirits, wearyed the mind, worn the body, and rarefied the
brain to the next degree unto a distraction, what satisfaction can it give, as
to what is attained, or encouragement as to future seize? And when, as to
both these, something is had, and the poor soul puffed up with an aerie and
fancyful apprehension of having obtained* some great thing, but in truth a
great Nothing, or a Nothing pregnant with Vanity, and vexation of Spirit,
foolish twines causing no gladness to the Father, for he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow, Eccles. 1: 18. what peace can all yield to a soul
reflecting on posting-away time, now near the last point, and looking forward
to endless Eternity? Oh! the thoughts of time wasted with, and fair
opportunities of good lost by, the vehement pursueings and huntings after
shadows and vanities, will torment the soul, by assaulting it with pierceing
convictions of madness and folly, in forsaking All, to overtake Nothing; with
dreadful and soul-terrifying discoveries of the saddest of disappointments: and
with the horror of an everlastingly irrecoverable loss; And what has the
laborious Spirit than reaped of all the travail of his soul, when he has lost
it? But, on the other hand, O with what calmness of mind, serenity of soul and
peace of conscience, because of the peace of God, which passes all
understanding, will that poor soul look back, when standing on the border of
Eternity, on the bygone days o^ hours it spent, in s^eking after, praying and
^seing all appointed means for, some saying acquantance with, and interest in
this only soul up making, and soul satisfying Mystery; and upon its yielding up
it self, through the effica^ious operations of the Spirit of grace, wholly,
without disputing unto the powerful workings of this mystery within; and in
becoming crucified with Christ* and living through^ crucified Christ's living
in it, by his Spirit and power: and with what rejoyceing of heart and gloriou
singing of soul, will it look forward to Eternity* and its everlasting abode in
the prepared mansions, remembering that there, its begun study will be
everlastingly continued, its capacity to understand that unsearchable mystery
will be inconceivably greater; and the spiritual, heavenly and glorious joy,
which it will have, in that practical reading its divinity without book of
ordinances, will be its life and felicity for ever? And what peace and joy in
the holy Ghost, what inward and inexpressible quiet and contentment of mind,
will the soul enjoy, in dwelling on these thoughts, when it shall have withal
the inward and well grounded persuasion of its right, through Jesus Christ, to
the full possession of that All, which now it cannot conceive, let be
comprehend; the foretastes whereof fills it with joy unspeakable and full of
glory; and the hope of shortly landing there, where it shall see and enjoy and
wonder and praise, and rest in this endless and restless felicitating work,
making it to sing, while passing through the valley of the shadow of death? O if
this were believed! O that we were not drunk, to a distraction and madness,
with the adulterous love of vain and aerie speculations, to the postponing, if
not utter neglecting, of this maine and only upmaking work, of getting real
acquaintance with and a begun possession of this mystery in our souls, Christ,
the grand mystery* formed within us, living, and working within us by his
Spirit, and working us up unto a conformity unto, and an heart-closeing with
God manifested in the flesh, that we may find in experience, or at least, in
truth and reality, have a true transumpte of that Gospel mystery, in our souls!
Oh when shall we take pleasure in pursueing after this happiness, that will not
flee from us, but is rather pursueing us; when shall we receive with joy and
triumph this King of glory, that is courting us daily, and is seeking access
and entry into our souls? Oh why cry we not out, in the hieght of the passion
of spiritual longing and desire. O come Lord Jesus, King of glory, with thine
own key, and open the door and enlarge and dilate the chambers of the soul,
that thou may enter, and be entertained as the King of glory* with all thy
glorious retinue, to the ennobling of my soul, and satisfying of all the
desires of that immortal spark? Why do we not covet after this knowledge, which
has a true and firm connection with all the best and truly divine gifts? O
happy soul, that is wasted and worn to a shadow (if that could be) in this
study and exercise, which at length will enliven and (as it were) bring in a
new heavenly and spiritual soul into the soul, so that it shall look no more
like a dead, disspirited thing, out of its native soil and element; but as a
free, elevated and spiritualized Spirit, expatiating it self, and fleeing
abroad in the open air of its own element and country. O happy day, O happy
hour, that is really and effectually spent in this employment! what would
souls, sweeming in this ocean of all pleasures and delights, care for, yea,
with what abhorrency would they look upon the bewitehing allurements of the
purest kind of carnal delights, which flow from the minds satisfaction in
feeding on the poor apprehensions, and groundlesly expected comprehensions of
objects, suited to its natural genius and capacity? O! what a more
hyperbolically exceeding and glorious satisfaction has a soul, in its very
pursueings after (when it misseth and cannot reach) that which is truly
desireab^e! How does the least glimpse, through the smallest cranie, of this
glorious and glorifying knowledge of God in Christ, apprehended by faith, raise
up the soul to that pitch of joy and satisfaction, which the knowledge of
natural things, in its purest perfection, shall never be able to cause; and to
what a surmounting measure of this joy and contentation, will the experienceing
and feeling by spiritual sense the sweet and spiritual relish of this
capivating, and transcendently excellent knowledge, raise the soul unto? O!
must not this be the very suburbs of heaven to the soul? When the soul thus
sees and apprehends God in Christ, and that as its own God, through Christ
(for as all saving knowledge, draws out the soul unto an imbraceing and
closeing with the object, so it brings in the object to the making up of the
rec^procal union and in-being) it cannot but admire with exultation, and exult
with admiration, at that condescendence of free grace, that has made it in any
measure capable of this begun glory, and will fur^her make it meet, by this
begun glory, to be a (...) of the inheritance of the Saints in light: and what
will a soul, that has tasted of the pure delights of this river of gospel
manifestations, and has seen with soul-rav^shing delight, in some measure, the
manifold wisdom of God wrapped up therein; and the comple^t and perfect
^ymmetrie of all the parts of that noble contexture, and also the pure design
of that contr^vance to abase Man, and to extol the riches of the free grace of
God, that the sinner, when possessed of all, designed for him and effectuated
in him thereby, may know who alone should wear the crown and have all the
glory; what, I say, will such a soul see in another gospel^ calculated to the
meridian of the natural, crooked and corrupted temper of proud man, who is soon
made va^ne of nothing, which in stead of bringing a sinner, fall^n from God
through pride, back again to the enjoyment of Him, through a Mediator, does
but foster that innate plague, and rebellion, which caused and procured his
first excommunication from the favor, and banishment out of the paradise of
God) that shall attract its heart to it, and move it to ^ compliance with it?
When the poor sinner, that has bin made to pant after a Savior, and has bin
pursued to the very ports of the city of refuge by the ave^ger of blood, the
justice of God, has tasted and seen, how good God is, and felt the sweetness
of free love in a crucified Christ, and seen the beauty and glory of the
mystery of free grace, sutably answering^ and overcoming the mystery of its sin
and misery; O what a complacency has he therein, and in the way of gospel
salvation, wherein free grace is seen to overflow all banks, to the eternal
praise of the God of all grace. How saltless and unsavory will the most
cunningly devised and patch together mode of salvation be, that men, studying
the perversion of the gospel* and seeking the ruin of souls, with all their
skill, indusery and learning, are setting off with forced rhetoric, and the
artifice of words of man's wisdom, and with the plausible advantages of a
pretended sanctity, and of strong grounds and motives unto diligence and
painfulness, to a very denying and renunceing of Christian liberty, when once
itis observed, how it entrencheth upon, and darkneth the luster, or diminishes
the glory of free grace, and has the least tendency to the setting of the
crown on the creatures head, in whole or in part? The least perception that
hereby the sinners song, ascribeing blessing, honor, glory and power, unto
him, that was s^ain, and has redeemed them to God by his blood, out of every
kin^ed and tongue and people and nation, and has made them unto their God
kings and prie^ts, shall be marred, will be enough to render that device
detestable, and convince the soul, that itis not the gospel of the grace of
God, nor that mystery of God and of Christ, but rather the mystery of ^niquity.
What a peculiar savouriness does the humbled believer find, in the doctrine of
the true gospel grace; and the more, that he be thereby made Nothing, and
Christ made All; that he, in his highest atainments, be debaised, and Christ
exalted; that his most lovely peacoke feathers be laid, and the crown flourish
on Christ's head; that he be laid flat, without one foot to stand upon, and
Christ the only supporter, and carryer of him to glory; that he be as dead
without life, and Christ live in him, the more lovely, the more beautiful, the
more desirable, and acceptable is it unto him. O what a complacency has the
graced soul, in that contrivance of infinite wisdom, wherein the mystery of the
grace of God is so displayed, that nothing appears, from the lowest
foundation stone to the upper, most cope-stone but grace, grace, free grace
making up all the materials, and free grace with infinite wisdom cementing all?
The gracious soul can be warm under no other covering, but what is made of
that web, wherein grace and only grace is both wooft and werpe; and the reason
is manifest, for such an one has the clearest sight and discovery of his own
condition, and sees that nothing suiteth him, and his case, but free grace:
nothing can make up his wants, but free grace: nothing can cover his
deformities, but free grace; nothing can help his weaknesses, shortcomings,
faintings, sins and miscarriages, but free grace: therefore is free grace all
his Salvation, and all his Desire: itis his glory to be free grace's debtor,
for evermore; the crown of glory will have a far more exceeding and eternal
weight, and be of an hyperbolically hyperbolick and eternal weight* and yet
easily carried and worn, when he sees how free grace and free love has lined
it* and free grace and free love sets it on, and keeps it on for ever: this
makes the glorified Saint, wear it with ease, by casting it down at the feet
of the gracious and loving purchaser, and bestower. His exaltation is the
Saints glory; and by free grace, the Saints receiving and holding all of free
grace, is He exalted. O what a glory is it to the Saint, to set the crown of
glorious free grace, with his own hands, on the head of such a Savior, and to
say, not unto me, not unto me, but unto thee, even unto thee alone, be the
glory for ever and ever! With what delight, satisfaction, and complacency, will
the glorified Saint, upon this account, sing the Redeemed and Ransomed their
song? And if the result and effect of free grace will give such a sweet sound
there, and make the glorified's heaven, in some respects, another thing, or at
least, in some respect, a more excellent heaven, than Adam's heaven would have
been; for Adam could not have sung the song of the Redeemed; Adam's heaven
would not have been the purchase of the blood of God; nor would Adam have
sitten with Christ Redeemer on his throne; nor would there have been in his
heaven such ^ich hangings of free grace, nor such mansions prepared by that
gracious and loving husband, Christ, who will come and bring his bough^-bride
home with Him. Seeing, I say, heaven, even upon the account of free grace, will
have such a special, lovely, desirable, and glorious luster, O how should
Grace be prized by us now? How should the Gospel of the Grace of God be
esteemed by us? What an antipa^hy to Glory, as now prepared and dressed up for
sinful man, must they show, whose whole wit and parts are busied to da^ken the
glory of the Grace, which God would have shineing in the Gospel; and who are a^
so much pains and labor, to dress up another gospel (though the Apostle has
told us, Gal. 1: 7. that there is not another) wherein Gospel Grace must stand
by, and law grace take the throne, that so man may sacrifice to his own net,
and burn incense to his own drag, and may at most be graces debtor, in part;
and yet no way may the saved man account himself more graces debtor, than the
man was, who wilfully destroyed himself, in not performing of the conditions;
for Grace (as the new Gospelers, or rather Gospel - spillers mean, and say*)
did equally to both frame the conditions, make known the contrivance, and
tender the conditional peace and salvation. But as to the difference betwixt
Paul and Judas, it was Paul that made himself to differ, and not the free grace
of God* determineing the heart of Paul by grace to a closeing with and
accepting of the b^rgan. It was not grace that wrought in him both to will and
to do* It wa^ he and not the grace of God in him. What more contradictory to
the gospel of the grace of God? And yet vain Man will not condescend to the
free grace of God. Pelagianisme and Arminianisme, needs not put a man to much
study, and to the reading of many books, to the end, it may be practically
learned (though the patrons hereof labor hot in the very fires, to make their
notions hang together, and to give them such a luster of unsanctified and
corrupt reason, as may be taking with such as know no other conduct in the
matters of God) for n^turally we are all borne Pelagians and Arminians: these
Tenets are deeply engraven in the heart of every Son of fallen Adam: what
serious servant of God finds not this, in his dealing with souls, whom he is
laboring to bring into the way of the Gospel? Yea what Christian is there, who
has acquantance with his own heart, and is observing its byasses and corrupt
inclinations, that is not made to cry out, O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from these dregs of Pelagianisme, Arminianisme and Iesuitisme, which
I find yet within my soul? Hence it may seem no wonderful, or strange thing
(though after so much clear light, it may be astonishing to think, that now, in
this age, so many are so openly, and a^wedly, appearing for this dangerous and
deadly errou^) to us, to hear and see this infection spread^ng and gaining
ground so fast, there needs few arguments or motives, to work up carnal
hearts to an imbraceing thereof, and to a cheerful acquiesceing therein; little
labor will make a spark of fire work upon gunpowder. And, me thinks, if
nothing else will, this one thing should convince us all of the error of this
way; that nature so q^imely and readyly complyeth therewith; for who, that has
any eye upon, or regaird of such things, sees not, what a world of carnal
reasonings, objections, prejudices, and scruples, natural men have in readiness
against the Gospel of Christ; and with what satisfaction, peace and delight,
they reason and plead themselves out of the very reach of free grace; and what
work there is to get a poor soal, in any measure wakened and convinced of its
lost condition, wrought up to a compliance with the gospel way of Salvation?
How many other designs, projects and essays does it follow; with a piece of
natural vehemence and seriousness, without wearying, were it even to the
wasteing of its body and spirits, let be, its substance and riches, before it
be brought to a closeing with a crucified Mediator, and to an accounting of all
its former workings, seize, and painful labourings, and gain, as loss
for Christ, and for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, and as dung that
it may win Christ, and be found in Him, not having its own righteousness, which
is of the la^, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness, which is of God by faith, Phil. 3: 7, 8* 9. And may it not seem
strange, that now, after so many have found, through the grace of God, the
sweet experience of the gracious workings of the gospel grace of God upon their
hearts, and so are in case, as having this witness within them, to give verdict
against those assertions; yea more and many more, than were in several ages
before; yet Satan should become so bold, as to vent these desperate opinions,
so diametrically opposite to the Grace of God, declared in the Gospel, and
engraven in the Hearts of many hundereds, by the finger of God, confirming* in
the most undoubted manner, the truth of the gospel doctrines. This would seem
to say, that there are such clear sun shine days of the Gospel, and of the Son
of man, a coming (and who can tell how soon this night shall be at an end?)
that all these doctrines of nature shall receive a more conspicuous and
shameful dash, than they have received for these many ages: Hithertil when
Satan raised up, and sent forth his qualified instruments, for this desperate
work, God always prepared carpenters to fright these horns and thus
Gospel*truth came forth, as gold out of a furnace, more clear and shineing: And
who can tell but there may be a dispensation of the pure grace of God, in
opposition to these perverting ways of Satan, yet to come, that, as to the
measure of light and power, shall excel whatever has been, siace the Apostles
days? Even so come Lord Jesus!

However, Madam, the Grace of God will be, what it is, to all the chosen and
ransomed ones. They will find that in it, which will make whatever comes in
competition therewith or would darken it, contemptible in their eyes: And happy
they, of whom, in this day wherein darkness covers the earth, and gross
darkness the people, it may be said, the Lord has arisen upon them, and his
glory, has been seen upon them: for whatever others, whose understanding is
yet darkened, and they alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance
that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts, imagine of the
Gospel Grace; and however they discern nothing of the heavenly and spiritual
glory of the Grace of God: yet they being delivered or cast into the form and
mould of the doctrine of the Gospel, which they have obeyed from the heart,
through the powerful and irresistible efficacy of the mighty grace of God, have
seen such an allureing excellency, in (...) gracious contrivance of infinite
wisdom, to set forth the unparallelableness of the pure grace of God, and are
daily seeing more and more of the graciousness and wisdom of that heavenly
invention, in its adeq^at s^teablness to all their necessities, that as they
cannot but admire and commend the riches of that grace that interlineth every
sentence of the gospel, and the greatness of that love, that has made such a
completely broad plaster, to cover all their sores and wounds; so the longer
they live, and the more they drink of this pure fountain of heavenly nectar;
and the more their necessities press them, to a taking*on of new obligations,
because of new supplies from this ocean of grace, the more they are made to
admire the Wisdom and Goodness of the Author* and the more they are made to
fall in love with, to delight^, and lose themselves in the thoughts of this
incomprehensible grace of God; yea and to long to be there, where they shall
be in better case to contemplate, and have more wit to wonder at, and better
dexterity to prize, and a stronger head to muse upon, and a more enlarged heart
to praise for this boundless and endless treasure of the Grace of God, with
which they are enriched, through Jesus Christ. Sure, if we be not thus
enamoured and ravished with it, it is because we are yet standing without, or,
at most, upon the threshold and border of this Grace; were we once goto within
the jurisdiction of grace, and had yielded up ourselves unto the power thereof,
and were living and breathing in this air, O! how sweet a life might we have?
What a kindly ^lement would Grace be to us? As sin had reigned unto death, even
so grace should reign, through righteousness, unto eternal life, by Jesus
Christ, our Lord Romans 5: 21. Grace reigning within us through righteousness,
would frame and fit our souls for that eternal life, that is ensured to all,
who come once under the commanding, enlivening, strengthening, confirming,
corroborating, and perfecting power of Grace: and seeking grace for grace, and
so living and walking and spending upon Grace's cost and charges, O how lively,
and thriveing proficients might we be? The more we spent of grace (if it could
be spent) the richer should we be in grace: O what an enriching trade must it
be to trade with free Grace, where there is no loss, and all is gain, the
stock and gain and all is ensured; yea more, laboring in Grace's field would
bring us in Isaack's blessing, an hundred fold: But Alas! it is one thing to
talk of Grace, but a far other thing to trade with Grace. When we are so great
strangers unto the life of grace, through not breathing in the air of grace;
how can the name of the Lord Jesus Christ be glorified in us, and we in Him,
according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1: 12?
Consider we, what an affront and indignity it is unto the Lord dispenfator of
Grace, that we look so lean, and ill favored, as if there were not enough of
the fatning bread of the grace of God, in our Fathers house, or as if the great
Steward, who is full of grace and truth, were unwilling to bestow it upon us,
or grudged us of our allowance, when the fault is in ourselves, we will not
follow the course, that Wise Grace, and Gracious Wisdom has prescribed; we
will not open our mouth wide, that He might fill us; nor go to Him, with our
narrowed or closed mouths, that Grace might make way for grace, and widen the
mouth for receiving of more grace; but lie by in our leanness and weakness: and
alas we love too will to be so. O but grace be ill wared on us, who carry so
unworthily with it, as we do: yet it is well with the gracious soul, that he is
under grace's Tutory and care; for Grace will care for him, when he cares not
much for it, nor yet sees well to his own welfare; Grace can and will
prevent, yea must prevent, afterward, as well as at the first; that Grace may
be Grace, and appear to be Grace, and continue unchangeably to be Grace, and so
free Grace. Well is it with the Believer, whom grace has once taken by the
heart, and brought within the bond of the Covenant of Grace, its deadest
condition is not desperate: when corruption prevails to such an hight, that
the man is given over for dead, there being no sense, no motion no warmth, no
breath almost to be observed; yet Grace, when violently constrained by that
strong distemper, to retire to a secret corner of the soul, and there to lurk
and lie quiet, will yet at length, through the quickening, and reviv^ing
inf^uences of Grace* promised in the Covenant, and granted in the Lords good
time, come out of its prison, take the fields, and recover the impire of the
soul; and then the dry and withered stocks, when the God of all grace will be
as the dew unto Israel, shall blossom and grow as the lilie, and cast forth
his roots as lebanon: his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the
olive tree, and his smell as lebanon. It is a happy thing, either for Church or
particular soul to be planted in G^ace's (...) soil, they lie open to the warm
beams of the sun of righteousness; and though winter blasts may be sharp and
long; clouds may intercept the heat, and nipping frosts may cause a sad decay *
and all the sap may return and lie, as it were dormant, in the root; yet the
winter will pass: the rain will be over and gone, and the flowers will appear
on the earth: the time of the singing of birds will come and the voice of the
turtle will be heard in the land: then shall even the wilderness and solitary
place be glade, and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose, it shall
blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of
Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall
see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God We wonder that it is
not always hot summer days, a flourishing and fruitful season, with Souls
and with Churches; But know we the thoughts of the Lord? See we to the bottom
of the deep contrivances of infinite wisdom? Know we the usefulness, yea
necessity, of long winter nights, stormy blasts, hail, rain, snow and frost?
Consider we, that our state, and condition, while here, calls for those
vicissitudes, and requires the blowing of the north, as well as of the south
winds? If we considered, how Grace had ordered all things for our best* and
most for the glory and exaltation of Grace; we would sit down and sing, under
the sadest of dispensations, and living by faith and hope, we would rejoice in
the confident expectation of a gracious outgate, for as long as Grace
predomineth (and that will be until Glory take the Empire) all will run in the
channel of grace: and though now, sense (which is often faiths unfaithful friend)
will be always suggesting false tales of God, and of His Grace unto unbelief,
and raising thereby discontents, doubts, fears, jealousies, and many
distempers in the soul, to its prejudice and h^rt; yet in end, Grace shall be
seen to be Grace; and the faithful shall get such a full sight of this manifold
Grace, as ordering, tempering, timeing, shortening or continueing of all the
sad and dismal days and seasons, that have passed over their own, or their
Mothers head, that they shall see, that Grace did order all, yea every
circumstance of all the various tossings, changes, ups and downs, that they did
meet with. And O what a satisfying sight will that be, when the general*
assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are enrolled in heaven, and
every individual saint shall come together, and take a view of all their
experiences, the result of which shall be, Grace began, Grace carried on, and
Grace has perfected all, Grace was at the bottom of all, and Grace crowned
all? What shoutings Grace, Grace unto it, will be there; when the head stone
shall be brought forth? What soul satisfying complacency in, and admiration at
all, that is past, will a back look ^hereat yield, when every one shall be made
to say, Grace has done all well, not a pin of all the work of Grace in and
about me might have been wanted; now I see, that the work of God is perfect,
Grace was glorious Grace, and wise Grace, whatever I thought of it then: O what
a fool have I been, in quarrelling at, and in not being fully satisfied with,
all that Grace was doing with me? O how little is this believed now?

In confidence, Madam, that your La: (to me no ways known, but by a savoury
report) shall accept of this bold address, I recommend your La: my very noble
Lord your Husband, and off spring, to the word of His grace, and subscribe my
self Your and Their

Servant in the Gospel of the Grace of God. JOHN BROWN.

Christian Reader,
IF thou answer this designation, and art really a partaker of the Unction,
which is the high import of that blessed and glorious name called upon thee,
thine eye must affect thy heart, and ^ soul swelled with Godly sorrow must at
last burst and bleed forth at a weeping eye, while thou looks upon most of this
licentious and loathsome generation, arrived at that h^ight of prodigious
profanity, as to glory in their shame, and boast of bearing the very badge and
blake mark of damnation. but, besides this swarm, who savage it to h^ll, and
make such have thi^her, as they foame themselves into everlasting flames,
carrying, under the shape and visage of men, as Devils in disguise. The face of
the Church is covered with a sc^me of such, who are so immersed in the concerns
of* this life, and are so intense in the pursuit of the pleasures, gain and
honors thereof, as their way does manifestly witness them to be sunk into the
deep oblivion of God, and desperate inconsideration of their precious and
immortal souls: But in the 3. place besides these, who are hurried into such a
distraction with the cares of this life, that they as natural brute beasts,
made to be taken and d^stroyed, are never at leisure to consider either the
nature and necessity of their noble souls, or to converse with the notion of a
Deity. Thou may perceive a company of self deceiving speculatists, who make
broad the phylacteries of their garments, and boast of some high attainements,
in religion; yea, would have others look upon them as arrived at the very porch
of heaven, and advanced to a high pitch of proficiency in the ways of God,
because they can discourse a little of the mysteries of salvation, and without
ever diveing further into the depth and true nature of Religion, dream
themselves into a confidence of being saints, and conclude themselves Candidats
for glory.

This is that heart-moveing object, which presents itself to thy eye and
observation this day: this is that deplorable posture, wherein thou may
perceive most men at the very point of perishing eternally, who are within the
pale of the visible Church; some danceing themselves headlong in all have into
the lake of fire and brimstone; some so much concerned in things, which have no
connection with their happiness, as to drop inconcernedly into the pit, out of
which there is no redemption; and others dreaming themselves into endless
perdition; and all of them unite in a deriding at or despiseing the means used,
and essays made, in order to their recovery.

Now while Religion (which is the beauty of the soul, and the basis of man's
blessedness, advanceing him both to a conformity to God, and qualifying him
for the fruition of Him) by the generality of those, called to be saints, (that
they may be haved) is not only upon deliberation and choice laid aside, as
having nothing in it to recommend and endeare it to the souls of men, but
hated, floured, fled from and forsaken, as if it came on purpose to mar men's
tranquillity, and torment them before the time. While I say it is thus some
faithful Servants, who make conscience to carry on His work, who came to
destroy the works of the Devil, and went about, while in the world, healing all
that were oppressed of him, set themselves to pray, preach and perswad the
things concerning the Kingdom of God, yea to write and warn and weep men into
a compliance with their own happipinesse; they endeavor solicitously to
inform men's minds, that they may reform their manners, and rescue them with
fear, who are running upon their own ruin, but alas with so little success,
that they do the work of the Lord with grief, and have much sorrow of those,
of whom they ought to have joy; and after all their beseechings, obtestings,
requestings and cryings, this is the way, walk ye in it, turn you, turn,
oh! why will you dye; have this as the last return to all their importunities,
Nay, there is no hope; speak no more to us of that matter; do not offer to
persuade us to relinquish the old road, or dissuade us from following our
lovers; for when ye have done all, after these we will go; we resolve to abide,
what we have been, children of imperswasion.

But if his Servants, in following their work closly, seem to have gained a
little ground upon men, and almost persuaded them to be Christians, Satan, to
the end he may make all miscarry, and counter work these workers together with
God, and poison poor souls by a perversion of the Gospel, beyond the power of
an antidot, has raised up, instigat, and set on work a race of proud
Rationalists (for they are wiser then to class themselves amongst those poor
fools, those base things, those nothings, to whom Christ is made all things, to
whom Christ is made wisdom that he may be righteousness, sanctification and
redemption to them; nay, they must be wise men after the flesh, wise above what
is written: a crucified Christ is really unto them foolishness and weakness,
though the power of God and the wisdom of God; they will needs go to work
another way; they will needs glory in his presence, and have a heaven of their
own hand-wind. (O my soul enter not into their secrets! and, O sweet Jesus, let
thy name be to me, the Lord my righteousness, thou have wone it, wear it; and
gather not my soul with such, who make mention of any other righteousness, but
of thine only!) to bring-in another Gospel amongst men, then the Gospel of the
grace of God; as they determine to know some other thing then Christ and him
crucified; so with the inticeing words of man's wisdom, they bewitch men into a
disobedience to the truth, setting somewhat else before them then a crucified
Christ: And this they do, that they may remove men from those, who call them
into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel: A Christ, it is true, they
speak of; but it is not the Christ of God; for all they drive at (O cursed and
truly Antichristian design!) is, that he may profit them nothing, while they
model all Religion according to this novel project of their magnified morality?
This is that which gives both life and luster to that image they adore, to the
Dagon, after whom they would have the world* wonder and Worship.

That there is such a moralizeing or muddizeing (if I may be for once admitted
to coin a new word to give these men their due) of Christianity now introduced
and comeing in fashion, many of the late pieces in request do evince? Now, that
Christianity should moralize men above all things, I both give and grante; for
he who is partaker of the divine nature, and has obtained precious faith, must
add virtue to his faith; But that it should be only conceived and conceited as
an elevation of nature to a more clear light, in the matter of morality,
wherein our Lord is only respected, as an heavenly teacher, and perfect
pattern proposed for imitation, is but a proud pleasing fancy of self
conceited, darkened and deluded dreamers, robing God of the glory of his mercy
and goodness; our Lord Jesus Christ of the glory of his grace and merit; The
Spirit of the efficacy of his glorious and mighty operations; and themselves
and their pilgrims, who give them the hand as guids, of the comfort and fruit
of all.

This is the pilgrimage, we are persuaded to undertake to the holy Land; this
is that reasonableness of Christianity, which with great swelling words of
vanity is ventilat, to the allureing and ensnareing of such, who had almost
escaped the corruption, which is in the world through lust, and the pollutions
of the flesh through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; This
is the way which they, who undertake to publish to the world the true causes of
the decay of piety, take to revive and introduce that piety, which they
complain is wanting: O impious invention, not only encroaching upon the
unsearchable mystery of the Gospel; but subversive of the whole method, and
blessed and beautiful contrivance of salvation, and rendering salvation
impossible to the greatest proficients in this study; and the grand patrons
and practitioners in this new art, the greatest opposers of that grace of God,
which b^ingeth salvation unto all men. It is true, they will not plainly plead
for profanitie, Nay, they may and do make a great noise about the practice of
piety, as if they were the only patrons thereof; that with less observation
and greater facility, they may beguile themselves and their followers of the
reward: they may possibly persuade even to a pinching of the body, that they
may puff up, and pamper their fleshly mind; and while they overdrive men to
the practice of will - worship, and performance of those things, which have a
show of wisdom, it is that they may withdraw them from holding that blessed
head, from which all the body by joints and bands, having nourishment
ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God; yet the
grace of God, that only liveing principle of all true piety, which they
dispute out of the souls of men, that they may debauch them into a contempt of
the Spirits working in men to will and to do, takes frequent vengance on this
their invention, by leaving them not only to play the Devil in disguise, that
they may be known by their fruits; but also to lay aside that garb of external
godliness, (for the Devil nor his Domestics cannot long wear a strait
doublet) that it may appear, how it is verified in them, from him that has
not shall be taken away even that he has; which is so plain, that to many of
these pleaders for this new way, and their pros^lyts, in the righteous
judgment of God, it happens according to the true proverb, the dog is turned
to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the
mire.

It cannot escape thy observation, how busy Satan is this day, upon the one
hand, to keep men, under the call of the Gospel to give all diligence to make
their calling and election sure, idle all the day; so that no persuasion can
enduce them to engage seriously to fall about a working out their own salvation
in fear and trembling; and on the other, equally diligent and industrious to
divert men from trusting in the name of the Lord, and staying upon their God;
seting them on work to go and gather fuel, and kindle a fire, and compass
themselves about with sparks, that they may walk in the light of their own
fire, and in the sparks that they have kindled; knowing well that they shall
this way most certainly lose their toil and travel, and have no other reward at
his hand of all their labor, but to ly down in everlasting sorrow, while the
stout hearted and far from righteousness, and salvation, shall get their soul
for a prey, and be made to rejoice in his salvation, and bless him who has
made them meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.

It is fit therefore, in order to thy own establishment in the present truth,
and that thou may so work, that thy labor be not in vain, but God may
accept thy works, often to think, and seriously to consider in thy own soul,
what that Gospel holiness is, and what these men substitute in the place of
it, that thou may choice the perfect and pleasant way of Gospel holiness, and
exercise thy self to that godliness, which is profitable for all things,
having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

I am neither the fit person for so great an undertaking, nor do these limits,
within which I must bound my self, permit me to expatiat, in many notions about
the nature of this excellent and precious thing, true Gospel holiness: Oh if,
in the entry, I could on my own behalf and others, sob out my Alas, from the
bottom of my soul, because, be what it will, it is some other thing then men
take it to be: few habituat themselves to a thinking upon it, in its high
nature, and soul enriching advantages, till their hearts receive suitable
impressions of it, and their lives be the very transumpt of the law of God
written in their heart; the thing (Alas!) is lost in a noise of words, and heap
of notions about it, neither is it a wonder that men fall into mistakes about
it, since it is only the heart possessed of it that is capable to understand
and perceive its true excellency: But if it be asked, what it is? we say, it
may be shortly taken up, as the elevation and raising up of a poor mortal unto
a conformity with God; As a participation of the divine nature; or as the very
image of God stamped on the soul, impressed on the thoughts and affections, and
expressed in the life and conversation; so that the man, in whom Christ is
formed, and in whom he dwells, lives and walks, has, while upon the earth, a
conversation in heaven; not only in opposition to those many, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame, who mind
earthly things; but also to these pretenders unto and personaters of religion,
who have confidence in the flesh, and Worship God with their own Spirit (which
in the matters of God is flesh, and not Spirit) and have somewhat else to
rejoice in, then in Christ Jesus, and a being found in him not having their own
righteousness.

True Gospel holiness then consists in some similitude and likeness to God,
and fellowship with him, founded upon that likeness: there is such an
impression of God, his glorious attributes, his infinite Power, Majesty, Mercy,
Justice, Wisdom, Holiness, and Grace, etc. As sets him up all alone in the
soul without any competition, and produces those real apprehensions of him*
that he is alone excellent and matchless. O how preferable does he appear,
when indeed seen, to all things? And how does this light of his infinite
gloriousness, shineing into the soul, darken and abscure to an invisiblenesse
all other excellencies, even as the riseing of the sun makes all the lesser
lights to disappear. Alas! how is God unknown in his glorious being and
attribute? When once the Lord enters the soul, and shines into the heart, it is
like the riseing of the sun at midnight: all these things, which formerly
pretended to some loveliness, and did dazzle with their luster, are eternally
darkened: now all natural perfections and moral virtues, in their flowr and
perfections are at best looked upon as aliquid nihil: what things were formerly
accounted gain and godliness, are now counted loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus the Lord; and the soul cannot only suffer the loss
of them all without a sob, but be satisfied to throw them away as dung, that it
may win him, and be found in him. Now the wonder of a Deity, in his greatness,
power and grace, swallows up the soul in sweet admiration: O how does it love
to lose it self in finding here what it cannot fathom? And then it begins
truly to see the greatness and evil of sin; then it is looked upon without
the covering of pleasure or profit, and loathed as the leprosy of hell. Now the
man is truly like God in the knowledge of good and evil, in the knowledge of
that one infinite good, God; and to the knowledge of that one almost infinite
evil, sin. This is the first point of likeness to him, to be conformed to him
in our understanding, that as he knows himself to be the only self being and
fountain good, and all created things in their flour and perfection, with all
their real or fancied conveniences being compared with him, but as the drop of
a bucket, the small dust of the balance, or nothing, yea less then nothing,
vanity; (which is nothing blown up, by the force or forgery of a vainly working
imagination, to the consistence of an appearance) so for a soul to know indeed
and believe in the heart, that there is nothing deserves the name of good
besides God, to have the same superlative and transc^dent thoughts of that
great and glorious self being God, and the same diminishing and debaseing
thought ^o all things and beings besides him. And that as the Lord sees no
evil in the creation but sin, and hates that with a perfect hatred, as contrary
to his holy will; so for a soul to aggravat sin in its own sight to an
infiniteness of evil, at least till it see it only short of infiniteness in
this respect, that it can be swallowed up of infinite mercy. But whence has the
soul all this light? It owes all this and owns it self as debtor for it to him,
who opens the eyes of the blind: it is he who commands the light to shine out
of darkness, who has made these blessed discoveries, and has given the poor
benighted soul, the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ: These irradiations are from the Spirits illumination: it is the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation that has made day light in the darkened soul:
the man who had the heart of a beast, as to any saveing or solid knowledge of
God or himself, has now got an understanding to know him that is true: now is
Christ become the poor man's wisdom, he is now renewed in knowledge after the
image of him that oreated him: he might well babble of spiritual things, but
till now he understood nothing of the beauty and excellency of God and his
ways: Nay, he knew not what he knew, he was ignorant as a beast of the life
and luster of those things, which he knew in the letter: nothing seemed more
despicable to him in the world, then true godliness; but now he judges
otherwise, because he has the mind of Christ: the things, which in his
darkness he did undervalue as trifles to be mocked at, he now can only mind
and admire* since he became a child of light: now being delivered from that
blindness and brutishness of Spirit, which possesses the world, (and
possessed himself till he was transformed by the renewing of his mind) who
esteem basely of spiritual things and set them at naught, he prizeth as alone
precious: the world wonders, what pleasure or content can be in the service of
God, because they see not by tasteing how good he is: to be pryeing into, and
poreing upon invisible things, is to them visible madness, but to the
enlightened mind, the things that are not seen are only worth seeing, and
while they appear not to be they only are; whereas the things that are seen
appear but to be, and are not. Though the surpassing sweetness of spiritual
things should be spoke of to them, who cannot savor the things of God, in such
a manner as the giorious light of them did surround men; yet they can perceive
no such thing: all is to them cuningly devised fables: let be spoke what will,
they see no form, no comeliness, no beau^y in this glorious object, God in
Christ reconcileing sinners to himself. Alas the mind is blind^d, the dungeon
is within* and till Christ open the eyes, as well as reveal his light, the foul
abide^ in its blindnefse, and is buried in midnight darkness; but when the
Spirit of God opens the man's eyes, and he is translated by an act of
omnipotency out of the kingdom of darken^sse into the kingdom of his dear
son, which is a kingdom of mavelous light; O! what matchless beauty does he
now see in these things, which appeared despicable and ^ke rothings to him,
till he got the unction, the eye salve, which teaches all things: now he sees
(what none without the Spirit can see) the things, which God has prepared for
them that love him, and are freely given them of God; and these, though seen at
a distance, reflect such rays of beauty into his soul, that he beholds and is
ravished, he sees and is swallowed up in wonder.

But then, in the next place, this is not a Spiritlesse inefficacious
speculation about these things, to know no evil but sin and separation from
God, and no blessedness but in the fruition of him; it is not such a knowledge
of them as does not principle motion to pursue after them. This, I grant, is
part of the image of God, when the sun of righteousness, by ariseing upon the
man, has made day light in his soul, and by these divine discoveries has
^aught him to make the true parallel betwixt things that differ, and to put a
just value upon them according to their intrinsic worth: But this divine
illumination does not consist in a mere notion of such things in the head, nor
does it subsist in enlightening the mind; but in such an impression of God upon
the soul, as transformes and changes the heart into his likeness by love:
knowledge is but one line, one draught or lineament of the souls likeness to
him; that alone does not make up the image; but knowledge rooted in the heart,
and engraven on the soul, shineing and showing it self forth in a gospel
adorneing conversation, that makes a comely proportion; when the same hand that
touched the eye, and turned the man from darkness to light, and give an heart
to know him, that he is the Lord, does also circumcise the man's heart, to love
the Lord his God, with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his
mind* and this love manifesting its liveliness, in its constraining power to
live to him and for him: light without heat is but wild fire; but light in the
mind begetting heat in the heart, making it burn Godward, Christward, and
Heavenward, light in the understanding setting on fire and enflameing the
affections, and these shining out in a heavenly conversation, makes up the
lively image of God, both in feature and stature, both in proportion and
color: faith begins this image and draws the lineaments; and love bringing
forth obedience finishes, and gives it the lively luster: the burneings of love
in obedience to God is that which illuminats the whole, and maks a man look
indeed like him, to whose image he is predestinat to be conform, and then maks
him, who is ravished with the charms of that beauty, say, as in a manner
overcome thereby, how fair is thy love, my Sister, my spouse? How much better
is thy love, then wine, and the smell of thine ointments then all spices? But
consider, that as these beams, which irradiat the soul, are from the Spirit of
Christ, so that spiritual heat and warmth come out of the same airth, and
proceed from the same Author* for our fire burns as he blows, our lamp
shines as he snuffes and furnishes oil: men therefore would not indulge
themselves in this delusion, to think that, that which will pass for pure
Religion and undefiled before God, consists either in an outward blameless
conversation, or in putting on and weareing an external garb of profession:
no, as the top of it reaches higher, so the root of it lies deep^r; it is
rooted in the heart, this seed being sown in an honest heart (or making the
heart honest, in which it is sown) takes root down ward, and brings forth
fruit upward; as trees that g^ow as far under ground as above, so these trees
of righteousness, the planting of the Lord that he may be glorified, grow as
far and as fast under ground, as above; godliness grows as far downward in
self emptying, self denial and self abaseing, in hungring and thirsting after
more of righteousness, in the secret engagements of the heart to God in
Christ, in these burstings of heart and bleedings of soul (to which God alone
is witness) because of shortcomeing in holiness, because of a body of death
within, and because of that law in the members warring against the law of the
mind, and bringing often into captivity to the law of sin; as it grows upward
in a profession: and this is that pure Religion and undefiled before God, which
is both most pleasant to him, and profitable to the soul.

But to make the difference betwixt dead morality, in its best dress, and true
godliness, more clear and obvious (that the loveliness of the one may engage
men into a loathing of the other, this dead ca^ion and stinking carca^e of
rotten morality, which still stinks in the nostrills of God, even when embalmed
with the most costly ointments of its miserably misled patrons) we say, that
true godliness, which in quality and kind differs from this much pleaded for
and applauded morality (a blake heathen by a ^el kind of Christians baptized
of late with the nam^ of Christianity, and brought into the temple of the Lord,
concerning which he has commanded hat it should never, in that shape, and for
that end it is introduced, enter into his congregation; and the bringers for
their pains are like to seclude themselves for ever from his presence) It
respects Jesus Christ. 1. As its Principle. 2. As its Pattern. 3. As its Altar,
and. 4. As its end.

First, I say, true holiness, in its being and operation, respects Jesus
Christ as its principle: I live, (said that shineing saint) yet not I, but
Christ lives in me: as that which gives religion its first being, is the
religation of the soul to God; so that which gives it motion, and draws forth
that life into action, is the same God's working all their works in them and
for them, so that in all they do, they are workers together with God; every act
of holiness is an act of the soul made alive unto God through Jesus Christ,
and quickened to each action by the supervenience of new life and influence:
therefore, says Christ, without me you can do nothing: it is not, being out of
me you can do nothing (for he spoke it to those who were in him) but if ye
leave me out in doing, all ye do will be nothing: Its Jesus Christ who gives
life and legs, so that our runings are according to his drawings: my soul
follows hard after thee (said that holy man;) but whence is all this life and
vigor? Thy right hand upholdeth me. O it is the upholdings and helpings of
this right hand, enlargeing the man's heart, that makes a running in the way of
his command^ents; it is he who, while the saints workeout the work of their own
salvation, work^th in them ^th to will and to do: It is he, who gives power to
the faint, and who to them that have no might increases st^ength; so that the
poor lifelesse, languishing ly by is made to mount-up with Eagles wings, and
su^mount all these difficulties, with a holy facility, which were simply
insuperable, and pure impossibilities: now the man runs and does not weary,
because Christ draws; and he walks and does not faint, because Christ, in whom
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, dwells in him, and walks in him, and
dwells in him for that very end, that he may have a compleatnesse and competency
of strength for duty: all grace is made to abound unto him, that he always
having all sufficiency in all things, may abound unto every good work: he is
able of himself to do nothing, no not to think any thing as he ought, but he
has a sufficiency of God, whereby he is thoroughly furnished unto every good
work; so that he may say, I am able for all things, it is more then I am able
to do all things (as we read it) its just import is. I am able to do all
things, and to endure all things; and that which keeps it from vain boasting is
what is ad led, through Christ which strengthens me, or putting power in me,
or rather impowering me, which is by a supervenient act drawing forth life into
a liveliness of exercise, according to the present exigent. There is a power
in a saint, because Christ is in him, that over powers all the powers of
darkness with out, and all the power of indwelling corruption within, so that
when the poor weak creature is ready to despond, within sight of his duty, and
say because of difficulty, what is my strength that I should hope? Christ
says, despond not, my grace is sufficient forthee, and my power shall rest
upon thee, to a reviveing thee, and raising thee up, and putting thee in case
to say, when I am weak then am I strong; his strength, who impowers me, is
made perfect in my weakness, so that I will glory in my infirmities, and be
glade in being graces debtor. But what power is that, which raises the dead
finner, and carries the soul in its actings so far without the line, and above
the sphere of all natural activity, when stretched to its utmost? O it is an
exceading great power, which is to them ward who believe, that must make all
things, how difficult so ever, easy, when he works in them to will and to do,
according to the working of his mighty power (or as it is upon the margent, and
more emphatick, of the might of his power) which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, etc. he that
raised up the Lord Jesus from the dead, raises up believers also by Jesus, and
being raised and revived by him, to walk in new nesse of life: the life of
Jesus, in its communications of strength, is manifest in their mortal flesh,
according to that of the same Apostle, the life that I live in the flesh (sais
he) I live by the faith of the Son of God: faith brings in Christ in my soul,
and Christ being my life carries out my soul, in all the acts of obedience,
wherein* though I be the formal agent, yet the efficiency and the power, by
which I operat, is from him; so that I can give no better account of it, then
this, I not I. But who then, if not you? The grace of God, sais he, which was
with me. But this mystery to our bold, because blind, moralists, of an
indwelling Christ, working mightily in the soul, is plain madness and
melancholy; however we understand his knowledge in the mystery of Christ, who
said, the life I live in the flesh, etc. and from what we understand of his
knowledge in that mystery, which he had by revelation, we understand, our
moralists to be men of corrupt minds, who concerning the faith have made
shipwreck; but what is that, the life I live in the flesh, etc? The ^port of it
seems to be this, if not more, while I have in me a soul animating my body, as
the principle of all my vital and natural actions, I have Jesus Christ
animating my soul, and by the impulse and communicate virtue and strength of an
indwelling Christ, I am made to run the ways of his commandments, wherein I
take so great delight, that I am found of no duty as of my enemy.

Secondly, This gospel holiness respects Jesus Christ as its pattern. It
proposes no lower pattern for imitation, then to be conform to his image; he
that is begotten again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ from
the dead, girds up the loins of his mind (which are the affections of his
soul, lest by falling flat upon the earth he be hindered in running the race set
before him, as looking to the foreruner his pattern) in this girdle of hope,
that he may be holy in all manner of conversation, keeping his eye upon the
precept and pattern, that his practice may be conform. It is written, says
he, Be ye holy for I am holy, the hope of seeing God, and being ever with him
imposes a necessity upon him who has it, to look no lower, then at him, who
is glorious in holiness; and therefore he is said to purify himself, even as
he is pure; and knowing that this is the end of their being quickened together
with Christ, that they may walk even as he walked; they, in their working and
walking, aim at no less then to be like him; and therefore never sit down
upon any attained measure, as if they were already perfect: the spotless
purity of God expressed in his laws, is that whereto they study assimilation;
therefore they are still in motion toward this mark, and are changed from one
degree of glorious grace into another, into the same image, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord, who never gives over his putting them to cleanse from all
filthiness of the flesh and of the Spirit, till that be true in the truest
sense, thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee. And knowing that
perfect fruition of him cannot be without perfect conformity to him, herein do
they exercise themselves, to grow in grace, and to be still advanceing toward
some more likeness to his image, forgetting all their seize, as things
that are behind, and by their reachings forth unto that which is before, make
it evident, that they make every begun degree of grace and conformity to God, a
prevenient capacity for a new degree, which yet they have not attained. I know,
our maralists look upon themselves as matchless, in talkeing of following his
steps, as he has left us an example: in this they make a flourish with
flanting effrontry, but for all their boasting of wisdom, such a poor simple
man as I, am made to wonder at their folly, who proposeing, as they say, the
purity of Christ for their pattern, are not even thence convinced, that in
order to a conformity thereto, there is a simple and absolute necessity of the
mighty operations of that Spirit of God, whereby this end can be reached; but
while they flout at the Spirits working, as a melancholy fancy, whereby the
soul is garnished with the beauty of holiness, and made an habitation for God,
I doubt not to say of these great sayers, that they understand neither what
they say, nor whereof they affirm: nay does not their talking of the one, not
only without seeing the necessity of the other, but speaking against it, say in
the heart of every one, (who has not the heart of a beast) that they have
never yet got a sight of the holiness of that pattern, nor of their own
pollutions and impotency; for if they had, they would give themselves up to
Jesus Christ to be washed by him, without which they can have no part with him.
O there will be a ^ast difference, at the latter day, betwixt them who have
given their blake souls to Jesus Christ to bletch, when he shall present them
without spot, not only clothed with wrought gold, but all glorious within,
and these who have never dipped, yea who have despised to dip their defiled
souls in any other fountain, save in the impure pudle of their own
performances: this will make them loathsome in his sight, and cause his soul
abhor those, who^ have done this despite unto the Spirit of grace, as to
slight that bl^ssed fountain, opened for sin and for uncleanness, let them
pretend as high as they will, to look to him, as a pattern, while (because the
plague sore i^ got up in their eye) they look not to him as a price, no^ to the
grace of Jesus Christ, as that which can only principle any acceptable
performance of duty, he will plunge them in the ditch, and it Will cost them
their souls, for rejecting the counsel of God against themselves, in not making
use of him who came by water, as well as by blood.

Thirdly, This gospel holiness respects Christ as the Altar. It is in him and
for him that his soul is well pleased with our performance, this is the Altar,
upon which thou must lay thy gift, and leave it, without which thy labor is
lost, and whatsoever thou do is loathed, as a corrupt thing. As believers
draw all their strength from him, so they expect acceptance only through him,
and for him: they do not look for it, but in the beloved: they dare not draw
near to God in duty, but by him: this is the new and liveing way, which is
consecrat for them: and if such, who offer to come to God, do no enter in
hereat, in stead of being admitted to a familiar converse with God, they shall
find him a consumeing fire: when the saints have greatest liberty in prayer
(and so of all other performances, when their hearts are most lifted up in the
ways of the Lord) they abhor at thinking their prayer can any otherwise be
set forth before him as incense, or the lifting up of their hands as the
evening sacrifice, but as presented by the great intercessor and perfumed by
the merit of his oblation. If they could weep out the marrow of their bones,
and the moisture of their body in mourning over sin; yet they durst not think
of having what comes from so impure a spring* and runs through so polluted a
channel, presented to God but by Jesus Christ, in order to acceptance; for as
they look to the exalted Savior, to get their repentance from him, so when by
the pourings out upon them the Spirit of grace and supplication, he has made
them pour out their hearts before him, and has melted them into true
tenderness, so that their mourning is a great mourning, they carry back these
tears to be washen and bathed in his blood, as knowing without this of how
little worth and value with God their salt water is; but when they are thus
washed, he puts them in his bottle, and then pours them out again to them in
the wine of strong consolation: thus are they made glade in his house of
prayer, and their sighs and groans come up with acceptance upon his Altar. O
blessed Altar, that sanctifies the gold! This is that Altar, whereto the
mocking moralist has no right. It is by him, that the poor believer offers up
his sacrifice to God continually; what ever he does, in word o^ deed, he
desires to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus: as he knows, He lives to make
intercession, and to appear in the presence of God for his poor people, both
to procure influences for duty, and plead for acceptance; so he depends upon
him for both, as knowing he can never otherwise hear, or have it said unto
him, well done, good and faithful servant. It may be he can do little, he has
but a mite to offer; but he puts it in the mediators hand to be presented to
God: he has not gold, nor silver, nor purple to bring, he can do no great
things, he has but goats hair or rams skins, but he gives them the right
tincture, he makes them red in the blood of Christ, and so they are a beautiful
incarnat.

Lastly, This Gospel holiness respects Jesus Christ as its last end: as it
has its being from him, so it is all directed toward the praise of his grace;
while the believing soul in whom Christ dwells designs no l^sse, and aims at
no lower mark, then assimilition to God, and f^uition of him, while he is
endeavoring, always and in all things, to be unlike himself and what he was,
that he may be like God; it is not to be like him on that wicked and wretched
design, which man had at first in his eye, whereby he lost his God, and unmade
a man* but it is that thereby he may be in better case to glor^fy him, and that
God may be the more endeared to his own soul, because of what he has done for
him, and commended and mad^ precious to the souls of others, while they take
notice of what a change grace has not only made in his most eminent
appearances for God: he contracts himself into a disappearance, that God may
appear and be seen, in the shin^ing glory of his grace bestowed upon him: for
the godly man of all men is ^he most humble* this is the garb he clothes
himself with, if his face shine in his accesses to God, that pride may be h^d
from his eyes, he wots not of it; the very thoughts of ^obing God of his glory,
and clothing himself with the spoils of his honor* are terrible to him, and
looked upon as that wherein the soul resembls Satan most manifestly; and
therefore that great practitioner, who ou^ stripped all others in doing and
suff^ring for God, dare not stand up to intercept the glory due to his Master,
but ascribes all to him, with a neverthe less, nevertheless not I, but the
grace of God which was with me: what have thou, which thou have not received,
prevents his boasting, and imposes the necessity of blessing the donor: the
mark he aims at in his exerciseing himself to godliness, is mainly this, that
men seeing his goods works may glorify his Father which is in heaven. As he
knows, he acts not in his own strength, but in his, who counts him worthy of
the high calling, and fulfils all the good pleasure of his goodness in him,
and the work of faith with power; so he considers for what all this is, it is
that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in us, and we in him,
according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ: and he has a
sweet complacency in complying with this God-exalting and grace-magnifiing
design: when grace has set a crown upon his head, and made him a king (for
the meanest believer is truly a more illustrious Prince, then the greatest
Potentat of the earth, not only because under his rags lies hide a title to a
crown, and his expectation is to sit with Christ upon his throne; but because
he is already crowned with loving kindness and tender mercies, and does,
while on the earth, sit together with Christ in heavenly places; Christ is
possessed of glory in his stead, as his representee and head, and a man is all
crowned and acknowledged as king, when his head is crowned) he knows he is
made a priest al^o, to sacrifice it to the giver; and therefore he casts down
his crown before the throne with this, thou art worthy to receive glory and
honor, etc. and he esteems the privilege of doing so^, as great as the
prerogative of having it set on: when he works hardest to adorn himself with
the beauty of holiness, it is not so much that his beauty may appear perfect,
as that that grace, to which he is a debtor for all his comeliness, may shine
in its luster; and his virtues, who has called him to glory and virtue, may be
showed forth: he designs not, in his diligence in duty, to be taken notice of
as a singular saint, but his great and shineing singularity, which he does most
ambitionat, lies in this, that Christ, in the communications of his grace, and
efficacy of his influence, may be admired in him, as in all that believe. In a
word, as all he has is of him and from him, so all he does or designs is for
him and to him; it is Christ to him to live, in whom Christ lives: now this is
the very nature of pure religion and undefiled, and that which compleats the
image of God, and puts it beyond all debat, that his soul has received the
stamp and impression of the royal seal on it, and that his heart is the epistle
of Christ, written not with inck and pen, but with the Spirit of the liveing
God, when his glory and the exaltation of the manifold grace, and manifold
wisdom of God, in the contriveance of salvation, is upmost in his thinkings,
desireings, Projectings and endeavourings, and has the first place in the roll
of his wishings; while other men seek their own things, it is his own, his
only own, his one, his all, to seek the things of Christ, that blessed seeker,
who came to seek him and save him; and being found of him, he endeavors to
carry as one no more his own; the glorifieing of him in his body and Spirit,
which are his, because bought by him, is his begun heaven; and the greatest
errand he has in heaven, is to get a more clear sight of that blessed object
of all admiration and adoration, and to be in better case to cry him up for
ever.

Now this is but a short and general Character, drawn by an unskilful hand, of
that holiness, which will abide the test, and be found true, when tried by the
touch stone of the word.

But let us, on the other hand, take a short view of what our moralists
substitute in its place, as (in their account) both more beautiful to the eye,
and more beneficial to the souls of men; wherein I intend to be breife. I might
compend the account to be given shortly, and give it most exactly, yet trueln,
in these few words. As the most undoubted deviation from, and perfect
opposition unto the whole contriveance of salvation, and the conveyance of it
unto the souls of men, as revealed in this gospel, which brings life and
immortality to light, that fighters against the grace of God in its value and
virtue can forge, stretching their blind reason to the overthrow of true
religion, and ruin of the souls of men: for to this height these Masters of
reason have in their blind rage risen up against the Lord and against his
Anointed; this is the dreadful period of that path, wherein we are persuaded to
walk, yea Hectored, if we would not forfeit the repute of men by these grand
Sophies, who arrogat to themselves the name and thing of knowledge, as if
wisdom were to die with them. The deep mysteries of salvation, which Angels
desire to look into, and only satisfy themselves with admiration at, must
appear as respondents at their bar, and if they decline the judge and court,
as incompetent, they flee out and flout at subjecting this blind mole, man's
reason, to the revelation of faith in a mystery. The manifold wisdom of God
and the manifold grace of God, must either condescend to their unfoldings, and
be content to speak in their dialect, or else these wits, these Athenian
dictators will give the deep things of God, because beyond their diveings, the
same entertainment, which that great gospel preacher, Paul, met with from men
of the same mould, kidney and complexion, because he preached unto them Jesus,
what would this babbler say, said they; The Spirit of wisdom and revelation they
know not, they have not, they acknowledge not; nay they despise him in his
saveing, and soul - ascertaining illuminations; and the workings of that mighty
power to them ward who believe, is to the men of this new mould (because they
have not found it) an insufferable fansy, to be exploded with a disdain and
indignation, which discovers what Spirit acts them in this opposition.

But what do they say, that will found this charge, and free us from casting
iniquity upon them? They are of age and can speak for themselves: when they
have vomit out their gall against the imputed righteousness of Christ, and the
new birth, and that holiness, which is imparted to the real members of Christ,
with a scoffeing petulancy, they then make a great noise of holiness, as who
but they; the thing they plead for and persuade unto* is a kind of holiness
educed out of natural abilities, wherein Christ, the Spirit and the Gospel of
the grace of God, is permitted no greater interest, nor allowed a more
effectual adjuvancy, then to concur by way of precept, motive and example?
Thi^ is now that admired and applauded Diana, morality. It is true, they will
sometime chirt through their teeth (for what ever Christ, the Spirit and Gospel
gets of our Moralists, it is against the hair, and they are hard put to it, ere
they give it) a tepid acknowledgement, that the gospel does afford men some
special help, and is of singular use and advantage, in showing the way and rule
with greater clearness, and guiding and directing how to walk in it with a
plain perspicuity, and exciting by noble examples* and some do also add some
faint and frigid motions of the holy ghost, in the dispensation of this truth,
put forth to make men more foreward; but all this salvo jure of the great
Diana: so much and no more is yielded to the gospel, then to show men with
clearness, how they may exert and put forth their proper and innat power, it
affords them some special help in holding the candle, or rather snufing it,
that so they may with more promptitud see how to operat, and by the motives it
adduceth, and examples it brings, have a special provocation to the exercise of
these virtues commanded: the gospel, with all it brings and does, does no more
but hold the candle, till these artists weave their web, shape and show their
garment, and then let them see how to put it on* and being put on persuade them
to wear it, as the highest beauty and chief ornament of the soul: this is all
the provision they lay up for eternity, and in this dress and garb of gilded
morality, they mind to address themselves to God, and appear before his
tribunal with confidence of acceptance: they will bear their own charges to
heaven, and carry a sum with them to purchase the possession of the saints in
light, with a little abatement, which a mercy of their own moulding (for God
mercy it is not) must make; and thus they make all sure.

But what is all this noise, that these vain talkers make about holiness; they
heap up words (which weep to be so abused) about virtue, love to God,
mortification, etc. But they have really taken away our Lord Jesus Christ, and
will not tell us where they have laid him, for fear we should go seek him, and
foresake them. What are these rotten and loathsome rags, where with they would
cloth us, that the shame of our nakedness may not appear, to that holiness,
whereto we are predestinat before the foundation of the world, and whereto (in
order to the obtaining of that salvation, even the glory of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to which we are chosen) we are created again in Christ Jesus, and made
meet to be possessed of by sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
truth? What is all this tattle of theirs to the new birth, the saveing work of
regeneration (without which a man cannot enter into the kingdom of God) the
new creature, the new heart, having the law written in it, the Spirit which he
puts within us, causeing us to walk in his ways; that noble principle of
spiritual life, whereby we are quickened, raised from the dead, made alive unto
God through Christ Jesus, disposed, inclined and enabled to live to God, and
walk before him to all pleasing? Nay, according to the imposeings of these new
dogmatists (beware of dogs, says the Apostle of the same size and sort of men)
in stead of that principle implanted, and that power produced in us by the
effectual operation of the H. G. working in us mightily, according to the
workings of that mighty power, which was wrought in Christ, when raised from
the dead; we must be content with some what, which was liveing, though lazy
and dormant, in the natural powers of our own soul, now awakened out of its
sopor, and educed into act by the mere application of external means: in a
word, in stead of all that, which is purchased and procured unto us by the
death of Jesus Christ, wrought in us by his Spirit (who takes of his, and shows
it unto us) whereby our conformity to Jesus Christ is begun and carried on, we
must be content with this morality (good Lord prevent such madness!) whose
Principle is natural reason; whose Rule is the law of nature, as explained in
the scriptures; whose use and end is acceptance with God, and justification
before him; which is pure (impure) Pelagianisme, propagat now in Brittan, where
it had its unhallowed birth; a tremenduous signification of the high
displeasure of God against these huffeing arrogants of this age, who, because
they have not received the truth in love, are left to soul-murthering
delusions, and for their dispiseing the unsearchable riches of Christ, held
forth in the gospel, are left, in stead of embraceing Christ Jesus into their
soul as altogether lovely, whom God has made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption; to embrace in their bosom, and hug between
their breasts this hell-borne, and (after all the cost they have bestowed upon
it, wherein they are at the expense of their precious soul, if repentance
prevent it not) hell-blake brate, morality, in opposition to that gospel
holiness, wherein conformity to God consists.

It concerns thee, Christian Reader, whosoever* ever thou art, carefully to
observe, that the great design* the Devil this day drives in the world, i^ how
to introduce a Religion, amongst these called Christians, which for the soul
and substance of it is an Antichristian mass and medly, substitute and
obtruded, in place of the marrow of the gospel, and mysteries of salvation: And
though Christ be named amongst these perverters of the gospel; yet he is really
exautorat and robbed of his offices; and while false ends are assigned, the
great end of his comeing in the world is denied, and the blessed intendment and
design of the gospel of the grace of God is defeat. Now because Satan finds no
mids so propper for his purpose, nor mean so certain to accomplish his end, as
to corrupt the minds of men with perverse principles (for they are more then
half way to hell, when their principles state them in an opposition to the^
Prince of life) he perverts them into a nauseating of the plain path way of
salvation by a slain Savior (for the preaching of the cross, what ever they
pretend, is really to them foolishness) and seduceth them into a satisfaction
with, and pleading for this pagan piety, as preferable to pure Religion and
undefiled before God: And then under this mask of morality, and disguise of
virtue, does Abaddon muster all his several legions, and manage his opposition
against the Mediator, in the comeing of his kingdom in the world, and
conquering the souls of men. It is true, there may be some small differences
betwixt his forces when gathered in the field, in their manner or method, and
mark; some attacqueing the gospel in the very substance of it, with a flouting
and fierce insolency, others with a subtle and snarkeing fullenness; but all
of them concenter in the design, and bewray such a keenness and diligence in
driveing it, as shows both under whose banner they fight, and how true they
are to their colors and Captain: herein Papists, Pelagians, Socinians,
Arminians, and (the compound of all abominations) Quakers are unite. And r^uely
if I might be heard, I would beseech also our pepper corn men to consider, how
far the Adversary of man's salvation has improved their assertions and
concessions, and how much advantage the common enemies of the truth have got
thereby.

Take notice therefore, I say, Christians, of this, being Satan's main design,
and how and by whom it is managed, lest ye be seduced into the same
conspiracy; for many, who seemed to be of understanding, have fallen; and
fallen, because the did not fear to fall: O beware, lest ye also being led
away with the error of the wicked fall from your own stedfastness; but study to
grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior (for there is none
other name given und^ heaven, whereby men may be saved) Jesus Christ* I know,
that every Reader and serious Christian* in order to his own establishment, is
not able to purchase, nor is at leisure to peruse what Godly men have written
for this end, and whose praise, because of their pains, is in the Church of
Christ, such as that large discourse of learned and truly religious Doctor
Owen, upon the Holy Spirit^ wherein that worthy Author, as he has given* proof
to the world of Christ's being formed in him, and that his working, and walking,
and witnessing to the truth* proceeds from the same noble principle, Christ
dwelling in him, and walking in him; so he has with a profound perspicuity,
and convinceing plainness, discovered the nature, pedigree, descent and
tendency of this monster; and then, having discovered whence it came, and for
what end, he has given it a mortal blow, whereby he has laid it all alongs,
and left it sprawling and gnawing its tongue and gnashing its teeth: for which
learned, elaborat and judicious discourse, as all the lovers of that truth,
which is according to godliness, are obliged to bless the Lord; so are they
under the obligation of thankfulness to him; and by this I return him my poor
insignificant thanks, And I have the allowance of the Author, to do the same in
his name.

But I would recommend to you, who can neither purchase nor peruse what is more
voluminous (how worthy soever) the serious perusal, as of the whole of that
savoury and grace-breathing piece. The fulfilling of the Scriptures; so therein
that short but sweet digression, against blake-mouthed Parker, wherein the
gracious Author takes out his own soul, and sets before thine eye, the image of
God impressed thereon; for while he deals with that Desperado by clear and
convinceing reason, flowing natively from the pure fountain of divine
revelation, he has the advantage of most men, and writers too, in silencing
that blasphemer of the good ways of God. with arguments taken from what he
has found acted upon his own soul. And likewise I would recommend, as a
sovereign antidot against this poison, the diligent peruseing, and pondering
of what is shortly hinted against the hellish belchings of the same unhallowed
Author, (in the preface to that piece of great Mr. Durham, upon the Commands)
by a disciple, who, besides his natural acuteness and subactness of judgment in
the deepth of gospel mysteries, is known by all who know him (and for my self,
I know none now alive his equal) to have most frequent access to lean his head
on his Masters bosom, and so in best case to tell his fellow disciples and
brethren, what is breathed into his own soul, while he lives in these embraces,
and under the shedings abroad of that love of God in his soul, which drew, and
did dictat these lines* against that flouter at all such fruitions. Nor can I
here omit to observe, how when the devil raised up Parker, that Monster, to
bark and blaspheme, the Lord raised up a Merveil to fight him at his own
weapon* who did so cudgel and quell that boasting Bravo* as I know not if he be
dead of his wound, but for any thing I know, he has laid his speech.

But to close this short account of that new gospel, that other gospel
introduced and obtruded upon us, with a foameing flourish of words; and to say
it before thee, in its pure and perfect opposition to the gospel of the grace
of God, take a short compend of it, in the words of one of its great patrons,
they are set down in that new piece, called Claustrum animae Page 114. where
the Author having cited some scriptures, which do indeed press and persuade to
the practice of pure religion and undefiled, lest his morality should suffer
loss, and be found reprobat metal, if tried by such a touchstone, he guards
his Reader from falling into such a mistake (a dangerous one it is indeed to
his design, for if thou fall in it thy soul is escaped out of his cloister, he
loses his prey, and he will not be able to car^y thee hood-winked to the pit)
as if he meant or were pressing that holiness, which for its foundation has
peace with God through Christ Jesus, and for its working principle has the
life of God, whereby the dead is quickened; and for its progress the renewed
influences of the Spirit: no, by no means, he cleares himself that he is of a
far other mind, and therefore to make his Reader of his mind too, he adds --
Here is nothing to countenance these frightful fanatical pangs of the new
birth, which proceed from Enthusiasme or Melancholy, nothing to countenance the
(...) applications of a barrowed or rather snatched away righteousness: why
not? The change (says he) that our religion requires, the scripture supposes
it in all that have embraced Christianity, Page 113. And again to the same
purpose Page, 114. in opposition to the new creature, which he mocks and
murders, the real change in our affections is supposed and recommended
(Pelagius redivivus) which is this upon the matter; it is frightful, fanatical
melancholy, mad fansy to talk and tell people of being borne again, of
quickening the dead: no, the soul is alive, itis not dead, itis but at worst a
little drowsy or a sleep; there needs no more but knock at the door, and the
man will rise and run in the way of commanded duties, and acquire more
liveliness and agility by a frequent and reiterat eduction of his innare power
into act: let objective grace be but given (and to these great wits every stone
and brute is a bible, on which they can read, what will regulat them in their
walk; so that there is no simple necessity of the scriptures to them, for
making them wise to salvation: these concur only ad been esse, and are
given ex superabundante); there is subjective grace enough; one needs not go
without the powers of his own soul, to seek a sufficiency; he can will, and he
can do, without a dependence upon any real lifegiving power, or supervenient
influence, working in him to will and do: And then, in opposition to that
fansieful, borrowed and snatched away righteousness (to him an odd and new
devised doctrine) do and live is substitute at the close of the Paragraph: and
that to him is the only way, how the offered salvation is obtained.

Now Reader, if thou be not an utter stranger to the work of God upon the souls
of his people, the poison dropped from this impure and impious pen, is so
hell-blake and bitter, that it needs not my antidot; and it is so palpable and
plain a perversion of the gospel, as will vindicat and acquit any thing, which
has been said of these perverters of the right ways of the Lord, and layers
of another foundation, besides Jesus Christ* from the imputation of severity.
Christ had told us, that the way to heaven is strait and narrow, and few find
it; but out comes one out of the Cloister (I suspect hell is broke loose
against us) and having laid aside Christ, who is the door, and the way, and the
light, and the life, shows us an easy, plain and pleasant way to heaven.

Well, before thou follow such a* guide, I desire thee to take notice, how well
the all of what is contained in this cursed claustrum, does agree unto, and is
a just commentar upon what is prefixed in his frontispeece, wherein he has
Christ drawn upon the cross, but not satisfied to crucify him in effigy, he,
through the whole of his discourse, does really crucify him again, and put him
to an open shame* the sense and soul of every line, as it lies in his book, and
is levelled to his design, is away with him, away with him, he calls him self
the Lord our righteousness, take away that name from him, we own him not, we
acknowledge him not, as our righteousness, we will not beg nor borrow a rob
from him, our own mantle of morality must be to us, in stead of this Mediator:
and for the two thieves that must be crucified with him, the one is the new
birth, the other is the all of that gospel obedience, performed by virtue of
supervenient influences, communicate from that sole spring of spiritual life,
Christ dwelling in the soul of the regenerat person: two (in their account) as
great thieves as ever run, for they have stole away mistress morality her
plumash, and stripped her of her ornaments, so that it is impossible to hide the
shame of her nakedness but in their death, and for this must they be taken and
crucified with their Master, that morality, having what these took from her
restored, may bewitch the world with her beauty, and ravish them with her
charms. And for his title to his book, The love of Jesus, I* judge,
considering, how he explaines it in his book, and how true he is to his
undertaking, this question is a suitable return to it, betrayest thou the son
of man with a kiss? O he is killing kind, it is not enough that he act Pila^'s
part* unless he act Judas his part also. But why did he not speak more
modestly of the new birth, lest men should remember that it was Jesus his own
doctrine? Why? (the man goes not mad without reason) first because in prejudice
to morality, and its merit, he had delivered this doctrine with such a severe
certification, that there is no seeing the kingdom of God without it. But
secondly lest any thing of the solemnity, that attended the crucifieing of
Christ, should be wanting, after he has nailed him upon the cross, and thrust
a spear in his side, falls a mocking, to increase his pangs; for having taught
so frightful, fanatical, enthusiastic and melancholy a doctrine, as the
necessity of being in pangs of the new birth, if ever men would be in heaven.

However, I perceive some are now upon a reformation (good news if true, for
the world will bear them witness of its necessity.) But is this it? is this
the mode of the Religion to be introduced with such a pomp and parad? Is this
the reformation, that the reformed Church must be taken away and thrown down,
to make way for the erection of this new monastry? Well, when it is built
(which only mercy can prevent) to give it its due, you see, less cannot be
written over the poarch of this aedifice, if according to the pattern, then
this; The unclean spirit that was cast out, is returned, and has taken
possession, with seven devils worse then himself.

Now while Satan drags most men with their own consent, through the pudle of
gross profanity, and these swine, swallowed up in sensuality* run as he drives
(being led captive of him at his pleasure) without all dread of being drowned
in the lake, where he will land them. And while he besots the soreing wits of
the age, into a slighting and setting at naught the glorious Savior, with that
invaluable and precious salvation, which he brings to poor self destroyed
sinners; some few there are, whom he will not want, and whom he will not suffer
to wander from the refuge and resting place of souls, and whom he will not
suffer to rest satisfied while they want him; these he delivers from the
imposeings of Satan, and the betrayings of their own deceitful and desperately
wicked heart, by opening their eyes, so that they are made to approve the
things, which are more excellent, being taught of God, and are prevailed with,
through the efficacious persuasions of that grace, which will take no refus^l
from some, to subject their consent unto the gospel* But Alas! even many of
these, into soul the light has shined, and who have a liveing principle
implanted in them, which will spring up into everlasting life; (and therefore
cannot miss of the end of their faith, the salvation* of their souls) yet how
busy is Satan, and how does he hang upon their working hand, so that the good
which they would that they do not; and in this he has the concurrence of that
law, which is in their members, carrying them impetuously to do what they would
not, and captivating them unto that law of sin, which is in their members? How
often Alas! are they engaged by the slye suggestions of Satan, and specious
solicitations of their own hearts, into things unworthy of their high and holy
calling; so that however grace, which prevented them at first, will also rescue
them at last; yet by their untender way and walk, as they rob God of the glory
of his grace, in not showing forth his vertue^ in all things, they also deprive
themselves of the comfort thereof, through their uncircumspect walking, and of
that sweet inward serenity of mind, and unspeakable joy, which is to be had in
fellowship with him; and in the end must suffer loss, by heaving their works
burnt, and they themselves but almost, yea scarcely saved; saved they must be
(because on the foundition) yet so as by fire; while the tender Christian, who
exercises himself to godliness, has a sweet life, his heaven is serene and
clear, his study to purge his heart from corruption and cleanse his hands in
innocence, keeps his interest unclouded; his care not to grieve the Spirit in
his workings, delivers him from the grief, flowing from the Spirits ceasing to
witness; he so thinks on whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, as to do them, knowing
this is the way to have that peace of God, which passes all understanding, to
guard his heart and mind through Christ Jesus: he who has a conversation in
heaven, cannot want a consort of sweet music in his own soul. O what melody
must it make in the soul, how sweet must the chirpings and chimeings of such a
bird be singing in the bosom, as the testimony of a man's consesence, that in
simplicity and Godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God (O mark how the crown of his gloriation and gladness is put upon grace's
head!) he has his conversation in the world; and then when he has served his
generation thus, according to the will of God, having made it his work, as one
made partaker of the divine nature, to add one grace to another, he enters his
harbor (O glorious landing, where God is seen, and glory dwells!) with a room
sea, and a porting wind: for says the Holy Ghost, an entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ: whereas the man, whose work it has not been, so to walk
as he might adorn the doctrine of God the savior, in all things, and hold
forth in his way the word of life, dies often in the dark, because he did not
walk as become a child of light: and though that God, whose gifts and calling
are without repentance, may save him; yet his glory may require it, to withhold
from him the testimony of the Spirit, which is by watter, and never, while he
is in this world, either let himself or others wit of it, nay not only so, but
he may go off the stage with horror, and go out of this life under the terrors
of God; for, though the Spirit of God being the spirit of truth will never
alter the word that is gone out of his mouth; and once having said, thou art a
son, and in a gracious state, will never again say, thon art no son, and thy
grace is no grace; but yet, when his conscience awaks upon him, and aggravats
his guilt, from what he had formerly been helped to do, and stings him till he
roar by reason of the disquietnesse of his heart, and all his evidences for
heaven are so blurred, (though not delet) as there is not one legible letter in
them, he cannot say, when he is just laying speech, that he has one toaken for
good; and in this mist, the sincerity and reality of the whole may not only be
questioned, but denied. The Spirit, I say, though once having wrought the good
work, and translated the soul out of a state of bondage into a state of
glorious liberty, will never again deny his own work; yet may he stand by
silent, and say nothing, and see the poor man, whom he will save for all this
(as a just punishment for his untendernesse, and that all, who hear or look
on, my learn to walk more circumspectly, and take heed of grieving the Spirit,
whereby they are sealed) expire under these pangs, throws, tossings, terrors,
affrightments, and soul-distracting fears, wherewith he was filled and
overwhelmed, under the first workings of the Spirit of bondage.

But besides these, a little lovely flock there is, a few number, who through
grace obtain mercy to walk, as hateing the garment spotted with the flesh;
they make Religion their business; it is their one thing, to abstain from all
appeareance of evil; and to exercise themselves to godliness: by the
circumspection of their walking, it is evident, they are upon their watch, and
make it their work, not only to keep their heart with all keeping, but so to
keep themselves in their converseings in the world* amidst a crowd of snares,
and throng of tentations, as that evil one touch them not: they carry as
knowing that Satan, who goes about seeking whom he may devour, way ^ lays
them, and watches to catch all advantages against them; and therefore as not
ignorant of his devices, they study sobriety and vigilance, left through a
secure incircumspection they be circumvented, and give him the advantage he
seeks; and so bear the mark of his blake hand: yea some of these, at some
rare times, do not only satisfy themselves to carry as defendants, but are
helped to such a heroic heavenly and Christ-like resistance, as to make Satan
flee from them; and when they, through him who strengthens them unto the
battal, (and will at last once for all and for eve^, tread Satan under their
feet, and make the weakest wrigling, that ever gave up their names to the
Captain of salvation, set their feeble feet as more than conquerours upon the
neck of the great red dragon, and off his neck, to his everlasting confusion,
mount up in their triumphing chariot, and receive the conquerours crown) have
acquit themselves, as the good soldiers of Jesus Christ, not only in warding
off the blows of that soul enemy, but in manageing the sword of the Spirit,
and the shield of faith, so in the conflict, as they make the enemy, who
stretched out the hand to strick at them, take in a stump, they then pursue
their victory, on purpose to set the crown on the Captains head, through whose
strength alone they gained it. But Alas! even amongst this select number, these
more serious souls and single servants of God, how few do improve, as they
ought and might, that strength and help, which is their allowance* and whereby
they might be made strong for the labor of Religion? How many, of these few
followers after holiness, do move slowly, and promove little? They cannot give
over the study of holiness, (their heart being engaged to God and his ways,
beyond a retreat) but how heartlesse and handlesse are they at their work? They
tugge at duty, and tire themselves in the ways of God, without any seen
success, or experiencing the sweet of his service; their profiting does not
appear to all, which, as it is their sin, is also attended with shame and
sorrow: yea, they carry so despondently in duty, as if the gospel required
brick without furnishing straw, whereas if they took the right way, they might
walk without wearying; even the faint, and they who have no might, if they
knew, and had learned how to lay their help upon him, who is mighty, where God
has laid it, should find their strength increased, to a surmounting of all
difficulties, and an experienceing of a sweet facility in the ways of God, so
that in stead of whineing and sobing over their duty, of which they are often
found as an enemy, and sinking under a hand ^ weakening despondency, they might
sing in the sweet, pleasant and plain ways of holiness, they might make his
statutes their songs in the house of their pilgrimage, and be able from their
own experience to say it and seal it, that his yoke is easy, and his burden is
light.

Now, that the less tender, in whom the root of the matter is, may be
persuaded and provoked to a shineing seriousness, to the adorning of that
doctrine of God, the Savior, which they profess: And they whose souls are not
only biased toward the ways of God, but have some holy habitual bentness
heaven - wards, and it is their burden that the whole of their course does not
evidence a conversation in heaven: To the end, I say, that both may not only
be prevailed with, to study more conformity to the Head, whose members they
are, and have a conversation such as becomes the gospel indeed; but may
through grace acquire a blessed facility* in going from strength to strength,
and growing strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, this ensuing
Treatise is put in thy hand, that thy heart may be lift up, in the waves of the
Lord, wherein the Author has, with a peculiar perspicuity and special
plainness, not only set before thine eye that blessed Sun of righteousness, as
shineing in this gospel with a meridian brightness, to the irradiating, with
the rays of his glorious light, the darkened soul; and likewise thou have him
not only here held forth as that alone liveing fountain and overflowing
spring of all spiritual life and strength. But he has taught thee and me, how
to make use of him, in whom dwells the fullness of the God head bodily, in all
the several steps of darkness or difficulty, which may emerge and occur, to
the fore-slowing us in our course of Christianity, so as we may find a
compleatnesse and competency of strength communicate unto us. That blessed high
way, called the way of holiness, is made so plain herein, that the way
fareing man cannot err in it, because it shows how to give the hand to God,
as a gu^d to Jesus Christ, that blessed leader, who brings the blind by a way
that they know not, and leads them in paths that they have not known, who maks
darkness light before them, and crooked things straight: And the apparently
rough and rigid ways of godliness are discovered to be so easy and sweet, that
the lame may leap as an heart, because of life-giveing influence; and the tongue
of the dumb or disconsolat Christian may sing, under these gracious
supportings, and say, his ways are indeed ways of pleasantnesses.

It was not the Authors design in this piece, (levelled only at this mark,
to teach thee how to make use of the strength and grace, that is in Christ
Jesus, and find the promised ease in performance of duties; in handleing of
which argument, he has been remarkably assisted; and thou can not read with
attention, but thou must bear him witness, and bless the Lord on his behalf,
that he has hit the mark at which he aimed) to engage in a formal debate with
these audacious moralists, who would boast and bogle us out of the good old
way* wherein if men walk they must find rest to their souls: yet if by the
doctrine he has here explained and pressed, as the only way of life, they do
not find, what a mortal wound he has given their morality, all the lovers of
the truth will see it; and it may be, the Lord spareing life, and continueing
the same gracious and great assistance, he has had in engageing with many
great adversaries to the truth at home and a broad, they may see somewhat from
his pen* which may make the lovers of our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and
of the operations of his Spirit, sing over these successors to Sisera, who with
their jumping charriots and rattleing wheels assault the truth, at his feet
they bowed, they fell, they lay down at his feet, they bowed, they fell where
they bowed, there they fell down dead; so let all the enemies of thy truth
perish, O Lord. How to make the whole more useful for thee, for whose advantage
its mainly intended I leave to the Author's own direction; only this I must
say, his method and mould, wherein he casts this sweet matter; and his way of
handling this so seasonable a subject, it so accommodat to each case, and
brought home to the conscience, and down to the capacity of the meanest
Christian, which was his aim, that the feeble, in this day, might be as David;
that howbeit many worthy men have not only hinted, but enlarged upon the same
matter, yet thou can not but see some heart-endeareing singularity in his way
of improveing and handleing this great gospel truth. Next I must tell thee*
that as I my self read it with much satisfaction (though Alas! I dar not say, I
have by reading reaped the designed advantage so that thou may be blushed
into a peruseal thereof, and profiting thereby, I must likewise tell thee, I
say, it has been turned into dutch, and that it has not only met with great
acceptance, amongst all the serious and Godly in these parts, who have seen
it; but is much sought after; and they profess themselves singularly thereby
edified, and set a going after God, by its efficatious perswasivenesse, with a
singing alacrity; and if it have not the same effect upon thee and me, they*
and it will rise up against us in judgment.

Up therefore, Christians, and be doing: listen to such a teacher, who, lest
thou tire in thy race or turn bake, teaches thee a certain and sweet way of
singular proficiency and progress in the ways of God. It may be, it is not
thy work* nor mine, to writ books against these soul murdering, however
magnified, methods of taking men off Jesus Christ; but our pe^ury of parts for
that* should (1.) Put us to seek plenty of tears* that we may weep, to see our
Master so wounded, by the piercing pens of those, who, to patronize their mock
religion, wrest the Scriptures, and with wicked hands wring the word of the
Lord, till it weep blood: this* I say, should provoke thee and me to weep upon
Him, till He appear, and beat the pens of such deceivers out of their hand by
a blow of his. (2.) It should provoke us to know the truth, that we may contend
earnestly for the faith delivered to the saints, and to have these contradicted
truths so impressed in their life upon our souls, that the pen of the most
subtle pleader, for this perversion of the gospel, may neither delet th^se,
nor be able to stagger us, but we may from the efficacious workings of these,
have the witness in our selves, and know the men who teach otherwise not to
be of God. (3.) It should be our ambition, when the all of religion is cried
down, and a painted shadow, a putrid (however perfumed) nothing put in its
place, to make it appear by our practice, that Religion is an elevation of the
soul above the sphere and activity of dead morality; and that it is no less or
lower principle that acts us, than Christ dwelling in us, and walking in us:
how can the love of God, and of Christ, and of the Spirit be in us, if these
perverse pratters against, the power of godliness, provoke us not to emit a
practical declaration to the world, and extort a Testimony to his grace by our
way, from the enemies thereof* Improve therefore this his special help to that
purpose, which in a most sensonable time is brought to thy hand.

But to sum up all shortly, there are but three things which make religion an
heavy burden. First, the blindness of the mind; and here thou art taught to
make use of that eye salve, whereby the eyes of the blind see out of obscurity
and out of darkness he who formerly erred in Spirit, by the light held forth
in these lines, may see a surpasseing beauty* in the ways of God. Secondly,
That aversion and unwillingnesse, which is in the mind, whereby the sweet and
easy yoke of his commands i^ spurned at as heavy; in order to the removing
thereof; and that thou may be among his willing people, here thou have
Christ held forth in his conquering beauty, displaying his banner of love over
souls, so that thou can not look upon him as held forth, but ^ith will bow
thy neck to take on his yoke, because it sees it is lined with the love of
Christ, and then this love, that line the yoke, shed abroad in the heart, will
constrain to a bearing of it. O it must be an easy yoke, because itis love,
tender love, that imposes it; and it must be easy and delightful to the
bearer, because itis the nature of love to think the greatest difficulties
easy, if thereby an evidence of loves reality may be given to the party
beloved: now, if Christ thought the greatest burden easy, even that which with
its weight wrung these words from him, now is my soul troubled, etc. to
persuade souls of the reality and riches of his love to them; Then the soul can
think nothing heavy that he imposes, since he will interpret the bearing of it
an evidence of its love to him: none of his commandments can be grievous to the
man now, since he has said, This is the love of God, that ye keep his
commandments. Now there is a readiness of mind to do all things without
disputings and murmurings; as love knows no lion in its way, so it is no
murmuring disputant; when this question is cleared, Lord, what will thou have
me to do, then love has no more questions; its greatest difficulty is solved.
But Thirdly when the Spirit is willing, there remains yet much weakness, love
kindled in the heart conquers the mind into a compliance with his will, and a
complacency in his commands, but its greatest strength is often to weep over a
withered hand: now that thy hands which fall down may be made strong for
labor, and thou may be girded with strength, and have grace for grace, yea
all grace, to make thee abound unto every good word and work; The Author leads
thee up unto the sull fountain of all Gospel furniture, and strength; and
teaches thee how to make use of Jesus Christ, as thy sufficiency, for working
all thy works in thee and for thee. Take heart therefore unto thee: when thy
looking unto du^y may make thee despair of performance, lift up thine eyes to
him, who is here set before thee; look till every new look upward bring light
and life inward, and capacitat thee for making a new louse foreward, in the
power of (...) might: ^he was but a wicked servant who said, I (...) thou art a
hard master: No, it is false. That religion which gives ease must be an easy
religion; and truly such (...) Gospel holiness, not only in regaird that it
is the liberation of the soul from the basest bondage, but in regaird that he
who is thy Master will be served of his own: the allowed supplies for all
commanded duties* are full measure, heaped, up, shaken together, and running
over. And though he who has much has nothing over, yet he (...) has little
has no inl^ke, for he abounds toward us in (...) wisdom. I say therefore
again unto thee, take heart, let not thine hands fall down, essay nothing thou
would have well done or easily done, in thine own strength* but yet how
difficult so ever the duty be, approach it as having no confidence in the
flesh, but with an eye to thy stoc^ that rich store house of all furniture, and
it shall be with thee, as it was with the priests, before whom jordan recoiled,
so soon as their foot entered within the (...)* God shall make thy difficulties
evanish; and by the (...) the Spirit of power and might, from Jesus Christ
depended upon, shall so strengthen thee, that thy duty is made easy to
admiration, and becomes the delight of thy souli (...) I have exceeded the just
limits of an Epistle: pray for the continuance of the life of the Author, who
by his assiduous working for Christ, has been often neir unto death, not
reguarding his own life, to supply the lake of other meus service, (...) the
interest and Church of God; and let him be comforted for this piece of travel,
undertaken for thy soul's m^erest, by hearing thou do improve it to thy
advantage, for which it is so exactly calculat: And withal I beg thy fervent
and earnest intercessions for grace, and more grace, to him who is.

Thy poor, yet souls well wisher and servant for Christ's sake. R. Mc. W.

The Author to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
AFter the foregoing adress, I need not put thee to much more trouble: only I
shall say; That he must needs be a great stranger in our Israel, or sadly
smitten with that epidemick plague of indifferency, which has infected many of
this Generation, to a benumming of them, and rendering them insensible, and
unconcearned, in the matters of God, and of their own souls; and sunck deep
into the gulf of dreadful inconsideration, who sees not, or takes no notice
of, nor is troubled at the manifest and terrible appearances of the
unexpressibly great hazard, our all, as Christians, in this life, is this day
into. I mean the mystery of the Gospel of the grace of God, wherein the
exceeding riches of His grace, in his kindness toward us, through Christ
Jesus, has been shoune: We have enjoyed, for a considerable time, a clear and
powerful dispensation hereof, in great purity and plenty; but Alas! is it not
manifest to all, that will not wilfully shut their eyes, that this Mercy, and
Goodness of God, has been wickedly abused, and the pure administration of His
Grace and Love perfidiously sinned away, by this Apostate Generation? Are our
spots this day the spots of his children? Are there fruits answerable to the
Lord's pains and labor about us, to be seen even among the greatest of
Professors? Is there that gospel holiness, tenderness, watchfulness, growing
in grace and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, that growing up (...) Christ, in
all things, that heavenly mindedness, that followshipe with the Father and with
his Son Christ Jesus, and that conversation in heaven, that the dispensation of
grace, we have been favored with beyond many, and have been long living under,
did call for at our hands? Alas! our grapes are but wild and stinking.
Wherefore (and who can think it strange, if it be so?) the Lord seems to be
about to contend with us, by covering our horizon with Egyptian darkness: many,
who would not receive the love of the Truth, that they might be saved; being
already given up to strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, and many
more in hazard to be drawn aside to crooked paths, by men of corrupt minds,
who have been, and are still busy to vent and spread abroad, with no little
petulancy and confidence, damnable doctrines, to the perverting of the doctrine
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to the subverting and overturning of the
very foundations of our Hope and Assurance; and that in such a way, and by such
means and stratagems, as seem to have wrath written upon them, in legible
letters; for the more plausible and taking a corrupt doctrine be, it is the
more dangerous, and judgment-like, and more are thereby in hazard to be deluded
and drawn away.

Nay (which is yet more terrible and dreadful) it is to be feared, that the
jealous God, in his holy and righteous judgment, has given a providential
commission (to speak so) unto the seduceing Spirit, to persuade and prevail:
for is not this the clear language of the present holy and righteous
dispensations of God, and of the stupenduously indifferent frame and
disposition of the generality of men, called Christians, not only provoking God
to spew them out of his mouth, but disposeing them also unto a receiving of
whatsoever men, lying in wait to deceive, shall propose and obtrude?

Alas! the clouds are not now a gathering* but our horizon is covered over with
blakness* and great drops are a falling, that presage a terrible overflowing
deluge of error, and Apostasy from the Truth and Profession of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, to be at hand* if the Lord wonderfully prevent it not. And behold
(O wonderful!) the generality of Professors are sleeping in security,
apprehending no danger. Satan is more cunning now, than to drive men to Popery
by rage and cruelty; (and yet what he may be permitted to do after this manner,
who can tell?) or by openly pleading, in his emissaries, for this abomination,
(and yet even thus is he already prevailing with not a few) or to send forth
his agents for Arminianisme and Socinianisme (though even this way too, he is
too much prevailing.) But his maine work now seems to be, to bring in another
Gospel, (and yet there is not another) or rather an Antievangelick and
Antichristian delusory dream, overturning at, once the whole Gospel of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; and for this end he inployeth the Quakers, one the
one hand, Men of desperate and antievangelick principles, the very sink of all
abominations, old and late (as I shall show, if the Lord will continue health
and strength, in an examination of their doctrine and principles, lately
emitted by one Robert Barclay) and on the other hand, Men (or Moralists if you
will call them so) pleading for and crying up an antievangelick holiness, a
mere shadow without substance or reality; and that in place of Christ himself;
And in order to the carrying on of this desperate design, The old dragon is
employing men of seeming different principles and ways, whom, though their
faces seem to look to contrary a^rths, yet he holds notwithstanding fast tied
by their tails (as Samson's foxes were) that thereby, if the Lord permit it, he
may, by the fire of enmity to the pure Gospel of the grace of God, burning in
their tails* cause a confl^gration of that Truth, wherein lies all our hope:
for this new model of Religion, that many are so busied about, is such as
Pelagians, Arminians, Papists, Socinians, Quakers, yea Turks, and moral
H^athens; Yea and all, who are enemies to, and not reconcilable with the true
grace of God held forth in the Gospel, will willingly admit of, and
harmoniously agree in: A way, which complyeth so well with proud self, and with
the Corrupt Nature of Man, that it is little wonder, if it have many abettors
and admirers. I shall say no more of this, seeing my beloved Brother has said
so much to it already to very good purpose, in the foregoing Epistle; but only
infer,

That sure the consideration of this should move all, in whom is any thing of
the zeal of God, and love to souls, their own and others, to appear in the
defense of the Gospel of our Salvation, by all means, incumbent to them, and
possible for them: for if this Citadel, and strong hold, wherein our All, and
the all of pure and true Religion, lies, be blown up, we are gone: and indeed
no less is intended by this Antichristian and antievangelick enemy, than the
utter subversion of True Christian Religion. Who would not then be hereby
alarmed, and upon their guaird, when matters are at this pass? Should not all,
who have any love to their own souls, any zeal for the glory of Christ,
anointed of the Father to be our Prophet, Priest, and King; any desire to see
the crown flourishing upon his Head, and to have the Gospel preserved pure and
uncorrupted, be pleading with God by prayer, in the behalf of His Son's
Kingdom, Crown, and Glory; and wrestling with Him, till He were pleased to
dispel these clouds, and prevent this blake day: Especially, should they not be
laboring to be acquanted, in truth and reality, with the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, that having the mysterious truths thereof imprinted on their souls, and
their hearts casl into its mould, they may be preserved from the hurt of this
deadly poison: for this, with a constant dependence upon, and use making of
Christ in all His offices, will prove the best preservative against this
infection.

The persvvasion whereof did induce me to publish the follovving heads of some
sermons, after they had been translated into dutch, and published here;
knovving that they might be of no less use to the people of God, in Britane
and Ireland. I know not a more effectual mean to keep unstable souls from
sideing with and imbraceing every new notion; and from being carried about with
every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive; than to put them upon the real exercise of Gospel
godliness, and to the daily practice of the maine and fundamental gospel work,
of living by faith in Jesus Christ and of growing up into Him, in all things,
who is the Head, from whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted,
by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it
self in love. Such, I am sure, as have thus learned the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, and are practiseing the same accordingly, will have an Antidot within
them against the strongest poison of these Seducers; and a real answer to, and
confutation of all their subtle sophismes. The soul exerciseing it self unto
Gospel godliness, will find work enough to take it wholly up* and find such a
solid ground to stand upon; and see such a satisfying fullness, answering all
its necessities and wants, and such a sure heart-quieting ground of Peace, Hope
and Consolation, in Jesus Christ, as that it will have no leisure, and small
temptation to listen to Seduceing perverters, and no inclination to seek after
empty Cisterns.

I know much may be desiderated, in this following Treatise, and many may have
exceptions, not without ground, against it: Some may think it arrogance and too
great confidence in me, to attempt the handling of such a mysterious and
necessary part of Christian practice, wherein few, (if any so far as I know)
have gone before, in direct handling of this matter, at least in this method
and order; I mean that part, which is about Sanctification: others may be
displeased with the mean and low style; with my multiplying of particulars,
which might have been better and more handsomely couched under fewer heads;
and with my uncessary contracting of the whole, into such narrovv bounds; and
other things of that kind: for which and many other failings of the like
nature and import, which may without any diligent search, be found in it,
even by ordinary and unprejudiced Readers, I shall not industriously labor to
apologize, knovving that my very apology, in this case, will need an apology:
Only I shall say this, That considering how the snare, which the vigilant and
active enemy of our Salvation, the Devil, was laying, by an unholy morality,
did nearly concearne all, and especially the meanest (for parts and experience)
and less fixed Christians, I thought a discourse on such a subject, as I judged
most necessary at all times, and especially in such a day of hazard, should be
framed to the capacity of one, as well as another; the most understanding can
receive benefit, by that which is calculat to the capacity of children, when
these can reap little edification by what is suited to the palate of those: and
the less experienced, or such as are of lower understanding, will be less able
to draw a General to a Particular; or to improve, and so fully to comprehend
one particular touched, as to be able thereby to understand, and take in a like
particular, not mentioned; than such, as have their senses more exercised, and
are thereby in case to make a better improvement of what is but compendiously
declared, when those must have the bread brocken to their hand, or they shall
receive but small edification thereby: and yet, I suppose, the judicious will
observe some variety, smaller or greater, even where Particulars seem to be, at
the first view, most unnecessarily multiplied. I know, and willingly grant (for
it is obvious enough) that a discourse of this Subject and matter, might have
required a fa^ larger volume; But then how should such have profited thereby,
whom Poverty might possibly have scarred from b^ying; or the necessary affairs
of their ordinary callings would have kept from a diligent perusal of it? And
I thought, that neither of these should have been overlooked, in this special,
or general design, which I had before mine eyes.

One thing, as my answer to all, I shall but add: If hereby Others, whom the
Lord has more enabled with all necessaries for such a work, shall be hereby
either instigated, or encouraged, to write upon this Subject (I mean mainly
the last part thereof, touching the usemaking of Christ, in Sanctification;
for, blessed be the Lord, many have been employed of the Lord to speak soundly
and edifyingly, unto the usemaking of Christ as to Righteousness and
Justification) and give a Full, Plain, Edifying and Satisfying discovery of
this Necessary and Important Truth, viz. Christ made of God to us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption: and withal Point out plainly
and particulary the way, how Believers, in all their Particular and various
exigencies, man and should so make use of, and apply that all fullness, which is
treasured up in the Head, for the benefit and advantage of the Members of the
Mystical body, as they may not only theoretically see, but practically also
experience this truth. That in Him they are complete; and so they may be helped
to understand how, through the necessary and constant usemaking of Him, as all
in all, they may grow up in Him, in all things: If this be, I say, done by any,
to better purpose, I shall think this my adventure not altogether fruitless,
and in part, at least, excusable.

As for thee, O Christian, whose instruction, edification and confirmation in
the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints, I mainly intended in this undertaking, I have a few things to add:
know then that there are certain men (as the Apostle Jude speaks) crept - in
unawares, who were of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning
the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ for in these last days, we see that these perilous
times are come, (of which Paul advertised Timothy, 2 Timothy 3: 1. etc.) wherein
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, (or make bates) incontinent, fierce,
despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of
pleasure morethan lovers of God, having the form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof -- for of this sort are they, which creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: And because it
is so; be exhorted to give deligence to make your Calling and Election sure, by
giving all diligence to add to faith virtue; to virtue knowledge; and to
knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness;
and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity: for if
ye do these things, ye shall never fall. As the Apostle Peter assures us, 2
Pet. 1: 5, 6, 7, 10. for itis the Elect, who are secured from full and final
defection and Apostasy, Mat. 24: 24. Mark. 13: 22. Romans 11: 5, 7. and 9: 11.
and 8* 33. Mat. 24: 31. Mark. 13: 27. and the promise of Salvation is made to
such, as shall endure to the end. The Crown is for the Overcomers, and such as
are faithful to the death, Mat. 10: 22. and 24: 13. Mark. 13: 1^* Revel. 2: 10,
11, 17, 26, 27, 28. and 3: 5, 1^, 21. All which, and the like, are sct down,
that hereby his people might be rationally moved to a constant seriousness, in
the working out of their own Salvation, in fear and trembling; and the
forevvarnings given of the great difficulty of reaching the end of our faith,
the salvation of our souls, because of the many Active, Vigilant,
Indefatigable, Subtle, and Insinuating adversaries, who by good words and
fair speeches, will readily deceive the hearts of the simple, are to avvaken
the more His people to be sober and vigilant, because their Adversary, the
Devil (who acts and moves his under-agents, in their several Modes, Methods
and Motions, so as he may best, according to the various Tempers, Present
Dispositions, Advantages or Disadvantages of such* as he intends to seduce,
which he carefully studyeth, and plyeth for this end, obtain his designed
end, their ruin and destruction) as a roaring lion, walking about seeking whom
he may devour. And this calls them to haste out of their slumber and
security, lest their Adversary, who will be loath to miss his Opportunity,
surprise them, to their great loss and disadvantage.

It is, Beloved, high time now to awake, to look about us, to consider where
we are, upon what ground we stand, whether the Enemy or we have the
advantage, how and in what Postour we are, to rancontre with deceivers, that
seek to cheer us of all, of our souls, and of our Salvation, because they
would cheat us of the Lord our Righteousness, and dravv us off the paths of
life, that when we come to die (beside the unspe akable great loss we
would thereby be at, even here, in missing the comfortable accestes to God,
through lesus Christ, the inflowings of grace and strength for spiritual duty,
through the Lord our Strength; the sweet communications of peace and joy in the
holy Ghost; the shedings abroad of the love of God in our hearts, by the holy
Ghost, which is given unto us, and the full assurance of hope, through the
Lord Jesus our hope) we might be frustrated of all our expectations; and find
that all that, which Men made us grip to, lay hold on, and lean unto, in
stead of Christ, was but a mere shadow, and a lie in our right hand, to the
unexpressible grief, vexation and sorrovv of soul, when all should end in a
dreadful and horrible disappointment.

But let us not think, that our Purposes, firme-like Resolutions, to adhere to
the Truth, and our present Abhorrence at, and Detestation of errors now
broached, to the overturning of the very foundations of true Christianity,
will sufficiently guaird us from, and make us proof against the shotes and
assaults of these crafty seducers: Nor think* that our learning and knowledge
in the Theory of the Truth; nor our Abilities to rancontre Sophisters, will
secure us from a fall: let us not think that the Enemies are contemptible, and
therefore we need be the less anxious; nor yet think that former experiences
and throughbearings, in the like cases, will be a pillow, vvhereupon we may
now lay our selves down to sleep: If we do, we shall certanely deceive
ourselves, if all our strength and standing be in ourselves, and through
ourselves; and if this be the ground of our hope, the Righteous Lord, in his
holy justice, may give us up to be a Prey: Peter's instance should never be
forgotten b^ us: and such as tempt the Lord have no ground to expect his last
issue.

Our strength must be in Christ: to the rock of ages must we flee: to our
chambers in Him must we retire, and there must we hide ourselves: on Christ's
lee side can we only ride salfe, and be free of the hazard of the storm. To
Him therefore must our recourse be daily, by new and fresh acts of Faith. In
and through Him and His Influences, communicated according to the tenor of the
Covenant of grace, through Faith eyeing the Promiser, the Promise, with the
Price purchaseing, and so dravving and s^king Light, Direction, Strength,
Stability, and what our present exigent calls for, must we think to stand:
and happy they, who conscious to themselves of their own weakness and
convinced of the insufficiency of all things* within them, in Godly fear hide
themselves under the wings of the Almighty, and get in into this Strong hold,
resolving there to abide, and there to be secured from all their Adversaries,
within, or without: These humble fearers may expect a saife and noble
outgate; when more strong-like and more confident adventurers, shall (being
left to themselves, because trusting in themselves) shamefully fall, and be
triumphed over by the Enemy, to the grief of the Godly, and for a snare to
others.

The best way then, to keep the faith of Christ, which many are now seeking
to shake, and to loose us from, is to be exerciseing the faith of Christ. The
serious and upright practiseing of the Gospel is the only best mean to keep
thee firm in the profession of the Gospel: when the Gospel with thee, is not
a fevv fine notions in the brain; but is heavenly and necessary Truth sunck
into the heart, and living and acting there; it will keep thee, and thou will
own it, more firmly and steadfastly, in a day of trial. Thy walking in Christ,
and working and living, by Him living in thee, will so root thee in the Gospel
truth, that enemies will pull in vain, when seeking to overthrow thee. The
Gospel of the grace of God, received and entertained in thy soul in love, and
constant suitable improvement, will fortify thee, and secure it self in thee,
so that vehement blasts shall but contribute to its more fixed abode, and more
fruteful actings in thee. Live up then to the Gospel, and so be sure of it, and
be saife in it. I mean, let Christ live in thee, as thy all, and cast all thy
care and cumber on Him; lay all thy difficulties before Him; lean all thy
weight upon Him; draw all thy necessities out of Him; undertake all thy duties
in Him; be strong in Him, and in the power of His might; let Him by thy
Counseler, Conductor, Leader, Teacher, Captain, Commander, Light, Life, Strengh
and all, so shall thou stand, and have cause to glory, even in thy infirmities,
for thou shall find the power of Christ resting upon thee, and thou shall have
cause to say, Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am
weak, then am I strong: Remember that great word, Phil. 4:13. I can do all
things, through Christ, which strengthens me.

It has bin the usual and ordinary question of Believers; How shall we make
use of Christ for Sanctification. To this great and important question; I,
(though the meanest and most unfit for such a work, of all that God has sent
to feed his flock) have adventured or endeavored, at least, to give such as
truly desire to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and
Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, some satisfation herein, laying
before them, some plain directions, framed to their capacities, and suited to
some of their most ordinary and usual cases; some whereof are more
comprehensive; and others, more particular, may be looked upon as exemplary
instances, serving for other cases of the like nature; for hardly could every
particular circumstan^iat case be particularly spoken to, and some might judge
that to be superfluous. If thou, in the light and strength of Christ, shall
really practice what is here pointed forth, I may be confident to say, thy
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, and thou shall attain to another
sort of holiness* than that, which Proud pretenders boast of; and shall be far
without the reach of that snare, which unstable souls are too readily entangled
with. I mean, the plausible pretension of more than ordinary sanctity, which
yet is but forced, feigned, constrained, mostly external, and framed to cause
some admiration in beholders, whom they intend to make a prey of. This shall be
no temptation to thee, who by experience finds a more saife, satisfying,
full, free, easy, pleasant and heartsome way of mortifying lusts, growing in
grace* and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ* and so perfecting holiness* by
running immediately to Christ, and by living in and upon Him, who is mad of God
to us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. That the Lord may
bless the same to thee, for this end* shall ^e and is the desire and prayer of
Him, who is thy servant, in the work of the Gospel.

I. B.

CHRIST, The Way, the Truth, and the Life. Or A discovery of the right way of
making use of Christ, for Sanctification:
From JOHN. XIV. 6. Jesus says unto them, I am the Way, and the Truth* and
the Life; No man comes unto the Father but by Me.
CHAP. I. The introduction, with some general observations from the cohesion.
Doubtless it is always useful, yea necessary, for the children of God, to
know the right way of making use of Christ, who is made all things to them
which they need, even Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption*
1 Cor. 1: 30. But it is never more necessary for believers to be clear and
distinct in this matter* than when Satan by all means is seeking to pervert
the right ways of the Lord; and one way or other to lead souls away, and draw
them of Christ; knowing that if he prevail here, he has gained his point: and
therefore he endeavors not only to darken it by error, either more gross,
or more subtle; but also to darken it by mistakes, and prejudices; whence it
comes to pass, that not only Strangers are made to wander out of the way, but
oftentimes many of his own people are walking in the darkness of ignorance
and mistakes, and remain lean through want of the real exercise of the Life
of faith, which would make them fat and flourishing; because it would make them
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, and to grow up in Christ in
all things.

The clearing up then of this truth cannot but be most seasonable now, when
Satan is prevailing with many, whom he cannot get tempted to looseness and
profanitie, to sit down upon some thing, which is not Christ; and to rest upon
something within themselves, distinct from him, both in the matter of
Justification, and Sanctification. This subtle Adversary is now setting some a
work, to cry up, by preaching, speaking and printing, a way to heaven, which is
not Christ, a kind of morality, civility and outward holiness, whereupon the
soul is to rest: and this holiness, not wrought and effectuated through the
strength of Jesus, by faith sucking life and furniture from him; but through
our own art and skill; which in effect is nothing but an extract of refined
Popery, Socinianisme, and Arminianisme, devised and broached of purpose, to
draw the soul off Christ; that he may stand upon his own legs, and walk by his
own power, and thank himself, at least in part, for the crown, at length.

Further, through the great goodness of God, the true way of a soul's
justification is admirablie cleared up; and many are, at least theoretically,
acquanted therewith; and many also practically, to the quieting of their
wakened consciences, and stopping the mouth of their accusers, and obteaning of
peace, joy, and the lively hope of the everlasting crown: yet many a gracious
soul profess their unacquantednesse with the solid and thriveing way of
usemaking of Christ for grouth in grace and true Sanctification. Therefore some
discovery of the truth here cannot but be useful, seasonable, yea and
acceptable unto them: If He, who is the Truth, would give grace to understand,
and to unfold this so necessary and always advantageous a Truth; and would
help to write of and explain this Truth, by faith in him, who is here said to
be the Truth; then should we have cause to bless and magnify his name: But if
he* because of sin, shall hide himself, and not let out those beams of light,
whereby we might discover light, we shall but darken counsel with words
without knowledge, and leave the matter as uncleare, as ever. Therefore is it
necessary, there be both in him that writes, and in such as read a single
dependence on him, who is given for a leader, Esa. 55: 5. and has promised to
bring the blind by a way, which they knew not, and to lead them in paths that
they had not known, and to make darkness, light before them, and crooked things
straight* Esa. 42: 16. that thus by acting faith on him, we may find, in so
far, the truth of this verified, viz. That he is the Way the Truth, and the
Life.

Now for clearing up of this matter, we would know, That our Lord Jesus, from
the beginning of this Chapter is laying down some grounds of consolation,
sufficient to comfort his Disciples, against the sad news of his departure and
death; and to encourage them against the fears they had of much evil to
befall them, when their Lord and Master should be taken from them* Which is a
sufficient proof of the tender heart of Jesus* who allows all his followers
strong consolation, against all* fears, hazards* troubles and perplexities,
which they can meet with in their way. He will not leave them comfortless; and
therefore he lays down strong grounds of consolation, to support their
drouping and fainting hearts; as loving to see his followers rejoyceing always
in the Lord, and Singing in the ways of Zion; that the world may see, and be
convinced of a reality in Christianity, and of the preferablenesse of that
life, notwithstanding of all the troubles that attend it, unto any other, how
sweet and desirable so ever it may appear to flesh and blood.

In prosecution of which design, he told them verse. 4. that they knew whither
He went, and the way also* which he was to take, and by which he was to bring
them to the Father to the mansions spoken of, and so to life eternal. But
Thomas rashly and incredulously (as too usually he did Chap. 11: 16. and 20:
25) venteth himself, and little less then contradicts his Master, saying
verse. 5* We know not whither thou go, and how can we know the way? wherein
we have an emblem of many a believer, who may have more grace and knowledge of
God and of Christ, than they will be able to see, or acknowledge that they
have, what through temptations; inward distempers; sense of their many defects
and great ignorance; strong desires of high measures; clearer discoveries of
the vastness of the object; mistakes about the true nature of grace,
despiseing the day of small things; and indistinctnesse as to the actings of
grace, or want of understanding and right uptaking of grace, in its various out
goings, and actings under various notions, and the like*

Whereupon Christ, after his usual manner, takes occasion to clear up that
ground of consolation further unto them; and to let them see the true way of
coming to the Father, that thereby they night be helped to see, that they were
not such strangers unto the way, as they supposed; and withal he amplifieth;
and lays out the properties and excellencies of this way, as being the true
and living way, and the only true and living way; and that in such a manner, as
they might both see the way to be perfect, full, saife, saving and satisfying;
and also learn their duty, of improving this way always, and in all things,
until they came home at length to the Father: saying I am the Way, the Truth
and the Life: no man comes to the Father but by me.

Christ then, saying, that He not only is the Way to the Father, even the true
way; but that he is so the true way, as that he is also Truth it self* in the
abstract, and so the Living way, that he i^ Life itself, in the abstract, g^eth
us ground to consider, after what manner it is, that He is the Truth, and the
Life, as well as the Way; and that for the clearing up and discovering of His
being an absolutely perfect, transcendently excellent, incomparably preferable,
and fully satisfying way, useful to believers in all cases, all exigents, all
distresses, all difficulties, all trials, all temptations, all doubts, all
perplexities; and in all causes or occasions of distempers, fears, faintings,
discouragements etc. which they may meet with in their way to heaven. And this
will lead us to clear up the duty of believers, on the other hand, and to show
how they should, in all their various cases and difficulties, make use of
Christ, as the only alsufficient Way to the Father, and as Truth and Life in
the way, and so we will be led to speak of Christ's being to his people all that
is requisite for them here in the way, whether for justification or
sanctification, and how people are to make use of him, as being all, or as
being made of God to us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.
1. Cor. 1: 30.

Ere we come to the words in particular, we would look upon them, as having
relation to Thomas his words, in the preceding verse. wherein he did little
less, then contradict what Christ had said in the 4 verse. and learn several
very comfortable points of doctrine, as.

First.
THat Jesus Christ is very tender of his followers, and will not cast them off,
nor upbraide them for every escape, whereby they may provock him to anger and
grieve his Spirit; but gently passes by many of their faileings, when he
finds they are not obstinate in their mistake, nor perverse in their way: for
how gently and meekly does He here pass over Thomas his unhandsome expression,
findeing that Thomas spoke here, not out of obstinacy and pertinaciousnesse,
but out of ignorance and a mistake. And the reason is because 1 Christ knows
our infirmity and weakness, and is of a tender heart, and therefore Will not
break the bruised reed. Esa. 42. Well knows He, that rough and untender
handling would crush us, and break us all in pieces. And 2. He is full of
bowels of mercy, and can have compassion on them that are out of the way and
can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Heb. 4: 15. and 5: 2.

Which truth, as, upon the one hand, it should encourage all to choose him for
their leader, and give up themselves to Him, who is so tender of his followers;
so, upon the other hand, it should rebuke such as are ready to intertaine evil
and hard thoughts of Him, as if he were an hard Master, and ill to be followed:
and put all from interteaning the least thought of his untendernesse, and want
of compassion. But moreover.

Secondly.
WE see, That weaknesses and corruptions breaking out in believers, when they
are honestly and ingenuously laid open before the Lord, will not scarre Him
away: But rather engadge Him the more to help and succor. Much of Thomas his
weakness and corruption appeared in what he said: yet the same being honestly
and ingenuously laid open to Christ, not out of a spirit of contradiction, but
out of a desire to learn, Christ is so far from thrusting him away, that He
rather condescendeth the more, out of love and tenderness, to instruct him
better, and to clear the way more fully. And that because 1. He knows our
mould and fashion, how fecklesse and frail we are, and that if he should deal
with us according to our folly, we should quickly be destroyed. 2. He is not as
Man, hasty, rash, Proud; but gentle, loving, tender and full of compassion. 2.
It is his office and proper work to be an instructor to the ignorant, and a
helper of our infirmities and weaknesses, a physician to bind up and cure our
sores and wounds.

Who would not then willingly give up themselves to such a teacher, that will
not thrust them to the door, nor give them up to themselves, always when their
corruptions would provoke Him thereunto? And what a madness is this in many,
to stand aback from Christ, because of their infirmities; and to scarre at Him,
because of their weakness, when the more corruption we find the more should
we run to him? and it is soon enough to depart from Christ, when he thrusts us
away; and says, he will have no more to do with us: yea he will allow us to
stay, after we are, as it were, thrice thrust away: only let us take heed, that
we approve not ourselves in our evils, that we hide them not, as unwilling to
part with them, that we obstinatly maintain them not, nor ourselves in them:
but that we lie open before him, and deal with him, with honesty, ingenuity and
plainness.

Thirdly.
WE see further, That ignorance ingenuously acknowledged and laid open before
Christ puts the soul in a fair way to get more instruction. Thomas having
candidely, according as he thought, in the simplicity of his heart, professed
his ignorance, is in a fair way now to get instruction: for this is Christ's
work to instruct the ignorant, to open the eyes of the blind.

Why then are we so foolish, as to conceal our ignorance from him, and to hide
our case and condition from him: and why does not this commend Christ's School
to us so much the more? why do we not carry as ingenuous scholars, really
desireous to learn^? But.

Fourthly.
WE may learn. That our ill condition, and distempers put into Christ's hand
will have remarkable ou^gates, and an advantageous issue; seeing Christ takes
occasion here from Thomas his laying open his condition, not without some
mixture of corruption, to clear up the truth, more fully and plainly, than it
was before: for hereby 1. Christ gives an open declaration of the glory of his
power, mercy, goodness, wisdom etc. 2. He has occasion to give a proof of
his divine art, and glorious skill of healing diseased souls, and of making
brocken bones stronger than ever they were 3. Thus he effectually accomplisheth
his noble designs, and perfecteth his work, in a way tending to abase Man, by
discovering his infirmities, and failings; and to glorify Himself in his
goodness and love. 4 Thus he triumphs more over Satan, and in a more
remarkable and glorious manner destroys his works. 5. Thus he declares how
wonderfully he can make all things work together for good to his chosen ones,
that love him, and follow him. 6 Yea thus he engadgeth souls to wonder more at
his divine wisdom and power; to despair less in time comeing, when cases
would seem hard; to acknowledge his great and wonderful grace, and his
infinite power and wisdom, that can bring death out of life; and also to be
more sensible of the mercy, and thankful for it.

O believer; what matter of joy is here? how happy art thou, that has given up
thy self to him! Thy worst condition can turn to thy advantage. He can make
thy ignorance, vented with a mixture of corruption, turn to the increase of
thy knowledge. Bless him for this; and with joy and satisfaction, abide thou
under his tutory and at his school. And withal be not discouraged* be thy ^ase
of ignorance and corruption what it will* lay it out before him with sincerity
and singleness of heart, and then thou may glory in thine infirmities, that
the power of Christ may rest on thee 2 Cor. 12: 9. for thou shall see, in due
time, what advantage infinite love and wisdom can bring to thy soul thereby.

May not this be a strong motive to induce strangers to give up themselves to
him, who will sweetly take occasion at their failings, and short comeings, to
help them forward in the way? and what excuse can they have, who sit the call
of the gospel, and say in effect they will not go to Christ because their
case is not good. And oh that believers were not sometimes led away with this
error of scarring at Christ, because of Infirmities seen and discovered!

Fifthly.
IT is remarkable, that, as the disciples did ofttimes vent much of their
carnal conceptions of the kingdom of Christ, as apprehending it to be some
carnal, outward, pompous, stately, and, upon that account, desirable
condition; so there might be much of this carnal apprehension, lurking under
this acknowledgment and question of Thomas: And the Lord, who knew their
thoughts, does here wisely draw them off those notions* and (...) them about
another study: To tell us, That it is ^est and most useful and profitable for
us, to be much taken up in the study and sear^ of necessary and fundamental
truths and particularly, of the way to the father, for 1. Here is the
substantial food of the soul: other notions are but vain, and oftentimes they
make the case of the soul worse; but the study of this is always edifying. 2
The right understanding of this, and other fundamental truths, will not puff
up, but keep the soul humble, and will make the soul active and diligent in
duty. 3 The fruit of this study is profitable, and lasting. 4 And the right
uptaking of these truths will discover the vanity of other sciences, falsely so
called, and the folly of spending our time about other things. 5 The right
understanding of this fundamental* will help us to understand other truths
the better. 6 A mistake in this and such like fundamentals, or the ignorance of
them, is more dangerous, then the ignorance of or a mistake in other things.

Oh if this were teaching us all, in humility, to be much in the study of such
fundamental necessary truths, as this is: and to guaird against a piece of
vanity in affecting knowledge, the effect of which, is nothing but a puffing of
u^ up with pride and conceit.

Sixthly.
WE may here take notice of what may serve to discover Thomas his mistake, and
what is the ground of Christ's assertion verse. 4. which Thomas does little
less than contradict verse 5. viz. That such as had any acquantance with
Christ, did, according to the measure of their knowledge of him, both know
heaven, and the way to it, whence we see those truths.

1 Persons may have some real acquantance with Christ, and yet be, for a time,
very indistinct in their notions about him, and apprehensions of him: They may
know Christ, in some measure; and yet look upon themselves as great strangers
to the knowledge of heaven, and be often complaineing of their ignorance of the
right way to heaven.

2. Where there is the least measure of true acquantance with Christ, with love
to him, and a desire to know more of him, Christ will take notice thereof,
though it be covered over with a heap of mistakes, and accompanied with much
ignorance, weakness, and indistinctnesse. He sees not as man sees: which is
good news to some, that are weak in knowledge, and unable to give any good
account of any knowledge they have, yet one thing they can say, That he who
knows all things, knows that they love him.

3. Various are the dispensations of Gods grace unto his own: to some he
gives a greater, to others a lesser measure of knowledge of the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven; And to one and the same person, more at one time than at
another: Various are his manifestations and outlettings of grace and love.
Small beginnings may come to much at length. Thomas, and the rest of the
disciples, had but little clear and distinct apprehensions of the way of
Salvation through Jesus Christ* and yet ere all was done, they attained to such
a measure of understanding in the mysteries of God, as that we are said to be
built upon the foundation of the Apostles; Christ Jesus being the chief corn^r
stone Ephesians. 2: 20. This should teach the best much sobriety, and not to judge
of all by themselves; or to think, that Gods way with them must be a standart
or a rule, whereby to judge of all the rest* as if his way of dealing were one
and the same with all.

4 The knowledge of Christ is all; know him and we know heaven, and the way to
it: for upon this ground does Christ make good, what he had said, touching
their knowing whither he went, and the way: and answers the objection that
Thomas did propose, viz, Because he was the way etc and they being acquant with
him (which here is presupposed) were not ignorant of the place, whither he was
going; nor of the way leading thither. The knowledge then of Jesus Christ is a
true and full compend of all saveing knowledge. Hence It is life eternal to
know him Ioh. 17: 3. They that know him, know the Father Ioh. 14: 9. and 8: 19.
They that see him* see the Father also John. 14: 9. He is in the Father, and
the Father in him, John. 14: 10, 11* and 10: 38. and 17. 21. And so knowing
him, they know heaven: for what is heaven else* but the presence, and glorious
manifestations of the Father: for when Christ speaks of his going to heaven, he
says, he was going to the Father. So knowing him, they knew the way, both how
Christ was to go to heaven, as our Cautioner, Head and Atturnay; and how we
must follow.

Let then a Man have never so much knowledge, and be acquanted with the
mysteries of all arts and sciences: and with the deepths of nature, and
intrigues of States, and all the theorie of Religion; if he be unacquanted with
Jesus Christ, he knows nothing as he ought to know.

And upon the other hand, let a poor soul, that is honest, and has some
knowledge of and acquantance with him, be satisfied, though it cannot
discourse, nor dispute, nor speak to cases of consciences, as some others. If
we know him, it matters not, though we be ignorant of many things, and thereby
become less esteemed of by others. Here is the true test, by which we may
take a right ^stimate of our own or of others knowledge: The true rule to try
knowledge by, is not fine notions, clear and distinct expressions: but heart
acquantance with him, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge Col. 2: 3.

O sad! that we are not more taken up in this study, which would be a
compendious way for us to know all? Why spend we our money for that which is
not bread, and our labor for that which will not profit us? Why waste we our
time and spirits, in learning this science, and that art, when alas, after we,
with much labor and toil, have attained to the youdmost pitch there, we are
never one white the nearer heaven and happiness? yea it were well, if we were
not further off? Oh! if we were wise at length, and could think more on this
one thing necessary* and could be stirred up to lear^e more of him, and to make
this the subject of all our study, and labor*

CHAP. II Of the words themselves in general.
WE come now to the words themselves; wherein Christ asserts that, He is ^1)
the Way (2) the Truth, (3) the Life. and (4) That no man comes to the Father
but by him.

In them we learn those two things, in general* first The misery of wretched
man by nature: This c^nnot be in a f^w words expressed* These words will point
out those particulars thereof, which we will but mention.

1. That he is borne an enemy to, and living at a distance from God, by virtue
of the curse of the bro^ken covenant of life, made with Adam.

2. That he neither can, nor will return to God, of himself. His way is not in
himself; He has need of another to be his way.

3. That he is a blind wandering creature, ready to take by ways and to
wander; yea he loves to wander: He goes astray as soon as he is borne,
speaking lies.

4* He cannot discern the true way; but is blinded with prejudice thereat, and
full of mistakes, he is nothing but a lump of error.

5: He is dead legally, and really, how can he then come home? How can he walk
in the way, though it were pointed out to him?

6. He, even when entered into the way, is subject to so many faintings,
swoonings, upsittings etc. that except he get new quickening, he must lie be
the way, and perish.

In a word* his misery is such as cannot be expressed; for as little as it is
believed, and laid to heart; or seen and mourned for, and ^amented.

Now for a ground to our following discourse, I would pr^sse the solid,
through, and sensible apprehension of this, without which there will be no
usemaking or application of Christ: for the whole need not the phy^itian, but
the sick: and Christ is not come to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. Mat. 9: 12. Marc. 2: 17. Yea, believers themselves would live
within the sight of this, and not forget their frailty: for though there be a
change wrought in them, yet they are not perfect, but will have need of Christ
as the Way, the Truth and the Life, till he bring them in, and set them down
upon the throne, and crown them with the crown of life. And O happy they, who
must not walk one foot without this guide, leading them by the hand, or rather
carrying them in his arms. Let all then, who would make use of Christ, remember
what they were, and what they are, and keep the sense of their frailty and
misery fresh; that seeing their need of him, they may be in better case to
look out to him for help and supply, and be more distinct in their application
of him.

The Second general is, That Christ is a complete Mediator, thoroughly
furnished for all our necessities: Are we at a distance from the Father: He is
a Way to bring us together. Are we wandered out of the way: He is the Way to
us. Are we blind and ignorant: He is the Truth* Are we dead: He is the Li^e:
Cuncearning this fullness and compleatnesse of his, we would mark those things.

1. That he is thoroughly fu^nished with all things we stand in need of: the
Way, the Truth and the Life* He has eye salve, cloothing, gold tried in the
fire, etc. For the Spirit of the Lord is upon him, and has anointed him. Esa.
61: 1.

2. He is suteably qualified, not only having a fullness, and an all fullness,
so that whatever we need, is to be had in him; but also a suitable fullness
answering our case to the life: are we out of the way. He is the Way, are we
dead, he is Life etc.

3. He is richly qualified with this suitable good. He has not only wisdom
and knowl^dge, but treasures of it, yea all the treasures thereof Col 2: 3.
There is fullness in him, yea it has pleased the father that in him should all
fullness dwell. Col. 1: 19. Yea the fullness of the godhead dwells in him
bodyly. Col. 2. 9.

4. Hence this is an upmaking compleatnesse and fullness: for we are said to be
Complete in him Col. 2: 10. And he is said to be all and in all Col. 4: 11* He
fill^th all in all. Ephesians. 1. 23.

5. It is also a satisfying compleatnesse. The eye* is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hea ring, the avaricious man is not satisfied with
gold, nor the ambitious man with ho^our: but still they are crying with the
loch-leech give, give. But the man who gets Christ is full; he sits down
and cries, enough, enough* and no wonder, for he has all. He can desire no
more, he can seek no more, for what can the man* want, that is compleet in him?

6 There is here that, which will answer all the objections of a soul, and
these sometimes are not few. If they say, they cannot know the way to the
Father; then he is Truth, to instruct and teach them that, and so to enter them
into it: and if they say, they cannot walk in that way, nor advance in it one
step, but will faint and sit up, succumb and fall by; he answers that. He is
the Life, to put life, and keep life in them, and to cause them to walk, by
putting a new principle of life in them, and breathing of new on that Principle.

O thrice happy they who have fled to him for refuge! It is easy for them, to
answer all objections, and ^avils of Satan, and of a false heart; It is easy
for them, to put Christ to answer all. And on the other hand, who can tell the
misery of such, as are strangers to Jesus? How shall their wants be made up?
how shall they answer challenges, accusations, temptations, doubts, fears,
objections, and discouragements ^ast up in their way?

O! should not this indeare the way of the gospel to us, and make Christ
precious unto us? Is it not a wonder that such an alsufficient Mediator, who is
able to save to the uttermost all that come to God through him, should be so
little regairded and sought unto, and that there should be so few, that embrace
him, and take him, as he is offered in the gospel?

How can this be answered, in the day of accounts? what excuse can unbeleevers
now have? Is not all to be found in Christ that their case calls for? Is he
not a complete mediator, thoroughly fournished with all necessaries? Is not the
riches of his fullness written on all his dispensations? The mouths then of
unbeleevers must be for ever stopped.

CHAP. III. How Christ is the way, in General. I am the way.
WE come now to speak more particularly to the words; and first of his being a
Way. Our design being to point at the way of use making of Christ, in all our
necessities, straites and difficultyes, which are in our way to heaven: and
particularly to point out the way, how believers should make use of Christ* in
all their particular exigences; and so live by faith in him, walk in him, grow
up in him, advance and march forward toward glory in him. It will not be amiss
to speak of this fullness of Christ in reference to unbeleevers, as occasion
offers, because this will help to clear the other.

Before we can clear up, how any can make use of Christ, we must speak some
thing of their necessity of him, and of his being furnished fitly, fully,
richly and satisfylngly for their case; and this will make the way of use
making of Christ more plain.

While Christ then says I am the Way, he points out those things to us.

first. That man is now estranged from the Lord, and in a wandering condition:
He has departed, from God; he is revolted and gone. They are all gone out of
the way. Romans 3* 12. They go astray, as soon as they are borne, speaking lies.
Psalm. 58: 3. Nay not only so, but we love naturally to wander, and to run away
from God* as Jeremiah compleaneth of that wicked people Ier 14: 10. Naturally,
with the dromedary, we traverse our ways. Ier. 2. 23. and run hither and
thither, but never look toward him. Nay we are like those spoken of Job. 21:
14. We desire not the knowledge of his ways we will have none of him Psalm. 81:
11. Nor of his reproofs Prove. 1: 30.

Oh how sad is this? And yet how is it more sad, that this is not believed, nor
once considered. And that it is not believed, is manifest, for,

1. How rare is it to meet with persons, that are not very well pleased and
satisfied with themselves and their condition? They thank the Lord, it was ay
well with them. They have no complaints. They see no wants, nor necessities.
They wonder what makes folk complain of their condition, of their evil heart,
or of their hazard and danger. They understand not these matters.

2. Do we not find people very quiet and at rest, though they remain in the
congregation of the dead P^ov. 21: 16. They sleep in a sound skin, because
they see no hazard. The thoughts of their condition never bereave them of one
nights rest: no challenges have they; all is at peace with them, for the strong
man keeps the house.

3. How rare is it, to find people exercised about this matter, and busied
with it in their thoughts, either while alone, or while in company with others;
or once seriously thinking and considering of it, yea or so much as suspecting
the matter?

4 How rare is it to see any soul brocken in heart, and humbled because of
this? who is walking under this as under a load? whose soul is bleeding upon
the consideration of this? Is there any mourning for this?

5 Where is that to be heard, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved?
How shall we enter into the right way? where is that good old way, that we may
walk in it? Few such questions and cases troubling consciences: and no wonder;
for a deep sleep is upon them.

6. How comes it then, that the pointing forth of the way is so little
hearkened unto; Sure, were this natural condition perceived, a report of the
sure and saise way, would be much more welcome, then it is. Christ by his
Messengers would not be put to cry so often in vain. This is the way, turn in
hither.

Here is enough to convince of this ignorance, and in sensiblenesse: but it is
his Spirit, which convinces the world of sin, John. 16. that must bear home
this conviction.

Secondly. It points out to us this, That the way of man is not in himself
Ier. 10: 23. That is, That nothing he can do, can or will prove a way to him to
the Father: for Christ is the Way, as excludeing all other means and ways.
And that man can do nothing to help himself into the way is clear, for,

1. His way is* is as darkness Prove. 4: 14. He knows no better, he is
satisfied therewith, there he sleeps and rests.

2. He cannot, nor does not desire to return* He hates to be reformed.

3. Yea, he thinks himself saise; no man can convince him of the contrary,
The way he is in seems right to him, though the end thereof be death, Prove.
14: 12. and 16: 25.

4. Every man has his own particular way, to which he turns Esa. 53: 6.
some one thing or other, that he is pleased with, and that he thinks will
abundantly carry him through, and there rests he: and what these ordinaryly
are, we shall hear presently.

5. In this his way, which yet is a false way, he trusts Hos. 10: 13. he
leans upon it, little knowing that it will faill him at length, and that he
and his hope and confidence shall perish.

Is it not strange then to see men and women gaudeing about to seek their way,
as it is said, Ier* 2: 36. as if they could find it out; or as if they could
of themselves fall upon the way. What a lamentable sight is it, to see people,
wearying themselves with very lies, Ezech. 24: 12* and wearyed in the multitude
of their own counsels, Esa. 47: 15.

But what are those false and lying ways, which men weary themselves in, and
all in vain, and which they choose and trust into, and yet are not the way,
which will prove sa^ and sure?

Answer. It will not be easy to reckon them all up, we shall name some, that
are principal, and most ordinary: such as,

1. Good purposes and resolutions, with which many deceive themselves,
supposeing that to be all, which is required: and alas all their purposes are
like to Ephraims goodness, like the early cloud and morning dew, that soon
evanisheth: their purposes are soon brocken off, and soon disappointed, because
made without counsel, Prove. 15: 22. Many foolishly rest here, that they have a
good mind to do better, and to amend their ways, and they purpose after such
a time or such a time, they shall begin a new manner of life; but their
purposes never come to any effect, and fo at length they and their purposes
both perish.

2. Some convictions and inward challenges. The word now and then p^erceth them
so far; and ^ore and sharp dispensations from the Lord so far affecte their
heart, that they see it is not well with them, and they are made with Saul to
cry out, I have sinned 1 Samuel 15: 24. and they advance no further, those
convictions either die out again, or work no further change: And poor souls
they think because at such a sermon or such a Communion, they had some such
convictions and sharp challenges, therefore they imagine all is well with
them* when a Judas may have convictions, sharper than ever they had. and a
Felix Act. 24: 25.

3. Convictions followed with some sort of amendment. Some may dreadfully
deceive themselves with this, and conclude that all is right with them, and
that the way they are in is saife and sure: because they have had convictions,
which have been so effectual, as to cause them amend many things, and become,
as to many things, changed men and women, when alas their way is but a way of
darkness. still; it is not Christ, they have never, come to him. Herod hearing
John Baptist had his own convictions and amendements: for he did many things,
Mark. 6: 20.

4. Many rest upon their outward civility and morality, or negative holiness.
They cannot be challenged for gross faults, and that is all the way they have
to rest in: alas, could not a wicked Pharise^ say, as much as they, viz That he
was no extortioner, unjust person, nor an adulterer, nor such as the publicane
was, Luke 18: 11? How many heathens, as to this, shall outstripe such as
profess themselves Christians? and yet they lived and dyed strangers to the
right way to happiness. See what that poor young man said Luke 18: 21.

5. Some may win to more then civility, and attain unto a kind of outward
holiness, and outward performance of the duties of religion, such as hearing,
reading, prayer, communicating; and rest there, and yet perish: for that is but
their own way; it is not the right way. Had not the foolish virgins lamps? and
did they not wait with the rest Matt. 25? and will not many say in that day,
we have eaten and drunken in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streats,
to whom Christ shall answer, I know not whence you are, depart from me, all ye
workers of iniquity* Luke 13: 26, 27? were not the jews much in duties and
outward ordinances? and yet see how the Lord rejects them all, Esa. 1: 11,
12, 13* 14, 15* and 66: 3.

6. Much knowledge does deceive many. They think because they can talk of
religion, speak to cases of consciences, handle places of scripture, and the
like, that therefore all is right with them: when alas that is but a slippery
ground to stand upon. The Phari^ees sat in Moses seat, and taught sometimes
sound doctrine: and yet were heart enemies to Jesus, Mat. 23. And will not
many, think to plead themselves in to heaven. By saying, that they have
Prophesied in his name, Mat. 7: 22? There is a knowledge that puffs up 1 Cor.
13: 2* Some there are, whose knowledge seems to be operative and practical,
and not merely speculative. Some may escape the pollutions of the world through
the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and yet again become
entangled therein and overcome, so that their latter end is worse than the
beginning, See 2 Pet. 2 20, 21, 22. knowledge, I grant, is good, but it is not
Christ; and so it is not the way to the Father: and many, alas lean to it, and
are deceived, at last.

7. A kind of seeming seriousness in the performance of duties, and in
seeking of God, deceives many. They think because they are not conscious to
their own dissembling, but they look upon themselves as earnest in what they
do, that therefore all is well. Says not Christ, that not every (...) that
says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of God. Mat. 7: 21? that is,
not every one that renews their suits, and ingeminateth their desires, cry
and cry over again, and as it were, will not give it over. And yet they come
short of their expectation: did not the foolish virgins seem earnest and
serious, when they continued waiting with the rest, and at length, cried Lord,
Lord open unto us; and yet they were kept at the door* Many consider not that
there is a secret and closse hypocrisy, that some may be under and not know
it, as well as a gross hypocrisy, and dissimulation, which may be easily
observed: Will not many seek to enter in, that shall not be able? Mat. 7: 13.
Luke 13. 24.

8. Many may deceive themselves with this, that they are looked on by others
godly discerning persons and ministers, as good serious Christians, and that
they carry so handsomely and fair, that no man can judge otherwise of them,
than that they are good serious seekers of God. But alas the day is comeing,
which will discover many things: and many one will be deceived both of
themselves and of others. Not he who commends himself is approved; but whom
God approves. 2 Cor. 10: 18. Therefore Paul exhorts Timothy to study to show
himself approved unto God, 2 Timothy 2: 15. Men look only on the outside, and
cannot see in to the heart* but God searches the heart: and it is an easy
matter to deceive Men: But God will not be deceived.

9. Some may suppose themselves in a saife and sure way, if they out stripe
others in religious duties, and be much in extraordinary duties, when alas, for
all that, the heart may be rotten. The Pharisee fasted twice a week. Luke 18:
12. and yet was but an enemy to Christ. O how deceitful is the heart of Man!

10. Inward peace and quietness of conscience* may deceive some: and they may
suppose that ^ll is right with them, because they do nothing over the belly of
their conscience. Their heart does not accuse them of falsehood and
dissimulation in their way with God or Man; but they do all things according to
their light. No doubt that young Man, Luke 18: 21. spoke according to his
judgment, and light, when he said, all these things have I observed from my
youth. And Paul says of himself* Act. 23: 1. that he had lived in all good
conscience before God till that very day. Meaning, that even while he was a
Pharisee unconverted, he had not thortured his conscience, nor done any thing
directly against it, but had always walked according to his light. See Act.
26: 9.

11. A way of Zeal may deceive many; who may think their case unquestionable,
because they are Zealous for their way: and as they think their Zeal is pure
zeal for God: was not Paul, while a Pharisee, very Zealous, when out of zeal to
his way he persecuted* the Church? Phil. 3: 6. See my zeal for the Lord, could
a I^hu. say, 2. King. 10: 16. and the jews had a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge, Romans 10: 2. and Christ tells us, that such as should
persecute the Apostles unto death, wouldthink they did God good service John.
16: 2.

12. Some also may put it beyond question, that they are in the right way,
because, they are more strick in all their ways, than others, and will not so
much as keep fellowship or company with them, saying, with those Esa. 65: 5.
Stand by, I am holier* than thou, come not near to me, who yet are but a smoke
in Gods nose, and a fire that burns all the day.

13. Some may rest on, and deceive themselves with their great seize, and
more then ordinary experiences. When alas! we see to what a hieght some may
come, and yet prove nothing* Let such souls read with trembling that word of
Paul Heb. 6: 4, 5. where we see some may come to be enlightened, to taste of
the heavenly gift, to be made partakers of the holy ghost, to taste the good
word of God, and the powers of the world to come* and yet prove castawayes:
taking these expressions as pointing forth some thing distinct from real grace.

Many such false ways, wherein Men please themselves, might be mentioned: By
these every one may see cause of Searching and trying, over and over again. It
is a dreadful thing to be deceived here; and it is best to put it to a trial,
when there is a possibility of getting the matter helped: and many may fear
and tremble, when they see, they are not yet come the length of many such, as
sit down without Christ, and lose all their labor. O* if this could put
people to a serious examination and trial of themselves, and of the nature of
that way, wherein they are and rest at present!

Thirdly We might here observe. That this true and living way is but one for
all. There is but one Mediator betwixt God and Man, 1 Timothy 2: 5. One Mediator
for both old and new Testament: the Seed of the woman: Howbeit the Lords
dispensations with his people, in that one way, may be various; as his way with
his people under the Law is different from his way with his people under the
gospel; and his dispensations with individual believers, whether under the
law, or under the gospel, is not the same in all things.

And this should teach us to relinquish our own ways, and to enter into this
one only way: and it should move such as are in this way, to study unity and
agreement among themselves; and yet not infer or suppose that Gods way with
them must be in all things alike. Yea, though the Lords way with them be
different from his way with others, and more dark, disconsolate, and bitter;
yet let them be quiet and silent before the Lord, and acknowledge his
goodness, that has brought them into the one only way* Jesus Christ, and
keeps them there.

But fourthly, the maine thing here, and which is obvious, is this, That Jesus
Christ is the Way to the Father* the one and only way, the sovereign and
excellent way: and he alone is this way. There is not another. Neither is there
salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4: 12.

For clearing of this, we shall speak a little to those four things, and show

1. What is our case, and what need we have of a way. 2. How Christ answers
this our case and necessity, and is a fit way for us. 3. How he alone is this
way, and answers this our case. 4. What are the rare advantages and
specialities of this way.
And this will make way for our clearing up* how Christ is made use of as a way
by poor sinners.

For the first of these, our present case and necessity, something was spoken
to it before: we shall reduce all to those two heads. The first is our state of
guilt, and separation from God because of sin and guilt. The next is our state
of wickedness and enmity against God.

As to the first, we may take notice of those things.

1. That sin original and actual has separated us from God, and cast us out
of his favor, and out of that station of favor and friendshipe, which once we
were advanced to, in Adam.

2. That we are under Gods curse and wrath, and excommunicated from the
presence of the Lord, by a sad, yet just, sentence, according to law, and so
are under death.

As to the next thing, we may take notice of those particulars

1. That we are impure and polluted with sin, and daily iniquity.

2. That we are ignorant of the right way of returning into favor with God,
seeking out to ourselves many inventions.

3. That we are impotent for any good work or commanded duty.

4. That not only so, but we are unwilling to do any thing that is good, or to
enter into the way, when pointed out unto us; ye^ we are enemies to God by
wicked works, and have an innate hatred to all his ways.

5. We desire not to be out of the condition whereinto we are: there we love to
lie and sleep, and desire not to be roused up or awakened.

6. We are under the power and command of Satan, who leads us out of the way,
yea and drives us forward in the wrong way to our per^tion.

These things are plain and undeniable, and need no further confirmation,
though alas! it is little believed and laid to heart by many.

For the second, How Christ answers this our ^ase and necessity. He is a way
to us, to help us out of both these, both out of our state of guilt, and
separation; and out of our state of wickedness, and enmity.

And first he helps us out of our state of guilt and separation.

1. By Taking away our guilt and sin, being made sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him 2 Cor. 5: 21. He has
filled up the great gap betwixt God and us, with his body, and has made of it,
as it were, a bridge, by which we may go over unto the Father: we enter now
into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, Heb. 10: 19,
20. we are now brought near by his blood, Ephesians. 2: 13. So that through him we
are restored again to friendship with God, and made one with him: for Christ
the Mediator has made both one, reconcileing jews and Gentiles both unto God,
in one body, by the cross, having slain the enmity, Ephesians. 2: 16.

2. By taking way the curse and wrath, that was ^ue to us, being made a curse
for us, Gal. 3: 13. So that he is become our peace, and through him, we have an
access by one Spirit unto the Father, and are no more strangers and
foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God,
Ephesians. 2: 14, 18, 19. He is set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, Romans 3: 25, 1 John. 2: 2. and 4: 10. by him have we now received
atonement Romans 5: 11.

Next, He helps us out of our state of wickedness and enmity.

1. By taking away our impurity and uncleanness, by washing us and cleansing
us in his blood Ephesians. 5: 26. 27. Col. 1: 22* having purchased grace for us
Ephesians. 1: 3. we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in Him: He applies
his merits and lays the foundation of grace and holiness in the soul, and
carries on the work of mortification and vivification, and so, killing the old
man by his Spirit, both meritoriously and efficiently, he cleanses and
washes. Hence we are said, to be Baptized with him in his death, and buried
with him by baptism into death, that we should walk in newness of life: and
so our old Man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed
that henceforth we should not serve sin, Romans 6: 3, 4, 6. And for our daily
infirmities and escapes, whereby we pollute ourselves his blood is a fountain
opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and
uncleanness Zach. 13: 1. and to this fountain he brings, by the spirit of
repentance, which he, as an exalted prince, bestows. Act. 5: 31. and by
faith. So 1 Ioh. 2: 1. If any Man sin, we have an advocat with the Father, etc.

2. As for our ignorance and blindness, he takes that away, being given for a
light to the Gentiles. Esai. 42: 6. and 49. 6. Luke 2. 32. He is sent to open
the blind eyes Esa. 42: 7. to bring out the prisoners from their dark prisons,
Esa. 42: 7. and 61: 1. Yea, he is anointed for this end. So that such as walk
in darkness see a great light, and they that dwell in the land of the shadow
of death, upon them the light has shined, Esai. 9: 2. Mat. 4: 15. and he has
eye salve to give Revel 3: 18.

3. He is qualified for taking away our impotency: so that through Him, we can
do all things, Phil. 4: 13. When we are weak, we are strong in him, who is our
strength, and lives in us, 2 Cor. 12. 10. Gal. 2: 20. Hence He works in us
both to will, and to do, of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2: 13.

4. He also takes away our natural averseness, unwillingnesse, wickedness
and hatred of his ways, making his people willing, in the day of his power.
Psalm. 110. So he takes away the enmity that is in us Col. 2: 20, 21. and
reconcileth us to God, and to His ways, that our hearts do sweetly comply with
them, and we become most willing and glade to walk in them: yea and to run the
way of his commandments through his enlarging of our hearts, Psalm. 119: 32.

5. He likewise takes away that desire and willingness; which we have to lie
still in our natural condition; by convinceing us of the dreadful hazard
thereof, through the Spirit of conviction, whereby he convinces the world of
in* John. 16: 8. and circumciseth their care to hear, and makes them willing
to hearken to the counsel of God.

6. As for the power and Dominion of Satan, he breaks that, by leading
captivity captive. Ephesians. 4: 8. Psalm. 68: 18. and spoiling the strong Man's
house: for he is come to destroy the works of the devil, 1 John. 3: 8. and He
spoileth principalities and powers, Col. 2: 15. Thus, as captain of salvation,
he leads them out as a conqueror; having paid the price, he delivers also
by power and authority, from the hand of this Jailour.

And thus we see, how he answers our case and necessity, and is a fit way
for us: and though this be not questioned; yet little is it believed and
considered, and less put in practice.

And as for the Third particular. That He alone is this way, and answers our
case herein* it needs not be much spoken to, since it is clear and manifest,
confirmed by the experience of all generations, and the disappointments of
fools, who have been seeking other ways. Angels in heaven cannot do our
business. They cannot satisfy justice for (...)* nor have they any power over
our heart to turn it as they will; nay they are not acquanted with our secret
thoughts, that cabinet is keept closse from them, and reserved as the peculiar
privilege of God alone. The blood of bulls and goats can not do it: for the
Apostle tells us, that it is impossible that that should take away sin, Heb.
10: 4. That blood shed according to the law did cleanse ceremonially, but it is
only the blood of Jesus, typified by that, which cleanses really: so that we
are sanctified through the offerring of the body of Jes^ Christ once for all.
Heb. 10: 10. No pains or labor of ours can avail here. The Lord will not be
pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil. He will
not take our first borne for our transgression, nor the Son of our body for the
sin of our soul, Micah. 6: 7. Ordinances and means will not do it, nor any
invention of our own, No man can by any means redeem his brother, or give to
God a ransom for him, for the redemption of the soul is precious and cease
for ever. Psalm. 49: 7. 8. He alone has laid down the price; all our
sufferings, prayers, tears, labors, pennances, and the like, signify nothing
here; they cannot satisfy justice for one sin.

As to the fourth particular, viz the singularity of this way, Those things
make it manifest and apparent.

1. This is such a way, as can discover it self, and make it self known unto
the erring traveller: Christ Jesus is such a way, as can say to the wandering
soul, This is the way walk in it, Esa. 30: 25. No way can do this. This is
comfortable.

2. This way can not only discover it self to the wandering traveller; but also
it can bring folk into it. Christ can bring souls unto himself, when they are
runnig on in their wandering condition, He can move their heart to turn in to
the right way, put grace in their soul for this end, begin resolutions in
them, and sow the seed of faith; and so stay their course, which they were
violently pursueing, and make them look about and consider what they are doing:
as the former was good news to poor blind and witless creatures, that were
wandering, and knew not whither they were going; so this is good news to poor
souls, that find their heart inclineing to wander, and loving to go astray.

3. This way can cause us walk in it, If we be rebellious and obstinate. He can
command with authority: for he is given for a leader and a commander, Esa. 55:
4. How sweet should this be to the soul, that is weighted with a stubborn,
untractable and unperswadable heart, that He, as a King, Governor, and
Commander, can with authority draw, or drive, and cause us follow and run?

4. This way is Truth* as well as the Way, So that the soul that once enters
in here is saife for ever, no wandering here: The wayfareing men though fools
shall not err in this way, Esa. 35: 8. He will bring the blind by a way that*
they knew not, and lead them in paths that they have not known; he will make
darkness light before them, and crooked things straight, those things will he
do unto them, and not forsake them. Esai. 42: 16.

5. This way is also Life: and so can revive the fainting and weary travailer:
He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he Increases
strength: Yea, he renowes their strength, and makes them mount up with wings as
eagles, and run and not be weary, and walk and not faint, Esa. 40: 29, 31. and
so he gives legs to the traveller: yea he carries the lambs in his bosom
Esa. 40: 11. O! who would not walk in this way? what can discourage the man
that walks here? what can he fear? no way can quicken or refresh the weary
man. This way can do it: yea it can quicken one that is as dead, and cause him
march on with fresh alacrity and vigor.

6 From all these it follows, that this way is a most pleasant, hartsome,
desirable and comfortable way. The man is saife here, and he may sing in the
ways of the Lord, Psalm. 138: 5* for wisdoms ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace Prove. 3: 17. He is a Way, that is Food, Physic,
cordials, and all that the poor traveller stands in need of, till he come
home.

From all which, ^re we come to particulars, we shall in general shortly point
out those duties, which natively result thence by way of use.

1. O! what cause is there here for all of us to fall on wondering, both that
God should ever have condescended to have appointed a way, how sinners and
rebels, that had wickedly departed from him, and deserved to be cast out of
his presence and favor for ever, might come back again, and enjoy happiness
and felicity, in the friendshipe and favor of that God, that could have got
the glory of his justice in our destruction, and stood in no need of us, or of
any thing we could do: as also, that he appointed such a way, That Jesus
Christ, his only Son should, to speak so, lie as a bridge betwixt God and
sinful rebels, and as a highway that they might return to the great God,
upon him: Let all the creation of God wonder at this wonderful condescending
love of God, that appointed such a way; and of Christ, that was content to lou^
so low, as to become this way to us, this new and living way* and that for this
end, he should have taken on flesh, and become Emmanuel, God with us, and
taberrackled with us, that through this veil of his flesh, he might consecrate
a way to us. Let angels wonder at this condescendency.

2. Hence we may see ground of being convinced of those things 1 That naturally
we are out of the way to peace and favor with God, and in a way that leads
to death, and so, that our misery and wreatchednesse, so long as it is, so,
cannot be expressed. 2. That we can do nothing for ourselves, set all our wits
a work we cannot fall upon a way that will bring us home. 3. That it is
madness for us to seek out another way, and to vex ourselves in vain, to run
to this and to that mean, or invention of owr own, and be found fools in end.
4. That our madness is so much the greater in this, that we will turn to our
own ways, that will fail us, when there is such a noble and excellent and
every way satisfying way prepared to our hand. 5. That our wickedness is so
desperate, that the way, which is pointed out to us, does not please us, and
that we will not enter into it, not walk in it, 6. That this Way, which is also
the Truth and the Life, is only worth the Imbraceing, and is only saife and
sure: we should be convinced and persuaded of the worth, sufficiency and
desireablenesse of this way. Reason with ordinary light from the word may teach
these things; But grace can only carry them into the heart, and make them take
rooting there.

3. We may read here our obligation unto those particulars. 1. To turn our bak
upon all other false and deceitful ways, and not rest there. 2. To enter into
this way; though the gate be narrow and strait, Mat. 7: 13. Luke 13: 24. yet
to strive to enter in. 3. To resolve to abide in that way as acquiesceing in
it, resting satisfied with it, and this is to be rooted in him, Col. 2: 7. and
to dwell in him. 1 John. 3: 24. and to live in him or through him! 1. John. 4:
9. 4. To walk in this way, Col. 2: 6. that is, to make constant use of him, and
to make progress in the way, in and through him: to go from strength to
strength in him, drawing all our furniture from him, by faith, according to the
covenant: And this says, that the soul should guaird against, 1 stepping
aside out of this good and pleasant way. 2. backslideing. 3. sitting up and
fainting by the way.

In a word, This points out our duty, to make use of Christ as our way to the
father; and only of Christ: and this leads us to the particulars we shall speak
a little to.

There are two maine things, which stand in our way, and hinder us from
approaching to the Father, 1. Unrighteousness and guilt, whereby we are
legally banished because of the broken covenant, and the righteous sentence of
God according to that covenant: and 2. Wickedness, impurity and unholinesse,
which is, as a physical bar, lying in our way, because nothing that is
unclean can dwell and abide with him, who is of purer eyes then he can behold
inquitie; and nothing that is unclean can enter in there, where He is. So then
there must be an usemaking of Christ, as a way, through both these impediments.
We need justification and pardon for the one, and sanctification and cleansing
for the other. Now Christ being the way to the Father; both as to
justification, in taking away the enmity, in changeing our state, and removing
our unrighteousness, and guilt, whereby we were lying under the sentence of
the law, adjudging such sinners, as we are, to hell: and as to sanctification,
in cleansing us from all our pollutions, renewing our souls, washing away our
spots and defilements etc. He must be made use of in reference to both.

In speaking to the first, we shall be the shorter, because, through God's
great mercy, the gospel pure way of justification by faith in Christ, is
richly and abundantly cleared up by many worthy authors of late, both as
concearning the theoreticall, and practical part.

CHAP. IV. How Christ is made use of for justification, as a Way.
WHat Christ has done to purchase, procure and to bring about our
justification before God, is mentioned already viz. That He stood in the room
of sinners, engadging for them as their cautioner, undertaking, and at length
paying down the ransom: becoming sin, or a sacrifice for sin, and a curse for
them, and so laying down his life a ransom to satisfy divine justice: and
this he has made known in the gospel, calling sinners to an accepting of him,
as their only Mediator, and to a resting upon him for life and salvation; and
withal working- up such, as belong to the election of grace, to an actual
closeing with him, upon the conditions of the covenant, and to an accepting of
him, believing in him, and resting upon him, as satisfied with, and
acquiesceing in that sovereign way of salvation and justification, through a
crucified mediator.

Now, for such as would make use of Christ as the way to the Father in the
point of justification, those things are requisite; to which we shall only
premit this word of caution; That we Judge not the want of these requisites a
ground to exeem any, that hears the gospel, from the obligation to believe
and rest upon Christ, as He is offered in the gospel.

First* There must be a conviction of sin and miser^, a conviction of original
guilt, whereby we are banished out of God's presence and favor, and are in a
state of enmity and death, are come short of the glory of God. Romans 3: 23.
becomeing dead or under the sentence of death, through the offense of one, Romans
5: 15. being made sinners by one Man's disobedience verse, 19. and therefore
under the reigneing power of death verse. 17. and under that judgment, which
came upon all men to condemnation, verse. 18. And of original innate
wickedness, whereby the heart is filled with enmity against God, and is a
hater of Him and of all his ways; standing in full opposition to him and to
his holy laws; loving to contradict and resist him in all his actings;
despiseing and undervalueing all his condescensious of love; obstinately
refuseing his goodness and offers of mercy; and perempto^ily persisting in
rebellion and heart opposition; not only not accepting his kindnesses and
offers of mercy; but contemning them, trampling them underfoot as imbittered
against him. As also there must be a conviction of our actual transgressions,
whereby we have corrupted our ways yet more, run further away from God,
brought on more wrath upon our souls, according to that sentence of the law,
cursed is every one that abides not in all that is written in the law to do
it. Deuteronomy. 27: 26. Gal. 3: 10. What way this conviction is begun and carried on
in the soul, and to what a measure it must come, I cannot now stand to
explain: only in short know, That upon whatsoever occasion it be begun,
whether by a word carried home to the heart by the finger of God, or by some
sharp and crossing dispensation, fear of approaching death, some heinous
outbreaking, or the like, it is a real thing, a heart reaching conviction, not
general and notionall, but particular, plain, and pinching, affecting the
heart with fear and terror, making the soul seriously and really to mind this
matter, to be taken up with the thoughts of it, and anxiously and earnestly to
cry out, what shall I do to be saved, and finally will make the soul willing to
hearken and hear what hopes of mercy there is in the gospel, and to embrace
the way of salvation, which is there laid down: And the reason of this is,
because Christ himself tells us, The whole needs not the physician, but the
sick, Mat. 9: 12. He is not come to call the righteous, that is, such as are
righteous in their own eyes, but sinners, that is, such as are no more now
whole at the heart, as seeing no evil, no hazard or danger; but pricked and
pierced with the sense of their lost condition, being under the heavy wrath and
vengeance of the great God, because of sin; and seeing their own vileness,
cursednesse, wickedness and desperate madness. Because naturally we hate God
and Christ John. 15: 23, 24, 25. and have a strong natural antipathy at the
way of salvation through Jesus; therefore, nothing but strong and inevitable
necessity will drive us to a compliance with this gospel device of love.

2. There must be some measure of humiliation: under this conviction the man is
bowed down, and made mute before God; no more boasting of his goodness and of
his happy condition; no high or great thoughts of his righteousness; for all
are now to be looked on as filthy rags, Esai 64: 6. what things were as gain
before to the soul, must now be counted loss, yea and as dung Phil. 3: 7, 8.
The man must be cast down, in himself, and far from high and conceity thoughts
of himself, or of any thing he ever did, or can do: for the Lord resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble, Jam 4: 6. 1 Pet. 5: 5. He reviveth the
Spirit of the humble. Esa 57: 15. He that humbles himself shall be exalted,
Mat. 18: 4. and 23: 12. Luke 14: 11. and 18: 14.

3. There must be a despaireing of getting help or relief out of this
condition, by our selves, or any thing we can do: a conviction of the
unprofitablenesse of all things under the sun for our relief: No expectation
of help from our supposed good heart, good purposes, good deeds; works of
charity, many prayers, commendation of others, sober and harmless walking, or
any thing else within us or without us, that is not Christ: for so long as we
have the least hope or expectation of doing our own business without Christ,
we will never come to Him. Our heart hangs so after the old way of salvation
through works, that we cannot endure to hear of any other, nor can we yield to
any other: could we but have heaven by the way of works; we would spare no
pains, no coast, no labor, no expenses; Nay we would put ourselves to much
pain and torment by whippings, cuttings, fastings watchings, and the like; we
would not spare our first borne; nay, we would dig our graves in a rock with
our nails, and cut our own days, could we but get heaven by this means:
such is our antipathy at the way of salvation through a crucified Christ, that
we would choose any way* but that, cost what it would: therefore before we can
heartyly close with Christ and accept of him, we must be put from those refuges
of lies, and see that there is nothing but a disappointment written on them
all, that all our prayers, fastings, cries, duties, reformations, sufferings,
good wishes, good deeds etc, are nothing in his eyes, but so many provocations
to the eyes of his jealousy, and so, further causes of our misery.

4. There must be a rational, deliberate, and resolute relinquishing of all
those things in our selves, on which our heart is ready to dote. The Man being
convinced of the vanity of all things, by which he has been hopeing for
salvation, must now purpose to loose his grips off them, to turn his back upon
them, to quite them with purpose of heart, and say to them, get you hence, as
Esa. 30: 22. This is to deny our selves, which we must do, ere we become his
disciples Mat. 16. 24. This is to forsake our Fathers house Psalm. 45: 10. and
to pluck out our right eye, and to cut off our right arm. Mat. 5: 29, 30. This
abandoning of all our former false props and subterfuges must be resolute, over
the belly of much opposition within, from the carnal and natural inclinations
of the heart; and of much opposition without, from Satan's insnareing
suggestions, and deceitful temptations: It must be a real, rational act of the
Soul, upon solid and through conviction of their unprofitablenesse; yea of
their dangerousnesse and destructivenesse.

5. There must be some knowledge of the nature of the gospel covenant, and of
the way, which now God has chosen, whereby to glorify his grace in the
salvation of poor sinners. That God, Father, Son, and Holy ghost thought good,
for the glory of free grace, and wisdom, in a way of Justice and mercy, to
send Jesus Christ to assume man's nature, and so become God and man in two
distinct natures, and one person for ever; and to become under the law, to
undergo the curse thereof, and to die the cursed death of the cross, to
satisfy Justice, and to pay the ransom for the redemption of the elect. In
which undertaking our Lord was a servant Esa. 42: 1. and 49: 6. and 52: 13. and
53: 11. Zech. 3: 8. Matthew. 12: 18. and had furniture from God for all his
undertaking Esai. 42: 1. and ^1: 1, 2. Mat. 12: 18. and had a promise of seeing
his seed, and of prolonging his days etc. Esa. 53: 10. 11. Thus there was a
covenant of Redemption betwixt God and the Mediator: and the Mediator
undertaking was obliged to perform all that he undertook, and accordingly did
so: for as the Lord laid on him, or caused to meet together on him, the
iniquity of us all Esa. 53: 6. So in due time He bear our griefs and carried
our sorrows: He was wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him: He was cut off out of
the land of the living, and stricken for the transgression of his people. He
made his soul an offering for sin, and bear the iniquities of his people.
Pouring out his soul unto death; he bear the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors Esa. 53: 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 12. So that what
the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, for sin, (or by a sacrifice for
sin) condemned sin in the flesh Romans 8: 3. that the righteousness of the law
might be fulfilled in us verse. 4. Thus he made him sin, (or a sacrifice for
sin) that we might become righteous 2 Cor. 5: 20. and he was once offered to
bear the sins of many Heb. 9: 28. and he through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God. verse. 14. and his own self bear our sins in his
own body on the tree 1 Pet. 2: 24. There must, I say, be some knowledge of,
and acquantance with this great mystery of the gospel, wherein is declared
the manifold wisdom of God Ephesians. 3: 10. and with the noble design of God in
sending his Son after this manner, to die the death, that condemned sinners
might live, and return to the bosom of God, as redeemed not with gold or
silver or corruptible things; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
lamb without blemish and without spot 1 ^et. 1: 18. and being so redeemed by
blood, to become kings and priests unto God, 1 Pet. 2: 2, Revel 5: 9, 10. The
man must not be ignorant of this, else all will be in vain. I do not
determine, how destinct and full this knowledge must be; but sure, there must
be so much knowledge of it, as will give the soul ground of hope; and, in
exspectation of salvation by this way, cause it turn its back upon all other
ways, and to account it self happy, if it could once win here.

6. There must be a persuasion of the sufficiency, compleatnesse and
satisfactorynesse of the way of salvation, through this crucified Mediator;
el^e the soul will not be induced to leave its other courses, and betake it
self to this alone. He must be sure, that salvation is only to be had this way;
And that undoubtedly it will be had this way; that so with confidence he may
cast himself over on this way, and sweetly sing in hope of a noble outgate. And
therefore he must believe, that Christ is really God as well as Man, and a true
Man, as well as God; that he is fully furnished for the work of Redemption,
having the spirit given to him without measure; and endued fully and richly
with all qualifications, fitting him for all our necessiries, and inabling him
to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25; that He is
made of God to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1
(...). 1: 30. That all power in heaven and earth is given unto Him. Mat. 28:
18. That all things are put under his feet, and that He is given to be the head
over all things to the Church Ephesians. 1: 22. That in him dwells all fullness
Col. 1: 19. That in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Col.
2: 3, yea, that in him dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodyly: so
that we are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and power
verse. 9, 10.

7. The soul must know, that He is not only an able and alsufficient mediator;
but that also he is willing and ready, to redeem and save all that will come:
for all the preceding particulars will but increase his sorrow, and torment
him more, so long as he supposes* through ignorance, and the suggestion of
Satan, that he has no part in that redemption, no access to it, no ground of
hope of salvation by it. Therefore it is necessary, that the soul conceive not
only a possibility; but also a probability of help this way; and that the
dispensation of the gospel of grace, and the promulgation and offer of those
good news to him, speak out so much; that the patience of God waiting long,
and his goodness renewing the offers, confirms this; that his serious
pressing, his strong motives on the one hand, and his sharp threatenings on the
other; his reiterated comands, his ingeminated obtestations; his expressed
sorrow and grief over such as would not come to him, his upbraidings and
objurgations of such* as do obstinately refuse, and the like, put his
willingness to save such as will come to him, out of all question: yea^ his
obviating of objections, and taking all excuses out of their mouth, make^ the
case plain and manifest; so that such as will no^ come, are left without
excuse, and have no impediment lying in the way, but their own unwillingnesse.

8. The man must know upon what terms and conditions Christ offers himself
in the gospel* viz. upon condition of accepting of Him, believing in him and
resting upon him; and that no other way can we be made partakers of the good
things purchased by Christ, but by accepting of Him, as he is offered in the
gospel, that is to say, freely* without price or money Esa. 55: 1. absolutely
without reservation: wholly, and for all ends etc. for till this be known there
will be no closeing with Christ; and till there be a closeing with Christ,
there is no advantage to be had by him, The soul must be married to him as an
husband; fixed to him as the branches to the tree; united to him as the members
to the head; become one with him, one Spirit. 1. Cor. 6. 17. See John. 15: 5.
Ephesians. 5: 30. The soul must close with him for all things; adhere to him upon
all hazards; take him and the sharpest cross that follows him: now I say,
the soul must be acquanted with these conditions: for it must act deliberatly
and rationally here: Covenanting with Christ is a grave business and requires
deliberation, posednesse of soul, rational resolution, full purpose of heart,
and satisfaction of soul; and therefore the man must be acquanted with the
conditions of the new covenant.

9. There must be a satisfaction with the terms of the gospel, and the heart
must actually close with Christ, as h^s offered in the gospel. The heart must
open to him, and take him in, Revel 3: 20. The soul must embrace and receive
him Ioh. 1: 12. The man must take him, as his Lord and Master King, Priest and
Prophet; must give up himself to him as his Leader and Commander, and resolve
to follow him in all things, and thus close a bargain with him: for till this
be done there is no union with Christ; and till there be an union with Christ,
there is no partaking of the fruits of his redemption, as to Justification* no
pardon, no acceptance, no access to the favor of God, nor peace, nor joy in
the holy ghost, no getting of the conscience sprinkled, nor no intimation of
love or favor from God. etc.

10. There must be a leanning to, and resting upon him and on his perfect
sacrifice. The soul must sit down here as satisfied, and acquiesce in this
complete mediation of his. This is to believe on him, to rest on him Joan. 3:
18. 1 Pet. 2: 6. as an alsufficient help. This is to cast the burden of a
brocken covenant, of a guilty conscience, of deserved wrath, of the curse of
the law etc. upon Him, that He may bear away those evils from us. This is to
put on the Lord Jesus (in part) Romans 1^: 14* to cover ourselves with his
righteousness from the face of justice, to stand in this armor of proof
against the accusations of Law, Satan, and an evil conscience: This is to flee
to him as to our city of refuge, that we may be saife from the avenger of
blood: This is to make him, our refuge from the strome of Gods anger, and, a
shadow from the heat of his wrath Esa. 25. 4. and our hideing place from the
wind, and a covert from the tempest, and as the shadow of a great rock in a
weary land Esai. 32: 2. When we hide ourselves in him as the complete
cautioner, that has fully satisfied justice, and desire to be found in him
alone, not having our own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which
is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith,
Phil. 3: 9. This is to lay our hand on the head of the sacrifice, when we rest
on this sacrifice, and exsp^ct salvation through it alone. This is to cast our
selves in Christ's arms, as peremptorily resolving to go no other way to the
Father, and to plead no other ^ighteousnesse before Gods bar, but Christ's.
That is faith, yea the lively acting of Justifying faith.

Thus then is Christ made use of, as the way to the Father, in the point of
Justification, when the poor w^kened sinner, convinced of his sin and misery,
of his own inability to help himself, of the insufficiency of all means
beside Christ; of Christ's alsufficiency* readiness, and willingness to help,
of the equity and reasonabln^sse of the conditions on which he is offered, and
life through him, is now content, and fully satisfied with this way, actually
renunceing all other ways whatsomever, and does with heart, and hand embrace
Jesus Christ, and take him as he is offered in the gospel, to make use of him
for all things, to lean to him, and rest upon him in all hazards; and
particularly to refuge it self (...) his wings, and to rest there with
complacency, satisfaction, and delight; and hide it self from the wrath of God,
and all accusations.

Yet it would be known, that this act of faith, whereby the soul goes out to
Christ, and accepts of and leans to him, is not alike in all: for*

1. In Some it way be more lively, strong and active, like the centurious
faith, that could a^gue syllogistically. Matthew. 8: 8, etc. which Christ looked
upon as a great faith, a greater whereof he had not found, no not in Israel
verse. 10. and like the faith of the woman of Canaan Mat. 15: 21. etc. that
would take no nay say, but of seeming refu^eals did make arguments, which
Christ commended as a great faith verse. 28. But in others, it may be more weak,
and fainting, not able to reason a^ight for its own comfort and strength, as
Mat. 6: 30. ^ut is mixed with much fear, as Math. 8: 26. yea and with much
faithlesnesse, so that the soul must cry, Lord help my unbeleef Mark 9* 24.

2. In some, the acts and actings of this faith may be more clear, and
discerneable, both by themselves, and by spiritual on-lookers: In others so
covered over with an heap of doubts, unbeleef, jealousy, and other
corruption, that the actings of it can hardly, or not at all, be perceived by
themselves or others, so that nothing shall be heard but complaints, fears,
doubtings, and objections.

3. In some, this faith may have strong, and perceptible actings, wreastling
through much discouragment and opposition, and many difficulties; as in that
woman of Canaan Matthew. 15. running tho^ow with peremptory resolutenesse; saying
with Job. Cap. 13. 15. though he stay me, yet will I trust in him; and thus
taking the kingdom of heaven with violence. In others it may be so weak, that
the least opposition or discouragement may be sufficient to make the soul give
over hope, and almost despair of overcomeing and wining through: and be as a
bruised reed, or a smoking flax.

4. In some, though it appear not strong, and violent or wilful (in a manner)
in its actings; yet it may be firm, fixed, and resolute, in staying upon Him,
Esa. 26: 3, 4. and trusting in Him. Psalm. 125. 1. resolving to hing there, and
if it perish It perishes. In others weak, and bashful.

5. In some, it may be yet weaker, going out in strong and vehement hungerings,
Mat. 5: 6. The man dar not say, that he does believe, or that he does adhere to
Christ, and stay upon him; yet he dar say, he longs for him, and pants
after Him, as ever the heart does after the wa^ter brooks Psalm. 42: 1, 2. he
hungereth and thirsts for him, and cannot be satisfied with any thing without
him.

6. in some, it may be that weak, that the soul can only perceive the heart
looking out after Him: upon little more ground, than a may be it shall be
helped Esai. 45: 22. They look to Him for salvation, being convinced that there
is no other way, and resolved to follow no other way, they resolve to lie at
his door, waiting and looking for a sight of the kings face, and to lie there
waiting till they die, if no better may be.

7. In some, it may be so weak, that nothing more can be perceived, but a
satisfaction with the terms of the covenant, a willingness to accept of the
bargane, and an heart consenting thereunto, though they dar not say, that they
actually close therewith, yea nor dar say, that they shall be welcome Revel.
22: 17.

8. In some, it may be so weak and low, that they cannot say, that they have
any right hunger or desire after Him, nor that their heart does rightly and
really consent to the covenant of grace; yet they would feign be at it, and cry
out oh for a willing heart. O for ardent desires! O for a right hunger! and
they are dissatisfied and can not be reconciled with their hearts, for not
desireing more, hungering more, consenting more; so that if they had this, they
would think themselves happy and upmade. And thus we see their faith is so low,
that it appears in nothing, more manifestly, than in their complainings of
the want of it.

So then the poor weak believer needs not be so far discouraged, as to
despair and give over the matter as hopeless and lost: let him hang on,
depend, and wait; a week faith to day may become stronger within a short time.
He that laid the foundation, can and will finish the building, for all his
Works are perfect. And a weak faith, when true, will prove saving, and lay hold
on a saving strong Mediator.

Moreover, as to the acting of faith on Christ's death and sacrifice; for
stopping the mouth of Conscience, Law, Satan, and for opposeing to the
pursueing Justice of God because of sin. It may some times be strong, distinct,
clear and resolute. At other times again be weak, mixed, or accompanied with
much fear, perplexity doubting, and distrust, because of their own seen
unworthiness, many failings, doubtings of the sincerity of their repentance,
and the like.

This is a maine business, and of great concearnment, yet many are not much
troubled about it, nor exercised at the heart hereabout, as they ought,
deceiving themselves with foolish imaginations; for

1. They think, they were believers all their days, they never doubted of Gods
grace and goodwill, they had always a good heart for God, though they never
knew what a wakened conscience, or sense of the wrath of God meaned.

2. Or they think, because God is merciful, he will not be so severe, as to
stand upon all those things, that Ministers require; forgetting that He is a
just God, and a God of truth, that will do according to what He has said.

3. Or they suppose, it is an easy matter to believe, and not such a difficult
thing as it is called: not considering or believing, that no less power, than
that, which raised Christ again from the dead, will work up the heart unto
faith.

4. Or they resolve that they will do it afterward, at some more convenient
season; not perceiving the cunning slight of Satan in this, nor considering
that faith is not in their power, but the gift of God; and that if they lay not
hold on the call of God, but harden their heart in their day, God may
judicially blind them, so that these things shall be hid from their eyes; and
so that occasion, they pretend to wait for, never come.

Oh if such, whom this mainely concearneth, could be induced to enter into this
way, considering.

1 That except they enter into this way, they cannot be false the wrath of God
will pursue them, the avenger of blood will overtake them; no Salvation but
here.

2 That in this way is certain Salvation; this way will infallibly lead to the
Father; for he keeps in the way and brings saife home Exodus 23: 20.

2 Its the old path* and the good way, Ier. 6: 16. all the saints have the
experience of this, who are already come to glory: and.

4. It is a high way, and a way of righteousness, wherein if very fools walk,
they shall not wand^r, Esai. 35: 8, 9 and if the weak walk in it, they shall
not fainte Esai. 40: 31.

5. That except this be done, there is no advantage to be had by Him, His death
and all his sufferings, as to those persons that will not believe and enter
into him as the way to the Father, are in vain.

6. Yea, such as will not believe in Him, say in effect, either that Christ
has not died nor consecrated away through the veil of his flesh: or that all
that He has done and suffered is not sufficient for bringing a soul home to
God: or that they can do their own business without him* and that it was a
foolish and vain thing for Christ to die the death for that end: or lastly
that they care not for salvation, they are indifferent whether they perish, or
be saved:

7. That, as to them, the whole gospel is in vain, all the ordinances, all the
administration of ordinances, all the pains of Ministers are in vain.

8. That, as to them, all Christ's entreaties, motives, allurements, patience
and long suffering, his standing at the door and knocking, till his locks be
wet with the dew etc. are in vain: yea, they are contemptuously rejected,
despised, slighted, and undervalued.

9. That all the great promises are by such rejected as untrue, or as not
worthy the seeking or having: and that all the threatenings on the other hand,
are not to be regairded or feared.

10. In a word. That heaven, and the fellowshipe of God is not worth the
seeking; and that hell and the fellowshipe of devils is not worth the fearing.
Or that there is neither a heaven, nor a hell: and that all are but fictions:
and that there is no such thing as the wrath of God against sinners, o^ that it
is not much to be feared.

If it be asked, what warrant have poor sinners to lay hold on Christ, and
grippe to him, as made of God righteousness?

I answer, Our absolute necessity of him, is a ground to press us to go and
seek help and relief: we see we are gone in ourselves, and therefore are we
allowed to seek out for help elsewhere.

2 Christ's alsufficient furniture, whereby he is a qualified mediator, fitted
with all necessaries for our case and condition, having laid down a price to
the satisfaction of justice, is a sufficient invitation for us to look toward
him for help, and to wait at that door.

3. His being appointed of the Father, to be mediator of the covenant, and
particularly to lay down his life a ransom for sin; and Christ's undertaking
all his offices, and performeing all the duties thereof, conform to the
covenant of redemption, is a strong encouragement to poor sinners to come to
Him; because He cannot deny himself, and he will be true to his trust.

4. The Fathers offering of him to us in the gospel, and Christ's inviteing us,
who are weary, and heavy laden; yea calling and commanding such to come to
him, in his own, and in his Fathers name, under the pain of his and his
Fathers wrath and everlasting displeasure; exhorting further and requesting
upon terms of love, pressing earnestly by many motives, sending out his
ambassadors to beseech, in his stead, poor sinners to be reconciled, and to
turn in to him for life and salvation: yea upbraiding such as will not come to
him: all these are a sufficient warrant for a poor necessitous sinner to lay
hold on his offer.

And further, to encourage poor souls to come unto him, all things are so well
ordered in the gospel as that nothing occurreth, that can in the least prove a
stumbling block, or a just ground of excuse, for their forbearing to believe,
and to accept of his offer: all objections possible are obviated to such, as
are but willing? the way is cast up; and all stones of stumbling cast out of
it; so that such as will not come can pretend no excuse. They cannot object the
greatness of their sins: for the greater their sins be, they have the greater
need of one who is sent to take away sin, and whose blood purges from all sin,
1 John: 1: 7. what great sinner did he ever refuse, that came to him, and was
willing to be saved by him* Is there any clause in all the gospel exclud^ing
great sinners? Nor need they object, their great unworthiness: for ^e does all
freely for the glory of his free grace: (...)* got any good of him for their
worth: for no man ever had any worth. Nor need they object their long
refuseing, and resisting many calls: for he will make such as are willing
welcome at the Eleventh hour. Him that comes he will in no case put away Ioh.
6: 37. Nor can they object their changeableness, that they will not stand to
the bargan, but break and return with the dog to the vomit: for Christ has
engadged to bring all through that come to him, He will raise them up at the
last day, Joh. 6: 40. He will present them* to himself holy and without spote
or wrinckle, or any such thing* Ephesians. 5. The covenant is fully provided with
promises to stop the mouth of that objection. Nor can they object the
difficulty, or impossibility of believing: for that is Christ's work also. He
is the author and finisher of faith Heb. 12: 1. Can they not with confidence
cast themselves upon him; yet if they can hunger and thirst for him, and look to
him, he will accept of that: look to me (says he) and be saved Esa. 45: 22. If
they cannot look to him, nor hunger and thirst for him; yet if they be willing,
all is well: are they willing that Christ save them in his way, and therefore
willingly give themselves over to him, and are willing and content, that Christ
by his spirit work more hunger in them, and a more lively faith, and work both
to will and to do according to his own good pleasure. it is well.

But it will be said, that the terms and conditions, on which he offers
himself, are hard Ans. I grant the terms are hard to flesh and blood, and to
proud unmortified nature, but to such as are willing to be saved, so as God way
be most glorified, the terms are easy, most rational and satisfying: for*

1. We are required to take Him only for our mediator, and to join none with
him, and to mix nothing with him. Corrupt nature is averse from this, and would
at least mix something of self with him, and not rest on Christ only: corrupt
nature would not have the man wholly denying himself, and following Christ
only: and hence many lose themselves and lose all; because with the Gallatians
they would mix the law and the gospel together; do something themselves for
satisfaction of justice, and take Christ for the rest that remains. Now the
Lord will have all the glory, as good reason is, and will have none to share
with him. He will give of his glory to none. And is not this rational and
easy? What can be objected against this?

2. We are required to take him Wholly, that He may be a complete Mediator to
us, as a Prophet to teach, as a King to subdue our l^sts, to cause us walk in
his ways, as well as a Priest to satisfy justice for us, to die and in^ercede
for us. Is it not reason, that we take him as God has made him for us? Is
there any thing in him to be refused? And is there any thing in Him which we
have no need of? Is there not all the reason then in the world for this, that
we take Him wholly? and what stumbling block is here?

3. We are required to take Him Freely, without money and without price Esa.
55: 1* for He, will not b^ bough^ any m^nner of way: that free grace may be
free grace, therefore he will give all freely. True enough it is, corruption
would be at buying, though it have nothing to lay out: Pride will not stoup to
a free gift. But can any say the terms are hard, when all is offered freely?

4. We are required to take him absolutely, without any reversion or mental
reservation. Some would willingly quite all, but one or two lusts, that they
cannot think to twinne with: and they would deny themselves in many things, but
they would still most willingly keep a back door open to some beloved lust, or
other. And who sees not what double dealing is here? And what reason can plead
for this double dealing? Corruption, it is true, will think this hard, but no
man can rationally say, that this is a just ground of discouragment, to any; or
a sufficient ground to warrant them to stay away from Christ* seeing they cannot
be supposed sincerely to desire redemption from any sin, who would not desire
redemption from every sin. He who loves any known lust, and would not
willingly be delivered therefrom, has no re^ll hatred at any lust, as such*
nor desire to be saved; for one such lust would be his death.

5. It is required, that we accept of Him really and cordially, with our heart
and soul, and not by a mere external verbal profession: and is there not all
the reason in the world for this? He offers Himself really to us, and shall
we not be real in accepting of Him? what, I pray, can justly be excepted
against this? or what real discouragement can any gather from this?

6. We are to take Him for all necessities, that i^, with a resolution to make
use of Him as our alsufficient Mediator. And is not this most reasonable? Ought
we not to take Him for all the ends and purposes, for which God has appointed
Him, and set Him forth, and offered Him to us? What then can any suppose to lie
here, which should scarre a soul from laying hold upon Him? Nay should not this
be looked upon as a very great encouragement? And should we not bless the
Lord, that has provided such a compleet and alsufficient Mediator?

7. We are to take Him, and all the crosses, that may attend our taking or
following of Him: we must take up our cross, be it what it will be, that He
thinks good to appoint for us, and follow Him. Matthew. 16: 24* Mark. 8: 34.
for he that takes not up his cross, and follows not after Him, is not
worthy of Him. Mat. 10: 38. I know, flesh and blood will take this for a hard
saying; but they, that consider, that Christ will bear the heavyest end of the
cross, yea all of it, and so support, them by his Spirit, while they are under
it, that they shall have no just cause to compleane; and how He will suffer
none to go his errand, upon their own charges, but will be with them, when
they go through fire and watter, Esai. 43: 2. so that they shall suffer no
loss, neither shall the watters over flow them; nor the fire kindle upon them:
and that he who loses his life, for Christ's sake, and the gospels, shall save
it. Mark. 8: 35. yea, that they shall receive an hundred fold for all the
losses Matthew. 19: 29. and that even with persecution, Mark. 10. 30. and in the
world to come eternal life. They, I say, who consider this, will see no
discouragement here, nor ground of complaint; nay, they will account it their
glory to suffer any loss for Christ's sake.

8. Hence it follows, that we are to take Him, so as to avouch Him, and his
cause, and interest, on all hizards, stand to his truth, and not be ashamed of
Him, in a day of trial. Confession of Him must be made with the mouth, as with
the heart we must believe To. 10: 9. Let corruption speak against this what it
will, because it is always desireous to keep the skin whole: yet reason
cannot but say, that it is equitable, especially, seeing He has said* that
whosoever confesses Him before men, He will confess them before his Father
which is in heaven. Mat. 10. 32. And that, if we suffer with Him, we shall also
reign with Him. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Is He our Lord and Master, and should we not
own and avouch Him? Should we be ashamed of him for any thing, that can befall
us, upon that account? What Master would not take that ill at his servants
hands?

Hence then we see, that there is nothing in all the conditions, on which He
offers Himself to us, that can give the least ground, in reason, why a poor
soul should draw back, and be unwilling to accept of this noble offer, or think
that the conditions are hard.

But there is one maine Objection, which may trouble some, and that is. They
cannot believe: faith being the gift of God, it must be wrought in them* How
then can they go to God for this, and make use of Christ for this end, that
their souls may be wrought up to a believing and consenting to the bargan and
hearty accepting of the offer?

To this I would say these things.

1. It is true, that faith is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2: 8. and that it is He
alone who works in us, both to will and to do Phil. 1: 29, and none comes to
the son, but whom the father draws John. 6: 44. and it is a great matter, and
no small advancement, to win to the real faith, and through conviction of this
our impotency: for thereby the soul will be brought to a greater measure of
humiliation, and of despaireing of salvation in it self, which is no small
advantage unto a poor soul that would be saved.

2. Though faith be not in our power, yet it is our duty: Our impotency to
perform our duty, does not loose our obligation to the duty; so that our not
believing is our sin; and for this God may justly condemn us. His wrath
abides on all, who believe not in his Son Jesus, and will not accept of the
offer of salvation through the crucified mediator. And though faith, as all
other acts of grace, be efficiently the work of the Spirit, yet it is formally
our work: we do believe; but it is the Spirit that works faith in us.

3. The ordinary way of the Spirit's working faith in us, is by pressing home
the duty upon us, whereby we are brought to a despairing in ourselves and to a
looking out to Him, whose grace alone it is that can work it in the soul, for
that necessary (...) and breathing, without, which the soul will not come.

4. Christ Jesus has purchased this grace of faith, to all the elect, as other
graces necessary to their salvation: and it is promised and convenanted to Him;
that He shall see his seed and shall see of the travel of his soull Esai. 53:
10, 11. and that by the knowledge of him, that is, the rational and
understanding act of the soul griping to and laying hold upon Him, as he is
offered in the gospel, many shall be justified: Ibid. Hence he says, that
all, whom the father has given to Him, shall come unto Him, Ioh. 6: 37. and
the Apostle tells us, that we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in Him,
Ephesians. 1: 3.

5. Not only has Christ purchased this grace of faith, and all other graces
necessary for the salvation of the elect; but God has committed to Him the
administration and actual dispensation and outgiving of all those graces,
which the redeemed stand in need of. Hence, He is a Prince exalted to give
repentance and forgiveness of sins Act. 5: 31. all power in heaven and earth
is committed unto him. Mat. 28: 18: 19. Hence, He is called the author and
finisher of faith Heb. 12: v. 2. and He tells his disciples John. 14* 13. 14.
That whatever they shall ask in his name, He will do it. He is made Prince and
a Savior, having all judgment committed unto him. John. 5: 22. and He is Lord
of all Act. 10: 36. Romans 14: 9.

6. Hereupon, the sinner being convinced of his lost condition, through sin and
misery: of an utter impossibility of helping himself out of that state of
death: of Christ's alsufficiency, and willingness to save all that will come
to Him; and of its own inability to believe or come to Him for life and
salvation; or to lay hold on and lean to his merits and satisfaction, and so
despaireing in himself, is to look out to Jesus the author of eternal
salvation, the foundation and chief corner stone, the author and finisher of
faith. I say, the sinner, being thus convinced, is thus to look out to Jesus;
not that, that conviction is any proper qualification, prerequisite as
necessary, either to prepare, dispose, and fit for faith, or, far less, to
merit, any manner of way, or bring on faith; But because this is Christ's
method to bring a soul to faith by this conviction, to the glory of his grace.
The soul naturally being averse from Christ, and utterly unwilling to accept of
that way of salvation, must be redacted to that strait, that it shall see, that
it must either accept of this offer, or die: as the whole needs not a
physician; so Christ is come to save only that which is lost: and his method is
to convince the world of sin, in the first place, and then of righteousness
John. 16: 8, 9.

7. This looking out to Jesus for faith, comprehends those things 1. The
Souls acknowledgement of the necessity of faith, to the end it may partake of
Christ, and of his merits. 2. The souls satisfaction with that way of
partaking of Christ; by a closeing with Him, and a resting upon Him, by faith
3. A sense and conviction of the unbeleefe and stubbornness of the heart; or a
seeing of its own impotency, yea and unwillingnesse to believe 4. A persuasion
that Christ can overmaster the infidelity, and wickedness of the heart, and
work up the soul to a willing consent unto the bargane. 5. A hope, or a half
hope (to speak so) that Christ, who is willing to save all poor sinners, that
come to Him for salvation, and has said, that He will put none away in any
case, that comes, will have pity upon him at length. 6. A resolution to lie at
his door, till he come with life, till He quicken, till He unite the soul to
Himself. 7. A lying open to the breathings of his Spirit, by guarding against
every thing (so far as they can) that may grieve or provok Him, and waiting on
Him in all the ordinances, He has appointed, for begetting of faith; such as
reading the scriptures, hearing the word, conference with godly persons, and
prayer etc. 8. A waiting with patience on Him, who never said to the house of
Jacob, seek me, in vain, Esai. 45: 19. still crying, and looking to Him, who
has commanded the ends of the earth to look to him; and waiting for him, who
waits to be gracious, Esai. 30: 18. remembering that they are all blessed
that wait for him, Ibid. and that there is much good prepared for them, that
wait for Him. Esai. 64: 4.

8. The sinner would essay this believing, and closeing with Christ, and set
about it, as he can, seriously, heartily, and willingly, yea and resolutely
over the belly of much opposition, and many discouragements, looking to Him,
who must help, yea and work the whole work: for God works in and with Man,
as a rational creature. The soul then would set the willingness it finds on
work, and wait for more; and as the Lord is pleased to commend, by his Spirit,
the way of grace more unto the soul, and to warm the heart with love to it and
a desire after it, strick the iron while it is hot; and looking to Him for
help, gripe to Christ in the covenant: and so set to its seal, though with a
tembling hand; and subscribe its name, though with fear and much doubting,
remembering that He who works to will, must work the deed also Phil. 2: 13.
and He that begins a good work will perfect it, Phil. 1: 6.

9. The soul essaying thus to believe, in Christ's strength, and to creep when
it can not walk or run, would hold fast what it has attained, and resolve
never to recall any consent, or half consent, it has given to the bargane, but
still look forward, hold on, wreastle against unbeleefe, and unwillingnesse;
intertaine every good motion of the Spirit for this end, and never admit of any
thing, that may quench its longings, desires, or exspectation.

Nay 10. If the sinner be come this length, that with the bit willingness he
has, he consents to the bargane, and is not satisfied with any thing in
himself, that draws back, or consents not, and with the little skill or
strength he has is writing down his name, and saying even so I take Him. and
is holding at this, peremptorily resolving, never to go bake, or unsay what he
has said; but on the contrare, is firmly purposed to adhere, and, as he
grows in strength, to grippe more firmly, and adhere to Him, he may conclude,
that the bargan is closed already, and that he has faith already: for, here
there is an accepting of Christ on his own terms, a real consenting unto the
covenant of grace, though weak, and not so discernable, as the soul would wish.
The soul dar not say, but it loves the bargane, and is satisfied with it, and
longs for it, and desires nothing more than that it might partake thereof,
and enjoy Him whom it loves, hungereth for, pants after, or breaths, as it
is able, that it may live in Him, and be saved through Him.

But Some will say, If I had any evidence of God's approbation of this act of
my soul, any testimony of his Spirit, I could then with confidence say, that I
had believed and accepted of the covenant and of Christ offered therein: but so
long as I perceive nothing of this; how can I suppose, that any motion of this
kind in my soul, is real faith?

For answer. 1. We would know, that our believing, and God's sealing to our
sense are two distinct acts, and separable, and often separated: our believing is
one thing, and God's sealing with the holy Spirit of promise to our sense, is
another thing; and this follows though not inseparably the other Ephesians. 1: 13.
-- In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit
of promise.

And so, 2. We would know, that Many a man may believe, and yet not know that
he does believe; He may set to his seal, that God is true, in his offer of life
through Jesus, and accept of that offer as a truth, and close with it; and yet
live under darkness and doubtings of his faith, long and many aday; partly
through not discerning the true nature of faith; partly through the great sense
and feeling of his own corruption and unbeleefe; partly through a mistake of
the operations of the spirit within, or the want of a clear and distinct
uptaking of the motions of his own soul; Partly because he finds so much
doubting and fear, as if there could be no faith, where there were doubting or
fear, contrare to Mark. 9: 24. Mat. 8: 26. and 14: 31. Partly because he has
not that persuasion, that others have had, as if there were not various degrees
of faith, as there is of other graces, and the like.

Therefore 3. We would know, that many may really believe, and yet miss this
sensible sealing of the Spirit which they would be at: God may think it not yet
seasonable to grant them that, lest they forget themselves and become too
proud; and to train them up more to the life of faith, whereby He may be
glorified; and for other holy ends, He may suspend the giving of this for a
time.

4. Yet we would know, that all that believe, have the seal within them 1.
John. 5: 10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself*
that is, He has that which really is a seal, though he see it not, nor
perceive it not; even the work of God's spirit in his soul* inclining and
determineing him unto the accepting of this bargan, and to a likeing of and
endeavoring after holiness: and the whole gospel clearing up what faith is,
is a seal and confirmation of the business. So that the matter is sealed, and
confirmed by the word, though the soul want those sensible breathings of the
Spirit, sheding abroad his love in the heart, and filling the soul with a full
assurance, by hushing all doubts and fears to the door; yea though they should
be a stranger unto the Spirits witnessing thus with their spirits, that they
are the children of God, and clearning up distinctly the real wot^ of grace
within their soul, and so saying in effect, that they have in truth believed.

But enough of this, seeing all this and much more is abundantly held forth and
explained, inthat excellent and useful treatise of Mr. Guthries entitled The
Christians great interest.

CHAP. V. How Christ is to be made use of, as the Way, for Sanctification, in
general.
HAving shown how a poor soul, lying under the burden of sin and wrath, is to
make use of Jesus Christ, for righteousness and justification, and so to make
use of Him, go out to Him, and apply Him, as He is made of God to us
righteousness 1. Cor. 1: v. 30. and that but briefly; this whole great
business being more fully, and satisfactoryly handled, in that fore mentioned
great, though small Treatise, vix The Christians great Interest. We shall now
come and show, how a believer or a justified soul shall further make use of
Christ, for Sanctification, this being a particular, about which, they are
ofttimes much exercised and perplexed.

That we may therefore, in some weak measure, through the help of His light
and grace, propose some things to clear up this great and necessary truth, we
shall first speak a little to it, in the general, and then come to clear up
the matter more particularly.

Before we speak of the matter in general, it would be remembered, first, That
the person who only is in case to make use of Christ for Sanctification, is
one, that has made use of Him already for Righteousness and justification:
for one who is a stranger to Christ* and is living in nature, has no access
to Christ for sanctification. He must be a believer and within the covenant,
ere he can make use of the grounds of sanctification, laid down in the
covenant. One must first be united to Christ, and justified by faith in Him,
before he can draw any virtue from Him for perfecting holiness. He must first
be in Him before he can grow up in Him, or bring forth fruit in Him. And
therefore the first thing that souls would go about, should be to get an union
made up with Christ, and be clothed with his righteousness by faith* and then
they have a right to all his benefits: first they should labor to get their
state changed from enmity, to peace and reconciliation with God, through faith
in Jesus.

Yet, next, it would be observed. That when it is said, that one must be a
believer, before he can go to Christ, and make use of Him for* holiness and
sanctification; it is not so understood, or said. That one must know, that
indeed he is justified by faith* before he can make any use of Christ for
sanctification. One may be justified, and a believer, yea and growing in grace
through Jesus Christ, and so actually improving the grounds of sanctification,
and making use of Christ for this end, and allowed thereunto, and yet win to no
certainty, o^ his union with Christ, of his justification through faith in Him*
no^ of his faith.

But thirdly, if it be said, How can a soul with confidence approach to Christ,
for usemaking of Him, in reference to sanctification, that is still doubting of
his state and regeneration? I answer* It is true, a clear fight of our
interest in Christ by faith, would be a great encouragement to our confident
approaching to, and usemaking of Him, in all things; and this consideration
should mo^e all, to a more earnest search and study of the marks and evidences
of their Interest* a good help whereunto they will find in the forementioned
book. I shall only say this here. That if the soul, have an earnest desire, t^
be sanctified wholly, and to have on the image of God, that he may glorify
Him* and pants after holiness, as for life, that he may look like Him, who
is holy* and makes this his work and study; sorrowing at nothing more than at
his short coming; crying out and longing for the day, when he shall be
delivered from a body of death, and have the old man wholly crucified; he
needs not question his interest in Christ* and warrant to make use of Him,
for every part of sanctification: for this longing desire after conformity to
Gods law, and panting after this spiritual life to the end God may be exalted,
Christ glorified, and other^ edified; will not be readyly found, in one that
(...) yet in nature. It is true, I grant, some who design to establish their
own righteousness; and to be justified by their own works and inherent
holiness, may wish, that they might be more holy and less guilty: and for
some other corrupt ends, they may desire to be free of the power of some lust*
which they find noxious and troublsome; and ye^ retain with love and desire,
some other beloved lusts; and so have a heart still cleaving to the heart of
some detestable thing or other: But gracious souls, as they have respect to all
the commands of God; so they have not that design of being justified before
God by their works; nor do they study mortification, or sanctification for any
such end* nay, they no sooner discover any by as of their false deceitful
hearts unto any such end, but as soon, they disowne it, and abhore it. So that
hence believers may get some discovery of the reality of their faith, and
interest in Christ, and of their warrant, yea and duty to make use of Christ
for sanctification.

T^s premised, we come to speak some thing, in the general, of believers
usemaking of Christ, as made of God to us Sanctification: and for this end, we
shall only speak a little to two things, first we shall show, upon what account
it is, that Christ is called our sanctification, or made of God to us
sanctification, as the Apostle's phrase is 1. Cor. 1: 30. or what Christ has
done, as Mediator, to begin, and carry on to perfection, the work of
sanctification in the soul. And secondly, How the soul is to demean it self in
this matter, or how the soul is to make use of, and improve, what Christ has
done, for this end, that it may grow in grace* and perfect holiness in the
fear of God.

As to the first, we would know, that though the work of sanctification be
formally ours; yet it is wrought by another hand, as the principal efficient
cause; even by the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The Father is said to purge the
branches, that they may bring forth more fruit John. 15: 1. 2. hence, we are
said to be sanctified by God the Father, Iud. verse. 1. The Son is also called
the sanctifier Heb. 2: 21. He sanctifies and cleanses the Church, with the
washing of water by the word Ephesians. 5. ^6. The Spirit is also said to sanctify
2. These 2: 13. 1 Pet. 1: 2. Romans 15: 16. Hence we are said to be washed and
sanctified by the Spirit of God 1 Cor. 6: 11.

But more particularly, we are said to be sanctified in Christ. 1. Cor. 1. 2.
and He is made of God to us sanctification 1 Cor. 1. 30. let us then see, in
what sense this may be true: and

1 He has by his death and blood procu^ that this work of sanctification shall
be wrought, and carried on: for he suffered without the gate, that He might
Sanctify the people with his own blood Heb. 13: 12. we are saved by the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy ghost, which He shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior Tit. 3: 5, 6. He gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. Tit. 2: 14. Thus our sanctification is
the fruit of his death, and purchased by his blood^ He gave himself for his
church, that he might sanctify it Ephesians. 5: 25, 26.

^, He dying as a cautioner and public person, believers are accounted in law
to be dead to sin, in Him. Hence the Apostle tells us, Romans 6: 3* 4, 5, 6. that
as many of us as are Baptized into Jesus Christ were Baptized into his death;
and that therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death; and are
planted together in the likeness of his death; yea and that our old man is
crueified with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that hence forth
we should not serve sin: whence believers are warranded and commanded verse. 11.
to reckon themselves to be dead indeed unto sin: and therefore sin should not
reign in their mortal bodies to fulfill the lusts thereof verse. 12. This is a
sure ground of hope and comfort for believers, that Christ dyed thus, as a
public person; and that by virtue thereof, being now united to Christ by
faith, they are dead unto sin by law; and sin cannot challenge a dominion over
them, as before their conversion it might have done, and did; for the law has
dominion over a man, as long as he lives* but no longer: wherefore believing
brethren, becomeing dead to the law by the body of Christ, are married to
another, even to Him, who is raised from the dead, that they should bring forth
fruit unto God Romans 7: 1, 4.

3. Hence It follows, that our old man is crucified with Christ, that the
body of sin might be destroyed Romans 6: 6. So that this old tyrant, that
oppresses the people of God, has got his deaths wounds, in the crucifixion of
Christ, and shall never recover his former vigor and activity, to oppress and
bear down the people of God, as he did: He is now virtually, through the death
of Jesus, killed, and crucified, being in Christ, nailed to the cross.

4. His resurrection is a paune and pledge of this sanctification: for, as He
died as a public person, so He rose again as a public person: we are buried
with Him by baptism, that likeas Christ was raised up from the dead, by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. Romans 6:
4. and believers are said to be planted together with him, in the likeness of
his resurrection verse. 5. and they shall live with Him. verse. 8. and therefore
they are to reckon themselves, alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
verse. 11. we are raised up together Ephesians. 2: 6.

5. This sanctification is an article of the covenant of redemption, betwixt
the Father and the Son Esa. 52: 15. so shall he sprinkle many nations: and Cap.
53: 10. He shall see his seed, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand. Christ then having this promised to Him, must see to the
accomplishment thereof, and will have* it granted to him; seeing He has
fulfilled all that was engadged to by Him, having made his soul an offering for
sin.

6. This sanctification is promised in the covenant of grace. Ier. 33. 8. and I
will cleanse them from all their iniquity Ezech 37: 23. -- and I will cleanse
them. So Chap. 36: 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye
shall be clean, from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I
cleanse you. Now all the promises of the covenant of grace are confirmed to us
in the Mediator: for in Him all the promises are yea and amen 2. Cor. 1: 20.

7. He has also purchased and made sure to his own, the new nature, and the
heart of flesh* which is also promised Ezech. 36: 26. and 11. 19. Ier. 32. 39.
This is the new and lively principle of grace, the spring of sanctification,
which cannot be idle in the soul* but must be emitting vital acts natively.

Yea, through Him, are believers made partakers of the divine nature, which is
a growing thing; young glory in the soul. 2. Pet. 2: 3, 4. According as his
divine power has given unto us all things, that pertain unto life and
godliness, through the knowledge of Him, that has called us to glory and
virtue whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by
these you might be partakers of the divine nature. etc.

8. The Spirit is promised, to cause us walk in his statutes Ezech. 36: 27. Now
all these promises are made good to us in Christ, who is the cautioner of the
covenant: yea He has gotten now the dispensing and giving out of the rich
promises of the covenant, committed unto Him; so as He is the great Lord
treasurer and administrator of the great and glorious purchased blessings.

9. There are new waterings, breathings, and gailes of the Spirit, given in
Christ. Esai. 27: 3. He must water his garden or vinyaird every moment. This is
the north wind, and the south wind that blows upon the garden Cant. 4: 16.
He must be as the dew unto Israel. Hos. 14: 5.

10. Through Christ is the believer brought into such a covenant state, as
gives great ground of hope of certane victory. He is not now under the law but
under grace; and hence infers the Apostle Romans 6: 14. That sin shall not
have dominion over them. Being now under that dispensation of grace, whereby
all their stock, is in the Mediators hand* and at his disposal; and not in
their own hand and power, as under the covenant of works, there is a sure
ground laid down for constant supply and furniture, in all necessities.

11. Christ has prayed for this. John. 17. 17. Sanctify them through thy
truth. where the Lord is praying, that his disciples might be more and more
sanctified, and so fitted and qualified for the work of the ministry, they
were to be employed in. And what He prayed for them, was not for them alone*
but also for all the elect, proportionably, who are opposed to the world, for
which He did not pray v. 9.

12. He stands in relation to believers of a Vine, or a Root, in which they
grow as branches, so that by abiding in Him, living by faith in Him, and
drawing sap from him, they bring forth fruit in Him John. 15: 1, 2, 4, 5. Their
stock of grace is in Him, the root; and He communicate^h sap and life unto his
branches, whereby they grow, floorish, and bring forth fruit to the glory of
God.

13. Christ has taken on Him the office of a Prophet and Teacher, to instruct
us in the way, wherein we ought to go: for He is that great Prophet, whom the
Lord promised to raise up, and who was to be heard and obeyed in all things
Deuteronomy. ^8: 15. Act. ^. 2^. and 7: 37. He is given for a witness and a leader.
Esai. 55: 4. and we are commanded to hear Him Mat. 17: 5. Mark. 10: 7.

14. He has also taken on Him the office of a* King Psalm. 2: 6. Mat. 21: 5.
Esai. 9: 6, 7. Phil. 2: 8. 9, 10, 11. and thereby stands engadged to lubdue
all their spiritual enemies, Satan and corruption: Psalm. 110. He is given for
a leader and commander. Esai. 55: 4* and so can cause his people walk in his
ways.

15. When we defile ourselves with new transgressions and failings. He has
provided a fountain for us to wash in: a fountain opened to the house of
David and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness Z^ch.
13: 1. and this fountain is his blood which cleanses from all sin Heb. 9: 14.
1. John. 1: 7* Revel. 1: 5.

16. He is set before us, as a copy and pattern^ that we should walk even as
He walked 1. Ioh. 2* 6. He left us an example, that we should follow his stepps
1. Pet. 2: 21. But we would beware to separate this consideration from the
preceding, a^ Antichristian Socinians do, who will have Christ only to be a
copy.

17. He has overcome Satan our arch-enemie* and has destroyed his works. 1.
John. 3* 8. He came to destroy the works of the devil. And in particular his
works of wickedness in the soul* Thus He is a conqueror, and the Capta^e of
our Salvation.

18. As He has purchased, So has He appointed ordinences, for the laying of
the foundation, and carrying on of this work of sanctification^ both Word and
(...) are appointed for this end* The Word to convert and to confirm* John.
17: 17. sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth, said Christ. The
word is given as the rule; and also through the means thereof is life and
strength conveyed to the soul, to perfect holiness in the fear of God 1. Pet.
2: 2. And the Sacraments are given to strengthen and confirm the soul in the
ways of God.

19. As He has laid down strong encouragements to his followers, to hold on
in the way of holiness, many great and precious promises, by which they might
be partakers of the divine nature. 2. Pet. 1: 4. and by which they are
encouraged to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit
2. Cor. 7: 1. and many motives to hold on and continue; So has He rolled
difficultyes out of the way, whether they be within us, or without us, and
thereby made the way easy, and pleasant to such as walk in it; so as they may
now run in the way of his commandments, and walk and not weary, and run and
not be faint.

Nay 20 we would remember, for our encouragment and confidence, that in
carrying on of this work lies the satisfaction of soul, and the pleasure of
the Lord, that must prosper in His hand, and thus He sees his seed, and has
of the travail of his soul, and is satisfied.

These particulars rightly considered will discover unto us, what a noble
ground for sanctification* is in Christ laid down for believers, which they
may, and must, by faith, grippe to, that they may grow in grace, and grow up in
Christ* and perfect holiness; and what a wonderful contriveance of grace
this is, wherein all things are made so sure for believers; Christ becomeing
all things to them, and paveing a royal and sure way for them* sure for them,
and glorious to himself.

As to the second particular; that is, How believers are to carry in this
matter, or how they are to make use of Christ, and of those grounds of
sauctification, in Christ, which we have mentioned.

First, There are some things which they would bewar of, and guaird against: as,

1. They would bewar of an heartlesse despondency, and giving way to
discouragements, and harkening to the language of unbeleefe, or to the
suggestions of Satan, whereby he will labor to persuade them of the
impossibility of getting the work of sanctification throughed, or any progress
made therein to purpose. Satan and a deceitful heart can soon muster up many
difficultyes, and allege that there are many Lions, many insuperable
difficultyes, in the way, to discourage them from ventureing forward: and if
Satan prevail here, he has gained a great point. Therefore the believer would
keep up his head in hope, and beware of multiplying discouragements to himself,
or of concludeing the matter impossible; for then shall he neither have heart
nor hand for the work, but sit down and wring his hands, as overcome with
discouragement, and despondency of Spirit.

2. They would beware of wilful rejecting their own mercyes, and forbearing
to make use of the grounds of hope of strength and progress, in the matter of
sanctification, which Christ has allowed them to make use of. There is such an
evil even amongst Gods children, that they scarre at that which Christ out of
great love has provided for them, and dar not with confidence make use of nor
apply to themselves, the great and comfortable promises, to the end they might
be encouraged: they will not take their allowance, as thinking themselves
unworthy; and that it should be presumption in them to challenge a right to
such great things; and they think it commendable humility in them, to stand
aback; and so wilfully refuse the advantages and helps, that make so much for
their grouth in grace.

3. They would beware of a careless neglect of the means, appointed for
advanceing in holiness: for though the means do not work the effect, yet it
is by the means, that God has chosen to work the work of sanctification:
Here that is to be seen, that the hand of the diligent makes rich; and the
field of the slothful is soon grown over with thorns and nettles; so that
poverty comes as one that travelleth, and want as an armed man. Prove. 24: 30,
31, 34. It is a sinful tempting of God, to think to be sanctified another way,
than God has in his deep wisdom condescended upon.

4. Yet they would beware of laying too much weight on the means and
ordinances; as if they could effectuat the business. Though the Lord has
thought good to work in and by the means; yet He himself must do the work.
Means are but means, and not the principal cause; nor can they work, but as
the principal agent is pleased to make use of them, and to work by them: when
we lean to the means, and to instruments, we prejudge our selves; by
disobligeing God, and provoking Him to leave us, that we may wrestle with the
ordinances alone, and find no advantage. Therefore the soul would guaird
against this.

5. Albeit the means can do nothing unless He breath, yet we would beware not
only of neglecting them (as we said before) but also of a slighting way of
performing of them, without that earnestness and diligence, that is required.
Cursed is he who does the work of the Lord negligently. Ier. 48: 10. Here then
is the special art of Christianity apparent, to be as diligent, earnest, and
serious in the use of the means, as if they could effectuate the matter, we
were seeking; and yet to be as much abstracted from them, in our hopes and
exspectation, and to be as much leaning on the Lord alone, and depending on Him
for the blessing, as if we were useing no means at all.

6. They would beware of slighting and neglecting the motions of the Spirit:
for thereby they may lose the best opportunity. They should be always on the
wing, ready to embrace the least motion; and they should stand always ready,
waiting for the breathings of his Spirit, and open at his call; least
afterward, they be put to call and seek, and not attain what they would be at,
as we see in the Spouse Cant. 5: 2, 3, 4. 5, 6. etc.

7. They would also guaird against the quenching of the Spirit 1 These. 5: 12.
or greiving of the Spirit. Ephesians. 4: 30. by their unchristian and unsuteable
carriage: for this will much mar their sanctification. It is by the Spirit
that the work of sanctification is carried on, in the soul: and when this
Spirit is disturbed, and put from his work* how can the work go on? When the
motions of this indwelling Spirit are extinguished, his work is marred, and
retarded: and when He is grieved, he is hindered in his work. Therefore souls
would guard against unbeleefe, despondency, unsuteable and unchristian carriage
etc.

8. Especially they would beware of wasteing sins Psalm. 51: 10. Sins against
light and conscience; such as David calls presumptuous sin^. Psalm. 19: 13.
They would beware also of favoring any known corruption, or any thing of that
kind, that may hinder the work of sanctification.

Secondly. It were useful and of great ad^antage, for such as would grow in
grace, and advance in the way of holiness, to be living in the constant
conviction*

1. Of the necessity of holiness, without which no man shall see God Heb. 12:
14. nothing entering in into the new Jerusalem, that defiles. Revel. 21: 27.

2. Of their own inability to do any one act aright; how they are not
sufficient of themselves to think any thing, as of themselves 2 Cor. 3: 5. and
that without Christ, they can do nothing John. 15: 5.

3. Of the insufficiency of any humane help, or means, or way, which they may
think good to choose, to mortify aright one corruption; or to give strength
for the right discharge of any one duty* for our sufficiency is of God 2. Cor.
3: 5. and it, i^ through the Spirit that we must mortify the deed^ of the body
Romans 8: 13.

4. And of the treachery and deceitfulness of the heart, which is bent to
follow by ways* being not only deceitful above all things, but also
desperately wicked, Ier. 17: 9.

That by this means the soul may be jealous of it self, and despair of doing
any thing in its own strength; and so be fortified against that maine evil,
which is an enemy to all true sanctification, viz confidence in the flesh.

Thirdly. The soul would keep its eye fixed on those things.

1. On Christ's alsufficiency to help, in all cases, that He is able to save
to the uttermost. Heb. 7: v. 25.

2. On his compassionednesse to such as are out of the way; and ready nesse to
help poor sinners, with his grace and strength: and this will keep up the soul
from fainting and dispaireing.

3. On the commands to holiness: such as those cleanse your hands, and purify
your hearts Iam 4: 8. and be ye holy for I am holy 1 Pet. 1: 15, 16. and the
like. That the authority of God, and conscience to a command, may set the soul
a work.

4. On the great recompense of reward, that is appointed for such as wrestle
on, and endure to the end; and on all the great promises of great things to
such, as are sanctified, whereof the Scriptures are full; that the soul may be
encouraged to run through difficultyes, to ride out storms, to endure
hardness, as a good soldier, and to persevere in duty.

5. On the other hand* on the many sad threatenings and denunciations, of wrath,
against such as transgress his laws; and on all the sad things that such as
shake off the fear of God, and the study of holiness, have to look for, of
which the Scripture is full; that by this means, the soul may be kept in
awe, and spurred forward unto duty, and made the more willing to shake off
Leazynesse.

6. On the Rule, the word of God; by which alone we must regulate all our
actions; and this ought to be our meditation day and night, and all our study,
as we see it was David's* and other holy men of God their daily work. See Psalm.
1. and 119.

Fourthly, In all this study of holiness, and aimeing at an hiegher measure of
grace, the believer would lavell at a right end: and so would not design
holiness for this end, that he might be justified thereby, or that he might
thereby procure and purchase to himself heaven and God's favor for the weight
of all that, must lie on Jesus Christ, who is our Righteousness: and our
holiness must not dethrone Him, nor rob Him of his glory, which He will not
give to another: But would study holiness, to the end, he might glorify God,
Father, Son, and holy Spirit; and please Him, who calls to holiness; and
thereby be made meet to be partaker of the Inheritance of the saints in light
Col. 1: 10, 12. and be made a meet bride for such a holy bridegroom, and a
member to such an holy head: that hereby others might be edified Mat. 5: 16* 1.
Pet. 2: 12. and 3: 1, 2. that the soul may look like a temple of the holy
ghost, and like a servant of Christ's, bought with a price 1 Cor. 6: 17, 18,
10. 20. And have a clear evidence of his regeneration and justification, and
also that he may express his thankfulness to God, for all his favors and
benefits.

Fifthly. The soul would by faith lay hold on, and grip fast to the ground of
sanctification: that is to say. 1. To what Christ has purchased for his
people. 2. To what as a public person He has done for them: And so by faith,

1. Challenge a right to, and lay hold on the promises of grace, strength,
victory, and throwbearing, in their combating with corruption within, and Satan
and a wicked world without.

2. Reckon themselves dead unto sin, through the death of Christ; and alive
unto God through his resurrection, Romans 6: 4, 11. and that the old man is
crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed verse. 6. and that
they are now, not under the law, but under grace, verse. 14.

That by this means, they may be encouraged to continue fighting against a
vanquished enemy, and not give over, notwithstanding of disappointments,
discouragements, prevailings of corruption, etc. and the believer may know upon
what ground he standoth, and what is the ground of his hope and exspectation of
victory in end; and so he may run, not as uncertanely; and so fight, not as one
that beats the air 1 Cor. 9: 26.

Sixthly. In this work of sanctification, the believer would be much in the
lively exercise of faith; fight by faith; advance by faith; grow up, and bring
forth fruit by faith: and so*

1. The believer would be often renewing his grips of Christ, holding Him fast by
faith, and so abideing in Him, that he may bring forth fruit John. 15: 4, 5.

2. Not only would he be keeping his union fast with Christ, but he would be
also eyeing Christ by faith, as his store house, and general Lord dispensator
of all the purchased blessings of the Covenant, which he stands in need of:
and looking on Christ, as standing engadged by office, to complete his work of
salvation; and to present him with the rest to himself holy, without blemish,
yea and without spote or wrinkle or any such thing Ephesians. 5: 27.

3. He would by faith gripe to the promises, both of the general stock of
grace, the new heart and heart of flesh, and the Spirit to cause us walk in his
statutes Ezech. 36: 26, 27. and of the several particular acts of grace, that
he stands in need of, such as that Ier. 30: 8. I will cleause them from all
their iniquities etc. so Ezech. 36: 25: Ier. 31: 19. as the Church does Micah.
7: 9. He will subdue our iniquities etc. And so having, or gripping these
promises, we are to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
Spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7: 1.

4. As the believer would by faith draw out of Christ, through the conduite of
the promises, which are all yea and amen in Him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. grace, strength,
knowledge, courage, or what ever his fight in this warfare calls for, to the
end, he may be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6: 10.
So he would by faith roll the weight of the whole work upon Christ; and thus
cast himself, and his care and burden on Him, who cares for him, 1 Pat. 5: 7.
Psalm. 37: 5. and 55: 22. and so go on in duty, without anxiety* knowing who
bears the weight of all, and who has undertaken to work both to will and to
do, according to his good pleasure: thus should the work be easy and saife,
when by faith we roll the burden on Him, who is the chosen one, fitted for that
work; and leave it on Him, who is our strength, patiently waiting for the
outgate, in hope.

Thus the believer makes use of Christ, as made of God Sanctification, when in
the use of means appointed, eyeing the covenant of grace, and the promises
thereof, and what Christ has done to Sanctify and cleanse his prople, he
rolleth the matter on Him, and exspecteth help, salvation and victory, through
Him.

CAUTIONS.
But least some should be discouraged, and think all this in vain, because
they perceive no progress, nor grouth in grace, for all this, but rather
corruption as strong and troublesome as ever, I would say a few things to them.

1. Let them search and try, whether their shortcoming and disappointment does
not much proceed from this, that the matter is not so cleanly cast over on
Christ, as it should be: Is it not too often found, that they go forth to the
battle in their own strength, lippening to their own stock of grace, to their
own knowledge or to their duties, or the like? How then can they prosper?

2. Let them mourn, as they get any discovery of this; and guaird hereafter
against that corrupt by as of the heart, which is still inclining them to an
engadgment, without the Captane of their salvation, and a fighting without the
armor of God.

3. Let them try and see, if in studying holiness, they be not led by corrupt
ends: and do not more labor after sanctification, that they may be more
worthy, and the better accepted of God, and that they may have quietness and
peace as to their acceptance with God, as if this were any cause, matter or
condition of their righteousness and justification before God; then that they
may show their obedience to the command of God 1 These. 4: 3. Ephesians. 2: 10. Ioh.
15: 16. and express their thankfulness to Him, and glorify God Mal. 1: 6.
Mat. 5: 16. John. 17: 10. Ephesians. 4: 30. and if so, they ought to acknowledge
Gods goodness in that disappointment, seeing thereby they see more and more a
necessity of laying aside their own righteousness, and of betaking themselves
to the righteousness of Christ, and of resting on that alone, for peace and
acceptance with God.

4. They would try and see, if their negligence and carelessness in watching,
and in the discharge of duties, do not occasion their disappointments and
shortcomeing. God sometimes thinks fit to suffer a lion of corruption to set on
them, that they may look about them, and stand more vigilantly upon their watch
tour, knowing that they have to do with a vigilant adversary, the devil, who as
a roaring lion goes about, seeking whom he may devour 1 Pet. 5: 8. and that
they fight not against flesh and blood; but against Principalities, against
powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world* against spiritual
wickedness in high places. Ephesians. 6: 12. It is not for naught, that we are so
often commanded to watch Mat. 24: 42. and 25: 13. and 26: 41. and 14: 38. Luke
21: 36. Mark 13: 33, 34, 35, 37. 1 Cor. 16: 13. 1 These. 5: 6. 1* Pet. 4: 7.
Col. 4: 2. through the want of this, we know what ^efell David and Peter.

5. They would try and see, whether there be not too much self confidence,
which occasioned Peter's foul fall: God may, in justice and mercy, suffer
corruption to break loose upon such, at a time, and tread them underfoot, to
learn them afterward to carry more soberly; and to work out their salvation
with fear and trembling Phil. 2: 12. remembering what a Jealous holy God He is,
with whom they have to do; what an adversary they have against them; and how
weak their own strength is.

6. This would be remembered, that one may be growing in grace, and advancing
in holiness, when to his apprehension, he is not going forward from strength
to strength, but rather going backward. It is one thing to have grace, and
another thing to see that we have grace: so it is one thing to be growing in
grace, and another thing to see that we are growing in grace. Many may question
their grouth in grace, when their very questioning of it may evince the
contrary: for they may conclude no grouth, but rather a back going, because
they perceive more and more violent, and strong corruptions, and hidden works of
darkness and wickedness, within their souls, than ever they did before; while
as that great discovery, shows the Increase of their spiritual knowledge;
and an increase in this is an increase in grace. So they may question and doubt
of their grouth, upon mistakes* as thinking corruption always strongest, when
it makes the greatest stir and noise; Or their complaints may flow from a
vehement desire they have to have much more sanctification, which may cause
them overlook many degrees they have advanced: or some such thing may occasion
their darkness and complaints; yea God may think it fittest for them, to the
end they may be kept humble and diligent, to be in the dark as to their
progress; whereas if they saw, what advancement and progress they had made in
christianity, they might grow wanton, secure, and careless, and so occasion
some sad dispensation to humble them again.

7. It would be remembered, that perfect victory is not be had here: it is
true, in respect of justification, through the imputation of the perfect
righteousness of Christ; and in respect of their sincerity and gospel
simplicity, and in respect also of the parts of the new man, believers are
said to be perfect; Such an one was Noah Genesis 6: 9. and Job. Cap. 1: 1, 8. see
also Psalm. 37: 37, and 64: 4. 1 Cor. 2: 6. Heb 5: 14. Iam. 3: 2. And it is
true, we are to aim at perfection* and to pray for it, as Mat. 5: 48. 2. Cor.
13: 11. Col. 4: 12. Heb. 13. 21. Iam. 1: 4. 1. Pet. 5: 10. Heb. 6: 1. Yet as to
the degrees of holiness* and sanctification, and in respect of the remnant of
corruption within, there is no full perfection here. Job. 9: 20, 21. Phil. 3:
12. for even he who is washen, and as to justification, is clean every whit,
yet needs to wash his feet, because contracting filth, in his conversation
Ioh. 13: 10. So that if the Lord should mark iniquity, no man should stand.
Psalm. 130: 3. and 143: 2. There will still be in the best something, more or
less; of that battle, that Paul speaks of Romans 7: 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23. So that they will still have occasion to cry out with him verse. 24.
O! wretched man that I am, who shall deliver^e from the body of this death? And
the flesh will still lust against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh,
so that they shall not be able to do what they would Gal. 5: 17. The place of
perfection is above, where all tears are wiped away, and the weary wreastler is
at rest.

8. Let them not mistake, and think, that every stirring of corruption in the
soul, argues its dominion and prevailing power. Corruption may stir and make
a great deal ado, where it cannot get leave to reign; and be as a violent and
cruel invader, seeking the throne, putting the whole kingdom in a combustion,
who is resisted with force of arms. Corruption may be more quiet and still,
when indeed it has the throne of the soul: as a conqueror may be more quiet
and still, when he has overcome, and is in peacable possession of the kingdom,
than when he was but fighting for it: when the strong* man keeps the house, and
is Master, than all is quiet, and at rest, till a stronger come to thrust him
out, and dispossess him.

9. Sanctification does not always consist, in a man's freedom from some
corruptions: for there may be some corruptions, that one has no natural
inclination to; but, o^ the contrary, a great aversation from: as some worlds
wretches, may have no inclination to prodigality, and ranting, or such like
vices, which are contrary to their humor, or to their constant education: and
Satan may ^ever tempt some man to such evils* knowing he wi^ get more
advantage, by plying his temper and genius, and so carrying him away to the
other contrary evil; and so, though this man know not so much, as what it is
once to be tempted to those vices, yet that will not say, that he is a
sanctified man; far less will it say, that he has more grace than another
man, whose predominant that evil is, and against which he is daily fighting and
wreastling. Whence it appears, that wreastling, and protesting against even
an overcoming corruption, may evidence more of grace, than freedom from some
evils, to which some are not so much tempted, and to which they are naturally
less inclined.

10. Nor should they think, that corruption is always master of the soul, and
possessing the throne as a full conqueror, when it prevails and caryeth the
soul headlong, at a time: for corruption may sometimes come in upon the soul
as an inu^dation, with irrestible violence, and, for a time, carry all before
it; so that the soul cannot make any sensible resistance; as when a sudden,
violent and unexpected temptation sets on, so as the poor Man is overw
helmed, and scarce knows where he is, or what he is doing, till he be laid on
his back: at that time, it will be a great matter, if the soul dar quietly
enter a protest against, and dissent from what is done: and if there be an
honest protestation against the violent and tyrannical invasion of corruption,
we cannot say, that corruption is in peacable possession of the throne: if the
Spirit be lusting against the flesh, leavying all the forces he can* against
the invader, by prayer and supplication to God, and calling-in all the supply
of divine help he can get, and when he can do no more, is sighing and groaning
under that unjust invasion, resolving never to pay homage to the usurper, no^
to obey his laws, nor so much as parley with him, or make peace, we can not
say, that the soul does consent* fully unto this usurpation: Nay, if the soul
shall do this much, at such a time* when Satan sets on with all his force, it
will be a greater evidence of the strength of grace in the soul, than if the
soul should do the same or alittle more, at a time, when the temptation is not
so strong.

11. It is not good for them to say, that grace is not growing in them, because
they advance not so far, as some do; and because they come not to the pitch of
grace, that they see some advanced to: That is not a sure rule to measure their
grouth in grace by. Some may have a better natural temper, whereby they are
less inclined to several vices, which these find a strong propension to;
they may have the advantage of a better education, and the like. So that they
should rather t^y themselves this year, by what they were the last year, and
that in reference to the lusts, to which they have been most subject, all their
days.

12. We must not think that every believer will attain to the same measure of
grace: there is a measure appointed for every member, or joint of this body;
and every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every p^ Ephef. 4: 16. God has more a do with some ^han with others: there
is more strength required (...) an arm or leg, than in a finger or toe. And
ev^ one should be content with his measure, so (...) ^ot to fret or repine
against God, and his dispen^tions, that makes them but a finger, and not (...)
arm of the body; and do their duty in their station, fighting against sin,
according ^o the measure of grace dispensed to them of the Lord, and the
^aithfully and constantly; and not quarrel with God, that He makes us not as
free of temptations and corruptions, as some others: for the Captane must ^ot
be blamed for commanding some of his soldiers to this post, where they never
once see the enemy; and others to that post, where they must continually fight:
the soldier is here under command, and therefore must be quiet, and take his
lot* so must the Christian reverence the Lords dispensa^tions, in ordering
matters, so as they shall never ^ave one hours quietness, whileas others have
more rest and peace; and stand at their post fig^ting, resolving never to
yield, but rather to cover the ground with their dead bodies, till the
Commander in chief think good to relieve them. Su^ ^ am, as the only wise God
has distributed to every member of the body, as He has thought good* so it is
the duty of every member, to endeavor this holy submission to Him, as to the
measure of gra^* considered as His free gift, bestow^d on them: and to be
humbled for the grudgings of his heart* (...) God has not given him more
talents? (...) sure I am, though this submission make no (...) ^oise in the
world; yet really this is one of (...) ^ghest degrees of grace attaineable
here, and (...) a^ ornament of a m^ek and quiet Spirit, (...) it in (...) sight
of God of great price; So that who ever has (...) to this; have the very grace
they seem to (...), and more. Yet le^t this should be (...), l^ me add a word
or two of c^ution, to (...) this submission. 1. There must be with it an (...)
pri^ing even of that degree of grace, which they want. 2. There must be a
panting after grace, as it is God's image, and a conformity to Him* and that
with so much singlness, as they may be in ^ase to say, without the reproachings
of their heart, they do not so much love holiness for heaven, a^, heaven for
holiness. 3. There must be an uncessantness in useing all means, whereby the
grouth o^ grace may be promoved, to this end, that they may be comformed to His
image* rather than that they may be comforted. 4. There must be also a deep
humiliation for the want of that degree of grace they would have, as it
importet^ the want of so much conformity to Him, to whose image they are
praedestinated to be conform, which will very well consist with this
submission, we are speaking of^*

13. It would be remembered, that there may be a great progress, even when it
is not observed, when, 1. Hereby the man is made to ly in the dust, to loath
himself, and cry, behold I am vile* 2. Hereby his indignation against the body
of death is the more increased. 3. Hereby his esteem of a Saviou^ an^ of the
blessed contrivance of Salvation is the (...) hi^ghtned, that he sees he is
thereby brough^ to make mention of His righteousness, even o^ (...) only. 4.
Hereby his longing after (...) fr^ition is increased, where all these complain^
shall cease. 5. And hereby he is put to (...) that much slighted duty of
holding fast the rejoy^ing of his hope firm unto the end, looking (...)
longing for the grace, that shall be brought unto him, at the revelation of
Jesus Christ, when he shall be presented without spot, and made meet to be ^
partaker of the inheritance of the saints in light.

CHAP. VI. How Christ is to be made use of, in reference to the k^lling and
crucifying of the old man.
HAving thus shortly pointed out something^* in general, serving to the
clearing and opening up the way of our usemaking of Christ for sanctification,
we come now more particularly to the clearing up of this business. In
sanctification we must consider First the renewing and changeing of our nature
and frame: and next the washing and purging away of our daily contracted spots.
The first of these is commonly divided into two parts* viz. 1. The
mortification, killing and crucifying of the old man of sin and corruption,
which i^ within; and 2. The vivification renewing, quickening and strengthening
of the new man of grace, and this is a grouth in grace, and in fruitfulness
and holiness.

As to the first of these viz the mortification (...) crucifying of the old
man, we would know, the there is such a principle of wickedness and enmi^*
against God, in man by nature now, since the fall, whereby the man is inclined
to evil, and only to evil. This is called the old man, as being, like the body,
made up of so many parts, joints and members* that is, so many lusts and
corruptions and evil inclinations, which together make up a corpus, and they
are f^st joined and compacted together as the members of the body, each useful
and serviceable to another, and all of them concurring and contributing their
utmost to the carrying on of the work of sin* and so it is the man of sin and
it is also called the old man, as ha^ing first possession of the soul, before
it is by grace renewed; and is ^ dying more and more daily. Thus it is called
the old man, and the body of sin Romans 6: 6. This old man has his members in
our members and fa^cultyes, so that none of them are free, understanding, will,
affections, and the members of our body are all servants of unrighteousness to
this body of sin, and old man. So we read of the motions of sin Rom 7: 5. which
work in our members to bring for^ fruit unto death: and of the lusts of the
flesh Romans 13: 14. Gal. 5: 16, 24. and the lusts of sin Romans 6: 12. So we hear
of the desires of the flesh, and of the mind Ephesians. 2: 3. and of affections
and lusts Gal. 5: 24. And the old man is said to be corrupt, according to the
deceitful lust^. Ephesians. 4* 22. all which lusts and affections are as so many
members of this body of sin, and of this old man. And further, there is herein
considerable a power, force and efficacy, which this old man has in us, to
carry us away, and, as it were, command us, o^ constrain us* as by a forcible
law. Hence we read of the law of sin and death Romans 8: 2* which only the law of
the Spirit of life in Christ does make (...) free from. It is also called a law
in our mem^rs warring against the law of our mind Romans 7: 23. and bringing us
into captivity to the law of sin, which is in our members. So it is said to
lust against the Spirit and to war. Gal. 5: 17 All which point out the
strength, activity and dominion of sin in the soul; so that it is as the
husband over the wife Romans 7: 1. yea it has a domineering and constraineing
power, where its horns are not held in by gr^e. And as its power is great, so
its nature is wicked and malicious; for it is pure enmity against God Romans ^:
7. so that it neither is, nor can be reconciled, (...) therefore must be put
off, and abolished Ephesians. 2: 15. killed and crucified Romans 6: 6. Now herein
lies the work of a believer, to be killing, mortifying and crucifying this
enemy, or rather enmity; and delivering himself from under this bondage and
slavery, that he may be Christ's free man, and that through the Spirit. Romans 8*
13.

Now if it be asked, how shall a believer make life of Christ, to the end this
old man may be gotten crucified: or how should a believer mortify the Old man,
and the lusts thereof, through Christ, or by the Spirit of Jesus? We shall
propose thos^ things which may help to clear this.

1. The believer would have his eye on this old man, as his arch enemy, as a
deadly cutthroat, lying within his bosom. It is an enemy ludging within him,
in his Soul, Mind, Heart and Affections, so that, there is no part free; and
therefore is acquant with all the motions of the soul, and i^ always
opposeing, and hindering every thing that is good, It is an enemy, that will
never be reconciled to God, and therefore will not be reconciled with the
believer, as such; for it is called enmi^y it self: and so it is actively
always seeking to promove the ruin of the soul, what by prompting,
inclineing, moving and forceably drawing or driveing, (sometimes with violence
and rage) to evil; what by withstanding resisting, opposeing, counter working,
and contradicting what is good; so that the believer can not get that done,
which he would do; and is made to do that, which he would not. Therefore this
being such an enemy, and so dangerous an enemy, so constant and implacable an
enemy, so active* and closse an enemy, so deadly and destructive; it is the
believers part, to guaird against this enemy, to have a vigilant eye upon it,
to carry as an irreconcilable enemy thereunto; and therefore never to come in
terms of capitulation, or agreement, therewith, never o^ce to parlie, let be,
make peace. And the believer would not have his vigilant eye upon this or that
Member of this body of death, so much as upon the Body it self, or the
Principle of wickedness and rebellion against God; the Head, Life, Spirit or
Law of this body of death: for there lies its greatest wickedness, and
activity: and this is always opposeing us though not in every joy at and
member; but sometime in one, sometime in another.

2. Though the believer should have a maine eye upon the Body, this innate,
strong and forcible law of sin and death; yet should he have friendshipe and
familiarity with no part, member or lust of all this body: all the deeds of the
body should be mortified, Romans 8: 13. the old man with his deeds should be
mortified Col. 3: 6. and we should mortify our members, which are upon the
earth, verse. 5. for all of them are against us, and the least of them
countenanced, entertained and embraced, will work ou^ ruin, and cut our souls
throat; therefore should the believer look on each of them, and on all of them,
as his deadly enemies.

3. He would consider, that as it is a very unseemly thing for him, to be a
slave to that old tyrant, and to yield his members, as so many servants to
iniquity; so it is dangerous and deadly: his life lies at the stake: either he
must get it mortified, killed and subdued, or it will kill him: his life will
go for its life: if this enemy escape, he is a gone man. The consideration of
this would cause the beleeve^ act here in earnestness and seriousness, with
care and diligence; and set about this work of mortification, with labor and
pains.

4. Much more must it be against all reason and christianity, for the believer
to be making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13:
14. To be strengthening the hands of, and laying provision to this enemy, which
is let and sworn against us, can stand with no reason. And here is much of the
christians prudence and spiritual wisdom required, to discern, what may make
for fostering of this or that corruption, or member of the body of sin and
death, and to withdraw that, as we will labor to take away provision of any
kind, from an enemy, that is comeing against us: Paul acted herein, as a wise
gamster, and combatant, when he keept under his body, and brought it into
subjection 1 Cor. 9: 27. It were but to mock God, and to preach forth our own
folly, to be looking to Christ for help against such an enemy, and in the mean
time, to be underhand strengthening the hands of the enemy: this would be
double dealing and trearchery against our selves.

5. To the end, their opposition unto this enemy may be the stronger and more
resolute, they would consider, that this body of sin is wholly set against God,
and his interest in the soul, being very enmity it self against God Romans 8: 7.
and always losting and fighting against the work of God in the soul Gal. 5:
17. and against every thing that is good, so that it will not suffer (so far as
it can hinder) the soul to do any thing that is good, at least in a right
manner, and for a right end: nay, with its lustings it drives constantly to
that which is evil, raises evil motions and inclinations in the soul, ere the
believer be aware: sideth with any tentation that is off^ed, to the end it may
destroy the soul, like a traitor within; as we see it did in David, when he
fell in adultery; and with Asaph Ps. 73: 2. yea it self opposes and tempts
Iam. 1: 14. by setting mind, will and affections, on wrong courses: and thus
it drives the soul to a course of rebellion against God, or diverts it and
draws it back, that it cannot get God served aright; yea sometimes it sets a
fire in the soul intangling all the facultyes, filling the mind with darkness
or prejudice, misleading or perverting the affectious, and so miscarrying the
will, and leading it captive Romans 7: 23. so that the thing is done, which the
regenerate soul would not do, and the duty is left undone which the soul would
fain have had done: yea, and that sometimes notwithstanding of the souls
watching, and striveing against this; so strong is its force.

6. The believer would remember that this enemy is not for him to fight against
alone, and that his own strength and skill will make but a slender opposition
unto it: It will laugh at the shaking of his spear: it can easily insinuate it
self, on all occasions, because it lies so near and close to the soul,
always resideing there, and is at the believers right hand, whatever he be
doing, and is always openly or closely, opposeing, and that with great
facility: for it easily besetteth Heb. 12: 1. because it lies within the soul,
and in all the faculties of it, in the Heart, Mind, Will, Conscience and
Affectiones; so that upon this account, the deceitfulness of the heart is
great, and passes the search of Man Ier. 17: 9. Man cannot know all the
windeings and turnings, all the drifts and designs, all the lurking and
retireing places, all the falsehoods and double dealings, all the
dissimulations, lies and subterfuges, all the plau^ible and deceitful pretexts
and insinuations of this heart, acted and spirited by this law of sin and
death. And beside this slight and cunning, it has strength and power to draw,
by lusts, into destruction and perdition 1 Timothy 4: 9. and to carry the soul
headlong. So that it makes the man's case miserable Romans 7: 24. All which would
say, that the believer should call in other help than his own, and remember,
that through the Spirit he must mortify the deeds of the body. Romans 8: 13.

7. And therefore the believer must lay aside all his carnal weapons, in
dealing with this adversary; and look out for divine help and assistance, even
for the promised Spirit, through which alone he can be instructed and enabled
for this great work; for of himself he can do nothing, not so much as think a
good thought as of himself 2 Cor. 3: 5. fa^ less will he be able to oppose
such a mighty adversary, that has so great and many advantages, and therefore
all his carnal means, purposes, vows, and fightings in himself, will but
render himself weaker, and a readyer prey unto this adversary, which gains
ground while he is so opposed. It is Christ alone and his Spirit, that can
destroy the works of the devil, and kill or crucify this enmity.

8. So that the believer must have his recourse, for help and succor here,
unto Jesus the Captain of salvation; and must follow Him, and fight under his
b^nner, make use of his weapons, which are spiritu^ll; fight according to his
counsel and conduct, taking Him as a leader and commander* and lying open for
his orders and instructions: waiting for the motions of his Spirit. and
following them: and th^s oppose and fight against this deadly enemy, with an
eye always on Christ by ^aith, depending on Him, for light to the mind,
resolution to the will, and grace to the whole soul, to stand in the battle;
and to withstand all assaults, and never engadge in a disput with this enemy,
or any lust or member of this body, without Christ the Principal: that is, the
soul would despair in it self, and be strong in Him, and in the power of his
might, by faith gripping to Him, as Head, Captain and Commander in chief,
resolving to fight in his strength, and to oppose, through the help of his
Spirit.

9. And for this cause, the believer would eye the covenant of Redemption, the
basis of all our hope and consolation, wherein final and full victory is
promised to Christ, as head of the elect, viz, that He shall bruise the
serpents head; and so that in Him, all his followers, and members of his
mystical body, shall lift up the head, and get full victory at length over
both sin and death. Now it is God, that gives us the victory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15* 57. The b^leever would also eye by faith the covenant
of Grace, where*in particularly this same victory is promi^ed to the believer,
in and through Jesus, Romans 16: 20 and the God of peace shall br^ise Satan under
your feet shortly: and, Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not
under the law but under grace Romans 6: 14. The believer, I say, would look out
by faith unto, and lay hold on, these and the like promises; and thereby get
strength conveyed to him. self, whereby he may strive lawfully, and fight
valiently, and oppose with courage and resolution.

10. Further, the believer would eye Christ as a fountain of Furniture, as a
full and complete magazine, standing open, and ready for every one of his
honest soldiers, to run to, for new supply of what they want: so that whatever
they find wanting in their Christian armor, they must run away to the open
magazine, Christ's fullness, that stands ready for them; and by faith take and
put on what they want and stand in need of, in their warfare. If their girdle
of truth be slacked, loosed or weakened, and they be meeting with temptations
anent their hypocrisy, and Satan objecting to them their double dealing, of
purpose to discourage them, and to make them fainte and give over the fight;
they must away to Him, who is the Truth that He may bind on that girdle
better, and make their hearts more upright before God, in all they do. And if
their breast plate of righteousness be weakened, and Satan there seem to get
advantage, by casting up to them their unrighteous dealings toward God or Men,
they must flee to Him, who only can help here, and beg pardon through his
blood, for (...) failings, and set to again a fresh to the battle. If their
resolution, which is understood by the preparation of the gospel of peace,
grow weak, it must be renewed in Christ's armory, and the feet of new be shode
therewith. If their shield of faith begin to fail the^, away must they get to
Him, who is the Author and finisher of faith Heb 12: 2. And if their helmet of
hope begin to fail them, In this armory alone can that be supplied. And if
their sword be blunted in their hand, or they unable to weild it aright, the
Spirit of Jesus can only teach their hands to fight, and instruct them how to
manage that useful weapon with advantage. Thus must the believer be strong in
Him, and in the power of his might Ephesians. 6: 10. He is their God that girdeth
them with strength and makes their way perfect. He makes their feet like
hindes feet, and sets them upon their high places. He teaches their hands
to war, so that a bow of steal is brocken by their arms. He gives them the
shield of Salvation. His right hand upholdeth them. He girdeth with strength
unto the battle, etc. Psalm. 18: verse. 32, 33, 34, 35, 39. etc.

11. For the further strengthening of their Hope, Faith and Confidence,
believers would eye Christ, as hanging on the cross* and overcomeing by death,
Death and him that had the power of death, the Devil; and so as meritoriously
purchaseing this redemtion from the slavery of sin and Satan; and particulary,
from the slavery of that body of death, and of the law of sin and death: for
the Apostle tells us Romans 8: 2* that the law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, does make us free from the law of sin and death, and that because, as he
says further verse. 3, 4. what the law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. That the rig^* teousnesse of the law
might be fulfilled in us. So that the believer may now look upon that enemy,
how fearful so ever it appear, as condemned and killed* in the death of
Christ. He, having laid down the price of Redemption, has bought this freedom
from the chains and fetters, with which he was held in captivity: faith then
on the death of Jesus, satifying justice, for the poor captive, may and should
support, and strengthen the hope and confidence of the believer, that he shall
obtain victory at length.

12. And it will further confirm the hope and faith of the believer, to look
to Christ hinging on the cross, and there vanquishing and evercomeing this
(...), as a public person, representing the elect, who died in him, and
virtually and legally did, in him, overcome that Jailour, and break his
fetters: and the soul now believing, may, yea should, reckon it self, in
Christ, dying, as it were, upon the cross; and there overcomeing all those
spiritual enemies: likewise, says the Apostle Romans 6: 11. Reckon ye also
yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin. From hence, even while fighting, the
believer may account himself a conqueror, yea more then a conqueror, through
Him that loved him* Romans 8: 37. Now faith acting thus on Christ* as a public
person, dying and overcomeing death and sin, the believer may not only inferte
the certainty of victory, knowing that our old man is crucified with Christ Rom
6: 6. but also from the cross of Christ draw strength to stand, and fight
against the struglings of this vanquished and killed enemy. They that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5: 24. But
how? even by the cross of Christ, for thereby is the world crucified unto me
(says the Apostle Gal. 6: 14.) and I unto the world: your old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, Romans 6: 6.

13. The believer, being dead indeed unto sin, through the cross of Christ, is
to look upon himself as legally freed from that yock of bondage under sin and
death. The law has dominion over a man, so long as he lives Romans 7: 1. but by
the body of Christ, believers are become dead to the law, verse. ^* That law of
sin and death, which has dominion over a man, that lives still in nature, and
is not yet by faith planted in the likeness of Christ's death, no^ buried with
him by baptism into death Romans 6: 4, 5. has not that dominion over believers,
it had once: for the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made them
free from the law of sin and death Romans 8: 2. So that now the believer is free
from that tyranny; and that tyrant can exerce no lawful jurisdiction or
authority over him, and therefore he may with the greater courage repel the
insolences of that tyrant, that. contrare to all right and equity, seeks to
Lord it over him still. They are no lawful subjects to that cruel and rageing
Prince, or to that spiritual wickedness.

14. So that the believer renunceing that jurisdiction, under which he was
formerly, and being under a new husband, and under a new law* even the law of
the Spirit of li^e in Christ Jesus* is to look upon all the motions of sin as
illegal, and as treasonable acts of a tyrant. The old man being crucified with
Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed, the believer is not any more
to serve sin Romans 6: 6. And being now dead they are freed from sin verse. 7. and
are married to another, even to Him, who is raised from the dead, and so they
should not serve sin, but bring forth fruit unto God Romans 7: 4. and therefore
look upon all motions of the flesh, and all the inclinations and stirrings of
the old law of sin, as acts of treachery and rebellion against the right and
jurisdiction of the believers new Lord and Husband; and are therefore obliged
to lay hold on this old man, this body of death, and all the members of it, as
traitors to the rightful King* and Husband, and to take them prisoners to the
King, that He may give out sentence, and execute the same, against them, as
enemies to his kingdom and interest in the soul: They being now no more
servants of sin, but of righteousness Romans 6: 18. they ought no more to yield
their members servants to uncleanness and iniquity, un^o iniquity verse. 19.
and being debtors, no more to the flesh, to live after the flesh Romans 8: 12.
they are to mortify the deeds of the body through the Spirit verse. 13. and to
crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts Gal. 5: 24. that is, by
bringing them to the cross of Christ, where first they were condemned and
crucified, in their full body and power; that a new sentence, as it were, may
go out against them, as parts of that condemned Tyrant, and as belonging to
that crucified body.

15. So that the believer, that would carry faithfully in this matter, and
fight lawfully in this warfare, and hope to obtain the victory, through Jesus
Christ, must bring these Traitors, that appear in their sinful motions, and
lusts in the soul, working rebellion against the lust authority, and equitable
laws of the lawful Prince, Jesus, before the tribunal of Him, who has now
got all power and authority, in heaven and earth. Mat. 28: 18. and has all
judgment committed to Him. Ioh. 5: 22. And to this end, both died and rose, and
revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living Romans 14: 9. that He
may execute justice upon the T^aitor, head and members, that He may tr^mple
these devils under, and bruise the head of these serpents within us. The
believer then is, by faith in prayer, to carry these open enemies to Christ,
and declare and witness against them as Traitors, by what mischief they have
done in the soul, by their hindering the righteous laws of the king to be
obeyed; and constraining and forceing, what by arguments or allurements, and
what by forceable inclinations and pousings, to disobedience and a
counteracting of Christ; and he should urge and plead, upon the fundamental
laws of the land, viz the articles of agreement betwixt the Father and the
Son; and the faithful promises of the Covenant of grace; and upon Christ's
office as King, and Governor, and his undertaking as Mediator; upon the
merits of his death and sufferings; upon his dying as a common person; upon
the constitution of the gospel, whereby they are in law repute as dying in
him, and so free from the law of sin and death; and upon their relation to Him
as their new Lord, Head* Husband, King* Commander etc. Upon these arguments (I
say) to plead for justice against the rebel, that is now brought to the bar,
and so by faith leave the prisoner in His hand, that He may, in his own time,
and way, give a second blow unto the neck of this implacable and rageing enemy,
that he may no^ rise up to disturb the peace of the soul, as before; or to
trouble, impede, and molest the soul in paying the homage and obedience due to
his lawful Master and Sovereign King Jesus.

Cautions and Directions.
For further clearing of the premises, I would propose a few particulars, for
caution and direction: as,

1. This work of laying the burden of this business on Christ by faith, would
be gone about, with much singleness of heart, aimeing at the glory of God, and
the carrying on of his work in the soul: and not for self ends, and carnal by
(...) respects, lest thereby we mar all.

2. It would be carried on, without partiality, against all and every one of
the lusts, and motions of the Old man: for if there be a compliance with and a
spareing of any one known lust, the whole work may be marred, they may meet
with a disappointment, as to the particular lust, they a^ desireing victory
over: and the lust they are harboring, though it may seem little, may open a
door to many stronger; and so occasion sad days to the man, ere he be aware.

3. As they would bring the particular lust, or lusts, unto Christ, as chief
Lord justice; so they would always lay the axe to the root of the tree; and
crave justice against the maine body, that yet lies within the soul; and these
particular corruptions and affections, that are as members of that body of sin,
should put them in mind of the old man; for they should crucify the flesh
with the affections and lusts thereof Gal. 5: 24. the body and the members:
these lusts are the lusts of sin* or of that Head-sin, which has a law, or the
force and impulse of a law, in the soul: and therefore, their maine design
would be against this root, where lies the strength and body of the enemy, and
which acts in those members; this is the capital enmity, and should be
mainely opposed: and the following of this course, would prove more succesfull,
than that which many a time we take: out nibling at or wreastling against this
or that member of the body of death, is but of little advantage* so long as the
maine body of sin, the bitter root of wickedness, the carnal mind, this
innate enmity, is miskent, and not opposed: but on the contrary strick at this,
we strick at all.

4. This would be the believers constant work, to be crucifying the flesh, with
the lusts thereof; to be mortifying their members, wherein the members of the
old man quarter and lodge* Colos. 3: 5. to be spiritually minded, and to mind
the things of the spirit Rom 8: 5, 6. for this carnal mind is enmity against
God Romans 8: 7. and so is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.
It is not only an enemy, which may be reconciled; but enmity, in the abstract,
which never can be reconciled: and this enmity will never be idle, for it
c^nnot, till it be fully and finally destroyed: the flesh is always lusting
against the Spirit Gal. 5. 17. for they are contrary one to the other. So that
though, to our sense, it may sometimes appear as sleeping, in regaird that it
does not by some particular lust so molest and perplexe the soul, as formerly
it did; yet it is restless, and may be more active in another lust; and so by
changeing weapons upon us deceive us. Here then is much spiritual wisdom and
vigilance required; when they think they have gotten one lust subdued, they
must not think the war is at an end; but after all their particular victories,
watch and pray, that they enter not into temptation.

5. This way of laying the weight of the matter on Christ, should and will keep
them humble, and teach them not to ascribe the glory of any good that is done
unto themselves, but to give Him all* the glory, who is jealous of his glory
and will not give it to another, that the crown may alone floorish on his
head, who is the Captane of their salvation, and who by his Spirit worket^ all
their works in them.

6. Nor would this way of carrying the matter to Christ, and putting it over on
Him, cause the believer become negligent in commanded duties, reading, hearing,
prayer etc. for it is there he must exspect to meet with Christ, there must he
seek Him, and there must he wait for Him, and his Spirit, to do the work
desired: for though He has not limited himself to these means, so as He
cannot, or will not, any other way help; yet He has bound us to them; and it
is our duty to wait there, where He has commanded us ^o wait, though He
should sometime ^hink good to come another way, for the manifestation of the
soveraignity of hi^ grace.

7. Yet while we are about the means, we would guaird against a le^ning to
them, lest in stead of getting victory over corruption, we be brought more in
bondage thereunto, another way: we must not think, that our Prayers, or our
Hearing or Reading etc. will bring down the body of death, or subdue any one
corruption: for that were but an yielding to corruption, and opening a back
door to the carnal mind, and to another deadly lust, and a beating corruption
with a sword of straw: This is not to mortify the deeds of the body through
the Spirit, but through the flesh; and a fleshly weapon will never draw blood
of this spiritual wickedness, or old man; or of any corrupt lust or affection
thereof: and yet how many times does our deceitful heart by as us thi^ way?
Our work would be, as is said, to use the ordinances, a^ meanc^* whereby we may
get the business laid on Christ, and help from Christ to do the b^sinesse. We
must go to the means with our prisoner to find Christ there at his court, and
a^ifes; that He may take course with the Traitor.

8. In all this there would be a looking to, and dependence on Christ for help
and grace: because of our selves, as of our selves, we can not do this much; we
cannot complean aright of corruptions, nor take them away to Christ, not ask
for justice against them: a^ constable^* and other officers must carry
malefactores to the courts of justice, upon public charges; so Christ will not
have us doing or attempting this much, on our own charges: for He gives noble
allowance.

9. In following of this course, we would not think always to come speed at
the first. Sometimes the Lord, for the encourageing of his children, may give
them a speedy hearing, and deliver them from the tyranny of some particular
lust or other, that has troubled them; that for some time, at least, it shall
not so trouble them, as it did. Yet He will not do so always; but may think it
good, to keep them waiting on Him, and hanging on his courts, for so^e
considerable time, that He may thereby exercise their Faith, Patience, (...),
(...), and Diligenc^* So that it should not seem strange to us, if we be not
admitted a^ the first, and get* not our answer, at the first cry.

10. When the Lord thinks good to delay the answer to our desires, and the
execution of justice on the Malefactor and Traitor, or to deliver us from his
tyranny and trouble, we would beware of thinking to capitulat with the enemy
for our peace and quiet, or to enter into a ce^lation of arms with him: that
is, our ^mity against him should never abate, nor should our desire after the
mortification and crucifixion of this lust grow less; nor should we be quiet
and at peace, though it should seem to grow a little more calm and still, or
not to rage as formerly (...) this looks but like a covenant or confedera^
(...), which will not stand.

11. We would also know, that what Christ said of devils, holds good of these
lusts* viz. The some of them do not go out, but by fasting and prayer; that
is, by Christ sought unto and found in these means. There are some lusts, that
will not be got so easily killed and mortified, as others; but will cost us
more pains and labor, as being corruptions, which possibly have some greater
advantage of our natural temper, and constitution of body, or of long
continuance and a cursed habit, or the like. We must not then think it strange,
if some such lust be not subdued, so easily as some others, to which we have
fewer, and weaker, and not so frequent* temptations.

12. As we cannot (...) full conquest of the body of death, so long as we are
here, as was shown above; so nor can we exspect a full and final victory over
any one lust, which ever we have been troubled with. It is true, Believers may
be kept from some gross outbreaking of a corruption, which sometime
prevailed, as Peter was from relapseing into an open and downright denying his
Master; yet that same corruption did afterward stir, though not so violently
as to carry him to such an hieght of sin; yet so far as to cause him do that,
which was a partial denying of his Master, when Paul withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed, for withdrawing from the Gentiles, for fear
of them of the circumcision etc* Gal. 2: 11, 12. So, though a particul^ (...)
be so far subdued through grace, as (...) considerable time, a man may not
find it so violent, as it was; yet he cannot say, that it is totally killed,
because it may stir thereafter in some weaker measure; yea he cannot tell,
but ere he come to die, that same corruption may rise to be as violent as ever,
and that Satan may again think to enter the soul, at that same breach, which
once he entered at; yea, and who can tell, whether God may not suffer that
corruption, which lay long as dead, to revive again, for a time, and for a
time drive the soul as violently as ever, and prevail for a time? And this
should teach all to walk soberly, watchfully, and in fear, and to have a
vigilant eye, even upon such lusts and carnal affections, as they may suppose,
they have got the victory of.

13. We would not think, that we gain no ground upon corruption, because we
still perceive it stirring, less or more; for as corruption is not always
strongest* (as was said above) nor has the deepest footing in the soul, when
its motions and stirrings are most felt; so nor must we think that there is no
ground gained upon a lust, because we are still troubled and molested with its*
stirrings: for it is a great advantage to be more sensible of the motions of
this enemy; and our more faithful, and active wreastling against it, may make
its least stirrings more sensible to us; as the motions and trouble, which a
malefactor, while in grips and in prison, makes, may be thought more of, than
his greater rageings, before he was apprehended; yet he may be sure in fetters
for all that: a beast that has gotten deaths blow may get out of grips and run
more mad then ever, and yet will die at length of the same blow.

14. Though we should not find present ease and quiet, by our following this
way; yet we should think it much, if the Lord help us to stand, when we have
done all we can; though we meet not with the hoped for success presently: If
he give us grace to continue, without wearying or fainting, and to be resolute
never to give over, we have reason to bless Him: if we be kept still in the
conflict with pursuit of the enemy, it is our great advantage; the victory
shall come, in God's own time. If our opposition ^o continue, that we are
resolved never to take, nor give quarter, though our trouble and exercise
should be the greater, and our ease and quiet the less, we ought to bless
Him, yea and rejoice in hope of what He shall yet do for us. For He that will
come shall come, and will not tarry. Let us wait for Him, in doing our duty,
and faithfully keeping our post.

15. Yea, if we get quietness or ease from the violence of rageing lusts, for
any little time; and be not continually driven and carried headlong therewith,
we ought to be thankful for this, and to walk humbly before Him; lest He be
provoked, through our unthankfulness and pride, to let these furious dogs
loose upon us again.

16. When we are bending our strength and all our forces against some one
corruption or other, which possibly has been most troublesome to us; we would
not be secure as to all others; or think that we are in hazard only on this
side: for Satan may make a saint here; and really intend a^ assault at another
place, by some other corrupt affection. O What need have we of spiritual
wisdom, that we may be better acquanted with his stratagems and wiles? Let us
so then fight against one member of this body of death, as to have our eye upon
others, lest when we think to keep out Satan at the fore door, he enter in at
the back door. He can make use of extremities, and play his game, with both;
yea, and gain his point, if we be not aware.

Objections answered.
It will not be amiss, for further explaining of the matter, to remove a
scruple or two. Some may say. That they cannot perceive, that all their pains
in this matter come to any good issue; for they never found corruption stir
more, and act more lively and incessantly, than since they began to fight
against it in earnest, So that this would seem not to be the right way.

I answer: Though, from what is said before, particularly cautions 9th and
13th a resolution of this doubt may be had; yet I shall propose those things,
for further clearing of the matter.

1. May not much of this flow from thy not laying the whole work so wholly off
thy self, and upon Christ, as thou ought to do? Try and see.

2. May not the devil rage most, when he thinks ere long to be ejected? May he
not labor to create most trouble to the soul, when he sees that he is like
to be put from some of his strengths*

3. May not the devil be doing this of purpose, to drive thee to despair, of
ever getting corruption subdued and mortified; or to a fainting and ^itting up
in the pursuit; and to a despondency of spirit, that so in stead of fighting
or standing, thou may cede and turn the back? and should we comply with him in
his designs?

4. May not the Lord give way to this for ^ time, to try thy Seriousness,
Patience, Submission, and Faith, and to sharpen thy diligence, and kindle up
thy Zeal? And should we not submit to his wise dispensations?

5. How can thou say, that thou gainest no advantage, as long as thou are not
made to lay aside the matter wholly, as hoplesse of any good issue; but on the
contrary, art helped to stand, and to resist sin, to cry out against it, to
fight as thou can, and at least not to yield?

6. What if God see it for thy advantage, that thou be kept so in exercise
for a time, to the end thou may be kept Humble, Watchful and Diligent? He
may see more of thee, than thou can see of thy self: and so may know what is
best for thee; and should thou not condescend to be disposed of by Him, as He
will, and to let Him make of thee, and do with thee, what He will?

7. What if God be about to chasten thee thus, for thy former Negligence,
Secur^y, and Unwatchfulnesse, and giving too too much advantage to those lusts,
which now, after his awakening of thee, thou would be delivered from? Should
not thou bear the indignation of the Lord, because thou have sinned against
Him, as the Church resolved to do Micah. 7: 9.

8. Is it not thy duty, the more that corruption stir, to run with it the
oftener to Christ, that He may subdue it, and put it to silence? May not thou
improve this to advantage, by making many errands to Him?

9. May it not come in a day, that has not come in a year? Art thou sure, that
all thy pains shall be in vain? Or thinks thou, that all his children have
go^e victory alike soon over their lusts? What cause is there then to complain
thus?

10. May not all this convince thee, that it is thy duty to wait on Him, in
the use of his appointed means, and to be patient, standing fast to thy post,
resolving, when thou have done all, yet to stand?

11. May not this satisfy thee, that God through grace accepts thy labor and
wreastling, as thy duty, and accounts it service to Him, and obedience?

But again, it may possibly be Objected thus* So long as I am in this
condition, keept (...) under with my lusts* I cannot get God glorified and
served, as He ought to be.

I answer, Though so long as it is so with thee^ thou cannot glorify and serve
Him, in such a particular manner, as others, who have got more victory over
those evils, under which thou art groaning; yet God can get glory and service
of thee another way; as,

1. By thy Submission with calmnesse of spirit, to his wise dispensations, when
thou dar not speak against Him, and say with Rebecca, in another case, if it be
so, why am I thus? But sweetly and willingly casts thy self down at his feet,
saying, good is the will of the Lord; let Him do what seems Him good etc.

2. By thy Patient onwaiting, when thou are not wearying, nor fainting; but
saying, why should I not wait upon the great king's leisure; Is He not free to
come, when He will? Dar I set limits to the holy one of Israel?

3. By thy Humility, when thou blesses Him for keeping thee so long out of
hell; and thinks much of his giving thee grace to see, and observe the
stirrings of corruption, which carnal wreatches never perceive; and helping
thee to withstand, and complean of corruption, which they sweetly comply with.

4. By thy Hatred of sin, when all that Satan can do cannot make thee comply
with those lusts* or sweetly embrace those vipers, or lie down in peace with
those rotten members of the old man, as others do.

5. By thy Watchfulness; when all thy disappointments cause thee, the more
earnestly, wat^ against that enemy*

6. By thy Acting faith; when still thou art carrying sin in its lusts to
Christ to kill and subdue, as believing the tenor of the gospel, and (...)
covenant.

7. By thy Hope, which appears by thy not despaireing and giving over the
matter as a hopeless business, and turning aside to wicke^ courses.

8. By thy Praying, when thou cryest to H^* continually for help, who only can
help.

9. By thy Wreastling and standing against all opposition, for thereby is his
strength made perfect in weakness. 2. Cor. 12: 9.

10. By thine Obedience. For it is his command, that thou stand and fight this
good fight of faith.

So that if thou have a desire to glorify Him, the wants not occasion to do it,
even in this condition, wherein thou complainest, that thou cannot g^ Him
glorified. And if those grounds do not satisfy thee, It is to be feared, that
it is not so much ^ desire to glorify Him, that moves thee to ^y so
earnestly, for actual delivery from the trouble of the flesh, and the lusts
thereof, a^ some thing else, which thou may search after and find out, such as
love to ease, quietness; applause and commendation of others, or the like.

But in the Third place it may be objected, Is it not promised, that sin
shall not have dominion over us, as not being under the law, but under grace?
Romans 6: 14. How can we then but be troubled, when we find not this promise
made good?

I Answer. 1. Sin is not always victorious and domineering, when it seems
to rage and stir most; your opposition thereunto, fighting and wreastling
against it, shows that it has not full dominion: So long as an invadeing
^rper (...) opposed, he has not full dominion, not having peaceable possession
of what he is seeking ^d thus the promise is in part accomplished.

2. Victory and a full conquest over the (...) and the lusts thereof, is not
promised to any believer, at his first appearing in the fields to fight, nor
granted to all, in any measure, at their first putti^ on their armor.

3. Therefore it is thy part to fight on, and wait for that full victory, viz
that sin shall not have dominion over thee; for it shall come in due time.

4. God has his own time and seasons, wherein he accomplisheth his promises.
And we must leave Him a latitude, both as to the time when, and as to the
manner how; and as to the degree, in which, He shall make good his promises;
and He is wi^e in his dispensations.

Therefore though the promise as yet appears not to be accomplished, there is
no true cause of trouble of mind; because it shall be afterward fully
accomplished; and thy wreastling against sin, says that it is in a great
measure accomplished already; because where it has a full dominion, it
suppresseth all opposition or contradiction, except some faint resistance,
which a natural conscience, for carnal ends, on carnal principles and
grounds, may, now or then, make against this or that particular corruption,
which occasioneth shame, disgrace, loss, challenges of a carnal conscience,
and disquietnesse that way, when yet it is not hated nor wreastled against as
sin, or as a member of the old man* and the body of death. The objecter would
consider, that having subjected his consent to Christ, he is delivered really
from that natural state of bondage under sin as a lawful Lord, how be it the
(...), now wanting a tittle, is making (...) v^sions, to trouble the peace and
quiet of the soul.

Fourthly, It may be said. But what can then, in the mean time, keep up the
heart of a poor soul from si^king?

Answer. Several things, if rightly considered, might help to support the
soul, in this ^ase, as

1. That they are helped to wreastle against this body of death, in all the
members of it, so soon, as they discover themselves, were it their right eye,
and right hand.

2. That those lusts gain not ground upon them; or if they do seem to gain
ground; yet they attain not to a full dominion, not (...) their consent.

3. That God is faithful, and therefore the promised victory shall be had, in
due time, and Satan's head shall certanely be bruised.

4. That the wreastling soul is about his duty, carrying as a good soldier of
Jesus Christ, fighting the battles of the Lord, and waiting on Him in faith and
hope.

But further Fifthly, some may say. If I were kept from yielding, my wrestling
and standing would yield me some comfort; but when lust so stirs, as that it
conceives, and brings forth sin James 1: 15. what can support or comfort me
then?

Answer. 1. Corruption can not stir in us, but therein we sin, for the very
first rise, the motus primo-primi, as they are called, are sinful, being
contrare to the holy law of God: and the very inbeeing of that Old man, is our
sin; for it is sinful and rebellious against God, yea it is very enmity and
rebellion it self: when Satan comes with a temptation from without, he finds
always much in us, to intertaine the temptation. So that the very stirring of
corruption, which is occasioned by the temptation from without, is ou^ guilt.

2. It is true, it is our duty, ^o set against the first riseings and motions
of corruption, when it first enticeth, before it has conceived of brought
forth sin: and it will argue grace in life and in action; to be able to hinder
the motions of lust so far, that it shall not conceive and bring forth sin.
Yet we may not say, that there is no grace in the soul, or no measure of
Mortification attained, where lust sometimes not only enticeth, but conceives
and brings forth sin. The sad experience of many of God's worthies,
registrated in the word, clears this abundantly. We must not say, Such an one
is fallen, Therefore he is dead. Paul reasons otherwise Romans 7.

3. Yet even then, when lust conceives and brings forth sin, this may
comfort and bear up the heart of a poor believer, 1. That though corruption
prevail so far, as to bear down all opposition and run down all that stands
in its way; yet it gets not the full consent of the soul, there is still a
party for God, in the soul, that opposes, so far as to protest against it, or
at least, to dissent from it, and not to will, that which yet is done, and
positively to will that which cannot be gotten effectuated. 2. And farther this
may bear up the poor soul, that there is a party within, which, though for a
time, dureing the violent overruning of corruption, can do little more than
sigh and groan in a corner, yet is waiting and longing for an opportunity, when
it may appear more for God, and against that wicked usurper. 3. So also this
may comfort the poo^ soul, that as it perceives corruption stirring, and the
old man moving one member o^ other, it runeth away to the king; and when it is
not able to apprehend the Treator, and take him captive to the court of
justice, does there discover the Taitour, and tell the king, that there is such
or such a traitou^, acting such and such rebellion against Him, and his laws;
and comple^, and s^k help to take the rebel prisoner, and bring him bound hand
and foot to the King, that He may give out sentence against him; that is, when
he can do no more against that rageing enemy, makes his complaint to the
Lord, and lies before Him, ^ghing and groaning for help, and strength to
withstand, and oppose more this enemy.

Lastly some may yet Object and say, if it were not worse with me, than it is
with others, I could then be satisfied: but I see some mightily prevailing over
corruption, and I am still at under, and can get no victory: and can I choose
but be sad at this?

I Answer. 1. Do thou know for a certan^ty, that those persons, whose
condition thou judge happy, are altogether free of the inward stirrings of
those lusts, that thou art brought under by? Or do thou know for a certainty,
that they are not under the power of some other corruption, as thou think
thy self under the power of that corruption, whereof thou compleanest? What
know thou then, but they may be as much complaining, on other accounts, as
thou do on that?

2. But be it so as thou supposes, that thereis a difference betwixt thy
condition, and the condition of others, know thou not, that all the members
of the body are not alike great and strong, as not being equally to be employed
in works requireing strength? Are there not some young strong men, in Christ's
family, and some that are but babe^? May not a Captane send some of his
soldiers to one post, where they shall possibly not see the enemy all the day
long; and some others to another post, where they shall have no rest all the
day? And why, I pray, may not God dispose of his soldiers as He will? He
knows what He is doing: It is not saife, that every one of the soldiers
know, what are the designs of the Commander or General; no^ is it always fit
for us to know, or to enquire, what may be the designs of God with us, and
what He may be about to do. He may intend to employ one in greater works than
another, and so exercise them otherwise for that warfare and work. It may
suffice, that the prevailing of others may encourage thee to hope, that, at
last, thy strong corruptions shall also fall by the hand of the same grace of
God.

3. If thy sadness ^avoure not of envy and f^etting, thou should bless Him,
that hereby thou art put to the exercise of spiritual sorrow.

4. It is well of this bring thee to bless God, for the success of others,
because hereby his grace is glorified 1 Cor. 12: 26.

Therefore 5. Let this satisfy us, that He is the Lord, who does what He will
in heaven and in earth; and may dispose of us, as He will; and make of us what
He will, for his own glory. And that we are to mind our duty, and be
faithful at our post, standing and fighting, in the strength of the Lord,
resolving never to comply with the enemy: and to rejoice in this, that the
enemy is already conquered by the Captain, and that we share in his victory:
and that the very God of peace shall quickly bruise Satan under our feet Romans
16: 20.

CHAP. VII. How Christ is to be made use of, in reference to Growing in grace.
I Come now to speak a little to the other part of Sanctification, which
concearneth the change of our nature and frame, and is called Vivification, or
Quickening of the new man of grace: which is called the New man, as having all
its several members and parts, as well as the old man; and called New, because
posteriour to the other; and, after regeneration, is upon the growing hand*
This duty of growing in grace, as it is called 2. Pet. 3. u^t, is variously
expressed and held forth to us in scripture: for it is called, an abideing and
bringing forth fruit in Christ John. 15: 5. adding to faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge etc. 2 Pet. 1: 5, 6, 7. a going on to perfection Heb. 7: 1. a
growing up in Christ in all things Ephesians. 4: 15. a working out our salvation
Phil. 2: 12. a perfecting of holiness 2. Cor. 7: 1. a walkeing in newness of
life Romans 6: 4. a yielding of our selves unto God, as alive from the dead, and
our members as instruments of righteousness unto God Romans 6: 13, 18. a
bringing forth of fruit unto God Romans 7: 4. a serving in newness of spirit
Romans 7: 6. a being renewed in the spirit of our minds* and a putting on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness Ephesians.
4: 23, 24. Col. 3: 10. and the like: some whereof do more immediately express
the nature of this change, as to the root; and some as to the fruit, and
effects thereof, and some the progress and advancement, that is made or to be
made therein. And all of them point out a special piece of work, which lies
on all, that would see the face of God, viz. to be holy, gracious and growing
in grace.

This then being a special piece of the exercise* and daily work of a
Christian and it being certane* as some of the places now cited do also
affirm, that without Christ, they cannot get this work either begun o^ carried
on, the maine difficulty and question is, how they are to make use of Christ
for this end?

For answer whereunto, though, by what we have said in our former discourse,
it may be easy to gather what is to be said here; yet I shall briefly put the
Reader in mind of those things, as useful here.

1. The Believer would consider, what an ornament this is to the soul, to have
on this new m^n, which is created after the image of God Ephesians. 4* 23. what an
excellency lies here, to recover the lost glory, holiness and the image of
God; and what advantage the soul reapeth hereby, when it is made meet to be a
partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light Col. 1: 12. and walking
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work* and
increasing in the knowledge of God* Col. 1: 10. and strengthened with all might
according to his glorious pover, unto all patience and long suffering with
joyfulnesse verse. 11. and when the abounding of the graces of the Spirit make
them, that they shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ 2. Pet. 1: 8* and to be a vessel unto honor, sanctified,
and meet for the masters use, and prepared unto every good work 2. Tim. 2: 21;
what glory and peace is here, to be found obedient unto the many commands given
to be holy? What hazard is in the want of holiness, when without it we cannot
see God Heb. 12: 14. How unanswereable it is unto our profession, who are
members to such a holy Head, to be un holy? What profit, joy and satisfaction
there is, i^ being temples of the holy ghost, in walking after the spirit, in
bringing forth fruit unto the glory of the Father, etc. The consideration of
these and other motives unto this study of sanctification, would arm the soul
with resolution, and harden it against opposition.

2. It would be remembered, that this work, though it be laid upon us, as our
duty, and we be called thereunto of God; yet it is beyond our hand and power:
it is true, at conversion, the seed of grace is cast into the soul, new habites
are infused, a new principle of life is given, the stonny heart is changed into
an heart of flesh; yet these principles and habits can not act in themselves,
or be brought into act, by any thing that a believer, considered in himself and
without divine help, can do: But this work of sanctification, and grou^h in
grace* must be carried on by divine help* by the Spirit of Jesus, dwelling and
working within; and therefore it is called the sanctification of the spirit 2.
These. 2: 13. 1. Pet. 1: 2. The God of peace must sanctify us 1. These. 5: 23.
We are said to be sanctifi^ by God the Father Iud. 1. and by the holy ghost
Romans 15: 16. See also 1. Cor. 6: 11. We would remember, that of our selves we
can do nothing 2. Cor. 3: 5. and that He must work in us both to will and to
do, of his own good pleasure Phil. 2: 13. Albeit no believer will question the
truth of this; yet it may be, it shall be found after trial, that one maine
cause of their not growing in grace, and making progress in this work, is
their not acting as believing this; but setting about the work, as if it were a
work, which they themselves could master, and do, without special divine help:
Therefore the believer would abide, live and act* in the faith of this truth.

3. Therefore believers would not, in going about this work, either trust to
their own strength, to the habites of grace, to their former experiences, to
their knowledge and pairts, or the like; nor yet would they trust to any
external mean, which they are to go about: because the wisdom, strength and
help, which their case calls for, is not to be found in them: yet they
should not think of laying these means and duties aside; for then should they
sin against God, they should prejudge themselves of the help, strength and
supply, which God uses to convey to the soul, in and by the use of the means:
and withal* they should tempte the Lord, by prescribing another way to Him,
than He has thought good to take: The believer then would use the means and
duties prescribed, and that diligently, se^iously and constantly; and yet would
lean as little to them, and exspect help and relief as little from them* as
if he were not useing them at all, as we said above. And indeed this would be a
right way, yea the most advantageous and profitable way, of going about duties,
to be diligent in the use of them, because of Gods command; and yet to place
out hope and exspectation in God alone, and to look above the ordinances for
our help.

4. Albeit it be true, that the power and grace of God, alone, does begin,
and carry on this work of sanctification in the soul; yet, though he might, did
He but see it for his glory, carry on and finish this work in the so^l, without
the intervention of second causes or means, he has notwithstanding thought it
fit, forth ^ glory of his name, to work this work, by means, and particulary
by believers setting about the work: He works not in man, as if he were a
block or a stone, but uses him as a rational creature, endued with a
rational soul, having useful and necessary facultyes* and having a body fitted
by organs to be ^ubservient to the soul, in its actions. Therefore the believer
must not think to lie by and do nothing: for he is commanded to work out his
own salvation, and that because it is God that works in him, both to will
and to do: Because God works all, therefore he should work; so reasons the
Apostle: so that God's working is an argument and motive to man to work, and
not an argument to him to lie by idle, and do nothing. And here is the holy art
and divine skill, requisite in this business, to wit, for the believer to be
as diligent and active, as if he could bring forth fruit, in his own strength,
and by his own working; and yet to be as abstracted from himself, his own
grace, ability, knowledge and experience, in his working, as if he were lying
by like a mee^ block, and only moving as moved by external force.

5. The soul, that would make progress in Christianity, and grow in grace,
would remember, that Christ is proposed to us, as a copy, which we are to
imitate; and that therefore we should set Christ continually before us, as our
pattern, that we may follow his steps. 1. Pet. 1: 15. and 2* ^1. But with all,
it would be remembered, that He is not like other ensamples or copies, that can
help the man, that imitateth them, no other way than by their objective
prospect* for looking by faith on this copy, will bring virtue to the man, that
studyeth to imitate, whereby he shall be enabled to follow his copy the
better. O (...) we knew in experience, what this were, to take a look of Chr^'s
Love. Patience, Long suffering* Meekness, Hatred of sin, Zeal etc. and by
(...) to pore-in, till, by virtue proceeding from that copy, we found our
hearts, in some measure, framed into the same disposition, or, at least, more
inclined to be cast into the same mould!

6. The believer would act faith on Christ, a^ the Head of the body, and as the
stock, in which the branches are engrafted, and thereby suck sap and life and
strength from Him* that he may work, walk and grow, as becomes a Christian.
The believer must grow up in Him, being a branch in Him, and must bring forth
fruit in Him, as the forementioned places clear. Now Christ himself tells us,
that the branches cannot bring forth fruit, except they abide in the vine, and
that no more can his disciples bring forth fruit, except they abide in Him.
John. 15. Therefore, as it (...) faith, that the soul, as a branch, is united
to Christ, as the vine; and as it is by faith, that they abide in Him; so is it
by faith, that they must bring forth fruit: and this faith must grippe Christ
as the Vine, and the Stock, or Root, from which comes sap, life, and strength:
faith then must look to Christ, as the fountain of (...)* as the head, ^om
whence comes all the in ^ces of strength and motion. Christ (...) strength and
life enough to give out, for the fullness of the God head dwells in Him
bodyly* and he is also willing enough to communicate of his fullness, as the
relations He has taken on do witness The head will not grudge to give to the
members of the body spirits, for action and motion; (...) will a vine grudge to
give sap unto the branches: ^ay life, strength and furniture will (as it were)
natively flow out of Christ unto believers, except they through unbeleef, and
other distempers, cause obstructions; as life and sap does natively and kindly
flow from the root to the branches, of from the head to the members unless
obstructions stop the passage* It is necessary therefore, that believers eye
Christ under these and the like relations, and look upon Him, as standing (to
speak so) obliged by his place and relation, to grant strength and influences
of life, whereby they may become fruitful in every good work; and so with holy,
humble and allowed boldness, press in faith for new communications of grace,
virtue, strength, courage activity, and what else they need: for from the head
all the body by joints and bands, having nourishment ministered, increases with
the increase of God Col. 2: 19. Ephesians. 4: 16.

7. For this cause, believers would lie open unto the influences of Christ, and
guaird against the putting of obstructions in the way, through grieving of the
Spirit, by which He conveyeth and communicates those influences unto the soul;
and through questioning and misbeleeving Christ's faithfulness, and
unchangable willingness, which as a violent humore stops the passage. So
then believers would lie open by looking, and waiting, drawing* seeking from
Him, what they need, and by guarding against every thing, that may provoke the
Lord to anger^, whether in omission or commission. Here is requisite ^n holy,
humble, sober and watchful walk, an earnest, serious, and hungry looking out
to Him, and a patient waiting for supply and furniture from Him. This is to
open the mouth wide, that He may fill it; to lie before the sun of
righteousness, that the beams thereof may beat upon them, and warm and
revive them; and to wait as a beggar at this kings gate, till he give the
alms.

8. For the strengthening of their hope and faith in this, they would lay hold
upon Christ dying, and by his death purchaseing all those influences of life
and strength, which are requisite for carrying on of the work of grace and
sanctification in the soul: for we must be blessed in Christ with all spiritual
blessings. Ephesians. 1^* 3. The believer then would look on these influences, as
purchased at a dear rate, by the blood of Jesus Christ; so that the divine
power gives unto us all things, that pertain unto life and godliness,
through the knowledge of Him, that has called us to glory and virtue 2 Pet. 1:
3. And this will encourage the soul to wait on, and expect the flowing down of
influences, and spiritual blessings, and showers of grace, to cause the soul to
flourish, and become fruitful; and to urge and press more earnestly by faith
the bestowing of the purchased benefits.

9. Moreover, the believer would look on Jesus, as standing engaged and obliged
to carry on this work, both as receiving them for this end, from the Father:
hence we are said to be chosen in him, before the fundation of the world, that
we should be holy etc. Ephesians. ^: 4. and a^ dying for them for He gave himself
son the church, that He might sancti^y and cleanse it, that He might present it
to himself a glorious church, that it should be holy Ephesians. 5: 25, 26, 27. He
has reconciled them, in the body of his flesh, through death to present them
holy Col. 1: 21, 22. So that the noble (...) of Redemption may found the (...)
hope and expectation of the believer, upon ^ (...). First upon the account of
the Fathers faithfulness, who promised a seed to Jesus, Viz. such as should be
his children, and so be sanctified through Him, and that the pleasure of the
Lord, which in p^rt i^ the work of sanctification* should prosper in his hand.
And next upon the account of Christ's undertaking* and engaging* as is said, to
b^ing his son^ and daughters to glory, which must be through sanctification,
for without holiness no man shall see God. And they must look like himself,
who is a holy Head, a holy Husband, a holy Captane, and therefore they must be
holy members, a holy spouse and holy soldiers. So that He stands engaged to
sanctify them by his Spirit and word; and therefore is called the Sanctifier.
Heb. 2: 11. for both he that sanctifies and they who are sanctified are all of
one. Yea, their union with Christ lays the foundation of this: for being
joined to the Lord they become one Spirit 1 Cor. 6: 17. and are animated and
quickened by one and the same Spirit of life and grace; and therefore must be
sanctified by that Spirit.

10. The believer likewise would act faith upon the promises of the new
Covenant, of grace, strength, life, etc whereby they shall walk in his ways,
have Gods laws put into their minds, and write into their hearts, Heb. 8: 10.
Ier. 31: 33. and of the new heart, and new spirit, and the heart of flesh, and
the Spirit within them to cause them walk in his ways or statutes, and keep
his judgments and do them Ezech. 36: 26, 27. and the like, wherewith the
scripture abounds: Because these are all given over to the believer, by way
of Testament and legacy, Christ becoming the mediator of the new Testament,
that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions, that were
under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance. Heb. 9: 15. No^ Christ by his death has confirmed this
Testament* for where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death'
of the testatour, for a Testament is of force after men are dead verse. 16, 17.
Christ then dying to make the Testament of force, has made the legacy of the
promises sure unto the believer, so that now all the promises are yea and amen
in Christ 2 Cor. 1: 20. He was made a minister of circumcision to confirm the
promises made to the Fathers Romans 15: 8. That the eyeing of these promises by
faith is a noble mean to sanctification, is clear, by what the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 7: 1. Having therefore these promises let us cleanse ourselves
-- perfecting holiness in the fear of God. And it is by faith that those
promises must be received Heb. 11: 33. So that the believer, that would grow in
grace, would eye Christ, the fundamental promise, the Testatour establishing
the Testament, and the excutor or dispensator of the covenant, and exspect the
good things through Him and from Him, through the conduite, and channel of the
promises.

11. Yet further, believers would eye Christ i^ his Resurrection, as a public
person: and so look on themselves, and reckon themselves, as riseing virtually
in and with Him, and take the resurrection of Christ as a certane paune and
pledge of their sanctification: for so reasons the Apostle Romans 6: 4, 5, 11*
13. we are buried (say^s He) with him by baptism into death, that likeas
Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father; even so we also
should (...) in (...) of life: for -- we shall ^e (...) also in the likeness
of his resurrection, and if we (...) dead with Christ, we believe, that we
shall also live with him -- therefore reckon ye also yourselves to be -- alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord * and yield yourselves unto God, as
these that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God. The right improving of this ground, would be of noble
advantage unto the student of holiness: for thence he might with strong
confidence conclude, that the work of sanctification should prosper in his
hand: for he may now look upon himself, as quickened together with Christ Epes.
2: 5. Christ dying and riseing, as a public person, and he by faith being now
joined with him, and united to him.

12. Moreover this Resurrection of Christ may yield us another ground of hope
and confidence, in this work: for there is mention made of the power of his
resurrection Phil. 3: 10. So that by faith we may draw strength and virtue from
Christ, as an arisen and quickened Head, whereby we also may live unto God, and
bring forth fruit unto him, and serve no more in the oldnesse of the letter,
but in the newness of Spirit. Romans 7: 4, 6. He was quickened as an Head, and
when the head is quickened, the members cannot but look for some communication
of life therefrom, and to live in the strength of the life of the head: See
Col. 3: 1, 2.

13. Faith may and should also look to Christ, as an intercessor with the
Father, for this particular, John. 17: 17. Sanctify them through thy truth,
thy word is truth: and this will add to their confidence, that the work shall
go on: for Christ was always heard of the Father John. 11: 41, 42. and so will
be in this prayer, which was not put up for these few disciples alone.

The believer then would eye Christ as engadging to the Father, to begin and
perfect this work; a^ dying to purchase the good things promised, and to
confirm the same; as quickened and riseing a^ head and a public person, to
ensure this work; and to bestow and actually confer the graces requisite; and
as praying also for the Fathers concurrence; and cast the burden of the work on
Him by faith, knowing, that He stands obliged, by his place and relation to
his people, to bear all their burdens, to work all their works in them; to
perfect his own work that He has begun in them; to present them to himself at
last a holy bride; to give them the Spirit to dwell in them Rom* 8: 9* 11* and
^o quicken their mortal bodies verse. 11. and to lead them verse. 14. till at
length they be crowned, and brought forward to glory. This is to live by faith:
when Christ lives, acts and works in us by his Spirit Gal. 2: 20. Thus
Christ dwells in the heart by faith: and by this, his people become rooted
and grounded in love, which is a cardinal grace, and knowing the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, they become filled with all the fullness of
God Ephesians. 3: 17, 19. So that the believer is to commit by faith the work to
Christ, and leave the stresse of all the business on Him, who is their life:
Yet the believer must not think, to do nothing, nor to lay aside the means and
ordinances, but us^ing these diligently would, in them, commit the matter to
Christ, and by faith roll the whole work on Him, exspecting, upon the ground of
his relations, engadgments, promises, beginnings etc. that He will certanely
perfect the work Phil. 1: 6. and take it well off their hands, and be well
pleased with them, for putting the work in his hands, and leaving it on Him,
who is made of God to us sanctification.

Cautions.
As in the former part, so here, it will not be (...) to give a few words of
caution, for preventing of mistakes.

1. We would bewar of thinking, that perfection can be attained here: the
perfect man, and measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ is but
coming* and till then the body will but be a perfecting and edifying, through
the work of the ministry Ephesians. 4: 12, 13. Believers must not think of sitting
down on any measure of grace, which they attain to here; but they must be
growing in grace, going from strength to strengh, till they appear in the
upper Z^on, with the Apostle Phil. 3: 13. forgetting those things that are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, they must
press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. It must then be a dreadful delusion, for any to think, that they can
reach to such a degree of perfection here, as not to stand in need of the
ordinance any more* Let all believers live in the constant convicton of their
shortcoming and be humbled, and so work out their salvation with fear and
trembling.

2. Nor should every believer exspect one and the same measure of holiness,
nor can it be expected with reason, that all shall advance here to the same
height of sanctity* for every part of the body has its own measure: and an
effectual working in that measure; and so every joint of the body supplieth
less or more according to its proportion, and contribureth to the increase of
the body, and to the edifying of it self in love, as the Apostle clea^ly
shows. Ephesians. 4: 16. As in the natural^ body, the diversity of functions and
uses of the members requires diversity of furniture and strength; so, in the
mystical body of Christ, the members have not all alike measure, but each has
his proper distinct measure, according to his place and usefulness in the
body. Believers then would learn much sobr^ety here and submission, knowing
that God may dispense his graces as he will, and give them to each member, in
what measure he thinks good: Only they would take heed* that their poverty
and leanness be not occasioned through their own carelessness and negligence,
in not plying the means of grace with that faithfulness, and single
dependence on Christ, that they ought.

3. It would be remembered, that there may be some progress made in the way of
holiness, when yet the believer may apprehend no such thing; not only because
the measure of the grouth may be so small and indiscernable, but also because
even where the growth in it self is discernable, the Lord may think it good for
wise ends, to hide it from their eyes, that they may be kept humble, and
diligent; whileas if they saw how matters stood indeed with them* they might,
(without a new degree of grace) swell and be puffed up, yea even forget God,
and misken themselves and others too. Likewise this may proceed from such an
earnest desire after more, that they forget any measure they have gotten. and
so despise the day of small things.

4. There may be a progress in holiness, though not in that particular, which
the believer is most eying, to his sense and apprehension: for when he thinks
he is not growing in Love to, and Zeal for, God etc. he may be growing in
Humility, which is also a memb^r of the new man of grace; and when he can
perceive no grouth in Knowledge, there may be a grouth in Affection and
Tenderness* And if the work be carried on in any joint or member, it decays
in none, though it may be better apprehended in one, than in another.

5. There may be much holiness, where the believer is compleaning of the want
of fruits, when under that dispensation of the Lord toward him, he is made to
stoup before the most high, to put his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be
hope, and pleasantly to submit to God's wise ordering, without grudging, or
quarrelling with God for what He does; and to accept sweetly the punishment of
his iniquity; if he see guilt lying at the root of this dispensation. Where
there is a silent submission to the sovereign and only wise disposeing hand of
God, and the man is saying, if he will not have me to be a fruitful tree in
his garden, nor to grow and flouri^h as the palm tree* Let me be a shrub, only
let me be keep^d within the precincts of his garden, that his eye may be upon
me for good* let me abide within his courts, that I may behold his countenance,
there is grace, and no small measure of grace. To be an hired servant is much
Luk* 15: 19.

6. But withal, it would be observed* that this gracious frame of soul, that
is silent before God, under several disappointments, is accompanied with much
singleness of heart, in panting after more holiness, and with seriousness and
diligence in all commanded duties, waiting upon the Lord, who is their hope and
their salvation, in each of them: and with mourning for their own sinful
accession to that shortcoming in their expectations.

7. We would not think that there is no progress in Christianity, or grouth in
grace, because it comes not our way, or by the instruments and means, that we
most expect it by: possibly we are too fond o^ some instruments and means,
that we prefer to others, and we think, if ever we get good, it must be that
way, and by that mean, be it private or public: and God may give a proof of
his Soveraignity, and check us for our folly. By taking another way: He would
not be found of the Bride, neither by her seeking of him secretly on her bed by
night; nor more publicly, by going about the city, in the streets and broad
ways; nor by the means of the watchmen Cant. 3* 1, 2, 3.

8. Nor would we think, that there is no grouth in the work of grace, because
it comes not at such or such a prelimited or fore-set time: nor would we think
the matter desperate, because of our looking long, and waiting, and asking, and
laboring, and yet seeing no sensible advantage: Such and such a believer
(says the soul) made great progress in a short time, but I come no speed,
for as long as I have been at this school. O! we should beware of limiteing the
holy one of Israel, Let us be at duty, and commit the event to Him.

9. It is not a fit time, to take the measure of our graces, as to their
sensible grouth and fruitfulness, when devils are broken loose upon us;
temptations are multiplied, corruptions make a great noise, and we are meeting
with an horrible tempest shaking us on all hands: for it will be strong grace,
that will much appear then; It will be a strong faith, that will say, though He
kill me, yet will I trust in Him. At such a time it will be much, if the man
keep the ground he has gained, though he make no progress: It will be much for
a tree to stand, and not be blown out of the ground, in the time of a strong
and vehement storm of wind, though it keep not its flourishes, and yield not
fruit. The trees, which in a cold winter day bear neither leafs nor fruit, must
not be said to go back, nor not to grow, because when the spring comes again,
they may revive, and be as fruitful as ever.

10. We would not always measure our graces by what appears outwardly; for
there may be some accidental occurrence, that may hinder that: and yet grace be
at work within doors, which few or none can observe. The Believer may be in a
sweet and gracious frame* blushing before the Lord, y^a melting in love, or
taken up with spiritual meditations, and wondering, when as to some external
duties, it can find no present disposition, through some accidental
impediment or other, so that to some, who judge most by out ward appearance, no
such thing as the active working of grace in life can appear.

11. We would think it no small measure or degree of holiness, to be with
singleness^ of heart pursueing it, even though it should seem to flee from us:
to be earnestly panting after it, and hungering and thirsting for it: Nehemiah
thought this no small thing, when he said Neh. 1. last. O Lord, I beseech thee,
let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer -- of thy servants, who desire to
fear thy name.

12. Whatever measure of holiness the beleeve^ win to, he would take special
heed, that he place no part of his confidence of his being accepted and
justified before God, in it; as if that could come in as any part of the price
to satisfy justice: but when he has done all, let him call and account himself
an unprofitable servant: Though believers will not be so gross, as to speak
thus; yet sure, their justifying of their holding aback from God, because they
find not such a measure of grace and holiness, as they would have, looks
too much this way, and says, that they lean too much hereunto, in the matter
of the acceptance of their persons before God. Now this would be specially
guairded against* lest their labor be in vain.

Objections answered.
An Objection or two must here also be removed* and first some may say: That
though they have been laboring and striveing and working, now for some long
time, yet they can perceive no advancement^ they are as far short as ever.

Answer 1. Has it not been found, that some have compleaned without cause?
Have not some complained of their fruitlesnesse and want of grouth, that other
good Christians would have thought themselves very happy, if they had but
advanced half so far, as they saw them to have done?

2. But be it so, as it is alleiged, what if the fault be their own? what if
the cause of this be, that they attempt things in their own strength, leaning
to their own understanding, or habites of grace, or means etc. and that they
do not go about duties, with that single dependence on Christ that is
requisite, nor do they suck life, strength and sap from Him by faith, through
the promises; nor give themselves up to Him by faith, that He may work in them
both to will and to do? Should not this be seen, mourned for, and helped?

3* If all this shortcoming and disappointment cause them lie in the dust, and
humble themselves more and more before the Lord, the grace of humility is
growing, and that is no small advantage, to be growing downward.

4. Withal, they would do well to hold on in duty, looking to Christ for help,
and rolling all difficulties on Him, give themselves away to Him, as their Head
and Lord, and so continue their life of faith, or their consenting to let
Christ live in them by faith, or work in them by his Spirit, what is
welpleasing in his sight, and wait for the blessing and fruit, in God's own
time.

Next it will be Objected. Though* we might wait thus; yet how unedifying are
we unto others, when there appears no fruit of the spirit of grace (...)*

Answer. A Christian behavior and deportment, under the sense of
fruitlesnesse, expressing an holy submission of soul unto God as Sovereign,
much humility of mind before Him, justifying of God and taking guilt to
themselves, with a firm resolution to wait on patiently, in the use of means
appointed, cannot but be edifying to Christian souls; such exercises being
really the works and fruit of the Spirit of grace working within.

But thirdly Some may say* How are then the promises of the covenant made good?
Answer 1. The same measure of sanctification and holiness is not promised to
all.

2. No great measure is promised to any absolutely. So much indeed is secured to
all believers, as shall carry them to heaven, as without which they cannot see
God: but much as to the degrees depends on our performing through faith the
conditions requisite, to wit, on condition of our abideing in the vine, of our
acting faith on Him etc. and when these and the like conditions are not
faithfully performed by us, what can we exspect? So the Lord has appointed a
way, wherein He will be found, and will have us to wait for strength and
influence from Him* and if we neglect those means, which He has appointed,
how can we exspect the good, which He has promised in the use of these means?

3. The Lord has his own time of making good all his promises, and we must
not limite Him to a day.

4. Hereby the Lord may be trying and exerciseing thy Faith, Patience, Hope*
Dependence, Submission, Diligence* etc. and if these be in thee and abound,
they shall make, that thou shall neither be barren, no^ unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ 2. Pet. 1: 11.

But lastly it will be enquired, what can support the believing soul, in this
case?

Answer 1. The consideration and says of the covenant of Redemption, wherein
both the Fathers engadgment to the Son, and the Sons engadgment to the Father,
secureth grace and holiness, and salvation to the believer. And whatever we
be, They will be true to each other, our unbeleef will not make the faith of
God of none effect.

2. The consideration of the noble and faithful promises, contained in the
covenant of Grace, which shall be all made good in due time.

3. If we be humbled under the sense of ou^ failings and shortcomings, and made
to mourn before the Lord, and stirred up to more diligence and seriousness,
that may yield comfort to our soul. If we be growing in Humility, godly Sorrow,
Repentance, Diligence, and be gripping faster by faith to the Root, we want not
ground of joy and support: for if that be, we cannot want fruit.

4. It should be matter of joy and thanksgiving, that the believer is kept
from turning his back on the way of God, and kept with his face still
Zion-ward: though he make but little progress; yet he is still looking
forward, and creeping as he may waiting at God's door, begging and asking,
studying, laboring, and endeavoring for strength to go faster.

5. It is no small matter of peace and comfort* if we be kept from fretting
grudging, and repineing at the Lords dispensations with us, and be taught to
sit silent in the dust, adoreing His Soveraignity* and ascribeing no iniquity
to our maker.

CHAP. VIII. How to make use of Christ, for taking the guilt of our daily
out-breakings away.
THe next part of our sanctification, is in reference to our daily failings and
transgressions, committed, partly through the violence of temptations, as we
see in David and Peter, and other eminent men of God; partly through daily
infirmities, because of our weakness and imperfections: for in many things we
offend all Iam. 3: 2. and if we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and
the truth is not in us 1 John. 1: 8. A righteous man falls seven times Prove.
24: 16. There is not a just man upon earth* that does good and sins not.
Eccles. 7: 20. and Solomon further says 1 King. 8: 46. that there is no man
that sins not. This being so, the question is, how Christ is to be made use
of, for taking of these away.

For satisfaction to this, it would be considered, that* in those daily
outbreakings there are two things to be noticed, first there is the Guilt,
which is commonly called Reatus poen^, whereby the transgressour is liable to
the sentence of the law, or to the penalty annexed to the breach thereof, which
is no less then God's curse* for cursed is every (...) that abides not in all
things, which are (...) the law to do them Gal. 3: 10. Next, there is the
^taine or blote, which is called Reatus culp^, whereby the soul is defiled and
made, in so far, incapable of glory (for nothing enters in there which
defiles) and of communion and fellowshipe with God, who is of purer eyes then
He can behold iniquity. So that it is manifest, how necessary it is, that both
these be taken away, that they may not stand in ou^ way to the Father. And as
to both, we must make use of Christ, who is the only way to the Father.

And this we shall now clear: and first, speak of the taking away of the
Guilt, that is contracted by every sin: and for this cause, we shall briefly
speak to two things: first, Show what Christ has done as Mediator, for this
end, that the guilt, contracted by our daily failings and outbreakings, might
be taken away. Secondly, show what the believer should do, for the getting of
guilt taken away in Christ: or* how he should make use of Christ* for
reconciliation with God after transgressions; or for the taking away of the
guilt that he lies under* because of his violation of the law.

As to the first, We say, Christ, for taking away of Guilt contracted daily,
has done these things.

1. Christ laid down his life a ransom for all the sins of the Elect: both
such as were past before they believed, and such as were to be committed after.
His blood was shed for the remission of sin^, indefinitly, and without
distinction Mat. 26: 28*

^* And this was done according to the tenor of the covenant of Redemption,
wherein the Father caused all our sins to meet together on Him Esai* ^3: 6. and
made Him sin, or a sacrifice for sin, indefinitely 2 Cor. 5: 21. and so did not
except the sins committed after conversion.

3. Having satisfiedjustice, and being risen from the dead, as a Conqueror, He
is now exalted to be a Prince to give Repentance and Remission of sins Act. 5:
31. Now repentance and remission of sins his people have need of, after
conversion, as well as before conversion.

4. There are promises of pardon and remission of sins in the new covenant of
Grace, all which are sealed and confirmed in the blood of Jesus Ier. 31: 34. --
for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more: and
Chap. 33: 8. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity* whereby they have
sinned against me: and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have
sinned against me, and whereby they have transgressed against me. Esai. 43: 25.
I even I am he that bloteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and will
not remember thy sins.

5. Though there be no actual pardon of sins, till they be committed, and
repented of, according to the tenor of the gospel Matthew. 3: 2. Luke 13: 3.
Act. 2: 38. and 8* 22. yet, while Christ bear all the sins of his people upon
the cross, they were all then virtually and meritoriously taken away: of which
Christ's resurrection was a certane pledge and evidence: for then got He his
acquittance from all, that either law or justice could charge Him with* in
behalf of them* for whom He laid down his life a ransom Romans 8: 33, 34. who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies,
who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, or rather that is risen
again etc.

6. So that by virtue of Christ's death, there is a way laid down, in the
covenant of grace, how the sins of the elect shall be actually pardoned. viz.
That at their conversion and first laying hold on Christ by faith, all the
sins, whereof they then stand guilty, shall be actually pardoned and forgiven,
in their justification: and all their after sins shall also be actually
pardoned* upon their griping to Christ of new by faith, and turning to God by
repentance. And this way is agreed to by Father and Son, and revealed in the
gospel, for the instruction and encouragement of believers: and all to the
glory of his free grace. In whom we have redemption (says the Apostle Ephesians.
1: 7, 8, 9.) through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the
riches of his grace, wherein He has abounded toward us, in all wisdom and
prudence; having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his
good pleasure, which He purposed in himself.

7. Beside Christ's Death and Resurrection, which give ground of hope of pardon
of daily outbreakings; there is likewise his Intercession useful for this end:
for says the Apostle John* 1 Epist. 2: 1. 2. -- If any man sin, we have an
advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and He is the propitiation
for our sins. This intercession of his (...) a special part of his Priesthood,
who was the great Highpriest Heb. 4: 14, 16. and a completing Part Heb. 8: 4
and 9 8. and upon this account (...), that He is able to save to the uttermost
all that come to God through Him, because He lives for ever to make
intercession for them Heb. 7: 25. for by his intercession is the work of
redemption carried on, the Purchased benefits applied; and particularly new
grants of remission are through his intercession issued forth. He pleading and
interceeding, in a way suitable to his glorified condition, upon his death and
propitiation made, while he was upon the cross, accepted of the Father, and
declared to be accepted by his resurrection, aso^sion, and sitting at the
Fathers right hand. And thus, as believers are reconciled to God by Christ's
death, they are saved by his life. Romans 5: 10. So that Christ's living for to
be an intercessour, makes the believers salvation sure; and so lays down* a
ground for taking away of daily outbreakings, which, if not taken away, would
hinder and obstruct the believers salvation.

8. And as for the condition requisite to renewed pardon, viz faith and
Repentance, Christ is the worker of both: for He is a Prince exalted to give
Repentance, first and last Act. 4: 30. and as He is the author of faith, so He
is the finisher of it Heb. 12: 2.

As to the second particular, namely, what believers should do for getting the
guilt of their daily failings and outbreakings taken away by Christ: or how
they should make use of Christ for this end; I shall for clearing of it,
propose those things to consideration.

1. We would beware to think, that all our after actual transgressions are
actually pardoned, either when Christ dyed, or when we first believed in
Christ, as some suppose; for sin cannot properly be said to be pardoned before
it be committed, David was put to sue out for pardon, after his actual
transgression was committed; and not for the mere sense and feeling of the
pardon, or the intimation of it to his Spirit, when he cried out Psalm, 51: 2 --
blot out my transgressions, wash me etc. and verse. 9* hide thy face from my
sins, and blot out all mine iniquities and verse. 14. deliver me from blood
guiltiness. Sure when he spoke thus, he sought some other thing, than
intimation of pardon to his sense and conscience; for that he desired also, but
in far more clear expressions verse. 8. make me to hear joy and gladness etc.
and verse. 12. restore unto me the joy of thy salvation etc. Scripture phrases
to express remission import this. viz Covering of sin, Pardoning of debts,
Blotting out of sins Hideing of God's face from sins, not Remembering of them,
Casting of them behind his back, Casting of them into the sea, Removing of
sins Psalm. 103: 12. a lifting off of sin, or Taking it away, a Non-imputation
of sin Psalm. 33: 1, 2. These and the like phrases, though many of them be
metaphorical; yet do all of them clearly evince, that sin must first have a
being, before it can be pardoned. The same is clearly imported by the gospel
conditions, requisite before Pardon, such as acknowledgment of sin 1 Ioh. 1: 9.
which we see was practiced by the worthies of old, David Psalm. 32. and 51.
Nehemiah Cap. 9. Ezra Cap 9 and Daniel Chap. 9. Confessing and Forsaking of it
Prove. 28: 13. Sorrowing* for it and Repenting of it, and laying hold on Christ
by faith, etc. The reason why I propose this, is not only to guaird against
this antinomian error: but also to guaird the soul from security, to which this
doctrine has a natural tendency: for if a person once think, that all his
sins were pardoned, upon his first believing, so that many of them were
pardoned before they were committed; he shall never be affected for his after
transgressions, nor complean of a body of death, nor account himself miserable
upon that account, as Paul did Romans 7: 24. nor shall he ever pray for
remission, though Christ has taught all to do so, in that pattern of prayer;
nor shall he act faith upon the promises of pardon, made in the covenant of
grace, for after transgressions, or for transgressions actually committed Ier.
31: 34. and 3^: 8. Heb. 8: 12. and so there shall be no use made of Christ for
new pardons, or remissions of new sins.

2. The believer would remember, that, among other things, antecedently
requisite to remission of posterior actual transgressions, gospel Repentence
is especially required Luke 13: 3. Mat. 3: 2. Ezeck. 18: 28, 30, 32. Luke 15:
17, 18 Ho^. 2: 6, 7. Ezech. 14: 6. whereby a Sinner* through the help of the
Spirit, being convinced not only of his hazard by reason of sin, but also of
the filthiness and hatefulness of sin; and having a sight of the mercy of God
in Christ Jesus to sinners, turning from their sin, does turn from those sins
unto God, with a full purpose of heart, in his strength, to follow Him and obey
his laws: and hereby the soul is brought to loath its self and sin, and is
made willing to desire, seek for, accept of and prize remission of sins. This
makes them more warry in time coming, and careful: for behold (says the
Apostle 2 Cor. 7: 11.) This self same thing that ye sorowed after a godly
sort, what carfulness it wrought in you; yea, what clearing of yourselves;
what indignation, yea what fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea what Zeal; yea
what revenge; etc. Thus is God glorified in his justice, Psalm. 51: 4. and his
mercy is acknowledged, in not entering with us into judgment, nor casting us
into hell, as He might have done in justice.

3. Yet it would be remembered, that though it has seemed good in the Lord's
eyes, to choose this method, and appoint this way of obtaining pardon of sins
daily committed, for the glory of his grace and mercy; and likewise for our
good, we must not ascribe too much unto Repentance, in the matter of pardon: we
must not make it a cause of our remission, either efficient or meritorious: we
must not think, that it has any hand in appeaseing the wrath of God, or in
satisfying of justice: pardon must always be an act of God's free grace,
unmerited at our hands; and procured alone through the merits of Christ: we
must not put repentance in Christ's room and place, nor ascribe any
imperfection unto his merits, as if they needed any supply from any act of
ours: we must beware of leaning to our Repentance, and godly Sorrow, even so
far as to think to commend ourselves to God thereby, that we may obtain pardon.

4. The believer would consider seriously the dreadfulnesse of their condition,
who are lying under the lash of the law for sin, The law says, cursed is
every one that continues not in all things written in the law: and every sin
is a transgression of the law: so that, acording to law and justice, they are
in hazard: for evry sin in it self exposes the sinner to eternal wrath, sin
being an offense against God who is a righteous judge, and a breach of his law.
A right sight and apprehension of this, would serve to humble the sinner before
God, and make him more earnest in seeking out for pardon, that this obligation
to punishment might be removed.

5. The believer would not only consider the sin it self; but also take notice
of all its Aggravations. There are peculiar aggravations of some sins, taken
from the time, manner and other circumstances, which rightly considered will
help forward the work of humiliation: And the sins of believers have this
aggravation, above the sins of others, that they are committed against more
love, and special Love, and against more opposition and contradiction of the
grace of God within the soul, against more light and conviction etc. and
therefore, their humiliation upon this account ought to be singular and
serious, So was it with David, when he took notice of the special aggravations
of his sin Psalm. 51: 4, 6, 14. and Ezra. cap. 9. and Nehemiah Cap. 9. and
Daniel Cap 9. This considering of sin with its due aggravations, would help to
prize mercy at an high rate, and cause the soul more willingly wait for, and
more seriously seek after Remission; knowing that God is more angry for great
sins, than for sins of infirmity, and may therefore pursue the same with sorer
judgments, as He broke David's bones, withdrew his comforts etc.

6. The believer would be convinced of an impossibility of doing any thing in
himself, which can procure pardon at the hands of God: should he weep, cry,
afflict himself, and pray never so, all will do nothing by way of merit; for
the taking away of the least sin, that ever he committed: and the conviction of
this would drive him to despair in himself; and be a mean to bring him
cleanly off himself, and to look out for mere mercy in Christ Jesus. So long
as, through the deceitfulness of Satan, the false heart inclines to the old
byas, and has its eye upon any thing in it self, from whence it draws its
hops and expectation of pardon and acceptance, it will not purely act faith on
Christ for this end, and so he will lose all his labor, and in end be
disappointed. Therefore the believer would guard against this, and that so much
the more, that the false deceitful heart is so much inclined thereto; and that
this deceit can sometime work so cuningly, that it* can hardly be discerned,
being fairded over with many false glosses and pretexts; and that it is so
dishonorable to Jesus, and hurtful and prejudicial to the soul.

7. The believer would act faith on the promises of pardon in the new covenant,
as having a right to them through Jesus Christ, and challenge with humble
boldness, the fulfilling of the same* according to that 1. Ioh. 1: 9* If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. So that the
believer may not only take hold of mercy, and grace in God, as an encouragement
and invitation to go to God for pardon; but even of the justice and
righteousness of God, because of his faithful promises: and the believer would
have here a special eye to Christ, in whom all the promises* are yea and amen;
and look for the accomplishment of them through Him, and for his sake alone.

8. Faith would eye Christ, as hanging upon the cross, and offering up
himself, through the eternal Spirit, a sacrifice to satisfy divine justice,
for all the sins of his own chosen ones: we cannot think, that Christ bare but
some of their sins, or only their sins, committed before conversion; and if he
bare all, as the Father laid all upon Him, the believer is to lay hold on Him
by faith, as hanging on the cross, as well for taking away of the guilt of
sins committed after conversion, as before. His sacrifice was a sacrifice for
all, and He bare our sins without distinction or exception, in his own body on
the tree, 1. Pet. 2: 24. David had his eye on this, when he cried out Psalm. 51:
7. purge me with hysope, hysope being sometimes used in the legal
purifications, which typified that purification, which Christ really wrought,
when He gave himself a sacrifice for sin Levit. 14: 6. Number. 19: 18.

9. The believer looking on Christ, dying as a Mediator, to pacify the wrath
of God, and to make satisfaction to the justice of God, for the sins of his
people, would renew his consent unto that gracious, and wise contriveance of
heaven, of pardoning sins, through a crucified Mediator, that mercy and Justice
might kiss each other, and be glorified together: and declare again his full
satisfaction with Christ's satisfying of justice for him, and taking away the
guilt of his sins, by that blood, that was shed upon the cross, by taking
those sins, whereof now he stands guilty, and for which he is desireous of
pardon, and by faith nailing them to the cross of Christ, and rolling them on
his shoulders, that the guilt of them, as well as of the rest, might be taken
away, through the merits of his death and satisfaction. Thus the believer
consents to that noble act of free grace, whereby the Lord made all our sins
to meet together on Christ, when he takes those particular sins, wherewith now
he is troubled, and casts them in into the heap, that Christ, as the true
scapegoat, may carry all away. This is to lay our hands on the head of our
sacrifice.

10. The believer has another ground of comfort to grippe to, in this case,
and that is, Christ's eternal Priesthood, whereby he makes intercession for
the transgressions of his people, and as their advocate and atturnay with the
father, pleads their cause, whereby he is able to save them to the last, and
uttermost step of their jurnay, and so to save them from the guilt of all
casual and emergent sins, that might hinder their salvation: So that the
believer is to put those sins, that now he would have pardoned, into the hands
of Christ, the everlasting intercessour and alsufficient advocat, that He, by
virtue of his death, would obtain a new pardon of these their failings* and
transgressions, and deliverance from the guilt thereof; and their acceptance
with the Father notwithstanding of these transgressions.

11. Thus believers eyeing Christ as Dying, Riseing again, Ascending, and as
Sitting at the Fathers right hand, there to be a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedeck, and to interceed for his own, and to see to the
application of what benefits, pardons, favors, and other things they need,
from all which they have strong ground of comfort and of hope, yea and
assurance of pardon, would acquiesce in this way; and having laid those
particular sins, under the burden whereof they now groan, on Christ the
mediator, dying on the cross to make satisfaction, and ariseing to make
application of what was purchased, and having put them in his hand, who is a
faithful High priest, and a noble Intercessour, would remember, that Christ is
a Prince exalted to give Repentance and Remission of sins* and so exspect the
sentence even from Him, as a Prince now exalted, and as having obtained that of
the Father, even a power to forgive sins, justice being now sufficiently
satisfied, through his death; yea and as having all power in heaven and in
earth, as being Lord both of the dead and of the living. Sure a right thought
of this would much quiet the soul, in hope of obtaining pardon through Him;
seeing now the pardon is in his own hand, to give out, who loved them so
dearly, that he gave himself to the death for them, and shed his heart blood to
satisfy justice for their transgressions. Since he, who has procured their
pardon at so dear a rate, and is their atturnay to agent their business at the
throne of grace, has now obtained the prayed-for and looked-for pardon, and
has it in his ownehand, they will not question but He will give it, and so
absolve them from their guilt.

12. The believer, having taken this course, with his daily provocations, and
laid them all on Him, would acqui^sce in this way, and not seek after another,
that he may obtain pardon. Here he would rest, committing the matter by faith
in prayer to Christ, and leaving his guilt and sins on Him, expect the pardon:
yea conclude, that they are already pardoned: and that for these sins, he shall
never be brought unto condemnation; whatever Satan and a misbeleeving heart may
say or suggest afterward.

Thus should a believer make use of Christ, for the taking away of the Guilt of
his daily transgressions; and for further clearing of it, I shall add a few
cautions.

Cautions.
1. However the believer is to be much moved at, and aff^cted with, his sins
and provocations, which he commits after God has visited his soul with
salvation, and brought him into a covenant with himself; yet he must not
suppose, that his sins after justification do mar his state; as if thereby he
were brought into a Non-justified state, or to a Non reconciled state. It is
true, such sins, especially if gross, whether in themselves or by reason of
circumstances, will darken a man's state, and put him to search and try his
condition, over again. But yet we dar not say, that they make any alteration
in the state of a believer: for once in a justified state always in a
justified state. It is true likewise, that as to those sins, which now he has
committed, he cannot be said to be acquitted or justified, till this pardon be
got out by faith and repentance, as is said; yet his State remains fixed and
unchanged; so that though God should seem to deal with such in his
dispensations, as with enemies; yet really his affections change not; he never
accounts them real enemies; nay love lies at the bottom of all his sharp st
dispen^ations. If they for sake his law, and walk not in his judgments, if
they break his statutes and keep not his commandments, he will visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquit^ with stripes: nevertheless his
loving kindness will he not utterly take from them, nor suffer his
faithfulness to ^ail: his covenant will he not break nor alter the thing that
is gone out of his lips Psalm. 89: 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.* And again, though
aftertransgressions may waken challenges for former sins, which have been
pardoned and blotted out, and give occasion to Satan to raise a storm in the
soul, and put all in confusion; yet really sins once pardoned cannot become
again unpardoned sins. The Lord does not revoke his sentence, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of his mouth. It is true likewise, that a believer, by
committing of gross sins, may come to miss the effects of God's favor and
good will, and the intimations of his love and kindness; and so be made to cry
with David Psalm. 51: 8. make me to hear joy and gladness and verse. 12.
restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, etc. Yet that really holds true,
that whom he loves he loves to the end; and He is a God that changes not;
and his gifts are without repentance. Yea though grieving of the Spirit may
bring souls under sharp throws, and pangs of the Spirit of bondage, and the
terrors of God, and His sharp arrows, the poison where of may drink up their
spirits* and so be far from the actual witnessings of the Spirit of Adoption:
yet the Spirte will never be again really a Spirit of bondage unto fear, nor
deny his his own work in the soul, or the souls real right to, or possession
of that fundamental privilege of Adoption; or say, that the soul is no more a
Son, no^ within the covenant.

2. The course before mentioned is to be taken with all sins, though. 1. They
be never so hai^ous and gross. 2. Though they be accompanied with never such
aggravating and crying aggravations. 3. Though they be sins frequently fallen
into: and. 4. Though they be sins many and heaped together. David's
transgression was a heinous sin, and had heinous aggravations, yea there was an
heap and a complication of sins together in that one; yet he followed this
course. We find none of those kind of sins excepted in the new covenant; and
where the law does not distinguish, we ought not to distinguish: where God's
law does not expressly exclude us, we should not exclude our selves. Christ's
death is able enough to take away all sin. If through it a beleeve^ be
justified from all his transgressions committed before conversion, why may not
also a believer be, through virtue of it, justified from his gross and
multiplied sins committed after conversion? The blood of Christ cleanses from
all sin^ Christ has taught his followers to pray, forgive us our sins, as we
forgive them that sin against us, and he has told us also, that we must
forgive our brother seventy times seven times Mat. 18: 22. We would not be
discouraged then from taking this course, because our sins are such and such;
nay rather, we would look on this, as an argument to press us more unto this
way, because the greater our sins be, the greater need have we of pardon, and
to say with David Ps. 25: 11. Pardon mine iniquity, for it is great.

3. We would not think, that upon our taking of this course, we shall be
instantly freed from challenges, because of those sins, for pardoning whereof
we take this course: nor should we think, that because challenges remain, that
therefore, there is no pardon had, or that this is not the way to pardon: for,
as we shall show afterward, pardon is one thing, and intimation of pardon is
another thing: we may be pardoned, and yet suppose that we are not pardoned;
challenges will abide, till the conscience be sprinkled, and till the Prince of
peace command peace to the conscience, and put the accuser to silence; who,
when he can do no more* will mar the peace of a believer, as long as he can*
and stop the current of his comforts, which made* David pray, that God would
restore to him the joy, of his salvation Psalm. 51.

4. Nor would we think, that upon our taking of this course for the pardon of
our sins, we shall never thereafter meet with a challenge upon the account of
these sins. It is true, when sins are pardoned, they are fully pardoned in
God's court, and that obligation to condemnation is taken away, and the
pardoned person is looked upon as no sinner, that is, as no person liable to
condemnation because of these sins; for being pardoned he becomes just before
God; yet we darre not say, but conscience afterward, being alarmed with new
transgressions, may mistake, as people suddenly put into a fright are ready to
do: nor dar we say, that God will not permit Satan, to upbraid us with those
sins, which have been blotted out long ago, as he suffered Shim^i, who was but
an instrument of Satan, to cast up to David his blood guiltiness, which had
been pardoned long before. The Lord may think good to suffer this, that his
people may be kept humble; and made more tender and watchful, in all their
ways.

5. Believers would not mis* improve or abuse this great condescendency of free
grace, and take the greater liberty to sin, because there is such a sure,
saif^, and pleasant way of getting those sins blotted out and forgiven. Shall
we sin because we are not under grace, but under the law? That be far from us,
says (...) Apostle Romans 6: 15. This were indeed to turn the grace of God
into lasciviousness. And it may be a question, if such as have really
repented, and gotten their sins pardoned, will be so ready to make this use of
it: sure, sense of pardon will work some other effect, as we see Ezech. 16: 62,
63.

6. The believer, in going about this work of nailing his sins to the cross of
Christ, and of improving Christ's Death, Resurrection and constant
intercession, for the obtaining of pardon, would not think of going alone, or
of doing this, in his own strength: for of himself he can do nothing. He must
look to Christ for grace, to help in this time of need, and must got about this
duty with dependence on Him, waiting for the influences of Light, Counsel,
Strength, and Grace from Him to repent and believe: for He is a Prince exalted
to give repentance, first and last, and He is the author and finisher of faith:
so that without Him we can do nothing.

7. Let the believer beware of concluding, that he has got no pardon, because
he has met with no sensible intimation thereof, by the flowing in of peace and
joy in his soul. Pardon is one mercy, and intimation of it to the soul is
another distinct mercy, and separable from it: shall we therefore say, we have
not gotten the first, because we have not gotten both? The Lord, for wise
reasons, can pardon poor sinners, and not give any intimation thereof; to wit,
that they may watch more against sin afterward, and not be so bold as they have
been, and that they may find more in experience, what ^ bitter thing it is to
sin against God, and learn withal to depend on Him for less and more: and to
carry more humbly: for it may be, God sees, that if they saw their sins
pardoned, they would forget themselves, and rush into new sins again.

8. The believer must not think it strange, if he find more trouble after
greater sins, and a greater difficulty to lay hold on Christ for pardon of
those, then for pardon of others: for as God has been more dishonored by
these; so is his anger more kindled, upon that account: and it is sureable for
the glory of God's justice, that our sorrow for such heinous sins be
proportionably greater: and this will likewise increase the difficulty: and
ordinarily the effects of God's fatherly displeasure, make deeper wounds in the
soul after such sins, and these are not so easily healed: all which will call
for (...) and proportionably greater godly sorrow and repentance, and acts of
faith: because faith will meet with more opposition and discouragment there;
and therefore must be the more strong, to go through these impediments, and to
lay hold on his cross. Yet though this should make all watchful, and to
guaird against gross and crying sins, it should not drive any to despair, nor
to say, with that dispairing wretch, their sin is greater than it can be
forgiven, the ocean of mercy can drown and swallow up great, as well as lesser
sins: Christ is an alsufficient Mediator, for the greatest sins, as well as
for the least. O for thy names sake pardon mine iniquity, for it is great,
will come in season to a soul ready to sink with the weight of this millstone,
^ied about its neck.

9. as the greater sins should not make us despair of taking this course for
remission; so nor should the smaln^sse of sin make us to neglect this way: for
the least sin cannot be pardoned but through Jesus Christ; for the law of God
is violated thereby, justice provoked, Gods authority vilipended etc. and
therefore cannot be now pardoned, by reason of the threatenings annexed to the
transgression of the law, without a ransom: death is the wages of all sin,
lesser and greater; and the curse is due to all sinners greater and smaller.
Therefore the believer would not suffer one sin, seen and discovered, to lie
unpardoned; but on the first discovery thereof, take it away to Christ, and
nail it to his cross.

10. The believer would not conclude, that his sins are not pardoned, because
possibly temporal strokes, inflicted because of them, are not removed: for
though David's sin was pardoned; yet, because of that sin of his a temporal
stroke attended him and his family, to his dying day: for not only did God cut
off the child 2 Samuel 15: 14. but told him, that the sword should never depairt
from his house, and that He would raise up evil against him, ^ut of his own
house, and give his wives to one, that should lie with them in the sight of the
sun verse. 10, 11. So we read, that the Lord took vengeance on their inventions,
whose sins he had pardoned Psalm. 99: 8. God may see this fit and expedient, for
his own glory, and for humbling of them, and causing them fear the more to sin
against him. Yea not only may temporal calamities be inflicted, because of sin
pardoned; or continued, after sin is pardoned; but even sense of God's
displeasure may continue after pardon, as appears by that penitential Psalm
51. penned by David, after Nathan had spoken to him concearning his sin.

Quaestions or Objections answered.
1. What course shall we take with secret sins ^ I answer. This same course
must be followed with them: There is an implicit repentance of sins, that have
not been distinctly seen and observed, as who can see and observe all their
failings? And so there may be an implicit faith acting: that is, the believer,
being persuaded that he is guilty of mo^ sins, than he has yet got a clear
sight of, as he would bewail his condition before God because of these, and
sorrow for them after a godly manner; so he would take them together in a
heap, o^ as a closed bag full, and by faith nail them to the cross of Christ,
as if they were all distinctly seen and known: who can understand his errors,
said David Psalm. 19: 12. yet says he moreover, cleanse thou me from secret
faults.

2. But what if after all this, I find no intimation of pardon to my soul?
Ans. As this should serve to keep thee humble, so it should excite to more
diligence, in this duty of going with thy sins to Christ, and to plye him, and
his cross more, in and through the promises, and keep thy soul constant in
this duty of running to Christ, as an alsufficient Mediator, and as an
intercessour with the Father; and thus wait on Him who waits to be gracious;
even in this particular, of intimating pardon to thy soul. He knows when it
is fittest for thee to know, that thy sins are forgiven.

3. But what can yield me any ground of peace, while itis so, that I see no
pardon or remission granted to me? Answer. This may yield thee peace, that
following this course, which has been explained, thou art about thy duty. Thou
art not at peace with sin, nor harboring that viper in thy soul; thou art
mourning and sorrowing over it, and running to Christ, the Prince of pardons,
through his blood, and intercession, conform to the covenant of redemption and
after the encouragement given, in the many and precious promises of the
covenant of grace, and, having these promises, and rolling thy guilt on Christ,
as thy cautioner, conform to the manner expressed in the gospel, thou art
allowed to believe, that thy sins are pardoned, and that thou art accepted in
the beloved, and so quiet thy soul through faith, God abideing faithful and
true, and his promises being all yea and amen in Christ.

4. But so long as I find not intimation of pardon, I cannot think that I have
taken the right gospel way of bringing my sins to Christ. Answer. Though that
will not follow, as we cleared above: for a soul may take the right gospel way
of getting the guilt of their sins taken away in Christ; and God may pardon
thereupon; and for all that not think it fit to give intimation of that pardon
as yet, for wise and holy ends: yet the soul may humble it self for its
shortcoming, and still go about the duty, amending in Christ, what it
supposes is amiss, and renewing its acts of repentance and faith, and beg of
Christ understanding in this matter, and so continue carrying sin al way to
Christ's cross, and eyeing his intercession, and wait for a full clearing of
the matter, in his good time.

5. But what shall I do with the guilt of my weak Repentance, and weak faith?
Answer. When with a weak and defective repentance and faith thou art carrying
thy sins away to Christ, and nailing them to his cross, let the imperfections
of thy faith and repentance go with the rest, and leave all there.

6. What shall I do with my conscience, that still accuses me of guilt,
notwithstanding of my taking and following this course* Answer. Despise not the
accusations of conscience; but let these humble thee the more, and keep thee
closser at, this duty: yet know that conscience is but an under servant and
God's deputy, and must accuse according to law (I speak not here of the
irregular, furious and turbulent motions of Satan, casting-in granads in the
soul and conscience, to raise a combustion and put all in a fire) its mouth
most be stopped by law, and so the soul would stay and answer the accusations
of conscience with this, that he has fled to Christ, the only Mediator and
Cautioner, and cast his burden on him; and leans to his merits alone; and
has put those sins in his hand, as his advocat and intercessour with the
Father; and that the gospel requires no more of him: and if conscience should
say, that both faith and repentance are imperfect and defective, and that guilt
is thereby rather increased then taken away: He must answer again. True, but
I have done with the guilt of my faith and repentance, as with the rest, taken
all to Christ, and left all on him; and herein only do I acquiesce; I look not
for pardon for my imperfect faith and repentance, yea nor would I look for
pardon of my sins, for my faith and repentance, were they never so perfect, but
only in and through Jesus Christ, the only Cautioner, Redeemer and Advocat. But
further, this deputy would be brought to his master, who can only command him
to silence: that is to say, the Believer would go to Christ with the accuseing
conscience, and desire Him to command it silence, that he may have peace of
conscience, and freedom from those accusations, that are bitter and
troublesome. Remember withal, that if these accusations drive thee to Christ,
and indear Him more to thy soul, they will do no harm, because they drive thee
to thy only resting place, and to the grand peace maker. But if otherwise they
discourage or for^stow thee in thy motion Christ ward, then be sure conscience
speaks without warrant, and its accusations ought not, in so far, and as to
that end, be regairded.

CHAP. IX. How to make use of Christ, for cleansing of us from our daily spots.
HAving spoken of the way of making use of Christ, for removing of the guilt of
our daily transgressions, we come to speak of the way of making use of Christ,
for taking away the filth that cleaves to the soul, through daily
transgressions: for every sin defiles the man Mat, 15: 20 and the best are
said to have their spots, and to need washing* which presupposes filthiness
and defilement Ephesians. 5: 27. John. 13: 8, 10. Hence we are so often called to
this duty of washing and making us clean Esai. 1: 16. Ier. 4: 14. Act. 22: 16.
David prays for this washing Psalm. 51: 2, 7. And it is Christ's work to wash 1
Cor. 6: 11. Revel. 1: 5. Ephesians. 5: 26. See Tit. 3: 5. Now in speaking to this,
we shall observe the same method; and first show, what Christ has done to take
away this filth; and next, what way we are to make use of Him* for this end, to
get our spots and filthiness taken away, that we may be holy.

As to the first. For the purging away of the filth of our daily failings and
transgressions, Christ has done those things.

1. He has died that He might procure this benefit and advantage to us; and
thus he has washed us meritoriously in his blood, which he shed upon the
cross. Thus he loved us, and washed us from our sins, in his own blood.
Revel. 1: 5. and this is from all sins, as well such as are committed after, as
such as are committed before conversion. Thus He by himself purged our sins
Heb. 1: 3. viz by offering up of himself as an expiatory sacrifice to make an
atonement, and so procure this liberty. So also it is said Ephesians. 5: 25, 26,
27. that Christ gave himself for his Church, that He might sanctify and cleanse
it -- that He might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. So
Tit. 2: 14. He gave himself for us, that he -- might purify to himself a
peculiar people, Zealous of good works. Here then is the foundation and ground
of all our cleanseing and purification; Christ's death procuring it.

2. As He has procured; so he sends the Spirit to effectuate this, and to
work this washing and sanctification, in us. Hence it is said 1 Cor. 6: 11.
that we are sanctified and washed, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. We are said to be saved by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy ghost, which he shed upon us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior Tit. 3: 5* 6. The sending then or shedding of the holy and
sanctifying Spirit upon us, whereby we are sanctified, and consequently
purified and purged from our filth, is a fruit of Christ's death and mediation,
being purchased thereby, and is an effect of his resurrection: and
glorification, and intercession in glory.

3. He has made a fountain of his blood for this end, that we may go to it
daily, and wash and be clean: thus his blood cleanses from all sin 1 Ioh. 1:
7, 9. This is the fountain opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness. Zech. 13: 1.

4. He has purchased and provided the external means, whereby this cleansing
and sanctification is brought about: viz the preaching of the gospel, which He
himself preached, and thereby sanctified John 15: 3. Now are ye clean through
the word that I have spoken unto you. Ephesians. 5: 26. the Church is sanctified
and cleansed with the washing of water, by the word.

5. So has He procured, and works in the soul those graces, that promove and
carry on this work of sanctification and purifying; such as faith, which
purifyeth the heart Act. 15: 9. whereof he is the author and finisher Heb. 12.
and hope which whosoever has, purifyeth himself, even as He is pure. 1 John.
3: 3.

6. He has confirmed and ratified all the promises of the covenant, which are
ample and large, touching this cleansing and washing Ier. 35: 8. And I will
cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me
Ezech. 36: 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean, from all your filthiness. So Ezech. 37: 23. -- and I will cleanse
them. And all the other promises of the covenant, apprehended by faith, have no
small influence on our cleanseing 2 Cor. 7: 1. having there o^e these promises,
let us cleanse our selves etc. all which promises are yea and amen in Christ 2
Cor. 1: 20.

Thus Christ has made all sure, for the cleanseing and washing of his people,
conform to that article of the covenant of Redemption. So shall he sprinckle
many nations Esai. 52: 15.

Secondly, As to the way of our usemaking of Christ, for the purging away of
our filth and daily pollutions. Believers would take this course.

1. They would remember and live in the conviction of the exceeding
abominablnesse and filthiness of sin, which is compared to the vomit of a
dog, and to the mire, wherein the sow walloweth 2 Pet. 2: 22. to filthy rags
Esai. 64: 6. to a menstruous cloth Esai 30* 22* and the like, that this may
move them to seek with greater care and diligence, to have that filth washen
away.

2. They would remember also how abominable sin makes them in the eyes of an
holy God, who cannot behold iniquity, being a God of purer eyes than to behold
it Habak. 1: 13. nor can He look on it. And how therefore no unclean thing can
enter in into the new Jerusalem* nor any thing that defiles. And this will
make them so much the more to abhore it, and to seek to be washen from it.

3. They would look by faith upon the blood of Christ, that is shed for this
end, to wash filthy souls into; and run to it as a fountain opened for this
end, that they might come to it, and wash and be clean.

4. For their encouragement, they would grip by faith to the promises of the
new covenant, which are large and full.

5. And remember the end of Christ's death* viz to purchase to himself a holy
people, Zealous of good works, to present them to Himself holy, and without
spot and wrinkle, or any such thing: and this will be a further encouragement.

6. They would put the work by faith in his hand, who has best skill to wash a
foul soul, and to purge away all their spots; and by faith pray for and
exspect the Spirit, to sanctify and cleanse them from all their filthiness:
that is, they would make known, and spread forth their abominations before the
Lord, and eyeing Christ as the only great Highpriest, whose blood is a
fountain to wash in, would lay the work on Him, and by faith put Him to wash
away that filth, and to purify their souls by his Spirit, pardoning their
bygone iniquities, and renewing them in the spirit of their minds by grace,
that they may walk before him in fear. Thus they would roll the work on Him,
and leave it there.

Cautions and Directions.
1. The believer would in all this work be kept, in the exercise of those
graces following.

1. Of Humility, seeing what a vile filthy wreatch he is, that stands in need
of washing and purging daily, because of his daily pollutions, and
transgressions.

2. Of Love* considering with what a loving God he has to do, that has
provided so liberally (...) things for him, and particularly has provided a
fountain and such a fountain, whereto he no^ only may, but is commanded to
resort daily.

3. Of Thankfulness, remembering how great this mercy is, how unworthy he is,
on whom it is bestowed, and who He is that does grant it.

4. Of Fear, least God's goodness be abused, and He provoked, who is so
gracious to us.

5. Of Sincerity, and godly ingenuity, avoiding all hypocrisy, and formality,
knowing that we have to do with Him, who will not be mocked.

6. Of holy Hatred, loathing and abhorrence of sin, which makes us so filthy
and odious in the eyes of the Lord.

2. This course would be followed, for the purging away of the least sins: for
till they be purged away, we remain in our filth, and cannot exspect God's
favorable countenance, nor his warm imbracements, nor the hearty intimations
of his love and kindness. And a small inconsiderable like spot may grow
greater, and provoke God to let the accuser of the brethren, Satan, who always
waits for his opportunity, loss upon us, and a conscience wakened may make
much of a little defilement, to keep the soul from approaching to God.

3. This course would be followed with every sin, quickly, without delay: for
the longer those spots continue, it will be the more difficult to get them
taken away: the soul will after some time, become the less troubled about
them, and possibly forget them; and so they will remain; and this may occasion
at last a sad distance, and provoke God to hide his face, which will cause more
bitterness and sorrow. It were good then, to keep up a Spirit of tenderness
and fear.

4. Let this be our Daily work and exercise: for we are daily contracting new
filth: yesterdayes cleansing will not save us from new filth to day: nor will
our running to the fountain to day, serve to take away new spots tomorrow: new
spots call for new washing, so that this must be our very life and exercise, to
be daily and continually running to the fountain with our foul souls; and
giving Christ, the great purger, much to do.

5. We must not think to be perfectly Washen, so long as we are here; for we
will be contracting new filth daily, our feet will still be to wash John. 13:
10. We will not be without spote or wrinckle, till we come home to that place,
wherein enters nothing that defiles.

6. Let the believers recourse in this matter be wholly to Jesus Christ and his
blood, and lay no weight on their sorrow, repentance, or tears, or on any
outward mean, which they are commanded to use: yet would they not lay aside
these means, but go through them to the fountain, to Jesus, there and there
only to be cleansed.

7. They would not be discouraged or despair, when their spots appear great,
and not like the spots of his children: for Christ's blood can purge from all
sin; and wash away all their filth, of how deep so ever a dye it, be. Christ's
blood is so deep an ocean* that a mountain will be sunck out of sight in it, as
well as a small peeble stone.

8. Though Christ's blood be strong enough to purge from all sin, even the
greatest; yet they would know, that scandalous spots, or a deep stain, may
cost them more frequent running to the fountain, through humiliation, godly
sorrow, prayer and supplication. David's scandalous blot cost him more trouble
and pains, before he got it purged away, than many others, as we see Psalm. 51.

9. When all this is done, we must think of having on another righteousness,
as our clothing and covering, in the day of our appearance before our judge,
even the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which only is perfect, and able to
save us from the wrath of God. Let us be never so washen in the matter of
sanctification, and cleansed from our spots, we cannot for all that be
accounted righteous before God: nor will that satisfy justice, or take away
the guilt so much as of one transgression before God. Christ's righteousness
will be ou^ upper-garment for all eternity: Ut his is the fine linning
wherewith his bride is busked in heaven.

10. At every time we run to the fountain, with our daily contracted filth, we
would not forget to carry alongs with us the mother corruption, which is the
sinck and puddle of all filthiness: I mean, our natural corrupted
rottenness and pollution, from whence flow all our other actual pollutions.
We would do well to carry mother and daughter both together to the fountain.
David prays to be washen and purged, as well from his original filthiness,
wherein he was conceived and borne, as from his bloudguiltinesse Psalm. 51: 5, 7.

11. Let not this occasion our carelessness in watching against sin; for that
would be to turn his grace into wantonness, but rather let it sharpen our
diligence in watching against all occasions of sin, lest we again defile our
soul.

12. Not only must we have our bodies, or our outward conversation washen; but
our soul within, the frame of our heart, our understanding, will, affections,
and conscience sprinkled with that blood. The blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot ^o God, must purge our
consciences from dead works, to serve the living God. Heb. 9: 14. And we must
have our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. Heb. 10: 22.

Finally. If the believer fear, that he shall not be able to remember all
these particular duties, let him remember this, to wit. To put a ^oule soul,
defiled with original and actual pollutions, in Christ's hand, daily, and
leave it with him to wash by his blood and Spirit. And yet remember to lay the
weight of his acceptance before God, upon the imputed righteousness of Jesus
Christ, and not upon his own cleanness, when thus sanctified and washen, which
is but imperfect.

Questions or objections answered.
But alas some may Object. and say, That their very faith which must carry the
rest of their filth to the fountain of Christ's blood, is defiled; How then
can they expect to be made clean? An. The blood of Jesus Christ is sufficiently
able to wash all our filth away; and the filth of faith, as well as of other
actions: Therefore, when faith, as a hand, is carrying the filth of the soul
away to Christ to be washen in his blood; let the foul hand go with the foul
hand - full, give Christ faith and all to wash.

2. But what shall I do, when notwithstanding of all this, my conscience shall
still accuse me of uncleanness, and cry out against me as filthy and
abominable? Ans. Take it away also to the blood of Jesus, that there it may be
purged Heb. 9: 14. and here alone will we get our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience. Heb. 10: 22. The conscience must be steeped (to speak so) in the
blood of Jesus, and so it shall be clean: and taking our filthy hearts to this
cleansing fountain, to be washen, we will get them delivered, and sprinkled
from an evil conscience, that it shall no more have ground of accusation
against us: when we have it to say, that we have put our filthy souls in the
hands of the great cleanser, Jesus Christ, and brought all our pollutions to
his blood, what can conscience say to us? The Lord, it is true, may suffer our
consciences still to bark upon us, and cast up our filthiness to us, that we
may be the more humbled, and be put to lie more constantly at the fountain;
yet when we have fled to Christ, and taken our filthiness to the open and
appointed fountain, we can answer the accusations of conscience, in law, and
have peace.

3. But I am apt to think, will some say* That if I had once taken the right
way, to get my sins and filthiness purged away, my conscience would trouble me
no more; but now so long as it doggeth me thus, I cannot think, that the way,
which I have taken, is the right way. Ans. Though the Lord may think good to
suffer conscience to trouble a man for a time, though he has taken the right
way, as is said, for a further exercise and trial to him; yet the believer
will have no loss nor disadvantage, by examineing his way, and trying whether
he has laid the matter, cleanly over on Christ, or whether he has laid too
much weight on his own humiliation, sorrow and pains; and whether he beleaving
the matter on Jesus; and exspecting to be washen alone in his blood, or looking
in to himself, and exspecting some help in the matter from self. And after
trial would mourn for any failing he gets discovered: and still be about that
work of running with filth to the fountain. But withal they would go to Christ
for help, because without Him, they cannot come to Him, they cannot come or
carry their soul to the fountain opened for sin and uncleanness. So that, in
all this work, there would be a single dependence on Christ, for understanding,
and strength to go about this work aright.

Thus, have we endeavored to clear up Christ's being the Way to the Father,
first and last; and how all, believers or unbeleevers, are to make use of him,
as the way to the Father, whatever their condition be; from all which we may
see* 1. That such are in a wreatched and forlorn condition, who are still
strangers to Christ* and will not lay hold on Him, nor come to Him, and walk in
Him, and make use of Him. They are unrighteous and unholy, and daily
contracting more guilt and more filth: and they know no way either for
justification or sanctification, but a way of self, which will prove like the
brooks, which run dry in summer and disappoint the weary travailer, when he
has most need. They are without Christ, and so without the way, the only way,
the saife and sure way, to the Father. And oh! if all that is here spoken could
induce them, to think once of the misery of their condition; and to seek out
for relief, that they might not only be saved from their state of sin and
misery; but brought into a state of salvation through Jesus Christ; so that
they might be justified before God, from all that justice, the devil, the law,
or conscience, could lay against them* and thoroughly sanctified; and so at
length brought home to the Father, fair and spotless 2. Upon the other hand,
we see the noble advantage of believers, who through grace are entered into
this way; for it is a full and complete way, that shall carry them saife home:
they shall find, that He is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God
through Him. And O if* they were sensible of this! How would it excite them to
thankfulness* How would it encourage them to run through difficulties great and
many! 3. We see what a special duty lies upon believers to make special use of
Christ, in all things, as the way to the Father, and so march to heaven in Him,
as the only way, march in his hands, or rather be carried in his arms and
bosom. This were to go from strength to strength, till at length they
appeared in Zion, and landed in that pleasant place of rest, where the weary
are at rest, and yet rest not, day nor night, but sing praises to Him, that
has redeemed them by his blood, out of every kindred and tongue, and people and
nation, saying blessing, honor, glory and power be unto Him, that sits upon
the throne, and unto the lamb, forever and ever Revel. 5: 9, 13. 4. Hence we
may see the cause of the leanness of believers, of their wanderings, of their
short comings* of their many defilements etc. viz. their not constant making
use of Christ, as the way, in all things, according to the tenor of the gospel.
Oh if this were laid to heart and mourned for, and if grace were sought to
help it.

This one point of truth. That Christ is the way, well understood, and ^ghtly
put into practice, would do all our business, both as to justification and
sanctification, and were poor sinners once entered into this way, and had they
grace from this way to walk in it, it would prove their life and salvation: for
it is the marrow and substance of the whole gospel. So that there needs
little more to be said: yet we shall speak, a little to the other particulars
in the text.

CAP. X. The Truth. Some generals proposed.
THat what we are to speak for the clearing and improving of this noble piece
of truth. That Christ is the Truth, may be the more clearly understood and
edifying, we shall first take notice of some generals, and then show
particularly how, or in what respects, Christ is called the Truth, and finally
speak to some cases, wherein we are to make use of Christ, as the Truth.

As to the first. There are four general things here to be noticed.

First This supposes what our case by nature is, and what we are all without
Christ, who is the Truth: as,

Frst. It supposes that without Christ, we are in darkness, mistakes, errors:
yea we are said to be darkness it self Ephesians. 5. 8. yea were sometimes
darkness etc. John. 1: 5. and of darkness. 1 These. 5: 5. yea, under the ^ower
of darkness Col. 1: 13 John 12: 35. 1 John. 2: verse. 11. walking in darkness
1 John. 1: verse. 6. and abideing in darkness 1 Pet. 2: 9. 1 These. 5: 4. John.
12: 46. we wander and go astray, as soon as we are borne speaking lies Psalm.
58: 3. yea we go astray in the greatness of our folly Prove. 5. last. we are
all gone astray Esai. 53: 6. See also Psalm. 119: 67, 176. So far are we from
any knowledge of, or acquantance with Truth, or with the way of truth.

Secondly it supposes, that we cannot turne-in to the right way: a Spirit of
error and untruth leads us continually wrong: like the sheep we wander
still* and we weary ourselves in our wandering; and so spend all our labor and
pains in vain. Being under the power of untruth and error, we cannot walk
one step right.

Thridly. Though all other ways, beside Him who only is the Way, and the
Truth, be false ways, and by-ways, leading us away from the true testing
place, and from that Way, which is the Truth; yet we are prone, and ready to
cleave to those false and erroneous ways, to grippe to shadows* andto lean
to them, as if they were the ways of truth: Such as

1. A good heart, which many imagine they have, when they have nothing less.

2. Good intentions and purposes for time to come, which such, as were not
under the power of error and untruth, would never deceive themselves withal.

3. An harmless life without scandalous outbreakings to the reproach of
christianity: a foundation* on which (...) wise man, led by truth, would build
his salvation, or hopes of eternal happiness.

4, An outward moral, civil and discreet carriage, which no man can blame, and
wherein a heathen can outstripe many, called christians, so that it must be a
poor ground to found our hopes upon, and yet many are so blinded, that they
lean all their weight upon such a rotten staff.

5. Outward exercise of religious duties, wherein a Pharisee may outstripe
many: and yet O! how many build all their hopes of heaven upon this sandy
foundation, which none but blinded persons would do.

6. The commendation and applause of ministers and christians, is that which
many rest upon: which is a sad proof of the blindness of their hearts.

7. The way of good works and alms deeds, blindfoldeth many, and shows that
they were never led by truth, or taught of Christ, who is the Truth.

8. Some pinching grief and sorrow for sin, i^ another way, which people,
strangers to the truth, deceive themselves withal.

9. A common sort of repentance, backed with some kind of amendment and
outward reformation, is away that many rest secure in, though it lead to
destruction.

10. Freedom from challenges of conscience, deceives many.

Though these and such like ways be dangerous, yea deadly, yet how many is
there to be found among christians, that have no better ground of their hope of
salvation, and will cleave to them so fast, as no preaching will make them so
much as once question the matter, or suspect that these ways will in end
deceive them; so strong is their inclination to the way of error, though not
as the way of error.

Fourthly. It presupposes also an inclineableness in us by nature to wander
out of the way: for being nothing but a mass of error, made up of darkness,
ignorance and mistakes, we have a strong byas to error, which agrees best,
with our natural corrupted temper. Hence is it, that we have such a strong
propension to error and mistakes: Whether

1. Concearning God, and his way of dealing with his Church or with our selves.
O how ready are our hearts by nature, to hatch and foment wrong, unseemly,
untrue, yea unchristian, if not blasphemous thoughts and conceptions of his
Nature, Attributes, Word, and Works? And how ready and prone are we, to receive
and intertaine wrong apprehensions of all his ways and dealings with his
Church and people? And as for his works in and about ourselves* O what
unsuteable, erroneous, false, ungodly, absurd and abominable opinions do we
with greediness drink-in, and foster; yea feed upon with delight? Who is able
to recount all the errors and mistakes, which our heart by nature is ready to
admit, and foster with complacency? Are we not by nature ready to say, that
there is not a God, as the fool Psalm. 14: 1. Or That He is not such a God, as
his word and works declare Him to be; a Holy, Just, Righteous, Omnipotent,
Omnipresent, Omniscient God etc* Or that He is a changeable God, and actually
changed, not being the same now, which sometime he was. That He has forgotten
to be gracious, and remembereth not his people in adversity; and so is not
Tender and Merciful. That He has forgotten his promises, and so is not
Faithful and True. That he approves of sin, because he suffers the way of
the wicked to prosper, and so is not an Holy God etc. Yea do not ofttimes such
thoughts as these lodge within the heart of the truly Godly? All which shows,
how prone we are to receive and intertaine erroneous and false thoughts of God.

2. Concearning Ourselves, Supposeing ourselves to be borne again and
reconciled to God, when yet we are living in black nature: and who so ^old and
confident that they are right, as such as are ^thest out of the way? Or, on the
other hand, sup^osing ourselves to be in a bad state and in nature, (...)
darkness, when the day star from on high has visited us, and brought our
souls from death unto life. And who more ready to compleane, then such as have
least cause? Or supposeing ourselves in a good condition, lively, active,
diligent, watchful, etc. when it is just other ways with us: or on the
contrary, compleaning of deadness, formality, upsitting, fainting,
heartlesnesse in the ways of God, when it is not so. Or, in questioned
matters, taking truth to be error, and error to be truth.

3. Concearning Others. How ready are we to run either to the one extremity, or
the other, in judging their persons, and actions?

O! where is the faith of this natural condition? Where is the real conviction
of it? Sure there is but little real believing of this, when

1. There are so many, that never so much as suspect themselves, or question
either their state or condition, at one time or other; never once imagine that
their blinded hearts may deceive them; never once dream of a possibility of
mistaking, and of dying with a lie in their right hand.

2. And so many, that are not lamenting and bewailing this their condition, nor
crying out and compleaning of a false deceitful and desperately wicked heart.

3. And so few, that are indeed humbled under the sense of this, and made
therefore to walk more watchfully and soberly with an eye always upon their
treacherous and deceiving hearts.

4. And so few, crying for help from God, against this deceitful adversary,
through daily experience of the atheism, hypocrisy, ignoranc^ misconceptions
of God and of his ways, and deceitfulness of our hearts, might sufficiently
put it out of doubt with us.

Next. How miserable must their condition be, who are yet strangers to Christ;
for they are living in darkness, lying in darkness, walking in darkness, yea
very darkness it self, a mass of error, mistakes, ignorance, and
misconceptions of all things, that are good; and still wandering out of the way.

Finally should not this preach out to, and convince us all of a necessity of
having more acquantance with Truth, with Jesus Christ, who is the Truth, that
we may be delivered from this woeful and wreatched condition: for Truth only
can set us free therefrom.

The Second general thing to be noticed here is. That all other ways and
courses, which we can take or follow, that we may obtain life, beside Christ,
are but lies, false and deceitful ways, there is no truth in them: for He only
is the Truth, No other whatsoever can bear this epithete: for

1. He only can satisfy the soul in all points: other ways, whatever we may
imagine and dream, can yield no true satisfaction in this matter.

2. He only can secure the soul from destructive ruinous courses, which will
undo the soul: all other ways will fail here; none of them can give the least
security to the soul, that they shall not bring him, in end, to destruction and
everlasting perdition.

3. He only can bring the soul saife through all opposition, and difficulties
in the way: no other way can do this; but will leave us in the mire, ere ever
we come to the end of our journay.

4. He will not deceive nor disappoint the soul: all other ways, in end will
prove treacherous, and give the travailer a doo^ul and sad disappointment.

O what a warning should this be to us all, to take heed, that we embrace not a
lie, in stead of Him, who is the Truth: and sit not down with a shadow in
stead of the substance. How ready are we to put other things in his place? But
whatever it be, that gets his room in the soul, though good and worthy in it
self, will prove a lie, Even. 1. All our outward holiness and duties: yea. 2.
All our experiences and great seize. Yea. 3. All our gifts and
enduements. Ay. 4. Our very graces: none of these are Christ; and if we place
that hope and confidence in them, which we should place on Him, they will not
prove the Truth to us. He alone is the Truth.

How sure then should we labor to be, that we do not die with a lie in our
right hand: and how carefully should we guaird against the trusting in, or
leaning to any thing that is not Christ, and whole Christ, and only Christ, and
Christ as offered in the gospel: seeing this way is only the Truth. And no other
way will be found so in end, though at present we may find in it.

1. Some inward peace and quietness of heart, as if all were right.

2. Some satisfaction of mind, things being right as we apprehend, butfalsly,
through the deceitfulness of the heart.

3. Something like assurance and confidence, tha^ all will be right with us.

4. And hope founded thereupon, which may help to ride through some storms,
and yet fail us atlength.

The third general is this, Christ Jesus is not only the Truth in himself, but
also in reference to us. The scope of the place clears this, as he is the Way
and the Life, for our use; so he is the Truth. Not only as God equal with the
Father, but also as Mediator, and our immanuel.

As God, He is 1. Essentially Truth, being God equal with the Father, in power
and glory.

2. In respect of veracity, he is the God of truth Deuteronomy. 32: 4. faithful in
all his sayings Psalm. 31^ verse. 5. keeping truth for ever Psalm. 146: 6.

3. He is the fountain and spring head of all created truth, for he is the
first truth.

As Mediator, and in reference to us. He is full of grace and truth John. 1:
14. He received not the Spirit in measure John. 3: 34. and this Spirit is a
Spirit of truth. But of this more, when we come to show more particularly, how
and in what respects, he is called the Truth, as mediator.

The fourth general, which is here observable* is, That he is not only called
Truth, but the Truth, as he is the Way, and the Life: and not only true* but
Truth, in the abstract: which says.

1. That He is every way Truth. how ever we consider him, as God, or as
Mediator.

2. That ^ll Truth is in Him: all truth of salvation for us is to be found in
Him.

3. That all that is in him is truth, his Natures, Offices, Performances,
Words, Works etc. all are true.

4. That He is pure and unmixed Truth: no lie in Him, no error or mistake
there.

5. That truth in Him is in its perfection, and excellency: In the truest of
men, it is very imperfect.

O what an excellent one must He be? How completely fitted and furnished for
us! Oh if our souls could love him, and close with him, and rest upon him as
alsufficient!

CHAP. XI. More particularly, in what respects Christ's is called the Truth.
BUt for further explaineing of this matter, we would see more particularly, in
what respects it is, that He is called the Truth; and this will make way to our
use making of Him. So

First He is the Truth, in opposition to the shadows and types of Him, under
the law: Hence, as the law (the whole leviticall and typical dispensation)
came by Moses; so grace and truth came by Jesus Christ John. 1: 17. They were
all shadows of Him, and He is the substance and body of them all. Col. 2: 17.
And this is true in these respects.

1. All these shadows and types pointed at Him, and directed as with a finger
the Israelites, who were under that dispersition, to look to Christ, the
promised Messiah, and to rest, and to lay all their weight, on Him: so that the
law was a shadow of good things to come Heb. 10: 1. Col. 2: 17.

2. They all terminate in Him, He putting an end, by his coming and performing
his work, to all those typs, which only related to Him, and to what He was to
do: the body being come, there is no more need of the shadow, and the thing
typified existing, there is no more need or use of the type.

3. They are all fulfilled in Him, He answers them all fully: so that what
ever was shadowed forth by them is completely to be found in Him. This the
Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews abundantly evinceth, and Paul to the
Colossians tells us, we are complete in Him. and therefore need no more follow
the shadows.

Secondly He is the Truth in reference to the prophecies of old; all which did
principally point at him, and his concearnments: his Person, Nature, Offices,
Work, Kingdom, etc. and whatever was foretold in these prophecies, is
perfectly fulfilled in Him, or done by Him, or shall in due time be effectuated
by Him. He is that great prophet, spoken of Deuteronomy. 18: 15, 18, 19. So said the
Jews themselves John. 6: 14. All the Prophets from Samuel spoke of Him, and of
his days Act. 3. 22, 23, 24. And to Him gave all the Prophets witness Act.
10. 43. And whatever they prophesied or witnessed of Him, was, or is in due
time, to be fulfilled in Him. Hence we find the Evangelists and Apostles
frequently applying the sayings and prophecies of the old testament unto Him,
And Luke 4: 18. himself said, that the prophecy of Esa 61: 1. etc. was
fulfilled in him. See 1 Pet. 10: 11, 12. And Himself expounded to the two
Disciples going to Emmaus, in all the scriptures, beginning at Moses, and all
the prophets, all the things concerning himself Luke 24: 27. And thus is He the
truth of all the prophecies.

Thirdly He is the Truth, in reference to his undertaking with the Father, in
that glorious covenant of redemption: for whatever the Father laid on him to
do, that He did fully and faithfully. He was to bear our griefs and to carry
our sorrows, and that He did. He was to be wounded for our transgressions, and
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was to be upon Him,
and by his stripes we were to be healed Esai. 53: 5, and so it was Romans 4: 25.
1 Cor. 15: 3. 1. Pet. 2: 23. His soul was to be made an offering for sin Esa.
53: 10. and so it was; for he offered up himself a sacrifice for sin: yea all
that He was to do, by virtue of that covenant, he did it perfectly, so as he
cried out, while hanging on the cross, it is finished. John. 19: 30. and in his
prayer John. 17. he told the Father verse. 4. that He had glorified Him on
earth, and had finished the work, which He gave him to do. So that the Father
was well pleased with Him Mat. 3: 17. and 12: 18, and 17: 5. Mark. 1: 11. Luke
3: 22.

Fourthly He is the Truth, in respect of his Offices, which He took upon him
for our good: for all the duties of these offices, which He was to do, and what
remains to be done, He will perfect in due time. Did He take upon him the
office of a Prophet? He did fully execute the same, in re^aling mediatly and
immediately the whole counsel of God. John. 1: 18. and 15: 15. Ephesians. 4: 11,
12, 13. Act. 20: 32. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 1: 2. Did He take upon him the
office of a Priest, so did he fulfill the same, offering up himself an
expiatory sacrifice to God. Heb. 9: 14, 28. and 2: 17. and becoming a Priest,
living for ever to make intercession for us Heb. 7: 25. And, did He take on the
office, and function of a King, so does He execute the same, calling a people
to himself out of the world by his word and spirit Act. 15: 14, 15, 16. Esa.
55. 4, 5. Psalm. 110. 3. erecting a visible Church, a company of visible
professors, to profess, and declare his name, which, as his kingdom, he
rules, with his own Officers, Laws, and Penalties or Censures, so that the
government is on his shoulders Esa. 9: 6, 7, who is the Head of the body the
Church Ephesians. 1: 22, 23. Col. 1: 18. and this his kingdom He rules, in a
visible manner, by his own officers etc. Ephesians. 4: 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12: 28. Esai.
33: 22. Mat. ^8: 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5: 4, 5. and further he executes this office by
effectually calling the elect, giving them grace Act. 5: 3. rewarding the
obedient Revel. 22: 12. and 2. 10. chastiseing the disobedient Revel. 3: 19.
bringing his own home at length* through all their temptations, afflictions,
and overcoming all their enemies 1 Cor. 15. 25. Psalm. 110. and at length, He
shall do the part of a king, when He shall judge quick and dead, at the last
day 2. These. 1: 8, 9. Act. 17: 31. 2. Tim. 4: 1.

Fifthly He is the Truth, in this regaird, that He fully answers all the
titles and names, which he got* As he was called Jesus, so did He save his
people from their sins Mat. 1: 21. As He was called Christ; so was He anointed
with the Spirit without measure John. 3: 34, Psalm. 45. 7. and separated for his
work, and endued with all power for that effect. John. 6: 27. Mat. 28: 18, 19,
20, and established to be a Prophet Act: 3: 21, 22. Luc. 4: 18, 21. a Priest
Heb. 5: 5, 6. 7 and 4: 14. 15. and a King. Psalm. 2. 6. Esa. 9: 6, 7. Mat. 21:
5. Phil. 2: 8, 9, 10. 11. Was He called Immanuel Esai. 7: 14. so was He indeed
God with us, being God and Man in one person for ever: was he called
wonderful, Esai. 9: 6. so was He indeed, in his two distinct natures in one
person, at which the Angels may wonder Ephesians. 3: 10, 11. 1 Pet. 1: 12. 1. Tim.
3: 16. was he called counselor, so was He indeed, coming out from the Fathers
besome, with the whole counsel of God concerning our salvation. John. 1: 14,
18. and 3: 13. and 5: 20, and 15: 15. was He called the mighty God; so was He
indeed Psalm, 110: 1. Mat. 22: 44. Heb. 1: 13. Psalm. 45: 6. Heb. 1: 8. Ier. 23:
6. and 33: 16. Mal. 3: 1. Matthew. 11. 10 Psalm. 83: 18. Luke 1. 76. John. 1: 1,
14. 1 John. 5: 20. Tit. 2: 13. Romans 9: 5. was He called the everlasting Father,
so is He the father of eternity, being (as some interpret the word) the author
of eternal life, which He gives to all that believe in Him Ioh. 6. 39, 40,
47, 51. and 8: 51. and 10. 28. and 11: 25, 26. Heb. 5: 9. and 7: 25. was He
called the Prince of peace, so is He the Prince of peace indeed, being our
peace Mic. 5: 5. Ephesians. 2: 14. making up peace betwixt God and us Esa. 53: 5. and
57: 19. Ephesians. 2: 17. Col. 1: 20. Hence his gospel is the gospel of peace, and
his Ministers ambassadors of peace Esa. 52: 7. Romans 10: 15. 2 Cor. 5: 19, 20.
Ephesians. 6: 15. And he gives peace to all his Zach. 9: 10. Ioh. 14 27. and 16: 33.
Romans 5: 1. and 8, 16. and 14: 17. 2. These 3, 17. was He called the Lord our
righteousness Ier. 23, 6. So is He the same indeed, bringing in everlasting
righteousness Dan. 9: 24. and being made of God to us righteousness 1. Cor.
1: 30. and making us righteous 2. Cor. 5: 21.

Sixthly He is the Truth, in reference to the promises, which

1. Center all in Him, and lead to Him, as the great promise.

2. Are founded all upon Him, who is the only Mediator of the covenant of
promises.

3. Are confirmed all by Him, and made yea and amen in Him 2 Cor. 1: 20. He
confirmed the promises made to the fathers Romans 15: 8.

4. are all dispensed and given out by Him; who is the executor of his own
testament, and the great dispensator of all that we need; so that what we ask
of the Father, He gives it himself, John. 14: 13, 14.

Seventhly He is the Truth, in that He fully answers all the hops and
expectations of his people. He shall not be found a liar unto them, whatever
Satan may suggest unto them, or a misbeleeving heart may prompt them to
conceive, and their Jealousy may make them apprehend; and whatever his
dispensations may now seem to say. In end they shall all find, that He is the
Truth, fully satisfying all their desires: and granting all that ever they
could hope for, or expect from Him. They shall at length be satisfied with his
likeness Psalm. 17: 15* yea abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his
house Psalm. 36: 8. and with his goodness Psalm. 65: 4. and that as with marrow
and fatness Psalm. 63: 5. One sight of his glory will fully satisfy, and cause
them cry out, enough. Jeremiah is not now saying, as once he did in the
bitterness of his soul, through the power of corruption and temptation Cap.
15: 18. will thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters, that fail?

Eighthly. He is the Truth, in opposition to all other ways of salvation: for

1. There is no salvation now by the law of works, that covenant being once
broken cannot any more save: The law cannot now do it, in that it is weak
through the flesh Romans 8* 3.

2. There is no salvation by the law of Moses: without Christ: hence Israel,
which followed after the law of righteousness, did not attain to the law of
righteousness, because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the
works of the law Romans 9: 31, 32. They went about to establish their own
righteousness, and did not submit themselves unto the righteousness of God.
Romans 10: 3.

3. There is no salvation by any thing, mixed in with Christ, as the Apostle
fully clears in his Epistle to the Galatians.

4. There is no salvation by any other way or medium, which man can invent or
fall upon, whereof there are not a few, as we showed above: for there is not
another name given under heaven, by which we can be saved, but the name of
Jesus Act. 4: 12. No religion will save but this.

So that He is the true savation, and He only is the true salvation; and He is
the sure and saife salvation: such as make use of Him, shall not be mistaken
nor disappointed Esai. 35: 8.

Ninthly He is the Truth* In respect of his leading and guideing his people in
the truth. Hence He is called a Teacher come from God, John. 3: 2. and one that
teaches the way of God in truth Man. 22: 16. A Prophet mighty in deed and word
Luke 24: 19. And in this respect, He is the truth, upon several accounts.

1. Of his personal teaching, God spoke by Him Heb. 1: 2. He revealed the
Father's mind Mat. 11: 27. John. 1: 18.

2. Of his messengers sent by Him, as Prophets of old, Apostles and ministers
of late, whom he sends forth to make disciples Mat. 28: 18. and to open the
eyes of the blind Act. 26: 18.

3. Of his word, which He has left as our rule, and which is a sure word of
prophecy, more sure than a voice from he^ven 2 Pet. 1: 19.

4. Of his ordinances, which He has established as means to guide us in the
way of truth.

5. Of his Spirit, whereby He makes the word clear John. 14: 26. This Spirit
is sent to teach all truth, and to lead and guide in all truth Ioh. 16: 13. 1
John. 2: 27. and sent by Him, and by the Father in his name John. 14: 26: and
15: 16: and 16: 14*

6. Of his dispensations of providence, within us and without us, by which
likewise he instructs in the way of truth.

Tenthly He is the Truth, in respect of his bearing witness to truth: and this
He does.

1. By Himself, who was given for a witness Esa. 55: 4. and came to bear
witness to the truth John. 3: 10. and 18: 37. and was a faithful witness
Revel. 1: 5. and 3: 14.

2. By his Ministers, who witness the tr^th of the gospel, by publishing and
proclaiming the same.

3. By his Martyrs, who seal the truth with their blood, and so bear witness
to it Revel. 2: 13. and 17: 6. Act. 22: 20.

4. By his Spirit, sealing the truth of grace in a believer, and his interest
in God through Christ, and his right to all the benefits of the new covenant.
In whom also after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. Ephesians. 1: 13: 14.

Eleventhly, He is the Truth, in respect that He carries toward poor sinners
in all things, according to the tenor of the gospel, and the offers thereof: He
offers himself to all freely, and promises to put none away that come to Him;
and this He does in truth; for no man can say, that he had a sincere and true
desire to come to Jesus Christ, and that He rejected him, and would not look
upon him. He gives encouragement to all sinners to come; that will be content
to quite their sins, and promises to upbr^id none that comes, and is there
any that in their own experience can witness the contrary? He offers all
freely, and did He ever reject any upon the want of a price in their hand? Nay,
has not the cause of their getting no admittence, been, that they thought to
commend themselves to Christ by their worth: and would not take all freely, for
the glory of his grace? Let believers and others speak here, out of their own
experience, in truth and in uprightness; and it shall be found, that He was
and is the Truth.

Twelvely He is the Truth, in that, in all his dispensations of the gospel,
and in all his works and actions, in and about his own people, He is true and
upright: all his offers, all his promises, all his dispensations, are done in
truth and uprightness, yea all are done out of truth and uprightness of love,
true tenderness, and affection to them, whatever the corruption of jealousy
and misbeleefe, think and say to the contrary: He is the Truth; And so always
the same, unchangeable in his love, whatever his dispensations seem to say: And
the believer may rest assured hereof, that He being the Truth. Shall be to him,
whatever his word holds him forth to be, and that constantly and unchangeably.

CAP. XII. Some general uses from this useful truth; that Christ is the Truth*
HAving thus cleared up this truth, we should come to speak of the way of
believers making use of Him, as the Truth, in several cases, wherein they will
stand in need of Him as the Truth. But ere we come to the particulars, we shall
first propose some general uses of this useful point.

First. This point of truth, serves to discover to us the woeful condition of
such, as are strangers to Christ, the Truth: and oh if it were believed! for

1. They are not yet delivered from that dreadful plague of blindness,
error, ignorance, mistakes, under which all are by nature, a condition, that,
if rightly seen, would cause the soul lie low in the dust.

2. Whatever course they take, till they come to Christ, and while they remain
in that condition, is a lie, and a false, erroneous, and deceitful way: for
still they are turning aside to lies Psalm. 40: 4. and seeking after them Psalm.
4: 2.

3. Whatever hopes and confidence they may have, that their way shall carry
them through; yet in end they will be found to inherit lies Ier. 16: 19* and
meet with the sadest disappointment that can be: for in stead of the
followshipe of God, Christ, angels, and glorified spirits, they shall take up
their lodging with devils and damned souls: and that because they have made no
acquantance with the way of truth; and the way wherein they are is but a lie,
and a falsehood: and so of necessity must deceive them.

4. All their literal and speculative knowledge shall not avail them, so long
as they are strangers unto Him, who is the Tr^th. Their knowledge is but
ignorance because it is not a knowledge of Him, who is the Truth.

5. They have none to go to, for help and light, in the day of their darkness,
confusion and perplexity: for they are not reconciled unto the Truth, which
alone can prove steadable and comfortable in that day.

6. They can do nothing to help themselves out of that state of darkness and
ignorance; and whatever they do to help themselves, shall but increase their
darkness, and misery: because there is no truth there, and Truth* even the
Truth, alone can dispell these clouds of error, mistakes, ignorance, etc.

Secondly. Hence we see the happy and blessed condition of believers, who have
embraced this Truth, and gotten their souls opened to Him, who is the Truth:
for,

1. They are, in part, delivered from that mass of lies, mistakes,
misapprehensions, errors, deceitfulness and ignorance, under which they lay
formerly, and all the unregenerate do yet lie: and though they be not fully
delivered therefrom, yet the day is comeing when that shall be, and the begun
work of grace and truth in them is a certane pledge thereof: and at present
they have ground to believe, that that evil shall not again have dominion over
them, they being now under grace, and under the guidance of Truth.

2. Howbeit they have many perplexing thoughts, doubts and fears of their
state and condition, and think many a time, that they shall one day or other
perish by the way; and all their hopes and confidence shall evani^h; yet having
given up themselves to Truth, and to the Truth, they shall not be disappointed
in end. The Truth shall land them saife on the other side. The Truth shall
prove no lie.

3. They have a fast and steadable friend to go to, in a day of darkness,
clouds, doubts, when falsehood and lies are like to prevail, even the Truth, who
alone can help them in that day.

4. Howbeit the knowledge they have of God, and of the mysteries of the
gospel, be but small; yet that small measure, being taught by Him, who is the
Truth, and flowing from Truth, shall prove sanctifying and saving.

5. They have ground to hope for more freedom from errors and deceitful
lies, than others: for they have chosen the way of truth, and given themselves
up to the leading of Truth.

Object. But do not even such drink-in and receive and plead for errors, as
well as others: and is it not sometime found, that they even live and die in
some mistakes and errors?
Answer I grant the Lord may suffer even some of his own to fall into, and to
continue for some time in errors, yea and it may be all their days, as to some
errors, that hereby, all may learn to tremble and fear, and to work out
their salvation with fear and trembling. 2. Some may be tried thereby Dan. 11:
35. 3. Others may break their neck thereupon. 4. To punish themselves, for not
making that use of Truth, and of the Truth, that they should have done: yet we
would consider these few things.

1. That there are many more unregenerat persons that fall into error

2. If his people fall into error at any time, they do not always continue
therein to the end. God for his own glory makes, some time or other, truth
shine in upon their soul, which discovers that mistake, and presently, the
grace of God in their soul makes them to abhore the same.

3 Or if some continue in it to their dieing day; yet they repent of it, by an
implicit repentance, as they do of other unknown, and unseen evils, that lie
in their soul; so that that error does not destroy their soul.

4 There are some gross errors, which a regenerat soul cannot readyly
embrace, or, if, through a mistake, or the power of a temptation, they do
embrace them, yet they cannot heartyly close with them, whatever for a time,
through corruption and pride, they may seem outwardly to do: and that because
the very daily exercise of grace, will discover them; and so they will be found
to be against their daily experience; as some opinions of the Papists,
Arminians and Socinians, together with the abominable Quakers, which a gracious
soul, when not carried away with the torrent of corruption, and with the
tempest of a temptation, cannot but observe to contradict the daily workings of
grace in their soul, and the motions of their sanctified soul, in prayer and
other holy duties; and so such as they cannot but find to be false by their
own experience.

Thirdly. Here is ground of a sharp reproof of the wicked, who continue in
unbeleef; and

I Will not believe, nor give any credit to his promises, wherewith He seeks
to allure poor souls to come to Him for life.

2 Nor will they believe His threatenings, wherewith He uses to alarm souls,
and to pouse them forward to their duty.

3 Nor will they believe and receive His offers, as true.

4 Nor will they believe, that He is the true Prophet, Priest, and king, that
must save souls from hell and death, and therefore they will not give Him
employment in his offices.

All which cannot but be an high provocation: for in effect, it is to say, that
He is not the Truth, nor worthy to be believed. Let them consider this, and ^ee
how they think, he shall take this off their hands. No man will take it well,
that another should either call or account Him a liar: and can they think, that
Christ shall take it well, at their hands, to be accounted by them a liar? What
will they think to be challenged for this, in the great day? Now the truth is,
all unbeleevers, as they make God a liar (o horrid and abominable crime! Whose
hair would not stand on end to hear this?) 1 John. 5: 10, 11, -- He that
believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the record,
that God gave of his Son, and this is the record, that God has given to us
eternal life; and this life is in his Son. So do they make the Son of God a
liar, in all his sayings, in all his Offices, and in all his works: And they
make the holy ghost a liar, in not believing that truth, that He has sealed as
a firm truth. They make the covenant of surtyshipe betwixt the Father and the
Son a mere lie, and a forgery, o dreadful! They make the word of truth a lie,
and they make all the saints liars, and all the officers of Jesus Christ, who
declare this truth, and the saints, who believe it and test upon it, liars.

Fourthly. Hence is there ground of reproof to the godly, in that

1. They do not firmly enough believe his sayings, neither his promises, nor
his threatenings, as appears too often upon the one hand, by their faintings and
fears; and upon the other hand, by their carelessness and loose walk.

2. They make not use of Him, in all cases, as they ought: his offices lie by
and are not improven, no^ is He gone to as the Truth, in cases requireing his
help, as the Truth; that is; in cases of darkness, doubtings, confusion,
ignorance of their case and condition, and the like.

3. They do not approach to Him, nor to God through Him heartyly, and
cordially, as the very Truth, and true way.

4. Nor do they rest with confidence upon Him, in all difficulties, as being
the Truth, that will not fail them, nor disappoint them.

5. Nor do they rejoice in Him, as satisfied with Him, who is the Truth, in the
want of all other things.

Fifthly. The right consideration of this truth, should keep us in mind of
several great duties: such as those,

1. Of pitying those places, where this truth is not heard of, as among Turks
and Heathens: or where it is darkened with superstition and men's inventions, as
among Papists: or where it has been clearly shineing, but now is darkened; as
in some churches now under the prevailing power of corruption: or lastly where
it is not received in its power and luster, as alas it is too little received
in the best and purest churches.

2. Of being thankful to Him, for making this truth known in the world, and
particularly in the place, where we Were borne, or had our abode; and yet more,
for that he has determined our hearts to a believing of this Truth, in some
weak measure; to an imbraceing of it, and to a giving of our selves up to be
led, ruled and guided thereby.

3. Of esteeming highly of every piece of Truth for his sake, who is the Truth;
studying it for his sake, loving it for his sake; holding it fast for his sake;
witnessing to it, as we are called, for his sake: we should buy the truth, and
not sell it Prove. 2^: 23. and we should plead for it, and be valiant for it
Esai. 59: 4, 14. Ier. 7: 28. and 9; 3.

4. Of taking part with Him, and his cause, in all hazards, for Truth is
always on his side, and truth shall prevail at length.

5. Of giving Him employment in our doubts and difficulties, whether (1) they
be about some controverted points of truth, which come to be debated, and to
trouble the Church: or (2) about our own estate and condition, quarreled at by
Satan, or questioned by the false heart: or (3) about our carriage in our daily
walk. In all these and the like, we should be employing Truth, that we may be
led in truth, and taught by truth, to walk in sure paths.

6. Of carrying in all things before Him as true: for He is Truth, and the
Truth; and so cannot be deceived, and therefore we should walk before Him in
sincerity and singleness of heart, without guile, hypocrisy, or falsehood,
that we may look like children of the truth; and of the day, and of light, and
children that will not lie or dissemble. Esa. 63: 8. not like these, that lied
unto Him Psalm. 78: 38. Esa. 59: 13.

7. Of taking Him only for our guide to heaven, by denying our own wit, skill
and understanding; and looking to and resting upon Him, who alone is the Truth,
and so acknowledging Him in all our ways, depending on Him for light and
counsel, with singleness of heart, humility, diligence, and truth in the
inward parts.

8. Of giving up ourselves daily unto Him, and his guidance, and denying our
own wills, humors, parties, or opinions: for He alone is Truth, and can only
guide us aright: and for this cause, we would acquant ourselves well with the
word, which is our rule, and seek after the Spirit, whom Christ has promised,
to lead us into all truth.

Sixthly, should not this be a strong inducement to all of us, to lay hold on
and gripe to Him, who is the Truth, and only the Truth? seeing,

1. All other ways, which we can take, will prove a lie to us, in end.

2. He is substance and no shadow, and all that love Him shall inherit
substance: for He will fill all their treasures Prove: 8: 21.

3. Such as Embrace Him, shall not wander, not be misled: for his mouth shall
speak truth; and wickedness is an abomination to his lips Prove. 8: 7. all the
words of his mouth are in righteousness and there is nothing froward or
perverse in them verse. 8. He is wisdom and dwells with prudence, and finds
out knowledge of witty inventions verse. 12. Counsel is his and sound wisdom,
he has understanding and strength. verse. 14.

4. He will make good all his promises in due time, and give a subsistence and
a being to them all, for He is the Truth, and the truth must stand to his
promises, and fulfill them all.

5. He will never, nay never, leave his people, not forsake them. Heb. 13: 5.
He is Truth, and cannot deceive; he cannot forsake nor disappoint: He is a
spring of water, whose waters fail not Esai. 58: 11. Therefore they cannot be
disappointed in end, and perish, who trust to Him.

6. The truth will make them free John. 8: 3^* 36. and so deliver them from
their state of sin and misery, wherein they lay as captives; and from that
spiritual bondage and slavery, under which they were held.

Seventhly, This to believers may be a spring of consolation, in many cases, as

1. When error and wickedness seem to prospe^ and prevail: for though it
prevail for a time; yet Truth will be victorious at length, and the Truth will
overcome all. He is Truth, and will plead for truth.

2. when friends, acquantances, relations, fail them; and father and mother
forsake them, truth will take them up: He who is the Truth will answer his
name, and never deceive, never forsake.

3. When riches, honors, pleasures, or what else their heart has been going
out after, prove like summer brooks: for the Truth will be the same to them in
all generations; there is no shadow of turning with Him. The Truth is always
truth, and true.

4. When we fear, that either ourselves or others shall fall away, in a day of
trial, and turn from the truth. Though all men prove liars and deceivers,
Truth will abide the same, and stand out all the blasts of opposition.

5. When unbeleef would make us question the truth of the promises. The faith
of his being Truth it self, and the Truth, even Truth in the abstract, would
shame unbeleef out of countenance. Shall Truth fail? Shall not the Truth be
true? what a contradiction were that!

6. When we know not how to answer the objections of Satan, and of a false
treacherous heart: for Truth can easily answer all cavils: and He who is the
Truth, can repel all objections against truth. Truth is impregnable, and can
stand against all.

7. When we cannot know, nor discover the wiles and subtility of Satan. Truth
can discover the depths of Satan, and make the poor soul more acquant with
them; so that they shall not any more be ignorant of his devices, who look to
Him.

8. when the thoughts of the deceitfulness of our hearts trouble us, the depth
whereof we cannot search. This then may comfort us, that Truth can ^earch the
heart, and the reins Ier. 17. 9, 10.

9. When we cannot tell what our disease and distemper is, and so cannot seek
suitable remedies, or help from God, O what a comfort is it, to know and
believe, that He is the Truth, with whom we have to do, and so knows our
distemper perfectly, and all its causes and symptoms, Truth cannot be at a
stand in discerning our disease; so nor can he be ignorant of the fittest and
only saifest cures.

10. When we know not what to ask in prayer, as not knowing what is best for
us; it is comfort to remember, that we have to do with the Truth, that is
perfectly acquanted with all that, and knows what is best.

11. When we know not how to answer the calumnies of adversaries. It is
comfortable to know that he is the Truth, that will hear truth, when men will
not; and will own and stand for the truth, when enemies do what they can to
darken an honest man's good cause. It is comfortable to know, we have the Truth
to appeal to, as David had Psalm 7: and 17.

12. When we think on our own covenantbreaking, and dealing deceitfully with
God. It is comfortable to remember that, though we and all men be liars, and
deal deceitfully with Him, yet He is the Truth and will keep covenant for ever,
He will not, He cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy 2: 1^

Eighthly, Hence we may certanely conclude, that truth, which is Christ's cause,
shall at length prevail: for He is Truth, yea the Truth, and so abides truth;
therefore must He prevail, and all the mouths of liars must be stoped. So then
let us remain persuaded, that truth at length shall be victorious, and that
the cause of Christ shall have the victory: though

1. The enemies of truth, and of the cause of Christ be multiplied, and many
there be that rise up against it.

2. These enemies should prosper, and that for a long time, and carry on their
course of error and wickedness with a high band.

3. There should be few found to befriend truth, and to own it, in an evil day.

4. Yea many of those, that did some time own it, and plead for it, should at
length turn their back upon it, as did Demas.

5. And such, as continue constant and faithful, be loaded with reproaches and
pressed under with sore persecution, for adhereing to truth, and owning
constantly the good cause.

6. Yea though all things in providence should seem to say, that truth shall
not rise again, but seem, on the contrary, to conspire against the same.

Nenthly, May we not hence read, what should be our way and course, in a time,
when a spirit of error is gone abroad, and many are carried off their feet
therewith, or when we are doubtful what to do, and what side of the disput to
take. O then is the fit time for us to employ Truth, to live near to Him, who
is the Truth, to wait on Him, and hang upon Him, with singleness of heart.

Object. But many even of his own people do err and step aside.
Ans. That is true: but yet 1. That will be no excuse to thee. Nay 2. That
should make thee fear and tremble more. 3. And it should press thee, to lie
near to Christ, and to wreastle more earnestly with Him, for the spirit of
light and of truth, and to depend more constantly and faithfully upon Him, with
singleness of heart, and to give up thy soul and ways to Him, as the God of
Truth, and as the Truth, that thou may be led into all truth.

Tenthly, This should stir us up, to go to Him, and make use of Him, as the
Truth, in all cases, wherein we may stand in need of truths hand to help us:
and for this cause we would mind those particulars.

1. We would live in the constant conviction of our ignorance, blindness,
hypocrisy, readynesse to mistake and err. This is clear and manifest, and
proved to be truth by daily experience; yet how little is it believed, that it
is so with us? Do we see and believe the atheism of our hearts? Do we see and
believe the hypocrisy of our hearts? are we jealous of them, as we ought to
be? Oh that it were so! let this then be more minded by us.

2ly. Let us live in the persuasion of this, that He only, and nothing below
Him, will be able to clear our doubts, dispel our clouds, clear up our
mistakes, send us light, and manifest truth unto us: Not our own study, pains,
prayers, duties, learning, understanding; not Ministers, or professors, and
experienced Christians, and the like.

3ly. We should be daily giving up ourselves to Him, as the Truth, in all the
forementioned respects; and receiving Him into our souls as such, that He may
dwell and abide there* Then shall the truth make us free; and if the Son make
us free, we shall be free indeed Ioh. 8: 36.

4ly. There would be much single dependence on Him, for light, instruction,
direction, and guidance, in all our exigences.

5ly. Withal, there would be a waiting on Him, with patience, giving him
liberty to take his own way and time, and a leaving of Him thereunto.

6ly. We should, by all means, guaird against such things as are hinderenees,
and will prove obstacles to us, in this matter: such as,

1. Praejudices against the truth: for then we will undervalue light, and
reject all the directions and instructions of the Spirit, as not agreeing with
our prejudicat opinion.

2* A wilful turning away from truth, as these 2. Tim. 4: 4. Tit. 1: 14.

3. Addictednesse to our own judgments and opinions, which causes
pertinaciousnesse, Pride, and conceit, as thinking ourselves so wise, as that
we need no information: and this occasioneth a self confidence.

4. Looking too much unto, and hanging too much upon Men, who are but
instruments; crying them up as infallible, and receiving, without further
examination* all that they say, not like the Bereans: Act. 17. This is a great
hinderence to the receiving of truth* and very prejudicial.

5. A neglecting of the use of the means, which God has appointed for this
end.

6. Or an hanging too much on them, and so misplaceing them, g^ving them His
room.

7. Leaning too much to our own understanding, wit and knowledge etc.

8. A refisting of the Truth 2. Tim, 3: 8.

These and the like hindrances would be guarded against, lest they mar our
attaining to the knowledge of Truth.

7ly There would be much of the exercise of prayer: for this is the maine
conduite, and mean, through which light is conveyed into the soul. There would
also be a serious and Christian reading and hearing of the word, which is
Truth, and the Word of Truth, and the Scripture of Truth, and those duties
would be gone about, with (1) much self denial (2) with much singleness of
heart. (3) with much humility. (4) with much willingness and readynesse to be
instructed. (5) with much seriousness and earnestness: and (6) with faith and
dependence on God, for his blessing and breathing.

8ly We would beware, as of trusting to our own understandings, so to the
judgments of other men: nor would we look to what suiteth most our own humors,
nor to what appears most specious and plausible: for that may deceive us.

9ly We would lie open to the influences and rays of light, by exerciseing
faith in earnest desires, as also patient waiting for and single looking to
Him: mindeing his name and his relations, promises and engadgments; for the
strengthening of our faith, and confidence.

10ly We would labor to keep fast, whatever He teaches us by his word and
spirit; and not prove ^ecking vessels. This the Apostle exhorts to Heb: 2: 1.
Therefore we ought to give the more e^rnest heed to the things which we have
heard, lest at any time we should let them slip: yea and we should be
established in the Truth 2. Pet, 1: 12.

11ly We would beware of resting on a form of the truth, as those did, of whom
we read Romans 2: ^0. and of holding the truth in unrighteousness, as these Romans
1: 18. and of disobeying it as these mentioned Romans 2: v. 8. see also Gal. 3:
v. 1. and 5: v. 7.

12ly But on the contrary, we would so receive truth, as that it might ^ule and
be master in us* captivate judgment, will and affections, and break out into
the practice: and this comprehends several duties, such as

1. To have the Truth in us; whileas if we practice otherwise, the truth is not
in us 1. John. 1: v. 8. and 2: v. 4.

2. To be of the Truth, as belonging to its jurisdiction, power and command 1.
John. 3: 19. John. 18: 37.

3. To do the Truth, by having true followshipe with Him. 1. John. 1: 6* and
to walk in the Truth 2, Ioh. 4. 3. Ioh. 4. Psalm. 86: 11.

4. To have the loins girt with truth Ephesians. 6: v. 14.

5. To receive the love of the truth ^ These* 2: 10.

6. To be instructed of him, as the truth is in Jesus Ephesians. 4: 21.

7. To purify the soul in obeying the truth. 1 Pet. 1: v. 22.

This shall suffice for clearing up and applying, in the general, this
excellent truth, That Christ is the Truth. We shall now come and make some more
particular use of this precious point, by speaking to some particular cases
(which we shall instance in, by which the understanding christian may be helped
to understand how to carry and how to make use of Christ, in other, the like
cases) wherein Christ is to be made use of, as the Truth; and show how
believers are to make use of Him, in these cases, as the Truth.

CHAP. XIII. How to make use of Christ, as the Truth, for grouth in knowledge.
IT is a commanded duty, that we grow in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. 2 Pet.
3. last. And the knowledge of Him being life eternal Ioh. 17: 3. and our
measure of knowledge of Him here being but imperfect, for we know but in part;
it cannot but be an useful duty, and a desirable thing, to be growing in this
knowledge. This is to walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, to be
increasing in the knowledge of God. Col. 1: 10. Knowledge must be added unto
virtue; and it lays a ground for other christian virtues 2 Pet. 1: 5, 6. In
this knowledge, we must not be barren 2 Pet. 1: 8. And this being so necessary,
so desirable, and so useful, and so advantageous a grace, the believer cannot
but desire to have more and more of it. Especially seeing it is a part of the
image of God Col. 3: verse. 10.

Now, it is the Truth that must teach them here, first and last. The light of
the knowledge of the glory of God must be had, in the face of Jesus Christ 2
Cor. 4: 6. The question therefore is, how we should make use of Jesus Christ
for this end, that we may attain to more of this excellent knowledge?

For clearing of this, I shall propose those directions.

First. It is good to live in the constant conviction of a necessity of his
teaching us, and this takes in those particulars,

1. That we should be conscious of our ignorance, even when we know most, or
think we know most, remembering that the best knows but in part 1 Cor. 13: 9.
The more true knowledge we attain to, the more will we see and be convinced of
our ignorance; because the more we know, the more will we discover of the
vastness, and incomprehensibility of that object, which is proposed to our
knowledge.

2. That we should remember, how deceitful our hearts are; and how ready they
are to sit down upon a shadow of knowledge, even when we know nothing, as we
ought to know. 1 Cor. 8. verse. 2. and this will keep us jealous, and watchful.

3. And to help forward our jealousy of our own hearts, and watchfulness, we
would remember, that our hearts naturally are averse from any true and saving
knowledge: whatever desire there be naturally after knowledge of hidden things,
out of curiosity; and of things natural; or of things spiritual, as natural,
for the perfection of nature, as might be pretended, whereby in effect those
that increase knowledge, increase sorrow Eccles. 1: 18. yet there is no
inclination after spiritual and saving knowledge, in us naturally: But an
aversation of heart therefrom.

4. That we should study and know the absolute necessity of this knowledge: how
necessary it is for our christian communion with God, and christian walk with
others; how necessary for our right improving of dispensations, general and
particular; what a noble ornament of a christian it is, and a necessary piece
of the image of God, which we have lost;

Secondly. Upon these grounds mentioned, (...) would also be convinced of this;
That of ourselves, and by all our natural parts, enduements, quickness and
sagacity, we cannot attain to this saving knowledge; which is a special and
saving grace, and so must be wrought in the soul, by a divine hand, even the
mighty power of God. By our private study and reading, we may attain to a
literal, heady, and speculative knowledge, that will puff us up 1 Cor. 8: 1.
but thereby shall we never attain to this knowledge, which is spiritual,
hearty, and practical, and so saving. We must have the anointing here, which
teaches us all things. 1 John. 2: 27. And of this we would be persuaded, that
we may look to a higher hand, for light, and instruction.

Thirdly, There would be an eyeing of Christ's furniture and fitness, for this
work of teaching of us. To wit,

1. An eyeing of Him, as the substantial wisdom of the Father Prove. 8.

2. An eyeing of Him, as one come out of the bosom of the Father John. 1: 18.
and so sufficiently enabled to acquant us with the mysteries of God, for
salvation.

3. An eyeing of Him, as mediator, fully endued with all necessaries for this
piece of his work, and so, having received the Spirit without measure, for this
end John. 3: 34. and as having hid in Him, all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge Col. 2: 3. and as having all fullness dwelling in Him Col. 1: 19. Sed
also Esai. 11: 2, and 61: 1, 2.

4. An eyeing of Him, as having power to send the Spirit, that anointing that
teaches us all things, and is truth and is no lie 1 John. 2: 20, 27. not only
by way of intercession and entreaty, begging it of the Father John. 15: 16, 17.
But also authotatively, as conjunct with the Father. The Father sends Him in
Christ's name John. 14: 26. and Christ sends Him from the Father John. 15:
26. and this Spirit of truth, which guides into all truth, shall receive of
Christ's, and show it unto us John. 16: 13, 14, 15.

Fourthly. There would be an eyeing of Christ's readynesse, willingness and
engadgment to help, in this case: and this will encourage the soul to go
forward: And for this cause we would remember those things.

1. That He stands obliged to help us with instruction, by virtue of his
office, as a Prophet, a Witness, a Leader, and a Commander, Esai. 55: verse. 4.

2. That He is commissionated of the Father for this end, and so is the Fathers
servant; and is given for a light to the gentiles Esai. 42: 6. and 49: 6. and
the Father is said to speak by Him, or in Him Heb. 1: 1.

3. That He received his gifts and qualifications for this end and purpose,
that He might give out and dispense to his members, according to their
necessity: as is clear from Psalm. 68: 18. compared with Ephesians. 4: 8. what He is
said to have received, in the one place, he is said to have given, in the other.

4. That He has begun this work already, by his Spirit, in his followers; and
therefore stands engadged, to see it perfected: for all his works are perfect
works.

5. That He has a love to his scholars, and a desire to have them all
thriveing, and making progress in knowledge; this being his glory, who is
their master and teacher.

6. That He laid down wa^es and means, and a constant course, for instructing
of his people: for.

(1.) He has given his word, and settled and established ordinances, for this
end.

(2.) He has established a ministry for instructing his people Ephesians. 4: 8,
9, 10, 13.

(3.) He has gifted persons for this work of the ministry, 1 Cor. 12: 4, 5, 6
7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

(4.) He backeth these officers, in the faithful administration of their
function, and, through his blessing and Spirit, makes their work prosperous
and effectual, in his own, as He sees fit.

Fifthly. There would be an eyeing of the promises of the covenant of grace,
made for this end, whether general, or particular, or both. Such as those which
we have Esai. 11: 9. Habbak. 2: 14. The earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the Lord (or of the glory of the Lord) as the waters cover the
sea: and that Esai. 32: 4. the heart of the rash shall understand knowledge
etc. and Ier. 31: 34. They shall all know me etc.

Sixthly. There would be a constant, diligent, serious and single useing of the
means of knowledge, with a faithful dependence on Christ by faith, gripping to
him, in his relations, offices, engadgments and promises, and waiting upon his
breathing, in hope and patience Psalm. 25: 5.

Seventhly. There would be a guairding against every thing, that may obstruct
this work, and grieve Him, in it: and therefore we would beware.

1. To undervalue and have a little esteern of knowledge: for this will grieve
Him, and, to speak so, put him from work.

2. To misimprove any measure of knowledge, he gives.

3. To weary of the means and ordinances, whereby He uses to convey knowledge
in to the soul.

4. To limite the holy one of Israel to this, or that mean, to this or that
time, or to this or that measure, who should have a latitude, as to all these.

5. To despise the day of small things, because we get not more.

6. To be too curious in seeking after the knowledge of hidden mysteries, the
knowledge whereof is not so necessary.

7. To lean too much unto, and to depend too much upon the ordinances or
instruments, as if all, or any thing, could come from them.

Eighthly There would be a right improving of any measure of knowledge we get,
to his glory and to the edification of others, with humility and thankfulness,
and so a putting of that talent in use, to gain more to his glory: whatever
measure of knowledge we get, we should in all haste, put it into practice; and
set it to work: so shall it increase, and engadge Him to give more.

Ninthly. There would be a lying open to Christ's instructions, and to the
shineings of the Spirit of light and of truth, and a ready receiving of what
measure He is pleased to grant or infuse: which includes those duties.

1. A serious and earnest hungering and thirsting after more spiritual
knowledge.

2. A diligent use of every approven mean for this end.

3. A going about the means with much self denial, spirituality* singleness
of heart and sincerity, looking to and depending upon Him, who must breath upon
the means, and make them useful.

4. A greedy receiving, drinking in, and treasureing up in the soul, what is
gotten.

5. A guairding against Selfish and by ends, with a single eyeing of his glory.

6. A guairding against pride in the heart, and a stustying of humility and
meekness: for the meek will He guide in judgment, and the meek will He teach
his way Psalm. 2* 5: 9.

7. A putting of the heart, or understanding in his hand, together with the
truth, that is heard and received, that He may write the truth in the heart,
and cause the heart receive the impression of that truth.

Tenthly. There would be a rolling of the whole matter by faith on Him, as the
only teacher, a putting of the ignorant, blockish, averse, and perverse heart,
into his hand, that He may frame it to his own mind, and a leaving of it
there, till He by his Spirit, write in it what He thinks meet, to his own
glory, and our good.

And sure, were this way followed, grouth in knowledge would not be so rare a
thing as it is.

Cautions.
For further direction and caution in this matter, the believer would take
notice of these particulars.

1. That he should not sit down upon any measure of knowledge he has attained
to, or can attain to here, as if he had enough, and should labor for no more:
but he should still be mindeing his duty of seeking, and pressing for more.

2. Whenever he is about any mean of knowledge, such as preaching, reading,
conference etc. his heart should be only upon Christ: He should be hanging on
his lips for a word of instruction; and with greediness looking for a word
from his mouth: he would be sending many posts to heaven, many ejaculatory
desires for light and understanding, and that with singleness and sincerity,
and not for base ends, or out of hypocrisy.

3. Let him not think, that there is no grouth in knowledge, because possibly
he perceives it not, or is not satisfied, as to the measure thereof; yea
though possibly he perceive more ignorance, than ever he did before: If he grow
in the knowledge of his own ignorance, it is a grouth of knowledge not to be
despised: and in a manner, what can we else know of God, but that He far
transcendeth all our knowledge, and that He is an incomprehensible one, in all
his ways?

4. Let him not think, that there is no grouth in knowledge, because he
perceives not a grouth in the knowledge of such or such a particular, which he
desires most: for if there be a grouth in the knowledge of other particulars,
necessary to be known, there is no reason to compleane. If one grow* not, as he
supposes, in the knowledge of God, and of the mysteries of the gospel; yet if
he grow in the discovery of the treachery and wickedness of his own heart, he
cannot say, that he grows not in knowledge.

5. Let him not measure his grouth in knowledge, by his grouth in the faculty
of speaking and discoursing of such or such points of Religion: many measure
their knowledge by their tongue, and think they know little because they can
express little; and so they think they attain to no increase or grouth in
knowledge, because they perceive no grouth or increase in this faculty of
discoursing, and talking of such or such points of truth. It is saifer to
measure their knowledge by the impression that the truth has on their spirits,
and the effects of it on all their carriage, than by their ability or skill to
talk and disput of it.

6. Let them beware to imagine, that they shall be able to search out the
almighty unto perfection, can thou (said Zophar Job. 11: 7, 8, 9.) by
searching find out God? can thou find out the almighty unto perfection? He
is as high as heaven, what can thou do? deeper then hell, what can thou
know? The measure thereof is longer than the earth* and broader than the sea.
Or that they shall be able ever to win to the bottom of their own false
deceitful heart, which, as Jeremiah says Cap. 17: 9. is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? And which is God's prerogative
alone to search and try. verse. 10. Neither let them think, so long as they are
here, to win to an exact and perfect knowledge of the mysteries of God, wherein
is the manifold wisdom of God Ephesians. 3: 10. which very Principalities and
powers in heavenly places are learning; and which the Angels are poreing and
looking into with desire 1. Pet. 1: 12. There is no perfection in knowledge to
be had here: for here the best but knows in part, and Prophecyeth in part. 1
Cor. 13: 4.

7. Let them not think that every one shall have the same measure of knowledge*
Every one has not the like use for it, or the like capacity for it. There is a
measure proportioned to every one: They should not then complean, because they
have not such a measure of knowledge, as they perceive in some others. It may
be, the Lord has some harder piece of service, which calls for more
knowledge, to put others to. Let every one then mind his duty faithfully, and
conscientiously, and let him not quarrel with God, that he attaineth not to
such a measure of knowledge, as he sees others attain unto.

8. Neither let them think, that the same measure is required of all: for more
is required of some, by reason of their office and charge, in the house of God,
being called to teach and instruct others; than of others: and so more is
required of such, as have larger capacities, and a better faculty of
understanding than others, who naturally are but of a narrow reach, and of a
shallow capacity: more also is required of such, as live under plain,
powerful, and lively ordinances, and under a more powerful and spiritual
dispensation of the grace of God* than of others, that want such advantages. So
likewise, more is required of old Christians, than of new beginners: Old men,
of much and long experience, should know more, than such as are but babes in
Christ, and of yesterday.

9. Let their desires run out after that knowledge, not which puffs up; for
there is a knowledge which puffs up. 1 Cor. 8. 1. but which humbles, and
drives the soul further from it self, and nearer to Christ.

10. They would carefully distinguish betwixt the gift of knowledge, and the
grace of knowledge, That ordinarily puffs up; This humbles: That brings
not the soul to Jesus; This does: That is but a form Romans 2: 20. and does not
retain God Romans 1: 28. This is a real thing, laying hold on God, and holds
him fast, having the fear of the Lord for its principle, for this fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom Job. 28: 28. Psalm. 111: 10. Prove. 1: 7. and 9:
10. That lies most in the head, and venteth most in discourses, words, yea and
sometime evanisheth into vain notions; But this goes down to the heart, and
lodges there, and appears in the man's walk and conversation: as these two
would be distinguished, so the one should not be measured by the other.

11 When they do not profit indeed, let them beware of quarrelling with
Christ, or of blameing Him, in any manner of way: but let them lay the blame of
their shortcoming on themselves, for not making more use of Him, by faith and
single dependence upon Him. It is true, none will be so bold, as in words to
quarrel with or blame Him; yet the heart is deceitful, and tacitly may raise
and foment such thoughts of Him, and his dispensations, as can pass under no
other notion, than a quarrelling with Him. Now these would be guairded against.

12. Beware of urgeing for or expecting of immediate revelations, or
extraordinary manifestations: for we should not tempt the Lord, nor set limits
to Him, neither should we prescribe means and ways to Him, we must be
satisfied with the ordinary means, which He has appointed, and wait at
wisdoms doors, with our ears nailed to his posts.

13. Whatever point of truth they learn, or whatever measure of knowledge they
get* they would do well to give that back again to Christ, to keep for them,
against a time of need; and wait on Him for grace to improve it for his glory.

14. Let them beware of mindeing things too high. Psalm. 131: 1. It is better to
fear and stand in awe, and to seek to lay the foundations well, to get the
saving knowledge of things necessary to salvation. This will yield most peace
and satisfaction.

CHAP. XIV. How to make use of Christ, as Truth, for comfort, when truth is
oppressed and borne down.
THere is another difficulty, wherein believing souls will stand in need of
Christ, as the Truth, to help them; and that is, when his work is overturned,
his cause borne down, truth condemned, and enemies, in their opposition to his
work, prospering in all their wicked attempts. This is a very trying
dispensation, as we see it was to the holy penman of Psalm 73. for it made him
to stagger, so that his feet were almost gone, and his steps had well nigh
slipped: yea he was almost repenting of his being a godly person, saying verse.
13. ver^ly I have clansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence.
It was something like this, which made Jeremy say Cap, 8: 18. when I would
comfort my self against sorrow, my heart is faint in me. The harvest was past,
and the summer was ended, and yet they were not saved. verse. 20. and they
looked for peace, but no good came, and for a time of health, but behold
trouble verse. 15. and this was fainting and vexatious. And what made Baruch,
Ieremiah's faith full companion in tribulation, say, woe is me now; for the
Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and I find no
rest* Ier. 45: 3. but this* that all things were turning upside down. God was
breaking down that, which he had bui^; and plucking up that; which he had
planted* Tribulation and suffering for a good cause, is even fainting to some;
as the Apostle hinteth Ephesians. 3: 13. when he says, wherefore I desire that ye
fainte not, at my tribulation for you. And that which evinceth the danger of
this dispensation, is the fainting and backsliding of many, in such a time of
trial* as sad experience too often clears.

Now the believers stay in this case, must be the rock of ages, Jesus, the
Truth. It is He alone, who can keep straight and honest, in such a reeling
time. So that a sight of Christ, as the Truth* in reference to the carrying on
of Truth in the earth, and throughing his cause and work, will be the only
support of a soul, shaken by such a piece of trial.

But the question is, How should Believers make use of Christ, in such a time,
to the end they may be kept from fainting and succumbing in such a storm? To
which I answer. That the faith and consideration of those particulars would
help to establishment.

1. That Christ, in all this great work of redemption, and in every piece of
it, is the Fathers servant. So is He frequently called, his servant Esai. 42:
1. and 49: 3, 5, 6. and 52: 13. and 53: 11. Zech. 3: 8. and therefore this work
is a work entrusted to Him, and He stands engadged as a servant, to be
faithful to his trust. Moreover add to this, that He has a commission to
perfect that work; and we need not doubt, but He, who is the Truth, will be
true to his trust. Him has God the Father sealed John. 6: 27. and He often tells
us himself, that He is sent of the Father John. 4: 34. and 5: 23, 24, 30, 36,
37. and 6: 38: 39. 40, 44, 57. and 8: 16, 18. and 12: 44, 45, 49. and 7: and 9:
4. and 10: 36. and 11: 42.

2. That while He was upon the earth, He finished that work, that was committed
to Him to finish here, having purchased all that was to be bought by his blood,
paying all the price that justice did ask John. 17: 4. and 19: 30. By which
price he has purchased a people to himself Revel. 5: 9. Luke 1: 68. So that
His work, cause, and interest is a purchased work, bought with his blood.

3. That his resurrection and glorification is an undoubted proof of this, that
justice is satisfied, and that the price is fully paid; and also that his
exaltation at the Fathers right hand is a sure evidence and ground of hope,
that He shall at last triumph over all his enemies; and that his work of truth
shall prosper. The Father said to Him Psalm. 110: 1. Sit thou on my right hand,
until I make thine enemies, thy foot stool. Being now highly exalted, he has
got a name above every name, that in his name every knee should bow, of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every
tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.

4. That the Father stands engadged to make good to Him, all that was
promised, and to give Him all that He purchased Esa. 53: 10, 11, 12. Christ,
having now fulfilled his undertaking, by making his soul an offering for sin,
and so satisfying justice, which is openly declared by his resurrection,
admission to glory, as the Head of his elect, is to expect the accomplishment
of what was conditioned unto Him. His work therefore on the earth must prosper:
and the Father has undertaken to see it prosper. Sure the faith of this would
much support a poor soul, staggering at the thoughts of the prosperity of the
wicked, and of their evil cause.

5. That Christ himself is now thoroughly furnished and enabled, for the
carrying on of his work, over the belly of all adversaries, for all power in
heaven and earth is given to Him Matthew. 28: 18. and every knee must bow to Him.
Phil. 2: 10. all judgment is committed unto Him Ioh. ^: 22, 27. Angels, powers
and authority are made subject unto Him 1 Pet. 3: 22. Yea all things are under
Him Ephesians. 1: 22. How then can his work miscarry? or who can hinder, that truth
should not flourish in the earth?

6. That Christ is actually at work, employing this power for the carrying
forward of his design, for the glory of the Father and for his own glory, and
for the good of his poor people. The Father works by Him, and He by the
Spirit, which is his great vicegerent, sent from the Father, and from Him, and
his work is to glorify the Son, and shall receive of his, and show it unto us
John. 16: 14.

7, That Christ, upon many accounts, stands engadged to perfect this work,
which He has begun and is about. His honor is engadged to go through, seeing
now He is fully furnished for it, and has all the creation at his command. He
must then perfect his work, as to the application, as well as He did perfect
it, as to the purchase: His love to his Fathers and his own glory, and to his
own peoples good and salvation may assure us, that He will not leave the work
unperfected; and his power and furniture may give us full security, that no
stope, which his work meets with, shall be able to hinder it.

8. That hence it is clear and manifest, that his wheel is in the midst of the
wheels of men, and that therefore He is ordering all their motions and reelings
to the best. His wheel keeps an even pace and moves equally and equably, in
the midst of men's contrary motions.

9. And that therefore, all the eccentrick and irregular motions of devils and
wicked men, being in His hand, and ordered by Him, cannot hinder but further
His end; So that even enemies, while opposeing and seeking to destroy the cause
and interest of Christ, that his name and truth should no more be mentioned,
are promoveing his work. His wheel is the great wheel that orders all the
lesser and subordinate wheels, whatever contrary motions they may have the one
to the other, and all or many of them may seem to have to this great wheel. So
that, do they what they will, the work of our Lord goes on. Their opposition
is setting his work forward, though they intend the contrary. However their
faces look, they row to the port, He would be at. This is an undoubted truth,
and confirmed in all ages, and yet is not firmly believed: and a truth it is,
which, if believed, would do much to settle our staggering souls in a stormy
day.

10, That at last, He shall come to be glorified in his saints 2 These. 1: 10*
when He shall be revealed from heaven with all his mighty angels verse. 7. Then
shall it be seen, whose shall counsel stand His or men's; and whose work shall
prosper, His or Satan's.

Cautions.
Yet let me add a few words, for caution and direction here.

1. The consideration of those things mentioned should not make us slacken our
diligence in prayer, and other duties: and when they are a right considered,
they will rather prove a spur and a goad in our side, to set us forward, than
a bridle to hold us aback.

2. We would not think, that Christ's work and interest is going backward
always, when it seems so to us. Even when He is casting down. what He has
built up; and plucking up, what He has planted, his work is prospering, for
all that is in order to the laying of a better foundation, and to the carrying
on of a more glorious work; when He shall lay all the stones with fair
colors, and the foundations with saphires, and make the windows of crystal
etc. Esai. 5 4: 11, 12.

3. Though his work be always going on, and his truth prospering; yet we would
not think that it will always prosper alike, in our apprehensions; many times
we judge by rules of our own making, and not by the rule of truth; and hence it
is that we mistake oftentimes. We walk little by faith, and too much by sense;
and hence we judge too much by sense, and so pass a wrong judgment, to his
dishonor, and the sadning of our own hearts.

4. Nor would we think, that His Truth and interest is ruined and gone, because
it is sore oppressed, in this or that particular place of the world; as if his
work were not of an universal extent, and in all the churches. If his truth
thrive and prosper in some other place of the world, shall we not say, that his
kingdom is coming? Or shall we limite all his work and interest to one small
part of the world?

5. We would not think the worse of his work, because it is carried on with so
many stops, and does meet with so many Impediments in its way: We are not
acquanted with the depths of his infinite wisdom and counsel: and so we see
not what noble ends He has before Him, in suffering those impediments to lie
in the way of his chariot. We think He should ride so triumphantly all alongs,
that none should once dar to cast the least block in his way: but we judge
carnally, as unacquanted with the many noble and glorious designs, which He
has, in ordering matters. As Himself was for a stone of stumbling and a rock
of offense; so will he have the way of the carrying on of his work prove, in
his holy and spotless justice, a stumbling stone to many, that shall stumble
thereat, and fall, and never rise any more.

6. We would beware to think, that Christ-hath forgotten his work, because He
seems to take no notice of our prayers, which we are putting up, now and then
for his work. He may be doing that, which we are desireing, in the general, and
yet not let us know, that He is answering our prayers: and that for wise and
holy ends, to keep us humble and diligent. He may seem to misregaird our
suites, and yet be carrying on his work, and granting us our desires, upon the
matter.

7. Hence we ^ould beware of desponding, and growing heartlesse and fainte,
when we see few owneing truth, Or standing upon Christ's side; for He needs
not man's help, to carry on his work, though He sometimes thinks good to
condescend so far, as to honor some to be instrumental in setting of it
forward, who yet have nothing but as He gives; let us not then think, that his
work cannot prosper, because great ones and mean ones oppose it, and such as
should stand for it and own it, are few and fainting, without strength courage
or Zeal.

CHAP. XV. How to make use of Christ for stedfastness, in a time, when truth is
oppressed and borne down.
WHen enemies are prevailing, and the way of truth is evil spoken of, many
fainte and many turn aside, and do not plead for truth, not stand up for the
interest of Christ, in their hour and power of darkness; many are overcome
with base fear, and either side with the workers of iniquity, or are not
valient for the truth, But being fainthearted turn back. Now the thoughts of
this may put some, who desire to stand fast, and to own Him and his cause, in
a day of trial, to enquire how they shall make use of Christ, who is the
Truth, so as to be enabled to stand in the day of temptation, and to keep fast
by Truth, when it is loaded with reproaches, and buried under an h^pe of
obloquy. For satisfaction to this question, I shall shortly point out those
directions, which, if followed, may prove helpful to keep the soul from
fainting, misbeleeving, doubting, quarrelling at the Lord's dispensations, and
from yielding to the temptatitions, in such a day.

1. The believer would live in the conviction of his hazard, through the slight
of Satan, the strength of the temptation, the wickedness and treachery of the
heart, the evil example of others, and the want of sanctified courage, Zeal and
resolution; and this will keep the soul humble, and far from boasting of its
own strength, which was Peter's fault.

2. They would live in the faith and persuasion of this. That it is Christ
alone, who is the Truth, who can help them to stand for truth, in a day of
temptation; and that all their former purposes, vows, resolutions, solemn
professions, and the like, will prove but weak cables to hold them fast, in a
day of storm: and that only the rock of ages must save them; and their being a
ley ward of Him, and partaking of his warm and saife protection, will do their
business. That all their stock of grace, and knowledge, and that confirmed
with resolutions and sincere purposes, will help but little, in that day: and
that new influences of grace and truth, from the fountain, that is full of
grace and truth, will only prove establishing to the soul, and confirm it in
the truth, in that day.

3. Therefore, they would eye Christ in his Offices; particularly as the great
Prophet, who can teach, as never man taught; so teach, as to make the soul
receive the doctrine, and to hold it fast, to receive it in love, and lay it up
in the heart, as a rich and enriching treasure.

4. They would eye him, in his relations unto his people, as their Head,
Husband, Brother, Leader, Commander, Captain, etc. for those give ground of
approaching unto Him, with confidence, in the day of darkness and mists, for
light and direction, and for strength and courage* in the day of temptation:
and give ground of hope of help, in that day of trial and difficulty.

5. They would eye and act faith upon the promises of assistance and through*
bearing, in the day of calamity; such as those* Esa. 43: 2. when thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not
overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall no^ be burnt;
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee* And Esai. 41: 13. for I the Lord thy
God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, fear not, I will help thee:
and particularly* they would eye the promises o^ light, in the da^ of
darkness. See Esai. 58: 8, 10. and 60: 20. 2 Samuel ^2: 29.

6. They would look on Christ as an exalted conqueror, now risen and
glorified: as a victorious captain, that has fought and overcome; that they,
as his followers, may be made partakers of his victory and conquest, and so
reap the fruit of his resurrection and ascension, in their establishment in
the truth, when it is borne down, and questioned, yea and condemned by men. He
abode steadfast and unmovable in the midst of all the storms, that blew in his
face: and as He came to bear witness to the truth; so did He faithfully and
zealously avow truth, even to the death; and in death got the victory of the
Arch liar and deceiver. Now the believer would eye this, for the strengthening
of his faith and hope of victory also, through Him: and therefore would wait
patiently for his help; and not make haste: for they who believe make not haste
Esa. 28: 16. knowing that He is true and faithful and will not disappoint his
followers, that trust in Him. And moreover, it would be of advantage to them,
in this case, to eye that gracious and comfortable word John. 14: 19 -- because
I live, you shall live also: and so by faith conclude, that seeing Christ now
lives, as a conqueror over darkness, untruth, reproaches, calumnies, and
opposition of liars, yea of the father of lies; they, through Him, shall also
live, and ride out that storm: and this will give much courage to the soul, to
endure temptation, and to wait in patience for an outgate.

7. They would study much, and suck at the grand promise of his coming again,
and of finally dispelling all clouds: and of fully clearing up his glorious
truths, that are now covered over with obloquie, and buried under reproaches:
and this will encourage the soul to stand to truth, in the midst of all
opposition, believing that, at length, truth, how much soever opposed now,
shall be victorious.

8. They should be single in their dependence on Him, for strength and
throwbearing, in that day of trial; not leaning to their own understanding; but
acknowledging Him in all their ways Prove. 3: 6. and when they see no hope of
outgate in the world, nor appearance of the clearing up of the day, they would
comfort themselves, and encourage themselves in the Lord, as David did, in a
great strait 1 Samuel, 30: 6.

9. Upon the forementioned grounds, they would cast all the care of their
throughbearing on Him, who cares for them 1 Pet. 5: 7. rolling all their
difficulties on Him, consulting only with Him, and his Word, and not with flesh
and blood; and so they would commit their ways to Him, who disposes of all
things, as He sees good; forbearing to limite the holy one of Israel, or to
quarrel with Him for any thing he does; and patiently wait for his out-gate,
and delivery.

10. It were good, in this time of trial, to be remembering the worth of truth,
and intertaining high thoughts of the smallest piece of truth, that is
questioned, for his sake, who is the Truth: that a sight of the glorious worth
thereof, may make them account the less of all they can lose, in the defense
and maintenance thereof.

11. So were it good at this time, when truths come to be questioned, to be
lying near to the Truth, for light, and to be keeping fast, what He by his
Spirit clears up to be truth, though the light should not be so full, as to
dispel all objections. This were to depend upon Him for light, with singleness
of heart; and in godly simplicity and sincerity to follow his direction and
torch, though it should not shine so bright, as they would wish.

Cautions.
A few words of caution will be useful here also: as

1. The believer, though taking this course, would not think to be altogether
free of fear of stepping aside, in less or in more: God may think good, to let
much of this abide, to the end he may be kept watchful, tender and diligent;
for fear makes the soul circumspect and watchful; and this is a good
preservative from defection.

2. Nor would the believer think, that hereby he shall be kept altogether
free of fainting. The heart now and then, through fear and misbeleef, may fall
into a fit of fainting, and think all is gone: and yet He may carry poor souls
through, and make his strength perfect in their weakness 2 Cor. 12: 9. That
when they are supported and carried through the temptation, they may sing
praise to Him; and not ascribe any thing to themselves: remembering how often
they were f^inting, and almost giving over the cause, as desperate and
hopeless.

3. They would not think it strange, if in the time of their wreastling with
difficultyes, the Lord hide his face from them, and give them not that (...)*
(...) Him in prayer that sometimes they have met with for the Lord may see it
fit, to put them to this point of trial, among the rest, to see if the love of
his glory and truth will keep them standing* when they want the encouragements,
that might be expected in that way: and if pure conscience to the command and
authority of God will keep from siding with an evil way, when the soul is
destitute of all sensible encouragement, both from within and from without.

4. In all this business, believers would carry singly, with an eye to God's
glory; and would not be acted with self ends, or drawn by carnal and selfy
motives. They would not desire stability and through bearing, to be seen of
men, or to gain applause and the praise of Men; lest God be provoked to leave
them to themselves, and they at length come off with discredit, as Peter did.
Therefore they would strive against these carnal motions of the heart; and
labor for spirituality, singleness of heart, and truth in the inward parts,
which the Lord desires. Psalm. 51: 6.

CHAP. XVI. How to make use of Christ as the Truth, when error prevails, and
the spirit of error carries many away.
THere is a time* when the Spirit of error (...) going ab^oad* and truth is
questioned, an many are led away with delusions* for Satan can change himself
into an angel of light, and make many great and fair like pretensions to
holiness, and under that pretext ushere-in untruthes, and gain the consent of
many unto them; so that, in such a time of temptation, many are stolen off
their feet, and made to depart from the right ways of God, and to embrace
error and delusions, in stead of truth. Now the question is, how a poor
believer shall make use of Christ, who is the Truth, for keeping him steadfast
in the truth, in such a day of trial, and from embracing the way of error, how
plausible soever it may appear: for satisfaction to this, we shall propose
those few things.

1. In such a time, when a Spirit of error is let loose and rages, and
carries several away, it were good for all, who would be kept straight and
honest, to be walking in fear. It is not good to despise such a s^ye and
subtle enemy, especially in the hour and power of darkness. Then all are
called to be on their guaird, and to stand upon their watch toure, and to be
jealous of their corrupt hearts, that are ready enough, of their own accord, to
drink-in error, and to receive the temptation, at any time, and much more then.

2. They would not think, that their knowledge, and ability to dispute for
truth, will keep them steadfast, if there be not more: for if the temptation
grow, they may come to reasone and dispute themselves out of all their former
knowledge and skill. The father of lies is a cuning sophister, and knows how
to shake their grounds, and cast all loose.

3. They would renew their covenant grips of Christ, and make sure that maine
business. viz. their peace and union with God in Christ, and their accepting
of Christ for their Head and Husband. They would labor to have the fundation
sure, and to be united unto the chief corner stone; that so, blow the storm as
it will, they may ride saifely; and that hereby they may have access to Christ
with boldness, in their difficulty; and may with confidence seek light from
Him, in the hour of darkness.

4. To the end they may be kept more watchful, and circumspect, they would
remember, that it is a dishonorable thing to Christ, for them to step aside,
in the least matter of truth: the denying of the least point of truth, is a
consequentiall denying of him, who is the Truth: and to lose a foot in the
matters of truth, is very dangerous* for who can tell when they, who once slip
a foot, shall recover it again? And who can tell how many, and how dreadful
errors, they may drink*in, who have once opened the door to a small error?
Therefore they would beware of tampering in this matter, and to admit any
error, upon the account that it is a small and inconsiderable one: there may
be an unseen concatenation betwixt one error and another, and betwixt a small
one and a greater one, so as if the little one be admitted and received, the
greater shall follow* and it may be feared that if they once dally with error,
and make a gape in their consciences, that God give them up to judicial
blindness, that, ere all be done, they shall embrace that opinion, which
sometime they seemed to hate as death.

5. They would eye the promises suteing that case: viz. the promises of Gods
Guideing the blindely a way, which (...) know not: of making darkness light
before them and crooked t^ings streig^s Es^. 42: 16. and of guideing
contin^ally Esa. 8* (...). see also Esa. 49* 10. and 57: 18. and they would act
faith on these and the like promises* as now made sure through Jesus.

6. Particularly, they would fix their eye upon that principal promise of the
Spirit of truth, to guide into all truth John 16: 13.

7. With singleness of heart, they would depend on Christ, and wait for light
from Him, and beware of prejudice at the truth: with singleness of heart, they
would lie open to his instructions, and to the influences of his light and
direction, and receive in the beams of his divine light: and thus go about
duties viz. Prayer, Conference, Preaching, Reading etc. with an eye fix^d on
him, and with a soul open to Him, and free of all sinful preingadgment, and
love to error.

8. With singl^nesse of heart, they would give up their souls to Christ, as the
Truth, that He would write the truth in their souls, and frame their souls unto
the truth, and unto that truth, which is most questioned, and by which they are
most in hazard to be drawn away; and urge and (...) Him by prayer and
supplication, to do the duty of an Head, an Husband guide and Commander etc.
unto them; and that He would be a (...) unto them, in that day of darkness, and
not suffer them to dishonor Him, or prove scandalous to others; by departing
from the truth, and embracing of error. A serious single-hearted dealing with
Him, upon the grounds of the covenant promises, and his relations and
engadgments, might prove steadable in this case, if accompanied with a lying
open to the influences of truth* and to the light of information, which He is
pleased to send by the Spirit of truth.

Cautions and Directions.
For further clearing of this matter, we shall hinte at some cautions, and
further directions useful here: such as

1. They would beware of thinking that God should come to them with light and
instruction, in an extraordinary manner; and reveal the truth of the question
controverted somewhat immediately: for this were a manifest tempting and
limit^ing of the holy one of Israel. We must be satisfied with the means of
instruction, which he has provided, and run to the Law and to the Testimony.
We have the Scriptures, which are able to make the man of God perfect and
thoroughly fournished unto all good works 2. Tim. 3: 16, 17. and to make wi^e
unto Salvation verse. 15. There must we seek light; and there must we wait for
the breathing of his Spirit with life, and coming with light to clear up truth
to us: for they are the Scriptures of truth. Dan. 10: 21. and the law of the
Lord, which is perfect, converting the soul, and the commandment of the Lord*
that is pure enlightening the eyes etc. Psalm. ^9: 7* 8. We have the Ministry,
which God has also appointed for this end, to make known to us his mind:
there must we wait for him and his light. Thus must we wait at the posts of
wisdoms doors: and wait for the king of light, in his own way, wherein He
has appointed us to wait for Him. And if He think good to come another way,
more immediate, Let Him always be welcome: but let not us limite Him, nor
prescribe ways to Him; but follow his directions.

2. When any thing is borne-in upon their Spirit, as a truth to be received. or
as an error to be rejected, more immediately, they would beware of admitting
of every such thing, without trial and examination: for we are expressly
forbidden to believe every Spirit, and commanded to try them, whether they are
of God or not 1 John. 4: 1. The Lord will not take it ill, that even his own
immediate motions and revelations be tried and examined by the word; because the
word is given us for this end, to be our test and standart of truth. The way
of immediate revelation is not the ordinary way now of God's manifesting his
mind to his people. He has now chosen another way, and given us a more sure
word of prophecy, than was even a voice from heaven, as Peter says 2 Pet. 1:
18, 19. It is commended in the Bereans Act. 17: 11. who upon this account were
more noble, then those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all
readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things
were so. Even Paul's words, though he was an authorized, and infallible Apostle
of Christ's, are here put to the touch stone of the word. Many false Prophets
may go out, and deceive many, and speak great swelling words of vanity 1 John.
4: 1. 2 Pet. 2: 18. and the devil can transchange himself into an angel of
light 2 Cor. 11: 14. And though an Angel out of heaven should preach any other
thing, than what is in the written word, we ought not to receive his doctrine,
but to reject it, and to account him accursed Gal. 1: 8. So that the written
word must be much studied by us; and by it must we try all motions, all
doctrines, all inspirations, all revelations, and all manifestations.

3. Much more would they beware of thinking, that the dictats of their
conscience obliges them, so as that always they must of necessity follow the
same. Conscience, being God's deputy in the soul, is to be followed no further,
than it speaks for God, and according to truth. An erring conscience, though
it bind so far, as that he who does contrary to the dictats thereof sins
against God, in that, knowing no other than that the dictats of conscience are
right and consonant to the mind of God* yet dar counteract the same, and thus
formally rebel against Gods authority; yet it does not oblige us to believe
and to do, what it asserteth to be truth, and duty. It will not then be enough
for them to say, my conscience, and the light within me speaks so, and
instructs me so: for that light may be darkness, and error and a delusion;
and so no rule for them to walk by. To the law and to the testimony: and, if
their conscience, mind, or light within them, speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no lig^t in them Esai. 8: 20. I grant, as I said,
they can not without sin, counter act the dictats even of an e^ing (...);
because they know not better, but that these dictats are according to truth:
and thus an erring conscience is a most dangerous thing, and brings people
under a very sad dilemma, that whether they follow it or not, they sin: and
there is no other remedy here, but to lay by the e^ing conscience, and get a
conscience rightly informed by the word: putting it in Christ's hand, to be
better formed and informed; that so it may do its office better. This then
would be especially guairded against; for if once they lay down this for a
principle, that whatever their conscience and mind or in ward light (as some
call it) dictat, must be followed, there is no delusion, how false, how
abominable so ever it be, but they may be at length in hazard to be drawn away
with: and so the rule, that they will walk be, be nothing in effect but the
Spirit of lies and of delusion; and the motions and dictates of him, who is the
Father of lies, that is, the Devil.

4. Such as pretend so much to walk by conscience, would take h^ed, that they
take not that for the dictate of conscience, which really is but the dictat of
their own humors, inclinations, preoccupyed minds, and biased wills. When
conscience speaks, it groundeth on the authority of God, whether truly or
falsely, and proposes such a thing, to be done, or to be refrained from,
merely because God commands that, and forbids this, though sometimes it
mistaketh: but, though the d^ctats of men's humors, inclinations, preoccupyed
judgments and wills, may pretend God's authority, for what they say, yet
really some carnal respect* selfish end and the like, lies at the bottom, and
is the chief spring of that motion: and also the dictats of humor, and biased
wills are usually more violent and fierce, then the dictats of conscience; for
wanting the authority of God to back their assertions and prescriptions, they
must make up that with an addition of a preternatural force and strength. Hence
such as are purely led by conscience, are pliable, humble, and ready to hear
and receive information; whereas others are headstrong, and pertinacious,
unwilling to receive instruction, or to hear any thing contrary to their
minds, lest their conscience* receiving more light, speak with a higher voice,
against their inclinations, and former ways; and so create more trouble to
them; whileas now they enjoy more quiet within, so long as the cry of their
selfwill and biased judgment is so loud, that they can not well hear the still
and low voice of conscience.

5. They would labor for much self denial* and sincerity; and to be free from
the snares and power of selfish ends, as credit, a name* and applause, or what
of that kind, that may be like the fear of man, that brings a snare: Prove.
29: 2. 5. for that will be like a gift, that blinds the eyes of the wise
Exodus 23: 8. love to carry on a party, or a design, to be seen and accounted
some body, to maintain their credit and reputation, lest they be accounted
changelings, and the like, will prove very dangerous in this case: for these
may forcibly carry the soul away, to embrace one error after another, and one
error to strengthen and confirm another, that it is hard to know* where or
when they shall stand: and these by-respects may so forcibly drive the soul
forward, that he shall neither hear the voice of conscience within, nor any
instruction from without.

6. They would study the word of truth, without prejudice and any sinful
preingadgment, lest they be made thereby to wiredraw and wrest the word, to
their own destruction; as some, of whom Peter speaks 2 Pet. 3: 16. It is a
dangerous thing, to study the word with a prejudicat opinion; and to bow or
wiredraw the word, and make it speak what we would have it speak, for the
confirmation of out opinions and sentiments: for that is but to mock God and
his law; and to say, Let his law speak what it will, I will maintain this
opinion; and so make the word speak, as we would have it, or else lay it by.
This is to walk by some other rule, than the word* and to make the word serve
our lusts, and confirm our errors, than which a greater indignity can not be
done to the Spirit of truth, speaking in the word.

7. In reading and studying of the word, there would be much single dependence
on the Spirit for light: waiting for clearness from Him, whom Christ has
promised to lead us into all truth. An earnest wreastling with Him for his
assistance, enlightening the mind with divine light, to understand the truth,
and inclineing the soul to a ready imbraceing and receiveing of the truth,
declared in the word.

8. Though one place of scripture be enough to confirm any point of truth, and
ground sufficient for us to believe what is there said, there being nothing in
scripture, but what is truth: yet in such a time of abounding errors, and when
many are going abroad, speaking perverse things, to lead the simple away, it
were spiritual wisdom to be compareing scripture with scripture; and not to be
lightly embracing whatever may seem probable, and fairly deduceable from some
one passage or other of scripture; but to be comparing that with other
passages, and see what concord there is: for this is certane, what ever point
contradicts other clear and manifest testimonies of scripture cannot be true;
how ever a cunning sophister may make it seem very probably to flow out of such
or such a passage of scripture. The testimony of the Spirit is uniforme, and
free from all contradictions: and therefore we must see, if such an assertion,
that some would draw from such a passage, agree with other plain passage: and
if not, be sure, that that is not the meaning of the place. When the devil did
wreste and abuse that passage of truth Psalm. 91: 11. He shall give his angels
charge concearning thee. etc. and from thence would infer, that Christ might
cast himself down. Mat. 4; 6. Christ show that this inference was bad, because
it did not agree with other divine testimonies, particularly not with that
Deuteronomy. 6: 16. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: And thereby he teaches us
to take this course, in times of temptation? and so compare spiritual things
with spiritual, as Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 2: 13. Especially they would beware
of expounding clear Scriptures by such as are more dark and mysterious: See 2.
Pet. 3: 16. it is always saifer, to explain darker passages by such as are
more clear.

9. Let them guaird against an humore of newfanglednesse, nauseating old and
solid truths, and seeking after something new, having ears itching after new
doctrines, yea or new modes and dresses of old truths: for this is provocking
to God, and proves dangerous; for such turn away their ears from the truth,
and are turned into fables, as Paul tells us. 2. Tim. 4: 3. 4. for the time
will come, says he, when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their
own lusts, shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears: and
they shall turn away their ears from the truth* and shall be turned unto
fables. This favors of a spirit of levity and inconstancy; which is
dangerous.

10. They would labor to have no prejudice at the truth, but receive it in
love, and the love of it* lest for that cause God give them up to strong
delusions to believe lies, and to be led away with the deceiveablnesse of
unrighteousness: as we see 2. These. 2: 10, 11, 12. and with all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved* and for this cause God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleev a lie; that they all
might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

11. So would they beware of stifling the truth, of making it a prisoner* and
detaineing it in unrighteousness, like those spoken of Romans 1: 18. for which
cause God gave* them up to uncleanness and to vile affections, and they became
vain in their imaginations and their foolish heart was darkened; yea
professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. verse. 21, 22, 24* 26. They
should let truth have free liberty, and power in the soul; and should yield up
themselves to be ruled and guided by it: and not thorture with it, lay chains
upon it, or fetter it, and keep it as a prisoner, that can do nothing.

2. For this cause, they would hold fast the truth, which they have learned,
and have been taught by the Spirit out of the word. When Paul would gua^rd* and
fortify Timothy against seducers, that creept into houses, leading captive
silly women etc. among other directions, he gives him this 2. Tim. 3:* 14, 15*
But continue thou in the things, which thou have learned, and have bin assured
of, knowing of whom thou have learned; and that from a child thou have known
the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to Salvation etc. So he
would have the Colossians walking in Christ, rooted and build up in Him, and
stablished in the faith, as they had been taught Col. 2. 6, 7.

13. Especially they would be holding the groundwork fast, says in Christ: It
were good, in such a time of erring from the way of truth, to be griping Christ
faster, and cleaving to* Him by faith, and living by faith in Him. This is to
hold the foundation fast; and then let the tempest of error blow as it will,
they will ride at a sure anchor, and be s^ife, because fixed upon the rock of
ages: and further, living near Christ, in such a dangerous day, would be a
noble preservative from the infections of error. The soul that is dwelling in
Christ, and griping to Him daily by faith, and acting love on Him, dwells in
light, and will discover error, sooner than another, because living under the
rays of the sun of righteousness; which discovers error.

14. They would labor to learn the truth, as it is in Jesus; and the truths,
which they have heard of Him, and have been taught by Him, as the truth is in
Him, will abide, when other truths, that have been learnt but of men, and
heard of men, and as it was in the preaching of men, and in books, shall soon
evanish, in a day of trial. This is to learn Christ, as the Apostle speaks
Ephesians. 4: 20, 21. But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that ye have
heard Him, and have been taught by Him, as the truth is in Jesus, When we
learn the truth, as it is in Jesus, it brings us always in to Him, and has
a tendency to fix our hearts on Him, and is a piece of the bond that binds
us to him and his way: we receive it then as a piece of his doctrine, which we
must own, and stand unto; O if we learned all our divinity thus! we would be
more constant and steadfast in it, then we are.

15. When controversies arise, and they know not which side to choice; both
seems to them to be alike well founded on the word, they would exerce their
spiritual sagacity, and set their gift of discerning a work, to see which of
the two tends most to promove piety and godliness, and the kingdom of
Christ: and so see which of the two is the truth, which is after godliness, as
the Apostle speaks Tit. 1: 1. they must look which of the two is the
doctrine, which is according to Godliness 1 Timothy 6: verse. 3. That is thetruth
which is Christ's, and which should be owned and embraced, viz, which flows
from a Spirit of godliness, and tends to promove godliness, and ^eth with
the true principles of godliness, even gospel godliness, wrought according to
the tenor of the covenant of grace; that is, by the strength of the Spirit of
Jesus, dwelling and working in us; and not according to the tenor of the
covenant of works, that is, wrought by our own strength etc.

16. Yet withal, they would take heed, that they mistake not here: for they may
look upon some ways and doctrines, as having a greater tendency to promove
godliness, then others; which indeed have not, but only seem so. They would
therefore consider well, what is the way of godliness laid down in the noble
device of the gospel, which is the way that only glorifyeth God, Father, Son
and Holy Ghost; and see what suiteth most with that, according to the word; and
not what seems most suitable to godliness in their apprehension. The word is
the best judge and test of true godliness; and in the word, we have the only
saifest mean of true godliness held forth* therefore we should see, what
doctrine tends most to promove godliness, according to the way held forth in
the word, and choose that.

17. They would guaird against pride and selfeconceite, as thinking they are
wise enough, and understanding enough, in those matters: and so need not take a
lesson of any. This may be of great prejudice, for itis the meek, that God
guides in judgment. And to the meek will He teach his way Psalm. 25: 9.
Therefore it were good for his people in such a day, to be meek and humble,
willing and ready to learn of any person, how mean so ever, that can teach
the ways of God. The Lord may bless a word spoken by a private person, when he
will not bless the word spoken by a Minister: for his blessings are free. And
itis not good to despise any mean: Apollos, though instructed in the way of
the Lord, mighty in the Scriptures, fervent in Spirit, and teaching diligently
the things of the Lord Act. 18: 24, 25. Yet was content to learn of Aquila and
of his wife Priscilla, when they expounded unto Him the way of God more
perfectly verse. 26.

18. In such a time, itis not unsaife to look to such, as have been eminent in
the way of God, and lie near to Him: for itis probable, they may know much of
the mind of God, in those questioned matters: Hence, we find the Apostle
putting Timothy and others to this duty, in a time when false teachers were
going abroad, saying 2 Timothy 3: 10. But thou have fully known my doctrine,
manner of life: and 1 Cor. 4: 16. wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of
me: and 1 Cor. 11: 1. and Again Phil. 3: 17. Brethren be followers together of
me. All which say, that though we should call no man Rabbi, as hanging our
faith absolutely on Him; yet in such a time of prevailing error, and of false
teachers going abroad, some respect should be had to such, as have found grace
of the Lord to be faithful in times of trial, an^ have maintained truth, and
stood for it, in times persecution, and have with singleness of heart followed
the Lord; It not being ordinare with God, to leave such, as in sincerity seek
Him, and desire to follow his way, in truth and uprightness; and to give the
revelation of his mind, and the manifestation of his Spirit, to others, who
have not gone through such trials.

19. They would also at such a time be much in the sincere practice of
uncontroverted duties, and in putting uncontroverted and unquestionable and
unquestioned truths into practice: and this may prove a notable mean to keep
them right: for then are they in God's way; and so the devil has not that
advantage of them, that he has of others, who ^re out of the way of duty.
David understood more than the Ancients, because he kept God's precepts Psalm.
119: 100.

20. It were good and suitable at such a time, to be much in the fear of God;
remembering what an one He is, and how hazardous itis to sin against Him, by
drinking-in the least point of error. The promise is made to such. Psalm. 25:
12. What man is he that fears the Lord, him shall He teach in the way that he
shall choose.

21. Finally, at such a time, they would be much in communion with Jesus, lying
near Him; much in prayer to Him, studying his Relations, Offices, Furniture,
Readiness to help with light and counsel; and they would draw near to Him
with humility, boldness, faith, confidence, love, tenderness and sincerity; and
then they shall not find that He shall fail them or disappoint them.

Enough of this. I proceed therefore to another case, which is.

CHAP. XVII. How to make use of Christ, as the Truth, that we may get our case
and condition cleared up to us.
THe believer is often complaining of darkness, concearning his case and
condition, so as he cannot tell what to say of himself, or what judgment to
pass on himself, and he knows not how to win to a distinct and clear
discovery of his state and condition. Now, it is Truth alone, and the Truth,
that can satisfy them as to this. The question then is. How they shall make
use of, and apply themselves to this Truth, to the end, they may get the truth
of their condition discovered to them. But first let us see, what this case may
be. Consider then

1. That grace may be in the soul, and yet not be seen nor observed: this is
manifest by daily experience.

2. Not only so, but a gracious soul, that is reconciled with God in Christ,
and has the Spirit of grace dwelling in it, may suppose itself a stranger yet
unto this reconciliation, and you of the grace of God, and so to be still in
the state of nature.

3. Yea, a soul may not only suppose and conclude it self in nature, while it
is in a state of grace, but ^urder, may be filled with terror and
apprehensions of God's wrath and indignation; and that in such a measure, as
that thereby it may be as a distracted person, as we see it was with Heman,
Psalm. 88: 15. who said, while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. The wrath
of God lay hard upon Him, and he said, that he was afflicted with all God's
waves verse. 7. hence he cried out verse. 16, 17. Thy fierce wrath goes over me,
thy terrors have cut me off, they came round about me daily, (or all the day)
like water, they compassed me about together, And yet for all this, the first
word of his complaint was faith verse. 1. Many such complaints hear we our of
Job's mouth, to whom God notwithstanding was that gracious, that he never, came
to question his state before God, or to conclude his hypocrisic, or his being
still in the state of nature. But it is not so with every one, that is so
exercised.

4. Yea further, with those inward strokes upon the soul, they may have sin and
guilt charged home upon their consciences: and this will make their life yet
more bitter, and put a sharper edge upon the rods. Thus was Job made to
possess the sins of his youth, Job, 13: 26. and made to say, My
transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquity Job. 14:
17.

5. Moreover, they may be in such a condition a long time, and all the while
have no light of comfort, as we see in Job and Heman. They may even walk in
darkness, and have no light of comfor^ Esai. 50: 10.

6. Yea and also be without the hope of a delivery or outgate, Hence cries
Heman Psalm. 88: 4, 5. I am counted with them that go down into the pit, free
among the deed, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou rememberest no
more, and they are cut off from thine hand. Yea they may be driven to the very
border of despair; and conclude that there is no hope; as the Church did,
Ezekiel. 37: 11. Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, and we are cut off for
our pairts: and as Job Chap. 7: 6. My days are swifter then a weavers shuttle,
and are spent without hope, and Chap. 19: 10. He has destroyed me on every
side, and I am gone: mine hope has he removed like a tree.

Now though sometimes, as we see in Job, and in Heman too, a soul may be under
such a sad and sharp dispensation, and yet not brought to question their
state, or to conclude themselves children of wrath, lyeing still in black
nature; yet it is not so with all, who are so exercised: but many, under such a
dispensation, may, at least, be in the dark, as to their state before God: and
if they do not positively assert their state to be bad; yet they do much
question, if they be in the state of grace, and would be comforted under all
their pressures and afflictions, if they could win to the least well grounded
apprehension of their interest in Christ.

In such a case as this is, there is ground fot a poor soul to make use of
Christ for outgate; and an outgate may be had in God's time, and as He sees
sit, by a right use-making of and going* out to Him, who is the Truth. So then
the soul, that would have its state and condition cleared up, and a discovery
of its being reconciled to God through Jesus, and in a state of grace, and
would make use of Christ as the Truth, for this end, would

1. Look out to Christ, as a feeling Highpriest, faithful and mercyful, who,
being like us in all things except sin, does sympathize with, and succure such
as are tempted Heb. 2: 17: 18. And as a Priest, that is touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4: 15. Albeit Christ, in the deepest of his
darkness, was never made to question his soneshipe, but avouched God to be his
God, even when he was forsaken, Psalm. 22: 1* Mat. 27: 46. Mark. 15: 34. Yet He
knew what it was to be tempted * to question his sonshipe, when the devil said
unto Him Mat. 4. if thou be the Son of God, and He knows, what such a
distress, as He himself was into, wreastling with an angry God, hideing
himself and forsaking, will work in a poor sinner, and being a mercyful and
sympathizeing Highpriest, he cannot but pity such as are under such a
distemper; and as a gracious Head sympathize with them* Now the believer would
look out to Him, as such an one, and upon this ground go to Him with confidence
and boldness, and lay out their case before Him, that He may help and send
relief.

2. They would also eye Christ, as able to save out of that condition, and to
command light to shine out of darkness: and so, as one able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God through Him Heb. 7* 25.

3. And not only so, but eye Him also, as given, sent and commissioned of the
Father, to be a light to such, as sit in darkness; even to the Gentiles, Esa.
42: 6. and 49: 6. Luke 2: 32. Act. 13: 47. and 26: 23. John. 8: 12. and this
will encourage the poor Souls to go out to him, with their darkness, when they
see that He is sent, as a Light, and as the Truth, to clear up poor souls, that
walk in darkness and have no light: when they see, that it is his place and
office to help them; and consider that He is true to his trust, and true and
faithful, in all that was committed to Him, it not only will embolden them to
come forward to Him, but it will strengthen their hope, and encourage them to
wait on.

4. They would stay themselves on Him, as an alsufficient helper, renunceing
all other; crying out, that they will have no light, but His light; and that
they will seek no where else for light, but wait at His door, till He, who is
the Sun of righteousness, arise in their soul, and come with hailing light in
his wings.

5. They would by faith roll and cast their darkened souls, their confused
case, their over whelmed hearts, on Him, and leave them there: for He is the
only physician: and the blind soul must be put in his hand, who can take away
the filme, and cause the scales fall off, and make light break in to the soul,
and discover to it its condition.

6. It would be useful and very steadable, in such a time of darkness, for the
believer, to be frequent in acting direct acts of faith on Christ; that is, be
frequent in going to Him, as an alsufficient Mediator, as the only refuge and
shadow, for a po^r weary scoarched soul Esai. 4. last and 32: 2. And a man
shall be as an hideing place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, as
rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a ^eary land:
as one who is a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the
storm, a shadow from the heat, etc. Esa. 25: 4. When the soul is thus
overwhelmed with clouds, and doubts of its interest in Christ, it would then
put it out of doubt, by fleeing to Him for refuge from the storm of God's
indignation, and lay hold on Him, as He is offered in the gospel; and thus
renew its grips of Him* as the offered alsufficient Mediator: and frequent
direct acts of faith will help at length to a reflex act. The soul that is
daily running to Christ, according to the covenant, with all its necessities;
and laying hold on Him, as only able to help, will at length come to see, that
it has believed on Him, and is made welcome by Him, and accepted through Him.
So that reterated acts of faith on an offered Cautioner, and Salvation, will
dispel at length those clouds of darkness, that trouble the soul.

7. Such souls would beware of making their bands stronger, and their darkness
greater, by their ^olly and unwise carriage: for this cause, they would beware,

1. To cry - out in despondency of Spirit, as if there were no hope, and to
conclude peremptorily, that they are cut off; and it is in vain to wait any
longer: for this course will but darken them more, and multiply the clouds over
their head.

2. To run away from Christ through unbeleef and despair; for that will make
their case yet worse.

3. To walk untenderly and not circumspectly; for the more sins appear, the
less light will be had. O but souls would be tender in all their conversation
at that time, and guaird against the least sin, or appearance of evil.

4. To fret and repine against God, because of that dispensation: for that will
but entangle the soul more, and wreath the yock straiter about its neck; and
put it self further out of case to be relieved, and to receive light.

8. Lastly, such would do well not to limite the holy one of Israel, but to
wait with patience, till his time come, to speak-in light to the soul; knowing
that such as wait upon Him shall never be ashamed, Esai. 49: 23. because He
waits to be gracious; and therefore blessed are they all that wait upon him
Esai. 30: 18.

Quest. But what if for all this, I get no outgate, but my distress and
darkness rather grow upon my hand?
Ans. That such a thing may be, I grant, the Lord thinking it fit. (1.) To
exercise their faith, dependence, patience, hope, and desire more. (2.) And to
discover more unto them their own weakness, faintings, faithlesness. (3.) To
show his absolute power and soveraignity. (4.) To make his grace and mercy more
conspicuous and remarkable at length: and. (5.) To train them up in away of
dependence on him in the dark; and of leaning to him, when walking in
darkness; yea and in a way of believing, when they think they have no faith at
all, and for other holy ends. Yet the soul would not despond; for there are
several things, that may serve to support and bear up the heart, even in that
case; as

1. This is not their case alone: Others have been in the like before; and many
have had the like complaints in all ages, as is known to such as have been
acquanted with exercised souls.

2. It may yield peace and comfort, to know that they are about duty, when
looking to Him, and depending upon Him, and waiting for his light.

3. The promises made to such, as wait for Him, may support the soul, and
yield comfort.

4. The distinct knowledge and uptaking of their condition, though it be
comfortable and refreshing; yet itis not absolutely necessary. A soul may be a
saved soul, though those clouds should continue to its dying day; and though,
as long as they lived, they should never get a clear discovery of their
gracious state, but spend their days in mourning, complaineing, and crying out
of darkness, etc.

5. Such a soul should think that its much, that he is kept out of hell so
long: and sure, the thoughts of what he is, and of what he doserveth, may make
him sober, and not to think much, though he reach not so high, as to see his
name written in the book of life.

6. They would know, that full assurance of hope and of faith, is but rare; and
even such as have it, do nor ordinarily keep it long: So that it should not
much trouble them, if after all their pains they cannot win at it.

7. If they win to any real ground of hope, how small so ever, they should
think much of that; for many dear to Christ live long, and never know what so
much is.

8. It is no small matter, that they are not sincking in the gulf of
inconsideration, and plagued with an indifferency in these matters; but are
made to value Christ and an interest in Him, at such a rate.

9. Their going to Christ with all their wants, laying all on Him; and their
making that their daily exercise, may keep up their hearts from fainting, yea
and fill their souls with joy: for that is really the exercise of faith. And
the great and gracious promises are made to such as believe, and not to such
only, as know they do believe. I grant such as know not that they do believe,
cannot draw comfort from these promises; yet it is as true, that one may, by
reflecting on the actings of his own soul, see and know that really he is going
out to Christ, forsaking himself, casting his burden on Him, waiting and
depending upon Him: when yet he will not say, that he does believe: and when he
sees this working of soul toward Christ, he is obliged to believe, that he
believes, and thereupon rejoice in the hope of the great promises. And
however, the very sight and knowledge of this acting and motion of soul, may
give them some comfort, though they shall not take it for faith; because, it is
the way of duty, and it is the thing, which the gospel calls for; and because
they cannot show an instance of any one soul, that did so, and perished. But
the truth is, the right understanding of the nature of faith, would clear many
doubts, and prevent many questions.

I come to speak a little to the last case, which I shall handle, which is

CHAP. XVIII. How we shall make use of Christ, as the Truth, that we may win to
right and suitable thoughts of God.
This is a case, that much troubles the people of God. They cannot get right
and suitable thoughts of God, which they earnestly desire to have; nor know not
how to win at them. And certane it is, He only who is the Truth, and came out
of the bosom of the Father, can help here. Therefore, for our use making of
Him for this end; It would be remembered.

1. That the mind of man, through the fall, is nothing but a mass of
ignorance and blindness; that the understanding is darkened Ephesians. 4: 17, 18.
And naturally we are in darkness 1 John. 2: 9, 11. Yea under the power of
darkness. Col. 1: 13. And, which is more, our minds naturally are filled with
prejudice against God and enmity, through wickedness, naturally resideing
there, and which the Prince of the powers of the air, the Spirit that works
in the children of disobediance, increases and stirs up.

2. That this evil is not totally taken away, even in the godly, but helped
only in pairt: for they see and know but in pairt. 1 Cor. 13: verse. 13.

3. That hence it comes to pass, that through the working of corruption, the
soul of a believer can sometime win to no right thought of God at all, or at
best to some very narrow, and unsuitable conceptions of Him and his ways: yea
sometimes, all the thoughts that they can get of God, are vain and idle, if
not misshapen and blasphemous.

4. That as we are, we cannot see God: for no man has seen Him Mat. 11: 27.
John. 4: 46. for He is an invisible God, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Heb. 11: 27. He dwells
in light, which no man can approach unto. Him no man has seen, nor can see 1 Timothy 6: 16. 1 John. 4: 12.

5. That all that knowledge of God, which i^ saveing, is to be found in Christ,
who is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person. Heb.
1: 2. and the image of the invisible God Col. ^. 15. and is for this end come
out from the bosom of the Father, that He might acquant us with Him, and with
all his secrets John. 1: 18. Mat. 11: 27. so far as is needful for us to know.
He is God incarnate, that in Him we may see the invisible. Thus God is manifest
in the flesh 1 Timothy 3: 16. and the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us
John. 1: verse. 14.

6. That therefore, if we would see and know God we must go to Christ, who is
the temple, in which God dwells and manifests his glory; and in and through
Him, must we see and conceive of God. The light that we get of the knowledge of
the glory of God, must be in the face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4: 6, that is, in
the manifestations, that Christ has made of himself, in his Natures, Offices,
Ordinances, Works, Dispensations of grace, mediate and immediate etc. And thus
does God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, cause this light
of the knowledge of his glory shine into our hearts, viz. in the face of Jesus
Christ, that is, in the dispensations of grace in the gospel, which is the
glorious gospel of Christ 2 Cor. 4: 4. and, as it were, the face of Jesus
Christ: for, as by the face a man is best known, and distinguished from others;
so Christ is visibly, discernably, and manifestly seen and known, in and by the
gospel dispensations; there are all the lineaments and draughts of the glory of
God, which we would know, lively and clearly to be seen.

So then, if we would make use of Christ for this end, that we may win to a
right sight of God, and suitable conceptions of his glory, we would consider
those things.

1. We would live under the sense and through conviction of the greatness and
incomprehensiblenesse of God, as being every way past finding out: and also
under the conviction of our own darkness, and incapacitie to conceive aright
of Him, even as to what He has revealed of himself.

2. We would know, that what the works of Creation and Providence declare and
preach forth of God, though it be sufficient to make Heathens and others, that
do not improve the same to a right acknowledging of him, inexcuseable; as Paul
teaches us, Romans 1: 20. yet all that is short of giving to us that saving
knowledge of Him, which must be had, and which is life eternal* John. 17: 2.

3. We would know, that what of God is to be found-out by the works of creation
and providence, is more distinctly seen in Christ, and in the gospel. Here is a
greater and more glorious discovery of God, and of his glorious attributes, his
Justice, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, Truth* etc. than can be found by
the deepest diveing naturalist, and most wise moral observer of providence,
that is not taught out of the Gospel.

4. Yea, there is something of God to be seen in Christ, in the gospel, which
can be observed ^o none of his works of creation, or common providence: there
is the grace of God that brings salvation, that is made to appear only by the
gospel Tit 2: ^1. and there is a peculiar kindness and love of God toward
man, which is only discovered by Christ in the gospel, Tit. 3: 4. There is that
manifold wisdom of God, that mystery, which was hid from the beginning of the
world in God; that Principalities and powers in heavenly places, the greatest
and wisest of naturalists, must learn by the church, wherein that is preached
and proclaimed, by the dispensations of the gospel Ephesians. 3: 9, 10. His mercy
pardoning poor sinners, justice being satisfied, can not be cleared by nature.
Nature cannot unfold that mystery of justice and mercy, concurring to the
salvation of a sinner, only the gospel can clear that riddle.

5. We would remember, that all the beams of that glory, which are necessary
and useful, for us to know, are, to speak so, contracted in Christ and there
veiled, to the end that we may more steadyly look upon them. We may go to our
Brother, who is flesh of our flesh, and there, through the veil of his flesh,
see and behold what otherwise was invisible: as we can look to the sun better
shineing in a pale of water, than by looking up immediately; so can we behold
God and his glory better in Christ, where there is a thin vail (to speak so)
drawn over that otherwise blindeing yea killing, glory, than by looking to God
without Christ: for alas we could not endure one glance of an immediate ray of
divine glory, it would kill us out right.

6. We must then go to Christ, and there see God: for He who sees Him, sees
the Father also. John 14: 9. Particularly, we must go to the face of Jesus
Christ, that is, that, whereby He has made himself known, the noble
contriveance of the glorious gospel; wherein all things are so carried on, as
that God is glorified in his Son, in the salvation of poor sinners. The whole
work of salvation is laid on Christ, and the Father is glorified in Him, who is
his servant and his chosen, whom He upholdeth and furnishes for the work Esai.
42: 1, 2. He is called the Covenant it self: He is the undertaker in the
covenant of Redemption, and in the covenant of Grace: all is founded on Him:
all the good things of it are given out by Him: all the grace, by which we
close with it, and accept of Him, according to it, is given by Him. Now, in
this gospel contrivance are all the lines of the glorious face of Christ to be
seen: and in that face must we see and discern the glory of God; all the rays
of which are centred in Christ, and there will we get a noble prospect of that
glorious object. So that all such, as would make use of Christ for this end,
that they might come to have right and suitable thoughts and apprehensions of
God, must be well acquanted with the whole draught and frame of the gospel; and
so acquanted therewith, as to see Christ the substance, ground, and all of it,
and to see Him in every part of it.

7. Whatever we know or learn of God, by his works of Creation or Providence,
in the world or about ourselves, we would bring it in here, that it may receive
a new tiucture, and a deeper impression. That is done, when we find and learn
something of Christ there; and are brought nearer Christ thereby; and made
thereby to discover something more of the glory of God in the face of Christ;
or are made to understand better something of the revelation, that is made of
God in the gospel; or moved thereby to improve it better.

8. In all this matter, we must not go without our guide, lest we wander in
this wilderness, and it prove a labyrinth to us. We must take Christ with us
all alongs: He must teach us to understand his own face: and to read the
glorious characters of that excellent glory, which is to be seen in his face:
He must be our interpreter, and teach us, how to read this book, and how to
understand what is written therein; He must give the discerning eye, and the
understanding heart: even the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, to take up
the mysteries of God.

9. And for this cause, we would by faith lay hold upon the promises of the
Spirit, whereby we may be made spiritual, and have our understandings
enlightened more and more, to understand the mysterious characters of divine
Majesty and Glory.

10. In all this exercise, we would walk with fear, and carry with us
impressions of the dreadful Majesty and Glory of God, that we may tremble and
fear, and stand in awe, and read what we read of this glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ, this glorious bible, with reverence, and godly fear.

And thus may we be helped to win to right and suitable thoughts of God; yet
with all we would, for

Cautions,
Consider a few things further, as

1. That we must not think, to search out the Almighty unto perfection, Job.
11: 7.

2. Nor must we think, to get any one point of God known and understood
perfectly: corruption will mix-in itself, do our best; and our short comeings
will not easily be reckoned up.

3. We must beware of carnal^ curiosity, and of unlawful diveing-in in this
depth, least we drown.

4. We would not dream of a state here, wherein we will not need Christ for
this end. Yea, I suppose, in glory, He will be of use to us, as to the seeing
of God: for even there, as he is to day, so shall he for ever abide, God and
man in two distinct natures and one person: and that cannot be for ^ought: and
as God will be still God, invisible and ^nsearchable; so we, though glorified,
will remain ^ite creatures; and therefore will stand in need of Christ, that
in his glorious face we may see the invisible. He must be our lumen gloriae.

5. We should think it no small matter, to have the impression of this sight
upon our hearts, that we cannot see Him* and that we, in this state of sin,
cannot get right and suitable apprehensions of Him. I say, the impression of
this on our spirits, that is, such a sight of an impossibility to get Him seen
aright, as will keep the heart in awe, and cause us walk before Him in fear
and reverence, and to humble ourselves in the dust, and to tremble when ever we
make mention of his name, or begin to meditate on Him, knowing how great an
one He is, and how dangerous it is to think amiss of Him, and how difficult to
get a right thought of him.

CHAP. XIX. And the Life. How Christ is the Life.
THis, as the former, being spoken indefinitly, may be universally taken, as
relating both to such as are yet in the State of nature, and to such as are in
the state of grace; and so may be considered in reference to both, and ground
three points of truth, both in reference to the one, and in reference to the
other. To wit, 1. That our case is such as we stand in need of his help, as
being the Life. 2. That no other way but by Him can we get that supply of life*
which we stand in need of; for He only is the Life, excluding all other. 3.
That this help* is to be had in Him fully and compleetly: for not only is He
able to quicken, but He is called the Life. So that the help, which he gives,
is full, excellent, and compleet.

Looking upon the words, in reference to such as are in Nature, they point out
those three truths to us.

First. That all of us by nature are dead, standing in need of quickening and
of life: for this is presupposed, while He is said to be the Life: and that
both legally and reall^: legally being under the sentence of death, for Adams
transgression Romans 5: 15. and for that original corruption of heart we have:
and Really, the sentence of the law being in part executed* and that both as to
the body, and as to the soul. As to the body. It is now subject to death, and
all the sorerunners thereof, such as weakness, pains, sickness, fears,
torment, trouble, weariness: yea and in hazard of hell fire, and the torments
of the second death for ever. As to the soul, it also is many ways dead, both
first in away that is purely penal, and next in a way that is also sinful; and
both ways, as to what is present, and as to what is future: for as to that
which is penal and present. It is (1) separated from God and his favor Genesis 3:
8, 10, 24. (2) is under his curse and wrath, whence it comes to pass, that by
nature we are children of wrath Ephesians. 2: 2* 5. Servants of Satan 2 Timothy 2: 26.
The consequence of which is sad and heavy; for hence it is that we cannot
please God, do what we will: till we be brought out of that state, our ordinary
and civil actions, even plowing the ground, is sin. Prove. 21: 4. Yea out
Religious actions, whether natural or instituted, are abomination; even our
sacrifices Prove. 15: 8. and 31: 27. and prayers Prove. 2^: 9. Ps. 10: 7. Yea and
all our thoughts and purpose^ Prove. 15: 26* and likewise all our ways Prove.
15: 9. As to what is penal and future, it is obnoxious to that everlasting
excommunication from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power
2 These. 1: 8, 9. and to the torments of hell for ever Mark. 9: 44, 46, 48 Luke
16* As to what is not only penal, but also sinful, the soul here is under the
stroke of darkness in the understanding, perverseness and rebelliousnesse in
the will, irregularity and disorder in the affections, whereby the soul is
unfit for any thing that is good, and prone to every thing that is evil. Romans
3: 10* 20. Ephesians. 2: 1, 2, 3. Romans 5: 6. and 8: 7, 8, whence proceeds all our
actual transgressions. Iam* 1: 14, 15. And moreover sometimes the soul is given
up to a reprobat mind Romans 1: 28. to strong delusions 2 These. 2: 2. to
hardness of heart Romans 2: 5. horror of conscience Esa. 33: 14. to vile
affections Romans 1: 26 and the like spiritual plagues; which, though the Lord
inflict on some only, yet all are obnoxious to the same by nature, and can
exspect no less, if the Lord should enter with them into judgment. And
finally, as to what is future of this kind, they are, being fuel for Tophet,
obnoxious to that malignant, sinful, blasphemous and desperate rebellion against
God, in hell for ever more.

O how lamentable, upon this consideration, must the condition of such be, as
are yet in the state of nature. Oh if it were but seen and felt! But alas there
is this addition to all, that people know no^ this, they consider it not, they
believe it not, they feel it not, they see it not: and hence it comes to
pass, that

1. They cannot bewail and lament their condition, nor be humbled therefore.

2. They cannot, nor will not, seek after a remedy: for the whole will not
trouble themselves to seek after a physician.

And sure upon this account, their case calls for pity and compassion from
all, that know, what a dreadful thing it is to be in such a condition: and
should stir up all to pray for them, and to do all they can to help them out
of that state of sin and misery, which is dreadful to think upon.

Should not the thoughts and consideration of this put us all to try and
search, if we be yet translated from death to life, and delivered out of that
terrible and dreadful state, and made partakers of the first resurrection. It
not being my purpose, to handle this point at large, I shall not here insist in
giving marks, whereby this may be known, and which are obvious in Paul's
Epistles, and to be found handled at large in several practical pieces, chiefly
in Mr. Guthries Great interest. I shall only desire every one to consider and
examine,

1. Whether or not, the voice of Christ, which quickens the dead* has been
heard and welcomed in their soul? This is effectual calling.

2. Whether or not, there be a through change wrought in their soul, a change
in the whole Man, so as all things are become new 2 Cor. 5: verse. 17?

3. Whether or not, there be a Principle of life within*? And they be led by
the Spirit?

4. Whether or not, there be a living to the glory of the Lord Redeemer?

And when by impartial trial, a discovery is made of the badness of our
condition, should we not be alarmed to look about us, and to labor by all
means for an outgate, considering, (1.) How do^lful and lamentable this
condition is. (2.) How sad and dreadful the consequents of it are. (3.) How
happy a thing itis to be delivered from this miserable and sinful condition:
and. (4.) How there is a possibility of outgate.

Finally, It may break a heart of stone to think, how people, that are in such
a condition, are so unwilling to come out of it: for,

1. How unwilling are they, once to suspect their condition, or to suppose that
it may be bad, and that they may be yet unconverted?

2. How unwilling are they, to sit down seriously to try and (...) the matter,
and to lay their case to the touchstone of the word?

3. Yea, how unwilling are they, to hear any thing that may tend to awaken
them, or to discover unto them the badness of their condition?

4. How ready to stiffle challenges of conscience, or any common motion of the
Spirit, which tends to alarm their soul?

5. How great enemies are they to such ordinances, as serve to awaken sleeping
consciences?

6. And how do they hate such ministers, as preach such doctrine, as may serve
to rouz them up, and set them a work about their own salvation?

Secondly, We learn hence. That without Christ there is no imaginable way of
delivery out of this natural state of death. No other name is given under
heaven whereby we can be saved. Act. 4: 12. and angels can make no help here,
nor can one of us deliver another; the redemption of the soul is more precious
then so Psalm. 49: 7, 8. Not is there any thing we can do for ourselves, that
will avail here; all our prayers, tears, whipeings, fastings, vo^es, alms
deeds, purposes, promises, resolutions, abstenance from some evils, outward
amendements, good morality and civility, outward religiousnesse, yea and, if it
were possible, our keeping of the whole law, will not help us out of this pit.
And we may weary ourselves in such exercises in vain; for they will prove but
bodylie exercises that profit little. And when in this way, we have spent all
our time, parts, spirits and labor, we shall at length see, and say, that we
have spent our money for that which is not bread.

This should put all of us to try, what itis, which we lean to for life; and
what it is, the consideration whereof gives us peace and quietness, when the
thoughts of death, judgment, hell and the wrath of God come upon us, and
trouble us: for if it be any thing beside Christ that our soul leans to, and
that we are comforted by, and found all our hopes upon, we will meet with a
lamentable (oh! for ever lamentable!) disappointment. Be sure then, that our
hearts renunce all other ways and means of outgate, out of this death, beside
Jesus, the Resurrection and the Life, else it will not be well with us.

Thirdly, We see here. That delivery out of this natural state of death, is
only had by Christ: for He alone is the Life, and the life that is in Him is
suiteable and excellent. Hence he is called the bread of life John. 6: 35, 48.
The resurrection and the life John. 11: 25. The water of life Revel. 21: 6. and
22: 17. The tree of life Revel. 22: 2, 14. The Prince of life Act. 3: 15. our
life Col. 3: 4. The word of life, and life it self 1 John. 1: 1, 2.

And as He is a suitable and excellent life; so is He an alsufficient and
perfect life, able every way to help us, and to deliver us from all the parts
of our death. For

1. He delivers from the sentence of the law Romans 5: 17, 18. undergoing the
curse of the law, and becomeing a curse for us 2 Cor. 5. last.

2. He takes away the curse and sting of all temporal plagues, yea and of
death it self, causeing all work together for good to such as love Him Romans 8:
28. He has killed Him, that had the power of death, that is, the devil Heb. 2:
14. And through Him, the sting of death, which is sin, is taken away 1 Cor. 15:
56, 57.

3. He reconcileth to God, taking away that distance and enmity 2 Cor. 5: 20.
and so He is our peace and peacemaker, purchaseing access to us to the Father
Ephesians. 2: 14, 16. and 3: 12.

4. He also delivers from the power of sin and corruption Romans 7: 24.

5. And from all those spiritual strokes; such as blindness, hardness of
heart, etc: for He is our light, and has procured a new heart for us, even ^n
heart of flesh.

6. So delivers He from hell fire, having satisfied justice, and having
brought life and immortality to light. And He gives life eternal, as ^e see
Rev. 2. and 3.

Oh! it is sad, that Christ is so little made use (...), and that so many will
forsake the fountain of ^wing waters, and dig to themselves brocken ciste^s,
that can hold no water; and slight, despise ^d undervalue the gospel of Christ,
which brings life and immortality to light.

Oh! if the consideration of this, could move ^ch, as never found any change in
themselves, to ^to and make use of Jesus Christ, for life: and would for this
end,

1. Cry to Him, that He would make them ^ensible of their deadness, and waken
them out of their deep sleep.

2. Cry to Him, to set them a work to renunce ^ll other help beside his, as
being utterly unable ^o quicken, and put life in them.

3. Cry to Him, that He would draw and determine their souls, to a closeing
with Him by faith ^lone, to a hearing of his voice, to an obeying ^f his call,
to a following of his direction, to a giving up of themselves to Him, leaning
to Him, ^d waiting for all from Him alone: in a word, to ^ake Him for their
life in all points, and to lean ^o Him for life, and to expect it from Him,
through ^th in the promises of the gospel.

Next. This being spoken to the disciples, whom ^e suppose to have been
believers, it will give us ^round to speak of it, in reference to believers,
and (...) yield three points of truth, which we shall briefly ^ch, and then
come to speak of use-making of christ, as the Life, in some particular cases.

First. It is here clearly presupposed, that even believers have need of Christ
to be life unto them; and so have their fits of deadness. If it were not so,
why would Christ have said to believers, that He was life? And daily
experience does abundantly confirm it. For

1. They are often so weak and unable to resist temptation, or to go about any
commanded duty, as if they were quite dead.

2. They are often so borne down with discouragement, because of the strength of
opposition, which they meet with on all hands; and because of the manifold
disappointments, which they meet with* that they have neither heart nor hand;
and they faint and sit up, in the ways of the Lord; and cannot go through
difficulties, but oftim^ lie by.

3. Through daily fighting, and seeing no victory, they become weary and faint
hearted; so that they lie by as dead; Esai. 40: 29.

4. They often fall sick and decay, and have need of restoration and quickening.

5. The want of the sense of God's favor, and (...) the comforts of the holy
ghost, makes them (...) dwine, and droup, and look out as dead.

6. While under soul desertions, upon one account or other, they look upon
themselves as f^ among the dead, that is* as dead men* of the society of the
dead, with Heman Psalm. 88.

7. Yea many times, they are as dead men ^d captive in chains of unbeleef, and
corrup^ons, as we see David was, when his hea^ panted, and his strength failed
him, and (...) light of his eyes was gone from him Psalm. 38: 10.

8. Many times the frequent changes, and ups and downs they meet with, take all
courage and heart from them* that they become like men tossed at sea, so as
they have no more strength.

And many such things befall them, which make them look as dead, and to stand
in need of quickening, reviveing and strengthening cordialls from Him, who is
the Life. And thus the Lord thinks good to dispense with his own people.

1. That they may be kept humble, and know themselves to be indigent
creatures, needing influences of life daily.

2. That they may have many errands to Him, who is the Life, and have much to
do with Him, and depend upon Him continually.

3. That He may show himself wonderful, in and about them, giving proof of His
skill in quickening the dead, and in bringing such through unto everlasting
life, who were daily, as it were, giving up the ghost, and at the point of
death.

4. That heaven may be heaven; that is, a place where the weary are at rest
Job. 3: 17. and the troubled rest 2 These. 1: 7. And where the inhabitants shall
not say they are sick Esai. 33: verse. 24.

5. That they may be taught more the life of faith and of dependence on Him,
and trained up in that way.

6. That He may be owned, acknowledged and submitted unto, as a Sovereign God,
doing what He will* in heaven and in earth.

For all this, there is no cause, that any should take up any prejudice at
christianity: for, for all this, their life is sure, and the outgate is sure
and saife. Nor would they think it strange, to see believers often mourning and
drouping, seeing their case will often call for new supplies of life. Their fits
are not known to every one; nor does every one know what lies sometime at
their heart.

Nor would they think it such an easy matter, to win to heaven, as they
imagine, and so deceive themselves. The righteous are saved through many deaths.

And as for believers, They would not think it strange, to meet with such fits
of deadness; nor thence conclude, that all their former work was but delusion,
and that they are still into the state of nature. But rather observe the
wisdom, faithfulness and power of God, in bringing their brocken shipe through
so much brocken water; yea and ship wracks; and his goodness in ordering
matters so, as they shall be kept humble, watchful, diligent, and constant in
dependence upon Him, who is and must be their life, first and last. And hence
learn a necessity of living always near to Christ, and depending constantly
upon Him by faith; for, he being their life, they cannot be without Him, but
they must die and decay.

Secondly, We hence learn. That under all these fits of deadness, to which
his people are subject, nothing without Christ will help. Not

1. All their pains in and about ordinary means, prayer, reading, hearing,
meditation, conference etc. They will all cry out, that help is not in them:
for He is the Life.

2. Nor extraordinary duties. Such as fasting and prayer, and vows, these will
never revive and quicken a drouping or fainting sickly soul: for they are not
Christ; nor the Life.

3. Nor will a stout courageous Spirit, and resolution of heart avail. If He,
who is the Life* breath^ not, all that will melt away, and evanish.

4. Nor will the stock of habitual grace, which remains in the soul, be
sufficient to quicken and revive the sick soul: if the Life breath not on these
habites, and if new influences of life and strength flow not in upon the soul,
and new rays come not down from this sun of righteousness, to warm the
frozen soul, the habites will lie by as dead.

5. Far less will their great gifts and enduements help them out of that dead
condition: all their light and knowledge, without the influences of this Life,
will prove weak and insufficient for this end and purpose.

6. Nor will sound, pure, and lively like ordinances work out this effect: for
till He look down, all those ordinances may prove dead and deadning to them.

It were good if believers were living under the conviction of this daily,
and, by their practice and carriage, declareing that they believe, that Christ
only is the Life, and that they must live in Him, and be quickened and revived
through Him alone.

Thirdly, We see hence* That Christ is the Life* that is, one that
sufficiently, yea and abundantly, can help the believer, while under those
fits of deadness, which have been mentioned, and the like. There is in him a
rich supply of all things, that tend to revive, encourage, strengthen, and
enliven: soul, under spiritual deadness and fainting. Therefore is He called
the Life; as having in Him all that, which is necessary for, and answereable to
souls under spiritual sicknesses, distempers, desertions, fainting and swooning
fi^es, etc. for with Him is the fountain of life Psalm. 36: 9. and He itis that
upholdeth the soul in life Psalm. 66: 9. and can command the blessing, even life
for evermore Psalm. 13 3: verse. 3.

For further clearing of this, we would consider those things.

1. That He is God, equal with the Father in power and glory, and thereby has
life in himself John. 5: 26. and can quicken whom He will. verse. 21. By this He
proves there his own godhead and equality with the Father. So John. 1: 4. Itis
said that in Him was life; and that life was the light of men, whereby also his
Godhead is confirmed. This should be firmly believed, and rooted in our hearts,
as being the ground of all our hope, comfort and life: for were it not so, that
our Mediator were the true God, all our hopes were gone, our comforts could not
be long lived, and our life were extinct.

2. As mediator God-man, He is fully and througly fournished to quicken and
enliven his members and followers, first and last: and all alongs their life
must be hid with Christ in God, for in Him dwells the fullness of the godhead
bodyly Col. 2: 9. as mediator he is called a tree of life Prove. 3: 18.
quickening and enlivening all that feed upon Him; and the bread of life. John.
6: 35, 48. Yea because of power and authority to commmand life to the dead
soul* He is called the Prince of life Act. 3: 15. and as a living quickening
stone, he gives life to all that are built upon Him 1 Pet. 2: 4. Yea as being
fully fitted and fournished for this work, He calls himself the resurrection
and the life John. 11: 25. This should be riveted in our hearts, as a
comfortable and encouraging truth.

3. Of this stock of life, and quickening and reviveing grace, which He has
got, and is furnished withal, as Mediator and Redeemer of his people, He is
communicative: of his fullness do we receive, and grace for grace John. 1: 16.
He got it, that He might give it out; and that from Him as an head it might
flow out unto his members, and therefore He is the bread that came down from
heaven, and gives life to the world John. 6: 35. Yea He gives eternal life to
all his sheep Ioh. 10: 28. and He is come for this end, that his sheep might
have life John. 10: 10* Therefore has he taken on such relations, as may give
ground of confirmation of this, as of an head, of a stock or root, and the
like. This consideration is strengthening and reviveing.

4. He communicates of this stock of life, and of reviveing strength, which He
has, most sweetly, and on most easy terms. So that

(1.) Such as seek him shall find life by Him Psalm. 69: 32.

(2.) Yea such as know Him, shall not miss life. John. 17: 3. 1 John. 5: 20.

(3.) If we will believe on Him and rest upon him, we have life, first and last
John. 3: 15, 16* 36. and 6: 40, 47. 1 Timothy 1: 16.

(4.) If we will come to Him John. 5: verse. 40. and cast our dead soul upon
him* we shall live.

(5.) If we will hear his voce Esai. 55: 3. and receive his instructions we
shall live; for they are the instructions of life.

(6.) Nay, if the soul be so dead, that it can neither walk, nor hear, if it
can but look to Him, he will give life Esai. 45; 22.

7. And if the soul be so weak, that it cannot look, nor lift up its eyes; yet
if it be willing, He will come with life Revel. 22: 17.

Oh! if this were believed.

5. As he is communicative of that life, which he has gotten as Head, and that
upon easy terms; so He gives out of that life liberally, largely,
abundantly; yea more abundantly John. 10: 10. The water of life, which He
gives, is a well of water springing up to everlasting life John. 4: 14.
Therefore he allows his friends to drink abundantly Cant. 5: 1.

6. Yet it would be remembered, that, He is Lord and master thereof, and Prince
of this life, and so may dispense it and give it out, in what measure He sees
fit, and He is wise to measure out best for his own glory, and to their
advantage.

7. All this life is sure in Him, none of his shall be disappointed thereof.
His offices, which He has taken on; and his commission, which he has of the
Father, abundantly clear this; and love to his will not suffer him to keep up
any thing, that i^ for their advantage. He is faithful in his house as a Son:
and will do all that was committed unto Him to do. The whole transaction of the
covenant of Redemption and Surety-sh^pe, and all the promise^ o^ the new
Covenant of grace confirm this, to be a sure truth: so that they that have Him
have life. 1 John. 5: 12. Prove. 8: 35.

8. Yea all that is in Christ contributeth to this life and quickening; His
Words and Doctrine, are the words of eternal life John. 6: 63, 68. Phil. 2: 16.
His Works and Ways are the ways of life Act 2: 28* His Natures, Offices,
Sufferings, Actings, and all He did as Mediator, concur to the quickening and
enlivening of a poor dead soul.

9. This fullness of life, which He has, is fully suited to the believers
condition, in all points, as we shall hear.

10. This life is eminently and transcendently in Him, and exclusively of all
others. Itis in Him, and in Him alone; and itis in Him, in a most excellent
manner. So that He is the Life, in the abstract; not only a living head, and an
enlivening head; but Life it self, the Life, the Resurrection and the Life.

CHAP. XX. Some general uses.
BEfore we come to speak of some particular cases of deadness, wherein
believers are to make use of Christ, as the Life; we shall first propose some
useful consequences and deductions from what has been spoken of this life, and.

First. The faith of those things, which have been mentioned, would be of great
use and advantage to believers: and therefore they should study to have the
faith of this truth fixed on their hearts, and a deep impression thereof on
their spirits, to the end, that

1. Be their case and condition what it will, they might be kept from
despair, and despondency of spirit, from giving over their case as hopless;
and from looking upon themselves as irremediably gone. The faith of Christ's
being Life, and the Life, would keep up the soul in hope, and cause it say; how
dead so ever my case be, yet Life can help me, and He, who is the resurrection
and the Life, can recover me.

2. Yea, be their case and condition what it will, they would have here some
ground of encouragement, to go to Him with their dead soul, and to look to Him
for help, seeing He is the Life, as mediator, to the end He might enliven and
quicken his dead, fainting, swooning members, and to recover them from their
deadness.

3. They might be freed from many scruples and objections, that scar and
discourage them. This one truth believed would clear up the way so, as that
such things, as would have been impediments and objections before, shall
evanish and be rolled out of the way now: such as are the objections taken from
their own worthlesness, their long continuance in that dead condition, and the
like.

4. They might hereby likewise be freed from that dreadful plag^e and evil of
jealousy, whereby the soul is often kept aback from comeing to Christ: for
they fear, He will not make them welcome; they doubt of his love and
tenderness, and questione his pity and compassion; yea their jealousy makes
them to doubt of his faithfulness. So that the faith of this truth would cure
this jealousy, and deliver the soul therefrom, and open a way for the soul to
come forward with boldness and confidence.

5. They might also be hereby helped to wait with patience, and to be still
and quiet under the Lord's various dispensations: so as they would not frete
nor repine against him, knowing that He would prove himself to be Life, even
the Life, in his own good time: so that the soul would paitiently wait at his
door, till He were pleased to look out, and with his look convey life in to
their dead soul.

6. They might be preserved hereby from looking out to, or expecting any help
from, any other arth: knowing that He alone is the Life, and so, that help can
no where else be had. The faith of this truth would guaird from many sinistrous
ways, which the soul, in a time of strait, is ready to run to, for relief:
for hereby would it see, that neither instruments, nor means, nor outward
administrations, nor any thing of that kind, can quicken their dead soul; and
that He, and He alone, must breathe - in life into them, as at first, so now
again.

Secondly, May we not see and observe here great matter of admiration, at the
goodness and rich bounty of God toward his people, who has found out and
condescended upon such a sure, saife and satisfying way, whereby he becomes
all things to his ^ple, which they stand in need of; and that notwithstanding

1. That we are most unworthy of any such dispensation of grace at his hands.

2. That we too often are too desirous of other guests in our hearts, beside Him.
O How much corruption, sin and death lodge we within our souls! and how more
desirous are we oftimes of death, than of life!

3, That we little improve the noble advantages for life, which we have granted
unto us: yea many a time we abuse them; and this He did foresee, and yet
notwithstanding would condescend thus unto us.

4. That we do little express our thankfulness for such mercies.

But not for our sakes has He done this, but for his own names sake: for
noble and holy ends has He resolved upon this course; as

1. That He might be all and in all Col. 3: 11. and they nothing. That He alone
might fill all in all Ephesians. 1. ult, and they be empty and nothing without Him.

2. That He might wear the glory of all; for of Him, and through Him, and to
Him, are all things Romans 11. last, and that no man might share therein.

3. That Man might be His everlasting debtor, and cast down, in testimony
thereof, his crown at His feet, who sits on the throne, as those did Revel.
4: 10. and might c^y out with these same elders verse. 11. Thou art worthy O
Lord, to receive glory and honor and power etc. and with those Chap. 5: 12.
worthy is the lamb that was stain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

4. That man's mouth might be stopped forever, and all boasting excluded: for
man is a proud creature, and ready to boast of that, which is nothing and
vanity. Now God has chosen this noble way of the covenant of grace, that man
might boast no more. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? by
the law of works? no, but by the law of faith, says the Apostle, Romans 3:
verse. 24.

5. That all might be sure to the poor chosen believer. The Lord will not have
the stock of life, any longer to be in man's own hand: for even Adam, in the
state of innocence, could not use it well, but made shipewrack thereof, and
turned a bankerupt: much more would man now do so, in this state of sin, in
which he lies at present; therefore Has God, out of love and tenderness to
his chosen ones, put all their stock in the hand of Christ, who is better able
to manage it, to God's glory and man's advantage, being faithful in all things,
and a trusty servant, having the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in Him
bodyly. Therefore (says the Apostle Romans 4: 16.) It is of faith, that it
might be by grace, to the end, the promises might be sure to all the seed.

6. That believers might have strong consolation, notwithstanding of all the
opposition of enemies without and within, when they see that now their life is
hid with Christ in God Col. 3: 3. and that their life is in their Head: they
will not fear so much devils and men without, nor their own dead and corrupt
hearts within.

Thirdly, How inexcuseable must all such be, (1.) Who will not lay hold on this
life, on Jesus who is the Life, sure life, yea everlasting life?

(2.) Who seek life any other way, than by and through Him, who is the Life?

(3.) Who oppose this way of life, and not only reject the offers of it, but
prove enemies to it, and to all that carry it, or preach it?

Fourthly, Here is strong encouragement to all, that would be at heaven, to
enter into this gospel way, which is away os life. Such need not fear that
their Salvation shall not be throughed, let Satan and all their adversaryes do
what they can, all that enter into this way shall live: for the way it self is
life, and nothing but life. So that here all objections are obviated: life can
answer all. If the believer fear, that he shall never win through difficultyes,
he shall die by the way, or by fainting, succumbeing and swooning, dishonor
the profession, and at length f^ll - off and apostatize, or despair and give
over all hope; Here is that, which may answer and obviat all: life can
quicken, and who can perish in the way, which is the way of life, an enlivening
way, yea the way, which is life it self; yea the Life, in a singular and
eminent manner?

Fifthly, Here is ground of reproof even of believers. who, though they have
come to Christ, yet do not live in Him, as they ought; do not walk in Him, with
that liveliness, activity, which is called for: but

1. Lean too much to their own understanding* gifts, or graces; and think
thereby to ride - out storms, and to wade through all difficulties, whileas, if
He who is the Life, do not breath upon us, all that will fail us, in the day
of trial: our understanding and pairts or gifts may dry up, and our graces may
whither and decay, and go backward.

2. Rest too much an duties; when they should in them go to Him, who is the
Life; for only in Him is life to be had; and Him should they seek to in the
ordinances* that they might have life from Him, in those outward duties: and
this appears in their way of going about duties, without that dependence on
Him, and single eyeing of Him, which is called for; as also by their freting
and repineing, when duties do not their business, as if life lay all in duties:
and concludeing all will be right, because they get duties somewhat tolerably
performed; and on the contrary desponding, when duties fall heavy on them, and
they find themselves indisposed for duty: all which clearly evinceth, that
they lay too too much weight on duties; whileas it would be otherwise with
them* if they were purely depending on Christ, and looking for all from Him.

3. Desponde too soon, because they get not help^ and relief instantly; or
because they are not preserved from every degree of fainting.

4. Neglect to make use of Him, and to come to Him, with all their wants,
failings and necessities, as they ought: or come not with that freedom and
boldness, which the gospel grounds allow.

Sixthly. This preaches out the woeful misery of such, as are strangers to
Christ: for being strangers to the Life, they have no life, they are dead, and
death is engraven on all they do; even though

1. They should be very diligent in external duties, yea and outstripe many
true believers; as the pharisees had their fasts twice a week. Luke 18.

2. They should be eminently gifted, able to iustruct others, and to speak of
the mysteries of the gospel, to good purpose and to edification: for such gifts
of knowledge and utterance may be, where the lively operations of the grace of
Christ are not; and consequently, where Christ is not, (...) the Life.

3. They should seem eminent in all their outward carriage, and seem to carry
most christinaly in all their walk, and appear most devout in the matter of
worshipe.

4. And they should have something more than ordinary; even taste of the
heavenly gift, and be made partakers of extraordinary gifts of the holy ghost,
yea and taste the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come. Heb.
6: 4, 5.

Seventhly. This discovers the noble advantage of such, as have accepted of
Christ for their life. Their condition is happy, sure, desirable and thriveing;
for Christ is theirs, and life is theirs; because Christ, who is the Life, is
theirs

Objection. 1. But some wicked person may say, we see not that happy and
advantageous condition of such, as go for believers; for we observe them to be
as little lively oftimes, as others, and as unfit for duties; yea and
sometimes, as much subject to sin and corruption, as others.
Answer. 1. However it be with them, either in thine eyes, or possibly in
their own, sometimes; yet thou may hold thy peace: for in their worste
condition, they would not exchange with thee, for a world. In their
deadest-like condition, they are not void of all life, as thou art,
notwithstanding all thy motions, and seeming activenesse in duty* because all
thy motion in and about duty is but like the moveing of childrens puppies,
caused by external motives, such as a name, applause, peace from a natural
conscience, or the like; and not from any inward principle of grace and life.

2. Howbeit they sometimes seem to be dead; yet they are not always so; life
does really work sometimes in them: whereas there was never any true or kindly
motion of life in thee.

3. There may be more life in them, yea life in motion, when they seem to be
overcome with some lusts or corruption, yea when really they are overcome; then
beholders, that are strangers to the heart, can observe: for when temptation is
violent, as having the advantage of the time and place, of the constitution of
the body, and the like, it argues no small degree of life, and of life in
motion, to make some resistance and opposition thereunto, though at length he
should be overcome thereby. And this opposition and resistance, flowing from a
principle of grace, speaks out life, though corruption, having the advantage,
should at that time over - power the motion of life, and carry the man away.

4. If it be not otherwise with believers than is objected, they may blame
themselves: for not improveing Christ better for life.

Obj. 2. But some, who are true believers, will object the same, and cry out of
themselves as dead; and say, they find not that liveliness and activity in
their souls, that will evidence Christ, the Life, dwelling and working in them.
Ans. It may be they prejudge themselves of that lively frame, they might
enjoy, and so wrong themselves.

1. In not exere^eing faith on Christ, nor drawing life from Him through faith.
The life which they live should be by faith Gal. 2: 20. How then can such as do
not eat become fat? by faith we feed on Christ.

2. In not watching, but giving way to security, and thereby encourageing and
strengthening the adversary, as we see in David: when they stand not on their
watch tower, they invite Satan to set on; and he is vigilant enough, and
knows how to take his advantage, and to improve his opportunity.

3. In giving way to leazinesse and not stirring up themselves, as we see in
the Bride Cant. 3: 1. and 5: 3. When they stir not up the grace of God, which
is in them, how can they belively? If grace be laid by, it will contract rust.
The best way to keep grace lively, is to keep it in exercise, how little so
ever it be.

4. By their rashness, walking without fear, as is to be observed in Peter,
when he slipped so foulely. When through their want of circumspection, they
precipitate themselves into danger, and cast themselves among their enemies
hands, is it any wonde^, that it go not with them, as they would; and that
they provock God to leave them to themselves, that they may know what they are,
and learn afterward not to tempte the Lord, and to walk more circumspectly?

5. By leaning too much to their attainements, and not looking out for new
influences of grace and life. Hereby they provock God to let them know to their
expenses, that for as great a length as they are come, they must live by faith,
and be quickened by new influences from the Spirit of life.

6. So they may wrong themselves through their ignorance of Christ, and of the
way of making use of Him: and if they, through unacquantednesse with Christ
and the right way of improveing the fullness that is in Him, miss the fruit
and advantage, which otherwise they might have, they can only blame themselves.

7. They may also prejudge themselves, by their self love, self esteem, self
seeking, self pleasing etc. which piece and piece will draw them off Christ,
and cause them forget the way of sucking life from Him, who is the fountain of
life.

8. When they give way to small sins, they open a door for greater; and they
lose thereby their tenderness, and so provock the Lord to withdraw: and this
is another way, whereby they prejudge themselves of that benefit of
liveliness, which they might otherwise have.

9. So also by wordly mindedness, which alienateth their mind from God: and.

10. By their impatience and fret^ing and repineing against God, and his wi^e
dispensations, they also prejudge and wrong themselves: for while they are in
that mood, they can not, with ^e composedness of Spirit, go to Christ, and
draw life from Him through faith.

Obj. 3. But is there not even some of those, who are most tender, that
compleane of their deadness and shortcomings?
Ans. 1. It may be that they complain without cause; and that they have more
cause of rejoyceing. and of blessing the Lord, for what He has done to them,
than of complaineing.

2ly. Their complaineing will not prove the want of life, but the contrare
rather: for when they complain most, they must be most sensible, if their
complaints be real, and not merely for afashion; and sense is a manifest
evidence of life.

3ly. It would be remembered, that the Lord can make their failings and
shortcomings contribute to the furthering of their life; as we see it did in
Peter.

4ly. It would also be remembered, that Christ does not distribute and give out
of this life to all his members and followers, in a like measure; but to some
more, and to others less, according as He sees it meet and convenient, both
for his own glory and their good. He has more service for some, than for
others: and some He will employ in greater and more difficult work, which will
call for more life; and others He will employ in common work, which will not
call for such an eminent degree of life.

5ly. And upon the same account, He may think it good, to give to the same
person a larger measure of grace at one time, than at another.

6ly. And that for wise reasons and noble ends, as

1. That all may see, how absolute He is in his dispensations: a Sovereign,
that does with his own what He will, and will not give an account of any of
his ways or communications* to us.

2. That we may learn submission, and quietly to stoup before Him, whatever
measure He be pleased to dispense toward us.

3. That we may learn, to depend upon Him, more closely all alongs; and in all
our ways to acknowledge Him.

4. That we may learn, to exercise patience, which must have its perfect work,
in waiting upon Him, as a great king. This is his glory, and itis the
testifying of our homage to Him.

5. He will train us up so, as to be welcontented and satisfied, if He bring
us home at length, though not with such a convey of the graces of his Spirit,
as we would wish.

6. That we may see and read our daily obligation to Christ our life, and the
daily need we have of his keeping our life in, by fresh ga^ls of his Spirit,
and new heavenly influences.

7. And that getting new proofs of his kindness and faithfulness, we may give
Him new songs of praise daily and so express our thankfulness to Him, which
will tend to set forth his glory.

Eighthly. This may point out unto believers, several duties, to which they are
called: we shall name some few of many: as

1. That they should rejoice, and be comforted, in the thoughts of this, that
they have such a compleet Mediator, one that is thoroughly furnished, and made
all things for them; not only the Way, and the Truth; but the Life also.

2. The thoughts of this should also stir up to wondering at the wisdom,
graciousnesse and goodness of God; and to thankfulness for providing such an
alsufficient way for them.

3. This should also encourage them under all temptations, faintings, backsets
and fits of deadness, that they fall into, that there is one, who is the Life:
and that He, whom their soul has chosen, is the Life, and so fully able to
quicken and enliven them.

4. This should teach them humility, and not to be proud of any thing they
have* or do: for it is He, who is the Life, who keeps them in life, and
helps them to any duty; yea it is life, that works all in them.

5. And likewise it should teach them to acknowledge Him, to whom they are
obliged, for any thing they do, for any life they have, or any acts or fruits
of life that appear in them; and to be thankful to Him therefore.

6. And mainly, They should here read their obligation and duty, to improve
this advantage, and to draw life out of this fountain, and so live by this
life; act and do all in and through this life; and so be quickened by this
life, in all their fits of deadness: and for this cause would keep those
things in mind,

(1.) That they should live in a constant conviction of their own weakness,
deadness and inability to do any acts of life, of themselves; and far less to
recover themselves out of any distemper and fit of deadness, which they fall
into.

(2.) That they should live in the faith of this. That there is life enough in
Him, who is the Life, to do their business. They should be persuaded of His
alsufficiency.

(3.) That He is not only an alsufficient deliverer, able to deliver a soul,
that is, as it were, rotting in the grave, and to cause the dead to hear his
voice and live; but also most willing and ready to answer them, in all their
necessities, according to wisdom, and as He sees it is for his glory, and
their souls advantage. The faith of this is necessary, and will be very
encourageing.

(4.) That they should go to Him, how deadlike so ever their condition be, and
by faith roll their dead case upon Him, who is the Life.

(5.) That they should pray upon the promises of grace and influence, even out
of the belly of hell, or of the grave, with Jonah Cap. 2: 2. for He is faithful
and true, and tender - hearted, and will hear and give a good answer at length.

(6.) That in the exercise of faith and prayer, they should wait with
patience, till He be pleased to come, and breath upon the dry bones, and till
the ^un of righteousness arise on their souls, with healing (...) his wings.

But of this more particularly, in the following cases, which now we come to
speak a little unto, of purpose to clear up more fully, how the believer is to
make use of Christ, as the Life, when he is under some one distemper or other,
that calls for life and quickening from Christ the Life. We cannot handle
distinctly all the particular cases, which may be brought under this head, it
will suff^, for clearing of this great duty, to speak to some few.

CHAP. XXI. How to make use of Christ as the Life, wh^ the believer is so
sitten-up in the ways of God, that he can do nothing.
SOmetimes the believer is under such a distemper of weakness and deadness,
that there is almost no commanded duty, that he can go about: his heart and all
is so dead, that he cannot so much as groan under that deadness. Yea he may be
und^ such a decay, that little or no difference will be observed betwixt him
and others, that are yet in nature; and be not only unable to go actively and
livelily about commanded duties, yea or to (...) astle from under that
deadness; but also be so dead* that he shall scarce have any effectual desir^
or longing to be out of that condition. Now* in speaking to the use making of
Christ, for quickening in this dead case, we shall do tho^ things

1. For clearing of the case, we shall show how probably it is brought on.

2. How Christ is life to the soul in such a case, as this.

3. How the believer is to make use of Christ for life, in this case; and,

4. Further clear the matter, by answering a question or two.

As to the first. Such a distemper as this may be brought upon the soul,

1. Through some strong and violent temptation, from without, meeting with some
evil disposition of the heart within, and so surprizeing and overpowering the
poor soul, as we see in David, and Peter.

2. Through the cunning and slight of Satan, stealing the believer, that is not
watchful enough, insensibly off his feet, and singing him asleep by degrees.

3. Through carelessness, in not adverting at first to the beginnings and first
degrees of this deadness and upsiting, when the heart begins to grow
formal, and superficial in duties, and to be satisfied with a perfunctorious
performance, without life and sense.

4. Through thortureing of conscience, in light and smaller matters: for this
may provock God to ^et conscience fall a sleep, and so the soul shall become
more untender, and scruple little, at length, at greater matters; and thus
deadness may come to an hieght, God ordering it so, for a further punishment
to them, for their* untendernesse and uncircumspectnesse.

5. Through their not stirring up themselves, and shaking off that Spirit of
laziness and drowsiness* when it first cease upon them; but, with the
sluggard, yet another slumber, and another sleep, and a folding of the hands to
sleep.

6. Continuing in some known sin, and not repenting of it, may bring on this
distemper, as may be observed in David.

As to the Second particular; Christ is life to the soul in this case; in that

1. He keeps possession of the soul: for the seed remains, the root abides
fast in the ground, there is life still at the heart, though the man make no
motion; like one in a deep sleep, or in a swoon, yet life is not away.

2ly. He is due time awakeneth, and rouzeth up the soul, and so recovereth it
out of that condition, by one mean or other, either by some alarm of judgment
and terror, as He did David; or dispensation of mercy and tenderness, as He did
Peter. And usually He recovereth the soul

1. By discovering something of this condition* by giving so much sense and
knowledge; and sen^ing so much light, as will let the soul see, that it (...)
not well, and that it is under that distemper of lifelesness.

2. By discovering the dreadfulness of such a condition, and how hazardous it
is to countinue therein.

3. By putting the soul in mind, that He (...) the Life, and the resurrection;
and through the stirring up of grace airting the soul to look to Him for
quickening and outgate.

4. By raseing up the soul at length out of that drouziness, and sluggish
folding of the hands to sleep, and out of that deep security; and putting it
into a more lively, vigilent and active frame.

As to the Third. The believer, that would make use of Christ, for a recovery
out of this condition, would mind those duties.

1. He would look to Christ, as the light of Men, and the enlightner of the
blind; to the end, he may get a better and a more through discovery of of his
condition; for it is half health here to be sensible of this disease. The soul
that is once brought to sense, is half recovered of this fever and lethargy.

2. He would eye Christ, as God, able to cause the dead and dry bones to live,
as Ezech. 37. and this will keep from despondency and despair; yea it will
make the poor believer conceive hope, when he sees that his physician is God,
to whom nothing is impossible.

3. He would look to Him also, as Head and Husband, an Life to the poor soul,
that adhereth to Him; and this will strengthen his hope and expectation: for he
will see, that Christ is ingadged, to speak so, in point of honor, to quicken
a poor dead and lifeless member: for the life in the head is for the good of
the whole body, and of every member of the body, that is not quite cut off: and
the good that is in the husband is forthcoming for the relief of the poor
wife, that has not yet gotten a bill of divorce. And Christ, being Life and
the Life, he must be appointed for the releife, the quickening, and recovering
from death of such as are given to Him, that they may be finally raised up at
the last day, He must present all his members lively in that day.

4. He would by faith wrape himself up in the promises, and lie before this Sun
of righteousness, till the heat of his beams thaw his frozen heart, and bring
warmth into his cold and dead soul, and thus renew his grips of Him, accepting
of Him, as the Life, and as his Life. Christ himself tells us John. 6: 40. That
this is the Fathers will, that has sent Him, that every one which sees the
Son, and believes on Him, might have everlasting life, and He will raise him
up at the last day. Faith closeing with Him, as it was the mean of life at
first, so will it be the mean of recovery out of a dead distemper, afterward.

5. He would mourn for such sins and provocations, as he discovers in
himself to have caused and brought on this distemper. Repentance and godly
sorrow for such evils, as have sinned Christ and life away, is a way to bring
life back again.

6. He would be sure to harbor no known sin in his soul, but to set himself
against every known evil, as an enemy to the life and recovery, which he is
seeking,

7. He must wait on Christ his Life, in the appointed means: for that is the
will of the Lord, that He should be waited - upon there, and sought for there.
There is little hopes of recovery for such, as lay aside the ordinances. Though
the ordinances without him cannot revive or quicken a poor soul; yet if He has
condescended so far as to come with life to his people, in and through the
ordinances, and has appointed us to wait for Him there, we must be willing to
accept of all his condescensions of love, and seek him and wait for Him there,
where He has said, He will be found.

8. In going about those ordinances of life, He would beware of putting them in
Christ's room: that is, He would beware of* thinking, that ordinances will do
his business: as some ignorantly do, who think that by praying so often a day,
and reading so much, and hearing so much, they shall recover their lost lively
frame, when (alas!) all the ordinances without Him signify nothing. They,
without Him, are cold and lifeless, and can never bring heat or warmth to a
cold soul. It is He in the ordinances whom they are to seek, and from whom
alone life is to be expected, and none else.

9. Though life lies not in the ordinances, as separated from Christ, and life
is to be expected from Him alone; yet he would beware of going about the
ordinances in a careless, superficial and indifferent manner: for this will
argue little desire after life, and will bring-on more deadness. The ordinances
than should be gone about seriously, diligently, and with great carefulness,
yea with such earnestness, as if life were to be had in them; and yet with such
a single and pure dependence on Christ for life, as if we were not about the
ordinances at all. This is the right way of going about ordinances.

10. He must in all this wait with patience, without freting or quarrelling
with Him, for his delaying to come* He must wait with much humility. It
becomes not him, who has* through his folly, sinned life away to quarrel now
with God, because he restores him not again to life, at the first asking. He
may be glade if at length, after long seeking, waiting and much diligence, He
come and restore to him the joy of his salvation, and if he be not made to lie
as a bedrid all his days, for a monument of folly, in sinning away his life,
strength and legs, as he did.

11. He must beware of giving way to any thing, that may increase or continue
this deadness, such as untendernesse in his walk, unwatchfulnesse, negligence
and carelessness; and especially he must beware to provock God, by sinning
against light.

12. He would also beware of limiteing the Lord to any set measure of life and
strength: for it becomes not beggars to be carvers; far less such beggars, as
through folly have sinned away a good portion. It was not fit for the prodigal
to seek ^ new patrimony, after he had dilapidated the former, it might suffice
him to be made as a servant.

13. He would use well any small measure of life, he gets, for God and his
glory; gets he but one talent he should use it, that he may gain thereby:
use (we say) limbs and have limbs, use strength and have it. This will be the
way to get more.

14. He would be taking on the vows of the Lord, and that in the Lord, to walk
more watchfully in time comeing, charging all within and without not to stir
or provoke the Lord to depart further, or to scarre Him from coming to the soul.

As to the last particular.

If it be enquired. 1. What can that soul do, that is not sensible of this
deadness and weakness?

Ans. Though there be not any real sense or feeling of this condition; yet
there may be a suspicion, that all is not right: and if this be, the soul must
look out to Christ, for the life of sense, and for a sight of the provocations,
that have brought on that condition. He that is the Life must recover the very
beginnings of life: and when the soul wins to any real apprehension and
sense of this deadness, it must follow the course formerly prescribed, for a
recovery.

2. But it will be asked. How a soul can act faith in such a case? And if it
cannot act faith, how can it come to Christ, and make use of Him?

Answer. It is true, while the soul is in that case, it cannot act a strong
and a lively faith; yet it can act a weak and a sickly faith: and a weak and
sickly faith can lay hold upon an enlivening Christ, and so bring*in more
strength and life to the soul. If the soul be so weak, as that it cannot
grippe; yet it can look to Him, that can quicken the dead, and has helped many
a poor soul before, out of a dead condition. Or if it cannot do so much as
look, yet it may give an half-look, and lie before Him, who waits to be
gracious; and sustain it self, if it can get no more, with a may be He shall
come.

3. But further it will be asked, what the soul can do* when after all this, it
finds no help or supply, but deadness remaining, yea and, it may be,
growing?

Ans. The soul in that case must lie at his door, waiting for his salvation;
and resolving, if no better may be, to die at his door; and leave no approven
mean, or commanded duty, unessayed, that it may recover its former vigor,
activity and strength. And while the believer is waiting thus, he is at his
duty; and this may yield him peace, and he may besure that he shall never be
ashamed Ps. 25: 3. and 69: 6. Esai. 30: 18.

CHAP. XXII. How Christ is to be made use of for life, in case of heartlesnesse
and fainting, through discouragements.
THere is another evil and distemper, which believers are subject to, and that
is a case of fainting through manifold discouragements, which make them so
heartless, that they can do nothing; yea and to sit up, as if they were dead.
The question then is. How such a soul shall make use of Christ, to the end it
may be freed from that fit of fainting, and win over those discouragments: for
satisfaction to which, we shall

1. Name some of those discouragements, which occasion this.

2. Show what Christ has done, to remove all those discouragements.

3. Show how the soul should make use of Christ for life, in this case; and

4. Add a few words of caution.

As to the first. There are several things, which may give occasion to this
distemper; we shall name those few.

1. The sense of a strong, active, lively, and continually stirring body of
death, and that not withstanding of means used to bear it down, and to kill
it. This is very discourageing: for it made Paul cry out woes me miserable man,
who shall deliver me from this body of death, Romans 7: 24. It is a most
discouraging thing, to be still fighting, and yet getting no ease, let be
victory; to have to do with an enemy, that abides always alike strong, fight
and oppose as we will, yea not only is not weakened far less overcome, but that
grows in power and prevails. And this many times affects the heart of
God's children, and causes them to faint.

2. It may be the case of some, that they are assaulted with strange
temptations of Satan, his buffettings, that are not usual. This made Paul cry
out thrice, 2 Cor. 12. and if the Lord had not told him, that His grace was
sufficient for him, what would he have done? Hence some of his cry out, in
their complaint, was there ever any so tempted, so assaulted with the devil, as
I am? Sure, this dispensation cannot but be much afflicting, sadning and
discourageing.

3. The sense of the real weakness of grace under lively means, and
notwithstanding of their serious and earnest desires, and endeavors after
grouth in grace, cannot but disquiet and discourage them: for they may readily
conclude, that all their pains and labor shall be in vain, for any thing
they can observe.

4. The want of sensible incomes of joy and comfort, is another fainting and
discourageing dispensation; as the feeling of these is a heart-strengthening
and most encourageing thing, which made David so earnestly cry for it Psalm. 51:
8, 12. when a poor soul, that has the testimony of its own conscience, that it
has been, in some measure of singleness of heart and honesty, seeking the face
of God, for a good many years, and yet cannot say, that ever it knew what those
incomes of joy and comfort mean, which some have tasted largely of, it cannot
choose but be discouraged, and much cast down, as not knowing what to say of it
self, or how to judge of its own case.

5. The want of access in their addresses to God, is another heart-discouraging
thing. They go about the duty of prayer, with that measure of earnestness and
uprightness of heart, that they can win at, at least this is their aim and
endeavor, and yet they meet with a fast-closed door: when they cry and shout,
he shoots out their prayer; as the Church complains Lament. 3: 8. This sure
will affect them deeply, and cause their hearts sometimes to fainte.

6. The want of freedom and liberty in their addreses to God, is another thing,
which causes sorrow and fainting. They go to pray, but their tongue cleaves
to the roof of their mouth; they are straightened, and cannot get their hearts
vented.

7. Outward persecution, that attends the way of godliness, and afflictions,
that accompany such as live godly, is another discourageing thing, both to
themselves, who are under afflictions; and to others, who hear it and see it;
wherefore the Apostle desired earnestly, that the Ephesians should not faint at
his tribulation, Cap. 3: 13.

8. The Lords sharp and sore dispensations for sin, as toward David Psalm. 51.
or out of his Soveraignity for trial and other ends, as toward Job, is likewise
a discourageing heartbreaking thing, and that which will make strong giants to
roar and fainte, and look upon themselves as dead men, as we see in these two
eminent men of God.

As to the second thing. Christ is life to the believer, in this case, in
having done that which in reason may support, under all these discouragements,
and having done so much for removing or weakening of these; yea and for
carrying them over them all, which may be in a word cleared, as to each.

1. As for the body of death. Let it stir in the believer, as fast as it
will, or can, it is already killed, and all that struggling is but like the
struggling of a man in the pangs of death; for our old man is crucified with
Christ, Romans 6: 6. and the believer is dead to sin, and risen legally with him,
Col. 2: 11, 12. and 3: 3. But of this we spoke abundance above.

2. As to Satan's troubling the poor believer. Through Christ also he is a
vanquished enemy. He has overcome him that had the power of death, even the
devil, Heb. 2: 14.

3. As for that felt weakness of grace. That is no ground of discouragement, so
long as he lives, who can make the lame to leep as an heart, and can make
waters break out in the wilderness, and streams in the desert. Esai. 35: 6,
7. and gives power to the fainte, and to them that have no might increases
strength: so that such as wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, and
they shall mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and
they shall walk and not faint, Esai. 40: 29, 31. For in Him are all the
promises yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1: 20. So that they need not faint upon this
account, nor be discouraged: for the work He has begun, He will finish it, and
He will quicken in the way, Psalm. 119: 37.

4. As for the want of sensible incomes of joy and comfort: He has promised to
send the comforter, in his own good time, John. 14: 26. and 15: 26. as one whom
his mother comfort, so will he comfort his, Esai. 66. 13. Joy and gladness
is promised in the covenant, Ier. 31: 13. But further; though He keep up those
influences of joy and comfort, He supporteth another way. The lively hope of
heaven may bear up the heart, under all this want: for there shall the soul
have fullness of joy and pleasures for ever more: no tears, nor sorrow there,
Psalm. 16: 11. Esa. 35: 10. and 51: 11.

5. As for the want of access in their prayers. They may possibly blame
themselves, for He has by his merits opened the door; and is become (to speak
so) master usher to the poor soul, to lead him, in to the Father, so that by
him we have access, Ephesians. 2: 18. yea boldness and access, through faith in
Him Ephesians. 3: 12. and He is our advocate 1. John. 2: 1. and as our atturnay is
gone to heaven before us; and there lives for ever to make intercession Heb.
6: 20* and 7: 25. And what is there more to be done, to procure us access? or
to move and encourage us to come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need? Heb. 4: 14, 16.

6. As to that want of freedom and liberty in prayer: He helps that also:
for He makes the dumb to sing, Esa. 35: 6. and makes the tongue of the
stammerers to be ready to speak elegantly, Esai. 32: 4. He can enlairge the
heart, and help the soul to pour-out its heart before God.

7. As to outward persecution: He can easily take that discouragement away, by
giving the hundereth fold with it: by supporting under it, and bringing saife
through it: when his presence is with them through fire and water, Esa. 43: 2.
what can trouble them? and when he makes their consolations abound, 2 Cor. 1:
5. what can discourage them? Have not his sung in the very fires? and rejoiced
in all their afflictions? The resting of the Spirit of God and of glory, which
Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 4: 14. is comfortable enough.

8. As for all those sharp dispensations, mentioned in the last place: He,
having taken the sting of all, even of death, away, by taking away sin, and
purchased the blessing and love of the Father, having made reconciliation
through his blood, all those dispensations flow from love, even such as seem
sharpest, being inflicted for sin, as we see Heb. 12: 6. So that there is no
cause here of fainting, or of being so discouraged, as to give over the matter.
But for help in this case, there should be an use making of Jesus, as the
Life; and that is

The third thing, which we shall speak a little to, viz How the soul should
make use of Christ, as the Life, to the end it may be delivered from this
fainting, occasioned through manifold discouragements,

1. The believer in this case would mind the covenant of Redemption, wherein
Christ has promised, and so stands obliged and engaged, to carry on his own
through all discouragements, to the end; so that if any one believer miscarry,
Christ loses more than they can lose: for the believer can but lose his soul,
but Christ shall lose his glory, and this is more worth, than all the souls
that ever were created. And further, not only shall Christ lose his glory, as
Redeemer; But the Father shall also lose his glory, in not making good his
promise to Christ his Son: for by the same covenant, He stands engaged to
carry through all the seed, that Christ has died for. And his appointing Christ
to be his servant for this end, and chooseing Him from among all the folk* and
his upholding of Him, concurring with him, delighting in Him, and promiseing
that He shall bring forth judgment to the gentiles, and that, to victory, or to
truth, speak out His engadgment to see all true believers brought home. See
Esai. 42: 1, 2, 3* 4. Mat. 12: 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Psalm. 89: 19, 20, 21, 28,
29* 35, 36, 37. S^re, the faith of this would support the poor believer, under
all those discouragements.

2. They would mind likewise the covenant of Grace, wherein all things are
contrived and laid down, so as that the believer may have abundant consolation
and comfort, in all cases; and wherein there is enough to take away all cause
of fainting and discouragement: as might fully be made to appear, if any did
questione it.

3. They would remember how richly Christ is furnished, with all
qualifications, suiteing even that case, wherein they are like to be
overwhelmed with discouragements: and could the believer but think upon, and
believe those three things, he might be keeped-up under all discouragements
first. That Christ is a compassionate tenderhearted mediator, having bowels
more tender, than the bowels of any mother; so that He will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax Esai. 42: 3. He had compassion on
the very bodies of the multitude, that followed him; and would not let them go
away fasting, lest they should fainte in the way, Mat. 15: 32. Mark. 8: 3. and
will He not have compassion on the souls of his followers, when like to faint
through spiritual discouragements? Secondly. That He has power and authority
to command all things, that can serve to carray-on a poor believer: for all
power in Heaven and Earth is given to Him; all things are made subject to Him.
Thirdly. That He has a great readiness and willingness, upon many accounts,
to help his followers in their necessities. Sure, were these three firmly
believed, the believer could not ^aint, having Christ, who is tender and loving
and willing to help, and withal able to do what he will, to look to, and to
run to, for supply.

4. They would take up Christ, under all his heart-strengthening, and soul
comforting relations, as a tender Brother, a careful Shepherd, a fellowfeeling
Highpriest, a loving Husband, a sympathizing Head, a life-communicating Root,
an alsufficient King etc. any one of which is enough to bear up the head, and
comfort the heart of a drouping, discouraged and fainting soul: much more may
all of them yield strong consolation, to support and revive a soul, staggering
and fainting, through discouragement. Oh! if we could but rightly improve, and
dwell upon the thoughts of these comforting and heart-quickening relations! our
hearts would not fail us, so much as they do.

5. They would eye Him, as now in glory, who, as Head and Captain of
salvation, has wreastled through, and overcome all difficulties and
discouragments, that were in his way, and in name and behalf of all believers,
that are his followers, and members of his body, is now possessed of glory, and
thence draw an heart-comforting, and soul-strengthening conclusion, thus. Is He
entered into glory as Head, than such a poor faint hearted, heart-brocken,
discouraged worm, as I am, may at length come there, as a little bit of his
body, especially since He said, that seeing He lives all his shall live also,
Ioh. 14: 19.

6. They would remember how Christ, who was always heard of his Father, John.
11: 41, 42. did supplicat for this, as Mediator and Intercessor for his people
John. 17: 24. saying, Father, I will the they also, whom thou have given me, be
with me, where I am, etc. May not the poor faint-hearted, believer, that is
looking to Jesus, draw an heart-reviveing and soul encouraging conclusion out
of this, and say. Though my prayers be shote out, and when I cry for relief
under my discouragements, I get no hearing; but, on the contrary, my
discouragements grow, and my heart faints the more; yet Christ always was
heard, and the Father will not say Him nay, why then may I not lift up my head
in hope, and sing in the hope of the glory of God, (...) the midst of all my
discouragements?

7. By faith they would cast all their discouragements, entanglements, and
difficulties, as burdens, too heavy for their back, on Christ, and ^eave them
there with Him, who only can remove them; and withal resolve never to give
over, but ^o go forward in his strength, and thus become daily ^ronger and
stronger in resolutions, purposes, desires and endeavors, when they can do no
^ore.

8. They would look to Jesus, the author and ^isher of faith, and set Him
before them, as a copy ^f courage, who, for the joy, that was set before Him*
^dured the cross, despiseing the shame, and en^red contradiction of sinners
against himself Heb. 12: 2, 3. and this may prove a mean to keep us ^om
wearrying and fainting in our minds, as the ^postle hinteth there.

9. They would remember, that Christ, going ^fore, as the Captain of
salvation, has brocken ^e ye to them, and the force and strength of all ^ose
discouragements, as we did lately show; so ^at now they should be looked upon,
as brocken and ^owerlesse discouragements.

10. They would fix their eye by faith on Jesus, as ^ly able to do their
business, to bear up their ^ad, to carry them through discouragements, to ^ply
cordials to their fainting hearts; and remain ^red in that posture and
resolution, looking for ^rengthening and encourageing-life from Him, and ^om
Him alone: and thus declare that 1. They ^e unable in themselves to stand-out
such storms of discouragements and to wreastle through such difficulties. 2.
They believe, He is only able to bear them up, and carry them through, and make
them to despise all those discouragements, which the Devil and their own evil
hearts muster up against them. 3. That, come what will come, they will not
quite the bargane, they will never recall or take back their subscription and
consent to the covenant of grace, and to Christ as theirs, offered therein,
though they should die, and die again, by the way. 4. That they would feign be
keeped-on in the way, and helped forward, without failing and fainting by the
way. 5. That they cannot run* through hard walls, they cannot do impossibilities,
they cannot break through such mighty discouragements. 6. That yet through Him,
they can d^ all things. 7. That He must help, or they (...) gone, and shall
never win through all these difficulties and discouragements, but shall one day
or other die by the hand of Saul. 8. That they will wait earnestly seeking
help from Him, crying for it, and looking for it, and resolve never ^ give
over, and if they be disappointed, (...) a^ disappointed.

Now for the last particular. The word of ca^tion. Take these.

1. They would not think to be altogether (...) of fainting: for there is no
perfection here, an^ there is much flesh and corruption remaining, (...) that
will occasion fainting.

2. Nor would they think to be free of all (...) causes and occasions of this
fainting, viz the discouragements formerly mentioned, or the like for, if the
devil can do any thing, he will work discouragements, both within and without.
So that they would lay their resolution to meet with discouragaments: for few
or none ever went to heaven, but they had many a storm in their face, and they
must not think to have a way paved for themselves alone.

3. They would not pore too much, nor dwell too long and too much upon the
thoughts of those discouragements: for that is Satan's advantage, and tends to
weaken themselves. But it were better to be looking beyond them, as Christ did
Heb. 12: 2. when he had the cross and the shame to wreastle with, He looked to
the joy that was set before Him; and that made Him endure the cross, and
despise the shame: and as Moses did Heb. 11: 25, 26, 27. when he had
afflictions, and the wrath of the King to wreastle against, He had respect unto
the recompense of the reward, and so he endured as seeing Him who is invisible.

4. They would remember, that as Christ has tender bowels, and is full of
compassion, and is both ready and able to help them, so is He wise, and
knows how to let-out his mercies best. He is not like a foolish affectionat
mother, that would hazard the life of the child, before she put the child to
any pain. He sees what is best for his own glory, and for their good, here
and hereafter; and that He will do, with much tenderness and readiness.

5. They would look upon it, as no mean mercy, if, notwithstanding of all the
discouragements; and storms that blow in their face, they are helped to keep
their face up the hill, and are fixed in this resolution, never willingly to
turn their back upon the way of God; but to continue creeping forward, as they
may, whatever storms they meet with: yea upon this account, ought they
heartily to bless his name, and to rejoice; for their hearts shall live that
seek Him, Psalm. 22: 26.

6. They would remember, for their encouragement, that as many have been helped
through all discouragements, and have been brought home at length, so may they
be brought through all those storms, which now they wreastle with. It is the
glory of the Mediator to bring his brocken, torn and sincking vessels saife to
shore.

Now I come to a third case, and that is

CHAP. XXIII. How to make use of Christ as the Life, when the soul is dead, as
to duty.
SOmetime the believer will be under such ^ distemper, as that he will be as
unfit and unable for dischargeing of any commanded duty, as a dead man, or one
in a swoon, is to work or go a journay: and it were good to know how Christ
should be made use of, as the Life, to the end the diseased soul may be
delivered from this: for this cause, we shall consider those four things,

1. See what are the several steps and degrees of this distemper.

2. Consider whence it comes, or what are the causes or occasions thereof.

3. Consider how Christ is life to the soul, in such a dead case: and

4. Point out the way of the souls usemaking of Christ, that would be delivered
herefrom.

As to the first. This distemper cometh-on by several steps and degrees: it
will be sufficient to mention some of the maine and most remarkable steps; such
as,

1. There is a falling from our watchfulness and tenderness: and when we
leave our watchtour, we invite and encourage Satan to set upon us; as was said
before.

2. There is going about duty but in a lazy way, when we love and seek after
carnal ease, and seek out ways of doing the duty, so as may be least
troublesome to the flesh; as the Spouse did, Cant. 3: 1. when she sought her
beloved upon her bed.

3. There is a lying by, and not stirring up ourselves to an active way of
going about duty, of which the Prophet complains, Esai. 64: 7. when he
says, there is none that stirs up himself to take hold of thee.

4. There is a giving way to spiritual drouzinesse, and upsitting in duties,
and in the ways of God. I sleep (said the Spouse Cant. 5: 2, 3.) and I have
put off my coat etc. She knew she was not right, but was drousie, and yet she
did not shake it off, but composed herself for it, took off her coat, and
washed her feet, and so lay down to sleep.

5. There is a satisfaction and contentment with his condition, as thinking we
are pretty well; at least, for that time; and thus was the spouse in that
forementioned place led away, she was so far from being dissatisfied with her
condition, that she rather expresses her contentment therewith.

6. There may be such a love to such a condition, and such a satisfaction in
it, as that they may shift every thing, that has a tendency to rouse them up
out of that sluggish laziness, as not loving to be awakened out of their
sleep. So we see the Bride shift^ and puts off Christ's call and invitation
to her, to arise and open to Him.

7. Yea, there is a defending of that condition, as, at least, tolerable and
none of the worste; a justifying of it; or, at least, a pleading for themselves
and excuseing the matter, and covering over their neglect of duty with fair
pretexts, as the Spouse did, when she answered Christ's call, with this, that
she had washed her feet and might not defile them agine.

8. Yea further, there is a pleading for this case, by alleging an
impossibility to get it helped, (...) matters now stand; or at least, they will
muster up insuperable-like difficulties, in their own way of doing duty, as the
sluggard will say, that there is a lion in the way: and the Spouse alleged she
could not put on her coat again.

9. Yea, it way come yet higher, even to a peremptour refuseing to set about
the duty: for what else can be read out of the Brides carriage* than that she
would not rise, and open to her beloved?

10. There is also a desperate laying the duty aside, as supposeing it
impossible to be got done, and so a resolute laying of it by as hopeless, and
as a business, they need not trouble themselves with ^l, because they will not
get it throughed.

11. And hence flows an utter indisposition, and unfitness for duty.

12. Yea, and in some it may came to this hieght that the thoughts of going
about any commanded duty, especially of worshipe, either in public or Private;
or their minting, and attempting to set about it, shall fill them with terror
and affrightment, that they shall be constrained to forbear, yea to lay aside
all thoughts of going about any such duty.

This is a very dead - like condition, what can be the causes or occasions
thereof*

I answer* (And this is the Second particular) Some, or all of those things
may be considered, as ^ving a hand in this.

1. No care to keep up a tender frame of heart, but growing slack, loose and
careless, in going about christian duties, may bring - on such a dis^emper.

2. Slighting of challenges for omission of duties, or leaving duties over the
belly of conscience, may make way for such an evil.

3. Giving way to carnality and formality in duties, is a ready mean to usher
- in this evil: for ^hen the soul turns carnal o^ formal, in the discharge of
duties, duties have not that spiritual luster, which they had, and the soul
becomes the sooner wearyed of them, as seeing no such desireablnesse in them,
^or advantage by them*

4. When people drown themselves in the cares of the world, they occasion this
deadness to themselves: for then duties not only are not gone about heartily,
but they are looked on as a burden, and the man becomes weary of them; and
from that he comes to neglect them; and by continueing in the neglect of them,
he contracteth an aversation of heart from them; and then an utter unfitness
and indisposition, for dischargeing of them, follows.

5. Satan has an active hand here driveing-on with his crafts and wiles from
one step to another.

6. The hand also of a Sovereign God is to be observed here, giving way to
this, yea and ordering matters in his justice and wisdom so, as such persons
shall come under such an indisposition, and that for wise and holy ends, as 1.
That by such a dispensation he may humble them; who possibly were puffed up
before, as thinking themselves fit enough to go about any duty, how difficult
or hazardous soever, as Peter, who boasted so of his own strength, as he
thought nothing to lay down his life for Christ, and to die with him; and yet
at length came to that, that he could not, or durst not, speak the truth before
a damsel. 2. That He may punish one spiritual sin with another. 3. To give
warning to all to watch, and pray, and to work out their salvation with fear
and trembling, and not to be high minded but fear. 4. That thereby, in his
just and righteous judgment* He may lay a stumbling block before some, to the
breaking of their neck, when they shall, for ^his cause reject and mock at all
religion. 5. That He may give proof at length of his admirable skill recovering
from such a distemper, that no flesh might have ground to despare, in the most
dead condition. they can fall into. 6. And to show sometimes, what a Sovereign
dispensator of life He is, and how free He is in all his favors.

As to the third particular. How Christ is Life, in this case?

We answer. 1. By keeping possession of the believer, even when he seems to
be most dead; and keeping life at the root, when there is neither fruit
appearing, nor flourishes, and hardly many grean leaves, to evidence life.

2. By blowing at the coal of grace in the soul, in his own time and way, and
putting an end to the winter, and sending the time of the singing of the birds,
a spring - time of life.

3. By looseing the bands, with which he was held fast formerly, enlargeing the
heart with desires to go about the duty; so that now he willingly ris^ up out
of his bed of security, and cheerfully ^aketh off his drowsiness, and
sluggishnesse, and former unwillingnesse; and now with willingness, and
cheerfulness he sets about the duty.

4. By sending influences of life and strength into the soul, whereby the
wheels of the soul are made to run with ease, being oyled with those divine
influences.

5. And this he does by touching the heart, and ^akening it by his Spirit, as
He raised the Spouse out of her bed of security and leazinesse, by putting in
his hand by the hole of the door, then were her bowels moved for Him, ant. 5:
verse. 4. and thus He sets faith on work again, having the key of David to
open the heart, Revel 3: verse. 7.

6. By giving a discovery of the evil of their former ways and courses, He
works up the heart to godly sorrow and remorse, for what is done, making
their bowels move for grief and sorrow, that they should have so dishonored
and grieved Him.

7. By setting the soul thus on work to do, what formerly it neither could, nor
would do; and thus He makes the soul strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, Epes. 6: 10. and able to run and not be weary, and to walk and not
be faint, Esai. 40.

8. By discovering the great recompense of reward that is comeing, and the
great help they have at hand, in the Covenant and promises thereof, and in
Christ, their Head and Lord* He makes the burden light, and the duty easy.

As to the Last particular viz. How a believer in such a case should make use
of Christ, as the Life, that he may be delivered therefrom?

When the poor believer is any way sensible of this decay, and earnestly
desireing to be from under that power of death, and in case to go about
commanded duties, he would

1. Look to Christ for enlightened eyes, that he may get a more through
discovery of the hazard and wreatchednesse of such a condition, that hereby
being awakened and alarmed he may more willingly use the means of recovery,
and be more willing to be at some pains to be delivered.

2. He would run to the blood of Jesus, to get the guilt of his by gone sinful
ways washen away, and bloted out; to the end he may obtain the favor of God,
and get his reconciled face shineing upon him again.

3. He would eye Christ, as a Prince exalted to give repentance, that so his
sorrow for his former sinful courses, may be kindly, spiritual, through and
affecting the heart. He would cry to Christ, that He would put - in his hand by
the hole of the door, that his bowels may become moved for Him.

4. He would also look to Him, as that good Shepherd, who will strengthen that
which is sick, Ezech. 34: 16. And take notice also of his other Relations, and
of his Obligations thereby, and by the Covenant of Redemption; and this will
strengthen his hope.

5. He would lay hold on Christ as his Strength, whereby his feet may be made
like hindes feet, and he may be made to walk upon his high places, Habb. 3: 19.
and he would grippe to that promise, Esai. 41: 10* I will strengthen thee; and
lay hold on Christ in it.

6. Having done thus, he would set about every commanded duty, in the strength
of Jesus, looking to Him for help and supply, from whom comes all his
strength: and though he should not find that help and assistance, which he
expected, yet he would not be discouraged, but continue, and when he can do no
more offer himself* as ready and willing to go about the duty, as if he had
strength.

7. He would lie open to, and be ready to receive the influences of strength,
which He, who is the Head, shall think good to give, in his own time manner and
measure: and this takes in those duties:

1. That they would carefully guaird against the evils formerly mentioned,
which brought on this distemper; such as Carelessness, Untendernesse*
Unwatchfulnesse, Lazynesse, carnal Security, Formality, and want of
Seriousness, etc.

2. That they would beware of giving way to despondency, or of concludeing the
matter hopeless, and remediless: for that is both discourageing to the soul,
and a tempting provocation of God.

3. That they should be exerciseing the grace of patient Waiting.

4. That they should be waiting, in the use of the appointed means, and
thereby, as it were, rubbing the dead and cold member before the fire, till it
gather warmth.

5. That they should be keeping all their sails ^p, waiting for the gaile of
the Spirit, that should make their shipe sail.

6. That they should be looking to Him alone, who has promised that quickening
Spirit; and patiently waiting his leisure, not limiting Him to any definite
time.

7. That they should be cherishing and stirring up any small beginnings that
are.

8. That they should be welcoming most cheerfully every motion of the Spirit,
and improveing every advantage of that kind, and stricking the iron when it is
hot, and hold the wheels of the soul a going, when they are once put in
motion, and so be loath to grieve the good and holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4:
verse. 30. or to quench his motions. 1 These. 5: verse. 19.

If these duties were honestly minded and gone about, in Him, and in His
strength; none can tell, how soon there might be a change wrought in the soul.

But of it be asked what such can do, to whom the very thoughts of the duty,
and aimeing at it is matter of terror.

Ans. It may be something, if not much, of that may flow from such a bodyly
distemper, as occasioneth the alteration of the body, upon the through
apprehension of any thing, that is weighty and of moment, so as they cannot
endure to be much affected with any thing: But leaving this to others, I would
advise such a soul to those duties.

1. To be frequently seting to the duty, as for example of prayer, though that
should raise the distemper of their body: for, through time that may wear
away, or at least grow less; while as their giving way thereto will still make
the duty the more and more terrible, and so render themselves the more unfit
for it, and thus they shall gratify Satan, who (it may be) may have a hand in
that bodyly distemper too: when the poor soul is thus accustomed or habituated
to the attempting of the duty, it will at length appear not so terrible as it
did; and so the body may become not so soon altered thereby, as it was.

2. When such an one can do no more, He would keep his love to the duty, and
his desires after ^t, fresh and lively: and would not suffer these quite to die
out.

3. He would be much in the use of frequent ejaculations, and of short
supplications darted up to God; for these will not make such an impression on
the body, and so will not so occasion the raiseing and wakening of the bodyly
distemper, as more solemn addresses to God in prayer would possibly do.

4. If he cannot go to Christ with confidence, to draw out of Him life and
strength, according to his need; yet he may give a look to Him, though it were
from a far: and he may think of Him, and speak of Him frequently: and would
narrowly observe every thing, that points Him out, or brings any thing of
Him to remembrance.

5. Such souls would not give way to despairing thoughts, as if their case were
wholly helpelesse and hopeless: for that is a reflecting upon the power and
skill of Christ: and therefore is provoking and dishonorable to Him.

6. Let Christ, and all that is His, be precious always and lovely unto them.
And thus they would keep some room in their heart open for Him; till He should
be pleased to come to them with salvation. And who can tell, how soon He may
come?

But enough of this: there is a Fourth case of deadness to be spoken to; and
that is this.

CHAP. XXIV. How shall the soul make use of Christ, as the life, which is under
the prevailing power of unbeleef and infidelity.
THat we may help to give some clearing to a poor soul in this case, we shall

1. See what are the several steps and degrees of this distemper.

2. Consider what the causes hereof are.

3. Show how Christ is life to a soul in such a case: and

4. Give some directions, how a soul in that case, should make use of Christ,
as the Life, to the end, it may be delivered therefrom.

And first. There are many several steps to, and degrees of this distemper: we
shall mention a few, as

1. When they cannot come with confidence, and draw ou^ of Him by faith, what
their souls case calls for; they cannot with joy draw waters out of the wels
of salvation, Esai. 12: 3. But keep at a distance, and intertaine jealous
thoughts of Him: this is a degree of unbeleefe, making way for more.

2. When they cannot confidently assert, and avow their interest in Him, as the
Church did, Esai. ^2: 2. saying Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and
not be afra^ed; for the Lord Ie hovah is my strength, and my song* He also is
become my salvation,

3. when they much question, if ever they have indeed laid hold on Christ; and
so cannot go to Him, for the supply of their wants and necessities.

4. When moreover they question, if they be allowed of God, and warranted to
come to Him, and lay hold upon Him: yea and they think they have many
arguments, whereby to maintain this their unbeleefe, and justify their keeping
aback from Christ.

5. Or when, if they look to Him at all, it is with much mixture of faithless
fears that they shall not be the better: or, at least, doubting whether it
shall be to their advantage or not.

6. This unbeleef will advance further, and they may come to that, not only to
conclude, that they have no part or portion in Him* but also to conclude, that
their case is desperate and irremediable: and so say, there is no more hope,
they are cut off for their part, as Ezech. 37: 11. and so lie* by as dead and
forelorne.

7. Yea they may come higher, and vent some desperate thoughts and expressions
of God, to the great scandal of the godly, and to the dishonor of God.

8. And yet more, they may come that length, to question all the promises, and
cry out, with David in his haste, Psalm. 116: 11. that all men are liars.

9. Yea they may come to this, to account the whole gospel, to be nothing but a
heap of delusions, and a cunningly devised fable, or but mere notions and
fancies.

10. And at length come to question, if there be a God, that rules in the
Earth.

These are dreadful degrees and steps of this horrid distemper, and enough to
make all flesh tremble.

Let us see next, whence this comes. The causes hereof we may reduce to three
heads.

First. The holy Lord has a holy hand in this, and has noble ends and
designs before Him, in this matter: as

1. The Lord may think good to order matters thus, that He may magnify his
power and grace, in reseueing such, as were returned to the very brinke of
hell, and seemed to many to be lost and irrecoverably gone.

2. Tha^ in punishing them thus, for giving way to the first motions of
unbeleefe, he might warn all to guaird against such an evil, and not to foster
and give way to groundless complaints, nor intertaine objections, moved
against their condition by the devil.

3. To warn all to walk circumspectly, and to worke-out their salvation with
fear and trembling, not knowing what may befall them, ere they die.

4. To teach all to walk humbly, not knowing what advantage Satan may get of
them, ere all be done; and to see their daily need of Christ to strenthen their
faith, and to keep their grips of Him fast.

5. So the Lord may think good to dispense so with some, that he may give a
full proof of his wonderfully great patience and longanimity, in bearing with
such* and that so long.

6. As also to demonstrate his Soveraignity, in measureing out his
dispensations to his own, as he sees will most glorify himself.

Next, Satan has an active hand in this, for

1. He raises clouds and mists in the believer, so that he cannot see the work
of God within himself, and so is made to cry out, that he has no grace, and
that all was but delusions, and imaginations, which he looked upon as grace
before.

2. He raises up in them jealousies of God, and of all his ways, and puts a
false gloss and construction on all, which God does, to the end he may
confirm them in their jealousies, which they have drunk in of God.

3. Having gained this ground, he works then upon their corruption, with very
great advantage; and thus drives them from evil to worse, and not only to
question their present interest in Christ, but also to quite all hope for the
time to come.

4. This being done, he drives the soul yet further, and fills it with
prejudices against God and his glorious truths; and from this he can easily
bring them to call all in question.

5. Yea he will represent God as an enemy to them; and when this is done, how
easy is it with him to put them on desperate courses, and cause them speak
wickedly and desperately of God?

6. And when this is done, he can easily darken the understanding, that the
poor soul shall not see the glory of the gospel, and of the covenant of grace,
nor the luster and beauty of holiness: yea and raise prejudices against the
same, because there is no hope of partaking of the benefit thereof and so
bring them on, to a plain questioning of all, as ^eer delusions.

7. And when he has gotten them brought this length* he has fair advantage
to make them question if there be a God and so drive them forward to Atheism.
And thus deceitfully he can carry the soul from one step to another.

But thirdly. There are many sinful causes of this, within the man self as

1. Pride and haughtiness, of mind, as thinking their mountain stands so
strong, that it cannot be moved: and this provokes God to hide his face, as,
Psalm. 30.

2. Self confidence, a concomitant of pride, supposing themselves to be so well
rooted, that they cannot be shaken, whileas it were better for them to walk in
fear.

3. Want of watchfulness over a deceitful heart, and an evil heart of
unbeleef, that is still departing from the living God, Heb. 3: 12. It is good
to be jealous here.

4. Giving way to doubtings and questionings too readyly at first. It is not
good to tempt the Lord by parlying too much and too readyly with Satan Eva's
practice might be a warning sufficient to us.

5. Not living in the sight of their wants, and of their daily necessity of
Christ, nor acting faith upon Him daily, for the supplying of their wants: and
when faith is not used, it may contract rust and be weakened, and come at length
not to be discer^ed.

6. Intertaining of jealous thoughts of God, and harkening too readyly to any
thing, that foster and increase, or confirm these.

7. Not delighting themselves in, and with pleasure dwelling on the thoughts of
Christ, of his offices, of the gospel, and promises; so that these come at
length to lose their beauty and glory, in the soul, and have not the luster
that once they had; and this does open a door to much mischief.

8. In a word, not walking with God, according to the gospel, provokes the
Lord to give them up to themselves for a time.

We come now to the Third particular, which is to show, How Chist is life to
the poor soul in this case. And for the clearing of this, consider

1. That Christ is the author and finisher of faith, Heb 12: 2. and so, as He
did rebuke unbeleef at the first, he can rebuke it again.

2. That He is the great Prophet, clearing up the gospel, and every thing, that
is necessary for us to know, bringing life and immortality to light by the
gospel, 2 Timothy 1: 11. and so manifesting the luster and beauty of the gospel.

3. He brings the promises home to the soul, in their reality, excellency,
and truth, being the faithful witness and the Amen, Revel 3: 14. and the
confirmer of the promises, so that they are all yea and Amen in him, 2 Cor. 1:
20. And this serves to establish the soul in the faith, and to shootout
thoughts of unbeleefe.

4. So does He, by his Spirit, dispel the mists and clouds, which Satan,
through unbeleef, had raised in the soul.

5. And thereby also rebukes those mistakes of God, and prejudices at Him and
his ways, which Satan has wrought there, through corruption.

6. He discovers himself to be a ready help in time of trouble* the hope and
anchor of salvation, Heb. 6: 19 and a Priest living for ever to make
intercession for poor sinners, Heb. 7: 25.

7. And hereby he clears up to the poor soul a possibility of help and
relief; and thus rebukes despair, or preventeth it.

8. He manifests himself to be the ma^ow and substance of the gospel: and
this makes every line thereof pleasant and beautiful to the soul and so freeth
them from the prejudices that they had at it.

2. So in manifesting himself in the gospel, he reveals the Father, that the
soul comes to the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 4: 6. and this saves the soul from atheism

10. When the soul cannot grippe Him, nor look to Him, yet He can look to the
soul, and by his look quicken and revive the soul, and warm the heart with
love to Him, and at length move and incline it sweetly to open to Him. And thus
grippe and hold fast a lost sheep, yea and bring it home again.

But what should a soul do in such a case. To this (which is the Fourth
particular to be spoken to) I answer.

1. They would strive against those evils, formerly mentioned, which procured
or occasioned this distemper: a stop should be put to these malignant humors.

2. They would be careful to lay again the foundation of solid knowledge of
God, and of his glorious truths, revealed in the gospel: and labor for the
faith of God's truth and veracity: for till this be, nothing can be right in
the soul.

3. They would be thoroughly convinced of the treachery, deceitfulness, and
wickedness of their hearts, that they may see it is not worthy to be trusted,
and that they may be jealous of it, and not hearken so readyly to it, as they
have done, especially seeing Satan can prompt it to speak for his advantage.

4. They would remember also, that it is divine help, that can recover them,
and cause them grippe to the promises, and lay hold on them of new again, as
well as at the first, and that of themselves, they can do nothing.

5. In useing of the means for the recovery of life, they would eye Christ,
and because this eyeing of Christ is faith, and their disease lies most there
they would do as the Israelits did, who were stung in the eye with the
serpents, they looked to the brazen serpent with the wounded and stung eye: so
would they do with a sickly, and almost dead, faith, grip Him, and with an eye,
almost put out and made blind, look to Him, knowing how ready He is to help,
and what a tender heart He has.

6. And to confirm them in this resolution, they would take a new vieu of all
the notable encouragements to believe, wherewith the whole gospel abounds.

7. And withal, fix on Him, as the only author and finisher of faith.

8. And in a word, They would cast a wonderderfully unbeleeving, and
atheistical soul on Him, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working
and is wonderful in mercy and grace, and in all his ways. And thus may He at
length, in his own time, and in the way that will most glorify Himself, raise
up that poor soul, out of the grave of infidelity, wherein it was stinking;
and so prov^ Himself to be indeed the resurrection and the life, to the praise
of the glory of his grace.

We come now to speak to another case, which is

CHAP. XXV. How Christ is to be made use of, as the life, by one that is so
dead and senseless, as he cannot know what to judge of himself, or his own
case, except that it is naught.
WE spoke something to this very case upon the matter, when we spoke of Christ
as the Truth. Yet we shall speak alittle to it here; but shall not enlarge
particulars formerly mentioned: and therefore we shall speak alittle to those
five particulars; and so,

1. Show, what this distemper is.

2. Show, whence it proceeds, and how the soul comes to fall into it.

3. Show, how Christ, as the life, brings about a recovery out of it.

4. Show how the soul is to be exercised, that it may obtain a recovery: and

5. Answer some Questions or Objections.

As to the first: Believers many times may be so dead, as not only not to see
and know, that they have an interest in Christ, and to be uncertain, what to
judge of themselves; but also be so carried away with prejudices and mistakes,
as that they will judge no otherwise of themselves, than that their case is
naught; yea and not only will'deny, or mis-call the good, that God has wrought
in them by his Spirit; but also reason themselves to be out of the state of
grace, and a stranger to faith and to the workings of the Spirit: and hereupon
will come to call all delusions, which some time they had felt, and seen in
themselves: which is a sad distemper; and which grace in life would free the
soul from.

This proceeds (which is the second particular) partly from God's hideing of
his face, and changing his dispensations, about them, and compassing them with
clouds; and partly from themselves, and their own mistakes: as

1. Judging their state, not by the unchangable rule of truth; but by the
outward dispensations of God, which change upon the best.

2. Judging their state by the observable measure of grace within them; and so
concludeing their state bad, because they observe corruption prevailing now and
then, and grace decaying; and they perceive no victory over temptations, nor
grouth in grace, etc.

3. Judging also their state by others; and so they suppose that they cannot be
believers, because they are so unlike to others, whom they judge true
believers. This is also to judge by a wrong rule.

4. Judging themselves by themselves, that is, because they look so unlike to
what sometimes they were themselves, they conclude, that their state cannot be
good, which is also a wrong rule to judge their State by.

5. Beginning to try and examine their ^ase and State, and comeing ^o no close
or issue, so that when they have done, they are as uncleare and uncertain,
what to judge of themselves, as when they began: or

6. Taking little or no pains to try themselves seriously, as in the sight of
God, but resting satisfied with a superficial trial, which can come to no good
issue.

7. Trying and examineing, but, through the slight of Satan, and because
pitching upon wrong marks, comeing to no good issue, but condemning themselves
without ground.

8. There is another thing which occasioneth this misjudging, to wit, the want
of distinctnesse and clearness in covenanting with Christ, and the ignorance
of the nature of true saving faith.

As to the third particular. How Chist is Life to the believer in this case.

I Answer. Christ manifests himself to be life to the soul, in this case.

1. By sending the Spirit of life, that Enlighteneth, Informs, Persuades*
and Seals.

2. By actuating grace so in the soul, that it manifests it self, and
evidenceth it self to be there, as the heat and burning of a fire will
discover it self, without other toakens.

The fourth particular, to wit, how the soul should be exercised, or how it
should employ Christ, for an outgate out of this, has been abundantly cleared
above, where we showed, that believers in this case would

1. Be frequent in griping Christ, and closeing with Him as their alsufficient
Mediator: and faith thus frequently acting on Him, may discover it self at
length.

2. Look to Christ, that has eye salve, and is given for a witness.

3. Keep grips fast of Him, though they be in the dark, and walk on, griping to
Him.

4. Keep love toward Him and his working, and in exercise.

5. Beg of Him to clear up their state by his Spirit, explaining the true
marks of grace, and discovering the working of grace in the soul.

But it will be said (and so I come to the last particular) what if after all
this, I remain as formerly, as unable to judge aright of my State, as ever?

Ans. Yet, thou would continue griping Christ, loving Him, looking to Him,
casting a lost dead soul, with all thy wants, upon Him, and mind this as thy
constant work. Yea, thou would labor to be growing in these direct acts of
faith: and learn to submit to God herein, knowing that those reflect acts are
not absolutely necessary, and that thou should think it much, if He bring thee
to heaven at length, though covered with a cloud, all thy days.

Obj. 2. But others get much more clearness?
Ans. I grant that: yet know, that every one geteth not clearness, and such as
have it, have it not in the same measure* and must God give thee as much as He
gives to any other? What if thou could not make that use of it, that others
do, but wax proud thereby, and forget thy self? Therefore, it will be best to
give God liberty to dispense his favors, as He will, and that thou be about
^hy commanded duty, the exercise of faith, Love, Fear, Patience, etc.

Obj. 3* But if at any time I got a sight of my case, it would be some peace
and satisfaction ^o me?
Ans. I grant that, and what know thou, but ^hou may also get that favor
ere thou die? Why ^hen will thou not wait his leisure?

Obj. 4. But the want of it in the mean time makes me go heartlesly and
discouragedly about ^ommanded duties, and makes that I cannot apply things
distinctly to my self.
Ans. Yet the word of command is the same, ^he offer is the same, and the
encouragement is the same: why then should not thou be going ^on, leaning to
Christ in the wilderness, even though thou want that comfortable sight?

Obj. 5. But it is one thing to want a clear ^ight of my state; it is another
thing to judge my self, to be yet in the state of nature: and this is my case.
Ans. I grant this is the worste of the two: yet, that if thou misjudge thy
self without ground* should thou not suffer for thine own folly? and whom can
thou blame but thy self? And if thou judge so, thou cannot but know* that it is
thy duty to do the thing, that thou supposes is not yet done, that is, run
away to Christ for life and salvation, and rest on Him, and abide there: and if
this were frequently renewed, the grounds of thy former mistake might be easily
removed.

Yet further, I would add those few things.

1. Take no pleasure in debateing against your own soul; for that is but to
serve Satan's design.

2. Be not too rash or ready to drink-in prejudices against the work of God, in
your own souls: for that is to collude with Satan against your selves.

3. Make much of any little light He is pleased to give, were it but of one
mark; and be not ill to please: for one scriptural mark, as love to the
brethren, may sufficiently evidence the thing.

4. See how thy soul would like the condition of such as are carnal, profane,
careless in the matters of God: and if thy soul does really abhore that, and
thou would not upon any account choose to be in such a case, thou may gather
something from that, to thy comfort: But enough of this case here?

CHAP. XXVI. How is Christ as the Life to be applied by a soul, that misseth
God's favor and countenance.
THe sixth case, that we shall speak a little to, is a deadness, occasioned by
the Lord's hideing of himself, who is their Life* and the fountain of life,
Psalm. 36: 9. and whose loving kindn^sse is better then life* Psalm. 63: 3. and
in whose favor is their life, Psalm ^0: 5. A case* which the frequent
complaints of the Saints manifest to be rife enough. Concearning which we shall,

1. Show some of the consequences of the Lord's hideing of his face, whereby
the soul^ case will appear.

2. Show the reasons of this dispensation.

3. Show how Christ is life to the soul in this case, and

4. Point - out the souls duty; or how he is to make use of Christ, for a
recovery.

As to the first, we may take notice of those particulars,

1. They complain of God's hideing of himself* and forsakeing them, Psalm. 22:
1. my God my God, why have thou forsaken me! and Psalm. 13: 3. how long will thou forsake me? etc.

2. They cry out for a blaink of his face, and get i^ not: for He has
withdrawn himself, Ps^ (...) 1. How long will thou hide thy face from me. Heman
Psalm. 88. cried out night and day, but yet God's face was hid verse* 1: 9, 14.
The spouse seeks long, Cant. 5. See Ps. 22: 1, 2.

3. They are looking for an outgate* but get none? And hope deferred makes
their heart sick, Prove. 13: 12.

4. They are in the dark, and cannot tell, why the Lord dispenses so toward
them: why (said Heman Psalm. 88: 14*) castest thou off my soul? why ^idest thou
thy face from me? They cannot understand wherefore it is. So Job cried out,
Show me wherefore thou contendest with me, Job 10: 2.

5. They may also be walking, in the mean while, without light or counsel, so
as they shall not (...) what to do. How long shall I take counsel in my soul,
Psalm. 13: 2.

6. Moreover* they may have their heart filled with sorrow; as we see, Psalm.
13: 2. having sorrow in my heart, said David. He also says, Ps. 38. that his
sorrow was continually before him, verse. 17. and Psalm. 116: 3. I found trouble
and sorrow.

7. They may be so, as that the sweet experiences of others, may yield them no
supply of comfort, at present, Psalm. 22: 4, 5, 6. Our Fathers trusted in the
(said David) and thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were
delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. But that gave him no
present ease or comfort: for immediately he adds, verse. 6. But I am a worm and
no man; a reproach of men* etc.

8. Yea all their own former experiences may yield them little solace: as we
see in the same place, Psalm. 22: 9, 10. compared with, verse. 14: 15. Thou art
He (says he verse. 9) that took me out of the womb, etc. and yet he complains,
verse. 14. that he was poured out like water, and his bones out of joint, that
his heart was melted in the midst of his bowels* etc.

9. They may be brought near to a giving over all in despondency; and be
brought, in their sense, to the very dust of death* Psalm 22: 16.

If it be enquired, why the Lord dispenses so with his own people?

We answer, (and this is the Second particular) That he does it for holy and
wise reasons, whereof we may name a few, as

1. To punish their carelessness and negligence* as we see he did with the
Spouse, Cant. ^.

2. To chastise them for their ill improving of his favor* and kindeness^,
when they had (...) as the same passage evidenceth.

3. To check them for their security and carnal confidence, as He did David
Psalm. 30: 6, 7. when he said his mountain stood strong, and he should never be
moved: then did the Lord hide his face, and he was troubled.

4. To try if their obedience to his commands be pure and conscientious, and
not in a sort mercenary, because of his lifting - up upon them the light of his
countenance: and to see if conscience to a command drives them to duty, when
they are in the dark, and have no encouragement.

5. To put the graces of the Spirit to trial, and to exercise; as their Faith,
Patience, Hope, Love etc. Psalm. 13: 5, 6. and 22: 24.

6. To awaken them from their security, and to set them to a more diligent
following of duty: as we see in the Spouse, Cant. 5.

7. To sharpen their desire and hunger after Him, as that same instance
clears.

Even in such a case as this, Christ is life to the soul, (which is the Third
particular)

1. By taking away the sinful causes of such a distance, having laid down his
life, and shed his blood: for the remission of their sins; so that such a
dispensation is not flowing from pure wrath; but is rather an act of mercy and
love.

2. By advocating the poor ^ans cause in heaven, where he His making
Intercession for His own, and thereby obtaining a delivery from that condition,
in God's own time, even the shining again of his countenance upon them.

3. By keeping life in, as to habitual grace, and by breathing thereupon; so
that it becomes lively and operative, even in such a winter day.

4. By supporting the soul under that dispensation, and keeping it from
fainting, through the secret influences of grace, which He conveyeth into the
soul: as He did to the poor woman of Canaan, Math. 15.

5. By seting the soul a work, to use such means, as God has appointed for a
recovery; as to cry, to plead, to long, to wait, etc. Their heart shall live
that seek Him.

6. By teaching the soul to submit to, and acquiesce in what God does;
acknowledging his Righteousness, Greatness and Soveraignity: and this
quietness of heart is its life.

7. By keeping the heart fast to the covenant of grace. So that, whatever come
they will never quite that bargan, but they will trust in Him, though He should
kill them; and they will adhere to the covenant of grace, though they should be
dragged through hell.

8. At length, when He sees it fit and convenient, He quickens, by
drawing-by the veil, and filling the soul with joy, in the light of God's
countenance; and causing it to sing, as having the heart lifted up in the ways
of the Lord.

As to the last particular, concearning the duty of a soul in such a case, we
say

1. He would humble himself under this dispensation, knowing that it is the
great God with whom he has to do; and that there is no contending with Him:
and that all flesh should stoop before Him.

2. He would justify God in all that He does; and say with David Psalm. 22: 3.
But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.

3. He would look upon himself as unworthy of the least favor of that kind: I
am a worm (said David Psalm. 22: 6.) and no man.

4. He would search-out his provocations, and run away to the fountain, the
blood of Christ; that these may be purged away. and his conscience sprinkled
from dead works, and his soul washen in the fountain opened to the house of
David, for sin and for uncleanness.

5. He must also employ Christ, to discover to him more and more of his
guiltiness, whereby he had grieved the Spirit of God; and as sins are
discovered to him, he would repent of them, and run away with them to the
blood, that cleanses from all sin. This was Elihu's advice to Job* Cap. 34:
verse. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement,
I will not offend. That which I see not, teach thou me, is I have done
iniquity, I will do no more.

6. He would grip to Christ in the Covenant, and ^est there, with joy and
satisfaction: he would hold that fast, that he may ride out the storm in a
dark night. Though he make not mine house to grow* said David, 2 Samuel 23:
verse. 5. Yet this was all his salvation and all his desire, that He had made
with him an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. The Spouse
took this course, when he could not get a sight of Him, whom her soul loved,
Cant. 6: verse. 3. and asserted her interest in Him. I am my beloveds, and my
beloved is mine.

7. He would be intertaining high, and loving thoughts of God, commending Him
highly, let His dispensations be what they will. So did the Spouse, Cant. 5:
verse. 10 - 16.

8. He would earnestly seek after Him. The Spouse did so, Cant. 5: verse. 6. the
discouragement she met with at the hands of the watch men did not put her off
her pursuit, Verse. 7. but she continued, yea was sick of love, Verse. 8. and
here looks had a prevailing power with him, as we see, Cant. 6: verse. 5. where
the Bridgroom uttered that most astonishing word, Turn away thine eyes from me,
for they have overcome me.

9. This new manifestation, which he is seeking for, must be expected in and
through Jesus, who is the true Tabernacle, and he who was represented by the
Mercy - seat. He is the only trysting place, in Him alone will the Father be
seen

10 He would also look to Him, for strength and support, in the mean time; and
for grace, that he may be kept from fainting, and may be helped to wait, til
he come, who knows the fittest season, wherein to appear.

But, it will be said, what if after all this, we get no outgate, but He hides
his face still from us?

I answer, Such would know, that life is one thing, and comfort is another
thing: Grace is one thing, and warm blainks of Gods face is another. The one
is necessary to the very being of a Christian, the other not; but only
necessary to his comfortable being: and therefore they should be content, if
God give them grace, though they ^isse comfort for a time.

2. They would lairne to commit that matter to Christ, who knows how to give
that which is good, and what is best for them.

3. They would be hanging on Him, for strength for duty; and, in his strength,
seting about every commanded duty, and be exercising, Faith, Love, Patience,
Hope, Desire, etc.

4. Let the well ordered covenant be all their salvation, and all their desire;
and though they should not get a comfortable blaink of God's face, so long as
they were here, yet holding fast this covenant they should at length be saved
souls, and what would they have more? and when they get this, what will they
miss?

CHAP. XXVII. How shall one make use of Christ, as the Life, when wreastling
with an angry God because of sin?
THat we may give some satisfaction to this question, we shall

1. Show what are the ingredients in this case, or what uses to concur in
this distemper.

2. Show some reasons, why the Lord is pleased to dispense thus with his people.

3. Show how Christ is life to the soul in this case.

4. Show the believers duty for a recovery: and

5. Add a word or two of caution.

As to the first. There may be those parts of, or (...) in this distemper*

1. God presenting their sins unto their vieu, so as they shall cry out, our
sin is ever before us, Psalm. 51: 3. and say, as it is Psalm. 90: 8. Thou have
set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance: and so cause them see the Lord contending for sin, as the Church
did, Esai. 59: we roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for
judgment but there is none, for salvation but it is far off from us: for our
transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us:
for our transgressions are with us; and as for our iniquities, we know them,
etc.

2. Yea, God may bring upon them the iniquities of their youth, as Job speaks
Cap. 13: 26. and so bring upon them, or suffer conscience to charge them with
their old sins, formerly repented of and pardoned. And this is more terrible:
David is made to remember his original sin, Psalm. 51.

3. And, as Job speaks, Cap. 15: 17. God may seem to be sealing up all their
sins in a bag, that none of them may be lost or fall by, without being taken
notice of; and, as it were, be gathering them together in a heap.

4. He may pursue sore with signs of wrath and displeasure, because of those
sins, as we see in David Psalm. 4. and 38. and 51. and in several others of
his people, chastened of the Lord because of their trangressions; whereof there
are many instances in scripture.

5. Yea, and that for a considerable time together, and cause them cry out,
with David Psalm. 4: 3. -- but thou O Lord how long!

6. And that not only with outward, but also with inward plagues. And strokes,
as David's case clears, in the forecited Psalms.

7. Yea and not only themselves, but even their posterity: as David's child was
smiten with death, and the posterity of Manasses, who found mercy himself, 2 Chronicles. 33: 13. was carried into captivity for his sin, 2 Kings 23: 26, 27.

8. Further, the Lord may deprive them of all their former joy and comfort,
which made David cry out Psalm. 51: 12. restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation, and grant me thy free Spirit.

9. And, which is yet more terrible, write their sin upon their judgment, as
when He caused the sword and whoredom follow David's house.

10. And finally, He may cause them fear utter offcasting as Psalm. 51: 11.
cast me not away (said he) from thy presence.

And this the Lord thinks good to do (that we may speak a word to the second
particular) for those and the like reasons.

1. To discover to them, and to all the world, how Just, Holy, and Righteous a
God He is, that cannot approve of or bear with sin, even in his own children.

2. To make all fear and tremble before this great and holy God, who is
terrible in his judgments, even when they come from a Fathers hand, that is
not pursueing in pure anger and wrath, but chastening in love: Sure, all must
think, that his dispensations with the wicked will be much more fearful and
horrible, seeing they are not yet reconciled unto Him through the blood of jesus.

3. To press Believers more earnestly in to Christ, that they may get a new
extract of their pardon* and their souls washen in the blood of Jesus.

4. To teach them to walk more circumspectly afterward, and to guaird more
watchfully against Satan's temptations, and to employ Christ more as their
Strength, Light and Guide.

5. To cause them see their great obligation to Jesus Christ, for delivering
them from that state of wrath, wherein they were by nature, as well as others,
and would have lyen-in to all eternity, had not He redeemed them.

6. To exercise their Faith, Patience and Hope; to see if in hope, they will
believe against hope, and lay hold on the strength of the Lord, that they may
make peace with him, Esai. 27: 5.

7. To give a fresh proof of his wonderful Mercy, Grace, Love, and Compassion,
upholding the soul, in the mean time, and at length, pardoning them, and
speaking peace to their souls through the blood of Jesus.

But as to the third particular. We may look on Christ, as the Life to the soul
in this case, upon those accounts.

1. He has satisfied justice, and so has borne the pure wrath of God due for
their sins: He has trodden the winepresse alone, Esai. 63: 3. He was wounded
for our transgressions, and bruised for our sins, Esai. 53: 5, 10. And
therefore they drink not of this cup, which would make them drunk, and to
stagger, and fall, and never rise again.

2. Yea, He has procured, that mercy and love shall accompany all those sharp
dispensations; and that they shall flow from mercy; yea and that they shall be
as a covenanted blessing, promised in he covenant, Psalm. 89: 30, 31, 32, 33.

3. And sometimes He is pleased to let them see this clear difference betwixt
the strokes they lie under, and the judgments of pure wrath, which attend the
wicked: and this supporteth the soul: for then he sees, that those
dispensations, how sharp so ever they be, shall work together for good to him,
and come from the hand of a gracious and loving Father, reconciled in the blood
of Christ.

4. He is a Prince exalted to give repentance and remission of sins to Israel,
Act. 5: 31. Yea, He has procured such a clause in the covenant, which is well
ordered in all things and sure, that upon their renewing of faith and
repentance, their after sin shall be pardoned; and besides the promises of
faith and repentance, in the covenant, His being ^ Prince exalted to give both,
gives assurance o^ their receiving of both.

5. He clears to them their interest in the Covenant, and their right to the
promises of the Covenant; and through their closeing with Christ* b^ faith, He
raises up their heart in hope, and cause^ them to exspect an outgate, even
remission of the^ sins, and turning a way of the displeasure in due tim^
through Him: and this is a great part of their life*

6. Being the author and finisher of faith, (...) ^ Prince to give repentance,
He, by His Spirit, works up the soul to a renewing of its grips o^ Himself,
by faith, and to a ^uning to the death and blood of Christ for pardon, and
washing: and works godly sorrow in the heart; whereupon follows Pardon,
according to the gospel constitution, though the believer as yet perceives it
not. And sin being pardoned before God, conform to the tenor of the covenant
of grace, the man is a living man, whatever fears of death, he may be kept
under for a time.

7. He helps also the soul to a justifying of God, and to a holy submissive
frame of Spirit, under that dispensation; so that they are willing to bear the
indignation of the Lord, because they have sinned against Him, Micah. 7: 9. and
to wait for an outgate in God's own time: and to kiss the rod, and accept of
the punishment of their sin.

8. When He sees it fit for his own glory, and their advantage, He speaks
peace at length to the soul, and says, Son or daughter, be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee. And then is the soul restored to life.

As to the fourth particular. The soul that is wreastling with an angry God for
sin, and would make use of Christ as the life, would do those things,

1. He would look to Christ, as standing under God's curse in our room, and as
satisfying justice for all the elect, and for all their sins.

2. He would eye the covenant, wherein new pardon is promised, upon the
renewing of faith and repentance.

3. He would eye Christ, as the great Lord dispensator of both Faith and
Repentance, and hing on Him for both; and thus believe, that he may believe and
repent, or lay his soul open to Him, that He may work in him both Repentance
and Faith.

4. He would flee to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than
the blood of Abel, that he may be washen, and sprinkled with hysope, as David
did Psalm. 51: 7.

5. He would eye Christ as a prince, to pardon, and give remission of sins, and
as exalted for this end, and would fix his eye upon Him, as now exalted in
glory for this end.

6. He would close with Christ of new, as his only alsufficient mediator; and,
having done this, and repented of his sins, whereby God has been provoked, he
would conclude through faith, that a pardon is past in the court of heaven,
conform to the tenor of the gospel, and wait on Christ, until the intimation
come.

As for the cautions, which I promised to speak to, in the last place, take
those few

1. Do not conclude there is no pardon, because there is no intimation thereof
made to thy soul, as yet. According to the dispensation of grace, condescended
upon in the gospel, pardon is had immediately upon a souls believing and
repenting; But the intimation, sense, and feeling of pardon, is a distinct
thing, and may, for several ends, be long ^eeped-up from the soul; Sure, they
go not always together.

2. Do not conclude, there is no pardon, because the rode, that was inflicted
for sin, is not as yet taken off* God pardoned David's sin, and did intimate the
same to Him by Nathan, and yet the sword did not depart from his house till he
died: God can forgive, and yet take vengeance on their in ven^ions, Psalm. 99* 8.

3. Do not upon this ground, question God's Faithfulness, or conclude that
God's covenant does not stand fast: He is the same, and the covenant abides
fast and firm; but the change is in thee.

4. Do not think, that because thou have once received Christ, that therefore,
without any new act of faith on Him, or of repentance toward God, thou should
immediately be pardoned of thy sins, as soon as they are committed: for the
gospel method must be followed, and it should satisfy us.

CHAP. XXVIII. No man comes to the Father but by me.
THis being added for further confirmation of what was formerly said, will
point out unto us several necessary truths: as

First. That it is most necessary, to be sound and clear in this fundamental
point, of coming to God, only in and through Christ: for

1. It is the whole marrow of the gospel.

2. It is the ^inge of all our salvation, Christ is the chief cornerstone,
Esa. 28: 16. 1 Pet. 1: 5, 6. and

3. The only ground of all our solid and true peace and comfort.

4. An error, or a mistake here, is most dangerous, hazarding, if not
ruineing, all

5. Satan endeavors mainely against this, raises up heresies, errors and
false opinions, and prompteth some to vent perplexing doubts and objections,
and all to darken this cardinal point* So does he muster up all his temptations
for this end, at length, to keep poor souls from acquantance with this way, and
from making use of it, or entering into it.

6. Our corrupt hearts are most averse from it, and will close with any way,
how troublesome, how expensive and costly so ever it may seem to be, rather
than with this.

7. There are a multitude of false ways, as we did show above.

All which clear up this necessity, and should teach us to be very diligent to
win to acquantance with it* and to make sure that we are in it, and to hold it
fast, and to keep it pure in our practice, without mixing any thing with it, or
corrupting of it.

Secondly. That it is no small difficulty to get this truth believed and
practiced, that through Christ alone we come to the Father. Therefore is the
same thing asserted and inculcated again, upon the matter: for

1. Nature will not teach this way, it is far above nature.

2. Yea our natural inclination is much against it, opposing it, and fighting
against it.

3. This way is altogether contrary to that high esteem, which naturally all of
us have of ourselves.

4. And is opposite to that pride of heart, which naturally we are subject to.

5. Yea there is nothing in us by nature, that will willingly comply with this
way: but, on the contrary, all is opposite thereunto.

6. And therefore it is the Christians first lesson, to deny himself.

The consideration of which should humble us, and make us very jealous of our
own hearts and inclinations, and of all those courses, which they are
inclineable to, and bent upon. And it should put us to try, if ever we have
overcome this difficulty: and have now all our hopes and comforts founded on
Him, and on nothing else: and are up or down in our peace and joy, according as
we win in to Him, or are shut out from Him: and in all our approaches to God,
upon whatsoever account, are leaning to Him and resting on Him alone,
exspecting access, acceptance, and a hearing, only in Him; and are quieted
under all our fears and temptations with this, that Christ is our way to the
Father.

Thirdly. That even believers have need to have this truth inculcated often: for

1. Satan is busy pulling them off this ground, by all the wiles and
temptations he can.

2. Their own corruption within, and the evil heart of unbeleefe, is always
opposeing this way, and drawing them off it.

3. Through the slight of Satan, and the power of corruption, they are oftimes
declineing from this pure gospel way.

4. The experience of believers can tell, that when they a^e at their best, it
is a great work and exercise to them, to keep their heart right in this matter.

5. Is it not too often seen, that they are under the spiritual plague of
formality, which steals them off their feet here?

6. And is it not found oftentimes, that they are too too ready to lean to
some thing beside Christ?

How ought all to be convinced of this, and humbled under the sense of it? And
see also how necessary it is to be often preaching on this subject, and to be often
thinking upon and studying this fundamental truth.

Fourthly. It should be a strong motive and incitement to us to make use of
Christ, as the way to the Father, That no man comes to the Father but by Him:
for this may be looked upon as an argument, enforceing their usemaking of Him,
as the way.

Fifthly. It discovers the ground of that truth, that there are but few that
are saved; for none comes to the Father but by Him: few, in respect of the
whole world, once hear of Him* and of such as hear of Him, few have the true
way of employing and applying him, as the way to the Father, cleared up unto
them: and again* of such as have the truth, as it is in Jesus, preached unto
them, O how few go to Him, and make use of Him according to the truth, and
believe and practice the truth*

Sixthly. That in and through Christ alone we must come.

1. To the Knowledge of the Father: for no man knows the Father but the son:
and He alone, who came out of the bosom of the Father, reveals Him.

2. To the Favor and Friendship of the Father: for He alone is our pea^e, and
in Him alone is the Father well pleased.

4. To the Kingdom of the Father here: for He only is the door, John. 10. and
by his Spirit are we effectually called.

4. To the Kingdom of the Father above: for He alone has opened that door,
and is entered into the holiest of all, as our forerunner, and is gone to
prepare a place for us.

5. Through Him alone must we address ourselves to the Father, in our
supplications, John. 16: 23. Revel. 8: 3. in our thanksgivings Romans 1: 8* Col.
3: 17. and praise Heb. 13: 15. Ephesians. 3: 21.

6. Through Him alone have we access, and an open door to the Father, Ephesians.
2: 18. and 3: 21. Heb. 4: 16.

I shall only speak to one case here. viz.

CHAP. XXIX. How should we make use of Christ, in going to the Father, in
prayer and other pieces of worship?
IN short, for answering of this question, I shall lay down those particulars.

1. There would be a lively sense of the infinite distance, that is betwixt the
great God, and us finite creaturs; and yet more betwixt the holy God and us
sinful wreatches.

2. There would be an eyeing of Christ, as the great peacemaker through his
death and merits, having satisfied justice, and reconciled sinners unto God;
that so we may look on God now, no more as an enemy, but as reconciled in
Jesus.

3. There would be, sometimes at least, a more formal, and explicit actual
closeing with Christ as ours, when we are going about such duties: and always
an implicit and virtual imbraceing of Him as our mediator; or an habitual
hanging upon Him, and leaning to Him as our mediator, and Peacemaker.

4. There would be an eyeing of Him as our great Highpriest, now living for
ever to make intercession for us, and to keep the door of heaven open to us:
upon which account the Apostle presses the Hebreewes to come boldly to the
throne of grace, Heb. 4: 14, 16. See also Heb. 7: 24, 25.

5. There would be a griping to Him, even in reference to that particular act
of worship, and a laying hold upon Him, to speak so, as our Master usher, to
bring us by the hand in to the Father, as conscious of our own unworthiness.

6. There would be a confident leaning to Him, in our approaching; and so we
would approachin Him, without fear or diffidence. And that notwithstanding that
we find not our souls in such a good frame* as we would wish, yea and guilt
looking us in the face.

7. Thus would we roll all the difficulties, that come in our way, and all the
discouragements, which we meet with, on Him, that He may take away the one and
the other, and help us over the one and the other.

8. As we would take an answer to all objections from Him alone, and put Him to
remove all scruples, and difficulties, and strengthen ourselves against all
impediments and discouragments, alone, in and through Him, so there would be
the bringing of all our positive encouragements from Him alone, and all our
hopes of coming speed with the Father should be grounded upon Him.

9. We would ex^pect all our welcome and acceptance with the Father, only in
and through Christ, and expect nothing for any thing in ourselves, not for our
graces, good frame, preparation, or any thing of that kind. So we would not
found our acceptance, nor our peace and satisfaction, on ourselves, nor on any
thing we have, or do; nor would we conclude our exclusion or want of
acceptance, because we do not apprehend our frame so good as it ought to be; so
we should not found our acceptance on our right performance of duties, for that
is not Christ.

10. We would quiet ourselves on Him alone, in all our approaches, whatever
liveliness we find, or miss in the duty* we are too much tickled and feign,
when duties go well with us, and troubled upon the other hand, when it is not
so; and the ground of all this, is, because we lean too much to our own
duties, and do not quiet ourselvs on Him alone: and hence itis, that we are often
quieted when we get the duty done and put by, though we have not met with Him
there, nor gotten use made of Him, as was necessary. All our comfort, peace and
quiet would be founded on Him alone.

11. We would look to Him for the removal of all the discouragments, that Satan
casts in our way, while we are about this or that piece of worship, to put us
back, or to cause us advance slowly and faintingly: and, casting them all on
Him, go forward in our duty.

12. We would look for all our returns and answers only in and through Him, and
lay all the weight of our hopes and exspectation of a good answer only on Him,
^ John. 5: 13, 14, 15.

For Caution I would add a word or two.

1. I do not think, that the believer can explicitly and distinctly act all
these things, when ever he is going to God; or can distinctly perceive all
these several acts: nor have I specified them, and particularly mentioned then
thus, for this end; but to show at some length, how Christ is to be employed in
those acts of worship, which we are called to perform; and that because, we
ofttimes think the simple nameing of Him, and asking of things for His sake, is
sufficient, though our hearts lean more to some other thing, than to Him: and
the conscientious christian will find his soul, when he is rightly going about
the duties of worship, looking toward Christ thus, sometimes more distinctly
and explicitly as to one particular, and sometimes more as to another.

2. Though the believer cannot distinctly act says on Christ, all these ways,
when he is going about commanded duties of worship; yet he would be sure to
have his heart going out after Christ, as the only ground of his approaching
to, and acceptance with, and of being heard by the Father; and to have his
heart in such an habitual frame of resting on Christ, that really there may be
a relying upon Him, all these ways, though not distinctly discerned.

3. Sometimes the believer will be called to be more distinct and explicit in
looking to, and resting upon Christ, as to one particular, and sometimes more
as to another: when Satan is dissuading him to go to God, because He is an
infinite holy one, and he himself is but a sinner: then he is called to act
faith on Christ as the mediator, making reconciliation betwixt God and sinners:
and when Satan is dissuading from approaching to God, because of their want of
an interest in God* then should they act faith on Christ, and embrace him,
according to the gospel, and rest there, and so approach. And when Satan casts
up his unworthiness and former sins, to keep him aback, or to discourage him,
then he is called to lay hold on Christ, as the great Highpriest, and advocate;
and, casting that discouragement on Him, to go forward. So likewise when Satan
is discourageing him in his duty, by bringing before him his sins, he should
take this course. And when, because of his sinful way of worshipping God and
calling upon him, and other things, he is made to fear, that all is in vain,
that neither God regairdeth him, nor his service, and that he shall not come
speed, than should he cast all the burden of his acceptance, and of obtaining
what he asks and desires, on Christ, and quiet himself there: and so as to
the rest: and hence appears the usefulness of our branching-out of this
matter.

4. In all this, there must be an acting in the strength of Jesus: a looking to
Christ and resting upon Christ, according to the present case and necessity, in
Christ; that is, by his strength and grace communicated to us by his Spirit.
Then do we worshipe God in the Spirit, and in the newness of the Spirit, when
all is done in the matter of worship; in and through Jesus.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters.
Chap. I, THe Introduction, with some general Observations from the cohesion.
Page 1 Chap. II. Of the Words themselves in general. 16 Chap. III. How Christ
is the Way in general. 20 Chap. IIII. How Christ is made use of, for
justification. 41 Chap. V. How Christ is the Way, for sanctification, in
general. 72 Chap. VI. How Christis to be made use of, for killing and
crucifying the old man of sin. 100 Chap. VII. How Christ is to be made use of,
for grouth in grace. 1^3 Chap. VIII. How Christ is to be made use of, for
taking away the guilt of our daily outbreakings. 155 Chap. IX. How Christ is to
be made use of, for cleansing us from our daily spots. 179 Chap. X. Some
generals clearing how Christ is the Truth. 200 Chap. XI. More particularly, in
what respects Christ is called the Truth. 206 Chap. XII. Some general Uses from
this useful truth, that Christ is the Truth. 209 Chap. XIII. How Christ is to
be made use of, as the Truth, for grouth in knowledge. 226 Chap. XIIII. How
Christ is to be made use of, as the Truth, for comfort, when truth is oppressed
and born down. 238 Chap. XV. How Christ is to be made use of, for stedfastness*
in a time when truth is oppressed and born down. 245 Chap. XVI. How Christ is
to be made use of, as the Truth when the Spirit o^ error prevails. 25^ Chap.
XVII. How Christ is to be made use of, as the Truth for geting of our case and
condition cleared up. 268 Chap. XVIII. How Christ is to be made use of, as the
Truth, to the end we may get right and suitable thoughts of God. 277 Chap. XIX.
How Christ is the Life. 284 Chap. XX. Some general Uses of Christ's being the
Life. 299 Chap. XXI. How Christ is to be made use of, as the Life, when we are
so sitten-up in the ways of God* that we can do nothing. 314 Chap. XXII. How
Christ is to be made use of, as the Life, when we are heartless and fainting
through discouragments, 322 Chap. XXIII. How Christ is to be made use of, as
the Life, when we are dead, as to doing of duties. 334 Chap. XXIIII. How Christ
is to be made use of, as the Life, when we are under the prevailing power of
unbeleef and infidelity. 344 Chap. XXV. How Christ is to be made use of, as the
Life, when we cannot know* what to judge of our case. 353 Chap. XXVI. How
Christ is to be made use of, as the Life, by one that misseth God's favor* 358
Chap. XXVII. How Christ is to be made use of, as the Life, when we have to do
with an angry God because of sin* 365 Chap. XXVIII. The last words of the Text
explained, with some Observations thence deduced. 372 Chap. XXIX. How Christ is
to be made use of, in going to the Father, in prayer, and other acts of
Worship. 376
FINIS.

