THE Support of the Faithful IN Times of Persecution. OR, A SERMON Preached in
the Wilderness TO THE Poor Protestants in FRANCE.

By M. Brousson, an Eminent Minister, who was broke upon the Wheel at
Montpelier, Nov. 6. N. S. School.

Faithfully Translated from the French.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Snowden, for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns, the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1699.

IT is hoped the Reader will not be displeased with these following Passages,
as not altogether unsuitable to this Discourse.
True Christianity is not only the best, but the best natured Institution in
the World; and so far as any Church is departed from good Nature, and become
Cruel and Barbarous, so far it is degenerated from Christianity. [A. B.
Tillotson's Sermons, Vol. III. 2 Edit. p. 26.

I have learnt from the ancient Fathers of the Church, that nothing is more
against Religion than to force Religion, and of St. Paul, The Weapons of the
Christian Warfare are not Carnal. And great reason; for humane Violence may
make Men counterfeit, but cannot make them believe, and is therefore fit for
nothing but to breed Form without, and Atheism within. Besides, if this means
of bringing Men to embrace any Religion where generally used (as if it may be
justly used in in any place by those that have power, and think they have
Truth, certainly they cannot with Reason deny, but that it may be used in every
place, by those that have power as well as they, and think they have truth as
well as they) what could follow but the maintenance perhaps of Truth, but
perhaps only of the Profession of it in one place, and the Oppression of it in
a hundred? What will follow from it, but the preservation peradventure of
Unity, but peradventure only of Uniformity, in particular States and Churches;
but the immortalizing the greater and more lamentable Divisions of Christendom
and the World? And therefore what can follow from it, but perhaps in the
Judgment of Carnal Policy, the Temporal Benefit and Tranquillity of Temporal
States and Kingdoms, but the infinite prejudice, if not the desolation of the
Kingdom of Christ.

The Preface.
Reader,
THE Groans of our poor distressed Brethren in France, have for several Years
past, reached our Ears, and touched our Hearts, and I hope many pious Souls have
not failed daily, and with fervor, to commit their sad case to God, and to beg
of him Support and Consolation, for so many miserable People. Our Relation to
them in the Profession of the same Reformed Religion, the common Tenderness of
humane Nature, and the share that we ought to have in their Sorrows, by virtue
of that Precept of St. Paul, To weep with them that weep, do all oblige us to
think of them with the greatest Compassion, and to pray, that either the bitter
Cup may pass from them, or be sweetened with the Love of God; and that when
their Trials are increased, their Faith and Patience may be so too. For the
Furnace is newly heated, and the Cloud over them more thick and dismal, as will
appear to any one that reads the Declaration, given at Versailles the 13th of
December. School.

Though these blessed Servants of God are greatly afflicted, yet they are not
forsaken. They have Manna in the Desert; of which the Reader has a taste in the
following Sermon. The Honesty, and Sincerity, and Love to the Souls of Men,
which appears in every part of it, will make a sufficient Apology for several
things that a curious Reader might expect. There is in this Discourse a warm
Zeal, and an Eloquence suited to the Condition of the Preacher and his Hearers.
People in deep Mourning do not affect Finery, but wear a grave solemn Dress.
The Wilderness has not those Varieties that are to be found in Cities and
Courts; but the Faithful, that are persecuted for Righteousness sake, find
there sweet Refreshments and Consolations: And John the Baptist did not starve,
when he fed upon Locusts and wild Honey.

This Sermon was preached in the Wilderness by M. Brousson, and taken out of a
Volume of several Sermons, Printed in Holland, and approved by the French
Synod, held at Haerlem, in the Year 1695.

How exemplary the Conversation of this blessed Man was, how convincing his
Doctrine, and how suitable to minister Consolation to his poor Brethren, as
also with what admirable Zeal and Constancy he triumphed over all Dangers, and
over Death its self, will appear when his Life is published, which is promised
to the Public by those that were acquainted with him, and we expect with great
earnestness, as knowing many remarkable and useful things, as well as
extraordinary, must be in the Life of so great a Man; who, whilst he lived,
preached under the Cross, and died with a Patience and Constancy, suited to the
cheerful Hopes that he had of a glorious Eternity; where he now rests from his
Labors and his Pains, and where all his Tears are wiped away.

If this Sermon, which was translated from the Original in French, meet with
acceptance, the Reader may expect more in due time; and methinks such Sermons
must come with a peculiar advantage, which were preached by such an one, as
sealed with his Blood, the Doctrine that he taught; He sat in brightness, and
has left heat and w^rmth behind him.

That the Reading of this Discourse may do good to many Souls, is the Prayer
of,

Tim. Rogers.

THE Support and Confidence OF BELIEVERS IN Times of Persecution
ISAIAH XLI. 14. Fear not, thou Worm Jacob, and ye Mortal Men of Israel: I will
help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.


My Beloved Brethren in Christ,
IN the 7th Chapter of The Book of Job, that Holy Man says, English Version, An
appointed time to Man upon Earth.
That the State appointed for Mortals upon Earth, is a state of Warfare, and
that their Days, are as the days of a Hireling. And it is so in effect, for Men
spend their Time in continual Labor, Trouble and Inquietude. But if that be
true, with respect to all Men in general, it is more peculiarly so with respect
to the Faithful: For their whole Life is but one continued Combat, against the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil. God makes them very often undergo very rude
and severe Trials. Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous, says David, Psalm
34.19. The Days of the Faithful are few and evil, as those of the Patriarch
Jacob of old. The Faithful are in continual Troubles and Alarums. If they were
of the World, the World would love them; but because they are not of the World,
the World hates and persecutes them. They are generally weak and feeble, but
their Enemies are powerful and terrible, after the Flesh; and thence it is that
the Righteous are so often oppressed.

And the God of infinite Wisdom thinks fit it should be so, my beloved
Brethren, in order to humble us, to reduce us from our Wanderings, to disengage
us from the World, to exercise our Faith and Patience, to force us to have
recourse to him in our Afflictions, and to put our Confidence in him, to make
us taste of the Consolations of his Spirit, and at the same time to convince
us, that his good Providence takes care of his Children in their Streights and
Necessities; and, in fine, to make us admire the wonderful Deliverances he
vouchsafes to give them, when they have profited by his Chastisements, and have
glorified him in the time of their Trial. And therefore now he says in our
Text, Fear not, thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel: I will help thee, says
the Lord, and thy Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.

Now to understand well the Sense of these Words and of the other Prophecies of
the old Testament, we are to observe, that since the Jewish Church was the Type
of the Christian, and the same things that befell the Jewish Church were to
befall the Christian; we must observe, I say, that though the literal Sense of
the Prophecies of the Old Testament had respect to the Church of Israel after
the Flesh; yet their Mystical Sense relates to the Christian Church, which is
Israel after the Spirit; and moreover, that those ancient Prophecies have their
chief and full Accomplishment no where but in the Christian Church. They that
take this remark along with them, as they read these ancient Prophecies, will
make wonderful Discoveries of what should fall out in the Christian Church: In
the general, they will find there, that the Christians would be corrupted by
Prosperity as the Jews were before them. That they would plunge themselves even
in the Idolatry of the Gentiles; and that afterward these Idolatrous
Christians would for a great while oppress the Faithful Servants of God that
Worship him in Purity according to his Word; but that God would relieve them at
last, and deliver them out of all their Troubles. And to this purpose God
speaks to his destitute People in the Verses before my Text; Fear thou not,
(says he) for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my Righteousness. Behold, all they that were incensed against thee,
shall be ashamed and confounded: They shall be as Nothing; and they that strive
with thee shall perish. Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them, even
them that contended with thee: They that War against thee, shall be as nothing,
and as a thing of naught, For I, the Lord thy God, will hold thy right hand,
saying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee. Whereupon he adds the Words of my
Text, Fear not, thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel; I will help thee, says
the Lord, and thy Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.

I shall confine my self to the Mystical Sense of these Words, and only examine
them as they may relate to Christians. And with the assistance of the Holy
Spirit, which, I have already implored, and do still with all my Soul, I shall
consider these two things.

1. The Name God calls his Distressed People by, Thou Worm Jacob, Men of Israel.

2. The Consolation he gives them in this their Destitute State; Fear not, says
he, I will help thee, and thy Redeemer is the Holy one of Israel.

God grant, my Beloved, we may all meditate on these things with due attention;
to the end we may receive that Instruction and Comfort which the Spirit of God
holds forth to us in these Words, and is so necessary for us in this time of
Distress; wherein all that will serve God with Purity according to his word,
suffer a Cruel and Bloody Persecution.

I.
God calls his People here, Thou Worm Jacob; or, Jacob thou art but a Worm. Now,

1. When God calls his People, Jacob; he would have us consider them all but as
one Man: And in effect, all the Faithful together compose but one mystical
Body, whereof Christ is the Head. They are all united by the Holy Spirit, they
are all Members of one another; therefore they ought to live in perfect unity,
and (like the Primitive Christians) love one another so entirely as to be but
one Heart and one Soul.

2. True Christians are called Jacob, because they are the Posterity of Jacob
after the Spirit, and Heirs of his Faith and Piety, and of the Promises which
God made to him of old. Jacob parted with the food that perishes, that he
might obtain the Blessing of his Father and that of his God, together with the
Heavenly enjoyments thereto annexed. In like manner the Faithful ought to
abandon all Earthly Advantages, that they may have a share in the Glory and
Felicity of Heaven.

3. Believers are called Jacob, because their condition in this Life is like
that of Jacobs. For as Jacob who was born after the Spirit, was heretofore
Persecuted by Esau his Elder Brother that was born after the Flesh: So Faithful
Christians that are Christians after the Spirit, are likewise persecuted by
Antichristians who are Christians after the Flesh. These wicked false
Christians reproach us every now and then, that we are but of Yesterday. The
truth is, more Ancient than they; But with respect to our Reformation, which is
our Spiritual Birth, we grant they are in a sort older than we, as Esau was
older than Jacob.

But then, as I told you before, they are born after the Flesh, as Esau was,
and we after the Spirit, as Jacob was; and that is the reason they persecute
us. And this is no new thing: Abel that was born after the Spirit, was
persecuted to Death by his Elder Brother Cain who was born after the Flesh The
same may be said of Isaac the Heir of the Promise, who was likewise persecuted
by his Elder Brother Ishmael, that was born after the Flesh. So likewise the
Prophets of old who served God with purity according to his word were
persecuted by the Jewish Church when it was fallen into Idolatry. We ought not
therefore to be surprised that at this time we who adore God in Spirit and in
Truth according to his Commandments are in like manner persecuted by a
corrupted and Idolatrous Church.

Moreover, the People of God are not simply called Jacob, but Thou Worm Jacob.
And in effect, my Friends, we are but Worms of the Earth in the presence of our
God, whose greatness knows no bounds; for he fills the Heavens and the Earth.
Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth is his Footstool. We are but dust and Ashes
in comparison of our great God; nay, we are less than the small dust of the
Balance. Therefore he calls us Worms, that we may always remember our misery
and nothingness, that we may always humble our selves in his sight, and never
violate that respect which is due to his Sovereign Majesty: But evermore be
possessed with a Religious awe in his presence.

Further, we are but Worms in comparison of our Enemies: For generally the
Faithful are weak and despicable in human appearance, whereas their Enemies are
powerful and formidable in the esteem of the World.

Besides, God calls his People Men of Israel, or Israel that are but Men.
Israel you know, my Brethren, is the name God himself gave Jacob, when he
contended with him: This holy Man hearing his Brother Esau was coming out
against him with four Hundred Men, was put into a great consternation;
therefore he passed the whole Night in Supplications and Tears. As he was
alone, the Son of God in the shape of Man strove with him till break of Day;
and when this Divine Person saw that he could not prevail against him, he
touched the hollow of his Thigh; so that the hollow of Jacobs Thigh was out of
joint as he wrestled with him; and he said, Let me go, for the Day breaks:
But Jacob answered him, I will not let thee go except thou bless me: And he
said unto him, what is thy Name? And he said Jacob; And he said, thy Name shall
be called no more Jacob; but Israel: For as a Prince have thou power with God
and Men and have prevailed. As we read in the 32d of Genesis: So again in
Hosea, chap. 12. We read that By his power he prevailed with the Angel; he wept
and made Supplication unto him; he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with
us: That is to say, he contended all the Night with his God by his Prayers and
Tears; and by that means he (as it were) conquered the Almighty, and obtained
his Favor, Blessing and Succor; so as that he was delivered out of the
astonishing danger he was in: But God thought fit his Lameness should remain,
to put him in mind that he ought to humble himself continually before God; in
order to obtain mercy and relief in all his necessities. So God in my Text,
when he calls his Afflicted People, Israel; it is that he might make us
understand that when we are benighted in Affliction, as we are at this time,
and when we fear the rage and fury of our Enemies; that then it is our Duty to
humble our selves before God in an extraordinary manner; to repent of all our
Sins, and entirely renounce them; and to have recourse to his Mercy and Grace
alone for pardon: and that we ought to strive with him continually by our
Prayers and Supplications, till we have disarmed (as it were) his Almighty Arm,
and obtained his Blessing and Assistance; and that for the time to come we
ought always to set his fear before our Eyes, and to walk humbly with our God
all the days of our Life.

It Is for this end likewise he calls us Men, ye Men of Israel. For thereby he
designs to put us in mind of the frailty of our Nature, and to make us consider
that since our life is in continual danger, either by the fury of our Enemies,
or by Sickness, or by a thousand other Accidents to which we are liable; we
have reason to Pray without ceasing, and to throw our selves into the Arms of
our God, who alone is able to conduct and preserve us in the midst of all the
dangers our life is continually exposed to.

II.
Now we are to consider the Consolation he gives his People under their
Sufferings: Fear not, says he, thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel; I will
help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.
Believers, my Friends, have several Reasons to be afraid; but it is the Will of
God, that they have recourse to him alone upon all occasions.

1. The Devil uses all his Efforts to tempt us with the Pleasures, Riches and
Vanities of the World: But then we are to beg of God without ceasing, that he
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from the evil One. And at the same
time we must take care our selves to avoid the Occasions of Sin, and separate
our selves from the Places and Persons that might induce us to offend God. We
must also renounce the World, and mortify our Bodies by moderation and
Sobriety, according to the Words of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be
vigilant; for your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour; whom resist, steadfast in the Faith.

Moreover, we must read and meditate on the Word of God with continual
Application of Mind, and constantly pray to God for the assistance of his Holy
Spirit; for it is by his Word and Spirit he fortifies our Faith, and it is by
Faith we are enabled to repel all the fiery Darts of the Devil.

2. If our Sins terrify us, God commands us to have recourse to his Mercy and
Grace. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the
Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. In case we
are sincerely converted, so as to conceive a sacred Horror for sin, and
heartily renounce all our evil Habits, and cease to do evil, and learn to do
good; then the promises in Isa. 1.18. That though our sins, be as Scarlet, they
shall be white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool.
To this end we must heartily embrace Jesus Christ, as our Savior, by a firm
and lively Faith; for it is he that suffered death for us upon Earth, and now
intercedes in our behalf in Heaven; it is he that is the Lamb of God which
takes away the sin of the World, John 1.29.

3. If Believers are at any time afflicted with bodily Diseases, it is the
pleasure of God, that we apply our selves to him as the Sovereign Physician of
our Bodies as well as Souls; for it is he alone that is able to deliver us out
of all our Troubles; and has promised that all things shall work together for
our good, if we do but fear him, and profit by his Chastisements.

4. The faithful people of God have likewise reason to be afraid of the Cheats
and Disguises of False Teachers: For, as St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.
These false Apostles are deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an
Angel of Light; therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be
transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness. But if Believers constantly
address themselves to God for the assistance of his Holy Spirit, God will
deliver them out of the Snares of these false Teachers. My Sheep, says Christ,
John 10.28, 29. shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my
Hand. My Father which gave them me, is greater than all, and none is able to
pluck them out of my Father's Hand. For this end Believers must try the
Spirits, to know if they are of God. They must (like the Ancient Bereans)
examine the Doctrines that are preached to them, to know if they agree with the
Holy Scriptures. For, as St. Paul says, Romans 2.20. the Word of GOD is the Rule
of Knowledge and Truth.

5. In fine, Believers have cause to fear the Power and Cruelty of their
Enemies. Jesus Christ says in the Gospel, That the Devil is a Murderer from
the beginning. The Ministers of Satan are also Liars and Murderers like
himself. When they cannot seduce and wheedle a Man into an Error, they
persecute him, and use their utmost endeavor to ruin him. We read in the
Scripture, That the Devil makes use of two great means to endeavor to shake
the Faith of the Elect. To some he offers the Glory and Advantages of the
World, as he did to our Savior before; others he spoils of their Goods,
deprives of their Children, and loads with a thousand Evils, as he did Job. And
his Ministers use just the very same Methods. But as God would not have us
suffer our selves to be seduced by Errors and Lies, nor to be led aside by the
Honors and Riches of the World; so on the other hand he would have us stand
firm and impregnable against the Power, the Injustice and Cruelty of the
Enemies of the truth. He requires of us to be always ready to suffer all sorts
of Evils and Miseries for his Service. It Is he that has given us all the good
things we enjoy in the World; and therefore he expects we should be always
disposed to part with them for his Glory: It Is he that has given us our
Children; and therefore he justly requires we should submit to his will when he
permits the Enemies of his Kingdom to deprive us of them: He requires us to
deliver them up to the care of his wise Providence, when they stand in
competition with our Duty to God. In fine, it is he that has given us Being,
Life and Motion; and therefore he expects we should be always prepared to
suffer Death for his Service, whenever he thinks fit to call us to such a Trial.

In a word, it is God that has given us all things; it is therefore very just
that we should love him above all things. He has created us for his own Glory;
it is therefore very reasonable we should glorify him both by our Life and
Death. Jesus Christ has suffered Death for us; it is very just then that we
suffer something for the advancement of his Kingdom. Our Sins deserved the
Eternal Flames of Hell; it is then an act of singular favor that God is
contented we should but suffer a little trouble in this World for his Holy Name
sake. In fine, the Glory and Happiness that he prepares for us in Heaven, is it
not a sufficient recompense for all that we can lose and suffer for his Service
upon Earth? All things duly weighed, says St. Paul, I reckon the Sufferings of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be
revealed in us: For this light Affliction which is but for a season, works
for us a more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

But although God many times permits his People to be oppressed by reason of
their Sins; yet his design is not to abandon them entirely: He only designs to
make them better by his Chastisements, and to cause them to return to their God
with all their Heart, and put their whole confidence in him. For upon condition
we turn to him, and repent of having offended him, he also repents of having
Afflicted us, and Comforts and Delivers us out of all our Distresses.

Fear not, says he in my Text, thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel: for I
will help you, says the Lord. thy Redeemer, the Holy one of Israel. The God
whose assistance we implore, my Beloved Brethren, is not as the Idols of the
Gentiles that can neither see, nor hear, nor stir to deliver those that invoke
them. No, it is the Lord of Hosts, the God of Heaven and Earth, the Great and
Almighty God. He that is Infinitely Good, is surely good enough to have pity on
our Sufferings: He that is Infinitely Wise, is Wise enough to provide for all
our necessities: And he that is Almighty cannot want Power to deliver us out of
all our troubles. He is called the Holy one of Israel, because he is Holiness
it self; and requires us to be Holy as he is Holy: And certainly he that is so
Holy and Just, will not let go unpunished all the injuries that are done to his
Glory, all the Evils that his Children are made to suffer. He promises to help
us; who is it then that can hurt us? If God be for us, who will be against us? He
tells us he is our Redeemer, viz. our Defender and Deliverer? what reason have
we then to be afraid? The Lord, says David, Psalm. 27.1, 3. is my Light and my
Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the Strength of my Life, of whom
shall I be afraid? Though a Host should encamp against me, my heart shall not
fear. Idolaters indeed put their confidence in Creatures; but the faithful
trust in their God; he is their only Protector and Refuge. And what comfort is
it to the Faithful that they have him for their Redeemer, whose Power knows no
bounds? Blessed is the Nation, says David, Psalm. 33.12. whose God is the Lord;
and the People whom he has chosen for his own Inheritance. Call upon me in the
day of trouble, says our Great God, Psalm. 50.15. I will Deliver thee, and thou
shall Glorify me. Fear not, says he again, Isa. 43: for I have redeemed thee,
I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine. When thou passest through the
Waters; I will be with thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow
thee. When thou walk through the Fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither
shall the Flame kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy one of
Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee:
That is to say, I have destroyed, and will again destroy thy Enemies for the
love of thee. Then he adds, Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, and I have loved thee; therefore I will give Men for the, and
People for thy Life; Fear not, for I am with thee; I will bring thy Seed from
the East, and gather thee from the West. I will say to the North, Give up; and
to the South, Keep not back: Bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the
ends of the Earth. That is to say, I have suffered you to be oppressed by your
Enemies, because of your sins, and to be dispersed throughout all the Earth;
but when you return to me with your whole Heart, I will, in great Compassion,
return to you; I will bring you back from the Places of your Exile, and
establish you in the Land of your Nativity.

In effect, my Friends, how many Examples have we before our Eyes in the Holy
Scriptures of the care God has in all Ages taken of his Children, and of the
wonderful deliverances he has vouchsafed to give them, to the end that we may
put our Confidence in him?

Jacob, when he was but young, was forced to leave his Father's House, and to
travel all alone into a very distant Country, to avoid the fury of his Brother
Esau, that would take away his Life. But the first Night he lay on the Road,
God appeared to him in a Dream, and told him, Behold, I am with thee, and will
keep thee in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee again into this
Land; for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have spoke to
thee of. And indeed God was always with him; he conducted him safe in his
Journey; he blessed Him; he blessed his Labor; he blessed his Family; he
brought him again into his own Country, and appeased his Brother's Anger.

So Joseph, when he was but a Youth of Seventeen Years, became the Object of
the Jealousy and Hatred of his Brethren. One day as he went to see them in the
Wilderness, they plotted against him to put him to death. They threw him into a
deep Pit, and afterward took him up again to sell him to the Ishmaelites, who
carried him to Egypt, and sold him there for a Slave. Sometime afterward being
falsely accused by his Mistress, he was put in Prison, and there he lay several
Years. But God at last had pity on him, delivered him out of his Distress, and
made him Governor of all Egypt, then a very powerful Kingdom.

Job, who was a Holy Man, and one of the greatest Men of the East, was spoiled
of all his Goods, deprived of all his Children, and covered all over with
Ulcers from the Sole of his Foot, to the Crown of his Head, insomuch that he
was forced to lie in the Dust. In this deplorable Condition he should have
received (one would think) at least some comfort from his Wife and intimate
Friends. But instead of that, they only increased his Affliction: For his Wife
tempted him to murmur against God, that he might put an end to his Life: And
his intimate Friends told him, That he must have been a Hypocrite and a Wicked
Man, since God had struck him in so terrible a manner. But at last God was
moved with companion toward him; he delivered him out of all his Sufferings
and Misery, restored his Health, gave as many Children as he had lost, and
Wealth twice as much as he had before, and made him live a hundred and forty
Years after his Trial.

David, who was a Man according to God's own Heart, was also persecuted for a
great while together by King Saul. He was forced to leave his Wife and Home,
and to seek for Refuge in Deserts and Caves, and even there he was still
pursued by his Enemy. He often found himself reduced to such Extremities, and
exposed to such evident Dangers, that he thought it impossible for him to
escape. But he had always recourse to his God, and God never forsook him. He
did wonders to preserve him in the midst of so many Dangers, and at last
delivered him out of all his Troubles, and exalted him to the Throne of Israel.

But above all, who would not admire that wonderful deliverance, which God
wrought for the three young Hebrews, whose History we read in Daniel, chap. 3.
These three faithful Servants of God, having refused to prostrate themselves
before the Idol which King Nebuchadnezzar had made, this proud and mighty
Prince, that had before destroyed Jerusalem, told them, that if they would not
fall down and worship this Idol, he would order them to be cast into a fiery
Furnace. And he adds further, Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my
hands? And they answered him, Our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver out of
the burning fiery Furnace; and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King. But
if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor
worship the Golden Image which thou have set up. As if they had said, We know
that our God is Almighty, and able to deliver us, if it seems good in his
sight; but if he thinks fit we should die for his Glory, we are all ready to
submit and die. Then this proud and cruel Prince, being full of Rage and Fury,
commanded that they should heat the Furnace seven times more than it was wont
to be heat; and ordered the most mighty Men that were in his Army, to bind
them, and cast them into the burning fiery Furnace: Which accordingly they did;
but the fire consumed those that threw them in; and, on the contrary, these
three faithful Servants of God fell in the midst of the Flames, without
receiving the least damage; the fire did nothing else but burn their Bonds; so
that they walked in the midst of the Flames, without being consumed. And
besides, there appeared with them a fourth Man, whose form was like the Son of
God. Whereupon this Idolatrous King being amazed to see so great a Miracle,
made them come forth out of the Furnace, and gave glory to the God of Heaven,
who had so miraculously preserved them in the midst of the Flames, because they
had chose to lose their Lives, rather than displease their God.

So Daniel himself, because he continued to pay to God the Homage due to him,
when the King by his Edict had forbid it, was cast into the Den of Lions: But
God was always with him. He shut the Mouths of those ravenous Beasts, so that
they did him no hurt. And the King seeing this Miracle, commanded him to be
fetched out of the Den, and to throw in his Enemies that accused him, and they
were immediately devoured by the Lions.

So when the people of God heretofore groaned under the Oppression of the
Egyptians, God smote Egypt with all his Plagues. Nay, he slew all their
Firstborn; and every House in Egypt was in Mourning, and had one died out of
it. So again, when the Egyptian Army was in pursuit of the people of God, as
they were going out of Egypt, God covered his people with a Cloud, and divided
the Red sea to let 'em pass through it: But when the Egyptians pursued 'em into
the middle of the Waters, God caused the Sea to return upon them, and so that
great Army was all swallowed up, and not one of them escaped. In short, the
Holy Scriptures are full of the great wonders that God wrought from time to
time for the deliverance of those that fear, and put their whole confidence in
him: Therefore says he in my Text, Fear not, thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of
Israel; for I will help thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel.

What we have said is enough for the Explication of the words; now let us apply
what we have heard to our selves.

Here we see, my beloved Brethren, that all the Faithful are represented as one
Man, and compose but one Mystical Body; therefore we ought to live together in
Union, as being Members one of another. We are all animated by the same Spirit,
to wit, the Spirit of Christ; and therefore we should be all joined together by
the Bond of a fervent and unfeigned Affection: For by this (says our Savior,
Joh. 13.35.) shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if you love one
another.

We may learn also hence, That in order to have a part in the promise which God
has made, to assist us, and to be our Deliverer, we must be the Spiritual and
Mystical Jacob and Israel; that is to say, we must imitate the Faith and Piety
of the Patriarch Jacob, whom God himself calls Israel The promises of God, my
Brethren, were made to the Patriarchs and their Posterity; and though we are not
their Posterity after the Flesh, yet we are their Spiritual Posterity, if we
imitate their Faith and Piety.

Examine your selves therefore by this Rule, that you may know whether you are
the Children of the Patriarchs, and can claim a Title in the favor of God, in
his Deliverance and Salvation. If you bear the image of the Patriarchs, if you
have their Faith and Piety, if you do their Works, you are their Children, and
God will bless you, as he did them; he will deliver you out of the Hands of
your Enemies; he will load you with his Favors and Benefits, and will one day
make you partakers of a blessed Immortality. But if you imitate not their
Example, you are not their Children, and have no share in the promises God made
to them.

Abraham, when God commanded him to leave his Country, and part with his
Relations, presently complied with the Will of his God, though he knew not where
he was to go. And again, when God commanded him to sacrifice Isaac his beloved
Son, he prepared himself without any more ado, to execute this dreadful
command, having this confidence in God, that he could even restore his Son to
him again, by raising him from the dead. And in effect, the Apostle takes
notice, that he was indeed restored to him again by a kind of Resurrection. So
Isaac himself submitted to the Will of his God, and put himself in a condition
to die, as a Testimony of his Obedience to him. And Jacob was contented to
deprive himself of the Food that perishes, in order to obtain the Celestial
and Eternal Inheritance: And afterward he left his Father's House, that he
might avoid the violence of his Brother Esau, who designed to have killed him.
And so likewise all the Patriarchs did always glorify God by their Zeal, by
their Piety, and by a Pure, Holy, and Unblameable Life.

God sets us these Examples, to the end we might square our Lives by them, if
we would be the Mystical Posterity of these Holy Men, and would have a part in
the Promises that were made to them. Now when God suffers his Church to be
persecuted, he calls upon us to leave our Country and our Friends, to forsake
our Goods, and renounce our ease and pleasures, to suffer the loss of our
Children, and even to expose our Lives for his Glory and Service. Therefore, if
we desire to obtain his Blessing, his Deliverance and Salvation, we must submit
to his Will, as the Patriarchs did of old. We must also glorify him by a Holy
Life, by our Justice, our Zeal, our Charity, and Piety: We must cause our Light
to shine before Men, that they seeing our good Works, may together with us,
give Glory to God. Otherwise we must expect to be treated, not as his Children,
but as Bastards and Unbelievers.

What can you expect then, you miserable Worldlings, whose Heart is always
bowed down to the Earth like that of Beasts; you impenitent Sinners that always
persist in your Vices and Disorders, Injustice and Frauds? You follow the
multitude that is running in the broad way to Hell. Therefore if you repent
not, you must expert to perish with this Reprobate Multitude. You are not the
Children of the Patriarchs, since you do not their Works. You do the Works of
the Devil, that impure Spirit, who is the Father of Lies and Impurity, of Fraud
and Injustice; and what can you expect, you profane and rebellious Souls! who,
that you might live at your ease in your Houses, and might preserve your Goods,
your Children and your Repose, are revolted from God, and continue still in the
same Spirit of Rebellion? Alas! you are not neither the Children of the
Patriarchs, since you imitate not their Zeal and Piety, and are not ready to
lose and suffer all things, as they were, for the Glory of your God. You do
also the Works of the Devil, who was the first Apostate, the first Rebel
against God. Therefore, if you repent not, you shall be condemned with him to
the eternal Flames of Hell. For you are not willing to follow the Example of
two or three hundred thousand Faithful Servants of God, who have abandoned all
for his Glory, have left their Country and their Kindred, and parted with their
dearest Friends, and have likewise exposed their Lives to great dangers, that
they might comply with the Will of their God, and have an interest in his
Favor and Comfort.

God has for a great while continued to send his Faithful Servants to you, to
bring you back to your God, and a great many of them have already suffered
death for your sakes. It Is true, you give them a Hearing; but a great many
among you persist still in your Vices and Backslidings. Therefore as many
faithful Ministers, as have preached, or do still preach Repentance to them
without success, shall be so many Witnesses one day in Judgment against them,
and shall condemn them.

Oh! wretched Sinners that you are! You would enjoy the Pleasures of the World,
like profane Esau: But you shall be deprived one day of the eternal Pleasures
of Paradise. You would have your Portion in this Life, but one Day your Portion
shall be in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. You would preserve
your ease in this World, but you shall be eternally tormented with the Devils
in Hell. There will be weeking and gnashing of Teeth: And these horrid
Punishments shall never have an end.

But as for you, Believers, that desire to have a share in the promises of your
God, be ye followers of the Faith, the Piety and Holiness of the Patriarchs;
and you shall receive the Crown of Righteousness, which God has prepared for
all them that fear him, and give glory to his Name. Let us not suffer our
selves to be tempted, my beloved Brethren, by the Criminal Pleasures of Sin,
nor by the Riches and Vanities of the World. Let us pray to God without
ceasing, that he would not lead us into Temptation, but deliver us from the
wicked One: And at the same time let us disengage our Hearts from the World,
and separate our selves from the Places and Persons that may lead us into sin.
Let us mortify our Bodies by Moderation and Sobriety: Let us continually read
and meditate on the Word of God, that we may become strong in the Faith; and
let us evermore beg of God the assistance of his Holy Spirit, that he may make
us always walk in his Holy VVays.

Let us not suffer our selves to be surpised by the specious Pretenses of
false Teachers. They come to us in Sheeps Clothing, but within they are
Ravenous Wolves. At first sight one would think they had the Sweetness and
Charity of Angels; but no sooner do the Faithful give them to understand that
they will not defile themselves with Idolatry, and that they are resolved to
serve God with purity, according to his Commandments; but these false Teachers
discover a Cruelty not inferior to that of the most Savage Beasts. You will
know them by their Fruits, says our Savior. Examine well their Conduct, and
you will see that they bear the Image of the Devil. The Devil, as we said before,
is a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning. Now these false Teachers, are not
they Liars like him? Do not they teach Errors and Lies? And do not they spread
Abroad Fables and false Miracles, to seduce the Simple and the Ignorant? Have
they not likewise violated Edicts, Treaties of Peace, and the most solemn
Oaths, which are the Pledges and Seals of the Public Faith? On the other hand,
are not they Cruel and Murderers, as well as the Devil? Do not they every day
make the Faithful suffer Torments, Martyrdoms and horrible Massacres? Do not
they likewise use, on all occasions, the two great means, which the Devil
invented, to endeavor to shake the Faith of the Elect? Do not they offer to
some the Riches and the Honors of this World? Do not they propose to them
Pensions, Offices of the greatest Trust and Dignity, and other Worldly
Advantages? And do not they spoil others of their Goods, take away their
Children from them, and oppress them with a thousand Evils?

We must therefore, my beloved Brethren, refuse with horror to hold Communion
with these Ministers of Satan; and if it be the Will of God that we suffer for
the Interest of his Glory and Service, let us submit to his Sacred Disposal,
and prepare our selves to lose and suffer all things, that we may give him a
Testimony of our Obedience and Faithfulness. Let us remember that we were
created for his Glory, and that we ought to glorify him both in Life and
Death. Let us remember that we ought to love him above all that is dearest to
us in the World, more than Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Lands and Vineyards;
nay, more than Life it self, if we would be his Children, and desire to partake
of his Salvation.

Let us consider well, my beloved Brethren, that this Earth is not our Home;
that it is a Valley of Tears, the place of our Sojourning, full of Misery and
Trouble; and that our True Country is Heaven. The Patriarchs, whose Children we
are, had not so much as where to set the Sole of their Feet; they were Pilgrims
and Strangers upon Earth; they sought a City that had solid Foundations, whose
Builder and Founder is God. We must therefore renounce all earthly Things, and
continually breathe after the Glory and Happiness of Heaven.

Let us consider again, that if God permits us to be persecuted, it is to the
end that we may discover to the World our Faith, Piety and Constancy; and that
this Trial, by which God is glorified, may also turn to our own Glory,
Salvation and Comfort. Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation, says St.
James, chapter 1.12. for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life,
which the Lord has promised to them that love him. Blessed are they that are
persecuted for Righteousness sake, says our Savior, Mat. 5.10. for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Now for a season we are in heaviness, through manifold
Temptations: But, as St. Peter says, 1 Epist. 1.7, 8, 9. it is that the Trial of
our Faith, being much more precious than of Gold that perishes, may be found
unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ: whom
having not seen, we love; in whom, though now we see him not, yet believing, we
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: receiving the end of our Faith,
even the Salvation of our Souls.

Nevertheless, my Friends, we must acknowledge that our sins are the cause of
all the Evils we suffer. The Churches of France were abominably corrupted in
their Manners. Therefore God has poured out his Judgments upon them and his
Wrath is still burning against us, because our Repentance is not such as it
ought to be. We must then, every one of us, turn himself from his evil Course;
and those that have been so unhappy as to enter into the Communion of Babylon,
must for ever renounce her Abominations for the time to come. We must be
possessed with a Sacred Horror for our Sins, and in a Holy Manner afflict our
Souls, and humble our Selves at the Foot of the Throne of the Divine Majesty;
we must have recourse to the Mercy and Grace of God in Jesus Christ, who has
died for the remission of our Sins. We must strive continually with God by our
Tears and Supplications, and not let him go till he has blessed us; and the
good God will at last suffer himself to be overcome by our Cries and
Supplications. Though our sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow:
though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. Then will he be moved by
our Misery to give us Succor and Relief: He will bow down the Heavens, and
come down, and deliver us out of the great Waters that surround us.

Now good Men are oppressed; He that departs from evil, makes himself a
prey, Isa. 59.15. They that would be true to God, serve him with Purity, and
sing Praises to his Holy Name, are afflicted and persecuted: whereas Idolaters,
the perfidious Judas's, the Drunkards, the Lascivious, the Wicked, the Swearers
and Blasphemers are tolerated and countenanced in the World. But these
disorders shall not always last: Yet a little while, and he that is to come,
shall come and will not tarry.

Let Us take courage then, my Friends, and not suffer our selves to be frighted
with the Menaces of the Enemies of the Truth. Let us throw our selves into the
Arms of our God; let us retire under the Shadow of his Wings; let us deliver
our selves up to the conduct of his wise Providence, and put our confidence in
him; he promises to be our Protector and Deliverer; and he is faithful in all
his Promises. Let us have these comfortable words always in our Thoughts, Fear
not, thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel; I will help thee, says the Lord,
thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. We are but Worms of the Earth, in
comparison of our Enemies; but let us remember, that the Lord of Hosts, the
Great God, is our Strength. We are mortal Men, our Life is continually in
danger; but let us remember, that he that has Life and Death in his Power,
promises to assist and protect us. Let us not be afraid then, since he will be
our Redeemer and Defender. He commands us to call upon him in our Distress, and
promises to deliver us out of it, to the end that we may glorify him; Let us
then make him our Refuge; let us cry to him continually; and he will come to our
relief, that so we may bless him for it, all the days of our Life. God will do
wonders for our sakes, as he has always done in favor of his Children. For, as
St. Paul says, Romans 15.4. whatsoever things were written before time, were
written for our Learning; that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures,
might have hope; that is to say, that we may have this confidence in God, that
in case we imitate the Faith, the Piety, and the Fidelity of those ancient
Servants of God, whom the Scriptures mention, God will vouchsafe to us the same
Deliverances, and the same Comforts as he vouchsafed to them on the like
occasions.

He Will restore our Children to us again, as he did to Abraham of old. He Will
preserve our Lives, as he did Isaac's. He Will be always with us, as he was with
Jacob; and give us the same Protection that he gave him. He Will release us out
of our Prisons, as he did Joseph. He Will deliver us out of all our Sufferings
and Misery, as he did Job; and like him, will put us in a happier Condition
than that we were in before our Trial. He Will put an end to all our Troubles, as
he did formerly to those of David. Now we are in the Furnace, as the three
believing Hebrews were of old; but God will preserve us, as he did them, in the
midst of the Flames. The fire of Persecution will only serve to purify us, and
to consume the Bonds of Sin within us; and he will bring us out of the Furnace of
Affliction, much brighter than we were before. Now we are in the midst of
Lions, as Daniel was of old: But God will shut the Mouth of these Savage
Beasts; he will repress the Violence of our Enemies, that encompass us about on
all sides, and come not behind the very Tigers and Lions in Cruelty. Now we
groan under hard Bondage, as the People of God did heretofore in Egypt; but God
will deliver us out of it with a strong Hand and stretched out Arm. Now we are
terrified with the Power of our Enemies; But since it is against God they wage
War, God tells us in his Word, 2 Chr. 20.15. that the Battle is not Our's, but
God's; and that he will fight for us himself, while we are singing Praises to his
Holy Name, as he fought heretofore for his People in the time of King
Jehoshaphat. Now they that afflict us, laugh at us for putting our confidence
in God, as if he was not strong enough to deliver us out of their Hands; But
God will send an Angel to destroy them, as he did the Army of the King of the
Assyrians, who blasphemed the Lord and ridiculed them that put their confidence
in him, as we read Isa. 36.

For this end, my beloved Brethren, let us live in the fear of the Lord; let us
obey his Holy Commandments; be faithful to him; confess his Truth; and
continually implore his Mercy, Favor and Relief; and this God will hear our
Cries, will hearken to our Prayers, will plead our Cause, will help and deliver
us, will fill us with his Graces and Comforts, will load us with his Benefits,
and will one day take us up to Heaven, to ma^^ us happy for ever with himself.
Which God of his infinite Mercy grant. Now to Him, Father, Son, and Spirit, one
only God belessed for ever, be Honor and Glory, world without end. Amen.

Preached in several places in the Wilderness, July 23, and 31. 1692. and
September. 14. 1693.
FINIS.

