Amusements SERIOUS AND COMICAL, Calculated for the MERIDIAN OF LONDON.

By Mr. BROWN.

LONDON, Printed for John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1700.

Amusements SERIOUS AND COMICAL.
The PREFACE.
Amusement I.
THE Title I have conferred upon my Book, gives me Authority to make as long a
Preface as I please; for a Long Preface is a true Amusement.

However I have ventured to put one here, under the Apprehension that it will
be very necessary toward the understanding of the Book; though the Generality of
Readers are of Opinion, that a Preface, instead of setting off the Work, does
but expose the Vanity of the Author.

A good General of an Army, is less embarrass'd at the Head of his Troops, than
an ill Writer in the Front of his Productions. He knows not in what Figure to
dress his Countenance. If he puts on a Fierce and Haughty look, his Readers
think themselves obliged to lower his Topsail, and bring him under their
Sterns: If he affects an Humble Sneaking Posture, they slight and despise him:
If he boasts the Excellency of his Subject, they believe not a Syllable of what
he says: If he tells them there is little or nothing in it, they take him at his
Word; and to say nothing at all of his Work, is an unsufferable Imposition upon
an Author.

I know not what Success these Papers will find in the World; but if any amuse
themselves in Criticizing upon them, or in Reading them, my Design is answered.

I have given the following Thoughts the Name of Amusements; you will find them
Serious, or Comical, according to the Humor I was in when I wrote them; and
they will either Divert you, Instruct you, or Tire you, after the Humor you
are in when you read them.

The Other Day one of the Imaginary Serious Wits, who thought it a Weakness in
any Man to laugh: Seeing a Copy of this Book; at the opening of it, fell into a
Passion, and Wrinkling up his Nostrils like a heated Stallion that had a Mare
in the Wind, said, The Book was unworthy of the Title; for Grave Subjects,
should be treated with Decorum, and 'twas to profane Serious Matters, to blend
them with Comical Entertainments. What a Mixture is here says he!

This Variety of Colors, said I to my Censurer, appears very Natural to me;
for if one strictly examines all Men's Actions and Discourses, we shall find
that Seriousness and Merriment are near Neighbors, and always live together
like Friends, if Sullen Moody Sots do not set them at Variance. Every Day shows
us, that Serious Maxims, and Sober Counsels, often proceed out of the Mouths of
the Pleasantest Companions, and such as affect to be always Grave and Musing,
are then more Comical than they think themselves.

My Spark pushed his Remonstrance further: Are not you ashamed, continued he,
to Print Amusements? Don't you know, that Man was made for Business, and not to
sit amusing himself like an Owl in an Ivy-Bush? To which I answered after this
manner.

The whole Life of Man is but one entire Amusement: Virtue only deserves the
Name of Business, and none but they that practice it can be truly said to be
employed, for all the World beside are Idle.

One Amuses himself by Ambition, another by Interest, and another by that
Foolish Passion Love. Little Folks Amuse themselves in Pleasures, Great Men in
the Acquisition of Glory, and I am Amused to think that all this is nothing but
Amusement.

Once more, the whole Transactions of our Lives, are but mere Amusements, and
Life it self is but an Amusement in a continued Expectation of Death.

Thus much for Serious Matters: Let us now make haste to Pleasantry.

I have a great mind to be in Print; but above all, I would fain be an
Original, and that is a true Comical Thought: When all the Learned Men in the
World are but Translators, is it not a Pleasant Jest, that you should strive to
be an Original! You should have observed your Time, and have come into the
World with the Ancient Greeks for that purpose; for the Latins themselves are
but Copies.

This Discourse has mightily discouraged me. Is it true then that there is such
an Embargo laid upon Invention, that no Man can produce any thing that is
perfectly New, and entirely his own? Many Authors, I confess, have told me so:
I will enquire further about it, and if Sir Roger, Mr. Dryden, and Mr. Durfey
Confirm it, then I will Believe it.

What need all this Toil and Clutter about Original Authors and Translators? He
who Imagines Briskly, Thinks Justly, and Writes Correctly, is an Original in
the same things that another had thought before him. The Natural Air, and
Curious Turn he gives his Translations, and the Application wherewith he graces
them, is enough to persuade any Sensible Man, that he was able to think and
perform the same things, if they had not been thought and done before him,
which is an advantage owing to their Birth, rather than to the Excellency of
their Parts beyond their Successors.

Some of our Modern Writers, that have built upon the Foundation of the
Ancients, have far excelled in disguising their Notions, and improving the
first Essays, that they have acquired more Glory, and Reputation, than ever was
given to the Original Authors: Nay, have utterly effaced their Memories.

Those who Rob the Modern Writers, study to hide their Thefts; those who filch
from the Ancients, account it their Glory. But why the last should be more
Reproached than the former, I cannot imagine, since there is more Wit in
disguising a Thought of Mr. Lock's, than in a lucky Translation of a Passage
from Horace. After all, it must be granted, that the Genius of some Men can
never be brought to Write correctly in this Age, till they have formed their
Wits upon the Ancients, and their Gusts upon the Moderns; and I know no reason,
why it should be their Disparagement, to capaciate themselves by these Helps to
serve the Public.

Nothing will please some Men, but Books stuffed with Antiquity, groaning under
the weight of Learned Quotations drawn from the Fountains: And what is all this
but Pilfering. But I will neither Rob the Ancient, nor Modern Books, but
Pillage all I give you from the Book of the World.

The Book of the World is very Ancient, and yet always New. In all Times, Men,
and their Passions, have been the Subjects. These Passions were always the
same, though they have been delivered to Posterity in different Manners,
according to the different Constitution of Ages; and in all Ages they are Read
by every one, according to the Characters of their Wit, and the Extent of their
Judgment.

Those who are qualified to Read and Understand the Book of the World, may be
beneficial to the Public, in communicating the Fruit of their Studies; but
those that have no other knowledge of the World, but what they collect from
Books, are not fit to give Instructions to others.

If the World then is a Book that ought to be read in the Original: One may as
well compare it to a Country that one cannot know, nor make known to others,
without Traveling through it himself. I began this Journey very Young: I always
loved to make Reflections upon every thing that presented it self to my View: I
was amused in making these Reflections: I have amused my self in Writing them:
And I wish my Reader may Amuse himself in Reading them.

Some will think it another Amusement to find a Book without a Dedication,
begging the Protection of a Mighty Patron, and by some fulsome kind of
Flattery, expose the Great Man, the Author intended to praise; but that I have
avoided, by sending the Brat naked into the World to shift for it self. It was
not designed to give any Man Offense. Innocent Mirth, compounded with Wholesome
Advice, is the whole Burden it travails with; and therefore the Author
flatters himself with the hopes of pleasing all Men: Which is a Pitch if his
Book arrives to, will be the greatest Amusement in the World.

Amusement II.
The Voyage of the World.
THERE is no Amusement so entertaining and advantageous, as improving some of
our Leisure Time in Traveling. If any Man for that reason has an Inclination to
divert himself, and Sail with me round the Globe, to supervise almost all the
Conditions of Humane Life, without being infected with the Vanities, and Vices
that attend such a Whimsical Perambulation; let him follow me, who am going to
Relate it in a Style, and Language, proper to the Variety of the Subject: For
as the Caprichio came Naturally into my Pericranium, I am resolved to pursue it
through Thick and Thin, to enlarge my Capacity for a Man of Business.

Where then shall we begin? In the Name of Mischief what Country will first
present it self to my Imagination? He Bien! I have hit upon it already: Let Us
Steer for the Court, for that is the Region which will furnish us with the
finest Lessons for our Knowledge of the World.

The COURT.
THE Court is a Country abounding with Amusements. The Air they breath there,
is very fine and subtle; only for about three parts and a half of four in the
Year, it is liable to be Infected with Gross Vapors full of Flattery and Lying.
All the Avenues leading to it are Gay, Smiling, Agreeable to the Sight, and all
end in one and the same Point, Honor, and Self-Interest.

Here Fortune keeps her Residence, and seems to expect that we make our
Addresses to her, at the bottom of a long Walk, which lies open to all Comers
and Goers. One would be apt to think at first sight, that he might reach the
End on it, before he could count Twenty; but there are so many By-Walks and
Allies to cross, so many Turnings and Windings to find out, that he is soon
convinced of his Mistake. It Is contrived into such an Intricate Maze and
obscure manner, that the Straitest Way is not always the Nearest. It looks
Gloriously in the Country, but when you approach it, its Beauty diminishes.

After all the Enquiry I have made about it, I am not able to satisfy your
Curiosity, whether the Ground it stands upon be firm and solid. I have seen
some New Comers tread as confidently upon it, as if they had been Born there;
but quickly found they were in a New World, where the tottering Earth made them
Giddy and Stumble: For though they knew Good and Evil were equally useful to
their Advancement, yet were so confounded, to know which of the two they ought
to employ to make their Fortunes, that for want of understanding only that
pretty knack, they made a Journey to Court only to go back again, and report at
Home they had the Honor of seeing it. On the other side, I have seen some Old
Stagers walk upon Court Ground, as gingerly as upon Ice, or a Quagmire: And
with all the Precaution and Fear imaginable, lest they should fall from a great
Fortune by the same Defects that raised them: And not without cause, for the
Ground is Hard in some Places, and Sinks in others; but all People covet to get
upon the highest Spot, to which there is no coming but by one Passage, and that
is so narrow, that no Ambitious Pretender can keep the Way, without Justling
other People down with his Elbows: And the further Mischief on it is, that those
that keep their Feet, will not help up those that are fallen: For it is the
Genius of a true Courtier not to lend a Hand, or part with a Farthing to one
that wants every thing; but will give any thing to him that wants nothing: Or
rather will lay up for a Rainy Day, because what he sees befall another to Day,
may be his own Turn to Morrow.

He a stout Heart should have, and Steady Head,
That in a dangerous Slipery Path does tread;
And it is the Court that Slipery Place I call,
Where all Men Slip, and very few but fall.
The Difficulties we meet with in this Country, are very surprising; for he
takes the longest Way about, that keeps the old Track of Honesty and True
Merit; for where the Address of some, does not help to make the Fortune of
others, immediately to Eclipse his Desert, Calumny raises the thickest Clouds,
Envy the Blackest Vapors, and the Candidate is lost in the Fog of Competitors,
and must hide himself behind a Favorites Recommendation, if ever he hopes to
obtain what he seeks for: So that Virtue is no longer Virtue, nor Vice Vice,
but every thing is confounded and eaten up by particular Interests.

A new comer, with his Pockets well lined, is always welcome to any Court in
Christendom, and every thing is provided for him without his own Trouble. He
neither Acts nor Speaks, and yet they admire him as a very Wise Man: First,
because he is so Foolish to hear them Talk Impertinently, and next because
there is no little Wisdom in his Modesty and Silence; for had he Acted or Spoke
never so little, they would soon have found out the Coxcomb.

He that holds a Courtier by the Hand, has a Wet Eel by the Tail. He no sooner
thinks he is sure of him, but he has lost him. Though you presented him in the
Morning, he will forget you at Night, and utterly Renounce you the Day
following. A professed Courtier, tho he never aims at the Peace of God, is past
any Man's Understanding. He is incomparably skilled in Modish Postures, and
Modeling his Looks to every occasion: Profound and Impenetrable, can Dissemble
when he does Ill Offices, Smile an Enemy to Death, Frown a Friend into
Banishment, put a Constraint upon his Natural Temper, act against his own
Inclination, Disguise his Passions, Rail against his own Principles, Contradict
his own Opinion, and by a Brillant Humor, convert a Friendly Openness and
Sincerity, into a Sly Chicanry and Falsehood.

Is it not a great Amusement, that a Man which can subsist upon his own, should
throw himself into the two great Plagues of Mankind, Expectation and
Dependence, and spend his Life in an Antichamber, a Courtyard, or a
Staircase, where he finds no Advantage or Content; but is also hindered from
finding it elsewhere.

Is it not strange, I say, to see a great Man that lives and is respected in
his own Country like a Prince, Haunt the Court to make himself little by
Comparison, and bow to those little Animals at the Palace, whose Creeping,
Cringing, and long Services, are all the Merits they can pretend to. Let the
Courtiers value themselves upon their refined Pleasures, their Power and
Interest: Their being able to do Good by Chance, and Evil by Inclination; yet
he that is under no Necessity of living precariously, or mending his present
Circumstances, it is an Amusement to see him Dance Attendance for a single
Office at Court, that has so many at his own Disposal in the Country.

And now let us take our Leave of all the Courts in Europe, and hoist Sail for
London; the Chiefest City in all Christendom* where we shall find Matter enough
to Amuse our selves, though we should live as long as Mathusela.

Amusement III.
LONDON.
LONDON is a World by it self. We daily discover in it more New Countries, and
surprising Singularities, than in all the Universe besides. There are among the
Londoners so many Nations differing in Manners, Customs, and Religions, that
the Inhabitants themselves don't know a quarter of them. Imagine then what an
Indian would think of such a Motly Herd of People, and what a Diverting
Amusement it would be to him, to examine with a Traveller's Eye, all the
Remarkable Things of this Mighty City. A Whimsy now takes me in the Head, to
carry this Stranger all over the Town with me: No doubt but his Odd and
Fantastical Ideas, will furnish me with Variety, and perhaps with Diversion.

Thus I am resolved to take upon me the Genius of an Indian, who has had the
Curiosity to Travel hither among us, and who had never seen any thing like what
he sees in London. We shall see how he will be amazed at certain things, which
the Prejudice of Custom makes to seem Reasonable and Natural to us.

To diversifie the Style of my Narration, I will sometimes make my Traveller
speak, and sometimes I will take up the Discourse my self. I will represent to
my self the abstracted Ideas of an Indian, and I will likewise represent ours
to him. In short, taking it for granted, that we two understand one another by
half a Word, I will set both his and my Imagination on the Ramble. Those that
will not take the Pains to follow us, may stay where they are, and spare
themselves the trouble of reading further in the Book; but they that are minded
to Amuse themselves, ought to attend the Caprice of the Author for a few
Moments.

I will therefore suppose this Indian of mine, dropped perpendicularly from the
Clouds, and finds himself all on the sudden in the midst of this Prodigious and
Noisy City, where Repose and Silence dare scarce show their Heads in the
Darkest Night. At first Dash the confused. Clamours near Temple Bar, Stun him,
Fright him, and make him Giddy.

He sees an infinite Number of differenr Machines, all in violent Motion. Some
Riding on the Top, some Within, others Behind, and Iehu in the Coach-Box
before, whirling some Dignified Villain toward the Devil, who has got an
Estate by Cheating the Public. He Lolls at full Stretch within, and half a
Dozen Brawny Bulk-begotten Footmen behind. Some Carry, others are Carried: Make
Way there, says a Gouty-Leg'd Chairman, that is carrying a Punk of Quality to a
Mornings Exercise: Or a Bartholomen. Baby Beau, newly Launched out of a
Chocolate-House, with his Pockets as empty as his Brains. Make Room there, says
another Fellow driving a Wheel-Barrow of Nuts, that spoil the Lungs of the City
Prentices, and make them Wheeze over their Mistresses, as bad as the
Phlegmatic Cuckolds their Masters do, when called to Family Duty. One Draws,
another Drives. Stand ap there, you Blind Dog, Says a Carman, Will you have the
Cart squeeze your Guts out? One Tinker Knocks, another Bawls, Have you Brass
Pot, Iron Pot, Kettle, Skillet, or a Drying Pan to mend: Whilst another Son of
a Whore yells louder than Homer's Stentor, Two a Groat, and Four for Six Pence
Mackarel. One draws his Mouth up to his Ears, and Howls out, Buy my Flawnders,
and is followed by an Old Burly Drab, that Screams out the Sale of her Maids
and her Sole at the same Instant.

Here a Sooty Chimney-Sweeper takes the Wall of a Grave Alderman; and a
Broom-Man Justles the Parson of the Parish. There a Fat Greasy Porter, runs a
Trunk full Butt upon you, while another Salutes your Antlers with a Flasket of
Eggs and Butter. Turn out there you Country Put, says a Bully with a Sword two
Yards long jarring at his Heels, and throws him into the Channel. By and by
comes a Christning, with the Reader and the Midwife strutting in the Front, and
Young Original Sin as fine as Fippence, followed with the Vocal Music of
Kitchen-Stuff have you Maids; and a Damned Trumpeter calling in the Rabble to
see a Calf with Six Legs and a Top-knot. There goes a Funeral, with the Men of
Rosemary after it, licking their Lips after their three Hits of White, Sack,
and Claret at the House of Mourning, and the Sexton walking before, as Big and
Bluff as a Beef-Eater at a Coronation. Here Is a Poet scampers for it as fast as
his Legs will carry him, and at his Heels a Brace of Bandog Bailiffs, with open
Mouths ready to Devour him, and all the Nine Muses. Well, say I to the Indian;
And how do you like this Crowd, Noise, and Perpetual Hurry?

I admire and tremble, says the poor Wretch to me. I admire that in so narrow a
Place, so many Machines, and so many Animals, whose Motions are so directly
Opposite or Different, can move so dexterously, and not fall foul upon one
another. To avoid all this danger, shows the Ingenuity of you Europeans; but
their Rashness makes me tremble, when I see Brute heavy Beasts hurry through so
many Streets, and run upon slippery uneven Stones, where the least faise Step
brings them within an Ace of Death.

While I behold this Town of London, continues our Contemplative Traveller, I
fancy I behold a Prodigious Animal. The Streets are as so many Veins, wherein
the People Circulate. With what Hurry and Swiftness is the Circulation of
London performed? You behold, say I to him, the Circulation that is made in the
Heart of London, but it moves more briskly in the Blood of the Citizens, they
are always in Motion and Activity. Their Actions succeed one another with so
much Rapidity, that they begin a Thousand Things before they have finished one,
and finish a thousand others before they have begun them.

They are equally incapable both of Attention and Patience, and though nothing is
more quick, than the Effects of Hearing and Seeing; yet they don't allow
themselves time either to Hear or See; but like Moles, work in the Dark, and
Undermine one another.

All their Study and Labor is either about Profit, or Pleasure; and they have
Schools for the Education of their Stalking-Horses, which they call Apprentices
in the Mystery of Trade. A Term unintelligible to Foreigners, and that none
truly understand the Meaning of, but those that practice it.

Some call it Over-witting those they deal with, but that is generally denied as
a Heterodox Definition; for Wit was never counted a London Commodity, unless
among their Wives, and other City Sinners; and if you search all the Warehouses
and Shops, from White-Chappel Bars, to St. Clement's, if it were to save a
Man's Life, or a Woman's Honesty, you cannot find one Farthing worth of Wit
among them.

Some derive this Heathenish Word Trade from an Hebrew Original, and call it
Overreaching, but the Jews deny it, and say the Name and Thing is wholly
Christian; and for this Interpretation quote the Authority of a London
Alderman, who sold a Jew five Fats of Right-handed Gloves, without any Fellows
to them, and afterward made him purchase the Left Handed ones to Match them,
at double the Value.

Some call Trade, Honest Gain, and to make it more Palatable, have lacker'd it
with the Name of Godliness; and hence it comes to pass, that the Generality of
Londoners are accounted such Eminent Professors; but of all Guessers, he comes
nearest the Mark, that said Trade was playing a Game at Losing Loadum, or
dropping Fools Pence into Knaves Pockets, till the Sellers were Rich, and the
Buyers were Bankrupts.

About the Middle of London, is to be seen a Magnificent Building, for the
Accommodation of the Lady Trade and her Heirs and Successors for ever, so full
of Amusements about Twelve a Clock every Day, that one would think all the
World was converted into News-Mongers and Intellingencers, for that is the first
Salutation among all Mankind that frequent that Place. What News from
Scandaroon and Aleppo? says the Turkey Merchant. What Price bears Currants at
Zant? Apes at Tunis? Religion at Rome? Cutting a Throat at Naples? Whores at
Venice? And the Cure of a Clap at Padua?

What News of such a Ship? says the Insurer. Is there any hope of her being
Cast away, says the Adventurer, for I have Insured more by a Thousand Pounds,
than I have in her? So have I through Mercy, says a second, and therefore let us
leave a Letter of Advice for the Master, at the New Light-House at Plymouth,
that he does not fail to touch at the Good-win-Sands, and give us Advice of it
from Deal, or Canterbury, and he shall have another Ship for his Faithful
Service as soon as he comes to London.

I have a Bill upon you, Brother, says one Alderman to another. Go Home,
Brother, says the other, and if Money and my Man be Absent, let my Wife pay you
out of her Privy-Purse, as your Good Wife lately paid a Bill at Sight for me, I
thank her Ladyship.

Hark you, Mr. Broker, I have a Parcel of Excellent Log-Wood, Block-Tin,
Spiders Brains, Philosophers Guts, Don Qnixot's Windmills, Hens-Teeth,
Ell-Broad Pack-Thread, and the Quintescence of the Blue of Plumbs. Go you
Puppy, you are fit to be a Broker, and don't know that the Greshamites buy up
all these Rarities by Wholesale all the Year, and Retail them out to the
Society every first of April.

Hah, Old Acquaintance! Touch Flesh: I have have been seeking thee all the
Change over. I have a pressing Occasion for some Seeds of Sedition, Iacobite
Rue, and Whig Herb of Grace, Can furnish me? Indeed lau, No; says the
Merchant. I have just parted with them to the several Coffee-Houses about the
Town, where the respective Merchants meet that Trade in those Commodities; but
if you want but a small Parcel, you may be supplied by Mrs. Bald -- n, or Da --
y and his Son-in-Law Bell and Clapper, and most Booksellers in London and
Westminster. Da, da, I Will about it immediately. Stay a little Mr, --, I have a
Word in private to you. If you know any of our Whig Friends that have occasion
for any Stanch Votes for the Choice of Mayors or Sheriffs, that were Calculated
for the Meridian of London, but will serve indifferently for any City, or
Corporation in Europe, our Friend Mr. Pars -- l has abundance that lie upon his
Hands, and will be glad to dispose of them a good Pennyworth. Enough said, They
are no Winters Traffic, for though Mayors and Woodcocks come in about
Michaelmas, they don't lay Springes for Sheriffs till about Midsummer, and then
we'll talk with him about those weighty Matters.

There stalks a Sergeant and his Mace, smelling at the Merchants Backsides,
like a Hungry Dog for a Dinner.

There walks a Public Notary tied to an lnkhorn, like an Ape to a Clog, to put
off his Heathen-Greek Commodities, Bills of Store, and Charter Parties.

That Wheezing Sickly Show with his Breeches full of the Prices of Male and
Female Commodities, Projects, Complaints, and all Mismanagements from Dan to
Beersheba, is the Devil's Broker, and may be spoken withal every Sunday from
Eleven in the Morning, till Four in the Afternoon, at the next Quakers Meeting,
to his Lodging, and not after; for the rest of his time on that Day he employs
in adjusting his Accounts, and playing at Back-Gammon with his Principal.

There goes a Rat-catcher in state, Brandishing his Banner like a Blackamore in
a Pageant on the Execution-Day of Roast Beef, Greasy Geese, and Custards.

And there Sneaks a Hunger-starved Usurer in quest of a Crasie Citizen for Use
and Continuance-Money, which the other shuns as carefully as a Sergeant, or the
Devil.

Now say I to my Indian, Is not all this Hodge-Podge a Pleasant Confusion, and
a Perfect Amusement? The Astonished Traveller replied, Without doubt the
Indigested Chaos was but an imperfect representation of this congregated
Huddle. But that which most Amuses my Understanding, is to hear 'em speak all
Languages, and talk of nothing but Trucking, and Bartering, Buying and Selling,
Borrowing and Lending, Paying and Receiving, and yet I see nothing they have to
dispose of unless those that have them, fell their Gold Chains, the Braziers
their Leathern Aprons, the Young Merchants their Swords, or the Old Ones their
Canes and Oaken-Plants, that support their Feeble Carcases. That doubt, quoth I
to my inquisitive Indian, is easily solved, for tho their Grosser Wares are at
Home in their Storehouses, they have many Things of Value to Truck for, that
they always carry about them: As Justice for Fat Capons to be delivered before
Dinner, A Reprieve from the Whipping-Post, for a Dozen Bottles of Claret to
drink after it. Licenses to sell Ale for a Hogshead of Stout to his Worship;
and leave to keep a Coffee-House, for a Cask of Cold Tea to his Lady. Name but
what you want, and I Will direct you to the Walks where you shall find the
Merchants that will Furnish you. Would you buy the Common Hunt, the Common
Cryers, the Bridge-Master's, or the Keeper of Newgate's Places? Stay till they
fall, and a Gold-Chain, and a Great Horse will direct you to the Proprietors.
Would you buy any Naked Truth, or Light in a Dark-Lanthorn? Look in the
Wet-Quakers Walk. Have you occasion for Comb-Brushes, Tweezers, Cringes, or
Complements, A la mode? The French Walk will supply you. Want you Old Cloaks,
Plain Shoes, or Formal Gravity? You may fit your self to a Cows-Thumb among
the Spaniards.

Have you any Use in your Country for Upright Honesty, or Downright Dealing?
You may buy plenty of them both among the Stock-Iobbers, for they are dead
Commodities, and that Society are willing to quit their Hands of them.

Would you lay out your Indian Gold for a New Plantation? Enquire for the
Scotch Walk, and you buy a Good Pennyworth in Darien: Three of your own Kings,
for as many New Hats, and all their Nineteen Subjects into the Purchase, to be
delivered at the Scotch East India Office, by Parson Pattison, or their
Secretary Wisdom Webster. If you want any Tallow, Rapparee's Hides, or Popish
Massacres, enquire in the Irish Walk, and you cannot lose your Labor: But I am
interrupted.

Look! Yonder Is a Jew treading upon an Italian's Foot, to carry on a
Sodomitical Intrigue, and Bartering their Souls here, for Fire and Brimstone in
another World.

See, there is a Beau that has Played away his Estate at a Chocolate-House,
going to Sell himself to Barbados, to keep himself out of Newgate, and from
Scandalizing his Relations at Tyburn.

There Is a Poet Reading his Verses. and squeezing his Brains into an Amorous
Cits Pockets, in hopes of a Tester to buy himself a Dinner.

Behind that Pillar is a Welsh Herald deriving a Merchant's Pedigree from
Adam's Great Grandfather, to entitle him to a Coat of Arms, when he comes to be
Alderman.

But now the Change began to empty so fast, I thought 'twas time to troop off
to an Eating-House; but my Indian pulled me by the Sleeve to satisfy his
Curisioty, why they stained such stately Pillars with so many Dirty Papers. I
told him, they were Advertisements. Why, says he, don't they put them into the
Post-Boy? Cannot the Folks in this Country read it? Pray let me know the
Contents of some of these Serawls.

Why first here is a Ship to be sold, with all her Tackle and Lading, There are
Virtuous Maidens that are willing to be Transported with William Penn into
Merriland, for the Propogation of Quakerism. In another is a Tutor to be Hired,
to instruct any Gentleman's, or Merchant's Children in their own Families: And
under that an Advertisement of a Milc-Ass, to be sold at the Night-Mans in
White-Chappel.

In another Colume in a Gilded-Frame was a Chambermaid that wanted a Service;
and over her an Old Bachelor that wanted a Housekeeper. On the sides of these
were two lesser Papers, one containing an Advertisement of a Red-Headed Monkey
lost from a Seed-Shop in the Strand, with two Guineas Reward to him or her that
shall bring him Home again with his Tail and Collar on. On the other side was a
large Folio filled with Wet and Dry Nurses; and Houses to be Let; and Parrots,
Canary-Birds, and Setting-Dogs to be sold.

They Way to my Lodging lay through Cheapside, but dreading the Canibal
Man-catchers at the Counter-Gate, that suck the Blood, and pick the Bones of
all the Paupers that fall into their Clutches; nay, are worse than Dogs, for
they will Devour one another; I Tacked about, and made a Trip over Moor-fields,
and Visited our Friends in Bedlam.

A Pleasant Piece it is, and abounds with Amusements; the first of which is the
Building so stately a Fabric for Persons wholly unsensible of the Beauty and
Use of it: The Outside is a perfect Mockery to the Inside, and admits of two
Amusing Queries: Whether the Persons that ordered the Building it, or those
that Inhabit it, were the Maddest? And whether the Name and Thing be not as
disagreeable as Harp and Harrow? But what need I wonder at that, since the
whole is but one Entire Amusement: Some were Preaching, and others in full Cry
a Hunting. Some were Praying, other Cursing and Swearing. Some were Dancing,
others Groaning. Some Singing, others Crying, and all in perfect Confusion. A
sad Representation of the greater Chimerical World, only in this there is no
Whoring, Cheating, nor Sleeping, unless after the Platonic Mode in Thought,
for want of Action. Here were Persons Confined that having no Money nor
Friends, and but a small Stock of Confidence, run Mad for want of Preferment. A
Poet that for want of Wit and Sense, run Mad for want of Victuals, and a
Hard-favour'd Citizens Wife, that lost her Wits because her Husband kept a
Handsome Mistress.

In this Apartment was a Common Lawyer Pleading; in another a Civilian Sighing;
a third enclosed a Iacobite Ranting against the Revolution; and a fourth a
Morose Melancholy Whig, bemoaning his want of an Office, and complaining
against Abuses at Court, and Mismanagements.

Missing many others, whom I thought deserved a Lodging among their Brethren, I
made Enquiry after them, and was told by the Keeper, they had many other Houses
of the same Foundation in the City, where they were disposed of till they grew
Tamer, and were qualified to be admitted Members of this Soberer Society. The
Projectors, who are generally Broken Citizens, were cooped up in the Counters
and Ludgate. The Beaus, and Rakes, and Common Mad Gilts, that labor under a
Furor Uterini in Bridewell, and Justice Long's Powdering-Tub; and the Vertuosi
were confined to Gresham-College. Those, continued he, in whose Constitutions
Folly has the Ascendant over Frenzy, are permitted to Reside, and be Smoaked in
Coffee-Houses; and those that by the Governors of this Hospital, are thought
Utterly Incurable, are shut up with a pair of Foils, a Fiddle, and a Pipe, in
the Inns of Court and Chancery; and when their Fire and Spirits are exhausted,
and they begin to Dote, they are removed by Habeas Corpus into a certain
Hospital built for that purpose near Amen-Corner.

Walking from hence, I had leisure to ask my Indian his Opinion of these
Amusements, who after the best manner his Genius would suffer him, harangued
upon Deficiency of Sense, as the only Beneficial Quality, since the bare
pretense to Wit was attended by such Tragical Misfortunes, as Confinement to
Straw, Small Drink, and Flogging.

Hearing a Noise as we approached near Cripplegate Church, my Curiosity lead me
into the Inside of it, where Mr. Sm -- is was Holding-forth against all the
Vices of the Age, but Whoring and Midwifery; for such a stretch of Extravagancy
had lost both his own and his Wifes Fees at Christenings, and Stuffing their
Wembs at Churchings: And you know none but Poets and Players decry their own
way of Living. He was very Heavenly upon Conjugal Duties and Chastity, for a
reason you may imagine: Pressed Filial Obedience and Honesty, with as much
Vigor, as if his own Sons had been his Auditors: But above all, laid out
himself as powerfully in exciting his Hearers to be Charitable to the Poor, as
if himself had been the Judas and the Bag-bearer. Now

I that am always more scared at the sight of a Sergeant, or Bailiff, than at
the Devil and all his Works, was mortally frighted in my Passage through
Barbican and Long-Lane, by the Impudent Ragsellers, in those Scandalous
Climates, who laid hold of my Arm to ask me, What I lacked? At first it made me
Tremble worse than a Quaker in a Fit of Enthusiasm, imagining it had been an
Arrest; but their Rudeness continuing at every Door, relieved me from those
Pannick Fears; Uterini in Bridewell, and Justice Long's Powdering-Tub; and the
Vertuosi were confined to Gresham-College. Those, continued he, in whose
Constitutions Folly has the Ascendant over Frenzy, are permitted to Reside, and
be Smoaked in Coffee-Houses; and those that by the Governors of this Hospital,
are thought Utterly Incurable, are shut up with a pair of Foils, a Fiddle, and
a Pipe, in the Inns of Court and Chancery; and when their Fire and Spirits are
exhausted, and they begin to Dote, they are removed by Habeas Corpus into a
certain Hospital built for that purpose near Amen-Corner.

Walking from hence, I had leisure to ask my Indian his Opinion of these
Amusements, who after the best manner his Genius would suffer him, harangued
upon Deficiency of Sense, as the only Beneficial Quality, since the bare
pretense to Wit was attended by such Tragical Misfortunes, as Confinement to
Straw, Small Drink, and Flogging.

Hearing a Noise as we approached near Cripplegate Church, my Curiosity lead me
into the Inside of it, where Mr. Sm -- is was Holding-forth against all the
Vices of the Age, but Whoring and Midwifery; for such a stretch of Extravagancy
had lost both his own and his Wifes Fees at Christenings, and Stuffing their
Wembs at Churchings: And you know none but Poets and Players decry their own
way of Living. He was very Heavenly upon Conjugal Duties and Chastity, for a
reason you may imagine: Pressed Filial Obedience and Honesty, with as much
Vigor, as if his own Sons had been his Auditors: But above all, laid out
himself as powerfully in exciting his Hearers to be Charitable to the Poor, as
if himself had been the Judas and the Bag-bearer. Now

I that am always more scared at the sight of a Sergeant, or Bailiff, than at
the Devil and all his Works, was mortally frighted in my Passage through
Barbican and Long-Lane, by the Impudent Ragsellers, in those Scandalous
Climates, who laid hold of my Arm to ask me, What I lacked? At first it made me
Tremble worse than a Quaker in a Fit of Enthusiasm, imagining it had been an
Arrest; but their Rudeness continuing at every Door, relieved me from those
Pannick Fears; and the next that attacked my Arm with What ye buy, Sir, What ye
lack? I threw him from my Sleeve into the Kennel, saying, Though I want nothing
out of your Shops, methinks you all want good Manners and Civility, that are
ready to tear a New Suit from my Back, under pretense of selling me an Old one:
Avaunt Vermin, your Clothes smell as rankly of Newgate and Tyburn, as the
Bedding to be sold at the Ditchside near Fleet-Bridge, smells of a Bawdy House
and Brandy.

Smithfield would next have afforded us variety of Subjects to descant upon;
but it being neither Bartholomew-Fair Time, nor Market Day, I shall adjourn
that View to another opportunity; and now proceed to,

Amusement IV.
Westminster Hall.
A Magnificent Building, which is Open to all the World, and yet in a Manner is
shut up, by the Prodigious Concourse of People, who Crowd and Sweat to get in
or out, and happy are they that don't leave their Lives, Estates, nor
Consciences behind them.

Here we entered into a great Hall, where my Indian was surprised to see, in
the same Place, Men on the one side with Bawbles and Toys, and on the other
taken up with the Fear of Judgment, on which depends their inevitable Destiny.

In this Shop are to be sold Ribbons and Gloves, Towers and Commodes, by Word
of Mouth: In another Shop Lands and Tenements are disposed of by Decree.

On your Left Hand you hear a nimble Tongued Painted Sempstress, with her
Charming Treble, Invite you to buy some of her Knick-Knacks: And on your Right,
a Deep-mouthed Cryar commanding Impossibilities, viz. Silence to be kept among
Women and Lawyers. What a Fantastical Jargon does this Heap of Contrarieties
amount to?

While our Traveller is making his Observations upon this Motly Scene, he is
frighted at the Terrible Approaches of a Multitude of Men in Black Gowns, and
Round Caps, that make between them a most Hideous and Dreadful Monster, called
Pettyfogging, of which there is such store in England, that the People think
themselves obliged to pray for the Egyptian Locusts, and Catterpillars, in
exchange for this kind of Vermin. And this Monster bellows out so pernicious a
Language, that one Word alone is sufficient to ruin whole Families.

At certain Hours appointed, there appears Grave and Dauntless Men, whose very
Sight is enough to give one a Quartan-Ague, and who says this Monster on his
Back.

Scarce a Day passes over their Heads, but they rescue out of his greedy Jaws
some Thousand of Acres half devoured.

This Cursed Petty-Fogging is much more to be feared than Injustice it self.
The latter openly undoes us, and affords us at least this Comfort, That we have
a Right to bewail our selves; but the former by its Dilatory Formalities, rob
us of all we have, and tells us for our Eternal Despair, that we suffer by Law.

Justice, if I may so express my self, is a Beautiful Young Virgin Disguised,
brought on the Stage by the Pleader, Pursued by the Artorney, Cajoled by the
Counselor, and Defended by the Judge.

Some Pert Critic will tell me now that I have lost my way in Digressions.
Under favor, this Critic is in the wrong Box, for Digressions properly belong
to my Subject, since they are all nothing but Amusements; and this is a Truth
so uncontested, that I am resolved to continue them.

By way of Digression, I must here inform you, that in all those Places of my
Voyage, where the Indian perplexes me with his Questions, I will drop him, as I
have already done, to pursue my own Reflections: Upon this Condition however,
that I may be allowed to take him up again, when I am weary of Traveling
alone. I will likewise make bold to quit the Metaphor of my Voyage, whenever
the Fancy takes me; for I am so far from confining my self like a Slave to one
particular Figure, that I will keep the Power still in my Hands, to change if I
think fit at every Period, my Figure, Subject, and Style, that I may be less
tiresom to the Modern Reader; for I know well enough, that Variety is the
Predominant Taste of the present Age.

Although nothing is durable in this Transitory World, yet it is observed, that
this Saying proves false in Westminster Hall, where there are things of eternal
continuance, as Thousands have found true by Woeful Experience, I mean Chancery
Suits. Certain Sons of Parchment, called Sollicitors and Barristers, make it
their whole Business to keep the Shuttle-Cock in motion, and when one Hand is
weary of it, they Play it into another. It Is the chiefest part of their
Religion to keep up and animate the Differences among their Clyents, as it was
with the Vestal Virgins in the Days of Yore, to maintain the Sacred Fire.

It Is a most surprising thing that notwithstanding all the Clamor, Squaling,
and Bawling there is in the Courts, yet you shall have a Judge now and then
take as Comfortable a Nap upon the Bench, as if he was at Church; and every
Honest Christian has reason to pray, that as often as a Cause comes to be
heard, the Judges of Ancient Times were Awake, and the Modern Fast Asleep.

However this must be said for them, that they are Righteous enough in their
Hearts; but the Devil on it is, that they cannot tell which way to take to
instruct themselves in the Merits of the Cause. The Contending Parties are
suspected by them, the Solicitor embroils them, the Counselor Deafens them,
the Attorney Importunes them, and (is it not a sad thing?) the Shee-Sollicitor
Distracts them. Well! Let what will happen on it, give me for my Money the
Female Solicitor.

A certain Judge in the Days of Yore, made his Boasts one Day, that the most
Charming Woman in the World, was not able to make him forget that he was a
Judge. Very likely, Sir, said a Gentleman to him; but I Will lay Twenty to One on
Nature's side. The Magistrate was a Man before he was a Judge. The first Motion
he finds is for the She Solicitor, and the Second is for Justice.

A very Beautiful Countess went to a Morose Surly Judge's Chamber, to
prepossess him in Favor of a very Unrighteous Cause, and to Solicit for a
Colonel, against a Tradesman that Sued him.

This Tradesman happened that very Moment to be in his Lordship's Closet, who
found his Cause to be so Just, and Clear, that he could not forbear to promise
him to take care he should carry the Day.

The Words were no sooner out of his Mouth, but our Charming Countess appeared
in the Antichamber. The Judge immediately run as fast as his Gouty Legs would
give him leave to meet her Ladyship. Her Eyes, her Air, her Graceful
Deportment, the Sound of her Voice, so many Charms in short, pleaded so
powerfully in her Favor, that at the first Moment he found the Man too
Powerful for the Judge, and he promised our Countess, that the Colonel should
gain his Cause. Thus you see the Poor Judge engaged on both sides. When he came
back to his Closet, he found the Tradesman reduced to the last Despair. I saw
her, cries the Fellow as it were out of his Wits. I saw the Lady that solicits
against me, and Lord what a Charming Creature she is? I am undone my Lord, my
Cause is lost and ruined! Why, says the Judge, not yet recovered from his
Confusion, imagine your self in my Place, and tell me if it is possible for
frail Man to refuse any thing that so Beautiful a Lady asks? As he spoke these
Words, he pulled a Hundred Pistols out of his Pocket, which amounted to the Sum
the Tradesman sued for, and gave them to him. By some means or other the
Countess came to the knowledge of it; and as she was Virtuous even to a
Scruple, she was afraid of being too much obliged by so Generous a Judge, and
immediately sent him a Hundred Pistoles. The Colonel full as Gallant as the
Countess was Scrupulous, paid her the Sum aforesaid; and thus every one did as
he ought to do. The Judge was afraid of being Unjust, the Countess feared to be
too much obliged, the Colonel paid, and the Tradesman was satisfied: Or
according to our old English Adage, all was well, Jack had Joan, and the Man
had his Mare again.

Shall I give you my Opinion of this Judge's Behavior. The first Motion he
found in himself, was for the Charming Sollicitrix, which I cannot Excuse him
for; and the second was for Justice, for which I Admire him.

While I thus amused my self, my Traveller is lost in a Fog of Black-Gowns; let
us go and find him. Oh yonder he is at the farther end of the Hall, I call to
him, he strives to come to me, but his Breath fails him, the Crowd over-presses
him, he is carried down the Stream, he Swims upon his Elbows to get to Shore.

At last half Spent, and dripping from every Pore in his Body, he comes up to
me, and all the Relation I could get from him of what he had seen, was; Oh this
Counfounded Country! Let us get out of it as soon as possibly we can, and never
see it more.

Come, come, says I to him, let us go and Refresh our selves after this Fatigue;
and to put the Idea of the Hall out of our Heads, let us go this Evening into
the Delicious Country of Opera.

Amusement V.
The Playhouse.
THE Playhouse is an Enchanted Island, where nothing appears in Reality what
it is, nor what it should be. It Is frequented by Persons of all Degrees and
Qualities whatsoever, that have a great deal of Idle Time lying upon their
Hands, and cannot tell how to employ it worser. Here Lords come to Laugh, and to
be Laughed at for being there, and seeing their Qualities ridiculed by every
Triobolary Poet. Knights come hither to learn the Amorous Smirk, the Ala mode
Grin, the Antic Bow, the Newest-Fashion'd Cringe, and how to adjust his Phiz,
to make himself as Ridiculous by Art, as he is by Nature.

Hither come the Country Gentlemen to show their Shapes, and trouble the Pit
with their Impertinence about Hawking, Hunting, and their Handsome Wives, and
their House-wifery.

There sits a Beau like a Fool in a Frame, that dares not stir his Head, nor
move his Body, for fear of incommoding his Wig, ruffling his Cravat, or putting
his Eyes, or Mouth out of the Order his Maitre de Dance had set it in, whilst a
Bully Beau comes Drunk into the Pit, Screaming out, Dam me, Jack, it is a
Confounded Play, let us to a Whore and spend our time better.

Here the Ladies come to show their Clothes, which are often the only things to
be admired in or about 'em. Some of them having Scab'd, or Pimpled Faces, wear
a Thousand Patches to hide them, and those that have none, scandalize their
Faces by a Foolish imitation. Here they show their Courage by being unconcerned
at a Husband being Poisoned, a Hero being Killed, or a Passionate Lover being
Jilted: And discover their Modesties by standing Buff at a Baudy Song, or a
Naked Obscene Figure. By the Signs that both Sexes hang out, you may know their
Qualities or Occupations, and not mistake in making your Addresses.

Men of Figure and Consideration, are known by seldom being there, and Men of
Wisdom and Business, by being always absent. A Beau is known by the Decent
Management of his Sword-Knot, and Snust-Box. A Poet by his Empty Pockets: A
Citizen by his Horns and Gold Hatband: A Whore by a Vizor-Mask: And a Fool by
Talking to her. A Playhouse Wit is distinguished by wanting Understanding; and
a Judge of Wit by Nodding and Sleeping, till the falling of the Curtain, and
Crowding to get out awake him.

I have told you already, that the Playhouse was the Land of Enchantment, the
Country of Metamorphosis, and performed it with the greatest speed imaginable.
Here in the Twinkling of an Eye, you shall see Men transformed into Demigods:
And Goddesses made as true Flesh and Blood, as our Common Women. Here Fools by
Slight of Hand, are converted into Wits. Honest Women into Errant Whores, and
which is most miraculous, Cowards into Valiant Hero's, and Rank Coquets and
Iilts into as Chaste and Virtuous Mistresses, as a Man would desire to put his
Knife into.

Let us now speak a Word or so, of the Natives of this Country, and the Stock
of Wit and Manners by which they Maintain themselves, and Ridicule the whole
World besides. The People are all somewhat Whimsical, and Giddy-Brain'd: When
they Speak, they Sing, when they Walk, they Dance, and very often do both when
they have no mind to it.

The Stage has now so great a share of Atheism, Impudence, and Profaneness,
that it looks like an Assembly of Demons, directing the Way Hellward; and the
more Blasphemous the Poets are, the more are they admired, even from Huffing
Dryden, to Sing-Song Durfey, who always Stutters at Sense, and speaks plain
when he Swears G -- Dam me. What are all their New Plays but Damned Insipid
Dull Farces, confounded Toothless Satyr, or Plaguey Rhiming Plays, with Scurvy
Heroes, worse than the Knight of the Sun, or Amadis de Gaul. They are the
errantest Plagiaries in Nature, and like our Common News-Writers, Steal from
one another.

When any Humor Takes in London, they Ride it to Death before they leave it.
The Primitive Christians were not Persecuted with half that Variety, as the
poor Unthinking Beaux are tormented with upon the Theater.

Character they supply with a Smutty Song, Humor with a Dance, and Argument
with Lightning and Thunder, which has often reprieved many a Scurvy Play from
Damning.

A Huge great Muff, and a Gaudy Ribbon hanging at a Bully's Backside, is an
Excellent Jest; and New Invented Curses, as Stap my Vitals, Damn my Diaphragma,
Slit my Windpipe; Rig up a New Beau, though in the Main it is but the same
everlasting Coxcomb; and there is as much difference between their Rhimes, and
Solid Verse, as between the Royal Psalmist, and Hopkins and Sternhold, with
their Collars of Ay's and Eeke's about them.

It Is a hard Matter to find such things as Reason, Sense, or Modesty, among
them; for the Men's Heads are so full of Music, that you can have nothing from
them but empty Sounds; and the Women are so Light, they may easily be blown up
or down like a Feather.

Amusement VI.
The WALKS.
WE have diverse sorts of Walks about London, in some you go to see and be seen,
in others neither to see nor to be seen, but like a Noun Substantive to be
Felt, Heard, and Understood.

The Ladies that have an Inclination to be Private, take Delight in the Close
Walks of Spring-Gardens, where both Sexes meet, and mutually serve one another
as Guides to lose their Way, and the Windings and Turnings in the little
Wildernesses, are so intricate, that the most Experienced Mothers, have often
lost themselves in looking for their Daughters.

From Spring-Garden we set our Faces toward Hide-Park, where Horses have their
Diversion as well as Men, and Neigh and Court their Mistresses almost in as
intelligible a Dialect. Here People Coach it to take the Air, amidst a Cloud of
Dust, able to Choke a Foot Soldier, and hindered us from seeing those that come
thither on purpose to show themselves: However we made hard shift to get now
and then a Glance at some of them.

Here we saw much to do about nothing; a World of Brave Men, Gilt-Coaches, and
Rich Liveries. Within some of them were Upstart Courtiers, blown up as big as
Pride and Vanity could swell them to; sitting as Upright in their Chariots, as
if a Stake had been driven through them. It would hurt their Eyes to exchange a
Glance upon any thing that is Vulgar, and that is the Reason they are so sparing
of their Looks, that they will neither Bow nor move their Hats to any thing
under a Duke or a Duchess; and yet if you examine some of their Originals; a
Covetous, Soul-less Miser, or a great Oppressor, laid the Foundation of their
Families, and in their Retinue there are more Creditors than Servants.

See, says my Indian, what a Bevy of Gallant Ladies are in yonder Coaches; some
are Singing, others Laughing, others Tickling one another, and all of them
Toying and devouring Cheefe-Cakes, March-Pane, and China Oranges. See that Lady
says he, was ever any thing so black as her Eye, and so clear as her Forehead?
One would Swear her Face had taken its Tincture from all the Beauties in
Nature; and yet perhaps, answered I to my Fellow Traveller, all this is but
Imposture; she might, for ought we know, go to Bed last Night as ugly as a
Hagg, though she now appears like an Angel: and if you did but see this Puppet
taken to pieces, her whole is but Paint and Plaster. From hence we went to take
a Turn in the Mall.

When we came into these Pleasant Walks, my Fellow Traveller was Ravished at
the most agreeable Sight in Nature. There were none but Women there that Day as
it happened, and the Walks were covered with them.

I never, said he to me Laughing, beheld in my Life so great a Flight of Birds.
Bless me, how Fine and Pretty they are.

Friend, replied I to him in the same Metaphor, these are Birds to Amuse one,
that change their Feathers two or three times a Day.

They are Fickle and Light by Inclination, Weak by Constitution, but never
weary of Billing and Chirping.

They never see the Day till the Sun is just going to Set, they Hop always
upright with one Foot upon the Ground, and touch the Clouds with their proud
Toppings. In a word, the generality of Women are Peacocks when they Walk;
Water-Wagtails when they are within Doors, and Turtles when they meet Face to
Face.

This is a bold Description of them, says my Indian. Pray tell me, Sir, says
he, is this Portrait of them after Nature? Yes, without Question, answered I,
but I know some Women that are Superior to the rest of their Sex, and perhaps
to Men also. In relation to those, I need not say much to distinguish them from
the rest, for they will soon distinguish themselves by their Virtuous Discourse
and Deportment.

Nothing is so hard to be Defined as Women, and of all Women in the World none
are so undefinable as those of London.

The Spanish Women are altogether Spanish, the Italians altogether Italians,
the Germans altogether Germans, the French Women always like themselves; but
among the London Women we find Spaniards, Italians, Germans, and French,
blended together into one individual Monopoly of all Humors and Fashions.

Nay, how many different Nations are there of our English Ladies. In the first
place there is the Politic Nation of your Ladies of the Town. Next the Savage
Nation of Country Dames. Then the Free Nation of the Coquets. The Invisible
Nation of the Faithful Wives, (the worst Peopled of all.) The Good-natured
Nation of Wives that Cuckold their Husbands, (they are almost forced to Walk
upon one another Heads, their Numbers are so prodigious.) The Warlike Nation
of Intriguing Ladies. The Fearful Nation of --, but there are scarce any of
them left. The Barbarous Nation of Mothers-in-Law. The Haughty Nation of
Citizens Wives, that are Dignified with a Title. The Strowling Nation of your
regular Visitants, and the Lord knows how many more: Not to reckon the
Superstitious Nation that run after Conjurers and Fortune Tellers. It Is pity
this latter sort are not locked up in a Quarter by themselves, and that the
Nation of Cunning Women are not rooted out that abuse them, and set them upon
doing some things, which otherwise they would not.

I have suffered my self to be carried too far by my Subject. It Is a strange
thing that we cannot talk of Women with a Just Moderation: We either talk too
much, or too little of them: We don't speak enough of Virtuous Women, and we
speak too much of those that are not so.

Men would do Justice to 'em all, if they could talk of them without Passion;
but they scarce speak at all of those that are Indifferent: They are
prepossessed for them they Love, and against them by whom they cannot make
themselves to be Beloved.

They rank the latter in the Class of Irregular Women, because they are Wise,
and indeed Wiser than they would have them be. The Railing of the Men ought to
be the Justification of the Women; but it unluckily falls out, that one half of
the World take delight to raise Scandalous Stories, and the other half in
believing them.

Slander has been the Product of all Times, and all Countries; it is very near
of as Ancient standing in the World, as Virtue. Defamation ought to be more
severely punished than Theft. It does more Injury to Civil Societies, and it is
a harder matter to secure one's Reputation from a Slanderer, than one's Money
from a Robber.

All the World are agreed, that both one and the other are Scoundrels, yet for
all that we esteem 'em when they excel in this Art. A Nice and a Witty Railer
is the most agreeable Person in Conversation; and he that Dexterously picks
another Man's Pocket, as your Quacks and Attorneys, draws the Veneration even
of those who live by Cutting of Purses.

When one observes in what Reputation both of them live, one would be apt to
say, That'tis neither Defamation, nor Robbery, that we blame in others; but
only their Awkardness and want of Skill. They are punished for not being able
to arrive at the Perfection of their Art.

Come, come, says my Indian, you ramble from your Subject; you speak of
Backbiting in General, whereas at present we are only talking of that Branch
of it which belongs to Women. I would bring you back to that Point, which puts
me in mind of certain Laws, which was heretofore proposed by a Legislator of my
Country. One of these Laws gave permission for one Woman to Slander another; in
the first place, because it is impossible to prevent it; and besides, because
in Matters of Gallantry, she that accuses her Neighbor, might her self be
accused of it in her turn, pursuant to the Ancient and Righteous Law of
returning a Rowland for an Oliver.

But how would you have a Woman quit Scores with a Man, who has published
disadvantageous Stories of her? Must she serve him in the same kind? By all
means: For if Men think it a piece of Merit to Conquer Women, and Women place
theirs in well defending themselves, she that gets a Lover sings a Triumph; and
she that Loves, confesses her felf to be Conquered.

If it were true, that the Ladies were more Weak than we are, their Fall would
be more excusable; but I think we are Weaker than our Wives, since we expect
they should pardon us in every thing, and we will pardon nothing in them. One
would think that when a Man had got a Woman into a Matrimonial Noose, 'twas
enough for her to be wholly his: And by the same Reason should not the Man be
wholly hers? What a Tyranny is this in the Men, to monopolize Infidelity to
themselves?

But if Men will be slandering Women, let them vent their Fury against those
only that are ugly, for that is neither Slandering nor Calumniating, tho'it be
a Crime the Ladies will never forgive; for the Generality of them are more
Jealous of the Reputation of their Beaties, than of their Honors, and she that
wants a whole Morning at least to bring her Face to perfection, would be more
concerned to be surpised at her Toilet, than to be taken in the Arms of a
Gallant.

I am not at all surprised at this Notion, for the chief Virtue in the Ladies
Catechism is to please; and Beauty pleases Men more effectually than Wisdom.
One Man loves Sweetness and Modesty in a Woman; another loves a Jolly Damsel
with Life and Vigor; but Agreeableness and Beauty Relishes with all Humane
Pallats.

A Young Woman who has no other Portion than her hopes of Pleasing, is at a
loss what Measures to take that she may make her Fortune. Is she Simple, we
despise her: Is she Virtuous we don't like her Company. Is she a Coquet, we
avoid her: Therefore to succeed well in the World, it is necessary that she be
Virtuous, Simple, and a Coquet all at once. Simplicity Invites us, Coquetry
Amuses, and Virtue Retains us.

It Is a hard matter for a Woman to escape the Censures of the Men. It Is much
more so to guard themselves from the Women's Tongues. A Lady that sets up for
Virtue, makes her self envied; she that pretends to Gallantry, makes her self
despised; but she that pretends to nothing, escapes Contempt and Envy, and
saves her self between two Reputations.

This Management surpasses the Capacity of a Young Woman: Those that are Young
and Handsome, are exposed to two Temptations: To preserve themselves from them
they want the Assistance of Reason; and it is their Misfortune that Reason comes
not in to their Relief, till their Youth and Beauty, and the Danger is gone
together. Tell us why should not Reason come as soon as Beauty, since one was
made to defend the other?

It does not depend upon a Woman to be Handsome; the only Beauty that all of
them might have, and some of them, to speak Modestly, think fit to part with,
is Chastity; but of all Beauties whatsoever, it is the easiest to lose.

She that never was yet in Love, is so ashamed of her first Weakness, that she
would by all means conceal it from her self: As for the second, she desires to
conceal it from others; but she does not think it worth the while to conceal
the third from any Body.

When Chastity is once gone, it is no more to be retrieved than Youth.

Those that have lost their Chastities, assumes an affected one, which is much
sooner provoked than that which is real: Of which we had an Experiment in the
Close Walk at the Head of Rosamond's Pond, where for one poor Equivocal World,
a Brisk She was ready to tear a Gentleman's Cravat off; who after a further
Parley, discovered her self to be sensible of some things which she ought to
have been ignorant of, to have maintained her affected Modesty.

A Lady of this Character was sitting on the side of this Pond upon the Grass
with her Younger Sister newly come out of the Country, to whom a Spark sitting
by, entertained her with a Relation of an Amorous Adventure between my Lord --,
and my Lady Love it; but expressing himself in such Obscene Ambiguous Terms,
that a Woman that did not know What was What, could as soon fly with a Hundred
Weight of Lead at her Heels, as tell what to make of it: The more obscurely the
Gentleman told his Story, the more attentively did our Young Creature listen to
it, and discovered her Curiosity by some simple harmless Questions. The Elder
of the two Sisters desirous to let the Gentleman, and others that sat by them,
understand that she had more Modesty than her Younger Sister, cried out, Oh
fie, Sister, fie; Can you hear such a wicked Story as this without Blushing?

Alas, Sister, says the Young Innocence, I don't yet know what it is to Blush,
or what it is you mean by it!

The Gentleman soon took the Hint, and whispering the Elder Sister in the Ear,
she immediately sends Home the Young Ignorant Creature by her Footman, and
Trig'd away Hand in Hand with the Gentleman. Her cunning Management, showed her
an Experienced Coquet, who observed a sort of Decorum, to Usher in a greater
Liberty.

Every thing is managed in good Order, by a Woman that knows her Company, and
understands her Business. He that loses his Money out of Complaisance, yields
place to him who lends the Lady his Coach to take the Air in. The Young Heir
begins where the Ruined Cully ended. He that pays for the Collation, is
succeeded by another that Eats it; and when my Lord comes in at the Gate, poor
Sir John must Scamper out at the Window.

The Green Walk afforded us variety of Discourses from Persons of both Sexes.
Here walked a Beau Bareheaded by a Company of the Common Profession in
Dishabilie, and Night-Dresses; either for want of Day Cloths, or to show they
were ready for Business.

Here walked a French Fop with both his Hands in his Pockets, carrying all his
Pleated Coat before, to show his Silk Breeches.

There were a Cluster of Senators talking of State Affairs, and the Price of
Corn, and Cattle, and were disturbed with the Noisy Milk Folks, crying, A Can
of Milk, Ladies; a Can of Red Cows Milk, Sir.

Here were a Beavy of Bucksom Lasses complaining of the Decay of Trade, and
Monopilies; and there Virtuous Women, Railing against Whores, their Husbands,
and Coquettry.

And now being weary of Walking so long, we reposed our selves upon one of the
Benches, and digesting several Dialogues between the Modest Ladies and Coquets,
made this Observation.

That though the Coquets were despised by the generality of Ladies, yet they
immitate them to a Hairs Breadth in their whole Conduct. They learn of them the
Winning Air, the Bewitching Glance, the Amorous Smirk, and the Sullen Pout.
They Talk, and Dress, and Patch like them: They must needs go down with the
Stream. It is the Coquets that Invent the New Modes and Expressions; every
thing is done for them, and by them; though with all these Advantages, there is a
vast difference between the one and the other. The Reputation of Virtuous Women
is more solid; that of Coquets is more extended. But

I am sensible I have made too long a stay in this part of my Voyage. A Man
always Amuses himself longer with the Women, than he is willing. Well, since we
are here, let us show our Indian the Horse-Guards, the Country of Gallantry.

In our Way thither, was nothing worth our Observation, unless 'twas the
Bird-Cage, inhabited by Wild-Fowl; the Ducks begging Charity, the Black-Guard
Boys robbing their own Bellies to relieve them, and an English Dog-Kennel
Translated into a French Eating-House.

GALLANTRY.
LET US enter into this Brave Country, and see --: But what is there to be seen
here? Gallantry and Bravery which was formerly so well Cultivated, so
Flourishing and Frequented by many Persons of Honor, is at present Desolate,
Unmanur'd, and Abandoned! What a Desert it is become! Alas, I can see nothing
in it but a Disbanned Soldier mounted upon a Pedestal, standing Sentinel over
the Ducks and Wild-Geese, and to prevent an Invasion by O -- 's Spanish
Pilgrims, or Webster's Darcinus.

Why, says my Indian, is that a Soldier? He has never a Sword, and is Naked.

I suppose, replied I to the Indian, since the Peace he has Pawned his Sword to
buy him Food; and for his being Naked, who regards it? What signifies a Soldier
in Time of Peace? Pish, a Soldier Naked, is that such a Wonder? What are they
good for else but Hanging, or Starving, when we have no occasion for them; as
has been learnedly determined by the Author of that Original Amusement,
Arguments against a Standing Army.

Our God, and Soldier, we alike Adore,
Just at the Brink of Danger, not before;
After Deliverance, they are alike requited,
Our God's Forgotten, and our Soldier's Slighted.
Come, this is a Melancholy Country, let us leave Amusing our selves about
Gallantry and Bravery, and all at once, like Men that have nothing to Do, nor
nothing to Have, take a Trip into the Land of Marriage, and see Who and Who are
together: But first, What are those Soldiers doing? They look like Brave
Fellows.

They are, (says I) drawn up to Prayers; and would be brave Men indeed, if they
were half as good at Praying, and Fighting, as they are at Cursing and Swearing.

Amusement VII.
MARRIAGE.
IT IS a difficult Task to speak so of Marriage, as to please all People. Those
who are not Noos'd in the Snare, will thank me for giving a Comical Description
of it. The Grand Pox eat this Buffoon, says the Serious Wary Husband; if he was
in my Place, he would have no more Temptation to Laugh, than to Break his Neck.
If I Moralize gravely upon the Inconveniences of Matrimony, those that have a
Longing to enter into that Honorable State, will complain that I dissuade them
from so Charming a Condition. How then shall I order my Discourse? For I am in
a great Perplexity about it.

A certain Painter made a Picture of Hymen for a young Lover. I would have him
drawn, says this Passionate Gentleman, with all the Graces your utmost Skill
can bestow upon him: Above all, remember that Hymen ought to be more Beautiful
than Adonis: You must put into his Hands a Flambeau more Brillant than that of
Love. In short, give him all the Charms that your Imagination and Colors can
bestow. I will pay you for your Picture, according as I find you use my Friend
Hymen. The Painter who was well acquainted with his Generous Temper, was not
wanting, you may be sure, to answer his Expectations, and brought him Home the
Piece the Evening before he was Married. Our young Lover was not at all
satisfied with it. This Figure, says he, wants a certain Gay Air, it has none
of those Charms and Agreements. As you have Painted him, he makes but a very
indifferent Appearance, and therefore you shall but be indifferently paid.

The Painter who had as much Presence of Mind, as Skill in his Profession, took
a Resolution what to do that very Moment. You are in the right on it, Sir, said
he, to find fault with my Picture, it is not yet dry: This Face is Soaked, and
to deal freely with you, the Colors I use in Painting, don't appear worth a
Farthing at first. I will bring you this Table some Months hence, and then you
shall pay me, as you find it pleases you: I am confident it will appear quite
another thing then. Sir, your Humble Servant, I have no occasion for Money.

The Painter carried his Piece Home; our young Lover was Married the next Day,
and some Months went over his Head before the Painter appeared. At last he
brings the Picture with him, and our young Husband was surpised when he saw
it. You promised, says he, that time would mend your Picture, and you are as
good as your Word. Lord, what a difference there is? I swear I scarce know it
now I see it again. I admire to see what a strange effect a few Months have had
upon your Colors; but I admire your Ingenuity much more. However, Sir, I must
take the freedom to tell you, That in my Opinion his Looks are somewhat of the
Gayest, these Eyes are too Brisk and Lively: Then to deal plainly with you, the
Fires of Hymen ought not to be altogether so bright as those of Love; for his
is a Solid but Heavy Fire. Besides, the Disposition of your Figure, is somewhat
to Free, and Cheerful, and you have given him a certain Air of Wantonness,
which let me tell you, Sir, does not at all sit well upon..... In short, this
is none of Hymen.

Very well, Sir, said the Painter; what I foresaw is now come to pass. Hymen at
present is not so beautiful in your Idea, as in my Picture. The Case is
mightily altered from what it was three Months ago. It Is not my Picture, but
your Imagination that is changed: You were a Lover then, but now a Husband.

I understand you very well, says the Husband interrupting him, Let us drop
that Matter. Your Picture now pleases, and here is more Money for it than you
could reasonably have expected. By no means says the Painter, you must excuse
me there; but I will give you another Picture, wherein by certain Optic Rules
and Perspectives, it shall be so contrived, as it shall please both the Lovers
and the Husbands, and performed it accordingly, placing it at the end of a
Long-Gallery, upon a kind of an Alcove; and to come to this Alcove, one must
first pass over a very Slippery Step. On this side of it was the Critical Place
where the Piece looked so Lovely and Delicious; but as soon as you were gone
beyond it, it made a most lamentable Figure.

If you understand how difficult a thing it is to paint Matrimony to the Gust
of all People, pray suspend your Censure here, I am going to Present my
Picture, choose what Light you please to view it in.

To come back to my Traveling Style, I must tell you at first Dash that
Marriage is a Country that Peoples all others: The Commonalty are more fruitful
there than the Nobility, the reason of which perhaps is, That the Nobility take
more delight to Ramble Abroad, than stay at Home. Marriage has this peculiar
Property annexed to it, that it can alter the Humors of those that are settled
in it. It frequently transforms a Jolly Fellow into a Mere Sot, it often melts
down a Beau into an errant Sloven; and on the other Hand it so happens
sometimes, that a Witty Virtuous Woman will improve a Dull Heavy Country Booby,
into a Man of Sense and Gallantry.

People Marry for different Motives: Some are lead by Portion, and others by
Reason; the former without knowing what they are going to do, and the latter
knowing no more, but that the thing must be done.

There are Men in the World so weary of Quiet and Indolence, that they Marry
only to divert themselves. In the first place the Choice of a Woman employs
them for some time: Then Visits and Interviews, Feasts and Ceremonies; but
after the last Ceremony is over, they are more Tired and Weary than ever.

How many Hundred Married Couples do we see, who from the second Year of their
coming together, have nothing more in Common than their Names, their Quality,
their Ill Humor and their Misery.

I don't wonder there are so many Unhappy Matches, since Folks Masry rather
wholly of their own Heads, or wholly by those of others. A Man that Marries of
his own Head, not seeing that in his Spouse, which all the World sees in her,
is in danger of seeing much more in her, than others ever did.

Another that has not Courage enough to trust his own Judgment, fairly applies
himself to the next Match-Maker in the Neighborhood, who knows to a Tittle the
exact Rates of the Market, and the Current Price of Young Women that are fit to
Marry. These Marriage Hucksters, or Wife-Brokers, have an admirable Talent to
sort Conditions, Families, Trades, and Estates: In short, every thing together,
except Humors and Inclinations, about which they never trouble themselves.

By the Procurement of these experienced Matrons, a Marriage is struck up like
a Smithfield Bargain: There is much Higling and Wrangling for to other Ten
Pound. One side endeavors to raise, and the other to beat down the Market
Price. At last, after a World of Words spent to fine purpose, they come to a
Conclusion.

Others that have not time to Truck and Bargain so, go immediately to a
Scrivener's to find out a Rich Widow, as they go to the Office of Intelligence
to hearken out a Service.

It is not altogether the Match-makers Fault, if you are deceived in your
Woman. She gives you an account of her Portion to a Farthing* You examine
nothing but the Articles relating to the Family and the Fortune; the Woman is
left in the Margin of the Inventory, and you find her too much at long run.

After all that I have said, I am not afraid to advance this Proposition; that
it is possible for those that Marry to be Happy. But you must call it Trucking
or Bartering, and not Marrying, to take a Woman merely for her Fortune, and
reckon her Perfections by the Number of Pounds she is like to bring with her.
Not is it to Marry but to Please one's self, to choose a Wife as we do a Tulip,
merely for her Beauty. It is not to Marry, but to Dote at a certain Age, to
take a Young Woman only for the sake of her Company.

What is it then to be Married? Why, it is to choose with Circumspection, and
Deliberation, by Inclination, and not by Interest, such a Woman as will choose
you after the same manner.

Besides other things in common with all the World, the Country of Marriage has
this Particular to it self; That Strangers have a desire to Settle there, and
the Natural Inhabitants would be Banished out of it with all their Hearts.

A Man may be Banished out of this Country by certain things called Separation;
but the true way of getting out of it is by Widdow-hood, and is much to be
preferred before Separation; for the Separated are Savage Animals, incapable of
the prettiest Ties of Society. The usual Causes of Separation is assigned as
the Fault of the Wife, but often the Husband is the occasion that the Wife is
in the Fault; and he himself is a Fool to proclaim to the World that his Wife
has made a false Step.

It will be expected now, that I speak a few Words of Widdowhood. It Is a
Copious and Fertile Subject that is certain; but a Man may burn his Fingers by
meddling with it. For if I describe them but as little concerned for the Death
of their Husbands, I shall offend the Rules of Decency and good Manners, and if
I exaggerate their Afflictions, I shall offend the Truth.

Whatever our Railers pretend to the contrary, I say there is no Widdowhood
without a sprinkling of Sorrow in it. Is it not a very Sorrowful Condition to
be obliged to Counterfeit a perpetual Sorrow? A very Doleful Part this, that a
Widow must plhy, who would not give the World occasion to Talk of her.

There are some Widows in the World so mightily befriended by Providence, that
their Sighs and Tears cost them nothing I know one of a contrary Temper to
this, who did honestly all that in her lay to afflict her self; but Nature it
seems had denied her the Gift of Tears. She desired to raise the Compassion of
her Husband's Relations, for her All depended on them.

One Day her Brother-in-Law, who lamented exceedingly, reproached her for not
having shed one Tear. Alas, replied the Widow to him, my Poor Heart is so
overwhelmed with this unexpected Calamity, that I am, as it were become
insensible by it. Great Sotrows are not felt at first; but I am sure mine will
Kill me in the End.

I know very well, said her Brother-in-Law to her, that Griefs too great don't
make themselves at first to be perceived; and I know as well, that Violent
Griefs don't continue long. Thus, Madam, you will be strangely surprised, that
the Grief of your Widdowhood will be past before you are aware.

Another Widow was reduced to the last pitch of Despair, nor was it without a
very Sorrowful Occasion. She had lost upon the same Day the Best Husband, and
the prettiest little Lap-Dog in London. This double Widdowhood had brought her
to so low a Condition, that her Friends were afraid of her Life. They durst not
speak to her of Eating and Drinking; nay, they durst not so much as offer to
Comfort her. It Is a dangerous Matter, you know, to combat a Woman's Grief. The
best way is to let Time and their Natural Inconstancy work it off. However to
accustom our Widow by little and little to support the Idea of her Two Losses,
a Good Friend spoke to her first of her Little Dog. At the bare Name of Dony,
there was such a Howling and Crying, such Tearing of Hair, and Beating of
Breasts; in short, such a Noise, and such a Pother, that one would have thought
Heaven and Earth had been coming together* At last she fainted away. Well, says
this Prudent Friend of hers, God be praised I was so happy as not to mention
her Husband to her, for then she had certainly Died upon the Spot.

The next Day the Name of Dony set her Tears a running in so great plenty, that
it was hoped the Spring would stop of it self, and the abovementioned Zealous
Friend, thought she might now venture to administer some Consolation to her.

Alas, says she, if the bare Name of Dony gives you so much Affliction, what
might we not fear from you, should we talk to you of your Dear Husband? But God
forbid I should do that. Ah Poor Dony! To be Mowed down thus in the Flower of
Youth and Beauty! Well, Madam, you will never have such another pretty Creature
again. But it is happy for the Dog that he is Dead, for you could never have
Loved him longer that is certain! Is it possible for a Woman to love any thing
after she has lost her Husband?

After this manner it was that this Discreet Gentlewoman very dexterously
mingled the Idea of the Husband with that of Dony, well knowing that as two
Shoulders of Mutton drive down one another, so two powerful Griefs destroy one
another by making a Diversion. She observed that at the Name of Dony, her Tears
redoubled, which stopped short at the Name of Husband: It was without question, a
sort of a Qualm. Every Body knows that Tears are a Tribute we owe, and only pay
to ordinary Griefs. However it was, our poor Afflicted Widow passed several
Days and Nights in this sad Alternative of Weeping for her Dog, and Lamenting
her Husband.

At last her Good Friend enquired all over the Town for a Pretty Dog; and it
was her good Luck to light upon one much Finer and Prettier than Dony of Happy
Memory, and presented it to our Widow, who burst into a fresh Stream of Tears
as she accepted it. This Beautiful New-comer, so strangely insinuated himself
into her Good Affections, that within Eight Days he had got the Ascendant of
her Heart, and Dony was no more thought of, then if he had never had a Being
there. Observe now what a Consequence our Widows Friend drew from it.

If a New Dog has put a stop to her Tears, perhaps a New Husband will have the
same Operation upon her Qualms. But Alas, the one was not to be so easily
effected as the other. The New Dog so played his Cards, that he effaced the
Memory of his Predecessors in Eight Days; but it was above Three Long Tedious
Months, before our Widow could be brought to take a New Husband into her Bed.

Now though I left my self full power to drop my Indian Traveller as often as I
saw convenient, yet I have no intention to lose him out of my Sight; for I have
occasion for him to authorize certain Odd Fances that come into my Head,
concerning Philosophy and Physic, which are the next Countries I design to
visit.

Amusement VIII.
The Philosophical, or Virtuosi Country.
IN this Country every thing is obscure, their Habitations, their Looks, their
Language, and their Learining. It Is a long time ago since they undertook to
cultivate the Country of Science; but the only Thing they have made clear and
undeniable, is, that One and One makes Two: And the Reason why this is so
clear, is because it was known by all Men before they made a Science of it.

Their Geometricians work upon so solid a Foundation, that as soon as ever they
have well laid the first Stone, they carry on their Buildings without the least
fear, so high as the Atmosphere; but their Philosophers build those haughty
Edifices they call Systems, upon a quite different Bottom.

They lay their Foundation in the Air, and when they think they are come to
solid Ground, the Building disappears, and the Architects tumble down from the
Clouds.

This Country of Experimental Philosophy, is very Amusing, and their
Collections of Rarities exceeds that of John Tradusken, for here are the Galls
of Doves, the Eye-Teeth of Flying Toads, the Eggs of Ants, and the Eyes of
Oysters. Here they weigh the Air, measure Heat, Cold, Dryness, and Humidity,
great Discoveries for the public advantage of Mankind. Without giving our
selves the trouble to make use of our Senses, we need but only cast our Eyes
upon a Weather-Glass, to know if it is Hot or Cold, if it Rains, or is Fair
Weather.

Tempted by these Noble Curiosities, I desired the favor of seeing some of the
Gentlemen they called Improvers of Nature, and immediately they showed me an
Old Bard cutting Asp Leaves into Tongues, which were to be fastened in the
Mouths of Flowers, Fruits, Herbs, and Seeds, with design to make the whole
Creation Vocal. Another was Dissecting Atoms, and Mites in Cheese, for the
improvement of the Anatomical Science, and a third was transfusing the Blood of
an Ass into an Astrological Quack; of a Sheep into a Bully; and of a Fish into
an Exchange-Woman, which had all the desired Effects; the Quack proved a Sot,
the Bully a Coward, and the Tongue-Pad was Silent. All Prodigies in Nature, and
none miscarried in the Operation.

In another Apartment were a curious Collection of Contemplative Gentlemen,
that had their Employments severally assigned them. One was Chewing the Cud
upon Dr. Burnet's New System of the World, and making Notes upon it in
Consutation of Moses and all the Antidiluvian Historians. Another was
Reconciling the Differences among Learned Men, as between Aristotle and Des
Carts, Cardan and Copernicus, William Penn and Christianity, Mr. Edwards and
Arabic: Determining the Controversy between the Acidists and Alkalists, and
putting a Period to the Abstruse Debates between the Engineers and Mouse-Trap
Makers.

If any one ask me, which of these Disputants has Reason of his side, I will
say that some of them have the Reason of Antiquity, the other the Reason of
Novelty; and in Matters of Opinion, these two Reasons have a greater influence
upon the Learned, than Reason it self.

Those that set up for finding the North-West Passage into the Land of
Philosophy, would with all their Hearts, if it were possible, follow these two
Guides all at once, but they are afraid to travel in a Road where they talk of
nothing but Accidents and Privation, Hecceities and Entelechias. Then they find
themselves all on the sudden seized with Hot and Cold, Dry and Moist,
penetrated by a subtle Matter, encompassed with Vortexes, and so daunted by
the fear of a Vacuum, that it drives them back, instead of encouraging them to
go forward.

A Man need not lay it much to Heart that he never Traveled through this
Country; for those that have not so much as beheld it at a distance, know as
much of it almost, as these that have spent a great deal of Money and Time
there; but one of their Arts I admire above all the rest, and that is, when
they have Consumed their Estates in trifling Experiments, to persuade
themselves they are now as Rich, and Eat and Drink as Luxuriously as ever; they
view a single Shilling in a Multiplying Glass, which makes it appear a
Thousand, and view their Commons in a Magnifying Glass, which makes a Lark look
as big as a Turkey-Cock, and a Three-penny Chop as large as a Chine of Mutton.

Before I let my Traveller pass from this place to Physic, 'twill not be amiss
to make him remark, That in the Country of Science and the Court, we lose our
selves; that we don't search for our selves in Marriage; that in the Walks and
among Women we find our selves again; but seldom or never come back from the
Kingdom of Physic.

Amusement IX.
PHYSIC.
THE first thing remarkable in the Country of Physic, is, that it is situate
upon the Narrow Passage from this World to the other. It Is a Clymaterick
Country, where they make us Breath a Refreshing Air, but such a one as is a
great Enemy to the Natural Heat, and those that Travel far in this Climate,
throw away a World of Money in Drugs, and at last Die of Hunger.

The Language that is spoken here, is very Learned; but the People that speak
it are very Ignorant.

In other Countries we learn Languages to be able to express what we know in
clear and intelligible Terms; but it looks as if Physicians learnt their
Gibberish for no other purpose, than to embroil what they do not understand.

How I pity a Patient of good Sense that falls into their Hands? He is obliged
at once to Combat the Arguments of the Doctor, the Disease it self, the
Remedies, and Emptiness. One of my Friends, whom all this together had thrown
into a Dilyrium, had a Vision in his Fever which saved him his Life. He fancied
he saw a Fever under the Shape of a Burning Monster, that pressed hard upon a
Sick Man, and every Minute got Ground of him, till a Man who looked like a
Guide, came and took him by the Wrist to help him over a River of Blood. The
poor Patient had not Strength enough to cross the Stream and so was Drowned.
The Guide used means to get himself paid for his Pains, and immediately run
after another Sick Man, who was carried down a Stream of Carduus Posset Drink,
Barly-Broth, and Water Gruel. My Friend advised by this Vision, discarded his
Doctor, and 'twas this that did his Business; for when he was by himself, there
was no Body to hinder him from recovering. The Absence of Physicians, is a
Sovereign Remedy to him that has not Recourse to a Quack.

These Gentlemen of the Faculty, are Pensioners to Death, and Travel Day and
Night to enlarge that Monarch's Empire; for you must know, notwithstanding
Distempered Humors make a Man Sick, it is the Physician that has the Honor of
Killing him, and expects to be well paid for the Job, by his Relations that lay
in wait for his Life to share his Fortune: So that when a Man is asked how such
a one Died, he is not presently to answer according to Corrupt Custom, that he
Died of a Fever or Pleurisy; but that he Died of the Doctor.

See a Consult of them marching in State to a Patient, attended by a Diminitive
Apothecary, that is just Arse high, and fit to give a Clyster. How Majesterially
they look, and talk of the Patient's Recovery, when they themselves are but
Death in a Disguise, and bring the Patient's Hour along with them. While the
Patient breaths and Money comes, they are still Prescribing; but when they have
sent the Patient hence, like a Rat with a Straw in's Arse; they will say his Body
was as Rotten as a Pear, and 'twas impossible to Save him. Cruel People, that
are not contented to take away a Man's Life, and like the Hangman, be Paid when
they have done; but must Persecute him in the Grave too; and Blast his Honor,
to excuse their Ignorance.

It were to be wished that every Physician might be obliged to Marry; for its
highly reasonable, that those Men should beget Children to the State, who every
Day rob the King of so many of his Subjects.

In this Land of Physic they have erected themselves a College, for the
Improvement of the Mystery of Manslaughter; which may be called their Armory;
for here are their Weapons and Utensils forged, and a Company of Men attending
to Kill Poor Folks out of mere Charity.

In one part of their Convent, is a Chemical Elabaratory, where some were
Calcining Calves-Brains, to supply those of the Society that wanted. Some
fixing Volatile Wits, and others Rarifying Dull ones. Some were playing Tricks
with Mercury, promising themselves vast Advantages from the Process; but after
they had Resolved the Viscous Matter, and brought the Materia Prima into the
Coppel, all went away in a Fume, and the Operator had his Labor for his Travel.

In another place were Apothecaries preparing Medicines. The Outsides of their
Pots were Gilded, with the Titles of Preservatives, Cordials, and
Panpharmacons; but in the Inside were Poisons, or more Nauseous Preparations.
However of all our late pretended Aschimists, commend me to the Apothecaries,
as the Noblest Operators and Chimists; for out of Toads, Vipers, and a Sir
Reverence it self, they will fetch ye Gold ready Minted, which is more than
ever Paracelsus himself pretended to.

Here were also Surgeons in great Numbers, talking hard Words to their
Patients, as Solution of Continuity, Dislocations, Fractures, Amputation,
Phlebotomy, and spoke Greek Words, without understanding the English of them.
One of the Gravest among them, propounded this Question to the rest. Suppose a
Man falls from the Main-Yard, and lies all Bruised upon the Deck; Pray what is
the First Intention in that Case? A Brisk Fellow answers: You must give him
Irish Slate quantum sufficit, and Embrocate the Parts affected Secundum Artem.
At which I seeming to Smile, another Reprimands me, saying, What do you Laugh
at, Sir, the Man's in the right on it. To whom I replied, With Reverence to your
Age and Understanding, Sir, I think he is in the wrong; for if a Man falls from
the Main-Yard, the first Intention is, To take him up again.

Among all these People every thing is made a Mystery, to detain their Patients
in Ignorance, and keep up the Market of Physic; but were not the very Terms of
Art, and Names of their Medicines sufficient to fright away any Distempers,
it is to be feared their Remedies would prove worse than the Disease.

That nothing might be wanting in this Famous College, there were others that
like Porters and Plaisterers stood ready to be Hired, as Corn-Cutters, and
Tooth-Drawers. The One of which will make you Halt before the best Friend you
have; and if you do but Yawn, the other Knaves will be examining your Grinders;
Depopulate your Mouths, and make you Old before your time, and take as much for
Drawing out an Old Tooth, as would buy a Set of New ones.

An Ill Accident happened while we were viewing the Curiosities of this
College. A Boy had swallowed a Knife, and the Members of the College being
sitting, he was brought among them, if it were possible to be Cured. The
Surgeons claimed the Patient as belonging to their Fraternity, and one of
them would have been poking a Cranes Bill down his Throat to pluck it up again,
but the Doctors would not suffer him.

After a long Consultation, one of the two Remedies was agreed on, viz. That
the Patient should swallow as much Aqua fortis, as would dissolve the Knife
into Minute Particles, and bring it away by Seige; but the other Remedy was
more Philosophical, and therefore better approved, and that was to apply a
Loadstone to his Arse, and so draw it out by a Magnetic Attraction; but which
of the two was put in practice I know not, for I did not stay to see the Noble
Experiment, though my particular Friend Dr. W -- d was the first that proposed
that Remedy, and he is no Quack I assure you.

Not but that there are some Quacks as Honest Fellows as you would desire to
Piss upon. This Foreigner here for instance, is a Man of Conscience, that will
take you but Half a Crown a Bottle for as good Lambs-Conduit Water as ever was
in the World. He pretends it has an Occult Quality that Cures all Distempers.
He Swears it, and Swears like T. O. on the right side of the Hedge, since this
very Individual Water has Cured him of Poverty, which comprehends all Diseases.

It Is with Physicians in London, as with Almanacks, the Newest are the most
Consulted; but then their Reign like that of an Almanac, concludes with the
Year.

When a Sick Man leaves all for Nature to do, he hazards much. When he leaves
all for the Doctor to do, he hazards more: And since there is a Hazard both
ways, I would much sooner choose to rely upon Nature; for this, at least, we may
be sure of, That she acts as Honestly as she can, and that she does not find
her Account in prolonging the Disease.

I pardon those that are brought to the Extremity of their Lives, to Resign
themselves to the Doctors, as I pardon those that are at the Extremity of their
Fortune to abandon themselves to Poetry, or Gaming,

Amusement X.
Gaming-Houses.
GAMING is an Estate to which all the World has a Pretense, though few espouse it
that are willing to keep either their Estates, or Reputations. I knew two
Middlesex Sharpers not long ago, which Inherited a West-Country Gentlemen's
Estate; who, I believe, would have never made them his Heirs in his last Will
and Testament.

Lantrillou is a kind of a Republic very ill ordered, where all the World are
Hail Fellow well met; no distinction of Ranks, no Subordination observed. The
greatest Scoundrel of the Town with Money in his Pockets, shall take his Turn
before the best Duke or Peer in the Land, if the Cards are on his side.

From these Priviledg'd-Places, not only all Respect and Inferiority is
Banished; but every thing that looks like Good Manners, Compassion, or
Humanity: Their Hearts are so Hard and Obdurate, that what occasions the Grief
of one Man, gives Joy and Satisfaction to his next Neighbor.

The Gracians met together in former Times, to see their Gladiators show their
Valor; that is, to Slash and Kill one another; and this they called Sport?
What a Cursed Barbarity was this? But are we a Jot Inferior to them in this
respect, who Christen all the Disorders of Lansquenet by the Name of Gaming, or
to use the Gamesters own Expression, where a Parcel of Sharks meet, To Bite one
another Heads off.

It happened one Day, that my Traveller dropped into a Chocolate-House in
Covent Garden, where they were at this Noble Recreation. He was wonderfully
surprised at the Odness of the Sight. Set your self now in the room of a
Superstitious Indian, who knows nothing of our Customs at Play, and you will
agree that his Notions, as Abstracted and Visionary as they may seem, have some
Foundations in Truth. I present you here with his own Expressions as I found
them set down in a Letter which he sent into his own Country.

The Fragments of an Indian Letter.
THE English pretend that they they Worship but one God, but for my Part, I
don't believe what they say: For besides several Living Divinities, to which we
may see them daily offer their Vows, they have several other Inanimate ones to
whom they pay Sacrifices, as I have observed at one of their Public Meetings,
where I happened once to be.

In this Place there is a great Altar to be seen, built round and covered with
a Green Whachum, lighted in the midst, and encompassed by several Persons in a
sitting Posture, as we do at our Domestic Sacrifices.

At the very Moment I came into the Room, one of those, who I supposed was the
Priest, spread upon the Altar certain Leaves which he took out of a little Book
that he held in his Hand. Upon these Leaves were represented certain Figures
very awkardly Painted; however they must needs be the Images of some
Divinities; for in proportion as they were distributed round, each one of the
Assistants made an Offering to it, greater or less, according to his Devotion.
I observed that these Offering were more considerable than those they make in
their other Temples.

After the aforesaid Ceremony is over, the Priest lays his Hand in a trembling
manner, as it were, upon the rest of the Book, and continues some time in this
posture seized with Fear, and without any Action at all: All the rest of the
Company, attentive to what he does, are in Suspense all the while, and
unmovable, like himself. At last every Leaf which he returns to them, these
unmovable Assistants are all of them in their Turn possessed by different
Agitations, according to the Spirit which happens to seize them: One joins his
Hands together, and Blesses Heaven, another very earnestly looking upon his
Image, Grinds his Teeth; a third Bites his Fingers and stamps upon the Ground
with his Feet. Every one of them, in short, make such extraordinary Postures
and Contortions, that they seem to be no longer Rational Creatures. But scarce
has the Priest returned a certain Leaf, but he is likewise seized by the same
Fury with the rest. He tears the Book, and devours it in his Rage, throws down
the Altar, and Curses the Sacrifice. Nothing now is to be heard but Complaints
and Groans, Cries and Imprecations. Seeing them so Transported, and so Furious,
I judge that the God they Worship is a Jealous Deity, who to Punish them for
what they Sacrifice to others, sends to each of them an Evil Demon to Possess
him.

I have thus showed you what Judgment an Indian would be apt to pass upon the
Transports he finds in our Gamesters. What would he not have thought then, if
he had seen any of our Gaming Ladies there.

It Is certain that Love it self as extravagant as it is, never occasioned so
many Disorders among the Women, as the unaccountable Madness of Gaming. How
come they to abandon themselves thus to a Passion that discomposes their Minds,
their Healths, their Beauty, that Ruins -- What was I going to say? But this
Picture does not show them to Advantage, let us draw a Curtain over it.

In some Places they call Gaming-Houses Academies; but I know not why they
should inherit that Honorable Name, since there is nothing to be learned there,
unless it be Slight of Hand, which is sometimes at the Expense of all our
Money, to get that of other Men's by Fraud and Cunning.

The Persons that meet are generally Men of an Infamous Character, and are in
various Shapes, Habits, and Employments. Sometimes they are Squires of the Pad
and now and then borrow a little Money upon the King's Highway, to recruit
their Losses at the Gaming-House, and when a Hue and Cry is out, to apprehend
them, they are as safe in one of these Houses, as a Thief in a Mill, and
practice the old Trade of Cross-biting Cullies, assisting the Frail square Dye
with high and low Fullums, and other Napping Tricks, in comparison of whom the
common Bulkers, and Pick-Pockets, are a very honest Society.

How unaccountable is this way to Beggary, that when a Man has but a little
Money, and knows not where in the World to compass any more, unless by
hazarding his Neck for it, will try an Experiment to leave himself none at all:
Or, he that has Money of his own, should play the Fool, and try whether it
shall not be another Man's. Was ever any thing so Nonsensically Pleasant?

One idle day I ventured into one of these Gaming-Houses, where I found an
Oglio of Rakes of several Humors, and Conditions met together. Some that had
lost were Swearing, and Damning themselves, and the Devil's Bones, that had
left them never a Penny to bless their Heads with. One that had played away
even his Shirt and Cravat, and all his Clothes but his Breeches, stood
shivering in a Corner of the Room, and another comforting him, and saying,
Damme Jack, who ever thought to see thee in a State of Innocence: Cheer up,
Nakedness is the best Receipt in the World against a Fevor, and then fell a
Ranting, as if Hell had broke loose that very Moment.

What the Devil have we here to do, says my Indian, does it Rain Oaths and
Curses in this Country? I see Gamesters are Shipwrackt before they come to
understand their Danger, and loose their Clothes before they have paid their
Tailors. They should go to School in my Country to learn Sobriety and Virtue. I
told him, instead of Academies, these Places should be called Cheating-Houses:
Whereupon a Bully of the Blade came strutting up to my very Nose, in such a
Fury, that I would willingly have given half the Teeth in my Head for a
Composition, crying out, Split my Windpipe, Sir, you are a Fool, and don't
understand Trap, the whole World's a Cheat.

The Playhouse cheats you of your time, and the Tradesmen of your Money,
without giving you either Sense or Reason for it. The Attorney picks your
Pocket, and gives you Law for it; the Whore picks your Purse, and gives you the
Pox for it it; and the Poet picks your Pocket, and gives you nothing for it.
Lovers cousen you with their Eyes, Orators with their Tongues, the Valiant with
their Arms, Fiddlers with their Fingers, Surgeons with Wooden Legs, and
Courtiers and Songsters, empty your Pockets, and give you Breath and Air for
it: And why should not we Recruit by the same Methods that have Ruined us.

Our Friends, continued he, gives us good Advice, and would fain draw us off
from the Course we are in, but all to no purpose: We ask them what they would
have us do? Money we have none, and without it there is no Living: Should we
stay till it were brought, or come alone? How would you have a poor Individuum
Vagum live? that has neither Estate, Office, Master, nor Friend to maintain
him: And is quite out of his Element, unless he be either in a Tavern, a
Bawdy House, or a Gaming Ordinary. No, we are the Men, says he, that Providence
has appointed to live by our Wits, and will not want while there is Money above
Ground. Happy Man catch a Mackeril. Let the Worst come to the Worst, a Wry Mouth
on the Tripple Tree, puts an end to all Discourse about us.

From the Gaming-House we took our Walk through the Streets, and the first
Amusements we Encountered, were the Variety and contradictory Language of the
Signs, enough to persuade a Man there were no Rules of Concord among the
Citizens. Here we saw Ioseph's Dream, the Bull and Mouth, the Hen and Razor,
the Ax and Bottle, the Whale and Crow, the Shovel and Boot, the Leg and Star,
the Bible and Swan, the Drying Pan and Drum, the Lute and Tun, the Hog in
Armor, and a thousand others that the wise Men that put them there can give no
Reason for.

Here walked a Fellow with a long white Rod on his Shoulder, that is ashamed to
cry his Trade, though he gets his Living by it; another bawling out TODD's Four
Volumes in Print, which a Man in Reading of, would wonder that so much Venom
should not tear him to pieces, but that some of the ancient Moralists have
observed, that the Rankest Poison may be kept in an Asses Hoof, or a Fool's
Bosom. Some say, the first Word he spoke was Rascal, and that if he lives to
have Chldren, they will all speak the same Dialect, and have a Natural
Antipathy to Eggs, because their Father was palted with hundreds of them, when
he was dignified on the Pillory.

Other Amusements presented themselves as thick as Hops, as Moses Pictured with
Horns on his Head, to keep Cheapside in Countenance. Bishop Overal's
Convocation Book Carved over the Dean of St. P -- l's Stall in that Cathedral.
Here sat a Fellow selling little Balls to take the Stains out of the Citizens
Wives Petticoats, that should have been as big as Foot-Balls, if applied to
that purpose. Under that Bulk was a Prejector clicking off his Swimming
Girdles, to keep up Merchants Credits from sinking. A pretty Engine to preserve
Bankers and Ensurers from Breaking, and prevent publishing it in the Gazette,
when they are Broke; that they will pay all their Debts as far as it may stand
with their Convenience.

In that Shop was an indebted Lord talking of his Honor, and a Tradesman of
his Honesty, things that every Man has, and every thing is, in some Disguise or
other, but duly considered, there are scarce any such things in the World,
unless among Pawn-Brokers, Stock-Jobbers, and Horse-Coursers; so that the Lord
and Tradesman were discoursing about nothing; and signified no more, than the
Parson's Preaching against Covetousness to the Maimed, Blind, and superannuated
Soldiers in Chelsey-College, nor Dr. Salmon's prescribing Cow Heels to a
Married Couple, as a conglutinating Aliment. But there the Weaver had the
Afcendant of the Doctor.

As we passed along, I could not forbear looking into some of the Shops, to see
how the Owners employed themselves in the Absence of Customers, and in a
Barber's Shop I saw a Beau so overladen with Wig* that there was no difference
between his Head, and the Wooden one that stood in the Window. The Fop it
seems, was newly come to his Estate, though not to the years of Discretion, and
was singing the Song. Happy is the Child whose Father is gone to the Devil, and
the Barber all the while keeping time on his Cittern; for you know a Cittern
and a Barber is as natural as Milk to a Calf, or the Bears to be attended by a
Bag-piper.

In the Scrivener's Shop I saw a company of Sparks that were selling their
Wives and their Portions, and Purchasing Annuities; and Old
Ten-in-the-Hundred-Fathers, Damning themselves to raise their Posterities. In
the Tobacconist's Shops Men were sneezing and spawling, as if they were all
Clapped, and under a Salivation for the cure on it. They that smoked it, were
persecuting others to follow their Example, and they that snuff'd it up in
Powder, were drawing upon themselves the Incommodies of all Age, in the
perpetual Annoyance of Rheum and Drivel.

Pursuing my Voyage through the City, and casting a Leere into the Shops of the
Rich Drapers, Mercers, and Lacemen, I saw them haunted by many People in Want,
especially young Heirs newly at Age, and Spendthrifts, that came to borrow
Money of them. Alas, said the Traders, Times are Dead, and little Money
stirring. All we can do, is to furnish you with what the Shop affords; and if a
Hundred Pound or two in Commodities will do you any good, they are at your
Service. These the Gallants take up at an excessive Rate, to sell immediately
for what they can get* and the Trader has his Friend to take them off Underhand
at a third part of the Value, by way of helping Men in Distress. These are they
that inveagle unthinking Animals, into all sorts of extravagant Expenses, and
ruin them Insensibly under color of Kindness and Credit: For they set every
thing at double the Value; and if you keep not touch at your Day, your Persons
are imprisoned, your Goods seized, and your Estates extended. And they that
helped to make you Princes before, are now the forwardest to put you into the
Condition of Beggars.

Among other Amusements, let us speak a Word or two of Lombard Street, where
Luxury seems to carry us to Peru, where you behold their Magazines, Ingots of
Gold and Silver as big as Pigs of Lead; and your Ladies after they have
traveled thither with some liberal Interloper, carry home with them more than
their Husbands are worth, and drag at their long Tails the whole Substance of a
Herd of Creditors. Here are Jewels and Pearls, Rubies and Diamonds, Broad
Pieces, Guineas, Lewis d'Or's, Crown Pieces, and Dollars without Number: Nay,
in some of their Shops is nothing to be seen, or Sold, but great heaps of
Money; that would tempt a Man to think, the whole Indies were emptied into one
single Shop it is so full of Gold and Silver; and yet it often happens, that he
that is possessed of all this vast Treasure, is not worth a brass Farthing. To
Day his Counters bend under the weight of Cash, and to Morrow the Shop is shut
up, and you hear no more of our Goldsmith, till you find him in a Gazette, torn
to pieces by a Statute of Bankrupt: And he and his Creditors made a Prey by a
parcel of devouring Vermin, called Commissioners.

The Neighboring Country is Stocks-Market, where you see a large Garden, Paved
with Pibble Stones in all the Beds and Allies; indifferently open to all Comers
and Goers, and yet bears as good Herbs, Fruits, and Flowers, as any in the
World. Here is Winter dressed in the Livery of Summer. Every day a Crop is
gathered, and every Night are stockt up in Baskets, till the next days Sun does
open them.

About this Garden great Numbers of Nymphs reside, who each of them live in
their respective Tubs: They have not only that in common with Diogenes, but
like that Philosopher also, they speak out freely to the first Comer whatever
comes uppermost. A further Description I would give you of their Parts, and
Persons, but that I cannot endure the smell of the Sergeants at the
Counter-Gate, who stink worse than old Ling, or Assa faetida, and would poison
the Country, if this pleasant Garden was not an Antidote against their
Infection. And therefore I Will go back again into the Country of

Coffee-Houses.
WHere being arrived I am in a Wood, there are so many of them I know not which
to enter. Stay, let me see! Where the Sign is Painted with a Woman's Hand in it,
it is a Bawdy House. Where a Man's, it has another Qualification; but where it
has a Star in the Sign, it is Calculated for every Lewd purpose.

Every Coffee-House is Illuminated both without and within Doors; without by a
fine Glass-Lanthorn, and within by a Woman so Light and Splendid, you may see
through her without the help of a Perspective. At the Bar the good Man always
places a charming Phillis or two, who invite you by their Amorous Glances into
their smoaky Territories, to the loss of your Sight.

This is the Place where several Knights Errant come to seat themselves at the
same Table, without knowing one another, and yet talk as familiarly together,
as if they had been of many years Acquaintance. They have scarce looked about
them, when a certain Liquor as Black as Soot, is handed to them, which being
Foppishly fumed into their Noses, Eyes, and Ears, has the Virtue to make them
Talk and Prattle together of every thing but what they should do. Now they tell
their several Adventures by Sea, and Land. How they Conquered the Geand, were
overcome by the Lady, and bought a pair of waxed Boots at Northampton, to go a
Wooing in. One was commending his Wife, another his Horse, and the third said
he had the best smoked Beef in Christendom. Some were discoursing of all sorts
of Government, Monarchical, Aristocratical, and Democratical. Some about the
choice of Mayors, Sheriffs, and Aldermen, and others of the Transcendent
Virtues of Vinegar, Pepper, and Mustard. In short, I thought the whole Room was
a perfect Resemblance of Dover-Court, where all Speak, but no body heard nor
answered.

To the Charms of Coffee, the wiser sort joined Spirit of Clary, Usquebaugh,
and Brandy, which completely Enchants the Knights: By the force of these
Soporiferous Enchantments, you shall find one Snoaring heartily on a Bench,
another makes Love to beautiful Phillis at the Bar; and the third as valiant as
Orlando Furioso, goes to signalize his Valor in scouring the Streets.

I should never have done, if I should attempt to run through all the several
Countries within the Walls of London; as the long Robe, the Sword, the
Treasury. Every State, in brief, is like a separate Country by its self, and
has its particular Manners and Gibberish.

Here you may view the Fruitful Country of Trade, that has turned Leather
Breeches into Gold Chains, blue Aprons into Fur Gowns, a Kitchinstuff Tub into
a gilded Chariot, a Dray-man into a Knight, and Noblemen's Palaces into Shops
and Warehouses.

Here is also the Barren Country of the Philosopher's-Stone, inhabited by none
but Cheats in the Operation, Beggars in the Conclusion, and now is become
almost Desolate, till another Age of Fools and Knaves do People it. To this may
be added the Cold Country of the News-Mongors, that Report more than they hear,
affirm more than they know, and swear more than they believe, that Rob one
another, and lie in Sheets for want of a Coverlid. The Hot Country of the
Disputers, that quarrel and raise a Dust about nothing. The Level Country of
Bad Poets, and Presbyterian Parsens: One of which is maintained by a good stock
of Confidence, and by the other Flattery and Canting. The Desert uninhabited
Country of Virtuous Women. The Conquered Country of Coquets, and an infinite
Number of others; not to reckon the Lost Country inhabited by Strowlers, who
aim at nothing but to lead others out of their way. They are of easy access,
but it is dangerous to Traffic with them. Some of them have the Art to please
without Management, and to love without Loving.

But how have I forgot my own Dear Country, that is consecrated to Bacchus;
that abounds with Nectar, the Wonder working Liquor of the World; that makes a
Poet a Prince in's own Conceit; a Coward Valiant, and a Beggar as Rich as an
Alderman. Here I live at Ease, and in Plenty, Swagger and Carouze, Quarrel with
the Master, Fight the Drawer, and never trouble my self about paying the
Reckoning, for one Fool or other pays it for me. A Poet that has Wit in his
Head, never carries Money in his Breeches, for fear of creating a New Amusement.

In Leicester-Fields, I saw a Mounte-bank on the Stage, with a Congregation of
Fools about him, who like a Master in the Faculty of Lying, gave them a History
of his Cures, beyond all the Plays and Farces in the World. He told them of
Fifteen Persons that were Run clear through the Body, and glad for a matter of
three Days together, to carry their Puddings in their Hands; but in Four and
twenty Hours he made 'em as whole as Fishes, and not so much as a Scar for a
Remembrance of the Orifice. If a Man had been so bold as to ask him when, and
where? his Answer would have been ready without Studying; that it was some
Twelve hundred Leagues off in Terra Incognito, by the Token, that at the same
time he was Physician in Ordinary to a great Prince, that died about Five and
twenty years ago, and yet the Quack was not Forty.

All these Subjects, though very Amusing, were not equally Edifying, and
therefore in my Voyage toward the City, I called in at a Quaker's Meeting,
where a Fellow was talking Nonsense as confidently, as if he had had a Patent
for it, and confirmed the Popish Maxim, That Ignorance is the Mother of
Devotion. The Women were the Oddest Creatures in the World, neither Flesh nor
Fish; but like Frogs, only their lower Parts were Man's Meat.

From thence I sailed into a Presbyterian Meeting near Covent Garden, where the
Vociferous Holder-forth was as bold and Saucy, as if the Deity and all Mankind
had owed him Money. He was showing the way to be Rich when Taxes rise, and
Trading falls, and Descanting upon all Humors and Manners. He (says the
Tubster) that would be Rich according to the Practice of this wicked Age, must
play the Thief or the Cheat; he that would Rise in the World, must turn
Parasite, or Projector. He that Marries, ventures for the Horn, either before,
or afterward. There is no Valor without Swearing, Quarrelling, or Hectoring.
If you are Poor, no body owns you. If Rich, you will know no body. If you dye
young, what pity 'twas they will say, that he should be cut off in his Prime. If
Old, he was even past his best; there is no great Miss of him. If you are
Religious, and frequent Meetings, the World will say you are a Hypocrite: And
if you go to Church, and don't make a liberal Contribution to us, we say you
are a Papist. To which I make bold to add, If you are Gay and Pleasant, you
pass for a Buffoon; and if Pensive and Reserved, you are taken to be Sour and
Censorious. Courtesy is called Colloguing and Currying of Favor: Downright
Honesty and Plain-Dealing, is interpreted to be Pride and Ill Manners: And so I
took my leave of Dr. --

And Peeped into a Fine Church in my Way to Fleet Street, where a huge double
Bellied Doctor, was so full of his Doubtlesses, that he left no room for one
Grain of Skepticism, and made me so perfect a Dogmatist, that I made these
Innocent Reflections. The Doctor is very Fat, Doubtless he is Rich. He looks
very Grum and Surly, Doubtless he is not the best Humored Man in the World;
but I soon gave over these Remarks; for being a Stranger to his Worship,
Doubtless I might have been sometimes in the Right, and Doubtless I should
sometimes have been in the Wrong; and therefore I removed my Corpse to another
Church in my Road to London.

Here a very Genteel Reader, to show himself Frenchify'd, instead of reading
Porage, after our Old Honest English Custom, gave it an A la Mode Turn, and
pronounced it Pottaugsh; whereas to have been more Modish in his Tongue, as
well as his othr Parts, he might have called it a Dish of Soop.

Before Sermon began, the Clark in a Slit Stick (contrived for that purpose at
a Serious Consult by the Famous Architects and Engineers, Sir C. W, and Col.
Pickpeper) handed up to the Pulpit a Number of Prayer-Bills, containg the
Humble Petitions of diverse Devoto's, for a supply of what they wanted, and the
removal of their Afflictions.

One was a Bill from a Courtier, that having a good Post, desired he might keep
it for his Life, without being called to an Account for Neglect, or
Mismanagement; and that he might continue without control, God's Servant in
Ordinary, and the King's Special Favorite.

A Young Virgin, apprehensive of her Wants, and Weaknesses, being about to
enter into the Holy State of Matrimony, prayed for proportionable Gifts and
Graces, to enable her for such an Under-Taking.

Some Prayed for Good Matches for their Daughters, and good Offices for their
Sons; others begged Children for themselves: And sure the Husband that allows
his Wife to ask Children Abroad, will be so Civil as to take them Home when
they are given him.

Now came abundance of Bills from such as were going Voyages to Sea, and others
that were taking long Journeys by Land; both Praying for the Gift of Chastity
for their Wives, and Fidelity for their Prentices, till they should return
again. Then the Bills of Complaint coming in thick and threefold, Humbly
showing that many Citizens Wives, had hard Hearts, Undutiful Husbands, and
Disobedient Children, which they heartily Prayed to be quit of; I discharged my
Ears from their Attendance on so Melancholy a Subject, and employed my Eyes on
the variety of Diverting Faces in the Gallery.

Where you might see in one Pew, a Covey of Handsome, Bucksome, Bona Roba's,
with High-Heads, and all the Mundus Muliebris of Ornament and Dress about them,
as Merry as Hawks in a Mew, as Airy as their Fans, and as Light as a Beaux
Head, or his Feather.

In another Pew was a Nest of such Hard-favour'd She Is, that you would have
blessed your self. Some with their Faces so Pounced and Speckled, as if they had
been Scarified, and newly passed the Cupping-Glass; with a World of little
Plasters, Large, Round, Square, and briefly cut out into such variety, that it
would have posed a good Mathematician to have found out another Figure. They
employed themselves while the Bills were reading, about -- Hush, hush.

The Would be Bishop is beginning, and it is a sign of a Clown, as well as an
Atheist, Ludere cum Sanct is; for though I expose the Foppery of Persons, I have
a great Veneration for Holy Offices. Our Doctor, I Grant it, has some of the
Qualifications of an All Souls Candidate, Been Vestiti and Mediocriter Docti;
and in good earnest fills a Pulpit very well; but that he so often hauls in his
Commonplace Book by Neck and Shoulders, that he cloys his Auditors with that
unpalatable Ragoust, called in Latin Cramben Biscoctum, and in plain English,
Twice-boil'd Cabbage; for having in every Harangue, let the Subject be what it
will, Marshaled his Discourse by the help of the Warlike Josephus, and by the
Assistance of the Learned Grotius, and Pious Dr. Hammond our own Countryman,
puzzled Aquinas, Confuted Bellarmin, and Baffled Origin, pass we on (says he)
to the next thing as considerable.

The Clark is such an Affected C. C. C --, that he Sings out of Tune, says out
of Order, and does nothing as he should do: For instead of saying, Amen, he
Screams out A Main, which had like to put me into a Confounded Fit of Laughter;
for a Spark who had been Overnight at 7 or 11, falling Asleep in the Church,
and being waked by the Noise of A Main, he starts up, and cries out aloud, I Will
Set you Half a Crown

Crowding to get out to breath my Spleen at this Adventure, I put the Bilk upon
a Pick-Pocket; who measuring my Estate by the Length and Bulkiness of my New
Wig, which (God knows) is not paid for, he made a Dive into my Pocket, but
encountering a Disappointment, Rubbed off, Cursing the Vacuum; and I as heartily
laughing at his Folly, that could think a Poet ever went to Church, when he had
Money to go to a Tavern. Poets are better Principled than to hoard up Trash;
and could they as well secure themselves from the Flesh and the Devil, as they
do from the World, there would not be a Hairs breadth 'twixt them and Heaven.

Now I crossed the way to a Booksellers, in hopes to get a Dinner and a Bottle;
but the Stingy Curr pop't me off with a Dish of Coffee, and the old Talk that
Trading was Dead, that they suffered for other Men's Works as well as their own;
and in short, finding not a Penny to be screwed out of the Prig, I pursued my
Voyage to the City; but it happening to Rain, to shelter my self from it, I run
my Face into

A Heralds Office.
HERE was a Confounded Noise of Descents, Pedigrees, Genealogies, Coat Armor,
Bearings, Additions, Abatements, and a deal of that insignificant Jargon. While
I was listening to this Gibberish, in comes a Fellow with a Role of Parchment
in his Hand, to be made a Gentleman, and to have a Coat of Arms finely Painted
to hang up in his Dining Room till his Wife Died, and then to be transported on
the Outside and Front of the House, to Invite a Rich Widow to Marty him.

My Father, says he, has bore Arms for His Majesty, in many Honorable
Occasions of Watching and Warding; and has made many a Tall Fellow speak to the
Constable at all Hours of the Night. My Uncle was the first Man that ever was
of the Honorable Order of the Black-Guard: And we have had five Brave
Commanders of our Family, by my Father's side, that have served the State in
the Quality of Marshal's Men, and Thief Takers, and gave His Majesty a fair
Account of all the Prisoners that were taken by them: And by my Mothers side,
it will not be denied, but that I am Honorably Descended; for my Grandmother
was never without a Dozen Chamber-Maids and Nurses in Family. Her Husband wore
a Sword by his Place, for he was Deputy-Marshal; and to prove my self a Man of
Honor, I have here a Testimonial in my Hand, in Black and White; and in my
Pocket brave Yellow-Boys, to pay for a Coat of Arms: Which being produced and
Fingered by the Herald, he immediately assigned him a Coat, viz. A Gibbet
Erect, with a Wing Volant. A Ladder Ascendant. A Rope Pendant, and a Marshal's
Man Swinging at the end on it.

I am Sandalized, says my Indian, at your Custom in London, in making every
Saucy Jack, a Gentleman.

And why are you not as well offended, replied I to my Indian, to hear almost
every Gentleman call one another Jack, and Tom, and Harry They first dropped the
Distinction, Proper to Men of Quality, and Scoundrels took it up and bestowed
it upon themselves; and hence it is, that a Gentleman is sunk into plain Jack,
and Jack is raised into Gentleman.

In Days of Yore, a Man of Honor was more Distinguishable by his Generosity
and Affability, than by his Laced Liveries; but too many of them having
degenerated into the Vices of the Vulgar Fry, Honor is grown Contemptible, the
Respect that is due to their Births, is lost in a Savage Management, and is now
assumed by every Scoundrel.

The Cobbler is Affronted, if you don't call him Mr. Translator. The Groom Names
himself Gentleman of the Horse, and the Fellow that carries Guts to the Bears,
writes himself one of His Majesty's Officers. The Page calls himself a Child of
Honor, and the Footboy styles himself my Ladies Page. Every Little Nasty
Whore takes upon her the Title of Lady, and every Impudent Broken-Mouth'd
Manteau-Maker, must be called Madam Theodosia Br --. Every Dunce of a Quack, is
called a Physician. Every Gown-Man, a Counselor. Every Silly Huff, a Captain.
Every Gay thing, a Chevalier. Every Parish Reader, a Doctor: And every Writing
Clerk in the Office, Mr. Secretary: Which is all but Hypocrisy and Knavery in
Disguise; for nothing is now called by its right Name.

The Heralds I see have but little to do, Honor and Arms which used to employ
all Men of Birth and Parts, is now almost dwindled into an Airy Nothing: Let us
then go and see how the World wags in the City Circle.

Amusement XI.
The City Visiting-Day.
I Have given my Traveller Walking enough from Country to Country, let us save
him the trouble now of Beating the Hoof, and show him the rest of the World as
he sits in his Chair.

To be acquainted with all the Different Characters of it, it will be
sufficient for him to frequent certain Numerous Assemblies, a sort of City
Circle, they are set up in imitation of the Circle at Court.

The Circle in Foreign Courts is a Grave Assembly, but ill seated upon Low
Stools set in a Round. Here all Women Talk, and none of them Listen. Here they
make a Pother about nothing. Here they Decide all things, and their most
diversified Conversations ons are a sort of Roundeaus that end either in
Artificial Slanders, or gross Flattery, but this being in no wise applicable to
the English Court, I shall wave a further Description of it, and come to

The City Circle.
WHICH is a Familiar Assembly, or a General Council of the Fair and
Charming-Sex, where all the Important Affairs of their Neighbors are largely
discussed, but Judged in an Arbitrary Manner, without hearing the Parties speak
for themselves. Nothing comes amiss to these Tribunals. Matters of High, and no
Consequence, as Religion, and Cuckoldom, Commodes and Sermons, Polliticks and
Gallantry, Receipts of Cookery and Scandal, Coquettry and Preserving, Jilting
and Laundry; in short every thing is subject to the Jurisdiction of this Court,
and no Appeal lies from it.

A Venerable Old Gentlewoman, called Madam Whimsey, whose Relations are
dispersed into all Corners of the Earth, is President of this Board. She is
Lineally Descended from the Maggots of the South, an Illustrious and Ancient
Family, that were a Branch of the Wag-Tails of the East, who boast themselves
Descended in a Right Line from Madam Eve. Here are to be found as many
Different Opinions as there are Heads in the Room. The same Judge is sometimes
Severe, and sometimes Indulgent, sometimes Grave and sometimes Trifling, and
they Talk exactly there, as I do in my Amusements.

They pass in a Moment from the most Serious, to the most Comical Strain; from
the greatest things to the smallest; from a Duke, to a Chimney-Sweeper; from a
Council of War to a Christning, and sometimes a sudden Reflection upon a Woman's
Head-Dress, hinders the Decision of a Case of Conscience under Examination.

In this Country Twenty several Sentences are pronounced all at once. The Men
Vote when they can, the Women as often as they please. They have two Votes for
one. The great Liberty that is allowed in the City Circle, invites all sorts of
Persons to come thither to see and to be seen. Every one talks according to his
Designs, his Inclination, and his Genius. The Young Folks talk of what they are
now a doing; the Old Fellows Talk of what they have done in the Days of Queen
Dick; and your Sots and Coxcombs of what they have a design to do, though they
never go about it.

The Ambitious Rail at the Sluggards as a Company of Idle Fellows that take up
a room in the World, and do nothing? The Sluggards return back the Compliment
to the Ambitious, that they trouble all the World with their Plots to advance
themselves and ruin others. The Tradesman Curses War from the bottom of his
Heart, as that which spoils Commerce, Depopulates Countries, and destroys
Mankind; and the Soldier wishes those that had a Hand in making the Peace, were
at the Devil.

The Vertuoso despises the Rich for making such a bustle about so Foolish and
Pale-faced a Metal as Gold. The Rich laugh at Learning, and Learned Men, and
cry, A fig for Aristotle and Des Carts. Your Men of Gravity and Wisdom
forsooth, rail at Love as the most Foolish and Impertinent Trifling thing in
the World; and the Lover fattens himself with his own Fancies, and laughs at
Wisdom as a Sower and Severe thing that is not worth the Pursuit. Those that
are Unmarried fall foul upon the Jealous-Pated Husbands, as Men that create
their own Troubles. And those that are Married justify their own Prudent
Conduct in endeavoring to prevent their own Dishonor.

A Young forward Puppy full of Vigor and Health, seemed to intimate by his
Discourse, that he thought himself Immortal. Well, says he, I have drank my
Gallon of Claret every Night this Seven Years, and yet the Devil of a Fever or
any other Disease dares Attack me, though I always keep two or three Sins going
at once. Before George I think our Family's made of Iron. There Is that Old Prig
my Father (a Plague on him) turned of Seventy, and yet he is as sound as a Roach
still. He Will ride you Forty Mile outright at a Fox-Chase. Small-Beer be my
Portion here and hereafter, if I believe he will ever have the Good Manners to
troop off.

A Grave Old Gentleman offended at this Rude and Frothy Discourse gave his
Whiskers a Twirl, and thus repremanded our Saucy Whipper-Snapper. Know Boy,
cries he to him in an Angry Tone: Know, Sirrah, that every Age stands upon the
same Level as to the Duration of Life. A Man of Fourscore is Young enough to
Live, and an Infant but of Four Days Birth, is Old enough to Die.

I apprehend your Meaning, Old Gentleman, says our Young Prig to him, well
enough. You are Young enough to Live to Day, and Old enough to Die to Morrow.

Those whom you have hitherto heard, talked only to let the Company see what
they were: The rest both in their Conversation and Manners, appeared directly
contrary to what they were.

You admire the Gay Noisy Impertinence of that Country Wit yonder, that tells
of many Pleasant Stories, and sets all the Company a Laughing. Don't be
mistaken in him, he is the Dullest Rogue alive, if you strip him of what he has
Plundered from others.

All his Jests and Repartees he Purloin'd from his Fathers Chaplain; they are
the effect of his Memory, and not of his Invention.

That other Spark there sets up for a Wit, and has some Sense to it. Pray mind
that Worshipful Lump of Clay, that Inanimate Figure that lolls in the
Elbow-Chair; he takes no manner of Notice of what is said in the Company. By
his Plodding Starched Solemn Looks, you would conclude that Business of
Importance, and Affairs of State, took up all his Thoughts, and that his Head
was brim full of Dispatches, Negotiations, Decrees, Orders of Council, and the
Lord knows what. I Will tell you what; he is the Emptiest, Dullest, Shallowest
Monster, within the Bills of Mortality. He Is equally incapable of Business and
Pleasure: He Will take you a Nap over a Game at Cards, and Yawn and Stretch at
the most diverting Comedy: Nay, under the Pulpit when the Parson has Preached
all the Dogs out of the Church. He Dreams as he Walks, and the Sot when he is a
Sleep, differs from the Sot when Waking, as a Nine-Pin when it is up, differs
from a Nine-Pin when its down. He has a Considerable Post in the Government,
and a Pretty Wife, and minds them both alike? It Is pity he has not a Deputy to
officiate for him.

That Young Creature there by the Window, at the bare mention of the Word Love,
Starts, and Trembles, as if a Demi-Culvirin were shot off at her Ear. Her
Virtuous Mother has told her such terrible Stories about it, that the Poor Fool
believes she hates it. And do you think, Sir, she will hate it to the end of the
Chapter? That Is not so certain, I dare not engage for it. A Woman that hates
Love before she knows what it is, is not in danger to hate it very long.

Perhaps I explain things after a Freer manner than I ought, and Unmask too
many Faces in my Circle; but if I were never so much inclined to spare them,
and they themselves had Address enough to conceal their own Defects: I see a
Lady of great Penetration coming into the Room, who will decipher them more
Unmercifully than I can.

Now she has Seated her self. Observe what a Modest Air she has? How Critically
she draws off her Gloves? How Artfully she manages her Fan? And if she lift up
her Eyes, it is only to see whether other Women are as Handsome and as Modest as
her self. She has so much Virtue the World says, that she cannot endure any that
have a less share on it than her self. What is harder still, those that have
more Virtue than she, do equally displease her. It Is for this reason she spares
no Body.

I asked a Lady of the same Character the other Day, how it came to pass that her
Exhortations were half Godliness, and half Slander? Bless me, cries she,
Slander! What mean you by the Word? It Is enough to give one the Spleen, or an
Augue Fit. The Truth on it is, I am sometimes obliged to accommodate my self to
the Taste of the World, to Season my Remonstrances with a little Satyr, for the
World expects we should make every thing agreeable, even Connection it self. We
must sometimes give a little Slip from Morality, to bring in a few Strokes of
Satyr. Speak more Honestly, Madam, says I to her, and confess that you bring in
one stroke of Morality, to countenance the making of a Thousand Scandalous
Reflections.

Very well, replies the Indian to me, I find the Londoners are as Comical in
their Garbs, as affected in their Discourses. They would think themselves
dishonored to appear in a Suit they wore last Year. According to the Rule of
Fashions, this Furious Beau the next Year must make but a Scurvy Figure; but I
pardon them for following the Custom of their Country. I put so ill a
Construction upon their Curiosity, I will not hereafter Judge of the Hearts of
Women by the Steps I see them make.

As for that Beau yonder, I have a great Curiosity to know whither his Inside
answers his Outside. Not a Word has dropped from him as yet; but surely the
Oracle will open Anon. The Ladies that encompass him, said I to my Curious
Traveller, are as impatient to hear him Talk, as you can be. Therefore let us
listen.

They all Compliment, and address their Discourses to him. What Answers does he
make them? Sometimes Yes, and sometimes No, and sometimes Nothing at all. He
speaks to one with his Eyes, to another with his Head, and Laughs at a third
with so Mysterious an Air, that it is believed there is something extraordinary
meant by it. All the Company are of Opinion that he has Wit in abundance. His
Physiognomy Talks, his Air Persuades, but all his Eloquence lies in the Fine
Outside he makes; and as soon as the Spark has showed himself, he has concluded
his speech. It Is a thousand pitties that Nature had not time enough to finish
her Workmanship* Had she bestowed never so little Wit upon an Outside so
Prepossessing us in his Favor, the Idlest Tales from his Mouth would have
passed for the most Ingenious Story in the World.

But our Ladies now begin to be weary of holding a longer Discourse with their
Idol, All of 'em resolved, if they must speak, to speak with some Body that
would answer them again, and not with a Statue. Our Beau retires into the next
Chamber, intent upon nothing but how to display his Charms to the best
advantage. He is at first view enamored with a Pretty Lady whom he saw in the
Room. He Besieges her with his Eyes, he Ogles at her, he Prims and Plumes
himself, and at last he Boards her.

This Lady is very Reserved, and though our Gentleman appear very Charming to
her, yet she is not surprised at the first sight of him. It Is nothing but her
Curiosity which makes her hazard meeting him in the Field. With this Intention
she listens to what our Adventurer has to say to her. In short, this was the
success of his Affair with her.

He found himself mightily at a loss how to Cope with this Lady. She had an
inexhaustible Source of Wit, and would not be paid with Gracious Nods and
Smiles, but as we see there are a Hundred Witty Women in the World, that are
not displeased with a fair Outside; our Confident Spark flattered himself, that
if he could but once persuade the Lady that he was in Love with her, the
Garrison would immediately surrender. To effect this he employed the Finest
Turns of Eloquence, and the most touching Expressions of the Mute Language; but
this Fair Lady made as if she did not understand him. What should he now do to
explain himself more clearly to her. He had a Diamond-Ring of a considerable
Value upon his Finger, and found himself put to it to contrive a Piece of
Gallantry A la Mode, to present it to her. Thus Playing with his Hand, and
holding it so that he might show his Diamond more advantageously to the Eyes of
the Fair Indifferent, he plays with it: She turns her Head, first on one side,
then on the other side. This Unconcernedness mortified him extremely; yet still
he kept on his Show, which is always the last Refuge of a Coxcomb. He is
Astonished to find a Woman insensible to such a Beau as himself, and to such a
Diamond as his was; but this made no Impression on the Lady, who still
continued Inexorable and Cruel.

At the very Moment he despaired of his Enterprise, this Cruel, this Insensible
seized him hastily by the Hand, to look nearer at the Diamond, from which she
first turned her Eyes: What a Blessed turn of the Scene was this to a Dejected
Lover! He reassumes his Courage, and to make a Declaration of his Passion for
once and all, he takes the Ring from his Finger, and after a Thousand Cringes
and Grimaces, Presents her with it. The Lady takes it in her Hand, and holds it
close to her Eyes, to view it more carefully: He redoubles his Hope and
Assurance, and thought he had a Right to Kiss that Hand, that had received his
Diamond. The Lady was so taken up in looking at it, that she was not at leisure
to think of being angry at this Freedom; but on the contrary smiled, and
without any more Ceremony put the Ring upon her Finger.

Now it is that our Lover thinks himself secure of Victory, and transported
with Joy, proposes the Hour and Place of Meeting. Sir, says this Lady coldly to
him, I am Charmed with this Diamond; and the reason why I have accepted it
without Scruple, is because it belongs to me. Yes, Sir, this Diamond is mine;
my Husband took it from off my Toilet some Three Months ago, and made me
afterward believe he had lost it. That cannot be, replys our Fop, it was a
Marchioness that exchanged it with me for something that shall be Nameless.

Right, right, continues the Woman, my Husband was acquainted with this
Marchioness, he Truck'd with her for my Diamond, the Marchioness Truck'd with
you for it, and I take it for nothing; tho if I were of a Revengeful Nature, my
Husband very well deserves, that I should give the same Price for it, as he
received from the Marchioness. At this unexpected Blow, our Fine Thing stood
Confounded and Astonished; but I can now forgive his being Mute upon so Odd an
Occasion. A Man of Wit and Sense could hardly avoid it.

That Great Lord yonder, was Bred and Born a Lord: His Soul is full as Noble as
his Blood, his Thoughts as high as his Extraction. I Esteem, but don't Admire
his Lordship; but the Man, who by his Merits and Virtues raises himself above
his Birth and Education, I both Esteem and Admire.

Why then should you, whose Virtues equal your Fortune, conceal the Meanness of
your Original, which raises the Luster of your Merit? And as for you that have
no other Merit to boast of, but that of advancing your Fortune; never be
ashamed to own the Meanness of your former Life: We shall better esteem the
Merit of your Elevation.

Look, yonder goes a Man, says one, that takes upon him so much of the Lord,
that one would think he had never been any thing else. It often happens, that
by our Over-acting of Matters, the World discovers we were not always the Men
we appear.

While I made my Reflections, my Indian was likewise busy in making his. He
did not so much wonder at the Man in the Embroidered Coat, who did not know
himself, as at the Assembly, who likewise seemed not to know him. He was
treated with the Respect due to a Prince; these are not Civilities, but
downright Adorations. What cannot you be content, says our Indian, cannot you
be content to Idolize Riches that are useful to you? Must you likewise Idolize
the Rich, who will never do you a Farthings-worth of Kindness?

I confess, continued he, that I cannot recover out of this Astonishment. I see
another Man of a very good Look come into the Circle, and no body takes the
least Notice of him. He has seated himself and Talks, and very much to the
purpose too, and yet no one will vouchsafe him a Hearing. I observe, the
Company Files off from him by degrees, to another part of the Room, and now he
is lest alone by himself. Wherefore say I to my self, Do they shun him thus? Is
his Breath Contagious, or has he a Plague Sore running upon him?

At the same time I took Notice, That these Deserters had flocked about the Gay
Coxcomb in the laced Suite, whom they worshipped like a little God. By this I
came to understand, that the Contagious Distemper the other Man was troubled
with was his Poverty.

Oh Heavens! says the Indian, falling all on the sudden into an Enthusiastic
Fit, like that wherein you saw him in his Letter; Oh Heavens! Remove me quickly
out of a Country, where they shut their Ears to the wholesome Advice, and sage
Instructions of a Poor Man, to lissen to the Nonsensical Chat of a Sot in Gaudy
Clothes. They seem to refuse this Philosopher a Place among Men, because his
Apparel is but indifferent, while they Rank that Wealthy Coxcomb in the Number
of the Gods. When I behold this Abominable Sight, I could almost pardon those
that grow Haughty and Insolent upon Prosperity. This latter Spark a little
while ago was less than a Man among you, at present you make a sort of a Deity
of him. If the Head of their new Idol should grow Giddy, he may even thank
those who Incense him at this abominable Rate.

There are among us in my Country, continues he, a sort of People who Adore a
certain Bird, for the Beauty and Richness of its Feathers. To justify the
Folly wherein their Eyes have engaged them, they are persuaded that this proud
Animal has a Divine Spirit that Animates him. Their Error is infinitely more
excusable than yours; for in short, this Creature is Mute, but if he could
Talk, like your Brute there in the Rich Embroidery, they would soon find him
out to be a Beast, and perhaps would forbear to Adore him.

This sudden Transport, carried our well-meaning Traveller a little too far. To
oblige him to drop his Discourse, I desired him to cast his Eyes upon a certain
Gentleman in the Circle, who deserved to have his Veil taken off with which he
covered himself, to procure the Confidence of Fools. Examine well this serious
Extravagant. The Fool's Bawble he makes such a pother with, is his Probity, an
amiable thing indeed, if his Heart were affected by it; but it is only the
Notion of it that has Fly-blown his Head. Because, forsooth, it has not yet
appeared in his Story, that he is a Notorious Cheat and Falsifier, upon the
Merit of this Reputation, the Insect thinks himself the most Virtuous Man in
the World. He demands an Implicit Faith to all he says. You must not question
any thing he is pleased to affirm, but must pay the same Deference to his
Words, as to the Sacred Oracles of Truth it self. If he thinks fit to assert
that Romulus and Remus were Grand Children to John of Gaunt, it is a Breach of
Good Manners to enquire into their Pedigrees.

If any Difference happens, he pretends his Word is a Decree, from which you
cannot Appeal without Injustice. He takes it for a high Affront, if you do but
ask him to give you the common Security. All the Universe must understand that
his Verbal Promise is worth a thousand Pounds. He would fain have persuaded his
Wifes Relations to have given him her in Marriage upon his bare Word, without
making a Settlement. He affects to be exactly Nice to a Tittle in all his
Expressions, and if you think it impossible to find a Model of this
impracticable Exactness, he tells you that you may find it in him, all his
Words you ought to believe to a Hairs breadth: Nothing less, and nothing beyond
it. If ever he gives you liberty to Stretch a little, it must be in his
Commendation. Let the Conversation turn upon what Subject it pleases, be it of
War, or of Religion, Morality, or Politics, he will perpetually thrust his
Nose into it, though he is sure to be laughed at for his Pains, and all to make
a fine Parade of his own good Qualities and Virtues.

A certain Lady for Instance, after she had effectually proved that all
Gallantry, and Sincerity, was extinct among the young Fellows of this Age,
corrected her self pleasantly in this manner. I am in the wrong Gentlemen, says
she, I am in the wrong, I own it. There is such a thing as Sincerity still
among the Men: They speak all that they think of us Women.

Upon the bare Mention of the Word Sincerity, our Gentleman thought he had a
fair opportunity to enlarge upon his own. Every Man, says he, has his
particular Faults My Fault is to be too Sincere.

Soon after this, the Discourse fell upon other Matters, as want of Compassion
and Charity in the Rich. What an excess of Barbarity cries our Man of Honor, is
this? For my part, I always fall into the opposite Extreme. I melt at every
thing, I am too Good in my Temper, but it is a Fault I shall never Correct in my
self. To make short, another who toward the Conclusion of his Story, happened
accidentally to let the Word Avarice drop from him, found himself interrupted
by our Modest Gentleman, who made no difficulty to own that Liberality was his
Vice. Ah Sir, replied the Man coldly, who was interrupted, you have three great
Vices, Sincerity, Goodness, and Liberality. This excess of Modesty in you,
which makes you own these Vices, give me to understand Sir, that you are
Masters of all the contrary Virtues.

In my Opinion now, this was plucking off the Vizor of our Sir Formal. This was
discharging a Pistol at his Breast: One would have thought it would have went
to the very Heart of him. In the mean time he did not so much as feel the Blow;
the Callus of his Vanity had made him invulnerable, he takes every thing you
say to him in good part. Call him in an Ironical manner, the Great Hero of
Probity, he takes you in the Litteral Sense. Tell him in the plain Language of
T. O. that he is a confounded Rascal, Oh Sir, says he, your humble Servant, you
are disposed to be merry I find: thus he takes it for Raillery.

These Raillers have a fine time on it you see, to Jest upon a Man of so Oily a
Temper. What a Vexation is it to your Gentlemen that speak sharp and witty
Things, to level them at so supple a Slave. All the Pleasure would be to touch
him to the Quick, to confound his Vanity. Wit does but hazard it self by
Attacking him in the Face, there is nothing to be got by it: Vanity is a Wall of
Brass.

But I find nothing will be lost. There sits a Gentleman in the corner of a
quite different Temper, who takes every thing upon himself, that was meant to
another. He Blushes, he grows Pale, he is out of Countenance; at last quits the
Room, and as he goes out, threatens all the Company with his Eyes. What does
the World think of this holding up the Buckler, they put but a bad Construction
upon it, and say that his Conscience is Ulcerated, that you cannot touch any
String, but it will answer to some painful place. Touch a Galled Horse and
He Will Wince. In a word, he is wounded all over, because he is all over Sensible
of Pain.

These are two Characters that seem to be directly opposite; however, it were
easy to prove that these two are the same at Bottom. What Is this Bottom?
Divine it if you can: One Word would not be sufficient to explain it clearly to
you, and I am not at leisure to give you any more. I perceive a Man coming into
the Room whom I am acquainted with, he will interrupt me without Remorse. I had
better be beforehand with him, and hold my Tongue.

Silence Gentlemen, Silence, and see you show due Respect. You will immediately
see one of those Noble Lords who believe that all is due to them, and that they
owe nothing to any Body. When my Lord entered, every one put on a demure Look,
and he himself came in with a Smiling look, like a true Politician. Immediately
he makes a thousand Protestations of Friendship to every one; but at the same
time that he promises you his Service, he looks as Pale as a Scotchman, when he
offers you his Purse.

He is scarce sat down in his Chair, but he embroiles the Conversation. He
talks to four several Persons about four several Affairs at once: He puts a
Question to one Man, without waiting for an Answer of another: He proposes a
Doubt, Treats it, and resolves it all by himself. He Is not weary of Talking,
though all the Company be of hearing him. They steal off by degrees, and so the
Circle ended.

The Public is a great Spectacle always New, which presents it self to the
Eyes of private Men, and Amuses them. These private Men are so many diversified
Spectacles, that offer themselves to the Public View, and Divert it. I have
already as it were in Minature, showed some few of these small inconsiderable
private Spectacles. My Fellow Traveller not content with this, still demands of
me, that I should speak a few Words more of the Public.

Amusement XII.
The PVBLICK.
THE Public is a Prince of which all those Hold, that aim at Honor,
Reputation and Profit. Those Sordid Mean-Spirited Souls, that don't take any
Pains to merit its Approbation, are at least afraid of its Hatred, and
Contempt. The Right we assume to our selves to Judge of every thing, has
produced abundance of Virtues, and stifled abundance of Crimes.

The Public has a Just, a Solid, and Penetrating Discernment: In the mean
time, as it is wholly composed of Men; so there is a great deal of the Man very
often in its Judgments. It suffers it self to be Prepossessed as well as a
Private Person, and afterward prepossesseth us by the Ascendant it has had
over us for many Ages.

The Public is a true Misanthrope, it is neither guilty of Complaisance, nor
Flattery; nor does it seek to be Flattered. It runs in Crowds to Assembles,
where it hears Truths of it self, and each of the Particulars that compose the
whole Body, love rather to see themselves Ieer'd, than to deprive themselves of
the Pleasure of seeing others Ieer'd.

The Public is the Nicest and most Severe Critic in the World; yet a Dull
Execrable Ballad, is enough to Amuse it for a whole Year. It is both Constant
and Inconstant. One may truly affirm, that since the Creation, the Public
Genius has never changed. This shows its Constancy; but it is fond of
Novelties, it daily changes all its Fashions of acting, its Language and its
Modes. A Weathercock is not more Inconstant. It is so Grave it strikes a
Terror upon those that Talk to it, and yet so Trifling that a Band, or a Cravat
put the wrong way, sets the whole Auditory a Laughing.

The Public is served by the greatest Noblemen: What Grandeur is there? And
yet it depends upon those that serve it: How Little it is?

The Public is, if I may allow my self the Expression, always at Man's Estate,
for the Solidity of its Judgment, and yet an Infant, whom the errantest
Scoundrel of a Iack-Pudding, or a Merry-Andrew, shall lead from one end of the
Town to the other. It Is an Old Man, who shows his Dotage by Murmuring without
knowing what he would have, and whose Mouth we cannot stop, when he has once
began to Talk.

I should never have done, were I minded to set down all the Contrarieties that
are to be found in the Public, since it possesses all the Virtues, and all the
Vices, all the Forces, and all the Infirmities of Mankind.

Let us reassume our Gravity to consider the Real Grandeur of the Public. It Is
out of it we see every thing proceeds, which is of any Consideration in the
World: Governors to Rule Provinces, Judges to Regulate them, Warriers to Fight,
and Heroes to Conquer. After these Governors, these Judges, these Warriers, and
these Heroes, have Gloriously signalized themselves in all Parts, they all come
to meet again at Court; where Interpidity it self Trembles, Fierceness is
Softened; Gravity Rectified, and Power Disappears.

There those that are distinguished in other Places, like so many Sovereigns;
among the Crowd of Courtiers, become Courtiers themselves; and after they have
drawn the Eyes of so many Thousands after them, think it their Glory to be
looked upon by One from whom those Illustrious Stars derive their Splendor,
and are never so near their Meridian, as when the Monarch, that Spring of
Glory, shines upon them, and Communicates some Beams of his Magnificence to
them.

As his very Looks raise the Merit of the greatest Actions, every one is
Jealous of him who endeavors to attract them to himself; but for all that,
they are so Complaisant, that they don't neglect to Caress the Man of whom they
are Jealous.

However, there are some Elevated Souls that have infinitely raised themselves
about those Court Infirmities. Real Heroes and Brave Men indeed! Who are no
more grieved at the Glory of others, than to share the Light of the Sun in
Common with them.

I own indeed, says my Indian, in taking his leave of me, that England produces
some of these perfect Englishmen, whose Reputations have reached our Parts of
the World; but it was to see something Greater than this, that I undertook this
Voyage; and consider how I reasoned with my self as I passed the Ocean. England
abounds with Illustrious Men, and though there may be Animosities among them; yet
they all unanimously now agree to Reverence and Respect the King alone: And
must not he be an Extraordinary Man?

FINIS.

