Physic lies a Bleeding, OR THE APOTHECARY turned DOCTOR. A COMEDY, Acted
every Day in most Apothecaries Shops in LONDON.

And more especially to be seen, by Those who are willing to be cheated, the
First of April, every Year.

Absolutely necessary for all Persons that are Sick, or may be Sick.

-- Vmbricius Artibus, inquit, Honestis
Nullus in urbe locus, nulla emolumenta laborum
-- Vbi Pharmacopola est.
Grammaticus, Rhetor, Geometres, Pictor, Aliptes,
Augur, Schenobates, Medicus, Magus: --
Juv. Sat. 3. By THO. BROWN.

London, Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1697

The Names of the Principal Actors.
John Galen. Dr. of Physic, and Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians
London. Tom Gallypot. An Apothecary by Trade, but practices Physic, as a
Doctor, near -- Garden. Lancet Pestle. An Apothecary by Profession, but boldly
undertakes to be a Physician, and Surgeon also, to all his Patients that want
the Assistance of either; living in -- Market. Retorto Spatula d' Vlceroso. An
Apothecary in -- Lane, but pretends to be a great Doctor, Surgeon, and Chemist,
valuing himself much upon his Foreign Birth, and Education. Jack Comprehensive.
An Apothecary living in -- street who professes himself only to be a Doctor,
Surgeon, Chemist, Druggist, Distiller, Confectioner, and (on occasion)
Corncutter, etc. Trueman. A Gentleman of honest Principles, endeavoring to
show each Person their Faults, and persuading them to act in their own Sphere
only. Messengers, Glyster-Pipes, Mortars, Saws, Forceps's, Boxes, Bolt-Heads,
Crucibles, etc. and other Attendants.
The SCENE Apothecaries Hall.

The Epistle Dedicatory, to that Worthy and Ingenious Gentleman Dr. J. B.
Doctor,
I Am heartily glad that a Person of your Learning and Parts has taken up the
Cudgels against the whole College of Physicians; and notwithstanding your great
Modesty have set your Face against so Learned and Ingenious a Society. I must
confess, I have a pretty good stock of Confidence my self, and perhaps dare
attack any single Person whatever, nay even Mr. Bays himself, but to attack
such a Body of Men of Learning and Sense, I must yield is a Task only fit for
your Management, who I dare boldly say can rail as bluntly as any Oyster-Wench
at Billingsgate. Therefore as you have began to make 'um appear a parcel of
Sots, and perjured Villains (as your witty Queries seem to import) I beg the
Favor of you to go on without any Consideration (as you have done already) and
perhaps in time you may prove 'um all Whores, and Rogues, Vagabonds, Persons
that had neither Fathers, or Mothers, and what not? For if any can prove it, I
believe it must be you, no Body else daring to attempt to prove Matters of so
great Consequence, because they want your Learning and Knowledge to go through
with it. Take only this Caution, Dear Doctor, in the Management of your
Affairs: Let not the Multitude of Business distract your Regular Thoughts (your
Head being a little out of order sometime) lest you grow apt to forget what you
have said of 'um before, and as you have in the Lump called 'um a parcel of
Perjured Villians, so don't publicly talk and say that the're about 10, or 12
Honest Fellows amongst 'um. This w'ont do my Friend; to say they are all
Rogues, and some of that All are honest Men, is a little Illogical, neither
does it savor much of an University Education, tho it may suit well enough
perhaps with Yours. The Irish Evidence that ignorantly swore a Person of
Quality into the Popish Plot, thought he could make no juster Retaliation to
him than by swearing of him out again. Now if you intend to follow the steps of
this worthy Evidence, and as you have stigmatized the Fellows of the College
with abundance of hard Names, so to make 'um amends you will endeavor to give
'um as good Characters as Moral Honesty and Christianity obliges you to do; I
think you propose a fair method of Reconciliation, and perhaps even against
their own Inclinations, out of mere Compassion, and not respect to your Merit,
they may vouchsafe to admit you into their Society. This Advice, my Friend, I
think is very seasonable, and were I a Member of the College I would endeavor
all I could to procure your Admittance upon your Submission: but if you will
still continue in an obstinate and perverse Humor of railing, I think you will
justly forfeit that good Opinion which Indifferent Judges have of the Hardship
of your Case (if any such there were) and be fit only to be brayed in that
necessary Instrument of your former Profession, a Mortar. These are the real
Sentiments of,

Your Loving friend T. B.

Physic lies a Bleeding, OR The Apothecary turned Doctor, etc.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Dr. Galen and Trueman. Trueman. DOctor, Good Morrow, What News do you
hear about the Plot? who are taken up? who are Evidences? are there any Persons
of Quality concerned in it, do you hear?


Dr. Galen. I mind no Plots not I, but a Plot to get good store of Patients, if
I can, but I think they never were so Healthy.


Tr. So, what? you seem to speak a little concerned, and look as if something
had vexed you, what is the Matter Doctor?


Dr. Matter? Let me tell you, Mr. Trueman, I have been a Physician in London
almost Forty Years, and I never knew so little Business to do in all my
Lifetime. It Is a Damnable Healthy Town grown since I knew it first. I have
known the Time when I could go out and pick up 10 or 12 l. in a Morning, come
Home to Dinner and emptied, so out again after to Replenish. But I am sure the
Times now are so hard that if my good Father had not conveniently stepped aside,
I could no more have bragged of living by my Wit, as some Men do, than the D --
s of N -- can of her Chastity.


Tr. Pray Doctor, not too severe. Why Damnable Healthy? Do you wish the Nation
a Plague, or an Epidemick Sickness, purely to promote your own private
Interest? Such Expressions, methinks, become not Men of your Education, nor
indeed savor much of Religion.


Dr. What do you talk of that to a Physician? I thought you had known the World
better than so. Is not every Body for their own Interest, be Religion what it
will? Does not the greatest Pretenders to Holiness cheat with Yea, and Nay, as
often (if not oftener) as he that says Dam me it cost me so much, when he knows
that he Lies at the same time he Swears? and all this to promote a Trade. All
the Excuse being, a Man must live, Customers always expect some Abatement of
what we ask. Nay I have known an Apothecary set down 4 s. 6 d. for a Specific
Bolus, when it has been about a Farthing-worth of Crab's-eyes in a little
London-Treacle.


Tr. Ay, Doctor, that may be. That Is 4 s. for the Word Specific, and 6 d. for
the Bolus. Pretty cheap on my Word. But this is not to the purpose to explain
what you mean by Damnable Healthy.


Dr. Why, Sir, are you always teazing me to explain my meaning? Then if you
will have it, I Will tell you. You know that every Body wishes well to
themselves; now Health is the greatest Enemy to our Interest and Profit that
can be.


Tr. But ye take care sometimes to subdue that Enemy of yours, I believe.


Dr. Good Mr. Trueman don't make Reflections upon our Profession, when the
Apothecaries after a long Siege have battered down the Walls, then the World
says we destroyed the Town; what reason is there in this?


Tr. Troth very little, I confess, if it be so; but however I hope, Doctor, you
will not be angry at a Jest.


Dr. No, no. But to go on. I call that Damnable Health (tho I know it bears
another Sense) when the Sickness is not great enough to require the skill of a
Physician, but every ignorant Apothecary assumes the Cure, and pretends to know
more than the learned Physician of us all.


Tr. What then, you would not have the Apothecaries recover Peoples Health?
Would you?


Dr. Yes, but I would, by all means, only let 'um do their part in their own
Sphere, and within their own Limits or Bounds. For when Men have no lawful
Authority to Act, that Action may be called Damnable, that is, such an Action
as may justly be condemned by all Wisemen. Now it is plain that the
Apothecaries have no lawful Commission to do what they do often, and
consequently they may be justly condemned for doing such an Action. So that if
the Patient dies under such an one's Hands, the Law judges him a bold Empyrick;
and all Men of Reason, the Patient a Fool, especially if he were able to pay.


Tr. Nay, Doctor, now you are grown Grave. We will let this Nicety of examining
Words alone; I see you are angry with the Apothecaries for invading your
Province. However, you have one Comfort left that your Good Father Broke, and
left you an Estate.


Dr. Broke, Sir? how do you mean?


Tr. How; why did not you say just now, had not your Good Father stepped aside.
What Is that but broke? And so compounded his Debts to support you with the
Cheat.


Dr. Truly Mr. Trueman you run a little too fast now. When I said my Father
stepped Aside, I meant, into his Grave, and left me some Estate.


Tr. O, Sir, I beg your Pardon, I thought you had meant otherwise, because I
hear all your whole Estate is mortgaged to pay the old Knights Heir some
Thousand's of Pounds.


Dr. What he has on my Estate, I Will not tell you; but I can tell you that he
has no more on it than what I am able to pay, tho perhaps more than I am
willing at the rate of such unreasonable Demands. Come let us talk no more of
that, we had Rogues and Knaves for our Ancestors, who brought us in Debt,
that is all can be said. You know the old Proverb, Happy is that Family that has
no Whores or Rogues belonging to it.


[ Tom Gallypot peeps in, with a Glyster-Pipe in one Hand, and a Cordial Bolus
in the other.] Tr. Come in, Come in, we were no sooner talking of Rogues but
enters an Apothecary: Prithee, Tom, where have been that thou come with the
Accoutrements of thy Profession thus?


Tom G. Truly, Sir, I have been at your House; your Lady was not very well to
Day, and she sent for me to -- to -- to -- Canonade her Posteriors: You know by
my Instrument what I have been doing. And now I have done that, I have
prescribed a Specific Bolus for her to take after it.


Tr. A Pox of your Specific Bolus, and You. My Wife is never well but when
she is taking Physic, I think. Prithee, Mr. Gallypot, what will be the Charges
of this Morning's work?


Gallyp. O, Sir, but little, you never stand upon that I am sure for your
Ladies good; she must also have a Pearl Julep, and an Anodyne Draught: and then
I hope she will be very speedily well again.


Tr. A Pox had you with your cramp Names. Tell me what all this will cost? I am
sure I left her well not above an Hour ago.


Gallyp. [ Starts back.] Good Sir, be not so unreasonably Passionate, and I Will
tell you. Sir, The Pearl Julep will be Six Shillings Eight Pence; Pearls being
dear since our Clipped Money was current. The Specific Bolus 4 s. and 6 d. I
never reckon less; my Master in Leadenhall-street never set down less, be it
what it would. The Antihysterick Glyster, 3 s. and 6 d. (a Common One is but 2
s. 6 d.) and the Anodyne Draught 3 s. 4 d. That Is all, Sir, a small matter and
please you, Sir, for your Lady. My Fee is what you please Sir. All the Bill is
but Eighteen Shillings.


Tr. Very fine, In Faith, do you make a But at it? I do suppose to be Genteel, I
must give you a Crown.


Gallyp. If your Worship please; I take it to be a fair, and an honest Bill.


Tr. Do you so indeed? But I wish you had called a Doctor, perhaps he would
have advised her to have forbore taking any thing, as yet at least, so I had
saved 13 s. in my Pocket.


Gallyp. O Sir, call a Doctor; we never do that, at least very, rarely till we
have done all we can with the Patients: And when we cannot tell what to do with
'um, then we oblige a Doctor and call him in.


Dr. Very fairly confessed, Mr. Gallypot, I believe you never spoke a truer
Thing in your Life. I am glad to hear your Confession to Mr. Trueman; and am
very sorry the State does not think fit to handle you a little for your
unreasonable Practices. I see you have Impudence enough to demand a Fee too,
but do wonder you should do it before my Face.


Gallyp. Truly, Doctor, I did not mind you. However, I hope, I may take what
Gentlemen please to give me.


Dr. Pleased to give you? Faith, I am ashamed to see Gentlemen so imposed upon
by ye Mrs. Doctors.


Gallyp. Troth, Doctor, that was a Lucky Thought of yours, we are but Mrs. tho
they commonly call us Doctors. And now you put me in mind of it, ha'nt you seen
my Paper, set out March 2, 1695? wherein I make above half the College of
Physicians Masters, tho they are called Doctors among themselves?


Tr. How! Mr. Gallypot; How do you do that? That Is a Trick and an half, pray
let us know it.


Gallyp. O Lord, Mr. Trueman, cannot you guess how? If the Doctor pleases, I Will
tell you immediately.


Dr. With all my Heart, if you make it out, I believe you will be a Man of
admirable Sagacity.


Tr. Faith so you will, for I cannot readily guess, tho I am sometime as good at
guessing as another, if you can prove that they are no Doctors, who have taken
Degrees in the Universities, then you will certainly be in the right.


Gallyp. Prove? I can infallibly prove more than that if I once undertake it.
You must know that I own none to be Doctors but those who have regularly done
their Exercises for Physic in one of our Universities; that is plain. But hold
a little, here is my Brother Pestle of King Street coming in, he can be a
Witness of the whole. I Gad, I have so ferreted and humbled 'um, that I Will
spoil their Association against the Apothecaries; for they have Associated by
the Names of Doctors, and I Will prove above half of 'um to be but Masters at
best.

[Enter Lancet Pestle, with a Plaister-Box in his Hand.] Brother Pestle, I am
glad you are come in, in this nick of time; I was just a telling Mr. Trueman
how I have humbled the College of Physicians, has'nt thee read my Paper of
Queries I put out March 2, 1695? Do not see how smartly and finely I jerk
'um? Hey.


Pestle. Ay Brother, I must needs say you have done your part very handsomely,
tho I don't hear any Body took much Notice of what you said.


Gallyp. True, that may be. And do'sn't that show their want of Understanding
the more? None but a Block-head would slight such smart Reflections. O that I
could think of a short Saying in the Classicks relating to this Matter. I vow
'twas a smart one, I remember it in English.


Tr. What was it Mr. Gallypot? cannot I help you out? what did it relate too?


Gallyp. It Is a Saying in Latin, all which I have now almost forgot, except
Physick-Latin; I remember 'twas a piece of a Verse out of Tacitus, or
Suetonius, I cannot tell which.


Tr. Come, come, Mr. Gallypot, let your two Poets alone, perhaps you may think
of Ovid, or Horace.


Gallyp. Ay really so 'twas, but it is a long while ago, so I had forgot their
Names on a sudden.


Tr. What! perhaps it was. Pudet haec opprobria nobis, and dici potuisse, and
non potuisse refelli.


Gallyp. I troth that is the very Saying. I thank you that you have helped me
out. Now is that not plain to the purpose? Horace was a fine Fellow, I vow he
was Mr. Trueman. Tho I don't well know whether Ovid, or he said it; yet they
were both fine Fellows.


Pestle. Ay so they were, I believe, Brother. But I am in haste, and must go to
blood an Eminent Citizen in Towerstreet. So, I am in haste.


Tr. Hold a little, Mr. Pestle, one Word with you before you go. Blood, Mr.
Pestle! I thought you had been an Apprentice to an Apothecary.


Pestle. So I was, Sir, but I thank God, and my own Industry, I have by my
Diligence perfectly acquired the whole Knowledge of Surgery. I Phlebotomize as
well as the best Surgeon in London, tho I say it that should not say it. I Will
tell you how I came to be so dextrous in performing that Operation in
particular.


Tr. Well now am I fairly hope up, between two of ye, one endeavoring to prove
all his Doctors to be Masters, and the other showing his dexterity in
Phlebotomizing, as he calls it. What a Pox, were not both of ye bred
Apothecaries?


Gallyp. and Pestle. Sir, pray be not so passionate. Yes we were both of us
bred Apothecaries. But Knowledge --


Enter Messenger. Mess. Is Dr. Pestle here?


Pestle. Yes he is. What do you come from Sir Thomas in Tower-street? What does
he want to be let blood immediately?


Mess. Yes, Sir, he does, and stays for you.


Pestle. Good Lad, Well, I Will come presently. [ Exit. Messeng.] Now I know he
will be blooded by no Body else; I have persuaded him that all the Surgeons are
Blunderers, as to Bleeding. Sir Thomas is a Good-natured Gentleman. He believes
that no Body understands the curing a Disease, or an Ulcer, or indeed any
Thing, but an Apothecary. Faith he is one of the honestest Gentlemen in England.


Tr. You make him a fine Gentleman indeed. Honest! For no other reason as I see
but because he suffers himself to be made a Fool of by such as you.


Pestle. But, Mr. Trueman, assure your self, he is a Man of very good Sense: All
the Apothecaries in Town say so, and then I am sure it must be true. He pays
well, and takes Physic freely; besides I particularly know his Constitution:
after Bleeding he must take a Purge or two, then some Cordial Powders,
Dulcifiers of the Blood, and two or three odd Things more, But as I was saying,
this Sir Thomas has a Vein as fine, and as small as the finest Silk you can
imagine: I Will tell you what I did to learn to let him Blood, I took a fine, nay
super-fine Cobweb, and picked out of it one of the smallest Filaments, or
Threads I could find: This Filament or Thread of the Cobweb, as I told you, I
lay upon a convenient place, as I remember upon a piece of white Paper, then I
took my Lancet, and without the least Hesitation, divided it soquickly, all the
whole length, to the great Admiration of the Standers by, that --


Tr. This was very admirable indeed, and almost like the Virtuoso's learning
first to swim on a Table in order to swim in the Water. But suppose this true,
does this make you a complete Surgeon, so as to undertake the Cure of any
Ulcer, or Wound?


Pestle. Puh! Mr. Trueman, I tell you it is an easy thing for a Man of Parts to
be a Surgeon; do but buy a Lancet, Forceps, Saw; talk a little of Contusions,
Fractures, Compress and Bandage: You Will presently, by most people, be thought
an Excellent Surgeon. Especially -- do you mind me -- Lord, you Nod, methinks, as
if you were Sleepy:


Tr. O, Sir, I hear you: But I sat up late last Night, and am a little Drowsy.
But I heard you say you were a Man of Parts, I think, and that you had two
Familiar Acquaintance Compress and Bandage: I grant it, Sir, ( rubbing his
Eyes) but still how does this make you a Surgeon? You may as well say my
keeping Company with a Bishop may make me a good Divine.


Pestle. Alas! poor Gentleman, I find you did not sleep well last Night. Hah!
Hah! I cannot but laugh at your Mistake. My two Acquaintance! Hah! Hah! Hah! a
pretty Mistake! -- but true enough: For a Man must be acquainted with his
Business indeed; now Compress and Bandage being a part of it, you may term them
my Familiar Acquaintance, if you please, Mr. Trueman. -- Lord, I think the
Devil's in you for Drowsiness, and Gaping.


Tr. Pray, Mr. Pestle, pray say something then that may divert me and keep me
awake, for I protest to hear you talk of skill in Surgery will never do; for my
part I am for employing every Man in his own way, the Doctor for Advice, the
Apothecary for Medicines, and the Surgeon for Wounds, etc.


Pestle. Now, how you are mistaken again, don't you think that one Man, being
an Apothecary, may understand perfectly and thoroughly all three parts?


Tr. O, Sir, being an Apothecary indeed he may understand very much, as you
say, especially if he be a Man of great Learning.


Pestle. Learning? That signifies but little in this Age, nor (I thank our kind
Stars) had ever less Encouragement; if you but profess your self an Apothecary,
and then undertake any thing whatever, (as we dare do) no body questions but
that you are an Able Doctor, and a Good Surgeon, at any time.


Tr. Very fine, on my Word; and do you think the World so blind as to believe
it?


Pestle. Faith, Mr. Trueman, they generally are. I my self have turned out
several Doctors out of Families, because they would not prescribe Physic
plentifully, and in large Quantities. I have persuaded my Patients, that they
did not well understand their Distemper; so have brought in another who has
swingingly dos'd 'um. I could tell you of a Sir Harry that paid an 100 l. for
Physic in six Weeks, and I accepted it, being a Friend, without requiring one
Penny for my own Fees. -- You don't know the Mystery of Trade.


Tr. In plain English, I know not what you call Mystery, but I now know the
Roguery of that Doctor and you too. What an 100 l. in 6 Weeks? Bless me, what
did she take? I believe she swallowed Guinea's made into Bullets for the
Gripes, so discharged 'um again for the Gold-finders. For I hear Guineas are
grown so cheap that Ladies begin to think that they can take them cheaper than
Apothecaries Doses.


Pestle. O Abominable! Do hear Brother Gallypot? I protest, Mr. Trueman, you
scan Peoples Actions too narrowly. Would Not you have us live?


Tr. The same Question may be as well asked by an Highway-man, or a
Pick-pocket. Live upon honest Gains, come do, and then it will wear well.


Pestle. Well, Sir, I go to Sir Thomas, and wait on you again presently.

[Exit
Tr. Nay, if you must be gone, even let us all go for the present, and discourse
the rest over to Morrow.


[Exeunt Omnes. ACT II. SCENE II.
Being the Representation of several Apothecaries, weighing Rich Men's Brains in
their Scales, by Scruples.
Enter Dr. J. Galen and Trueman. Dr. MR. Trueman, methinks 'twas a pretty
Diversion yesterday, to hear the Apothecary brag of his Skill in Surgery and
Physic; I could not imagine what he had to set up with, but a large stock of
Impudence: I know all his Medicines in his Shop did not cost above Fifty Pound,
and in Six Weeks Time has he made an hundred Pound of one part of it? Such
Reflections as these would make a Man burn his Books, and curse the Gentility
of his Education. It seems indeed wonder to me, that so many Gentlemen who
serve in Parliament, and have oft-times many Younger Sons to provide for, do
not find out a way to suppress these griping Empyricks, and Quacks, that their
Children may be the better able to support themselves in a Genteel Profession,
answerable to the Expense they have been at in their Education. In troth it is a
thing worthy Consideration.


Tr. Truly, Doctor, I am of your Opinion, but in such Points our English
Gentlemen of what Sect soever are generally of the same Temper with those they
call Church of England-Men, that is, lazy and slow in prosecuting a Public
Interest, but active enough to promote their own private Advantage. And this,
to give you but one Instance, is evident enough in the Choice of a
Parliament Man, where the active Dissenter generally gets the Day, because the
lazy Churchman will not stir to manage a Public Cause and choose honest
Representatives, though his own private Interest may be often promoted by the
assistance of such a Public Friend.


Dr. We have an English Saying that does a great deal of Mischief, which is
this, That which is every Bodies Business is no Bodies Business. Therefore I
wonder that the College of Physicians don't petition the Parliament for a
Remedy in this Case, and make it their particular Business.


Enter Tom Gally pot hastily. T. Gallyp. College of Physicians! What of them?
by your leave, Doctor, I think the Company of Apothecaries very Substantial
Men, and are able to buy twice your College. They are Monyed-Men; and have an
Interest almost every where. College of Physicians! they are Learned Men they
say, but what is that to Money? Hah! Hah! Hah!.


Dr. Look you, Mr. Trueman, I suppose you know this Gentleman is an Apothecary
by his Carriage, and rude Behavior.


Tr. Know him, Doctor? Ay very well, but I suppose he has been taking a large
Whet this Morning.


Gallyp. No, Sir, but I have not, I understand the regulating my Health better
than so; I that have practiced Physic now near 30 Years know better things
than Whets, as you call 'um.


Tr. Nay, Tom, if thee wou'lt have no Excuse made for thy Uncivility, I have
done. Then for ought I know Impudence is as necessary an Ingredient to an
Apothecary, as Sugar of Pearl for your Pearl Cordials, with a Pox.


Gallyp. Sir, you are my Patient, so you may say what you please. But saving
the Doctor's Presence, I hope you remember what I said yesterday about my Paper
that I put out March 2, 1695. wherein I cut out half the College from being
Doctors.


Dr. I have no Patience to hear this Fellow's prating.


Tr. Nay, but prithee Doctor, stay a little longer.


Dr. I beg your Excuse, I Will wait on you to Morrow.

[Exit.
Gallyp. Ho! I know he wou'd'nt stay to hear my Reasons against their worthy
Society.


Tr. Nor indeed do I desire it. But if I must of necessity hear them, prithee
put me out of Pain as soon as you can.


T. Gallyp. Why I Will tell you now. Some of them took their Degrees at Leyden,
some at Padua, some at Vtrecht, some in Scotland, others incorporated at
Cambridg, or Commenced Doctors, as an Honor conferred on them, being in the
Retinue of some Great Person, as Ambassador, etc. Now all these in reality are
no Doctors; and consequently every Member of the College that is such cannot
rightly be called Doctor.


Tr. Why not, good Mr. Gallypot, is not a Doctor of Physic bred in Foreign
Universities as much a Doctor as one bred at our Universities? As to their
Titles I see no Difference.


Gallyp. But I hope you will allow it to be more Honorable to be educated
regularly in one of our own Universities, and so Commence Doctor in One's Turn.


Tr. Suppose that were so, yet I hope they are Doctors still?


Gallyp. But, Sir, I say they are not properly Doctors. For then an Apothecary,
or Farrier may go to Leyden a Year or two, come afterward to that free and
unquestioning University of Cambridg to be dubbed Doctor, and straightway be
admitted into the College of Physicians.


Tr. I suppose you mean by properly Doctors, such Qualifications as you
require, they want. Else I should (as in other Cases) think they were properly
so. For a Church is properly a Church, so and so Built, and Consecrated. And a
Logger-head arguing very silly is properly a Logger-head. Besides I doubt such
Remarks come Home upon your Self.


Gallyp. Well, Sir, then let us bar Reflections, even let it be so as you say.
Come, I hate arguing. But let me tell you under the Rose, I can write a
Prescription as well as any of 'um all, I learned that the first thing I did,
by reading Doctors Bills in my Shop.


Tr. So, I am glad I have brought you to a good Temper: And I do believe you
had better been an Apothecary still. For to speak properly, as you call it, you
are a Mr. Doctor, or Dr, Master, which you please. But enough, hold, who is
that coming hither so gravely? what is his Name?


Enter Retorto Spatula d' Ulceroso. Gallyp. I cannot call him readily to my
mind, but I know him very well by Sight. I use to meet him at Apothecaries-Hall.


Tr. Sir, your Humble Servant. Pray, don't you belong to the Spanish Ambassador?


Retorto. [ Stroaking his Whiskers] No, Sir, but I am an Italian born, my Name
is Retorto Spatula d' Vlceroso; I was bred in Italy what you call an
Apothecary, by which I attained to the Knowledge of Physic, both the Theoretick
and Practick part: I also exercise the Art of Chyrurgery, as Scarrifying,
Cupping, Stupes, Rollers, and Bandage, etc. Besides, I can by Chemistry extract
the Quintessence of the Four Elements, and tame the Red Dragon: and in fine, I
can make up a Cordial, Bolus, or Pills, according to the best mode in Foreign
Countries, as you may see in my Shop in -- lane.


Tr. Hold, Sir, not too fast; after all with your hard Names, I believe you are
bred an Outlandish Apothecary; and they, forsooth, make up things far better
than our English Apothecaries do theirs.


Retort. O, Sir, infinitely better, in my Shop I should be ashamed if my Pills
looked not like true Gold; though but gilt, my Bolus's are put up all in gilt
Paper, cut in fine Shapes and Figures: a Quire costs me 5 s. the cutting;
besides the Paper is pure Venice-Paper: My Cordials are all put into
Venice-Vials, etc. and all this Alamodo d' Italiano, to make the Physic taste
the better, work the better, and look the better. O fine Italians!


Tr. Now you say something, look the better; but to taste the better, or work
the better, I don't well understand. Will a Vomit work the better for being in
a fine Venice-Glass? I think a little Nastiness for a Vomit makes it work the
better. I knew a Doctor that used to stir it with his Finger, before he gave
it, to make it nauseate the more.


Retort. O, Sir, that be very unhandsome. No Englishman can do so finely as I
can.


Tr. Then I must beg your Pardon, I believe they can all do as well as you
pretend; but I should look on it as a needless piece of Foppery if they all
should do as you do. And I am sure the Patient must pay more Sauce for his
Medicines.


Retort. O, Sir, that is very true; a good Cook will be well paid for his
Sauce, you know Sir.


Tr. A Pox, but this is paying Sauce for the use of Dishes, like a young
Oxford-Scholar's Treat, if he spends Five Pound in Meat, it is odds but he pays
3 or 4 l. for the use of Dishes and Linen.


Retort. Sir, notwithstanding all this, I never reckon for a little Bolus above
11 or 12 s. made of very good Diascordium, very good Gascoin-Powder, and a
little Pearl.


Tr. No, on my Word that is mighty kind, to take not above 12 s. for all your
fine Dressing, and a Groats-worth of Medicines. And do you take any Apprentices?


Retorto. Yes, Sir, I do, for about 100 l. a Lad.


Tr. Faith, and very well worth it too, and a great deal of Money saved, if you
teach him all your Trades; for the Devils in it if one don't hit. For the
Education of a Son to be a regular Doctor is reputed 1000 l. Charge at long
run. Any Surgeon of Note will have 120 l. or more, an Apothecary 50 l. or more;
a Chemist perhaps as mnch. Now if you will teach my Son all these Arts and
Sciences, I think I have a very good Bargain.


Retort. I Will certainly do it Sir, never doubt it.


Tr. Well, agreed: I Will send my Eldest Son to you, and when he is out of his
Time, I Will bind all his Younger Brothers to him, so each will have 4 Trades or
Callings, will not they Mr. Retorto?


Retort. Do You doubt it? I thought you had known an Apothecary better than to
disbelieve him in his own Calling. Nay, Sir, to be free with you, I Will teach
you how to multiply Medicines so fast upon a Patient, that in a Weeks time he
shall get ten Pound in some Cases, when the Doctor shall not get above 20 s.


Tr. That Is a rare Art indeed, then I suppose you must attack your Patient with
a Quadripartite Army of Medicines drawn from all Quarters of your four Sciences.


Retort. I can do it, and will; and if you don't think this enough, here is my
Brother Comprehensive a coming.

[Enter Comprehensive.] He can besides this teach him to make all sorts of
Sweetmeats, buy and sell Drugs, distill all sorts of Strong Water; nay cut
Corns for a need to Persons of Quality.


Tr. O, Sir, then he is a Corn-cutter only to Persons of Quality.


Retort. No, not unless he pleases.


Tr. Nor any thing else, unless he pleases. However, I am content my Son shall
only learn your four Arts, or Sciences, as you call them. I think that is enough
for One, especially if he learn thoroughly the last, that is, to multiply
Medicines so as to get Ten Pounds to the Doctor's Twenty Shillings.


Retort. That, assure your Self, I Will teach him perfectly: For all the
Apothecaries in Town now understand it pretty well; and, I think, I understand
it exceeding well.


Tr. Well, Sir, I thank you for your Kindness; but I Will see ye all at the Devil
first, to learn how to swallow Assafoetida, before ye shall have the Education
of my Son. I think, if it be possible, ye have less Honesty than a Lawyer that
has but one Cause in a Year to keep him, and his Family, out of --


Compreh. Sir, by your leave, this is not fit Language for a Gentleman
Apothecary to bear: He Is a Brother of the Quill, and an honest Man, I Will
justify it. He was Master of the Company not long ago.


Tr. That may be, and never the honester Man, if he teaches his Apprentices
that Cheat. But, by your leave, I suppose you are an Apothecary too by your
Talk. Pray, what may I call your Name?


Compreh. My Name, Sir, is Jack Comprehensive, originally a North Countryman,
and Brother Apothecary to this Worthy Gentleman, Mr. Retorto Spatula d'
Vlceroso, Apothecary, Surgeon, Chemist and Doctor.


Tr. Ay, Sir, his Titles I knew before; and pray, Sir, how many have you?


Compreh. Sir, I am, in short, generally called Doctor only, but I also profess
my self a Surgeon: An Apothecary, I should have said first, then Surgeon,
Chemist, Druggist, Confectioner, Distiller, etc. And, to Persons of Quality,
Corn-Cutter. And --


Tr. Hold, Sir, pray a little, 'till -- I Will take out my Table Book, lest I
should miscal you, and not give you your right Title.


Compreh. O, Sir, no matter, Sir, to give your Self that Trouble; I answer to
any one of them.


Tr. Sir, I am glad you do, for fear of giving Offense. Then pray, Mr. Corn
Cutter of Quality (that was the last Title I heard) tell me, since you have so
many Trades, which of all these were you bound to first? Or were you bound to
'um all at once?


Compreh. Corn-Cutter of Quality! What, could you pick out none but that? I
told you I was usually called Doctor, and nothing else. I will not tell you what
Trade I was bound to. One would think you had Sense enough to guess I was an
Apothecary.


Tr. Good Sir, pray don't be so angry. How should I guess so many Trades to
center in one Man?


Compreh. Then I see you don't know the Town. I thought you had told me you had
been in Town above 30 Years.


Tr. Truly so I have, and have known Apothecaries called Doctors, which is but
two Names; but you are Apothecary, Doctor, Chemist, Distiller. -- Hold, Call my
Man to give me my Pocketbook out of -- O! I have it by me in my Pocket. Faith,
you must excuse me, I cannot remember all your Titles.


Compreh. It Is no matter, Sir, remember but Doctor, that is enough, I Will answer
to that, if you please.


Tr. Mr. Comprehensive the Apothecary's a better Name, in my mind; it does not
please me to call you Doctor.


Compreh. Then call me what you please; I am sure some of the Greatest Men of
the Nation honor us with that Title, and value our Skill above a Physician's
often.


Tr. I am sorry they do; and do think it a great Fault in our Government that
Men of Liberal and Ingenious Education --


Enter Dr. Galen. Dr. Galen. Hold, let me go on. I heard what you were upon: --
I think you were saying the Government would do well to suppress such Cheats,
Quacks, and Empyricks.


Tr. No, Doctor, they were not my Words. But I was saying that I thought it a
Fault in a Government that Men of Liberal and Ingenious Education should not
have the Countenance of that Government under which they live, so far as to
have a Power granted them to punish Men who act out of their Sphere, and Invade
the Rights and Privileges of their Neighbors: This is what I was about to say,
but you interrupted me.


Dr. I beg your Pardon. When I hear these Apothecaries talk of their Practice,
their Skill in Diseases, and Medicines, their taking of Fees, and Pretension to
even the most difficult Diseases, it puts me into a Passion, then I am apt to
call 'um Cheats, and Quacks.


[Pestle and Gallypot peep in. Tr. Hold a little, Doctor, yonder are the other
two a coming; if you talk at this Rate, they will bait you to Death: I advise you
to retire.


Compreh. Now, Doctor, you highly value your self for your Title; Brethren come
hither, come in.


[Beckoning to Pestle and Gallypot. The Doctor hastily runs off. P. and G.
What Is the matter ye look so angry?


Comp. and Retort. Angry! why the Doctor has most abominably abused all
Apothecaries; he calls us Quacks, and Cheats: as if an Apothecary could be a
Cheat, or Knave.


P. and G. Did he so? would we had come time enough; we would a rounded his
Doctorship.


Tr. Now, Gentlemen, I see ye are all four together, I Will leave ye a little,
and go see if I can reduce this Doctor to a better Temper. -- Your Servant.


[Retires only behind the Hangings. T. Gallyp. Come, Gentlemen, now we are got
by our Selves, let us talk a little about Trade: How stand Affairs? Is there any
Business stirring? We ought to have a meeting every now and then, to settle
what ought to be the Prizes of our Medicines. Pray how do ye at your end of the
Town prize a Dose of Common Purging Pills?


Retort. Why, Brother, about Eighteen Pence, sometime Two Shillings, with an
Haustus after them of Three and Six Pence.


Pestle. And can you live so? I believe all the Things cost you at least a
Shilling out of Pocket.


Retort. No, God forbid! How could I live then? indeed they cost me about Six
Pence, and I take but Five Shillings and Six Pence, sometime less, and I think
that is honest Gains. Hey Brother!


I. Compreh. O very honest! very fair! There Is nothing can be fairer in the
World! Shall I tell ye Gentlemen? I not long ago had a Patient, who
accidentally had a Robust heavy Fellow tread on a Corn that grew on his left
Toe, which put him into some pain. I persuaded him he was a little Feverish, so
blooded him, and applied a Caustic to his Toe (as I told him) to eat out the
Corn: But unluckily eat to the very Bone, and made a pretty handsome Ulcer.
Then I Blister'd him, and distilled some Antifebrifuge Drops, Specificks for
him only, and good for no body else besides. In short, he lay Ill of this but
Eleven Weeks, and what do think he would have paid me for the Cure?


T. Gallyp. Faith, I cannot tell, perhaps 40 l. But why did not call in a
Surgeon at last for a dead Lift?


I. Compreh. O Pox Man! I saw I could do it my self, though but slowly. But
Faith, I thank my Stars, I have learned now to use them like the Doctors, never
call in either, but when I cannot tell what to do my self.


T. Gallyp. Right, so have I, but what had at last?


I. Compreh. What do talk of Forty Pound! Indeed as an Apothecary not above
Thirty Pound a Month, or so, was enough; but as Doctor (and saving thereby many
Fees) and Surgeon also, I asked him but 132 l. 12 s. 8 d. And he scrupled to
give it me.


Tr. [ Peeps in from behind the Hangings.] And, Faith, if he had paid you the
odd 12 s. and 8 d. I think he had paid you too much: A Parcel of Canary-Birds,
now your Rogueries and Cheats come out.


Retort. Prithee who was that peeped in and talked so, was it not Mr. Trueman?
Well, I like that Man's Company very well, were he not too Censorious upon a
Man for getting an honest Livelihood.


T. Gallyp. Ay, He is well enough but he has that disobliging Humor in him.


Tr. What a Pox, if I tell ye that ye are Knaves and Cheats, when ye are so,
this ye call a disobliging Humor: Leave of Cheating then, and practice fair in
your own Sphere.


Pestle. Cheats, and Rogues, and Knaves! That will bear an Action I am sure.
Let Us at him at Law, and maull him: Have none of ye a Lawyer Clapped, or (to
speak more modestly) has the High Scurvy; let us employ him: As we take his
Money, let him take ours: I warrant ye we'll outdo him in making a Bill of
Costs.


I. Compreh. That, Brother, I don't question: Besides you know if a Man be a
Knave it is an hard Matter to prove him so. Let Us put him upon the proof of any
one Apothecary in Town. If he should at last prove it, why it is but one
Maungy-Hound in a whole Pack.


Retort. Soft and fair Brother. For suppose he should prove you, or me,
Brother, to be that very Knave ye talked of. Don't venture Proofs. Come let us
threaten him with it, and he will hold his Tongue a course.


T. Gallyp. Gad, I will not venture it, not I.


Pestle. Nor I neither. Come let us talk of something else.


Retort. Ay; Prithee, Brother Comprehensive, tell me, did abate him any
thing of the Bill.


I. Compreh. Yes, Faith, I did; being an old Customer, I abated the odd 32 l. 8
s. and 4 d. and took a Goldsmith's Note for the other.


Retort. On my Word pretty well paid too. I suppose he had a good Estate, and
was a Knight at least. But prithee deal ingeniously with me, What did it cost
thee out of Pocket?


I. Compreh. Some body will hear me, or else I would: I cast it up to a Penny
to satisfy my self what really I gained by my Medicines.


T. Gallyp. No, No, Here are none but Friends, prithee tell us, I know you deal
with Lords, Ladies, and Knights; who sometimes pay, and sometimes not: But when
they do pay, besure you mount'um.


I. Compreh. To tell you the Truth they cost -- Hold look if no Body be near us
--


Pestle. No; I Will look my self ( Looks) there is no Body.


I. Compreh. Then, to be plain, the prime Cost was Six Pound 17s. 6d. Farthing,
or near that: So I got in the 11 Weeks clear Gains not above 93 l. of one
Patient. That Is all.


T. Gallyp. Would I had half a Score such: I cannot for the Life of me make
above Sixteen Pound in Twenty clear Gains; I mean not reckoning in my By-Fees
of Ten Shillings, and Five Shillings, or so.


I. Compreh. No! Come that is pretty well too, considering you are only Doctor,
and Apothecary. But I am Surgeon, and Chemist, etc. you know.


Enter Trueman from behind the Curtain. Tr. Is the Doctor here?


All. Yes, Yes, and all run to him to know what is the matter.


Tr. Hey! I find ye are all Doctors. O, Tom Gallypot, go call Dr. Galen, and
bid him go to my Wife, she is fallen Ill again.


T. Gallyp. Sir, He'ant at Home; Cannot I do it? Sir, 'twill save you Fees.


Tr. How do you know he'ant at Home? Go I say, I send for him because I would
save Money. I know last time how I saved Money by you indeed.


T. Gallyp. Well, if you will have the Doctor, I Will wait on him to your Lady.


[Offers to go out. Tr. Stay a little; now ye are all here together I must tell
you, with the rest, before you go, that there was some body behind the Curtain,
when the Medicines cost but Six Pound Seventeen Shillings and Six Pence; and an
Hundred Pound was paid for them.


All. O the Devil! What are we Betrayed?


Tr. Betrayed, do you call it? No; but ye have told your Rogueries, and Cheats,
in Private, and I Will publish 'um to the World, with my own Sentiments about the
Practice of Physic.


T. Gallyp. Ay pray do, so you don't reflect on us; you use to do things very
fair sometimes.


Tr. Well, Tom, my Advice to a Patient is as soon as he is Ill, to send for
some Doctor of the Lower Rank, of whose Learning and Skill in Physic he has an
Opinion; and in case he grow worse, to send for one of greater Fame,
Reputation, and Vogue in the World to join in Consult: For the Diligence of the
one, who has less Fame, and Vogue in the World (though perhaps equal in Learning
and Skill really, though not thought so in the Eye of the World) may, and often
does make amends for the supposed greater Skill of the other Physician, by
which means the Patient may more reasonably, and upon juster grounds expect a
Cure. Besides the Hurry, and Multitude of Business that distracts the Heads of
Men in great Practice, and makes 'um either forget what they did formerly in
the like Cases, or at least write but cursorily, and as they say, just for
their Fee, would by this means be a little tempered; and by the constant
Attendance and Observation of the Diligent Physician, the supposed Great Man
may be put in mind of using some more proper Medicines for the Patient, which
perhaps he would otherwise forget. These, Gentlemen, are my real Sentiments.


T. Gallyp. Now, Master, I like your Discourse very well, seeing you make no
Remarks on Apothecaries. Besides perhaps it may open Peoples Eyes to employ me
the sooner, for though I am an Old Apothecary, I am but a Young Doctor. For I
visit in either Capacity, either as an Old Apothecary, which is as good as a
Young Doctor, or as a Young Doctor, and that is as good as the other again.


Tr. But I thought you had left off Shop, and stuck only to your Doctorship.


T. Gallyp. So I do openly, but privately I keep a Shop, and side in all Things
with the Apothecaries against the Doctors; I am, and will be to such Families,
as yours, an Apothecary still, that pay well.


T. Ay, Tom, 16 l. in 20 l. is good Gains. Your Apothecaryship, I believe, out
does your Doctorship.


T. Gallyp. What. Sir, I believe you heard me jest a little among the rest. But
pray no more Reflections, I beseech you.


Tr. Well, I Will say nothing to you about your Degree, for to me you are an
Apothecary still, and no other; to you as such, and to ye all I direct my
Speech, it is my Opinion that ye all ought to be forced to take moderate Prizes,
and be content with honest Gains.


Pestle. So we are: What would you propose?


Tr. In Troth, Mr. Pestle, my Proposal will signify but little I know; but were
I to advise the Lawmakers, they should make a Law that no Apothecaries Bills
should be paid till first Taxed by Two or more Doctors, appointed in every
District, or Division, in and about the City of London.


Pestle. That Is very fine indeed: How is that Practicable?


Tr. Why not? as well as the Attorney's Bills by the Prothonotories.


Pestle. That Is only when the Client thinks himself overrated.


Tr. So should this be, when the Patient thinks himself over-rated in
Medicines. This would prevent the extravagant Cheats put upon the Patient often,
and be decided without the unnecessary Suits of Law. I am well assured that
very often it is cheaper to see a Doctor and pay you for Medicines, than employ
one of ye as Doctor and Apothecary too.


Pestle. Very fine again: You, and your Politics, You would make the Doctors
our Governors, would you? Good Mr. Trueman, we beg you Excuse, we are His
Majesty's Freeborn Subjects. And after all, pray, Mr. Trueman, How do the
Doctors understand to make Medicines? How do they understand the Prices of
Drugs? Puh! you talk you know not what. Come, let us leave him.


Tr. Mr. Pestle, by your leave a little. How did all the Apothecaries learn to
make Medicines at first? It Is very probable that Men of Learning, Study and
Industry (such which the World has called Physicians) first found out the use
of Herbs, Minerals, etc. Out of these, proportionably mixed, formed Compound
Medicines; and their Prescriptions taught the Apothecaries the general use of
these Medicines: Which made the Apothecaries use these Weapons first formed
against all Diseases (as I beg leave to call 'um) peculiarly against the First
Inventor, to destroy him Root and Branch if possible. Like the Spaniards in the
West Indies, who thought it good Policy (tho 'twas neither Honesty nor
Christianity) to destroy the Natives wholly; to make the Possession of their
Country more quiet and secure. The Gentility of their Profession, I confess,
has been a great hindrance to them in reaping those Advantages as they might
(and with more Honesty than any of ye) otherwise have done.


Pestle. Even let 'um be Genteel still. I don't think 'um indeed such Fools, as
that they cannot make Medicines if they will; but why cannot they keep their
Learning and Gentility to themselves, and let us alone?


Tr. O, Sir, I am glad you allow 'um to be capable of learning to make
Medicines if they please. Now, Mr. Pestle, to tell you the plain Truth, I hear
they have actually made several good Medicines at the College, and continue so
to do; neither do I think it so very difficult to understand making Compound
Medicines, and prizing of them: For if I know the Price of every Simple, sure
it is very easy for me to guess what the whole Mass cost, and so consequently by
a farther Calculation tell you what an Ounce, half an Ounce, or a Dram of that
Mass may be sold for: Thus I have made it plain that they can make Medicines,
and prize 'um too.


Pestle. How can they tell though when a Medicine is good?


Tr. Very easy, Mr. Pestle, they have taste, and sight to judge by as well as
ye, by which they discern the Goodness of Simples that make every Compound, and
the Goodness also of that Compound. Besides, if ever they have bought good out
of your Shops, (and yours is always right prime good, ye know) or have made
good, they may, and I believe can make the like again.


Pestle. Suppose all this true, though I am resolved I will not believe it true; who
after all shall give Attendance to observe the Operations of Medicines?


Tr. Who should but the Doctors themselves? They are paid for attending their
Patients.


Pestle. Hah! Hah! Hah! Attending? I mean adminitring Physic; how I should
laugh to see a Doctor giving a Glyster, and the Bladder break and bespatter all
his Velvet Jacket: Hah! Hah! Hah!


Tr. I find you would be merry at such a Mischance as that; but that is but Idle
to object, because every Nurse does that Office acourse, and all that ye
pretend to about sick Persons, or else are but sorrowful Nurses. As for
Bleeding, the Surgeon ought to be employed. As for Chemical Medicines, the
Chemist is at hand; and so for all others.


Pestle. Methinks your Head is full of Projects, cannot you find out one to
serve them in?


Tr. I don't pretend to be a Projector; but I think the College would do very
well to make all sorts of Medicines themselves, and sell them out at easy
Rates. What they design by forming a Fund by Subscription, I profess I at
present know not, but one of 'um told me the other day that they design to make
that a Fund for buying in Drugs, etc. and making of all sorts of Compound
Medicines necessary for the Sick, selling them out again for small profit,
sufficient only to pay about a dozen Servants, and the Prime Cost of the
Medicines, with a Penny in the Shilling Overplus to the College. By which
means the Doctors will be sure to have such good Medicines, and so well
prepared as to rely on them, not to be sophisticated; or, for want of any one
prescribed, to be supplied by another in the room of it, as you Apothecaries
often do: If you have not one Thing, you in your mighty Wisdom will put in another
in the room of it; so that the Physician may prescribe till Doomsday, and the
Patient will be never the better, if ye substitute what Medicines ye please,
and after that put what Prices ye please.


Pestle. Prices Sir? I sell as cheap as any Apothecary in Town; I never have
above 6 s. and 8 d. for a Pint of Pearl Cordial in my Life, an you go to that.


Tr. Not so passionate, Good Mr. Pestle, I believe you sell as cheap as your
Brethren, but all damned dear, and much to the Oppression of the Poor. To
remedy which they propose to sell a Pint of good Pearl Cordial for Eighteen
Pence, or thereabouts. A Cordial Bolus for a Groat, which ye reckon sometimes 1
s. 6 d. and sometimes 2 s. A Quart of Bitter Drink for 1 s. for which I my self
have paid 5 s. and 8 d. And so proportionable for all other Medicines.


Pestle. Puh! What if they do? our Old Customers will not leave us.


Tr. What if they do? Why then the Poorer sort of People will buy of them,
because they are sure of good and cheap Medicines. The better sort will think
it Prudence to save 5 s. in 6 s. and 8 d. if they can, to help pay Taxes, and
not have a Bill after a great Sickness brought in, enough to renew their
Sickness again. Even the Richest of all will be apt to be influenced by their
Physicians, when they tell 'um that there are the only Medicines prepared which
they can rely on. In short, every Body will be willing in their Illness to go
to such a Place, where they can with great probability be assured of Good and
Cheap Medicines.


Pestle. Good Mr. Trueman, you may even prate about ^^^ling the Practice of
Physic till you are weary, I warrant ye, let 'um do what they can, we'll
easily persuade People that we are all very Honest Men. -- We always said you
were always a prying, busy, Inquisitive Man, pretending to understand things,
I am sure you don't understand; you have a mighty Opinion of your Self. Come
let us leave him.


All. Ay come, come let us leave him.


[Exit. 4 Apothecaries Whistling in Glyster-Pipes. Tr. It Is an Old Saying, Si
Populus vult decipi, decipiatur, if People will be cheated even let 'um be so.
-- I have done what lies in my Power to open their Eyes; and by telling the
Truth have gained other Men's Hatred, but

I never to Flattery was, or will b' a Slave,
He that loves Truth is Generous and Brave,
And scorns the Wealthy and the Thriving Knave.
Exit.
FINIS.

