A DISSUASIVE From POPERY Sent in a LETTER From A. B. to C. D.

DVBLN. Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook Printers to the King's Most
Excellent Majesty; and are to be sold by Mary Crook and Andrew Crook at his
Majesty's Printing House in Skinner-Row. 1681.

Honored Sir,
THe last time we were together, you told me, that a friend of yours longed to
see in a paper under my hand the reasons of my unkindness to Popery. To which
he (or you for him) obligingly added, that I did not appear unkind to the
persons of Papists, and that indifferency in judging is there likelyest to be
found, where Bitterness of humor is not prevalent.

Now Sir though I know and very much honor you, yet I am not acquainted with
your friend, and am sensible that use may be made of such a paper to my
disadvantage. How ever I here send it you; for I do really look upon
Protestancy (That of the Church of England) to be so high a Blessing both to
the particular professors of it, and to the Country where it is embraced, that
I could, adventure very far in whatsoever should promise the advancement of it.

The paper may be shown as you or your friend shall think fit; but I would not
have it published in Print; it is not studied enough for that.

A Dissuasive from Popery.
I Reduce my dislikes of Popery to two Heads, the incrediblenes of its
Doctrins, and the grievousness of the Yoke imposed on its Professors. Of its
incrdible Doctrins. I name first Transubstantiation.

In the way of Nature this is not so properly called incredible, as absurd and
impossible; It makes the Body of Christ to be in a Thousand places at once. It
makes that Body wear its own quantity under the dimensions of a Wafer, that is,
to have its own bigness but to be never the bigger for it. It makes the
accidents of Bread and Wine Exist without a subject; that is, there is
whiteness and there is moisture, but there is nothing Either white or moist, It
makes the accidents of Bread and Wine to nourish the Eaters and Drinkers of
them* that is, to be turned into Substances. etc. To all which it is answered
that Gods power is sufficient to overcome all these Difficulties, Neither will
I dispute his Power where his Will is revealed. But I say it is incredible that
Transubstantiation in the Eucharist should be the will of God. For All other
Miracles recorded in the Holy Scriptures served to some End. Elias called fire
from Heaven, to make it appear that the Lord is God, and that he was his
servant So Christ raised up the widow's son, for the comfort of the widow, and
for the manifestation of his own Power. But Transubstantiation serves to no End
that has been yet named; It convices no body, it profits no body. Our Savior
says so, Jo: 6. the flesh profits not. That is, by being bodily Eaten. Christ's
flesh profits by being taken into God; by suffering upon the Cross, by being
believed on; but by being bodily Eaten, it has no effect either upon the body;
or the Soul of the cater. Not upon the body, for that they confess is concerned
only in the accidents of the bread and wine departed. Nor upon the Soul, for
that feeds on Christ only Spiritually, viz. by Faith, Hope and Charity. Now is
it credible that God would work so many miracles as are in the bowels of
Transubstantiation, for no end in the World?

2ly, The course of nature is certainly the will of God; therefore we must not
believe it is inverted, but where God himself declares it is so. Here they say
God has declared for Transubstantiation in these words: This is my body etc. I
answer, no more then in these: that rock was Christ. Or then in these of the
same Apostle: We are all one bread. For all three sentences are equally
positive, and are equally the word of God. Now, was the rock which followed the
Israelites in the wilderness turned into the substance of Christ not then born?
Or are all Christians turned substantially into bread? No, all say, that rock
was Christ imports no more then that rock was the representative of Christ. We
are all one bread; that is, we are all represented by one bread; Why not then,
this is my body, that is, this is the representative of my body? If it be
lawful to take one word of God figuratively, it cannot be wicked to take
another so, if the matter equally requires. And certainly there can be no
greater necessity any where, than in the Eucharist of flying from
Transubstantiation to a figure.

3ly. it is Incredible that the Apostles or the Primitive Church ever thought of
Transubstantiation; When our Savior said I go to the Father, the Disciples
asked what it was. When he told the Parable of the Sower, they asked what it
meant, If they had thought of a change of substance by the words of
Consecration, would they not have said: how can this be? do we not see there as
formerly? and the bread and wine as formerly? But he had instructed them Jo. 6.
how his flesh is meat indeed and his blood drink indeed, to wit Spiritually not
bodily, therefore they boggl'd not.

Again, not one Apostle nor one Christian Doctor for above six hundred years
after Christ either mentions this change of substances, or (in all those vast
volumnes) says one word that infers it. The Christians spoke not of it; neither
did the Jews or heathens object it; Yet Transubstantiation in the eye of an
unbeliever is a mass of contradictions.

What work would Lucian have made with it? But no such matter is mentioned by
that scoffer, or by Porphyry, or Festus, or Julian the Apostate etc. In so
incredible a doctrine would Beringarius (above a thousand years after Christ)
have been the first Heritique? If Transubstantiation had been the settled
doctrine of the Church in the days of Charlemaigne, would that Emperor have
writ to Bertram the Priest for his opinion of the real Presence? Would Bertram
have positively answered that the host is not the same body of Christ which was
born of the Virgin Mary? Only that body of Christ which was born of the Virgin
Mary is to be adored, therefore the adoration of the host was not in fashion in
Bertrams days.

4ly. As there is nothing in the Holy Scripture or ancient Fathers which can be
rationally brought in favor of Transubstantiation, so there are in them very
many sayings which seem incompatible with it. Mat: 26. Me ye have not always.
Which was spoken because of his Death and Ascension. Hear St. Austin upon it.
Non semper etc. Not always according to his bodily presence, but as to his
Majesty, as to his Providence, as to his invisible Grace is fulfilled that:
Behold I am with you to the end of the World. So Act. 3. 31. Whom the Heavens
must contain till the restitution of all things. Yes, say they, he is only in
Heaven locally, and in the Host but sacramentally and not as in a place; his
whole body being in the least part of the Host if separate from the other
parts. Which to St. Austin I am sure would have imported that Christ is really
in Heaven and not really in the Sacrament; for he says upon Psalm. 33. Si
spatia etc. If space of place be taken from a body it is no where, that is, it
is not. Does this sound as if he understood the quillets of Transubstantiation?
Again to Boniface ep. 25. Si Sacramenta etc. If Sacraments had not the likeness
of the things whereof they are Sacraments, they would not be sacraments; and
because of this likeness they often take the names of the things themselves; As
therefore the Sacrament of the body of Christ is in some sort the body of
Christ, and the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of Christ, so
the Sacrament of faith is faith. And against Adimantus the Manichee: Non
dubitavit etc. he doubted not to say: this is my body when he gave the sign of
his body. And upon Psalm, 3. mira est patientia etc. Wonderful is the patience
of Christ who entertained Judas at that banquet wherein he gave his disciples
the figure of his body and his blood. And St. Ambrose de Sacramentis: Non iste
panis etc. not that bread which goes down into the belly, but the bread of
Eternal life which supports the soul. Many such other sayings the Reader may
find cited by old Bertram and of late by all the Protestant writers; but not a
word like them is in any Roman Catholic author since the Council of Lateran.
The style of the Doctors is not altered for nothing. And so much for
Transubstantiation.

Secondly, I name Purgatory for an incredible doctrine, Purgatory as maintained
in the Church of Rome is a prison at the edge of hell, where souls are detained
till by suffering they satisfy for such venial sins as they dyed under, or for
mortal sins for which they had not perfectly done their penance. The pains
differ from hell fire only in being Temporary; and the souls which suffer them
are in high Charity, and at the last gasp were purged from all unfiting
affections; yet must they ly here and fry for their past trespasses, till the
utmost farthing be paid. And all their own charity avails nothing toward
their deliverance, but they are ordinarily ransomed from long durance by the
Charity of their friends on earth laid out upon Masses, Pilgrimages etc. And
upon some occasions whole sholes are let out by the Popes Indulgence.

Now I say this is an incredible doctrine in it self, for, 1. the Christian
faith is that Christ satisfied for the sins of the World, how then can souls
suffer merely for the satisfaction of the Divine Justice? Punishments in this
World are our corrections, but punishing when there can be no amendment must be
a mere wrecking of vengeance, it is so in hell, and they say it is so in
Purgatory. 2. it is incredible that God should so horribly afflict those Souls
which so entirely love him, and which he so highly loves. 3. It Is incredible
that venial sins which upon earth are purged with an Ave, a Pater noster, a
thump on the breast, or sprinkling of a little holy water should after death
merit such horrible torments, and which for ought I can hear may last many
years. 4. If these sins do merit the great pains of Purgatory, then it is
incredible that a Mass, or a pilgrimage should pay the debt. 5. If Purgatory
be a necessary and also an assured passage into heaven, it is incredible that any
fire there can be a torment; for the way to bliss is happy, In this world hope
of salvation made Martyrs endure tortures with patience, but that torture which
brings with it assurance is matter of triumph. 6. It Is incredible that souls
should be sensible of bodily fire: who can imagine what a scorched Soul is? or
how fire can torment the understanding or the Will? And the separated soul has
nothing in it besides them two. But to all this I am answered as I was about
Transubstantiation, that God's power is incomprehensible, and his ways past
finding out. However, I say Purgatory being so Irrational in it self has need
to be well pro'vd from abroad; I mean by Texts of Scripture, and Expositions of
ancient Fathers: But there is not one Text in the whole Bible applied to this
Purgatory till after S. Austin. Nay it is impossible that many of the Ancient
Fathers should hold Purgatory as it is now held in the Church of Rome; for they
held that no Souls (at least very few of the most perfect) go to Heaven till
the day of Judgment; and that in the interim they are kept in receptacles
without any pain but that of delayed Happiness; and that at the day of
Judgment they must all pass through fire; Origin: in Psalm: 36. Vt ego
arbitror etc. As I think it is necessary for us all to come to that fire:
though one be a Paul or a Peter; Such a one indeed shall be told: though thou
go through the flame it shall not burn thee; But a sinner like me shall come
to that fire like Peter or Paul, but shall not go through it like them. Ambros:
in coment: Psalterji: Igne nos etc. David says: thou have tried us by fire,
therefore we shall all be tried by fire: and if we be not consumed yet we shall
be scorched. Lactant: 7 instit C. 1. Sed and justos etc. When God Judges even
the just, he will examine them with fire, then they whose sins are great either
in weight or number shall be vehemently scorched: the ripe in virtue shall not
feel that fire. Hieronym: tomo 3. in Amos: Vocatus ignis etc. The fire called
to Judgment, first devours the Abyss, that is, all the kind's of sins, Wood,
Hay, Stubble. Aug: in 15. Genesis Ad solis etc. At the setting of the Sun, that
is, at the End, By that fire is signified the day of Judgment, separating those
carnalls who are to be saved by fire, from those who are to be damned in the
fire. And in Psalm. 6. Talem me etc. Render me such now as shall not need
amendment by fire. And 20 de civ: Dei: Out of what has been said it seems
evident that in the judgment some will suffer some purging pains.

I take this labor to clear the Purgatory held by some of the ancient, because
their sayings and the Texts which they cite for their Purgatory are all which
they bring now for the Purgatory maintained in the Church of Rome; whereas it is
impossible that they who held the former Purgatory should hold this latter,
for, 1. the former Purgatory was in the judgment, this Latter is immediately
after Death. 2. The former Purgatory was for the amendment of the person, this
latter punishes for Sin when the person is perfect. 3. The former Purgatory
afflicted the person till he had pay'^ the utermost farthing, that is, till all
hi^ disorderly affections were worn off; this latter clears a man out of prison
for the goo^ deeds of others upon Earth viz. Prayer Pilgrimages, Masses,
Indulgences etc. an^ without this Appendix of Indulgences the Pope would not
lift up a Finger for Purgatory. In fine, he that in the Church of Rome holds no
other Purgatory but that which the fore-quoted Fathers held, will be declared
haeretical, of which Tho: White late an English Priest of the Church of Rome is
an example. See his book de medio animarum Statu.

But it may be said: The ancient Fathers holding one sort of Purgatory, and the
present Church of Rome holding another sort, how come we Protestants to hold
none? I answer: The Church of Rome is to account for throwing off the Purgatory
maintained by some of the Fathers; for she had thrown it off long before our
Reformation; We indeed threw off that Purgatory which is maintained by the
present Church of Rome, as new and invented; which is thus demonstrated out of
the foregoing discourse. The present Church of Rome maintains a Purgatory
absolutely inconsistent with that which was maintained by the ancient Fathers
(as is proved above); therefore the Purgatory of the present Church of Rome
came not by tradition from the Fathers, but was invented by their children.

Add to this St. Austin ad Dulcitium q. 1. It is not incredible, says he, that
such a thing should be after this life, and inquiry may be made whether it be
so, and it may be found out, and it may be hid, that some of the faithful
through a certain Purgatory fire should be saved sooner or later as they did
more or less love the good things that perish. He says Purgatory is not
incredible (that is, some sort of Purgatory) that it may be inquired after, and
perhaps it may be found, and perhaps not. A good while after him Gregory said
to Peter the Deacon, that many things are now known of separate souls which
were not known of old.

And Bid says that Purgatory became known in England upon the miraculous
deliverance of a soldier from his bonds by the sacrifice of the Mass. In
fine, the Greek Church never owned Purgatory, and yet to them (as to gospel
matters) was declared the whole council of God. Act. 20. 27.

But suppose Transubstantiation and Purgatory are fictious, is the Error
Damnable? I do not say whether it be or no; but I am sure that all error is
dangerous to the soul, because it is its blindness; and if the blind lead the
blind etc. Besides, error has a spawn of consequents in which the blackness is
often more sensible than in the damm. For instance, the opinion of
Transubstantiation has (though not by good consequence to my reason) brough
forth a sacrilegious detention of the Cup from the Laity. Adoration of the Host
is another and a true birth of the same opinion; and that has in it many
symptoms of Idolatry. But what soul-killing venom comes from Purgatory? Why,
it is a gross disparagment of the passion of Christ which we do accuse of
imperfection, while we think it necessary to join our ownsufferings with it for
the satisfaction of the divine Justice.

I have done with Transubstantiation and Purgatory, and need not name any more
of the incredible doctrins of Popery; for this is one of their doctrins, that
he who denies one Article of the Faith, denies all; because the proposal of the
Church is the only reason of believing any. Out of which I infer; that if they
are baffled in any one Article; they are undone as to all; for their proposal
has lost its infallibility. Therefore in the next place, as the doctrins of
Popery are incredible and dangerous to our condition in the world to come, so I
say the yoke of it is very grievous and the burden almost insupportable in
this world. For,

First, Popery deprives us of several rights of nature. It requires us to
believe things naturally absurd, without giving us any supernatural proof, as
appears in the instances of Transubstantiation and Purgatory; and yet if we
doubt, we are damned to the fire of this world, and that of the world to come.
Again, to make us pray and praise God in an unknown tongue; What is it but to
rob us of the common rights of humanity: Parrots and Pies learn words, but to
understand them is the privilege of mankind. And he that should worship God
only by saying what he does not understand, were degenerate into a beast as to
his religion. St. Paul says if in the Church they all speak with tongues,
(though themselves do understand them) that a stranger coming in, will think
them mad. Is it not madder for them all to speak with tongues which they do not
understand? That Papist must be very much stupifyed to whom this imposition is
not grievous.

2dly. Popery is a great Invader of our Civil Rights. The Pope can
excommunicate a King; and by so doing, his Subjects are absolved from their
Oath of fidelity, and are commanded to pay no Obedience; so the Prince loses
his government, and the people not only, lose their Protection but also are
Embarras'd in insoluble doubts of conscience, between the pretensions of the
Pope and those of the King. And this was the Popish Doctrine long before the
Jesuits, as appears in Thomas Aquinas's Sum. Neither has the Pope ever been
drawn to declare against that Branch of his power; though in several Provinces
he might by such a declaration have delivered abundance of his people from very
great troubles. Nay the Pope disposes of unforfeited Kingdoms. He gave away the
Kingdoms of Mexico and Peru; though those Kings had never been under his
Jurisdiction, and S. Paul says; what have we to do with them that are without?
But there is an instance of this grievance about which I am more concerned. Our
King John had troubles from his Subjects to that height, that he was fain to
resign up his Crown to the Pope, and to receive it again from Pandol^ his
Legate, and to hold it thenceforth as from the Pope. This they say and brag
off, and upon this account pretend a Title to England at this day. Here are
several matters hard to be understood. If the Pope was partner in the
Rebellion, what can be more dangerous than he to Sovereignty? If he was no
partner in the Rebellion, how came he to get the Crown by the Success of the
Rebels? Again, if John was Persecuted as an Usurper, why was not the Crown
given to the right Heir? But nothing can be more unpolitick than their
pretending a Title to England from this Transaction with King John; for it
intitles them to the just Indignation of every King of England and of all his
good Subjects.

Thirdly, Popery is very grievous to the private purse etc. consequently dwarfs
any people that embraces it. Of what boundies numbers are their Clergy and
Religious? The present state of France says that one third of that Kingdom is
theirs; and it must be worse in Spain. Then, their Pilgrimages, Ransomes from
Purgatory, Offerings at shrines and Divifications are notable Pick-pockets. But
how do divifications work? Why the people look upon a new Saint as a new
Adovcate for them in Heaven.

But here it may be said, that some of our people think the Protestant Clergy
(Especially of the Church of England) pretty chargeable. I answer, that the
means of our Clergy is so small a pittance in comparison of that which went
away with Popery, that they must be very unreasonable who grutch it. And really
I never knew any malign the decent maintenance of our Church but such as
discovered a great many other vices. In our late confusions, all that were
against the Church were against God and the King and their fellow Subjects:
they were shamefully profane, and yet Hypocrites in contempt of all our
senses. But this is a digression. The truth is, Religion must be in some degree
Chargeable: for if we will serve God only out of that which costs us nothing;
then in our Eye the service of God is nothing worth. But there may be too much
taken as well as there may be too little given.

I might add other grievances: as the horrible imposing on the vulgar by
miracles; to which no man of reason among themselves gives any credit. Then how
restles are their Bigotts in Plotts! But they are told of that by Enough. We
had here a Barbarous Rebellion in the year 1641. I do not know whither the Pope
raised it or no; but he owned it, and encouraged it, and hindered all expedients
offered for a closure of the Wound, to the undoing of very many Gentlemen of
that party, who yet are so well natured as to love his Holiness never the less.
Nay of late Fanaticisme thrives by Popery. The Presbyterians say the Indulgence
to them and others was but to cover that to the Papists; But I never believe it
the sooner for their saying it. No I think the Papists helped the Fanatiques
only by Antiperistasis. The late Plot makes them look so black, that the
Ignorant people run to those Religions which pretend to greatest distance from
Popery.

I would now draw to a conclusion, but that I find my work is not don against
Popery till I clear Protestancy from some dirt thrown on it, which I shall
endeavor to do as briefly as I have don the rest.

Ob: 1. Protestants generally yield that a Papist may be saved, how then came
Reformation from Popery to be necessary? why should the unity of the Church be
broken for That without which we may be Eternally happy? I answer, we condemn
no man; there is one that will judge the world, and charity commands us to hope
that well meaning Papists will be saved in that day. But if any man thinks the
Popish doctrines false, and yet professes them as Articles of the Christian
Faith, his Hypocrisy is a damnable sin. Hence the Reformation became necessary.
God opened the Eyes of several people: They saw errors in the Church, refused
to own them, declared against them, and in some Countries prevailed against
them. They must either do so, or be Hypocrites in professing what they did not
think. Not that men are every where bound to proclaim their Religion, but in
the Church of Rome they are. There they must profess every thing with the
Church, or suffer as Heretics. In Sum, the Church of Rome kept the Christian
Faith, therefore we did not, neither might we leave it because of some
erroneous superstructious; not, for example sake, because they believed
Transubstantiation and adored the host; but because they compelled us to
believe and to do so.

Ob 2. If it be lawful for Protestants to reform from Popery for conscience
sake; then it is lawful upon the same account for Presbyterians to reform from
Protestants, and for Independents, and for Anabaptists, Quakers etc. without
end. And if this be allowed, in what a perpetual toss of troubles will
Christian Countries be? One crying up one way to Heaven, and another crying up
another way, and their words often proceeding to blows, each one party
condemning all the rest: but most of them joining against the Chief Magistrate?
Besides the unity of the Church is gone, the Communion of Saints is gone, and
the Church will soon be gone; for division is not many steps before destruction.

This objection goes a great way with many people, therefore I will set down my
answer distinctly in branches.

1. I confess that divisions in the Church do naturally tend to the destruction
of it; but of this Evil they only are guilty who cause the division. Now who
caused our departure from the Church of Rome, we that were driven, or they who
drove us away? If it be said: who drove you away? I answer: They that made it
mortal for us to stay. We must either hear our Conscience, or them, or the Word.

2dly. Every man is bound to reform himself according to his conscience, that
is, he is bound not to profess that which he does not believe, and not to do
that which he thinks is unlawful. But though every man's reason be his own
guide; yet no one man's reason is the guide of other men (unless they make it so
as in the case of Magistracy etc.) therefore no particular person ought to
press the Reformation of other men, unles he be authorized by God or man. Yet
it is possible, that private persons may think themselves bound in conscience
not only to reform themselves but others also; to Preach and perhaps fight up
their own way. And when this frenzy is prevalent, it is a great judgment from God
both upon the persons possessed with it, and upon the Nation in which it
happens. But the rule is, that as they follow their own erroneous conscience in
these pranks; so the chief Magistrate is to follow his conscience, which is not
to suffer them to do hurt to the Church or State.

3ly. I confess that our being subject to troubles from Presbyterians etc. is
an imbecility in our Church; but it is common to us with the Church of Rome; We
are vexed with Sectaries, and they are vexed with the same Sectaries, and with
us too.

4ly. But I shall be told that the strength of the Objection is in this, That by
our Reformation from Popery We gave a Precedent inviting others to Reform from
Us; To this I say, that in our Reformation the King and People were of a mind
and Reformed according to order of Law; therefore Our Reformation is no
Precedent for the tumultous, and violent Endeavors of Presbyterians etc.
Again, the Sectaries have not the same necessity of Seperating from us as we
had for Separation from Rome; for we could not stay there without declaring for
Transubstantiation etc. which we could not believe; but the Presbyterians,
Anabaptists etc. may hold their own Opinions in our Church without ever being
inquired into about it, nay if they are known to be of such Opinions, there is
not the least punishment for it. So that our Reformation was of Necessity,
Their's of Wantonness. We are no Precedent for them. To conclude upon this
Objection, I say human affairs cannot but be subject to inconveniences; and
therefore we must not reject any thing for an adhering Inconvenience, unles its
Opposite be less Inconvenient. Let us then consider whether possible Troubles
from Sectaries, or the certain Intolerablenes of the Roman Yoke upon our
Consciences, Lives, and Fortunes be the greater Inconvenience.

Ob. 3. At least the Romish Religion, by the power it has upon peoples
Consciences seems apter than the Protestant to keep the people in Obedience to
a Catholic Prince, and so ought to be cherished by such Princes. I answer:
Popery is not so good at keeping Subjects quiet as it is at raising tumults;
witness the French League against a Roman Catholic King. Yes, Popery has made
many Rebellions where no interest was concerned but its own: but where did it
ever hinder a Rebellion to which other interests invited? Did it hinder the
Barons Wars in England? Did it hinder the Rebellion of almost all Spain against
Charles the first? Did it hinder Massanello in Naples? Did it hinder the
Suiss-Cantons from revolting from the house of Austria? Papists have often
Rebelled, But we can say of the Protestants (I mean the Church of England) that
they have never yet rebelled, and that if ever they would Rebel; they would
have done it in the late times, when their Loyalty contended with all the
miseries of an unsuccessful War, of long penury, of Captivity, of banishment,
of shameful Deaths. But they bore all these; and also despised Cromwells many
slattering invitations. Whereas the Papists of England were then said to offer
in purchase of their Liberty an Abjuration of the Royal Line and a Submission
to the Line of that Usurper. I am not absolutely sure of this last; but I
perfectly sure, that in those days Mr. White a Romish Priest of England
published a book (Dedicated to Sr. Kenelm Digby) entitled Of Government and
Obedience; wherein he pretends to prove that God Himself is no otherwise
Monarch of the World than by his Omnipotence, and consequently that an Earthly
King loosing his Power* loses his Authority: and that neither ought others to
raise troubles for the recovering of his right, nor would he, if honest, desire
it. Certainly what ever Religion a King himself is of, he has reason to wish
for Protestant Subjects.

FINIS.

