An Account OF THE ROTULA ARITHMETICA Invented by Mr. George Brown, Minister of
Kilmaures.

Together with Instructions how to use it.



EDINBURGH, Printed for the Author, M.DCC.

At Edinburgh, December 1. M.DC.XC.VIII.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council do hereby Grant to Mr. George Brown
Minister, and His Heirs and Assigneys, the sole Privilege of Framing, Making,
and Selling His Instrument, called Rotula Arithmetica, for the space of 14.
Years yet to come, after the Day and Date hereof. And Discharges any other
Persons to make or sell the said Instrument, dureing the space foresaid,
without express Liberty and License from the said Mr. Geo. Brown and his
foresaids, under the Pain of 500. Merks, besides Confiscation of the Rotula's
made or sold.

Extracted by Me, Sic subscribitur, Gilb. Eliot, Cls. Sti. Cons.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader!
WHen first I applied my Mind to publish somewhat concerning my Rotula
Arithmetica; I designed only (without Preface or Apology) to set down, in the
plainest and most homely Dress, such Rules as might render those, who should
happen to have both a Book and a Rotula, capable by the Help of the one, to
make Use of the other; not doubting, but that such an useful, Machine as it
is, would be very acceptable to all sorts of persons; men that want Arthemetick
being by this means, in the space of four Hours made capable to Add, Substract,
Multiply and Divide without any other previous Knowledge, than that of Reading
Figures, though otherwise such Persons were not able readily to Condescend
whether 7 and 4 were 11 or 12: and the ablest Masters, being by the help of
this Machine rendered more able to perform the most tedious, and most numerous
Operations of Addition, Multiplication and Division, with the greatest
Certainty, and without all that Rack of Intention, to which they are, by all
the other methods hitherto known, obliged. But before I was ready to appear in
Public, I understood by several Documents, that it is as unfit for new
Productions, to go abroad, without the Helmet or cover of a preface, as it is
unsafe for a Highland-man, to travel amongst those Neighbors, with whom he is
at Variance, without the Protection of his Broad Sword and Target.

Indeed some Persons have been so unjust as to spread a report that the Rotula
is no new thing, but an old Invention of one Delamain, an English man, who
obtained from King Charles I. a Privilege for his Mathematical Ring Anno
1630. Now this Report, as false as it is, was at first no small prejudice
against the Rotula, in the Opinion of those, who knew no better, and who had a
great deference for the sentiments of those, who were the Raisers and Spreaders
of this report: and all I my self could say at first, (having never seen
Delamain's Book nor Instrument) was, that if the Rotula had ever been known in
the World before, it had never been out of fashion, but had very soon after
publication become very near as common as a Balance or an elln-wand, every one,
who has any thing considerable to measure or weigh, having likewise some
Account to cast.

But though this seemed to me a sufficient Demonstration concerning the Novelty
of my Invention, yet I was obliged for the Satisfaction of others to procure
some Copies, of De la main's Book and Projection, that such as were under a
mistake might be convinced of the falsehood of the foresaid Report, by Comparing
both Projections together.

I should be loath to Charge the usage, I met^ with in this affair, upon the
Score of malice; that base Vice being as far below men of their Generous and
Liberal Education, as it lies out of the Road of my Actions to give them any
other Provocation, than that of being an Inventor: Nor can it be Imputed to
Ignorance; for they are unquestionably men of Profound Learning, and Knowledge;
It must then be chargeable merely upon the Score of Rashness, for had they but
been at the Pains to Compare both Instruments together, they might have easily
perceived the Difference to be as great as that betwixt a Line of Logarithme
Numbers, and a Scale of equal parts: and for this cause I think I may Justly
Charge them with Injustice, according to that known Maxim.

Qui statuerit aliquid, part inaudita altera, licet aequum statuerit, haud
tamen aequus fuit.

How reasonably then may the man be charged with Injustice, who passes not
only a harsh, but an unjust Verdict and Censure on a thing he has not been at
the pains duly to examine and consider.

But to proceed; Our worthy Countryman the Lord Naper Baron of Merchistoun,
Invented the Logarithm-Tables; and Mr. Gunter, an English man, Converted these
Tables into a straight Lined Scale; after him Mr. Delamain, who was Gunter's
Scholar converted Gunter's Scale into a double Circle, merely to ease men of
Compasses: But then his Ring like Gunter's Scale, at that time, did only
consist of one Line of Numbers, Sines and Tangents: and as he never dreamed of
performing Addition, or Substraction by the help of his Machine, so he
Ingenously acknowledges that it was not capable to perform even Division and
Multiplication to an Arithmeticall exactness; But many times a man might come
short of very near an Unite; Nay He might have added that in Numbers of many
Places a man may be some times to seek for Units, and Tens, if not for
Hundreds. Nay to render it more certain the author requires That, which he
proposes as a portable Instrument, to be made of several Foots or Ellns
Diameter, which would render it unweeldy, and consequently less useful, either
by Sea or Land: and it is not Improbable, that for these defects, that
Instrument has been antiquated, and has given place to the Double Scale of
Proportion, now so much in use.

Now the Rotula performs all the four Arithmeticall Operations Arithmetically,
and to an Arithmeticall Exactness, not only of the Integers, but even of the
Decimalls, whither finite or Infinite. So that a man, who can but work by the
Rotula, may within a little Time and Practice, learn to work by the Pen; if he
should chance to want his Machine; Nay I believe, when the Rotula's are once
become common, the mother may teach her Children at home, as much Arithemetick,
as may serve them all their lives.

I should now close this tedious business of a Preface, but that I am obliged
to give some account of Mr. Glover, and his Invention called his Ro^e
Ariehmetique.

This Mr. Glover is a Scottish Gentleman, whose Elder Brother Thomas, who was
this John's Master, was my Scholar about the Year 74. at which time he learned
from me that Skill in Numbers and other things which he afterward taught this
Gentleman, and by which both of them have since become famous abroad.

Now though this Invention of John Glover's be Posterior to my Rotula, as appears
by the Date of his Privilege, Granted by his Majesty of France, which is of
the 13. of March 1699. whereas my Privilege is granted in Scotland on the first
of December School. Yet his comes so far short of mine, that I Verily believe,
had he seen or gotten a perfect Account of mine before he proposed his own, he
would have spared the pains of Publication.

I must Confess that for any thing I yet know, his Tables or Circles for
Multiplication and Division (which indeed are very Ingenious, and have cost him
much Thought) are his own; as also his Tables for the Reduction of Pence to
shillings, and shillings to Pounds. But in that Part which is common with his
Roue and my Rotula, he seems to have got some hint of mine; and this I am the
more apt to belive because about the time that I was bussie in contriving the
Rotula, there was a very smart Gentleman a near friend of his, Scholar with me
at Stirline.

But that which gives me greater evidence in this particular, is some
expressions in his own Book which makes me fancy that he has, at least, got
some imperfect Description of mine, before he contrived that part of his which
serves for Addition and Substraction.

For, whereas there is on my fixed Plate 3. Circles, he speaks of three, and yet
Immediately he takes away two of his, and turns them into Tables for Reduceing
of Pence into shillings, and shillings into pounds, and these not exceeding the
limits of 120. and instead of the third on the fixed he gives us nothing but a
little segment, about a fifth part divided into parts beginning at 0. and ending
at 24. which he calls his fixed Index: as also whereas my Circle is divided into
100. parts; he Chooses, (to make his differ from mine) 120. as being a common
Product of 10. 12. and 20. These Numbers (as he alleadges in the beginning of
his 1st. Chapter) being preferable to all other Numbers whatsoever; and yet
near the close of the same Chapter he acknowledges that it would be better to
divide the Circle for Addition and Substraction into 100 parts or some Power of
10. and so the Instrument would become universal: All which give me suspicion
that in this part, he has gotten, at least some lame account of mine.

Moreover his Instrument is Defective and comes far short of mine, even in
Addition; For in his, the Practitioner is obliged to mind or mark down how many
Revolutions his moveable Plate makes, and every one being 120, he has 120 to
Multiply by the Number of Revolutions, which is not only troublesome, but
likeways dangerous especially in real Bussiness, where a man whose mind is
bussied both about the figures of his Column, and the points of his moveable
plate, is obliged at the same time to mind the several Revolutions of his
moveable Plate, of which for every one he forgets, or overlooks, he loses 120
for his Pains; whereas in mine a man is not tied to any such intention above
once for 1000. (which is more than any Column does ordinarily contain) the
moveable Plate, at every Revolution both marking and giving notice of the
number of Revolutions.

But, besides this, in my Rotula the same Circles that serve for Addition and
Substraction serve likeways for Multiplication and Division, but in his Roue he
has one for Addition and Substraction and ten or eleven for Multiplication and
Division and yet though the Circles were twice as large, and though they contained
near twice as many figures as they do, they would be no more than what is
necessary to do, what I am able to perform by mine.

Lastly whereas his Tables are confined only to shillings and pence, and these
of limited Number not exceeding, 120. There are on the waste, on the middle of
my moveable Plate, Tables for the Reduction of shillings, Pence, Farthings,
Weights and Measures, be the Numbers never so large; Besides the Decimall
Tables for Money, weights Measures and the most ordinary common Fractions: By
the help of which six last sort of Tables, the Multiplication and Division of
Complex Numbers does become just as easy as that of Integers; without all that
tediousness which Mr Glover proposes in his Book.

To conclude, what I have said here is no more than was necessary for the
Vindication of my own Invention, and to satisfy those, who already are, or
hereafter may be misinformed either by the Story of Delamain, or Mr. Glover's
Roue Arithmetique, who for what is Peculliarly his, deserves a good degree of
commendation and Encouragement.

CHAP. I. Concerning the Rotula, and the Rectification thereof.
ALbeit in Books of this Nature, it be usual to prefix a Scheme of the Machine
of which they treat; Yet I have thought fit in this, to omit that; because such
as have a Rotula, need not a Scheme, and such as want one, have no use for a
Book; I shall therefore (as briefly as I can) describe the Rotula, and then
show You how to use it.

The Rotula Consists of two Principal Parts, to wit, a Circular Plain moving
upon a Center-pin, this we call the Moveable Plate; and a Ring, whose Circles
are described from the same Center, this we call the Fixed Plate; Because it is
fixed to the Box, to secure it from moving about the Center, as the other does.

The Fixed Plate is divided into three parts by two Circles; the Innermost of
which is doubled, with a little Interstice for Peg-Holes.

Near the Circumference of the Moveable, there is another Double Circle, with a
small Interstice also betwixt them, for Peg Holes.

The space without the double Circle, on the Moveable, and within that on the
Fixed, are both of them equally divided into 100. Parts: and both are Numbered,
beginning at 0. 1. 2. 3. and so proceeding in a Natural Order to 99. all the
Divisions being drawn straight from the Center.

On the Fixed many of these Divisions are protracted, some only to the middle
part; and others run over both: for confining the several single Coefficents
of the Respective Tabular Numbers, to which they are Prefixed, with this
Caution when the Coefficients are the same, they are set down in the uttermost
part; and when any Number admits of two pair of Coefficients, the one Pair is
set in the Midmost and the other in the Out-most Part. Thus against 18. on the
Fixed, You will find in the midmost Part, 2 x 9 (that is two times Nine or Nine
times two; This x cross signifieing the word times) and 3 x 6 in the outmost.
Also on the Moveable there is a Segment of a Circle, within the Peg-hole
Circle, beginning at 9. of the Natural Numbers and ending at 72. This Segment
is likewise Divided by the same lines that Divide the outmost Circle of
Natural Numbers into equal parts.

On the Fixed Plate at the Division betwixt 99 and 0 there is a little bit of
Metal Screwed or Rivited, reaching likeways a lit le further than the Peg-hole
Circle, on the Moveable, this piece of Metal we call the Stop: and must always
be placed next Your left hand, with the Number 25, or 30. toward your Breast.
There is also on the Fixed, over against the Numbers 89. or 90. a little Circle
Divided into to equal Parts; with a little Palm, which shifts one part at
every revolution of the Moveable; So that the figure, at which this Palm
Points, Signifies the Number of Revolutions or Hundreds You have in your
Account, or the Column last added

When the Figures of the Moveable Plate move toward that side of the Stop,
which is next the Cipher on the Fixed, we call the motion forward; but when they
retire from it, the motion is backward.

In Rectification, be sure not to touch the little Palm, till the Unites or
Numbers beginning with a Cipher on the Moveable, be some of them against the
Nynties on the Fixed; and then turn the little Palm to the Cipher of it is
Proper Circle; after which turn back the Moveable, till it will Move no
further, and so when the Ciphers of the Moveable are just at the Stop, as well
as the Palm of the little Circle at it is Cipher; The Rotula is Rectified and
ready for Operation.

I have filled up the Vacant Space in the middle of the Moveable with Decimal
Tables, and Tables of Common Divisors, very useful for those, that have much
Bussiness, or are in have.

Only observe carefuly that the Figures, on the right side of the Moveable,
are Top-^^e turvie; So that You must always take that which appears to be a
9th. for a 6th. and on the Contrary the 6th. for a 9th. and mind well, that the
Unites are always next the Center, and the Tens next the Circumference: thus
61. will appear 19. and 91. will look like 16.

CHAP. II. Concerning Addition.
AFter You have Rectified the Rotula, You may easily Perceive that all the
Numbers on the Moveable, are the same, with those derectly against them, on the
Fixed; but if You turn any other figure of the Moveable to the Stop, then will
all the Numbers on the Moveable be just so many more than these directly
against them on the fixed; for instance, if you were to Add any Number
whatsoever to 7. first, bring that point of the Moveable (which is not only
directly against 7 on the Fixed, but indeed the same with it) to the Stop, and
then you will find all the Numbers on the Moveable, 7 more than the respective
Numbers on the Fixed, so that lib. ss. d. 345 17 10 976 13 8 158 18 9 746 16 11
843 19 6 977 15 7 865 14 10 743 18 11 896 15 8 739 16 7 478 13 4 287 14 8 958
19 11 549 15 5 378 17 9 486 14 8 297 18 10 684 14 8 1956 18 9 2768 11 6 9875 19
10 against 1. on the Fixed you have 8. on the Moveable which is the Sum of 1.
and 7. and against 9. on the Fixed you have 16. on the Moveable, which is Just
the Sum of 9. and 7. and on this Theory depends the Certainty of all your
operations: wherefore you must take care in bringing up any number of Figures
to the Stop one after another, to look for all the Items on the Fixed Plate, but
not on the Moveable; Otherwise you will miscarry in your Operation: Example,
were you to add the Account on the preceding Page, you must begin on the Top
of the Column of Pence, covering the fifth Number with a bodle Peg, or any
other little thing, and then with your Peg bring up the First Four Numbers. To
wit: 10 8. 9. 11. thus, bring first up the point against 10. on the Fixed, which
is ten on the Moveable) to the Stop, and then that Point on the Moveable which
is against 8 on the Fixed, and then that Point of the Moveable, which is against
9. on the Fixed, and Lastly that point of the Moveable, which is against 11, on
the Fixed, and you will find the Sum of these four Numbers on the Moveable, at
the Stop, to be 38. but you need not regaird the Sum, till you have done with
the whole Column, wherefore shifting your Cover and Proceeding with the next
four Figures as you did with the First four Numbers, and so forward till you
come to the foot of the Column you will Find the Sum of your Pence to be just
175. of which 1 is found at the Palm, and 75. at the Stop on he Moveable;
these Reduced to shillings (as you are taught in the Chapter concerning
Division) do veild 14 shillings and 7d. set down your 7 under the Column of
Pennies; and having rectified the little Palm, (which must never be Forgot,
before you begin a new Column) set 14. of the Moveable (...) the Stop, for the
14. shillings you have to carry.

Then proceed, beginning at the Top of the Column for shillings, bringing up
17, 13, 18, 16, and so forward by four and four, as You did with the Pennies,
and Your shillings will amount to 3^7 shill.

These reduced to Pounds, conform to the Directions contained in the Chapter of
Division, do yield 17lib. 7sh. Set down your 7sh. under the column of
shillings, and having rectified the Palm, put 17 of the Moveable to the Stop,
for the 17lib. you have to carry.

Thence proceed to the Unites of the Pounds, and bring the Figures of that
Column up, as you did those of s^illings and Pence, and you will find the Sum of
it just 151. the last Figure of which being I must be set down under the
Integer Unites, and the other two Figures, to wit, 15 must be, after Rectifying
the Palm, carried as before.

After the same manner You will find the second Column, or Column of Tens of
Pounds amount to 142, where setting down the last, to wit, the Figure 2, and
carrying the other two, to wit, 14. You proceed as before to the Column of
Hundreds, the last three Numbers of which having Thousands annexed to them, You
may bring up all-together, to wit, 19, 27, 98, and save Your self the Labor of
a new Rectification or carrying. This last Sum amounting to 260, must be all
set down together in Order, to wit, the 0 under the Hundreds, the 6 under the
Thousands, and the 2d. Figure before all.

After the same manner, You may Add all other Species whatsoever; providing
allways You Divide the lesser Species by their proper Denominators, in
Reduceing them to the next greater Species.

In Your first Practice of Addition, satisfy Your self with Examples of
Integers, where there are no Reductions, till after You have learned Division;
and then You will find no Difficulty.

If at any Time you Add two Columns in Integers, you must set down the two
Figures at the Stop, under the two Columns; and carry that only, at which the
Palm points. Observe, that how many soever of any one Species are requisite to
make one of the next greater: That Number, I call the Denominator of the lesser
Species.

Thus, in Integers, 10 is allways the Denominator; Because 10 in the Column of
Unites, makes but one in the Column of Tens; and 10 in the Column of Tens,
makes but one in the Column of Hundereds, etc. Nay, the Denominator of Tens is
100. etc.

Also, 4 is the Denominator of Farthings, Lippies, Firlots: and Pecks in
relation to Firlots; but 16 is the Denominator of Bolls and of Pecks in
relation to Bolls; and 12 the Denominator of Pence, and 20 of shillings, etc.
This is well to be minded, because we may have frequent use to speak of the
Denominators of Species.

CHAP. III. Concerning Substraction.
SVbstraction finds the Difference betwixt two unequal Numbers.

The greater of these two Numbers is called the Charge; and the lesser, the
Discharge.

In Substraction, you must allways bring the several Figures of the Charge, one
after another, together with the respective Figures of the Discharge; the one
on the Moveable, and the other on the Fixed, directly against one another; and
if the Figure of the Charge be equal to, or greater than the respective Figure
of the Discharge, you have the Remainder at the Stop, on the Moveable.

But if the Figure of the Discharge be greater than that of the Charge, then
against the Denominator of the Species, on the Moveable, you have the Remainder
on the Fixed.

Thus, were I to take 8 from 8, or 7 from 7, having set the one against the
other, you have 0 at the Stop.

So likeways, if I were to take 5 from 8; having brought 8 on the Moveable,
against 5 on the Fixed: I have at the Stop, on the Moveable, 3 for a Remainder.
But, if I had been to take 8lib. from 5lib. the Remainder is on the Fixed,
against 10 (the Denominator of Integers) on the Moveable. And 8d. from 5
pennies, the remainder is on the Fixed, against 12 (the Denominator of Pennies)
on the Moveable. And 8sh. from 5sh. the Remainder is still on ehe Fixed, against
20 (the Denominator of shillings) on the Moveable. And 8 Ounces from 5 Ounces,
the Remainder is on the Fixed, against 16 (the Denominator of Ounces) on the
Moveable.

And the Peason of all this is plain; because the Discharge, in this case,
cannot be taken off the Charge, but off the Denominator, which is equivalent to
a borrowed one of the next greater Species, and the Overplus, by the very
Position of the Instrument, is added to the Charge.

Only mind carefully, that as often as the Remainder is found on the Fixed,
(which allways happens when any figure of the Discharge is greater than the
respective Figure of the Charge) you must, in that case, esteem the next
preceding Figure of the Discharge an Unite more than really it is; Taking 1
for 0, and 2 for 1, and 3 for 2, and so of others.

lib. ss. d. 25123478 11 4 Charge, 23254906 14 8 Discharge, 01868571 16 8

Thus, in this Example, I bring 8 on the Moveable to 4 on the Fixed; and because
the pennies of the Discharge, are greater than the Pennies of the Charge; I
look for 12, the Denominator of Pennies on the Moveable, and against it, I find
6 on the Fixed, for my remainder. These I set down under the Pennies.

Again, because I found my last Remainder on the Fixed, I esteem 14sh. in the
Discharge to be 15. for which cause I bring 15 on the Moveable to 11 on the
Fixed: and against 20 the Denominator of shillings, I have 16 on the Fixed. These
I set down under shillings,

Thereafter, for the same Reason, esteeming the 6lib. of my Discharge to be 7,
I bring 8 (the respective Figure of the Charge on the Moveable) to it; and
(because the Figure of the Charge, is greater than that of the Discharge) I
have 1 on the Moveable at the Stop, for the Remainder. Thence, because the last
Remainder was found on the Moveable, I must not change my 0 but bring 7 on the
Moveable to 0 on the Fixed, and the Remainder at the Stop, is 7. And proceeding,
conform to these Directions, with the rest, I perfect the Operation, finding
allways the Remainder, on the Moveable, at the Stop, when the Charge Figure is
greater than that of the Discharge, or equal to it, but on the Fixed against 10.
the Denominator of Integers on the Moveable, when the Discharge Figure is
greater than that of the Charge.

After the same M^nner, and by the same Directions, You may Substract any other
Species whatsoever, if You do but carefully mind the Denominators of the
several Species.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Multiplication.
MVltiplication supposes two Numbers, called Coefficients, to find a third,
called the Product, which Product contains any one of the Coefficients, as often
as the other contains an Unite.

Any one of the Coefficients, especially the greater, may be called the
Multiplicand, the other the Multiplier; thus, 3 times 4 is 12. of which 3 and 4
are the Coefficients, and 12 the Product, which Product contains 3, as often as 4
contains 1.

When one of the Coefficients is 10, 100, 1000. You need no Instrument for
Multiplication in Integers, for this is done merely by adding the Ciphers to
the right hand of the other Coefficient.

Thus, 10 x 64 is 640, and 100 x 64 is 6400, etc.

But when the Coefficients are all, or many of them, signifying Figures, set
the lesser Number under the greater, thus, ^

Having Rectified the Rotula (with the Pen in your Right Hand ready to Write,
and your Left Hand at the Rotula, to turn the Moveable as shall be necessary)
because 8 is the last Figure of the Multiplier, you must look for 8 x everv
Figure of the Multiplieand, one after another, beginning at the last, but you
must not regard the Products on the Fixed, but only upon the Moveable (nameing
allways the Tens of the Product, first, as a single Figure; putting that Figure
on the Moveable immediately to the Stop, and then the Unites, setting them down
on the Paper thus,

First, I look for 8 x 2. and against that, on the Moveable, I find 1 and 6.
for which cause I set 01 on the Moveable to the Stop, and 6 I write on the
Paper below the Coefficient 8.

Then I look for 8 x 4. and against that, on the Moveable, I find 3 and 3. for
which cause I turn 03 to the Stop, and write down 3 on my Paper.

Then I look for 8 x 5. against which I find 4 and 3. here I put 4 to the stop,
and 3 again to the Paper.

Thence at 8 x 6. I find 05 for the Stop, and 2 for the Paper.

And 8 x 9. I find 07 for the Stop, and 7 for the Paper.

And lastly, at 8 x 7. I find 63, all for the Paper, because it is the last
Product.

After which, I Rectify again.

Now, as I have gone over all the Figures of the Multiplicand with 8, the last
Figure of the Multiplier, so may you do by 7 for the second Product, and 5 for
the third, and 9 for the fourth; carefully observing only to set the first
Figure, or that next the right hand of every particular Product, under that
Figure of the Multiplier, by which it is produced: these particular Products
summed up do yield the total Product.

I shall subjoyn another Example, and so end with Multiplication.

^

In this last Example the two Ciphers of the Multiplier are set to the right of
the Unites of the Multiplicand, and then multiplying by 9. I set the two
Ciphers behind the Product; and so, what was but 9 times before, does now
become 900 times the Multiplicand.

You see also the Unites of the Product made by 7, set under 7 of the
Multiplier, and the Unites of that made by 3, under 3 of the Multiplier, all
the rest duly observing Rank and File.

To conclude this Chapter, and make You prompt in finding your Coefficients:
Observe, that all the Products of any Coefficients are contained within Ten
Times the least of the two, so that all the Products of 2 are within 20, and
all of 3 within 30, etc.

CHAP. V. Concerning Division.
SECTION 1.
DIvision serves to find a Number showing how often the great of the two given
Numbers contain's the lesser.

The greater of the given Numbers, we call the Dividend: The lesser the
Divisor; and the Number demanded, or found the Quotient.

When as many Figures taken from the left of the Dividend; as there are Figures
in the Divisor, are aequivalent to the Divisor, or better than it; then we set
a Point over the last of these, to Determine the first particular Dividend,
which for Brevity, I shall call the first Dividual.

But if as many taken, from the left of the Dividend, be less than the Divisor,
the Point must stand over the next Subsequent Figure of the Dividend, for
Determining the first Dividual.

Having Determined your Dividual, you must refer the first of the Divisor,
(when they are equal in Number of places) to the first of your Dividual; but
if they are unequal to the first two of the Dividual, and so forward, the
second, third and fourth Figures of the Divisor to the Subsequent Figures of
your Dividual as they ly in Order; So that in subduction, where you begin at
the last of the Divisor, you must refer, or Substract the Product of it, from
the last of the Dividual.

The Remainder of the first Dividual with the next following Figure of the
Dividend Yields you a 2d. Dividual.

So Soon as you have Determined your first Dividual, you presently understand,
how many Figures you are to have in the Quotient; to, wit, one for the Point,
or first Dividual; and one for every subsequent Figure of the Dividend.

Wherefore, if the 2d, 3d, or any other Dividual should happen to be less than
the Divisor; you must put a Cipher in the Quotient for that Dividual; And so
(as if it were but a new Remainder) bring down another Figure from the
Dividend; to wit, the next following for a new Dividual.

I shall first show you how to Divide by one Figure, and then by two, and after
that by as many as you please.

In Division by any one Figure, you have nothing to do, but to bring the
Dividual on the Moveable to the first Cell that occurres, in which the Divisor
is a Coefficient; the other Coefficient in the same Cell, is the Quotient, and
that (having first drawn a Line below the Dividend.) You must set down under
the last Figure of your Dividual; and the Figure, at the Stop on the Moveable,
you must set over the same last Figure of the Dividual, for a Remainder. And so
proceed Rectifying every time before you apply to the next Dividual.

Example.

^

Here you see, that 8 (the foremost Figure of the Dividend,) being less than 9,
the Divisor; the Point, for Determining the first Dividual stands over the
second fiigure of the Devidend: So that my first Dividual is 88: Which being
thus Determined, I understand that I am to have in my Quotient 7 Figures; to
wit one for the first Dividual, and one for every Subsequent Figure of the
Dividend.

These things considered, and the Rotula Rectified, I bring the first Dividual,
88. on the Moveable, to the first Cell, that occurres on the Fixed, in which 9
is a Coefficient; and because the other Coefficient in the same Cell is 9; I
set that down under 8, the last Figure of my Dividual; and, having 7 on the
Moveable at the Stop, I set 7 over the same last Figure of my Dividual for a
Remainder; then I Rectifiie.

Now the first Remainder and next Subsequent Figure being 76 I bring 76 to the
first 9 Coefficient, and there I find 8 for my Quotient, and 4 at the Stop for
my Remainder; these I set down as before, the one under the other, over the
last Figure of the 2d. Dividual, and then Rectify.

The 3d. Dividual being 45, and having without any Motion a Cell of 9,
directly against it, I sind 5 for my Quotient, and 0 for my Remainder.

So that the 4th Dividual becomes 04, which being less than 9; I set 0 in my
Quotient and then

The 4 still Remaining with the next Subsequent Figure of my Dividend, making
43; I bring 43 on the Moveable to the first 9 Coefficient, and there finding 4
for my Quotient, and 7 at the Stop for my Remainder.

Having set down these and Rectified, I find my next Dividual 72, against a
Cell. of 9, in which I have 8 for my Quotient, and 0 for my Remainder,

So that my last Dividual being oniie 01, which is less than my Divisor I set
naught in my Quotient; and 1 the the last Remainder, I set over 9 the Divisor
at the end of the Quotient, with a little Line betwixt them for a Fraction. Thus
1/9

If any Divisor consist only of one signifying Figure and Ciphers, you must
Divide only by the signifyng Figure, and from the Quotient cut off as many
Figures toward the Right Hand, as there are Ciphers in the Divisor, observing,
that if the signifying Figure be only an Unite, You have no use for the Rotula,
or any other Instrument; but merely to write down the Dividend below the Line
in the Quotient; and then cut off from it conform to the Number of your
Ciphers. Example first; Divisor 1000.) 976583 Dividend. 976583 Quotient.


In this Example, you see the Figures in the Quotient are the same with those
in the Dividend, because the signifying Figure of the Divisor is but an Unite.
But because there are three Ciphers to the Right of the Divisor, I have cut off
three Figures from the Right of the Quotient, where you see that (as your
Dividual Point Intimates) You have only three Integers in your Quotient, namely
those to the Left Hand, and the Remainder is a Decimal Fraction; or if you
will, the Numerator of a common Fraction, whose Denominator is the Divisor;
thus:

^

Example 2d. ^

In this Example, I first Divide as if my Divisor were only 8, so that I have 5
Figures in the Quotient, just as if the Dividual Point had stood over 7, the
Second of the Dividend: But because of the two Ciphers in the Divisor, I cut
off two from the Right of the Quotient, and so I understand, that if 800 Men
had to receive, or pay out equalie amongst them 478552 lib. each Man's share
would come to 598lib. 3. sh 9 d. and about an half Penny.

Section 2d. Showing how to Divide by two Signifying Figures
FIRST METHOD.
In this and all Operations, where the Divisor consists of more signifying
Figures than one, You must set the Quotient to the Right of the Dividend, and
the Remainder under the several Respective Figures of every Dividual.

Observe in all Subductions, that if the Remainder be either equal to, or
greater than the Dividual you have taken the Quotient too little, or not set
down your Figures right.

When you are to Divide by any two signifying Figures, having first determined
your first Dividual, and Rectified, look for your Divisor on the Fixed, and at
that, put in a little Peg to mark it.

Then with your other Peg or style, bring up that Point of the Moveable which
is against the standing Peg in the Fixed, once, twice, thrice, etc. till the
Number against the Peg, with regard to the Palm, exceed the Dividual, minding
only how many times you have brought up that Point, and these times are the
Quotient; and wherever you find the Dividual on the Moveable, (which is
either at the Stop, or betwixt the Stop and the Point, against the Peg in the
Fixed) there you have the Remainder on the Fixed.

As also you must remember, that when ever the Number on the Moveable against
the Peg in the Fixed, is less than that on the Fixed, that then you are to esteem
your hundreds, one more than that Figure is, at which the Palm Points; because
if you should bring up that Number to the Stop; the Palm would certainly cast
another hundred: Nay, 00 on the Moveable, is always to be reputed 100, when it
is not precisely at the Stop; and so you may Judge of every other Number on the
Moveable, when it stands against a greater on the Fixed.

Example.

^

Having set my Dividual point, I understand that I am to have 4 Figures in my
Quotient.

I put in a Peg at 15 on the Fixed for my Divisor and (the Moveable and Palm
being first rectifyed) I bring up constantly that Point of the Moveable, which
is Directly against this Divisor; saying once, twice, thrice, and so forward
till, at 5 times, I find the Number against my Divisor exceed my Dividual, and
then I put in 5 in my Quotient: After which, beginning at the Stop, I search
betwixt it, and my Divisor-Peg, for my Dividual 75, and I find it just at the
Stop; and against it on the Fixed, finding a Cipher for my Remainder; I
understand that 5 times 15 is just 75, and therefore I set down 0 under 5, the
last Figure of my Dividual, and to it I bring down 9 the next subsequent Figure
of my Dividend, for the second Dividual.

Now because this 2d. Dividual is less than the Divisor, I put 0 in my
Quotient; and to the 2d. Dividual as a mere Remainder, I bring down the next
Figure of the Dividend, to wit 8, and so I have 98 for a third Dividual.

Now you may either Rectify, and begin de Novo for 98, as you did for 75: Or,
because this Dividual is greater than the last, to wit 75, you may proceed:
Bringing up the Divisor once more, and saying 6 times; so have you 6 for your
Quotient. And againct 98 on the Moveable, you have 8 on the Fixed for your
Remainder.

When you have set down 8 on the Paper under 8, the last Figure of the third
Dividual; you bring down to it 6, the last Figure of the Dividend, so have you
86, for a new Dividual, and having Rectified; you find the Quotient 5, and the
Remainder 11, after the same manner as you did the first.

If after this manner, you Divide the Sum of your Pennies in Addition by 12,
and that of your shillings, by 20, you will reduce the first to shillings, and
the second to Pounds, in the Quotients; and the remainders are pennies, or
shillings, according to the Nature of the Sums Divided: The same may be said
of every other Species, if it be Divided by its Proper Denominator.

SECOND METHOD.
I shall here likeways show you how to do the same by the Tables of common
Divisors on the middle of the Rotula; which Method will likeways be sometimes
very useful in long Divisions, either by two, or more Figures.

Suppose then that the Sum of your pennies were 798. You must in reducing them
to shillings, Divide them by 12, because 12 is the Denominator of pennies,
wherefore having set them down as in the Margin, ^
and Marked your first Dividual, You must look for your Dividual 79 in that
Table, whose first Number is 12, and if you can not find 79, you must take that
which is next to it, but less; and that you will find to be 72, against which
you have 6 for your Quotient; as you find in the Column on the Left of the
Tables, under the Letter N. That 6 you put in your Quotient; and then
Substracting 72, the Tabular Number, from 79, the Dividual, you set down the 7
that remains under the 9 of the Dividual. And then bringing down 8, the next of
the Dividend, to 7 the Remainder, you have 78 for the 2d. Dividual; the next to
which in the Table is 72, which gives another 6th. Figure for your Quotient,
and 6 for your Remainder; So that in 798 pennies; you have just 66 shilling,
and 6 d. The last to set down under pennies, and the first to carry to your
shillings.

After the same manner you reduce shillings to pounds, by the Table, which
begins with 20: and Weights and Measures by the Tables of 16, 4, and 28,
according to their several Denominators

You may likeways in long Divisions, to prevent many turnings of the Rotula, at
one Fetch set down the Nine Multiplies of any two Figures, and so Divide as by
the Table,

Thus. ^

In This lesson I put 19 to the Stop, and then against 19 on the Fixed; I have
38 on the Moveable, and against 38 on the Fixed, I have 57 on the Moveable.
These I set down, and proceed, seeking 57 on the Fixed I find 76 on the
Moveable, and at 76 on the Fixed, I find 95 on the Moveable; then I set down
76, and 95, also I find at 95 on the Fixed, 14 on the Moveable, and at 14 on the
Fixed, I find 33 on the Moveable, and at 33 on the Fixed I find 52, these
likeways I set down and then in the Last place at 52. on the Fixed I find 71 on
the Moveable, which having set down, I distinguish my nine Numbers into threes
by two Lines.

Now because my 6th. Number is less than my fifth; I understand by that, That
here I must add one hundred, which hundred continues invariable till the Unites
and Tens, of a following Number grow less than those of a preceding, and then
I must add one more to the hundreds,

Having thus made my Table I search in it, for the nearest Number to 79; my
first dividual, and finding 76, The fourth Number I set 4 in my Quotient; and
substracting the Tabular Number 76, from 79 I set down the Remainder 3 under
the 9, of my dividual.

To this bringing down 6, I have 36 for my second dividual; for which looking
in the Table I find 19, the nearest, which being the first number, I set 1, in
my Quotient; and taking 19 from 36, I set down 17 the Remainder under 36, then
bringing down 8 of the dividend to 17; I have 178 for my next dividual; the
next to which in the Table is 171, which because it is the 9th Number, I put 9
in my Quotient, and the Remainder 7, I set under 8, and so proceeding after the
same manner with the two subsequent Figures of the dividend; I find my Quotient
to be 41939, and my Remainder to be 16.

After the Method here, proposed for making your little Table, You may Examine
the exactnes of the Tables of common Divisors, and so understand, whether upon
Occasion you may trust them or not.

Section 3d. Showing how to Divide by any Number of Figures whatsoever.
In this part, having first Determined the first Dividual observe whether the
divisor and dividual be equal in Number of places. For if they are equal, you
must Refer, or Compare, the first two of the Divisor to the first two of the
Dividual: But if the Dividual have one Figure more than the Divisor; you must
refer the first two of the Divisor to the first three of the Dividual.

Then you must (either by the first or 2d. Method, of Dividing by two Figures)
Find out how often the foremost two Figures of the Divisor is contained in the
Respective Figures of the Dividual, (whether the foremost two or three;) And
having found your Quotient, you must set it under the Divisor (at convenient
distance before the following Product) with the sign of Multiplication (to
wit, x,) after it, and after that the Letter d, and after that the sign of
equality to wit (=) for instance, suppose the Figure found for the Quotient
were 7, you must under the Divisor, as you see in the following Example, Set it
down Thus, (7 x d=) which signifies that 7 times the Divisor is just equal to
the Number that follows the sign of equality: This done, Multiply the
Divisor by the Figure found, and set the Unites of the Product under the last
Figure of the Dividual, and the rest in Order.

If this Product do not exceed the dividual, then you are sure that the Figure
found is the true Quotient Figure, for which cause you must write it in the
Quotient, and then having Subtracted the Product from the dividual; you must
bring down the next Subsequent Figure of the Dividend to the Right of the
Remainder, so have you a Second Dividual.

But if the Product should happen to be greater than the Dividual (which will
sometimes fall out) do not Expunge it; (for it may be afterward useful) but
abate an Unite from the Coefficient allreadie found; so have you the true
Quotient, by which when you have found it, Multiply the Divisor, and Substract
this last Product from the Dividual, and Proceed conform to the Directions
allreadie given. This is the far shortest Method of any I know for finding the
true Figure for the Quotient; and does abundantly compense the little Trouble a
Man is at in making sometimes two Products, by freeing a Man from all that
tedious Chain of thought, by which he is Obliged to compare every several
Figure of his Divisor, with the Respective Figures of his Dividual,
especially, when they consist of many Figures. Only when you see the first
Remainder, or the Difference betwixt your Tabular Number, and the Respective
Figures of the Dividual) palpablie too little to make the next Subsequent
Figure of the Dividual equal, or answer as many times the third of the
Divisor, you may abate an Unite from the Quotient Figure, allreadie found
before you make your first Product.

EXAMPLE.

^

In this Example, because the Divisor and first Dividual, have an equal Number
of Places, I refer 15 the first two of the Divisor, to 76 the first two of the
Dividual: And then by the Rotula, or little Table made by the help of the
Rotula, I find 5 x 15, or 75 in 76: But then the Remainder, which is but 1,
makes the third Figure of the dividual but 12, which being less than 5x9 (the
third Figure of the Divisor,) I abate an Unite from the first Quotient, and so
take it only 4 times; then I Multiply the Divisor by 4 and disposing the
Product duly under the Dividual; I Substract the Product from the Dividual, and
to the Right of the Remainder, I bring down the next Subsequent Figure of the
Dividend; so have I a second Dividual. Now the Divisor having but 4 Figures,
and the second Dividual 5, I refer the first two of the Divisor to the first 3
of the Dividual, to wit, to 122. Wherefore searching the little Table for 122;
I find 120, the nearest to it, which would yield me 8 for my Quotient, but the
Remainder 2, makes the fourth Figure of the Dividual, only 28 which is much
less than 8 x 9 the third Figure of the Divisor, wherefore I content my self
with 7 for the true Quotient and proceed as before.

In the third Dividual, I find by the foremost 3 figures 109 that I may have 7
times 15 (the foremost two of the Divisor) in that part of the Dividual, but
looking back on 7 x d under the 2d Dividual I find, That that Product exceeds
the 3d Dividual, for which cause I take 6 instead of 7 for my true Quotient.

In the 4th Dividual, I have showed you how to do, in case you should chance to
take your Quotient an Unite bigger than it ought to be: For finding 9x d
greater than the Dividual, I Substitute 8x d under it, and Substracting that
from the Dividual; I have 1211 for my last Remainder.

I have now gone through the 4 common Rules, and if what I have said be well
understood, a Man may propose as many Examples as he pleases, and perform them
with the like ease: And I am confident, that a Man of a very ordinary Capacity
may learn what concerns Addition and Substraction of all sorts or Species:
Multiplication in Integers; And Division by one or two Figures in the space of
one Hour, or at most of one Hour and a half, so that he has remaining two
hours and a half, for accomplishing this last lesson of Di^i^on by more
Figures, which I doubt not but he will be able to do in shorter space, so that
conform to what I undertake, the Scholar learnes the 4 Com-Rules in the space
of 4 Hours.

But before I leave this, and to show you how Copiously useful the Instrument
is, I will set you a Method of Dividing by many Figures, in which you may
(without Table or setting down a Product) come both at your Quotient and
Remainder, after the same manner as you ought to do, if you were Dividing by
the Pen.

To this purpose you may provide your self at first with a Label of Cart or
Paper, writting on the right edge of it, the Figures beginning at 0, 1, 2, and
ending at 9, PREFIXES 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
This we call the Labell of prefixes as you have it in the Margin.

Now suppose the following Example were proposed, having first rectified the
Rotula, and with a Point determined the first Dividual proceed after this
manner.

^

First I bring 15, the foremost two of the first Dividual on the Moveable,
(with a little Peg to stay there till I have found my Quotient,) to the first
Cell, in which 1 (The foremost Figure of my Divisor) is a Coessicient, and
there I have in the same Cell, 9 for a Quotient, and at the Stop, 6 for a
Ptefix; wherefore I lay 6 on the Label of Prefixes over 15, and so (0) the
third of my Dividual, becomes 60: Now because 9 is my Quotient, and 9 is also
the 2d. Figure of my Divisor, I look for 9 x 9 on the Fixed, and finding it
exceeds 60 the 2d: Number of my Dividual. I therefore shift the Point with the
Peg in it forward, to the next Cell of (1) and there having 8 for my Quotient,
and 7 for a Prefix, I alter my prefix to 7, and then consider, whether this
Quotient 8 x 9 the 2d. Figure of the Divisor, exceeds 70, the respective number
of the Dividual, and because 8x9 is greater than 70, I shift my standing Peg
once more to the next Cell of (1) and there having 7 for a Quotient, and 8 at
the Stop for a Prefix; I am confident, (that the Remainder being greater than
the Quotient) 7 will serve for all the following Figures of the Divisor, and so
I put 7 in my Quotient, then laying aside your Label till you come to seek a
new Figure for the Quotient. You must in the Subduction observe to take 7 times
every Figure of the Divisor; beginning at the last from the respective Figures
of the Dividual, that is to say the last from the last, and the last save one,
from the last save one, and so forward till you take 7x, the foremost of the
Divisor, from the foremost one or two Figures of the Dividual, according as
they fall out to be one or two. Thus, I first rectify, and take out the Peg,
and because I must take 7x6 of the Divisor from 6 of the Divial, I with my Peg
bring up 7x6 on the Moveable to the Stop, and searching for a Number on the
Moveable, having 6 Unites; I find the first that occurres to be 46 by which I
understand, that I am to carry 4 to wit, the tens of 46, and because I have 4
on the Fixed, against 46 on the Moveable, I understand, that I must set down 4
as a Remainder under 6 the last Figure of my Dividual, and so turning back the
Rotula till 4 on the Moveable appear against (0) at the Stop; I thereafter
write down 4 below the 6 of my First Dividual.

Then I bring up to the Stop, that Point of the Moveable, which is Directly
against 7x8 of my Divisor, and looking as before for 3 Unites I find 6 tens
to, carry, and 3 on the Fixed to set down, these carried, and set down as
becomes I next bring up 7x9 of my Divisor, and at (0) Unites on the Moveable, I
have to carry 7 tens, and on the Fixed (1) to set down under (0) of my
Dividual, of these the 7 carried, and the (1) set down.

In the last place I bring up 7x1 of (...) Divisor, to the Stop, and on the
Fixed I ^^ve 1 (against 15 the foremost two of the Dividual) for my Remainder,
(...) 1, I set under 5, the Unites of the (...) and so having finished the
first Subduction, I rectify and bring down 9 of the Dividend, to the right of
the first Remainder, for a second Dividual.

If you comprehend what I have said on the first, you may easily, and after the
same manner go through with the other there Dividuals, and so perform the whole
business your self.

If the Practitioner curiously observe the several Operationes by the Rotula,
he will discover them to be so Natural, that with a carrefull Practice, he may
come to such a Habit as will render him capable to do his business with the Pen
when he wants his Rotula. Though I must confess; That the ablest Masters are not
capable without it, to do any considerable business with that dispach,
Certainty and Exactnes, and with so little Trouble to the Head; as by the help
of the Rotula, they may perform with the greatest ease.

If any difficulty Occur, in what has been hitherto delivered, such as have
the Opportunity, shall not want what help I can afford them. But because in
what follows, a Previous knowledge in Decimal Fractions, is supposed; If such
as want that find any difficulty, they must be at the pains, or use a Master,
as they find most convenient, for the attainment of that knowledge before they
make any further or Considerable Progress.

CHAP. VI. Concerning COMPLEX NVMBERS.
I Call those Numbers Complex, that consist of Intigers and Fractions, or small
Denominations, such as lib. sh. d. or Stones lib. of Weight and Ounces.
Chalders, Bolls and Pecks, etc. Elnes, Half quarters, or Eight parts, etc.

If instead of these Fractions, or Denominations, you annex the Decimal to the
right of the proper Integer distinguishing betwixt them with this mark ((...))
called a Decimal Line, you may Multiply or Divide, as if the whole Number
represented by all them Figures were an Integer. In adding Decimals, You must
take care that those Figures next the Decimal Line make one Column, and the
rest in order. Thus were I to Join the Decimal of 7sh. which is ^ to the
Decimal of 9d. which is ^ I must state them Thus

And so the Decimal of 7sh. 9d. is ^

Observe that the Decimals for Pence and Farthings, where the last Figure is ^
or ^ as also those for third parts or sixth parts (whose last Figures are
likeways ^ or ^) are all Infinites; Thus the Decimal of one d. is ^ the last
Figure of which may be reiterated in Infinitum, or as often as the Rules of
Operation do require; for which I refer you to my Compendious, but complete
system of Decimal Arithmetic: But least that should not come to your hands I
shall here subjoyn a few Rules.

First you must not limit Infinites short of Decimal thirds.

2ly You must not limit infinites unless they contain one of the Reiterated
Figures; Thus because the Decimal of 4d. is ^ etc. I may upon occasion satisfy
my self with ^ and 8d. being, ^ cannot satisfy my self with ^ but ^ as also the
Decimal for one penny being ^ etc. I can satisfy my self with no less than ^

3ly Infinites in Addition and Substraction, must exceed the longest finite at
least by one Step toward the right Hand, thus, were I to Join one penny viz. ^

To three farthings viz. ^

The Sum would be ^

In which you may observe, that I have Reiterated the last Figure of the
Decimal for one d. twice.

4ly. Infinites must in Addition and Substraction, be equal in Number of
places; Thus were I to set down a Decimal for 4 d. though ^ might serve for 4d.
yet because the decimal of d. is ^

The decimal of 4d. is ^

So that the decimal of ^ 4 d. is ^ throwing away the Cipher after the Decimal,
as a thing of no value.

Lastly, The Sum, difference and Product of infinites is infinite, unless they
end in a Cipher.

Wherefore the Sum, Difference and Product of the last Column or Figure of an
Infinite, must be reckoned on the Segment within the Peg holes of the Moveable,
and not on the whole Circle without; Thus in the last Example you see that 6
and 8, which make 9 on the ^hole Circle, make 10 on the Segment; and therefore
I set, 0, and carry one; Put in all the rest of the Figures, I regard the
whole Circle, but not the Segment; the ^eason, of which is manifest from the
1st. Chapter of my Decimal Systeme.

In Cutting of your Decimals after Operation, you must observe.

First that the Decimal of the Sum, or difference, must in Number of places,
be equal to the longest Decimal of the Items.

Secondly, That In Multiplication the Decimal of the Product, must be equal,
in Number of places, to those of both Coefficients.

Thirdly, That in Division, the Decimal of the Dividend alone, must equal
those of the Divisor and Quotient both together.

Fourthly, All Numbers, either Actually have a Decimal annexed to them, or must
be supposed to have as many Decimal Ciphers as may be necessary, nay Finit
Decimals themselves, must sometimes be supposed to have Ciphers following them;
and on the other Hand Integers, must be supposed to have Ciphers to the left:
For these Additional Ciphers do neither increase, nor diminish the true value
of any Number.

Multiplication by such pure Numbers as 10, 100, 1000, etc. Is done merely by
shifting the Decimal Line of the Multiplicand, so many Steps nearer the Right,
as there are Ciphers in the Multiplier; only if the Multiplicand be Infinite
you must Reiterate the last Figure. Thus were it Demanded; How much would pay
100000 Men, to give them 3 Farthings a Piece? Now the Decimal of 3 Farthings is
^, and because there are five Ciphers in the Multiplier the Answer is ^ So that
312lib. 10sh. will just pay 100000 Men at 3 Far things per Piece; here you have
no Reiteration, because the Decimal is sinite.

But at 4d. per Piece, the Decimal of which is an Infinite, to wit, ^ You must
Reiterate the last Figure, and then you will find the Answer for ten Men to be ^
That is 3sh. 4d. But for 100 ^ That is 1lib. 13sh. 4d. and for 1000, ^. id est
16lib. 13sh. 4d. for 10000, ^ id est 166lib. 13sh 4d. after the same manner you
may by the decimal Tables for pence and shillings, at one look turn any pure
Number into their Proper Integers; Thus were 7000d. to be turned into Pounds,
take the Decimal for 7d. to wit, ^ and by shifting the Decimal Line one Step,
you have the Value of 70d. to wit, ^ which is 5sh. and 10d. But if you shift it
two Steps to the right Hand, you have the Value of 700d. namely ^ which is 2lib
18sh, 4d. and if you shift it 3 Steps, you Reduce 7000d. to their proper Pounds
and shill, namely ^ that is 29lib. 3shill. 4d.

I have contrived a little Pocketbook whereby you may with the same ease
convert any pure Number of the Species Current in this Kingdom, into pound
Scots or Sterling, at one look.

You may use the Table of Ounces to the same purpose, in turning Drops to
Ounces, Ounces to Pounds, and Bolls to Chalders; All which requires an exact
knowledge of Decimals. Example; The Decimal for 6, Ounces or Pecks, is ^ and
consequently 60 Pecks makes ^ that is 3 Bolls, 12 Pecks, but 600 Pecks make ^
that is 37 Bolls and 6000 pecks are just ^ Bolls.

In Division by 10, 100, 1000, etc. Just contrary to Multiplication, you must
remove the Decimal Line so many Steps nearer the lest, as there are Ciphers in
your Divisor: Thus were 2916lib. 13sh. and 4d. to be Divided amongst 10, 100,
1000, or, 10000 Men. You must first set down the Dividend ^ and then the
several shares of 10, 100, 1000, 10000, or, 100000, will appear as follows.

Divisor 10 ^ is 291lib. 13sh. 4d 100 ^ is 29 3 4 1000 ^ is 2 18 4 10000 ^ is 0
05 10 100000 ^ is 0 00 7

I must refer such as desire further Satisfaction in this particular to my
Compendious, but complete System of Decimals

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Rule of 3.
IN the Questions of this Rule, there are allways three Numbers, either
expressly given or suposed, to find a Fourth.

Of the given Numbers, there are allways two of the same sort, Species or
Notion, and these we shall call Relative Numbers, and the other or third
Number, which falls under a different Notion, we shall call the singular
Number: and the fourth Number demanded (which is allways of the same Species,
or Notion with the singular Number) we call the Answer; because, when it is
found, it Answers the Question.

Now to save you the trouble of two Rules, one Direct, and another Reverse: I
shall lay down such easy Directions, as may render a Man capable to Answer
Questions of either, without any such Distinction.

In discerning the Divisor, (which is all the difficulty, and which must
allways be one or other of the Relative Numbers) you must carefully consider,
whether the Answer ought to be greater, or lesser than the singular Number For,

1st. When the Answer ought to be greater than the singular Number, then the
least of the Relative Numbers must be the Divisor.

2ly. But if the Answer ought to be less than the singular Number, then the
greatest of the Relative Numbers must be the Divisor.

Having discovered the Divisor, set it down next your Left Hand, and the other
two, (which we now call Coefficients) at a convenient Distance; the one, (it
matters not which) before, the other after [] which we call the sign of
Proportion.

The Numbers thus disposed, Multiply the Coefficients and Divide the Product,
by the Divisor and the Quotient, yields you the Answer; Only observe, that when
the Divisor is an Unite, there will be no use for Division; and on the other
hand, when one of the Coefficients is an Unite there, will be no Multiplication.

As also, if one of the Coefficients have an Infinite annexed to it, be sure to
make that the Multiplicand.

The following Examples, shall Illustrate what has been said.

EXAMPLE, 1st. Concerning the Prices of GOODS.
IF 3 Else cost 10 L. what will 17 Else cost? In this Example 3 and ^7 are the
Relative Numbers, because they are both of the same sort, to wit, Else, and 10
is the singular Number; ^ow because the Price 17 Else, must ^^e greater than
the price of three Else to ^^it, than 10 L. that is the Answer; ^ust be be
greater than the singular ^^umber; I thereby understand, that 3 ^^e least of my
Relatives must be the Divisor, for which cause I set the Numbers as follows.
Taking instead of it is Decimal ^.

So that the Answer is 59 L. 3sh. 4d.

You see I first Multiply the Coefficients, and then Divide the Product by 3
the Divisor, so have I the Answer: You may convert the Question, and so prove
your Work, Thus,

2d. EXAMPLE.
If 17 Else cost 59 L. 3sh. 4d. what will 3 Else cost?

^

You see in the Division, that I ought to have 3 Figures in my Quotient, as the
Point intimates, of which one ought to be a Decimal, but that being a Cipher I
did not think it necessary to set it down.

3d. EXAMPLE.
At 3 sh. 4 d. per lib. what will ^ lib. of any thing come to?

The Decimal for 3 sh. 4 pence is ^ and that for d.

So that 3 sh. 4 d. is

Then conform to the Rule, the lesson will stand as follows.

^

You see in the lesson, there is no Division, because the Divisor is an Unite.

4th. EXAMPLE.
If 345 Else cost 58 L. 6 sh. o d. what will one Ell cost?

^

^

In this Example, you see that one of the Coefficients, being an Unite: There
is no Multiplication.

5th. EXAMPLE.
If Else cost lib. what will Else cost?

^

Answ. 18 sh. 3. d. and some little more.

Because the last Dividual is the same the Quotient is Infinite.

In this last Example, the Decimal o^ being Infinite; The Product of the dash'^
Figure, is reckoned on the Segment, but the Product of all the rest, is
reckoned on the Integer-Circle,

Item, because the Dividend is Infinite, in Prolongation of the Work I have
Reiterated the last Figure.

6th. EPAMPLE.
At 5 per Cent, what will 347 lib. 13 sh. 4 d. pay per Annum?

In this lesson, observe, that though all the Numbers be of one Denomination or
kind of things, yet (the 5 L. falling under a different Notion, to wit, that of
Interest; whereas the other two, to wit, the Cent. or 100, and 347 L. 13 sh. 4
d. are Principal Sums) the 5 is the Singular Number, and so 100 is the Divisor.

^

In this you have 6 Decimals in the Answer to wit, four for those of the
Coefficients, and two for the Ciphers of the Divisor.

7th. EXAMPLE.
At 4 sh. 10 per Crown, how many Pounds Sterling. must one have for 758 Crowns.

^

Answer. 184 lib. 17 sh. 8 d.

8th. EXAMPLE.
If 40 Men are able to finish a piece of Work in 8 Days, how many may do the
same in 5 Days? here, because the Answer ought to be greater than the singular
Number 5, the last of the Relatives is the Divisor, and so you are free from
the cumbersome Reflections, on a Reverse Rule.

^

9. EXAMPLE.
If the penny Loaff, ought to Weigh 18 Ounces, when the Wheat sells at 10 sh.
Sterling. per Boll, what ought the same to Weigh, when the Wheat sells at 15
sh. per Boll;

^

In Questions of 5 Numbers, you have, for the most part, two paires of
Relatives, and but one singnlar Number, wherefore you may take any one of the
paires of (...) with the singular Number, to find the first Answer, and that
Answer will serve for a singular Number, for the other pair of Relatives in
finding the last Answer.

9th. EXAMPLE.
At 5 per Cent per Annum, what will 197 L. 15 sh. 8 d. come to in 7 Years? In
this the Relatives are 100 L. and 197 L. 15 sh. 8 d. for the first pair and, 1,
Year and 7 Years for the 2 d. pair, and 5 is the Singular.

^

So that the Answer is 76 L. 12 sh. 9 d. and very little more.

10th. EXAMPLE.
At 2 Dollars per L. Flemish, Exchange at 35 sh, Flemish per L. St. how many L.
Ster. will 666 Dollars come to?

^

In this Division, finding my 3 d. Dividual, the same with the 2 d. and,
(because of the Reiterated Figures of the Dividend) understanding that it will
allways be the same in Infinitum, I therefore Reiterate the 2 d. of my Figures
in the Quotient; to wit, 6, till I have five Figures in all, as the
Dividual-Point Intimates: And seeing I have 3 Decimal in my Dividend, and but
one in my Divisor, I understand that the last two, of my five Figures in the
Quotient, must be Decimals, and the dashed Figure is added, because, (as has
been already said) Infinites cannot be limited under Decimal thirds; so that
my 666 Dollars, makes just 266 L. 13 sh. 4 d. Flem. for my first Answer, and
this must be one of the Coefficients for the 2 d. operation, because in this we
have now two Parcells of Flemish Money, and but one L. Sterling.

^

In this last Operation the third Dividual. viz.. 0000 being less than the
Divisor, I put 0 in my Quotient, and so the Answer is 150 Lib. Ster.

11th. EXAMPLE.
At 5 L. 10 sh. per Cent per An what will the Interest of 756 L. 13 sh. 4 d.
amount to in 7 Years, and 7 Months? ^

Vide. my Compend. system anent Multiplicati-L. In. = on, with an Infinite in
both Coefficients.

The Answer is 317 L. 11 sh. 10 d. very near

12th. EXAMPLE.
Interest at 5 per Cent. What will 456 L. 13 sh. 4 d. (payable 3 Years hence)
be worth in present Money?

^

Add this Interest to its principal, and the 2 d. Operation will stand thus.

^ Ans. 378 L 11 sh. 8 d. and less than d. more.

I shall conclude with an Example of unequal Division, which may be very
useful in fellowship.

13th. EXAMPLE
There is to be Divided amongst 14 Men 458 L. 5 sh. 11 d. with Proviso, that 9
of the Number (whose stocks or hazards were equull) have equal shares, but the
other 5 are to have, one of them share another another another another of an
equal share: The equal share, and consequently the several Fractions of the
equal share, is demanded?

In this you must add the Decimals of the several Fractions in the Question to
9, and so you will find your Divisor to be ^ and not 14 thus ^

The Sum of of all which is

Hence the Question must be thus stated.

^ ^

If any Difficulty occur in these lessons, it may be easily overcome, and at a
very Reasonable Rate, by a little converse with the AUTHOR.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 20, Line 4. read 8 for 6. P. 32. L. 8. R. 9276. for 8276. In the
end of the Product. also the Example Page. 38. is only disorderly set ^r the 9
of the Quotient ought to stand under the 2d. of the Dividend. and the rest in
Order.

At Edinburgh, the Twenty eight Day of November, one Thousand, six Hundred
Nintie Nine Years.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council Having by their Act of the first of
December, one Thousand, six Hundred, Nintie Eight Years, Granted to Mr. George
Brown Minister, and his Heirs and Assign is the sole Privilege of framing,
making and selling his Instrument called ROTVLA AR^^METICA; For the Space of
fourten Years: Fre^^ the Day and Date of the said Act. And Discharged any other
Persons to make and sell the said Instrument, during the Space foresaid without
express Liberty and License, from the said Mr: George and his foresaids: under
the Pain of five Hun^^ed Merks; besides the Confiscation of the ROTVLA's, Mice
or S^ld. The said Lords of his Majestics ^ivie Conncil Do ^ereby Discharge the
Imperting of the said Instrument, or ROTVLA; During the Space foresaid, alse
well as the making or Selling thereof: Under the said Pain of Five Foun^^ed
Merks: (...) the Cons^^cation of the Infir^ments or ROTVLA'S Imported. Also
well as these made or Sold. And declares, this present Act, to the Commence
from the Date of the former Act: Which is the first Day of December: One
The^^^nd, s^ H^nared, Nint^e Light Years.

Extracted by Me, Sic subscribitur, Gilb. Eliot Cls. Sti. Cons.

THE Principles of Geometry, Astronomy, and Geographie.

Wherein is breefely, evidently, and methodically delinered, whatsoever
appertains unto the knowledge of the said Sciences.

Gathered out of the Tables of the Astronomicall institutions of Georgius
Henischius.

By Francis Cook.

Appointed publiquelye to be read in the Staplers Chapel at Leaden hall, by
the Worcester. Tho. Hood, Mathematical Lecturer of the City of London.

AT LONDON Printed by John Windet, and are to be sold in Mark lane, oner
against the sign of the red Harrow, at the house of Francis Cook.

To the Worshipful welwiller and practiser of the Mathematics, M. Bernard
Dewhurst.
YOur courtesies (worshipful) inexpected, have brought me very far in
arrerage with you, and I have thought the time over long, until in some sort I
might break silence, and say so. But better late then never, as the proverb
goes, and yet perhaps as good not at al, as not as it should be. I have
intended many ways according to the courage of a scholar, to be even with
you, or at least to show some sign of gratitude, but it would not be: and
therefore have I rested so long upon hope of some sit opportunity, which now
being fitly offered, I have accordingly taken hold of: I present therefore this
little book unto your Worcester. little I mean in body, but full of substance and
matter: according to the commendacion which the Poet gives to Tydeus, the
Father of Diomedes, and that was that Tydeu^ Ingenio magnus, corpore paruus
erat. A little fellow, but full of edge. I commend it unto your Wor^ although
the praise thereof shall rather proceed from it self, then from me, unless I
could praise it worthily enough. I found it else where, and otherwise attired,
and my labor and charge is only in this, that I have bestowed thereon a new
coat after our English fashion, observing the matter, only altering the
manner. Accept it I pray you none otherwise then I mean it, not as a gift
worthy enough, but as some little sign of a thankful mind, which according
as power shall be answerable unto any good occasion, I will more manifestly
declare in some greater matter.

Your Worships wholly. F. Cook.

To the learned and worshipful. Tho. Hood Mathematical Lecturer of the City
of London.
AMong many your scholars whose diligence have made them more able: I have
adue^tured to put forward my self, being of all other most unfit and
insufficient. My purpose herein is not the gaining of mine own commendation,
but to communicate that with others, which I find beneficial unto my self.
The commendation is wholly yours, from whom as from the Sun we receive, as in
these exercises, all the light we have. And hereunto may be added another cause
of this my bold enterprise, namely, that others, who are better furaished, may
by mine example, being a nouice in these studies, make proof unto the world,
that your labors are not in vain, but that there are many which have greatly
profited thereby, and which in due time (I hope) will break forth, both to the
great commodity of the common wealth, and commendation and credit of the
Mathematical Lecture. Take in good part (I pray you) these my first fruits
of your own planting, and make favorable construction thereof, correcting the
faults, and pardoning my boldenes.

Your Scholar in this ease more forward then able. F. Cook.

To the loving and diligent Auditors of the Mathematical Lecture.
GEntlemen and Goodsellowes, and to loyne you both in one, men and
school-fellowes: I have as you see adventured to she, although both fitted with
the feathers of another, and lying but a low pitch, for want of wings. If I
shall see me to any of you too forward, I crave l^s pardon, it is my first
sault, I meant no ^urt: If any man will charge me of defects, I will confess
my wants, and submit my self unto any reasonable censure. Howbeit I look for
no hard measure from any, frequenting these exercises, either in the school or
abroad, masmuch as they are for the most part tame beasts that belong to this
fold: what the wild and savage forte can or will do I fear not, I can
appeal from them, as in this case, no competent Judges. I have after my manner
dealt plainly with the matter, and I pray you take it as it is, masmuch as
howsoever it de serves, I can set it out no better, For as one says.

They that are learned and have the gift,
may make of matters what they will,
But he that has none other shift,
must go the plain way to the mill.
As in this I have done, Fare you well.

The descriptions of Geometrical and Astronomicall terms.
Of Magnitude. Chap. 1.
THere be 3. kinds of Magnitudes, a line, a surface, a body.

In a line, called by the Greeks (...), we are to consider the definition, the
terms, the sorts.

The definition of a line is two fold: For it is defined to be either a length
without breadth, (...), or else the flowing of a point in length.

The terms of a line are points: and here we are also to note, the
distinction of points, and their denomination.

They are distinguished into points Geometrical, and Physical.

Geometrical points are such as have no part.

Physical points be such as may be apprehended by our sight, of which sort are
motes in the Sun shine.

Points are denominated either centres and poles, whereof the principal are
those of the world, of the Zodiake and of the Horizon: or else the
Equinoctial, and the Solstitiall points.

For the seue rall sores of lines look in the 2. Chapter.
In a Surface, in Greek (...) we are to attend the definition, and the terms.

It is defined to be either an extended and broad extremity, or else longth,
and breadth without depth.

The terms of a surface are lines, whereof in the Chapter following: as also
of the several sorts of surfaces in the 3. Chapter.

A body is defined to be breadth, having depth adjoined thereunto: or a figure
consisting of 3. dimensions.

The bounds or limits of a body are surfaces.

There be many sorts of bodies: whereof in the latter part of the book.

Of Lines. Chap. 2.
ALine is either right or crooked.

In a right line note, the definition, and the diverse kinds thereof.

A right line is defined to be, either the shortest extension from one point
unto another: or else, the shortest of those lines that have the same limits.

There are 4. sorts of right lines.

The first divides a figure into 2. equal or unequal parts.

Right lines dividing a figure into 2. equal parts, are either diameters,
namely in a square, or in a circle: or Axes, as in a Sphere: or else
diagonales, as in Polygons.

Right lines divide a figure into 2. in equal parts, as chordes in circles,
the halfes whereof are called Sines.

The second forte of right lines are those that bound the figure, whereof those
that limit the upper part, are called Corausci: those that bound the nether
part, are called the Rases: those that include the laterall parts, are called
Costa, the side lines.

The third sort of right lines are such, as are elevated either
perpendicularly, or not perpendicularly.

Right lines perpendicularly elevated, are called perpendiculars, plumb lines,
squire lines, orthogonall lines, or lines at right angles.

Right lines not perpendicularly elevated, are called Hypothenusalles or
subtendent lines, also oblique lines: likewise visuall lines, or visuall beams.

The fourth forte of right lines, are such as are equidistant, as paralleles.

In a crooked line consider the definition, and the sorts thereof

It is defined to be the running of a point unto a point, not by the shortest,
but by a longer way.

The sorts thereof are many: whereof some are simple, and some mixed.

Simple crooked lines are such as are made by a point running round, as in the
circumference of a circle, of a semicircle, and of an arc of a circle.

Mixed crooked lines are such as compass not a circle: and they are either
winding, or spirall.

Winding lines are such as in their parts are inequallie elevated from the
midst.

Spirall lines are such as being wound round about either some center in a
place surface, or some pillar, as we may see in cylinders and the scrues of
presses, do never return unto the same point from whence they began.

Of Surfaces. Chap. 3.
SVrfaces are either plane, or Sphericall.

Plane surfaces are such as are limited equally either with right, or else with
crooked lines.

Plane surfaces limited equally with right lines, are such as have either 3. or
4. or more right lines for their limits.

Plane surfaces equally limited with 3. right lines, are triangles, which have
their denominations either from the lines that enclose them, and then they are
said to be of equal sides, of equal feet, of inequall sides and feet: or
else from their angles, and so they are said to be right angled, obtuse angled,
acute angled.

Plane surfaces equally limited with 4. right lines, are either paralle
og^ammes, whereof some are squares, some long quadia^gles, some Rhombes, some
Rhomboides: or else, they are Trapezia, or Tables.

Plane surfaces equally limited with more the^ four right lines, are of many
sorts, as a Pentagon, an Hexagon, etc.

Plane surfaces equally limited with crooked lines, are circles, whose parts
are called arkes, portions, or sections, a semicircle, a quadrant, a segment,
or a sector of a circle.

Arkes are parts of the circumference of a circle separated by chords.

Portions or sections are the greater and less surface of the circle,
distinguished by a chord.

A semicircle is that which is contained under the half circumference, and the
Diameter.

A quadrant is the fourth part of a circle, included within 2. semidiameters.

A Segment or sector of a circle, is a figure contained under an arc of the
circumference, and 2. right lines drawn from the center.

Sphericall surfaces are such, as are limited and contained under inequall,
that is, under depressed and elevated lines.

Sphericall surfaces are either conuexe, or concaue.

Conuexe sphericall surfaces are such, as do bound the body on the outward
part.

Concaue sphericall surfaces are such, as do limit the body on the inward side.

Of Angles. Chap. 4.
AN Angle is made by the alternate or cross meeting of lines or surfaces.

An Angle is either superficial, or solid.

In a superficial angle there are to be considered, the definition, and the
division.

A superficial angle is defined to be the touch of two lines, the one
inclining to the other in one surface.

Superficial angles are divided two ways, for they are considered either by
them selves, or reatiuely.

Superficial angles considered by themselves, are either plane, or sphericall.

Plane superficial angles are such as are drawn upon a plane surface, and
they are either right lined, or crooked lined, or mixed.

Right lined plane superficial angles are such as are made by right lines
only, and those lines are either perpendiculare, whereof a right angle is made,
which is always equal unto the right angle next adjoining unto it self: or
not perpendiculars, whereof is made either an acute angle, less then a right
angle, or an obtuse angle, greater then a right angle.

Crooked lined plane superficial angles are such, as are made of crooked or
bowed lines only.

Mixed plane superficial angles, are such, as one right and one crooked line
does make.

Sphericall superficial angles, are such as are drawn upon the conuexe
surface of the sphere, differing according to the compass of the greatest
circle, described from the very top of the section.

Superficial angles are considered relatiuelye when they are compared with
others, in whose respect they are called joint angles, vertical, alternate,
and opposite angles.

Joint angles are such, as a right line falling upon a right line, makes on
either side.

Vertical angles are such, as the mutual joining together of two lines, does
make on contrary parts.

Alternate angles are such as one line falling upon 2. does make both on the
right and lest hand of either of them, as well within as without.

Opposite angles are those that can have no relation unto any one of the former.

A solid angle is that which is considered in solid bodies, contemed under
more then two plane angles, not situated in one and the self same surface.

Of Bodies. Chap. 5.
THe kinds of the third magnitude which is called a body, are diverse: some
are regulare, others are Irregulare.

Regulare bodies are such as are limited by equal surfaces, the which surfaces
are either turned round, or foulded one toward another.

The surfaces turned round, are either the equal sections of circles, or right
lined figures.

Equal sections of circles, are such as either sil up the whole plane, and by
them the spheres are made, or else they are cut out hollow in the midst, whereof
are made orbs, either vniformed or difformed.

Right lined figures limiting regulare bodies, are either right angled
triangles, whereof Pyramides are made, whose upper part is called the Cone, or
top, and the nether part and plane surface is called the base, or square or
quadrangulare figures on the one side longer, from whence are derived figures
long and broad, as pillars, or cylinders: or else they are of other sorts,
which are infinite, from whence diverse forms and kinds of bodies are drawn.

The regulare bodies contained under surfaces, folded one toward another, are
only these 5. the Tetraedrons, the Hexaedrons, the Octaedrons, the
Dodecaedrons, and the lcosaedrons.

Irregulare bodies are such, as inequall surfaces do limit and describe, the
which surfaces are either turned round, or folded one toward another.

The surfaces turned round and making irregulare bodies, are either the
sections of circles, or else they are inequall right lined figures.

The sections of circles, are either greater then a semicircle, whereof the
lenticulare bodies are made: or else they are less then a semicircle, and
thereby are the Onalles made.

The inequall right lined figures by whose conversion the irregulare bodies are
made, may be of what sort soever, whereby diverse kinds of vessels are framed,
either wanting or exceeding the regulare form.

The Irregulare bodies made of inequall surfaces folded one toward another, may
differ infinitely.

Of the name and definition of the Sphere. Chap. 6.
IN as much as we make often mention of the Sphere, and thereafter do entitle
this present treatise the doctrine of the Sphere, it shall not be amiss to
declare the name, and the definition thereof.

The name is used in diverse significations.

1. It signifies sometime any solid regulare body, limited with one surface
only.

2. Sometimes it signifies an instrument that does instisie the apparences of
heaven, and contains the celestial circles, and is otherwise termed a ring or
material sphere.

3. Sometimes it signifies the whole world, whereunto all the conditions of
the sphere may be applied: For it is a solid body, wherein nature abhors
that any emptines should be giu^: It has a sphericall form running daily
about his own Axis without intermission: It has a point placed in the midst
thereof, namely the earth.

The definition thereof, as it signifies any body, is by Io. desacro baseo,
set down two ways, the one after Encl. 11. Elem. the other out of Theodosius.

The definition thereof taken out of Euclide, contains the Geometrical
description of the sphere: For the sphere is described by the fixed and unmoved
diameter, and by the a^ke of the semicircle, which must be fully brought about.

The definition of a sphere according to Theodosius, determines, first the
orbiculate form, every part whereof is equally distant from the center:
secondly the principal parts, as the conuexe surface which is but one, and
the center, that is, the point in the midst equidistant from every part of the
surface, and the Axis, about which the sphere is turned, and which is limited
by the 2 poles. viz. The North pole or pole Arctick, and the south pole or pole
Antarcticke: and thirdly, the soliditie: For it is a complete body, having all
the dimensions.

The division of the celestial Sphere. Chap. 7.
THe celestial sphere, according to Io. de sacro bosco, admits a double
division, according to substance and according to accident.

The celestial sphere considered according to the substance, is divided into
several orbs, in the which we are to note the number, and the cause.

The number is diversely set down: For the ancientes contenting themselves with
8. orbs only, did distinguish them into the orbs of the 7. Planets, viz, of
and, and the firmament of the fixed stars: And the later Astronomers unto the
time of Alphonsus, into 9. orbs: but the Modern, among whom Purbachius was
the first, added the tenth.

The cause is considered either in the diversity of their number, noted both
by the former and later Astronomers, or in their order.

The ancient Astronomers noted their diverse number, either by the brightness of
the Stars, reconing so many orbs as they perceived to contain any stars:
or by the peculiar motion of each several orb, reconing so many orbs as they
found simple motions belonging thereunto.

The later Astronomers, for instruction and the better reconings sake, added
the ninth and the tenth, as circles necessary for the understanding of the
motion of the 8. sphere, unknown unto the ancient Astronomers.

The order is proved, 1. by the slower motion of the higher, and the swifter
motion of the lower orbs: 2. by the occultation or hiding of the higher
stars, by the lower: 3. by the diversity of apect, either great, or little,
or insensible.

The celestial sphere considered according unto accident, that is, according to
the situation of the heaven, or the course of the stars, is distinguished
into a right, or an oblique sphere.

The right sphere belongs unto those that dwell under the Equinoctial, who
(by reason that the poles of the world, about the which the stars are carried
by the first moveable, have none elevation, as also for that the Horizon
cutteth all the paralleles, under which the stars do go, at right angles)
perceive no reflection in the diurnall motion of the stars.

The sphere is said to be oblique, wherein the O and the rest of the stars
are carried from the East into the West, by an oblique motion, and it is
Septentrionall unto those that have the North pole elevated, and Meridionall
unto those under the Southern elevation.

The partition of the whole world: and the comparison of the celestial, with
the Elementall Sphere. Chap. 8.
THe whole frame of the world is made of some certain and those more
principal and notable parts, whereof there is first the number and the name,
and then the difference to be considered.

The number and name is double: For the parts are either ethereall, or
sublunare.

The aethereall that is, the celestial part (without the which Philosophy
admits nothing to be, although the Divines do add the third, which they
call Angelical, and the Platonickes, intellectual) is that, whereof we
entreated in the 7. Chapter.

The sublunare is that which contains the elementall bodies, and those either
simple, as the fire, the aer, the water, the earth: or else mixed, which are
diverse and innumerable, engendered of the 4. elements, either perfect or
imperfect.

The difference or dissimilitude of the parts of the world is that, whereby
they are distinguished one from another, either in respect of their situation,
or of their dignity, magnitude, motion, or their office.

They are distinguished according to their situation: For the celestial part
has obtained the higher place, the elementall the lower.

Their distinction according to dignity, is noted in the parts contained by
the celestial Region, which parts are bright and immortal, and by the
elementall region, those parts being of their own nature obscure and
decaying: or else, it is noted in the parts containing, whereof the one is
altogether with out alteration, neither increasing nor diminishing, the other
is continually subject unto generation and corruption, and is increased and
diminished.

Their distinction according to their magnitude is considered, in that the
celestial part with the great compass thereof, does cover all things, like
a thing without measure and end: but the elementall part is covered within
the compass of the heaven, the diameter thereof containing the diameter of the
earth, 23. times.

Their distinction according to their motion, is in that the celestial part
has a circulare, and a sphericall motion: the elementall, a right motion, more
imperfect then the circulare.

Finally, they are distinguished according to their office? For of those
things that are engendered in the elementall part, the heaven, working by a
continual motion, is as it were the formal and efficient cause, from whence
life is derived: and the elementall part, which is subject unto passion and
alteration, is as it were the material cause, from whence nourishment does
proceed.

The reason of the sublunare, or elementall Region. Chap. 9.
THe Elementall region, which the heaven encompasseth, comprehends within it
the elements, wherein we are to consider the definition, the number, and the
situation or order.

The elements are simple bodies, as well in respect of the mixed bodies which are
understood to be compounded of them, as of the simple and least parts: as
also in respect of the division, for that they cannot be divided into bodies of
diners kinds (if they be given pure and without mixture. For the use of living
creatures, and things growing does make them impure.)

The elements are 4. in number, found so to be, by sense, and by reasons.

The elements are found to be sour by sense (which the Physicians do sollow):
First for that more simple bodies cannot be showed: 2, nature has allotted unto
them certain places, to the end that other things might by the^ be bred, and
nourished: 3, nothing else can evidently be showed, whereof other things may be
made: 4, in living cretures there are certain parts, agreeable unto the natures
of the several elements.

The Elements are found to be four, by two reasons: the former whereof is
drawn from the number of the four prime qualities, and the four fold
possible knitting together of them. For heat may be joined either with
dryness, which two make fire, or else with moisture, which two do make up aer:
and cold may be joined with moisture, as it comes to pass in the water: or
with dryness, as in earth. The later reason is taken from the four fold
difference of the right motion: For the elements are directly moved, either
upward or downward.

Such things as move upward as light things do, are said so to do, either
simply, as the fire, which is the lightest of the rest: or respectiuelie, as
the aer, which is lighter then the water, or the earth.

Such things as move downward, as heanye things do, are said so to do, either
respectiuelie, as the water compared unto the fire, and aer: or simply as the
earth, which is the heauiest of all the rest.

The situation and order of the Elements, is found either by their motion, or
else by the communication of their qualities.

And first by the motion: For inasmuch as the fire and the aer do naturally
move upward, the fire shall occupy the highest place: the aer, an upper place:
and for that the water and the earth do naturally move downward, the water
shall possess a lower place, and the earth the lowest.

Again, the order of the Elements is found out by the communication of their
qualities, for it were unfit that such things as are merely contrary, but such
as in some sort can agree together, should be nigh one another. The fire
therefore shall be joined unto the aer, by reason of the heat common unto them
both: the aer unto the water, by reason of the common moisture: and the earth
unto the water, by reason of coldness common to them both.

The two fold differences, of the celestial motions. Chap. 10.
THe whole frame of the world is carried round about, with 2. motions, each of
them being, distinguished from the other in name, and in reason.

The one of them is called the first and universal motion: likewise the
diurnall or worldly motion, because it brings the day unto the world. For in
this motion the and all the celestial bodies do every day arise and set: they
call it also the violent, and rapt motion, because by the violent swiftnes
thereof, it carries with it the rest of the Spheres.

The other is called the second and particular motion, altogether contrary unto
the former, as by which all the particular orbs do resist the universal
motion. They call it also Sinister motus, the motion to the left hand, as the
former is in like sort called dexter, that is, the motion to the right hand.

The 2. motions are also distinguished according to the reason or the substance
in the which they are inherent: For they differ the one from the other three
ways.

The first difference is in respect either of the whole: For the diurnal motion
is common unto all the celestial bodies: or else of the parts, or stars
either fixed or wandering, which have a motion peculiar and propre unto
themselves.

The second difference is either in regard of the situation of the Axes, For
the diurnall motion is made upon the Axe and poles of the world, and therefore
the Equator divides it in the middle: but the propre motion is made upon the
Axe and poles of the Zodiake, and therefore the Zodiake does cut it in the
middle: Or else it is in regard of the position of the terms: inasmuch as the
diurnall revolution is made from the East unto the west, or as Plinte terms
it, from the right toward the left hand: but the propre revolution is from
the West unto the East, or from the left toward the right hand.

The third difference is in consideration of the swiftnes: For the diurnall
motion fulfilleth his course within the space of 24. common hours: but the
propre motion in diverse distances of time, according to the largenes of the
orbs: namely, the orb of the fixed stars performs his circle, in 36000.
years: of in 30: of in 12: of in 2. years: of the in 365. days, and about 6.
hours: of in 384. days, after Pliny: the orb of in as many days as the:
and the orb of the, in 27. days and 8. hours.

The circulare form, and circulare motion of the heaven. Chap. 11.
THe Heaven is circulare in motion, and in figure.

The circulare motion of the Heaven is proved as well by 2. experiments, as by
2. arguments.

The one experiment is taken from the stars of the 8. orb, which both in
their rising and setting, do always keep one and the same habitude, both in
regard of the earth, and one to another: which thing can agree with none other
then a circulare motion about the center.

The other experiment is also taken from the stars of the 8. orb, always
appearing, and retaining in diverse places the same distance from the Poles, and
onestom another: which also agrees with the circulare motion only.

The first argument is derived from the consutation of 2. opinions, whereof the
one supposes that the motion of the heaven is direct and instnite: which if it
were, the stars should vanishe out of our sight: The other, that the stars
in their setting are quenched, and in their rising are lighted again: as
Heraclitus affirmed, which is absurd, both in respect of the motion, which is
perpetual and constant in it self: and of the contrary power, which cannot be
in the earth: as also in regard of our Antipodes, whose West is our East.

The second argument is drawn from the dignity thereof: For the circulare
motion is the most worthy, and more perfect then the right motion, inasmuch as
it breeds no scission or cutting, and is made about the midst of the whole,
not by displacing the whole body, but by the only unchangeable succession of
the situation of the parts.

The criculare figure of the Heaven is proved partly by similitude, and
partly by reasons.

The similitude is this: namely that this sensible world is the image of the
first Archetype, or pattern of the world, who is without beginning or end.

The reasons do contain either the commodity of the circulare figure, or the
necessity.

The commodity consists either in the capacity, or else in the swistnes or
aptnes unto motion.

The capacity was sit for the heavens, in that they were to comprehend all
other things. Fot the circulare figure is the grated of alother, circumscribed
with equal conne^ities.

The s^^st^es or aptnes unto (...), is either belonging unto the di^^nall
motion, called also the right hand monon, nature all unto the (...) storels
unto the second motion, which resists the former.

Their asons drawn from the necessity of the circulare figure, are either in
respect of the whole world: For if the (...) were of any other figure, there
must need^s be some empty place, and a body without a place for elsan regard
of the celestial o^bes, which gather could not be tarned about by diverse
motions, or else they should suffer a scission or cutting in sunder not without
their great hurt.

There is one sarface of the earth and water, and that is round. Chap. 12.
THe earth and the water make one globe, and it is proved by causes either
general, or special.

The general causes belong unto both the elements made up in one form, and
are derived from 3. heads.

First from the signification of the worder For both in common speech, and in
the scriptures, it is called Orbis terra, the Globe of the earth, or the round
world.

Secondly, from the Sphericall form as well of the Heaven, into whose round
compass inasmuch as it is included, it cannot be but it must also be round: as
also of the shadow that this globe does cast forth: For the Masters of
Perspectiue do teach us, that such is the dark body as is the shadow thereof.

Thirdlye, from the natural descending of the portions, either of the earth,
the said portions coveting the center of the Globe, and falling upon the
surface of the earth at right angles: or else of the water, sinking also into
the center of the world, for the which their discending they gather themselves
into a round form, and cannot abide upon a plane surrace.

The special causes are such, as decerne the roundnes of the earth, and of the
water particularely.

The roundnes of the earth is decerned two ways.

The one is according unto Longitude, from the Last toward the West, or
contrariwise, and that either by all the stars, which in diverse places do not
appear at the same instant: or else, che^sely by the, whose Eclipse falls out
at one and the same time, but by those in the East reconed one way, by those in
the West, another.

The other is according unto Latitude, from the Equator toward each pole,
gathered by the unlike elevation of the Pole, and inequall quantity of the
days, both which increase unto those that go from the Equator toward the
North or South.

The roundnes of the water is decerned by tokens derived from the swelling of
the drops, either hanging, or thrown upon the dust, or laid upon the moss
of boughs: as also from the swelling of the Sea, by means whereof the Land
cannot be seen from the Ship below, although from the maine top it may:
and again if any shining thing be sastened to the top of a ship saying fair
from the shore, it deseendeth by little and little, according as the Ship
runs further off, and at the last is hidden from the sight.

The situation, immobilitie, and magnitude of the terrestrial Globe. Chap. 13.
THe earth or globe of the earth and water, has situation, rest, and magnitude.

The situation as being in the center, or the place of the world farthest
distant from the extremities thereof, is proved by arguments either direct, or
indirect.

The direct are derived from the nature of the broken parts, expressed either
Physicallye, or Astronomically.

Physically, because wheresoever they are about the earth, we alwates observe
them, that of their own inclination they tend downewarde. But the center is
the lowest place.

Astronomically, inasmuch as all the semidiameters of the world, by which
heavy things descend, are continued through the center of the world, and
there they cut one another. So that where the section is made, there must needs
be the place of the earth.

The indirect arguments consist in two suppositions.

The one, that the earth were in the Axis of the motion of the Heaven toward
one side and then should be taken away the apparent reason of the middle
Heaven: the reason of the shadows Equinoctial, Solstit^all, and plagall: and
the reason of the universal Equinoctialles.

The other supposition, that the earth were without the Axis, removed from the
poles, either to the East or to the Westwarde, and then shall be taken away, both
in the rising and setting, the equal quantity both of the dares, shadows,
and stars.

The Rest of the earth excludes al local motion, either right or circulate.

The right motion is that which is made from the midst, and it is either
natural and peculiar unto the earth: For otherwise it should come to pass
that heavy things should ascend: or else it is violent, some outward thing
insorcing it: For otherwise it should come to pass, that the earth should
forsake the center of the world.

The earth has no circulare motion, neither from the West to the Eastwarde, as
some have thought: For if it had, all things that are moved in the aer, should
always be moved to the westward: Neither from the last to the Westward, by the
d^^n nall motion: For then it should be an harder matter to travail toward the
East, then toward the west.

The magnitude of the earth is nothing, being compared either with the whole
world, whereof it is the center, which is proved by Mathematical instruments
that agree with the center of the world: For they at one time, and through the
same sight hole, show two Stars opposite in the Diameter: or else being
compared but with the orb of the which is proved by the equal spaces of the
days and nights.

The measure of the compass of the earth. Chap. 14.
THe circu^ference of the Globe of the Earth and water is found out by the rule
of four proportional numbers, in which rule 3. numbers are given, and the
fourth is unknown.

The three numbers given, which contain the proportion of a segment of a
celestial circle unto the like space on the earth, are: 1. the difference of
Latitude: 2 the viatorie distance: 3. the circumference of the whole heaven.

By the difference of Latitude is understood, so many celestial degrees, as
any terrestrial places are distant asunder.

The viatorie distance, is that terrestrial space of way, that is answerable
unto one degree, or any other difference of Latitude, and it is found out 3
manner of ways.

First, by the distance of any two places upon the earth, situated under one
meridian, the said distance being precisely tried.

Secondly, by the latitude of both places, either observed by instruments, or
taken out of Tables.

Thirdlye, by subducting the less out of the greater: for so the difference of
latitude shall appear, whereunto the space of way known between the places
given, shall be answerable. Whereby unto each degree of a great circle in the
heaven, there are answerable upon the earth after Ptolemee, furlongs 500.
passes 62500. greater leagues 15. After Eratosthenes, surl. 700. pass. 87500
leag. 21..

The circumference of the whole heaven (containing 360. gr.) is the 3. number
in the proportion: 1, for that of a little and of a great globe, there is the
like reason: 2. because the terrestrial meridian has the same center with the
celestial.

The fourth number of the proportion, that is the circuit of the greatest
circle in the earth, has 2. considerations.

The first is the manner of the searching thereof, and that is, first by
multiplying the third number, that is, the circumference of the heaven by the
second, which contains the space of way upon earth: and then by dividing the
product by the first, which is the difference of latitude.

The second consideration is of the quotient, or manifestation of the content,
which according to Prolemee is miles 22550. furl. 180000. pas. 22500000.
greater leagues, 5400. according to Eratosthenes, miles 61250. furl. 252000.
pass. 61250000. greater leagues 7875.

The measure of the Diameter, and Semidiameter of the earth, as also of the
Area and Surface thereof. Chap. 15.
IN measuring the terrestrial Globe, we conder either the Diameter, or the
Semidiameter, or the Area, or the connex surface thereof.

The Diameter is measured by the proportion thereof unto the whole
circumference, by the rule of four proportional numbers, wherein again three
are given, and the fourth is unknown.

The three numbers given, being throughlye known and understood, must be
duly placed, and they must contain two things.

The first is, the proportion of the circumference of a circle unto the
Diameter thereof, which is tripla sesquiseptima: that is to say the
circumference is unto the Diameter, as 22. is unto 7.

The second is the greatest circuit of the earth in any measure, which was set
down in the 14. Chapter.

The fourth number of the proportion being unknown, is the Diameter, which is
sought, first by multiplying the third by the second, which is 7. and dividing
the product by the first, which is 22. then by subducting the 22. part (which
comes forth of the division of the circumference by 22.) out of the
circumference, and dividing the remainder by 3. whereupon arises the content
of the Diameter, after Ptolemee containing miles 7159 (...). furl. 57272 (...).
pass 7159090 10/11 greater leag 1718 (...). After Eratosih. m^es 19488 7/11
fur. 80181 (...). pass 1948863 (...). greater leag. 2505 (...).

The ^emidiameter is the distance between the conuex surface of the earth, and
he center thereof (which some do imagine to be the place of helly the said
distance is found two wa^es.

1 By the proportion of the circle unto the Semidiameter, which is s^^tuple
over and beside 1/14: or as 44 is unto 7.

2 By dividing the Diameter into two parts: by which means it shall be found
to contain after Ptolemec, miles 3579. furl 28636 passes, 3579545 greater
leag. 859 1/11;. After Eratosthenes, miles 9744. furl 40090. pass. 974431.
greater leag. 12^2.

The Area or plane is found by multiplying half the circuit of the earth
taken in any known measure, by the Semidiameter thereof.

The conuex surface that covers the whole earth, is found by multiplying the
terrestrial Area or plane, by 4.

The general definition and division of the circles. Chap. 16.
IN as much as the surface of the Heavens is spherical, and their motion
circulare, therefore for the better conceiving of the reasons of the celestial
motions, they are distinguished into certain circles as parts, whereof we are
to show the names and the division.

In the names we are to consider their acception, and their diversity, being
notwithstanding all one in signification.

The acception of the name Circle, is of two sorts, Geometrical, and
Astronomicall.

The Geometrical acception, is when a circle is taken for a plane figure,
which one line equally distant from the center does encompasse.

The Astronomicall acception is other as it signifies a circular line, or a
circumference wanting breadth: or else a circulare surface, which has breadth
thereunto adjoined.

The diversity of names all one in meaning, is when circles are called
(amongst diverse Authors) threads, compasses, orbs, segments, rings, paralleles
and equidistant lines.

The division of circles is diversely delivered by the Greeks and Latins, in
three respects.

First in respect of the material sphere, within the which some of the circles
are not placed, and are therefore called extrinsecal, sixed, and manisold, as
the Horizons and the Meridians: others are placed within the sphere, and are
therefore called intrinsecall, moveable, and singular, as are the two polares,
the Equator, the zodiak, the two colures, and the two tropickes.

Secondly, in respect of the poles of the world, or the twofolde motion of the
heaven: and in this case the Greeks distinguish them again into three sorts.

The first are paralleles, in number 5. namely the 2. polares, the 2. tropicks,
and the Equator, all which have the same poles with the world, are equidistant
on all sides, and serve the first or universal motion.

The second are oblique circles, in number 3. namely the Zodiak serving the
second motion, the Horizon, the milk way, all the which lie oblique between
the poles.

The third are those circles that are drawn through the poles, and they are
also 3. in number, namely the Equinoctial and solstitiall colure, and the
Meridian

The third division of circles is in respect of their quantity, according
whereunto some circles are called greater, and some less.

The greater circles are in number 6. namelye the Equator, the Zodiak, the^.
Colures the Horizon and the Meridian, all which are equal one unto another,
and cut the sphere into equal pieces.

The less circles are in number 4. namely the 2. polares, and the 2. tropicks,
which are not all of them equal one unto another, neither divide they the
sphere into two equal pieces.

Of the greatest circle containing the measure of the first motion. Chap. 17.
THe whole heaven or universal frame, turned round by the first motion, does
in the middle place between the 2. poles, desscribe a certain circulare
compass, whereof we are to consider the name, the definition, the commoditye.

The name thereof is diverse: for it is sometimes called (...), Aequidialis,
that is, if we may so term it, equidiall, sometimes the line or the orb of
the equalitye or equation of the day: sometimes the Equinoctial and Equator:
and sometimes the girdle of the first motion or moveable.

The definition thereof is that, wherein the magnitude, situation, and equal
conversion thereof are contained.

The magnitude thereof is considered, in that it is the greatest circle, and
has these 2. proprieties, the one, that it divides the sphere into 2. equal
parts, the other, that it has the same center with the world.

The situation thereof is in the midst between both the poles of the world, in
which respect it differs from the rest of the paralleles, and oblique circles.

The equal conversion thereof, is that perfect revolution which it fulfilleth
within the determinate space of 24. hours.

The commodity thereof is great and manifold, and it is either Astronomicall,
or Geographicall.

The use thereof in Astronomical matters, is seen chiefly in 4. things.

First, by the help thereof we understand the measure of the first motion, and
thereby recon the time, which is the measure of the first motion.

Secondly, it helps us in the finding out of the Equinoctialls, and that in
two respects.

The one, in respect of the whole Earth. For every Horizon of every country
divides the Equator only of all the paralleles, into 2. equal pieces,
whereby it comes to pass, that when the is in the Equinoctial, the day and
the night throughout the whole world are equal.

The other in respect of certain Regions. For those that dwell under the
Equator, in what part of the heaven soever the is, have always the
Aequinoctium, or the day and the night equal.

Thirdly, thereby we find out both the situatio^ of the Stars either toward the
North, or toward the South, because it distinguishes the North part of the
world from the South: as also their declination, either Septentrionall or
Meridionall.

Fourthlye, through the help thereof, we search the length of the
artificial day.

The vtility thereof in Geographie is seen in 3. things.

1 Thereby we set every town in his due place, in the terrestrial Globe.

2 It brings us unto the knowledge of all the paralleles, as well celestial
as terrestrial.

3 By the aid thereof we finish the description of the earth.

Of the greatest circle measuring the second motion. Chap. 18.
THe stars of heaven which are moved round about from the West toward the
East, do describe in the midst between their poles, a certain circulare
surface common to all the planets, and a certain circulare line propre unto the
only.

Concerning the circulare surface, there are delivered by the Astronomers to be
considered, the names, the definition, the measure, and the use thereof.

The names are diverse, drawn either from the Greeks, or from the Latins.

The Greeks call it the Zodiake, either of (...), life, for that it is the
path wherein the, (taken to be the author of life) does walk: or else of
(...), a living creature, for that the ancient Astronomers, have beautifyed
this circle with the figures of certain living creatures.

The Latins term it Signifer, as carrying the signs, they call it also the
oblique circle, or the circle leaning a side.

The definition contains the magnitude, the oblique situation, and the
limits thereof.

Concerning the magnitude thereof, this is only to be considered: that it is one
of the greater circles.

The oblique situation thereof, is either in respect of the paralleles, which
it cutteth at inequal angles: or of the irregulare ascensions, and descensions,
or of the poles of the world, from the which it is not equidistant.

The limits thereof are the 2 tropicks, which it touches, and divides the
Equator into two equal parts, declining therefrom by little and little unto
the distance of 31. gr. 28. mi.

The measure thereof is either in regard of the length that it has, or of the
breadth.

The length thereof is 360. gr. and is divided into 6. Northren signs,
as...... and into 6. Southren signs, as......

The breadth thereof is 16. gr as well in regard of the roming of the planets
from the cliptrck, and specially of. and. as also in respect of the principal
consfellations, whereof the greater part declineth from the midst of the
zodiake.

The use is chiefly seen in the obliquitie thereof: for thereby it falls
out, that the parts of heaven, do with the more ease maintain their course
against the first and universal motion: as also that the stars may sometimes
be in the South, and sometimes in the North, for the greater benefit of the
inhabitants of the earth.

The circular line propre unto the only, has diverse names, with the
definition and commodity peculiarly appertaining thereunto.

It is called the wheeling, the way, the course, the place of the, the
Eclipticke line, also the burnt line, and the division of the zodiak.

The definition thereof, is that whereby it is called a greater circle,
dividing the breadth of the zodiake into 2. equal parts.

The commodity thereof is noted as well in designing the Eclipses of the and,
which never happen but when both of them are under or very near the Ecliptic
line; as also in distinguishing of the 4. quarters or seasons of the year.

Of certain terms whereby the stars have relation unto the aforesaid
circles. Chap. 19.
THe whole number as well of the sixed stars, as also of the planets, has
relation both to the Equator, and to the Zodiak.

They have a twofold relation unto the Equator, either in regard of the
orbiculare longitude of the Equator, or of the laterall position, thereof.

In the orbiculare longitude of the Equator we are to note the names, and the
definition.

It is sometimes called the longitude of a star: and sometimes the right
ascension.

It is defined: The ask of the Equator comprehended between the head of, and
the section of a great circle passing through the poles of the world and the
true place of the star.

The lateral position has also name, definition, and division.

It is called the declination of a starte.

It is defined to be: The arc of a great circle, passing through the poles of
the world, and the true place of the star, the said arc being intercepted
between the Equator, and true place of the starie.

It is divided into the Septentrionall, and Meridionall declination.

The relation that the stars have unto the Zodiake, is also two fold, either
according to the Longitude of the Zodrake, or else according to the transuerse
distance toward either of the Poles.

In the Longitude of the Zodiake we are to consider the name, and the
definition.

It is called Longitude: For that it is recoued longwaies on the circumference
of the Eclipticke: it is also called the true motion of the Star.

It is defined to be the Arc of the Zodiake, intercepted between the head of,
and the section of a great circle passing through the poles of the Zodiake, and
the true place of the star.

In the transuerse distance we are to note the name, the definition, and the
division.

It is called Latitude, because it is reconed according to the position that it
has from some one side of the Ecliptic.

It is defined to be the arc of a great circle, drawn through the poles of
the Zodiake, and the true place of the star, the said Arc being intercepted
between the Zodiake, and the center of the Star.

It is divided into the Septentrional Latitude, when the stars are under the
northerly signs: and into the Meridionall Latitude, when they are in the
Southerly signs.

Of the propertion and supputation of the declination of every point of the
Eclipticke, or the regard of the parts of the Zodtake, unto the Equator.
Chap. 20.
IN the declination of any point of the Eclipticke, 2. things are to be
observed: the proportion, and the supputation.

In the proportion we may note also 2. things: For either they have none
obliquation, or else their obliquations are equal.

Those that have none obliquation, are the head of and, as being the common
intersections of the Equator and the Zodiake.

Those that have equal obliquations, are such as are equally distant from the
Equator, and they are either greater obliquations, or else the greatest.

The greater obliquations are those that have any distance less then the
greatest from either of the sections, and of that sort there are always four.

The greatest obliquations are those that have the greatest distance from the
Equator, as the head of, that s, the Somer solstice: and the head of, that is
the winter solstice.

The supputation is made either by the tables of declinations, or of Sines.

The Tables of declinations are calculated in sundry places by Astronomers,
and they consist of the 2. sides, the Area, and of the two extremities or ends.

The sides are either at the right hand, or at the left: that at the left hand,
to be entered into, when you have the sign in the top of the table: and that
on the right hand, when the sign is in the foot thereof.

The Area is that, wherein at the common angle the declination is found.

The 2. extremities are those that contain the signs: of which extremities,
the one is called the top, or upper part: the other the foot, or the nether
patte of the table.

The supputation that is made by the table of Sines, is performed by the help
of the rule of 4. proportion all numbers, wherein 3. numbers are given, and
fourth is to be sought out.

The 3. numbers given, must contain the right sine of the whole quadrant, or
of the semidiameter: the right sine of the greatest declination of the: and the
right sine of the distance of the point of the Eclipticke given, from the first
section of the Zodiake and the Equator.

The fourth number produced by multiplitation and division, is the right sine
of the declination sought, whose subtended arc declares the number of degrees.

Of the 2. circles called the colures, distinguishing the Equinoctial and
Solstitiall points. Chap. 21.
FOrasmuch as there are certain points of the Zodiake and the Equator more
notable then the rest, therefore the Astronomers have thought good to fit unto
those points 2. Circles, whereof we may consider the reason of their name,
their definition, their number, their figuration or description, and their use.

They are termed colures, that is imperfect, in 3. respects.

1. Because they appear always incomplete, or maimed, the which thing
notwithstanding seems to be common with diverse other circles.

2. Because they have some parts that do never arise.

3. Because they are carried about after an imperfect manner, and not according
to the position of Longitude, as the motion of the Heaven is.

The definition contains their magnitude, their intersection, and their
motion.

As touching their magnitude, they are of the number of the greater circles.

As touching their intersection, they cut one another in both the poles of the
world, at sphericall right angles.

In their motion, they are moved together with the sphere.

Their number is two: whereof the one passes through the Equinoctial points
and the poles of the world, and is called either the equinoctial colure, or the
distinguisher of the Equinoctialls: the other passes through the solstitiall
points, and the poles both of Eclipticke and of the world: and is called both
the solstitiall colure, the distinguisher of the Solstices, and also the circle
of the greatest declinations.

Their figuration is described by the semidiameter of the world, whose
revolution being fullye performed through the poles of the world and the
Equinoctial points, makes the Equinoctial colure, but passing through the
poles of the world, and the solstitial points, it makes the solstitiall
colure.

Their use is manifold, but principallye in 3. things.

1. In distinguishing the Equinoctial and Solstitiall points.

2. In reconing as well the quantity of the greatest declinations of the, by
the arc intercepted between the Equator and the Eclipticke: as the space
comprehended between the poles of the world, and the poles of the Ecliptic,
which is always equal unto the arc of the greatest declination.

3. For better understanding of the ascensions and descensions of the signs.

Of the Meridian. Chap. 22.
THe carried about by the first motion, when it is at the highest, designeth a
point of a circle, whose definition, variety, and office, we are to consider.

The definition takes hold both of the names thereof, and of the matter it
self.

It is called the circle Meridian, Meridionall, and Merinoctiall, the circle of
the midday and midnight, either because it divides both the day and the night
into 2. equal parts, the one ascending, the other descending: or else, because
so often as the, according to the first motion, is under the Meridian, it is
then either midday, or else midnight.

The matter it self is that, according whereto it is defined to be one of the
greater circles, drawn through the poles of the world, and the vertical
point of any place given, and standing still when the Sphere is moved.

The variety of the Meridian, by reason of the round figure of the earth, is
either none at all, or manifold.

It is none at all, either in regard of reason, or of sense.

It is none at all in regard of reason, when one place is distant from another
in Latitude only, that is, from the North to the South, or contrariwise.

It is none at all in sense, when one place is distant from another according
unto Longitude, which is from the East unto the West, or contrariwise 36.
scrup. that is, about 300. furlongs.

The variety is manifold in regard also of reason and of sense.

The manifold variety in regard of reason is, when examining the least
distance toward the East or West, we conclude another Meridian: and by this
means we may have so many meriridians, as there shall be places at every small
distance toward the East.

The manifold variety according unto sense, is as often as any two places
shall be distant one from another, between East and West, more the^ half a
degree, and by this means we may have so many meridians. as there are half
degrees of the Equinoctial circle.

The office of the Meridiane is twofolde, either Astronomicall, or
Geographicall.

The Astronomicall office thereof is executed two manner of ways.

1. In pointing out the Noones tide, or Midday, either natural or artificial.
2. The diverse habitudes and positions of the stars, following the motion of
the heaven it self, are ascribed unto the Meridian.
The Geographicall office thereof is also of two sorts.

1. By the help thereof the Longitude of all places is calculated: and what
places are more oriental, and which more occidentall. 2. By the aid thereof
we describe in the terrestrial plane, a correspondent merdiane line, for
diverse uses of Astronomicalli Instruments.
Of the Horizon. Chap. 23.
THere is also another circle, which the by the first motion does point out
in the East and West points, whose definition, division, and dignity, is to
be considered.

The definition stretches it self both to the names thereof, and to the matter.

It has diverse appellations: and is sometimes called the Horizon, Finitor,
Finiens, as limiting our sight, and sometimes the compass or circle of the
Hemisphere of diverse regions.

The matter it self attends the description of the center or pole thereof,
the circumference and the magnitude.

The center or pole of the Horizon, is the vertical point of each place,
distant from the Equator so much, as the poles of the world are distant from
the Horizon.

The circumference of the Horizon is that, which the semidiameter of the world
in his full revolution through the points of the East and West, and the rest
of the brymme of Heaven, describes.

The magnitude of the Horizon is considered, in that it is one of the greater
circles, dividing the world (in regard of sense) into 2. equal segmentes,
whereof the one is called the upper, the seen, or the diurnall segment, the
other, the lower, the hidden, or the nocturnall segment.

The division of the Horizon is considered, in respect of the Equator as it is
either a right, or an oblique Horizon.

The right, or orthogonall Horrizon has 3. proprieties.

1 With the Equator it has equal angles. 2 It has the pole, or the vertical
point in the Equator. 3 It has the poles of the world in his circumference.
The oblique, bending, or inclining Horizon, is in all things contrary unto
the right.

The dignity of the Horizon, by reason of the manifold use thereof, is great:
For by the help thereof, we learn 6. things.

1 The quantityes of the artificial day and night, and consequently the time
of the rising, and setting of the. 2 The equal hour of the day, the shining 3
The degree of the Zodiak, wherewith any star given does arise and set. 4
What stars do always appear, or are always hidden. 5 The rising and
setting of the stars. 6 The Eclipses of the and, either seen, or not seen.
The division of the Horizon, according to Proclus. Chap. 24.
Moreover, the Greeks deliver unto us a more subtle division of the Horizon:
and it is twofold, the one to be conceived in mind, only, the other falling
within the compass of our sense, or our sight.

Concerning the Horizon to be conceived in mind only, we are to note the
names, the description, the cause.

It is diuerfly named, as either rational, or conceived by reason, by the
Greeks called (...), and also natural.

The description thereof is absolved by a semidiameter, and a circumference and
the Area thereof.

The semidiameter is that line, whereof the one extremity is in the eyes of the
inhabitants of the world, the other extremity is in the or be of the fixed
stars.

The circumference and the Area is the space and compass, which the
semidiameter makes, being carried about by the brimme of that part of the
heaven, that is exta^t above the Horizon.

The cause alleged is, that our sight being inhable to pearce unto the
beholding of all the fixed stars, does conclude that there is a certain circle
in the heaven, that limiteth the things seen, from the things not seen.

In the Horrizon apprehended by our sense, we are to note the names, the
description, the variety.

It is called the Horizon sensible, or perceived by our sense, also the
apparent, and artificial Horizon.

The description is performed by a semidiameter, a circumference, and a plane.

The semidiameter is that line, whereof the one limite is in our eye, the other
is in the end of our sight upon the surface of the earth, consisting of a
thousand furlongs, which end we imagine in a free prospect, to join the
heaven and the earth together.

The circumference and plane is that space and compass, which the aforesaid
semidiameter turning about, does describe.

The variety is common as well unto the Rational, as the sensible Horizon, and
it is either none at all, or else manifold.

The variety of the sensible Horizon is said to be none at all, when the
Horizon does continue all one and the same, and it is either in reason, or in
sense.

The sensible Horizon is not varied in reason, when the places are not any
whit, nor any way changed.

The sensible Horizon is said not to be varied in sense, when the places
distant about 400. furlonges one from another (that is 48 mi.) do not alter,
either the climate, or the length of the days, or the apparences of the
heavens.

The variety of the sensible Horizon is manifold, when the places are varied
more then 400. furlonges, and are situated either toward the East, or West: in
which variety neither the climate, nor the length of the day, nor the
apparences of the heavens are changed with the Horizon: or else they are
situated toward the north or south, wherein together with the Horizo^ both the
climate, and the length of the days, and the apparences of the Heavens are
altered.

Of the two Tropickes. Chap. 25.
THe carried about by the second motion, in his greatest declination from the
Equator by the violence of the first motion, describes certain paralleles,
whereof the general reason, the number, and the offices are to be considered.

The general reason is either in respect of their names, or their definition.

They are named by the Greeks (...), Tropickes, by the Latins Versiles,
conuersius, Vertentes, tourning, and the Solstitiall paralleles.

Their definition contains their quantity and their circumference.

Their quantity is noted, either in respect of the other circles, these being
compted in the number of the less circles, or in regard of themselves, whereby
they are compted equal, in as much as they are equally distant from the center
of the world, being separated the one from the other by the double distance of
the greatest declination.

Their circumference is that round compass, which the, passing through the 2
solstitiall points, does describe.

They are in number 2. the one Septentrionall, the other Meridionall.

The Septentrionall Tropicke is on this side of the Equator (in respect of us)
which we call either the Summer tropicke, for that it passes through the
poinct of the Summer solstice, or^ls the tropic of, because it is described
through the end of, and the beginning of.

The Meridionall tropicke is situated on the other side of the Equator, and is
called either the Winter tropicke, as passing through the poinct of the Winter
solstice, or the tropicke of, because it is drawn through the head of.

The offices and commodities of them, are in number 4.

1 They show the Tropes, that is, the conuersions, or tournings of the, as well
in Summer, happening in our age the 3. and 2. of the Ides of June, as also in
winter, the 3. and 2. of the Ides of December.

2 They show in every situation of the sphere, both the longest day, which is
as long as the diurnall Arc of the Tropicke of, contains hours: and the
shortest day, which is as long as the space of hours, contained within the
diurnall arc of the tropicke of.

3 They poinct out the limits of the course of the, and his greatest
declinations: which are 23. gr. 52. mi. as in the time of Aristarchus and
Ptolemee, or 23. gr. 28. mi. as it is now in our time.

4 They show the burnt zone which they separate from the temperate, and the
midst of the second climate, which they call dia-Syenes, and Anti-dia-Syenes.

Of the 2. polare circles. Chap. 26.
The two poles of the Zodiake, carried about by the regulare revolution of the
universal frame, describe about the poles of the world, two circles, whereof
the general reason, the number, and the use is to be noted.

The general reason offers to our consideration, their name, their
definition, and their accidents.

They are called the Polare circles, either because they are described about
the poles, or by the poles.

Their definition by the Latins, it is made by their quantity, and their
circumference and plane.

Touching their quantity, they are in the number of the less circles, equal
in all places.

Their circumference and plane is described either by lines, drawn from the
poles of the Zodiake, unto the Axe of the world, at right angles, and having
by the daily motion a perfect revolution: or else they are described by certain
semidiameters, drawn from the center of the earth unto the poles of the
Zodiak, and turned about by the diurnall and nocturnall motion.

The accidents of the polare circles do determine either their equality, for
they are paralleles, compared either one with another, in as much as they are
equidistant from the center, or compared with the tropicks, and the Equator: or
else they determine their distance, either from the next tropicke, which is 43.
gr. or from the poles of the world, which is equal unto the greatest
declination.

They are two in number: The one Septentrionall, the other Meridionall.

The Septentrionall Polare circle is described by the North pole of the
Eclipticke: the Meridionall, by the South pole thereof.

The Septentrionall polare circle is called Boreall, North of the North wind
called Boreas, and Arcticke, and Septentrionall, because of the 2.
constellations, the one of the greater bear called Arctos, the other of the
less bear called Septentriones, which are nigh thereunto.

The Meridional polare circle is called Australl, or Southern of the South
wind called Auster, and Antarcticke, ^s opposite unto the Arcticke, and
Meridionall, of the South part of heaven, called Meridies.

Their use is noted in that they comprehend the cold and frozen zones, and the
inhabitants of the earth called Perison, whose shadows go round about them,
and on either side limite the the distances of the poles.

The Polare circles otherwise described according to the Grecians. Chap. 27.
THe polare circles are described, either according to the greatest declination
of the or the altitude of the Pole above the Horizon.

The greatest declination of the, by means of the motion of inclination of the
eight Sphere, is diverse. For it was one in times past, and is found to be
another now: and of such circles, the reason is declared in the Chapter before.

The polare circles described according to the altitude of the pole, require
the consideration of their definition, their variety, their offices, and the
manner of their description.

In defining the Arcticke polate circle, we say: 1. That it is the greatest of
those circles which are always in our sight, that is, of those which we may
see at the same instant: 2. that it touches the Horizon in one point: 3. that
it is altogether above the earth.

In defining the Antarctick polare circle, we say: 1. that it is equal and
parallele unto the Arcticke: 2. that it touches the Horizon in one point: 3.
that it is altogether hidden under the earth.

The variety is manifold, according to the didiuersitie of the climates. For
either they are not at all, as in a right Sphere it happens, where excluding
altogether the polare circles, the Greeks recon 3. paralleles only: or else
they are, and those sometimes either less, equal, or greater then the
tropickes, or else they are equal unto the Equator and the Horizon. For by how
much the pole shall be higher, by so much shall these circles be greater.

The offices and use of the Arcticke circle is, in that it shows the Stars
that never arise ^nor set: of the Antarcticke circle, the con^trary is to be
conceived.

The means of their description is by those Stars, that in any Region do
touch the Horizon.

Of the Milkie circle. Chap. 28.
OF all the circles, there is none to be seen, beside the Milkie circle, which
for that the Greeks do recon among the other circles, we will express the
names, the definition, the causes thereof, and the distinct Stars which make
the same.

The names are diverse: as Galaxia, the Milkie orb or circle, the Milkie Zone
or milkie way. The Arabians dal it Matarati, as it were a broad, space, or
arc that moves.

It is defined to be one of the greater circles, oblique, drawn or stretched
toward both the Poles, most brightly shining, apparent unto the sense,
inequall, both in breadth and in color.

The causes are diverse, and those either fabulous, or natural.

The fabulous causes are in number 4.

The first is taken from the scorching of the, as if the had sometimes made his
motion there, and by his scorching had caused that place to be white.

The second is drawn from the milk of Juno, that running plentifully out of
her pappes, painted this circle of that color.

The third is fetched from the seat and habitation of strong and valiant men,
whom the Poets have placed in this circle.

The fourth is de^iued out of the way of the Gods, as if they passed thereby
unto the palace of Jupiter.

The natural causes alleged (although they be many, yet) are principally,
but 3.

The first by Theophrastus: who said, that it is that joining together, whereby
the heaven being divided into two hemispheres, is as it were by a certain claye
fastened.

The second, by Aristotle: who took it to be a Meteore, set on fire in such
sort as a Comete,

The third is Astronomicall: which affirms that it is a girdle caused by many
little stars, as it were one touching another, in the which concurring in
that Place, the light of the Sun is diffused.

The distinct stars that make it, are cheiflie these: The Arowe: the Eagle:
the bow of: the Altar: the 4. feet of the Centaure: the ship Argo: the head
of the Dog: the right hand of Orion: Erichthonius or the Wagoner, with the
Goat on his shoulder: Perseus: Cassiopeia: and the Swanne.

Of the 5 principal Regions of the world, commonly called Zones. Chap. 29.
THe Universal Globe as well of the heavens, as of the earth answerable
thereunto, is distinguished into certain orbicular tractes, which the spaces
comprehended between the 4. paralleles do make, of which tractes we may
consider the names, the definition, the general number, and their distance one
from another.

Their names are diverse: For they are called either Zones, or swaddling bands,
or girdles, or Mashes, or coasts.

They are defined to be the space either of the heaven, or of the earth,
comprehended between two less paralleles, or else included on every side with
the polare circles.

Their general number is twofolde: For either they are celestial, and so the
causes of the terrestrial, or else they are terrestrial, of the same
proportion with the celestial.

The celestial are either Mean, or Extreme, or between mean and extreme.

The Mean is that Zone which is included between the 2. tropickes, and is cut
in two equal parts by the Equator.

The Extremes or polare Zones, are those whereof (being but 2) the one is called
the Septentrionall Zone, within the Arcticke circle: the other the Meridionall
Zone, within the Antarcticke circle.

The Zones between mean and extreme, are also 2. whereof the one is
Septentrionall, comprehended between the tropicke of, and the circle Arcticke,
and the other Meridionall comprehended between the tropicke of, and the circle
Antarticke.

The terrestrial Zones have the same reason with the celestial, as well in
respect of their number, as in regard of their names.

The terrestrial Zones are also 5. in number, answering proportionallye unto
the 5. celestial Zones, conically marked out by the 4. celestial paralleles.

The terrestrial Zones have the same reason with the celestial, in respect of
their names also: For that terrestrial Zone that is under the mean celestial,
is called mean: those which are under the extremes or polares, are called
extremes septentrionall, or Meridionall: and those which are under the Zones
between mean and extreme, have their name accordingly, and are either
Northerlie, or Southerlie.

The distance one from another is in this manner: the mean or burnt Zone,
according to the Latitude reconed in the Meridian, contains 47. gr. or 705.
miles: the extreme intemperate Zones do each of them according to the said
reconing contain, as many degrees and miles, as the mean: the temperate zones
between mean and extreme, do each of them contain according to the former
reconing 41. gr, or 645. miles.

The difference of the Zones, and the manner how all places Upon the earth, may
be brought within their compass. Chap. 30.
THe difference also of the zones as well celestial as terrestrial, and the
reason how all places upon earth may be referred unto them, is worthy the
noting.

Their difference is to be considered either in respect of their figure, or
their accidental nature.

The figure of the mean is uniform, and for the most part alike.

The figures of the extremes are either of the^ equal to other, yet such, as
that they seem rather to carry the shape of circles, then of zones.

The figures of the zones between mean and extreme, be either of them alike,
and equal unto the other: yet about the tropicks their figure is limited with
a greater compass, then toward the polare circles.

The accidental nature of the zones is that, in regard whereof they are said
to be mean, extreme, and between mean and extreme.

The Mean or burnt zone is divided into 2. parts, whereof the one is situated
under the Equator, the other about the Tropickes.

That part which is situated under the Equator seems to be temperate, and
that for three causes.

1. By reason of the sudden and cross access, and recesse of the Sun. 2.
By reason of the continual equality of the night and day in that place. 3. By
reason of the swift carrying about of the, by the first motion.
That part which is situated under the Tropickes is hardlye to be inhabited,
and that also for 3. causes.

1. For the slow conversion of the. 2. For the doubled proiection of the
Sunne-beames, upon those places. 3. For the great increase of the Summer days
above the nights.
The extreme zones are both of them frozen, by reason of the too much cold
that falls out there, by means of the oblique proiection, and reflection of
the Sun beams.

The zones between mean and extreme are both of them temperate, and are
divided into 3. Regions, whereof one is situated about the middle part
thereof, which we judge simply to be temperate, by reason of the moderate
heat of the, namely, from 34. gr. unto 48. gr. distance from the Equator: the
other 2. regions are about the extremes thereof, the one being about the
tropicks, and so subject unto the intemperate heat of the burnt zone, the
other nigh unto the polares, and therefore subject unto the intemperate cold of
the frozen zone.

The reason how al places upon the earth may be referred unto those zones, has
two considerations.

1. If the places have Septentrionall Latitude, and that less then the
greatest declination of the, they belong unto the burnt zone: if equal, unto
the trop. of: if greater, and yet not exceeding, gr. 30. mi. they belong unto
the temperate zone. If the said septentrionall Latitude be equal unto the
compleme^t of the greatest obliquation, they must be placed under the arctick
circle: if greater, under the frozen zone.

2. If the places given have Meridionall Latitude, the same Judgment is to be
pronounced of them, as of the places under Septentrionall Latitude.

Of the fowerfolde rising and setting of the Stars. Chap. 31.
THe Poets, and for the better part all other Authors, do periphrasticallye
describe the times of things, worthy the noting, by the Stars of heaven,
either rising or setting.

In their rising is to be considered, the definition, the subdioision.

The definition does cheiflie consist of the name, and of the matter.

The name in this place signifies their first apparition unto the e^e, or
their Ascension.

The matter is that according whereunto, the rising of a star is defined to be
the apparition of any star given, which before could not be be seen, as
either being under the Horizon, or hidden by the Sun beams.

The subdiuision also offieth 2. considerations.

1. That the stars do ascend or rise by the vninersall motion from the lower
hemisphere unto the Horizon, either in the morning with the, and then they are
said to have a morning, a diurnall, a cosmicall, or worldly rising: os else in
the Evening at the setting, and then they are said to have an evening, a
nocturnal, a chronicall, or acronychall rising.

2. That the stars do rise by the 2. motion freed from the beams, either
before the rising of the Sun, and then they are said to have an Heliacall
morning rising, which comes to pass in those stars that are flower then
the, or else after the setting of the, and then they are said to have an
Heliacall evening rising, and that is in those stars, that are swifter the^
the.

In the setting of the stars there is also offered the definition, and the
subdiuision.

The setting is defined to be: the occultation or hiding of any star given,
either by the depression thereof under the Horizon, or by the ingression thereof
into the beams of the.

The subdiuision consists in their setting and withdrawing from our sight,
which is done two manner of ways.

1. By the first motion they descend from the upper hemisphere unto the lower,
either in the morning which is done cosmically at the rising of the Sun, and
that setting, as the rising also, is referred unto the, and those fignes of the
Zodiake which the possesses: or else in the evening, which is done chronically,
at the setting of the, and this setting, as also the rising, is referred unto
all the stars generally.

2. By their propre motion at their entrance into the beams of the Sun,
either before the sun rising, that is, cosmicallye, which happens only
unto the stars that are swifter then the, ot else after the setting of the
Sun, that is, chronically, which belongs unto those stars only, that are
slower then the.

Another more easy and perfect distinction of the risinges and settinges, with
the exposition of certain principles which are to be Understood for the reading
of Authors, concerning the rising and setting of the Stars, taken out of
Ptolemee, and the later Astronomers. Chap. 32.
FOr the easier understanding of the Poets and other Authors, which by the
rising and setting of the stars do circumscribe the times, 4. things chiefly
are to be known.

1. The latitude of the place whereof the speech is made, which may be gathered
out of the Tables of the Regions, set down in all Geographicall writings.

2. The place of the in the Eclipticke at any time, which the ancient Records
do minister, where notwithstanding you must note, that our age does differ from
former times: and that the in our age does enter into the heads of the signs,
sooner almost by 6. days, then in the ancient times.

3. What signs are opposite one unto another: viz. to: to: to: to: to: and to.

4 The difference of the rising, or of the setting.

The rising is either Heliacall and of the Morning, or Acronychall and of the
evening.

The Heliacall or morning rising, is either true or apparent.

The true Heliacall rising is when a star joined with the Sun, does
together and at the same instant arise with him in the morning.

The apparent Heliacall rising, is when the star does ascend and begin to
appear at the dawning, and before the Sun rising.

The Acronychall or evening rising, is also either true, or apparent.

The true Acronychall rising, is when a star precisely rises, at the very
instant of the Sun setting.

The apparent Acronychall rising is when after the setting of the Sun, the
star being freed from the beams thereof, shall make his first appearance in
the twilight.

The setting of a star is also either Heliacall, or Acronychall.

The Heliacal setting is either true or appare^t.

The true Heliacall setting is when a star at the rising, does at the same
instant set in the opposite part of the world, which before was called the
morning star.

The apparent Heliacall setting is when in the morning, somewhat before the
rising, the star is newly seen to set.

The Acronychall setting is in like sort either true or apparent.

The true Acronychall setting is when at the setting, the star also sets,
which all the mean time was called the evening star.

The apparent acronychall setting is when after the setting of the, the star
does not set at the same instant with the, but by reason it is hidden by the
beams of the, it appears no more until the morning that it arise again.

Of the Astronomicall rising and setting of the signs: or as the Greeks call
it, (...). Chap. 33.
THe rising, the coming unto the Meridian, and the setting of the signs, or
of any point of the heaven, is either poetical, or astronomicall.

The Poetical or vulgar, is when the reason of the apparition, or occultation
of the signs, is only in their comparison with the, which was handled in the
31. and 32. chapters.

The Astronomicall rising, culmination, and setting of any star or point of
the heaven is that which defines the proportion of the time and space, both
when and how great it is, wherein the aforesaid things are performed, either
in a right, or an oblique sphere.

In the rising are to be considered the definition, and the bipartite division.

The definition is either of the name, or of the matter.

The ascension is called the rising, which we measure by the coascende^t arc
of the Equator.

The matter is that, according whereunto it is defined, to be the arc of the
Equator, comprehended between the sign rising, or the East part of the Horizon
that contains the sign, and the head of, the which arc is to be accounted
according to the orderly succession of the signs.

The consideration had of the division, is that either a greater portion of the
Equator rises with the sign, and then it is said to have a right ascension,
because it makes righter angles with the Horizon: or else that a less portion
of the Equator does ascend therewith, and then it is said to have an oblique
ascension, by reason of the more oblique angles that it makes with the Horizon.

The culmination is defined, either the passing of some poinct of the Zodiake,
or of the world by the Meridian circle, or else the degrees of the Equator,
which with the portion of the Zodiake given, pass through the Meridian.

The setting of a sign or of any poinct of the heaven, offers 2. things
unto our consideration, the definition, and the diversity thereof.

The definition is either according to the name, or according to the matter.

According to to the name, it is called the descension or setting, which we
measure by the arc of the Equator descending therewith.

According to the matter it is defined to be the arc of the Equator,
comprehended between the sign or poinct setting, and the head of.

The consideration of the diversity of settinge, is either that a greater part
of the Equator descends with the sign or poinct of the heaven, and then it
is said to have a right, or along, and slow descension: or else that a less
portion of the Equator setterh therewith, and then it is said to have an
oblique, or a short and swift descension.

Of the diversity of ascensions, descensions, and culminations, in a right
sphere. Chap. 34.
THe Zodiake in a right sphere is fitted unto the equal conversion of the
Equator, and together with the parts thereof, passes by the East, or the
West, or the midst of heaven, both in the quadrants or quarters, and in the
signs.

The quadrants in equal spaces of time do ascend and descend, or do pass
through the midst of heaven, beginning either at the Solstitiall poinctes,
namely at the head of and, and compting to the end of and: or else, beginning
at the Equinoctial poincts, which are the heads of, and, and compting to the
end of and.

The signs applied unto the motion of the Equinoctial, are considered either
whole, or in parts.

The signs considered wholly, have relation either unto the Equator, or unto
the Zodiake.

The signs in their relation unto the Equator, do ascend inequally: For some
of them do rise rightly, and some obliquely.

Those that have right ascension are.... with the which there do coascende 32.
gr. 11. mi. of the Equator.

Those that have oblique ascension, are.... wherewith there do coascende 27.
gr. 54. mi. of the Equator: and.... wherewith there arise 29. gr. 54. mi.
thereof.

The signs in their relation unto the Zodiake, or considered severally apart,
have ascensions, either equal or inequall one unto another.

They have equal ascensions, that come forth in equal times, and they are
either opposite in the diameter, or equally distant from the Equinoctial
poinctes, as are:::::.

They have inequall ascensions that neither are opposite, nor equally distant
from the aforesaid poinctes.

The signs considered in their parts, have also relation either unto the
Equator, or unto the Zodiake.

The parts having relation unto the Equator do (as before) ascend inequally,
and that either rightly or obliquely.

The parts having right ascensions, are comprehended within the four signs,
next unto the 2. solstitialles.

The parts having oblique ascensions, are contained within the signs next
unto the Equinoctial poincts on each side.

Those parts of the signs, that have relation unto the zodiake, have their
ascensions partly equal, and partly inequall.

Parts having equal ascensions are these: the first degree is equal unto the
first degree of the opposite sign: and the first degree unto the last of
another sign equidistant from the equinoctial poincts.

Parts having inequall ascensions, are those, in whom neither opposition
falls out, nor equidistancie.

Of the diversity of ascensions, and descensions in an oblique sphere. Chap. 35.
IN the oblique situation of the sphere we consider either the proportion of
the ascensions, or of the descensions of the zodiake.

The ascensions are compared and applied either unto the Equator, or one with
another, or unto the ascensions of a right sphere.

Being compared unto the Equator, they are either equal, or inequall unto the
ascensions thereof.

In their equality they are numbered either in the Northren semicircle from the
head of, unto the end of: or from the head of, unto the end of.

In their inequality, they are reconed either in the whole semicircles,
beginning not in the Equinoctial poinctes, but else where: or else the reconing
is made, in some of their parts.

In their comparison one with another, they are either equal, or inequall.

When they are equal, they are reconed in some 2. concordant arkes of the
Ecliptic, as in: 14. gr. 50. mi.: 18. gr. 51. mi.; 27 gr. 16. mi.: 36. gr. 58.
mi.: 40. gr. 57. mi.: 40. gr. 58. mi. in the latitude of 40. gr.

When they are inequall, they are reconed either in parts not equidistant, or
in the semicircle either ascendent, or descendent.

The semicircle ascendent is from the head of unto the end of, and that
ascends more oblique and swift.

The descendent semicircle is from the head of, unto the end of, and it
ascends more right and slow.

When the ascensions are compared unto the ascensions in a right sphere, they
are either less, or more oblique: or greater, or righter then the said
ascensions in a right sphere.

The less or more oblique fall out in the North semicircle: the greater or
more right happens in the South semicircle: the distance between the
ascensions of each sphere, is called the difference of ascensions.

The descensions of the Zodiake, are unto the ascensions thereof either equal,
or inequall.

They are equal either in regard of the moities of the Ecliptic comprehended
between the equinoctial poinctes, or else according to the equidistant, or
opposite parts of the Zodiake.

The descensions of the Zodiake are inequall, being compared either unto the
right sphere, or unto the same climate.

The descensions of an oblique sphere are more oblique, then the descensions of
a right sphere whereunto they are compared, when as the ascensions in an
oblique sphere, are more right then in a right sphere.

The descensions of an oblique sphere are more right then the descensions of a
right sphere, when as the ascensions in an oblique sphere, are more oblique
then in a right sphere.

The inequall descensions of the zodiak, compared unto the same climate are to
be noted, either in the parts of the Zodiake which descending oblique do rise
right, such as are the parts of the descending semicircle: or else in the parts
of the zodiake, which descending right do rise oblique, and such are the parts
of the ascending semicircle.

Of the natural day, and of the inequality and difference thereof. Chap. 36.
OVt of the premises we may, not unfitly, derive some matter concerning the
days, whereof there are two sorts, the one is called civil or natural the
other artificial.

In the civil or natural day, we may consider the definition, the
distinction, and the cause of inequality.

The definition respects either the name, or the thing it self.

It is called either natural, as caused by the natural, or regulare motion of
the whole: or (...) by Prolemee, as consisting of the night and day together:
or else civil, because all nations naturally do term it a day.

The definition respecting the thing is that, according to which it is defined
to be the space of 24. hours and certain minutes, consisting of light and
darkness.

The definition thereof is in respect of the continuance and length of the day,
and thereof one is called inequall, or different, also the true and apparent
day (the Greeks call it (...), irregulare:) another the equal, or mean day.

The inequall or different day, is the space of 24. hours and so many
minutes, as are answerable unto each portion of the zodiak, which the does
daily run over.

The equal or indifferent day, is the space of 24. hours and so many minutes,
as are answerable unto the quatity of the mean motion of the in one day, which
is 59. gr. 8. mi.

The cause of the inequality happens unto the true natural day, either in a
right, or in an oblique sphere.

The cause of the inequality happening in a right sphere, is through the
inequall augmentation, by means either of the Equinoctial ascensions
inequally answering the same, by reason of the obliquitie of the zodiak: orels
of the motion of the, which about the ce^tre of the world is inequal

The cause of the inqualitye of the day happening in an oblique sphere, is
through the inequall augmentation apperteining either to the Equinoctial
ascensions inequally answeringe the same, by reason of the obliquity as well of
the Horizon, as of the zodiake: or else, to the eccentricke circle of the
wherein the running does in equal times, perform an inequall motion.

The Artificial day is handled in the Chap. following.

Of the artificial day and night, and the diversity belonging to them both.
Chap. 37.
THe carried about by the first motion, distinguishes the naturaall day into
two parts, whereof the one is called the artificial day, the other the
artificial night.

Concerning the artificial day, Astronomy delivers the definition, and the
proportion thereof.

The definition contains the Author, and the term thereof.

The Author of the artificial day is the, who carried about by the first
motion, describes in the day time a certain arc.

The term is either from whence: that is, from the Easterlie part of the
Horizon: or by what: that is, by the vertical meridian: or unto what: that is,
unto the Westerly part of the Horizon.

The proportion of the artificial day is delivered in so much as apperteineth
unto the length thereof, either in a right, or in an oblique sphere.

In a right sphere it is always equal unto it self, and to the night, by
reason of the equality both of the Ascensions (for the one half of the
Equator does always equally ascend, and descend with six signs of the
zodiake) and of the diurnall, and nocturnall segments.

In an oblique sphere the days to themselves and to the nights are either
equal, or inequall.

The days are equal both to themselves and to the nights in the
Equinoctial, by reason of the equality both of the ascensions (for look how
great the ascension of the diurnall arc is, so great also is the descensio^ of
the nocturnal) and of the segments which the describes, the said segments
being incident with the Equator.

The days are inequal both among themselves, and to the nights, when the has
passed the Equinoctial poincts, as well by reason of the diversity of the
ascensions of the signs, as also by reason of the Suns inequall describing
of the paralleles by the motion of the world.

The artificial night gives us to consider the definition and the measure.

It is defined to be the part remaining of the natural day, comprehending the
space between the setting of the, and the rising thereof.

The measure thereof is either equal, or inequall.

The equality of measure falls out in the right sphere always, in an oblique
sphere two times in the year.

The inequality of measure has notwithstanding either a like diversity in the
signs equidistant from the Equator: or alternate in opposite points.

Of the reason of the equal and inequall hours. Chap. 38.
Having thus set down the description of the days, it falls out now, to
entreat of their parts commonly called hours, whereof we must consider the
general reason, and the division.

The general reason attends their definition, their number, and their
subdiuision.

They are defined to be that space of time, wherein the 24. part, or 15. gr.
either of the Equator, or of the Eclipticke, do fully arise.

They are in number 24. belonging unto every natural day.

Every hour is subdivided into 60. minutes, every minute into 60. seconds, etc.

The division of the hours consists in this, that either they are reconed in
the Eclipticke, or else in the Equator.

Those that are taken in the Eclipticke, the ascensions whereof do vary, are
called inequall hours, whereof the names, the definition, and the number are
to be noted.

They are called natural (by Io. de sacro bosco) and temporal, and
artificial, and Planetarie.

They are defined to be the space of time wherein the moitie of a sign of the
Zodiake, counted from the place of the, or the opposite thereof, does ascend.

Their number is as much by day, as by night: For 6. signs of the Ecl. do
always arise, as well by day, as by night.

The hours that are reconed in the Equator, which arises uniformly, are
called equal hours, whereof we are in like manner to note the names, the
definition, and the number.

They are called natural (by many) and equinoctial hours.

They are defined to be that space of time, when in 15, gr. of the Equator do
fully arise.

Their number is always inequall, saving in the 2. Equinoctial seasons. For
at other times, 6. signs of the Equator do not every day completely arise
and set.

Of the diverse accidents of diverse parts of the earth, according to the
diverse situation of the Sphere. Chap. 39.
THe situation of every place and region on the earth, is in the space either
of the burnt, or temperate, or frozen zone.

The places situated in the burnt zone, are either in the mean spaces, or
between mean and extreme, or in the extremes.

Their situation that are in the mean spaces, differs from the rest: 1. In
the 4. sorts of shadows which they have, viz. Septentrionall, Meridionall,
Oriental and Occidentall: 2. In their 4. solstices which they have, two being
highest in and, and two lowest, in and: 3. In their continual Equinoctialles:
4. In their two Winters, and two Summers.

Those that have their situation between the means and extremes, do (as the
former) differ from the rest: 1. In the double passage of the over their heads,
but not in the heads of and: 2. In their four shadows and Solstices, although
not happening at the same time, as in former situation,

Those that have their situation in the extremes of the burning zone, do differ
from the other: 1. In that the Sun comes but once unto their Zenith: 2. in
the length of their greatest day, which is 3. ho..

Those places that are situated within the temperate Zone, are either in the
extremes, or in the mean.

The extreme spaces are those, that are under either the trop. of, (whereof we
spoke before) or the Arcticke circle.

Those that are under the Arcticke circle do differ from other: 1. In that they
have the Zodiake coincident with their Horizon, and the pole thereof with their
Zenith: 2. In that the signs do arise unto them either most swiftlye, or most
flowelye: 3. In the length of one day, consisting of 24 hours.

Those that are situated within the mean spaces of the temperate zone, do
differ from others: 1. In their vertical point, which the Sun never comes
unto: 2. In their shadows, which are only 3.

Those places that are situated within the frozen Zone, are either in the mean
spaces, or in the extremes.

Those that are within the mean spaces of the frozen zone, do differ from
other: 1. In the interfection of the Zodiake, and the Horizon in equidistant
points: 2. In that some portion of the Zodiake, is always either above the
horizon, or under the same.

Those that are within the extremes of the frozen zone, are either under the
Arcticke circle, (whereof we speak a little before) or under the pole.

Those that are under the pole do differ from other:

1. In their Horizon, which is all one with the Equinoctial: 2. in their day,
which is half a year, by reason that the one moitie of the zodiake does
always appear above the horizon.

Of the diversity of the names of the inhabitants. Chap. 40.
THe inhabitants of the earth compared one with another, have diverse
appellations, by reason as well of the shadows of the, as of the Horizon, or
paralleles and meridians.

The shadows cast by the upon the earth at Noone, are either infinite, or none
at all, or else they are finite.

The shadows that are infinite or equidistant unto the beam, are cast in the
frozen zones, whose inhabitants are called Periseti, that is shadowed round
about, because their shadows do go in compass round about them.

Those that have no shadows at Noone tide, are in the burnt zone, whose
inhabitants are named either Aseu, because when the is in their Zenith, they
have no shadow at all: or else, Amphiscii, having 2 shadows, the one
Septentrionall, when the Sun goes from them toward the South, the other
Meridionall, when he passes from them toward the North.

Those whose shadows are finite, are named Heteroscii, as having but one of
those shadows, either Septentrionall, as in the Septentrionall temperate zone,
or else Meridionall, as in the Meridionall temperate zone, whereof Lucane makes
mention.

As concerning the inhabitants of the world, whose comparison one with another
stands upon the Horizon, or the paralleles and Meridians, we have 5. things
to consider.

1. Some of them have the same sensible Horizon, whom Albertus calls Simul
habitantes, dwelling together.

2. Some of them do dwell under the opposite points of the same parallele, and
are called proprelie by the Greeks Pertoeci, as if you would say, dwellers
about, of the Latins Transuersi, dwellers on the other side.

3. Some of them dwell under the same parallele, but not in the opposite
points, having a diverse Longitude, whom Albertus calls circulare dwellers.

4. Some of them dwell under the points of the same semimeridian equidistant
from the Equator, having a contrary Latitude, and are called Antoeci, or
Antomi, also oblique inhabitants.

5. Some of them do inhabit an equal, or also the same parallele, but under
the points of the Meridian diametrallie opposite, and are called Antipodes,
Antichthones, and opposite.

The distinction of the Surface of the earth, according to the length of the
dates. Chap. 41.
FOr the more exact knowledge of the longest days in every place of the world,
sensibly changing them selves, the Astronomers have devised, the distinction
of paralleles, and of Climates.

The paralleles offer unto our consideration, their definition, and their
supputation.

They are defined to be circles distinguishing the climates, and distant one
from another at the most, but quarters of hours.

Their supputation is diverse, delivered by 3. sorts of Geographers.

1. By the common Geographers, which do distinguishe the space of the earth
from 12. gr. 45. mi. unto 50. gr. 30. mi. into 15. paralleles, attributing unto
each one, of an hour.

2. By the Mariners, who in like manner do recon 14. paralleles, distinguished
by quarters of hours, from the Equator unto 45. gr: but then they proceed by
half hours, unto the 19. parallele: and then by adding on whole hour, they
come unto the 21. prrallele.

3. By the more subtle Geographers, who make 48. several paralleles, from the
Equator toward the pole of the world, unto the 66. gr. 30. mi of elevation: and
from thence augmenting them by days, they add 20. more.

The climates are to be considered in their definition, in their division, in
their number, and in their magnitude.

The definition is thus: A climate is a space of the earth, included within 3.
paralleles, containing the difference of an hour.

Their division, is either general, or particulare.

Their general division it that, in regard whereof some of them are called
Northern climates, and some Southern.

The Northern climates have their propre names, derived from the places through
the which they do pass.

The Southern climates are those that are named by the contrary.

Their particulare division is that, in regard whereof every one of them is
divided into 3. paralleles, the first, the middlemost, and the last parallele.

Their number is known through the supputation of the paralleles.

Their magnitude is inequall, as well in respect of their Longitude, as of their
Latitude.

Their Longitude toward the Equator, is greater, by reason of the greater
compass of circles: and toward the poles it is less, by reason of their
less compass.

Their Latitude is inequall, in respect of the space of degrees, that half an
hour does conteyne, and it is greater about the Equator, by reason of the
almost equal compass of the degrees: and less about the poles, by means of
the narrow inclination of the roundnesse of the earth.

Of the light, and of the shadows, and their differences. Chap. 42.
FOrasmuch as there has been often mention made of the shadows, it shall not
be amiss if we set before your eyes, the methodicall description thereof: and
seeing that contraties are by their contraries made more manifest, we will
declare the nature of the light, and of the shadow.

The nature of the light is showed by the definition, the division, and the
cause thereof.

It is defined to be the image, or the beam of the bright light.

It is divided, either into the first and principal, or the secondarie and
reflexed light.

The first and principal is that, which proceeds directly from the light
body, and is either perpendiculare, or oblique.

The perpendiculare light is that, by the fall whereof right angles are made.

The oblique light is that which falls not at right angles.

The secondarie or reflexed light is that, which from one side spreads it
self on al parts, without any falling of the beams.

The cause of the light is either the Elementall bright light, whereof here we
teach nothing, o^ the celestial.

The celestial bright light, is that which either causes the shadow, as that
of the, of the, of: or else, which has no power to make any shadow, as the
light of the of the other Stars.

The nature of the shadow is declared by the definition, and by the division
thereof.

It is defined to be a light diminished: or a certain form of a dark body,
always contrary to the body casting the light.

The division thereof is two fold, the one drawn from the coasts of the
world, the other from the position of the dark body.

The shadow taking the appellation from the coasts of the world, is of 2.
sorts.

The one is extended toward some coaste, and it is either Oriental, or
Occidentall, or Meridionall, or Septentrionall.

The other is perpendiculare, or a right shadow by a perpendiculare, which is
not extended, as it is unto those, that have the in their Zenith.

The division derived from the position of the dark body is that, in respect
whereof one shadow is called right or extended, another reuersed.

The right shadow is that, which is caused by the dark body,
perpendicularelie erected upon the terrestrial plane.

The reuersed shadow is that, which is caused by the dark body, that is
parallele unto the Horizon.

Of the Eclipses in general. Chap. 43.
OF all the appare^ces of the heaven, the Eclipse is the principal: and
therefore we will declare the general reason of the same, by the definition,
and by the terms thereof.

The definition is either barelye and planelye propounded, or else it is more
largely expressed.

The plane definition thereof is that, whereby it is defined to be the taking
away, or the hindering of the bright light, so that it cannot come unto the eye.

The larger expression thereof is thus: unto every Eclipse there belong 3.
things: a bright heavenly light, our sight, and a shadowy or dark body.

The bright heavenly light was formed by the Creator, for the expelling of
shadows, and it is twofolde, a greater and a less.

The greater, is that of the, shining of it self.

The less is that of the, casting about (as out of a looking glass) her light
borrowed of the.

Our sight is diverse, according to the diverse position thereof, upon the
round compass of the earth.

The shadowy or dark body is also twofold, viz. the body of the, the one
moitie whereof the enlighteneth not: and the earth, whose shadow is always
opposite unto the.

The terms of the Eclipse, which in this kind of doctrine the Astronomers do
use, are in number three.

The first is the quantity of the body either of the, whose visuall diameter
(as a chord) does subtende in the Auge of his eccentricke 31. mi. and in the
opposite thereof 31. mi. or else of the, whose apparent diameter does in the
Auge of her eccentricke and epicycle, subtende 29. mi. and in the opposite
thereof 36. mi.

The second is the quantity of the shadow, which the motion of the through
either Absis, does canse to vary, as well in regard of the longitude from the
surface of the earth, which for the most part contains 276. semidiameters of
the earth, as also in respect of the latitude, which also in the place of the
overthwart crossing of the is diners, both in respect of the, being in either
Absis, and of the which in her opposition is either in the Auge of her
epicycle, and then it is 75. mi. or in the opposite thereof, and then it
contains 94. mi.

The third is the quantity of the terms eclipsed, either of the, which are 15.
parts 12. mi. or of the, by reason of the Parallux of the latitude of the,
being either about the South, and it is 11. gr, 22. mi. or about the North,
being 20. gr. 40. mi.

The particular description of the Eclipses, Chap. 44.
THe beams therefore both of the and of the, may be hindered from shining upon
the earth.

The beams of the being borrowed, may be hindered by the coming of the earth,
and the shadow thereof, between the and her, and that makes the Eclipse of
the, whereof we may consider the time wherein it happens, and the
continuance thereof.

The time of her eclipse is when she is at the full, when the, being in
opposition with the, drives the shadow either according to the longitude, as
every month it comes to pass, or else according to the latitude, which
falls out when the is either within or nigh unto the Nodi, that is, the head
and tail of the Dragon.

In the continuance it is to be considered, that the stay of the in her
darkening, is either long or short.

The long stay is with her whole body, when her opposition falls out
precisely in the Nodi.

The short stay is when she is distant from the Nodi, and then her body is
darkened either all, or half, or less then the half.

She is darkened wholly, when she has her latitude less then the
semidiameter of the shadow, by the quantity of her apparent semidiameter.

She is darkened half, when she has her latitude equal unto the
semidiameter of the shadow.

She is darkened less then the half, when she has her latitude greater then
the semidiameter of the shadow.

The beams of the are hindered by the interposition of, and that is called the
Eclipse of the, wherein we may have consideration of the time wherein it
happens, the diversity thereof, and the difference thereof from the Eclipse
of the.

The time wherein the is eclipsed, is in the new, at which time she seems to
have a diametrall conjunction with the, as well in respect of longitude, as of
latitude.

The diversity thereof is, in that it is eclipsed either wholly, or less then
all.

The is wholly eclipsed, when the being in visible conjunction with the, is in
the Nodi.

The is eclipsed less then wholly, when as the being in visible conjunction
with the, has latitude, but yet less then 35. mi. or else, when the
semidiameters of the and the are joined together.

The difference of the Eclipse of the from the eclipse of the, is in regard of
the time, the continuance, and the universality.

The difference considered in the time, is in that the is darkened in the
opposition, but the in the conjunction.

The difference considered in the continuance, is in that the darkening of the
falls out to be long, but the Eclipse of the but short, by reason of the
small quantity of the, and the swifte motion thereof.

The difference considered in the universality, is in that the Eclipse of the
is every where seen, but the Eclipse of the, in one only part of the earth,
namely in that, which is covered by the shadow of the.

FINIS.
DARY 's MISCELLANIES.

Being, for the most part, A Brief COLLECTION of MATHEMATICAL THEOREMS, From
diverse Authors upon these Subjects following.

I. Of the Inscription and Circumscription of a Circle. II. Of plain Triangles.
III. Of spherical Triangles. IV. Of the projection of the Sphere in plano. V.
Of Planometry and the Center of Gravity. VI. Of Solid Geometry. And (therein)
Gauging. VII. Of the Scale of Ponderosity, alias, the Stilliard. VIII. Of the
four Compendiums for quadratique Equations. IX. Of Recreative Problems.
By Michael Dary.

London, Printed by W. G. and sold by Moses Pit at the White-Hart in
Little-Britain, Tho. Rookes at the Lamb and Ink-bottle in Gresham-Colledge, and
Will. Birch at the Bibk in New-Cheapside in Moor-fields. 1669.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou have here presented to thy view and censure a few Mathematical Notes,
most whereof have lain by me many years; and the reason of their rushing into
the Public in this homely dress, is, for that I and some others have been
traduced and derided in a Book lately published, Entitled, A Guide to the
Young Gager, put forth by several Authors: In the tail of which Book there is a
whole Broadside (intricate, preposterous, inartificial, and most prodigiously
erroneous) disgorged by the Lieutenant or Bringer-up against a Book, Entitled,
The Art of Practical Gauging; which Book I am sorry to see so encumbered with
Press-Faults, though they were none of mine: But most of these Guns we shall
Charge again, and turn them upon this our Lieutenant, for we scorn to give an
Answer to his invective Examination, till we have first examined him.

In his Stereo. prop. page 6. pr. 2. he tells how to find the Solidity of a
Frustum Pyramide whose bases are parallel but not alike: The word Frustum
Pyramide I cannot understand, but if he had said Frustum of a Pyramide, he
would have been understood by every judicious man: But the Solid there spoken
of (as I am informed) might very fitly have been called a Prismoid, for it is a
kind of a Prism; for although the Sides thereof should be continued, they would
never be included or terminated in one point, as the Pyramide is; therefore,
why Frustum Pyramide?

For the construction of this his Frustum Pyramide, he brings (as an
induction of particulars) four Pyramides, four Prisms, and a Parallelepipedon,
that is in all five Prisms; (for a Parallelepipedon is a Prism) but in reality
there is but two Prisms, and the four Pyramides, which are indeed but one
Pyramide, in the largest sense it is capable of, both bases being parallel but
not alike, each being a rectangle.

In his Proposition page 105. (which he prosecutes in page 106, 107, 108.) the
stress of his Argument is weak and infirm (I pass by the Press-Fault page 105.
z+2 for it should be z - 2) for page 106. he says z= that is z is 3 and A, 5;
these numbers make good the Question: But stay, though we should grant z=, it
is yet to demonstrate, that z is 3 and A, 5; which I am not bound to tell him
how to do: But it is evident the man made have to the 108 page, to fling dirt
in the face of Van Schooten (for he does not care who he does bespatter) and it
is manifest, if you compare this last page with his Title page, which says,
Particularly intended for Gaging; let any man judge, whether this Proposition
have any relation at all to Gaging. But we would have him to know, that we can
perform this Proposition and two other, of good use for the rational Ordinates
of the Circle and Hyperbola, without casting dirt in the face of any person.

Prop. 1. xx+yy=zz. ques. x? y? z? Sol. x=aa-bb. y=2 ab. z=aa+bb. Prop. 2.
xy+yy=zz. ques. x? y? z? Sol. x=2 ab+bb. y=aa. z=aa+ab. Prop. 3. xx+xy+yy=zz.
ques. x? y? z? Sol. x=aa-bb. y=2 ab+bb. z=aa+ab+bb.
In all these three Solutions you may put a and b=any two numbers taken at
pleasure.

Moreover in Page 107. his Note for Progressions is invalid, and of no force:
For the Sum of the Sum and Difference of any two numbers is equal to the double
of the -- greatest. the Diff. of the Sum and Difference of any two numbers is
equal to the double of the -- least.


From whence the Argument is clear by assumption, for he assumes the same
greatest number twice: Therefore the Sum of the Sum and Difference must be the
same that it was before; to wit, the double of that same greatest number: So it
is evident that there is no need of Unity for the first Term of this
Progression as he intimates: If he shall say his Note is true notwithstanding
my declamation, then let him show a reason why he does amuse his Reader with
such a foolery. Are these the Men of a sound judgment which they speak of in
their Preface? The like general Theorem may be laid down in Geometrical
Progressions, but no need of Unity for the first Term.

The Fact of the Fact and quote of any two numbers is equal to the Square of
the -- greatest. The quote of the Fact and quote of any two numbers is equal to
the Square of the -- least.
But this I shall not insist upon.

In his invective Examination, Page 1. he says, That our Equation is five times
greater than it needs: If he could have said it had required five times more
work in the operation, he had said something; but to see how full he is fraught
with Envy, for this very Proposition has been commended by diverse Artists in
this City, for the contrivance of it, because it does accommodate both the
Spheroid and the Parabolical Spindle with one and the same Divisor, and the
Operation is very near as short as the old way for the Spheroid.

From the first page to the twelfth he is wholely taken up with inveighing
against the Table of Segments; in which I see there are many Press Faults, but
these Faults (as I said before) are none of my Faults: For the making of the
Table I gave this Rule, 6,2831853) 0,017453 A - S x Q (=K, which I shall
demonstrate.

It is manifest from Archimedes, Snellius, and other Authors, that if the
Radius of a Circle be Unity, that then the Area of that Circle is 3,14159266
too much, or 3,14159265 too little: Also from the same Authors it holds, that
the Area of a Sector is equal to the Fact or Rectangle of the Radius into the
Arch or Base of the Sector: Then if you put A=to the Arch, S=to the Sine of
that Arch, it must hold 1 x A=the Area of the Sector, and 1 x S=the Area of the
Triangle in the Sector; but the Sector less the Triangle is equal to the
Segment of the Circle in that Sector: So then A - S=any Segment of a Circle
whose Radius is Unity.

And by the 11. and 12. Prop. Partis Cyclicae of Leotaud's Examen of the
Quadratures of Greg. of St. Vine. it holds; As the Area of the Circle given
3,14159265, is to A - S; so is Q, the Quadrature or Area of any Circle
proposed, to K, its like Segment. Then multiplying both the first and second
terms by 2, in Jimbals (for so he calls the Symbols in derision) it will stand
thus; 6,2831853) A-S x Q(=K.

Now because A stands in Degrees and Centesmes, it must be reduced to the same
parts that S stands in, which may be done thus; As 360 degrees. the whole
Peripheria in the Parts of A, is to 6,2831853 the whole Peripheria in the parts
of S; so is A, to 0,017453A: therefore 0,017453A, comes in the room of A, and
the Rule stands thus; 6,2831853)0,017453A-SxQ(=K which was to be demonstrated.

In page 12. this insulting Scosser says, This may serve for instruction to
Segment-Makers for the future, to inform them whether their Work goes on
regularly or not.

Reader, I hope thou have more understanding than to take this Bringer-up for
one that modestly makes public pure Geometry (as he speaks in his Preface.)
But if thou do, I shall undeceive thee: For it is apparently true, that if a
Table of the Segments of a Circle shall be differenced never so often, they
have no equal Differences; but he seems to intimate that they have: For if he
mean otherwise, I would fain know of him the Habitude of that rank of
Differences by which he will prove the truth of a Table of Segments. But
methinks I hear the Reader object and say, That if a Table of Segments be
differenced far enough, the Differences at last will be equal: Stay there,
herein lies the deception; for those Figures that appear to be equal, are only
frontier-Figures, and if you make the Table of Segments a good company of
places larger, you will then see the ragged Regiment that stands behind these
Frontiers. This he ought to have told his Reader, otherwise he publishes (not
pure, but) very impure Geometry.

In page 13. he proceeds to the Trial of the Tables of Wine, and Beer and Ale;
and the Table for dividing the Gaging Rod, and he concludes them also badly
calculated, as may be proved (says he) by taking the second or third
Differences.

What? the second, or the third? It Is a marvel when his hand was in, he had not
put in the fourth Differences too: O ye Blind Guides! know ye not that the
Tables for Wine, Ale and Beer, are capable but only of the first and second
Differences; which I prove thus for the Wine: the construction of the Wine
Table is the Square of any Diameter in Inches, divided by 883. Then if you put
D=a Diameter proposed (do you see now) in Jimbals it will stand thus: DD+0D+ 0
1 Diff. 2 Diff. DD+2D+ 1 2D+1 DD+4D+ 4 2D+3 2 DD+6D+ 9 2D+5 2 DD+8D+16 2D+7 2

All to be divided by 883. And if you should interpole never so often, you
shall find no more but the second Differences. But it seems they will have the
second and third Differences come in, for it is all one to Anthony who Kisseth
Dorothy.

But what if our Lieutenant should say he did intend the third Differences for
the Trial of the Gaging-Rod Table: But certainly he did not, (out of doubt he
would not be so unkind to his Young Gager, to leave him thus in the dark
guideless,) if he did he is caught in an evil Net, for there he might as well
have said the thirteenth as the third, for that Table is the ordinates of a
Parabola standing at equal distances. This may serve for an instruction to our
Table-Tryers, how they burn their Fingers again: Let them learn how to be
Table-Makers before they turn Table-Tryers.

Courteous Reader, I am sorry I have held thee in this discourse so long: Now
let me address my self to thee, that we may understand one another. In Chap. 6.
Prop. 1. thou will meet with a Solid, which I call a Prism; by which word is
there meant a Solid having two Bases, equal, parallel, alike, and alike
situate, and in the Peripetasma a Right Line may be every where applied, from
one Base to another.

A Pyramide of the same Base and height with the Prism, is thereof: And in the
Peripetasma a Right Line may be every where applied, from the Base to the
Vertex.

A Pyramidoid of the same base and height with the Prism, is some certain
portion thereof; as if it be parabolical, it is if it be spherical, it is: And
in the Peripetasma a Right Line may be no where applied from the Base to the
Vertex.

For my Division, it is such as is used by others: As for Example,
24)37+41x4(=13. and may be read thus; 24 dividing 37 more 41, multiplied by 4,
equal to (or quotes) 13: Or it may be read by analogy thus: As 24, is to 37
more 41; so is 4, to 13. If thou meerest with some Divisions that stand double
lined, they were things that had lain by me a good while, and I would not stand
to alter them.

So craving thy favorable construction, where any thing has slipped amiss, for
it was not the intent of him who desires, if he were able, to be

Thine to serve thee, Michael Dary.

ERRATA.
THe five last Pages are wrong numbered, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46 they should be 44,
45, 46, 47, 48; and then page 24. lin. 20. for of its read of all its page 26.
lin. 15. for A=S read A-S p. 29. l. 5. for L.= read=L. p. 31. l. 5. for 0,159
read 0,16 p. 33. l. 1. for If read 8. If p. 36. l. 12. for Conjugate read
rectangular Conjugate l. 16. for rectanguled read rectangular l. 18. for
rectanguled read rectangular p. 37. l. 8. for=D read=D, p. 43. l. 3. and 4. for
sides read lines p. 45. l. 14. for let be read let it be, and for terms in read
terms: In p. 47. l. 16. for number read any number. Page 36. for Unequal
Begirter or Zone you may read Peripetasma.

The Contents.
CHap. 1. Of the Inscription and Circumscription of a Circle. page 1. Chap. 2.
Of Plain Triangles. page 10. Chap. 3. Of Spherical Triangles. page 13. Chap. 4.
Of the projection of the Sphere in plano. page 20. Chap. 5. Of Planometry and
the Center of Gravity. page 23. Chapter 6. Of solid Geometry. p. 29. Chap. 7. Of
the Scale of Ponderosity, alias the Stilliard. p. 43 Chap. 8. Of the 4
Compendiums for quadratique Equations. page 45. Chap. 9. Of recreative
Problems. page 47.
Dary's Miscellanies.
CHAP. I. Of the Inscription and Circumscription of a Circle.
1. FOrasmuch as the Ratio of an Arch line to a right line is yet unknown, it
is absolutely necessary, that right lines be applied to a Circle for the
Calculation of Triangles wherein Arch lines come in Competition.

2. Right lines applied to a Circle are Chords, Sines, Tangents, Secants, and
versed Sines.

3. The Chord of an Arch is a right line extended from one end of that Arch to
the other end thereof: The Sine is a right line drawn from one end of that
Arch, Perpendicularly upon the Diameter drawn from the other end of that Arch:
The Tangent is a right line touching one end of that Arch extended till it
Concur with the Secant: The Secant is a right line extended from the Center of
the Circle till it Concur with the Tangent: The Versed Sine is a right line
being a Segment of the Diameter, drawn from one end of that Arch till it be cut
by a Perpendicular (i. e. the Sine) from the other end of that Arch.

4. It is to be noted by this Definition in Prop. 3. that the Chord of an Arch
is common to two Arches, one of them being the Complement of the other to a
whole Circle; and likewise the Versed Sine is common to two Arches, one of them
being the Complement of the other to a whole Circle: But the Sine of an Arch is
common to two Arches, one of them being the Complement of the other to a
Semicircle.

5. As the Sum of two Sines is to their difference, so is the Tangent of the
Sum of those Arches, to the Tangent of their difference.

6. As the Sum of two Tangents, is to their Difference, so is the Sine of the
Sum of those Arches, to the Sine of their Difference.

7. As the Sine of the Sum of two Arches, is to the Sum of their Sines, so is
the difference of those Sines, to the Sine of their Difference.

8. If you put R=The Radius of a Circle, A=an Arch proposed, C=the Chord of
that Arch, S=the Sine of that Arch, T=the Tangent of that Arch, and Z=the
Secant of that Arch.

Then ^

9. If twice three Arches equi-different be proposed, Then, as the Sine of one
of the means, is to the sum of the Sines of its Extremes; so is the Sine of the
other mean, to the sum of the Sines of its Extremes.

10. And hence, if a rank of Arches be equi-different, As the Sine of any Arch
in that rank, is to the sum of the Sines of any two Arches equally remote from
it on each side; So is the Sine of any other Arch in the said rank, to the sum
of the Sines of two Arches next to it on each side, having the same common
distance.

11. Three Arches equi-different being proposed, If you put Z=the Sine of the
greater extreme, Y=the Sine of the lesser extreme, M=the Sine of the Mean,
m=the Cosine thereof; D=the Sine of the common difference, d=the Cosine
thereof, and R=the Radius.

^

12. From the last before going, it is evident, that if two thirds (i.e either
the former, or the latter 60 degrees. or the former 30 degrees. and the latter 30 degrees.)
of the Quadrant be completed with Sines: the remaining third part of the
Quadrant maybe completed by Addition or Subduction only.

13. If in a Circle, two right lines be inscribed cutting each other, The
Rectangles of the Segments of each line are equal. And the Angle at the point
of Intersection is measured by the Half-sum of its intercepted Arches.

14. If to a Circle two right lines be adscribed from a point without; The
Rectangles of each line from the point assigned to the Unequal and Concave are
equal. And the Angle at the assigned point is measured by the half difference
of its intercepted Arches

15. If in a Circle (or an Elipsis) three right lines shall be inscribed, one
of them cutting the other two: Then the Rectangles of the Segments of each line
so cut, are directed proportional to the Rectangles of the respective Segments
of of the Cutter.

16. If a plain Triangle be inscribed in a Circle, the Angles are one half of
what their opposite sides do subtend.

17. Therefore the Angles of a plain Triangle are equal to a Semicircle.

18. And hence, if a Rectangled Triangle be inscribed in a Circle, the
Hypothenuse thereof is the Diameter of the Circle.

19. As the Diameter of a Circle is to the Chord of an Arch; so is that Chord,
to the versed Sine of that Arch.

20. And hence, if from the right angle of a rectangled Triangle, a
Perpendicular be let fall upon the Hypothenuse, the Hypothenuse is thereby cut
according to the Ratio of the squares of the sides.

21. If in a Circle, any plain Triangle be inscribed, and a Perpendicular be
let fall upon one of the sides, from the opposite angular point; Then as that
Perpendicular is to one of the adjacent sides, so is the other adjacent side,
to the Diameter of the Circumscribring Circle.

22. If a Circle be inscribed within a plain Triangle, Then, as the Perimeter
is to the Perpendicular; so is the Base on which it falls, to the Radius of
the inscribed Circle.

23. If a Quadrilateral Figure be inscribed in a Circle, and Interfect with
Diagonals, The Rectangle of the Diagonals is equal to the two Rectangles of the
opposite sides.

24. If a Circle be both inscribed and circumscribed by two like ordinate
Polligons; Then, as the Co-versed Sine of the side of the inscribed is to the
Diameter, so is the Area of the Inscribed to the Area of the Circumscribed.

25. If an ordinate Polligon be both Inscribed and Circumscribed by two
Circles; Then, as the Diameter of the Circumscribed, is to the co-versed Sine
of the side of the Polligon; So is the Area of the Circumscribed, to the Area
of the Inscribed.

26. In any right lined Figure, if a Circle be Inscribed; Then, as the
Peripheria of the Circle, is to the Area thereof; So is the Perimeter of the
right lined Figure, to the Area thereof. Et Con.

27. But in all Circles, as the Peripheria is to the Area, so is 2 to the
Radius.

28. Therefore; In any right lined Figure, if a Circle be inscribed, as 2. is
to the Radius; So is the Perimeter of the right lined Figure, to the Area
thereof.

CHAP. II. Of Plain Triangles.
1. A Triangle is a Figure Comprehended of three sides; and is either Plain or
Spherical. 2. A Plain Triangle is that which is described on a Plain Surface,
whose three sides are right lines; and it is either right Angled or oblique
Angled; and the oblique, is either obtuse or acute. 3. If a line drawn from the
top or vertex of a Triangle equally Bisecting the Base, be equal to the
Bisegment, the Vertical. Angle is a right Angle; if lesser Obtuse, if greater
Acute. 4. In a Plain Triangle, a right line equally Bisecting the Vertical
Angle, cuts the Base directly according to the Ratio of the adjacent legs. 5.
Any one side of a Triangle is less than the sum, and greater than the
difference of the other two sides. 6. Any one side being continued, the
exterior Angle is equal to the two interior Angles opposite. 7. In any right
angled Plain Triangle, the sum of the squares of the sides containing the right
Angle is equal to the square of the Hypothenuse. 8. In a Plain Rectangled
Triangle any one of the sides may be put for Radius, and the other sides shall
be Sines, Tangents, or Secant. 9. In any plain Triangle the sides are directly
proportional to the Sines of their opposite Angles, Et Con. 10. In any Plain
Triangle, as the sum of any two sides is to their difference, so is the Tangent
of the Half-sum of their opposite Angles, to the Tangent of their
Half-difference. 11. In any Plain Triangle, as the Base is to the sum of the
Legs, so is the difference of the legs, to the difference of the Segments of
the Base, cut by a Perpendicular from the vertical Angle. 12. In any Plain
Triangle, as the Base is to the sum of the legs; so is the Sine of the vertical
Angle, to the Sine of the sum of the vertical Angle, and either of the Angles
conterminate at the Base 13. In any Plain Triangle, as the Diameter is to the
versed Sine of the vertical Angle; So is the square of the sum of the legs less
by the square of the difference of the legs To the square of the Base less by
the square of the difference of the legs
14. In any Plain Triangle, the fact of the legs and the Sine of their Angle,
is equal to the fact of the Base, Petpendicular, and Radius.
CHAP. III. Of Spherical Triangles.
1. A Spherical Triangle, is that which is described on the surface of a
Sphere. 2. The sides of a Spherical Triangle, are Arches of three great Circles
mutually intersecting each other. 3. The measures of Spherical Angles, are
arches of great Circles, described from the Angular Points as their Poles, and
subtending their Angles. 4. Those are said to be great Circles, which bisect
the Sphere. 5. Those Circles which cut each other at right Angles, the one of
them passes by the Poles of the other. Et Con. 6. The Distance of the Poles of
two great Circles, is equal to the Angle comprehended by them. 7. The 3 Angles
of any Spherical Triangle being given, there are likewise three sides of
another Spherical Triangle given, whose Angles are equal to the sides of the
former Triangle. 8. The sum of the Sides of a Spherical Triangle are less than
two Semi-circles. 9. The sum of the 3 Angles of a Spherical Triangle, are
greater than two right Angles, but less than Six. 10. Two Angles of any
Spherical Triangle, are greater than the difference between the 3 Angle and a
Semicircle. 11. Any side being continued, the Exterior Angle is less than the
two Interior opposite ones. 12. In any Spherical Triangle, the difference of
the sum of two Angles and a whole Circle, is greater than the difference of the
third Angle and a Semicircle. 13. A Spherical Triangle, is either
Rect-angular, or Oblique-angular. 14. A Rect-angular Spherical Triangle, is
that which has one right Angle at the least. 15. The Legs of a Rect-angular
Spherical Triangle, are of the same affection with their opposite Angles. 16.
In a Rect-angular Spherical Triangle, if either leg be a Quadrant, the
Hypothenuse is also a Quadrant; but if both be of the same affection, the
Hypothenuse shall be less than a Quadrant; if of different affections, then
greater: Et Con. 17. In a Rect-angular Spherical Triangle, if either of the
Angles at the Hypothenuse be a right Angle, the Hypothenuse shall be a
Quadrant; but if both of the same affection, it shall be less, if different
then greater: Et Con. 18. In a Rect-angular Spherical Triangle, either of the
Oblique-angles is greater than the Complement of the other, but less then the
difference of the same Complement to a Semicircle. 19. An Oblique angular
Spherical Triangle, is either Acute-angular, or Obtuseangular. 20. An Acute
angular Spherical Triangle, has all its Angles Acute. 21. An Obtuse angular
Spherical Triangle, has all its Angle; Obtuse or mixed, viz. Acute and Obtuse.
22. In an Acute angular Spherical Triangle, each side is less than a Quadrant.
23. In an Oblique angular Spherical Triangle, if two Acute Angles be equal, the
sides opposite to them shall be less than Quadrants; if Obtuse, greater. 24. In
an Oblique angular Spherical Triangle, if two Acute Angles be unequal, the side
opposite to the lesser of them shall be less than a Quadrant; but if Obtuse,
the side opposite to the greater, shall be greater. 25. In every Oblique
angular Spherical Triangle, if the Angles at the Base be of the same affection,
the Perpendicular drawn from the top of the Vertical Angle shall fall within
the Triangle; if different, without.
In Oblique angular Spherical Triangles, if a Perpendicular be drawn from the
Vertical Angle, to the opposite side, (continued if need be.)
COnsectary 1. The Co-sines of the Segments of the Base are directly
proportional to the Co-sines of the sides of the Vertical Angle: Et Con. Con.
2. The Co-sines of the Angles at the Base are directly proportional to the
Sines of the Vertical Angles: Et Con. Con. 3. The Sines of the Segments of the
Base are reciprocally proportional to the Tangents of the Angles Conterminate
at the Base: Et Con. Con. 4. The Co-sines of the Vertical Angles are
reciprocally proportional to the Tangents of their sides: Et Con.
Axioms for the Solution of Spherical Triangles.
Axiom 1. IN Rect-angular Spherical Triangles having the same Acute angle at
the Base: The Sines of the Hypothenuses are proportional to the Sines of their
Perpendiculars.

Axiom 2. In Rect-angular Spherical Triangles having the same Acute angle at
the Base: The Sines of the Bases and the Tangents of the Perpendiculars are
proportional.

Axiom 3. In all Spherical Triangles, the Sines of the Angles are directly
proportional to the Sines of their opposite sides: Et Con.

Axiom 4. In all Spherical Triangles, as the fact of the sides containing the
Vertical angle, is to the square of the Radius; So is the fact of the Sines of
the sum, and the difference of the Base and difference of the Legs, to the
square of the Sine of the Vertical Angle.

Or thus. In all Spherical Triangles, having added all the 3 sides together,
find the difference betwixt each side and their half sum: And then,

As the fact of the Sines, of the sum of all the sides, and the difference of
the side opposite to the Vertical Angle, is to the fact of the Sines of the
differences of the containing sides from the said sum, so is the square of the
Radius to the square of the Tangent of the Vertical Angle.

CHAP. IV. Of the Projection of the Sphere in Plano.
1. Orthographically.
IF a Sphere be by a Plain cut into two Hemispheres, and the Eye be placed at
an infinite distance, Vertically to one of the Hemispheres; then a right line
infinitely extended from the Eye, to any assigned point in the Spherical surface
of that Hemisphere, shall porject the assigned point upon the Plain: And the
distance upon the Plain, from the apex of the Hemisphere to the projected
point, is equal to the sine of the Arch from the Vertex of the Hemisphere to
the assigned point; the Radius of the Sphere being put for Radius.

2. Steriographically.
If a sphere be by a plain touched, and the eye be placed in the
Spherical-surface Diametrically opposite to the touch-point; Then a right line
infinitely extended from the eye to any assigned point in the Spherical surface
shall project the assigned point upon the Plain: And the distance upon the
Plain from the touch-point to the projected point is equal to the Tangent of
the Arch from the touch-point to the assigned point: The Diameter of the Sphere
being put for Radius.

3. Gnomonically.
If a Sphere be by a Plain touched, and the Eye be placed at the Center of the
Sphere; Then a right line infinitely extended from the Eye to any assigned
point, in the Spherical surface (whose distance from the touch-point is less
than a Quadrant) shall project the assigned point upon the Plain: And the
distance upon the plain from the touch-point to the projected point is equal to
the Tangent of the Arch from the touch-point to the assigned point: The Radius
of the Sphere being put for Radius.

To project a Meridian line upon any Horizontal plain.
1. Having prepared a piece of Metal or Wood, and made it a true Plain, and in
some convenient point thereof (taken as a Center) erected a Gnomon of
sufficient length, at right angles to the Plain: This done, six the Plain truly
Horizontal

2. If you take the Suns Co-altitude (i. e. his distance from the Zenith) three
times in one day, and (according to the Steriographical projection (having a
line of Tangents by you) set off from the Center of your plain or foot of the
Gnomon, the Tangent of each Arch upon his respective Azimuth, or shadow
(continued if need be) made by the Gnomon at that instant when the Co-altitude
is taken, you will insert three points upon the Plain.

3. If you find out the Center to those three inserted points, then a rigth
line infinitely extended by this Center found, and the Center of the Plain, or
^oot of the Gnomon, is the true Meridian line: Which was to be projected.

CHAP. V. Of Planometry, and the Center of Gravity.
1. IN any plain Triangle, the fact of the Base, and the Perpendicular, is
equal to the double of the Area of that Triangle.

2. In any Plain Triangle, as the Diameter is to the Sine of any one of the
angles, so is the fact of the adjacent Legs to the Area.

3. And hence, in how many soever Plain Triangles, having one angle equal in
Common, the facts of their sides including the common Angle, are directly
proportional to their Areas. Et Con.

4. In any plain Triangle, as the fact of the Diameter and the Sine of any one
Angle, is to the square of the opposite side; so is the fact of the Sines of
the other two Angles to the Area.

5. If you put P=the Semi-perimeter of any plain Triangle, and D, D, d,=the
respective differences accruing by Subduction of each particular side from the
Semi-perimeter, and the Area=A, Then: 1) D D d P (=A.

6. A Triangulate (i. e. any right lined figure) is Composed of Triangles, and
the Triangles are less by two than the number sides, and the Diagonals are less
by three: And the Area thereof is equal to the Area of its Triangles.

7. If you put 1=the Radius of a Circle, then the Area (and also the
Semiperipheria) shall be=3, 1416 fere: according to Van Culen, Snellius, and
Hugenius.

8. If you put D=the Diameter of a Circle, P=the Peripheria, and A=the Area,
then: ^

9. If you put K=the Area of the Segment, or Kant of a Circle; V=the Versed
Sine in the Segment, D=the Diameter of the Circle, or Q equal to its Area; also
if you put D) 2 V (=u, a Versed Sine (to be found in a Table of Versed Sines,
the Diameter being 2,000 etc.) whose respective Arch in Degrees and Decimals
being doubled, you may call A, and the correspondent Sine of A you may call S,
Then: 8) 0,017453 A - S x D D (=K Or 6,2831853) 0,017453 A-S xQ (=K

10. Again, if you put K or k=the greater or lesser Segment of a Circle, cut by
a Chord-line, D=the Diameter of the Circle y=the difference of the Segments of
the Diameter cut at right Angles by the foresaid Chord-line, also if you put D)
y (=S, a Sine (to be found in the Common Table of Sines, the Radius being
1,0000 etc.:) whose respective Arch in Degrees and Decimals being doubled you
may call A, and the correspondent Sine of A you may call S, Then: ^

Another way: ^

11. If you put Z=the Area of a Zone of a Circle intercepted between the
Diameter and Chord-line parallel to it, D=the Diameter of the Circle, B=the
breadth of the Zone, Then: ^

12. If you put k=the Area of the Segment of a Circle (not greater then a
Semicircle,) C=the distance of the Center of Gravity from the apex of the
Segment, r=the Radius, c=the Chord of the Segment, and u=the Versed Sine in the
Segment, Then: ^

13. If you put H=the Area of an Hyperbola, G=the distance of the Center of
Gravity from the apex of the Hyperbola, a=the Axis, B=the Base, r= the
Semi-transverse Diameter (between the Vertex of the Hyperbola, and the Center
of the assymtoptes) Then: ^

14. If you put D=the distance of the Center of Gravity of a Plain right lined
Triangle from one of the Angular points, and I=the right line from that Angular
point Bisecting the opposite side, Then: 3) 2 l (=D.

15. If you put D=the distance of the Center of Gravity of the Sector from the
Center of the Sector, c=the Chord, r=the Radius Bisecting A=the Arch, Then: 3
A) 2 r c (=D.

16. If you put L=the distance of the Center of Gravity of a, (=the lesser of
two Superficial figures proposed) and I=the distance of the Center of Gravity
of A, (=the greater of two Superficial Figures proposed) from the common Center
of Gravity of both the foresaid Figures, and D=the whole distance of their
respective Centers of Gravity, Then:

A + a) D A (L.=and A+a) D a (=l.

17. As an unite is to the Radius, so is the excess of the 3 angles above a
Semicircle (in a Spherical Triangle) to the bossed surface of that Triangle.
The excess is to be taken in the same parts, as is the Radius.

18. If a Sphere be enclosed in a Cylinder, and that Cylinder be cut with
plains parallel to its base; then the Intercepted rings of the Cylinder are
equal to the Intercepted surfaces of the respective Segments of the Sphere.

CHAP. VI. Of Solid Geometry.
1. If you put Pr=A Prism, B=one of its Bases, and P=the Perpendicular height
of the Prisme, Then: 1) B P (=Pr.

2. If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Piramide or a Cone intercepted between two
Plains Parallel cutting the axis, B=the greater Base, b=the lesser Base, and
P=the Perpendicular height of the Frustum Then, 3) B+ B b + b x P (=Fr.

3. If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Spherical Piramidoid, Sphere, or Spheroid,
Intercepted between two Plains parallels, one of them passing by the Center,
B=the greater Base, b=the lesser Base and P=the Perpendicular height of the
Frustum, Then: 3) 2 B + b x P (=Fr.

4. If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Porabolical Piramidoid or Conoid Intercepted
between two Plains parallel, cuting the axis, B=the greater Base, b=the lesser
Base, and P=the Perpendicular height of the Frustum: Then 2) B + b x P (=Fr.

5. If you put S=a Sollid made by Rotation, R=the Radius or nearest distance,
between the Center of Cravity of A=the begetting Figure, and a right line in
the same Plain assigned (without) for an axis, and p=the Peripheria of a Circle
whose Radius is unity, Then:

1) A R p (=S. or Thus 0,159) AR)=S.

6. If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Parabolical Spindle, intercepted between two
plains Parallel, one of them passing by the Center, B=the greater Base, b=the
lesser Base, P=the Perpendicular height of the Frustum, Then:

15) 8 B + 7 b x P (=Fr.

7. In the 2, 3, and 4 Propositions: (which Propositions are general for
Piramids or Cones, Piramidoids or Conoids, of what Base soever) If it will
serve your turn to find only the Cone, Conoids, and Parabolical spindle, when
their Bases are Circles, it may be delivered thus,

1. If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Cone incepted between to Plains parallel,
cutting the Axis at right Angles, D=the Diameter of the greater Base, d=the
Diameter of the lesser Base, P=the Perpendicular hight of the Frustum, and make
S=D + d, Then: 3, 82) S S - D d x P (=Fr.

2. If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Sphere or Spheroid, intercepted between two
Plains parallel, one of them passing by the Center Cutting the Axis at right
Angles, D=the Diameter of the greater Base, d=the Diameter of the lesser Base,
and P=the Perpendicular height of the Frustum, Then: 3, 82) 2 D D + d d x P
(=Fr.

3. If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Parabolical Conoid, intercepted between two
Plains parallel cutting the Axis at right Angles, D=the Diameter of the greater
Base, d=the Diameter of the lesser Base, and P=the Perpendicular height of the
Frustum, Then: 2,54) D D + d d x P (=Fr.

4. If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Parabolical Spindle, intercepted between two
Plains Parallel, one of them passing by the Center cutting the Axis at right
Angles, D=the Diameter of the greater Base, d=the Diameter of the lesser Base,
and P=the Perpendicular height of the Frustum, Then: 1 9,1) 8 DD + 7 dd x P
(=Fr.

If you put Fr=the Frustum of a Sphere intercepted between two Plains parallel,
one touching and the other cutting the Sphere, d=the Diameter of the Base, and
P=the perpendicular height of the Frustum, Then: 2,54648) dd.^.1 P P x P (=Fr.

This Rule will also hold if it were the frustum of a Spheroid, putting d
d:=the fact of the right angled Conjugates in the base.

9. If you put Fr=the frustum of a Cone intercepted between two Plains
parallel, one of them being fixed the other moveable, D=the Diameter of the
fixed base, p=the perpendicular height of the frustum, and d=the increment or
decrement of any two Diameters at one Inch distance in the perpendicular, Then:
3,82) 3 DD+/-3 Ddp+ddpp x p (=Fr.

10. A Coopers common Cask, that is such as are round at their heads (and not
eliptical as some Oil Cask are) being Proposed, if you put D=the Diameter at
the bouldge, d=the Diameter at the heads, G=the diagonal from the middle of the
bongue-hole to the bottom of either of the heads, L=the length of the Vessel,
and make S=D+d, Then: ^

11. According to the Equated Circle, now in use, if you put Q=the Quantity of
Liquor in a Coopers common Cask being filled totally or partly, the axis being
posited parallel to the horizon, the Vessel being taken as the middle Frustum
of a parabolical Spindle intercepted between two Plains parallel, equidistant
from the Center cutting the axis at right angles, D=the Diameter of the
bouldge, V=that proportion of this Diameter which is wet, d=the Diameter at the
heads, and P=the perpendicular height or length of the Vessel, also you shall
put D) V (=N, which N abuts you to K=a Segment to be found in the Table of the
Segments of a Circle whose Area is unity: Or if you have not by you a Table of
Segments you may find K by Chap. 5. Prop. 9. and then if you divide by 19, 1
you shall have cubical Inches, if by 4412, Wine Gallons; if by 5386, Ale or
Beer Gallons; and the Rule will stand thus: 19,1) 8 D D + 7 d d x P x K (=Q.

But if the said Vessel be taken as the frustum of a Spheroid intercepted, etc.
Then instead of: 8 D D + 7 d d: you shall put: 10 D D + 5 d d: And yet the
foresaid Divisors hold true to all intents and purposes.

12. Concerning the Cylindroid, etc. in its several kinds and several frustums.

By the word Cylindroid (in this place) is meant a Sollid contained under three
Surfaces (i. e.) two Plains parallel and a Unequal begirter, whereof the two
Plains parallel are called the Bases, and are both Circles or both Ellipsis, or
else one a Circle and the other an Ellipsis, and the Unequal Surface is called
the Zone; in which Zone there may be every where a right line applied from any
point in one base to some point in the other: and if such a Cylindroid be cut
with two Plains meeting in the Centers of both Bases, cutting (or rather
inserting) conjugate Diameters in both Bases, Then: If you put C=the sollid
Content of a Cylindroid. A and B aloft=the two rectangled conjugate Diameters.
G and H below=the two rectangled conjugate Diameters. A and G opposite=the two
correspondent Diameters. B and H opposite=the two correspondent Diameters. Also
P=the perpendicular height of the Cylindroid, Then: ^


13. To cut the Cylindroid with diverse Plains parallel, the Plains being of one
common distance, and that distance being taken for Unity in the lineal
Mensuration of the Cylindroid: To do this from that Base wherein G and H are
Conjugates, you shall make P) A - G (=D and P) B - H (=d, and Then: ^

All to be divided by 3,82.

If it shall so happen that A=B and G=H, it is the frustum of a Cone, Then: ^

All to be divided by 3,82.

If it shall so happen that B=H, Then: ^

All to be divided by 3,82.

If it shall so happen that B=H=G, Then: ^

All to be divided by 3,82.

If it shall so happen that A=B=G=H, Then it is a Cylinder: to be divided by
3,82.

14. Now instead of P=the perpendicular of the whole height of the Solid, if
you shall put p=the perpendicular height of any part thereof, from that Base
wherein G and H are Conjugates, and C=the solid content of the Cylindroid at
that height, then it holds as in the margin: ^

But if such a solid have not its Zone made by Circles or Ellipsies but by four
flat sides at right angles to the foresaid Conjugates, then it is a Prismoid:
Nevertheless the Rules before prescribed hold to all intents and purposes, if
you take away the Divisor 3,82 and in the room thereof place the Divisor 3.

15. This last Proposition to find the Content of the Cylindroid or Prismoid at
any height or depth may be also performed by the Table of figurate Numbers
following, thus: 1. Having got the first Frustum, first, second, and third
differences (if there be so many) of your Solid, multiply them by the
respective numbers in the Table at that height or depth. 2. Add all these
Products together into one Sum, having respect to the signs + and - (if they
shall be so signed) and this Total is the Content of your Solid at the height
or depth proposed.


A Table of Figurate Numbers for the speedy Collection and exact Correction of
the first, second and third Differences, in finding the Content of the
Cylindroid or Prismoid.
Depth. 1 Frus. 1 Diff. 2 Diff. 3 Diff. 01 1 00 000 0000 02 1 01 000 0000 03 1
02 001 0000 04 1 03 003 0001 05 1 04 006 0004 06 1 05 010 0010 07 1 06 015 0020
08 1 07 021 0035 09 1 08 028 0056 10 1 09 036 0084 11 1 10 045 0120 12 1 11 055
0165 13 1 12 066 0220 14 1 13 078 0286 15 1 14 091 0364 16 1 15 105 0455 17 1
16 120 0560 18 1 17 136 0680 19 1 18 153 0816 20 1 19 171 0969 21 1 20 190 1140
22 1 21 210 1330 23 1 22 231 1540 24 1 23 253 1771 25 1 24 276 2024 26 1 25 300
2^00 27 1 26 325 2600 28 1 27 351 2925 29 1 28 378 3276 30 1 29 406 3654 31 1
30 435 4060 32 1 31 465 4495 33 1 32 496 4960 34 1 33 528 5456 35 1 34 561 5984
36 1 35 595 6545 37 1 36 630 7140 38 1 37 666 7770 39 1 38 703 8436 40 1 39 741
9139 41 1 40 780 9880 42 1 41 820 10660 43 1 42 861 11480 44 1 43 903 12341 45
1 44 946 13^44 46 1 45 990 14^^0 47 1 46 1035 15^^0 48 1 47 10^^ 16^^^ 49 1 48
11^^ (...) 50 1 49 11^^ (...)

3. The construction of this Table is very easy, for you may see it is nothing
but a Collection of Unites: But to make the respective numbers in this Table
for the first, second, and third Differences to any Depth proposed, without any
gradual Collection, this is the Rule.

If you put D=the Depth

^

16. The symetry of like Superficies and like Solids. Superficies are like, and
Solids are like, if the Angles be equal in number and quantity,

17. Like Superficies are one to another as the Squares of their Correspondent
Sides: Like Solids are one to another as the Cubes of their Correspondent Sides.

CHAP. VII. Of the Construction and Use of the Scale of Ponderosity (commonly
called) the Stillyard.
1. A Right Line resting on a fulciment equiponderate being proposed: Then if
any ponderosity shall be applied to a point of Pendency in that ^ine; it ought
to be understood, that that Ponderosity is transplanted from the Fulciment to
that point of Pendency: But if any Ponderosity shall be withdrawn or taken away
from a point of Pendency in that Line, it ought to be understood that that
Ponderosity is transplanted from the point of Pendency to the Fulciment.

2. A Right Line resting on a Fulciment equiponderate being proposed: If diverse
Ponderosities shall be pendantly applied on sundry points of that Line, so that
the said line be equiponderate again: Then the facts (of each Ponderosity by
its transplantation from the Fulciment) on this side the Fulciment, are equal
to the facts on that side the Fulciment.

3. A Right Line, resting on a Fulciment, equiponderate by diverse
Ponderosities, pendant in sundry points of that line, being proposed: If two of
the Ponderosities pendant shall be transplanted, so that the said line be
equiponderate again: Then the facts of each Ponderosity by his distance run in
transplantation are equal.

4. If a Stillyard or Scale of Ponderosity, or (as the Dutch call it) the Roman
Beam, be true, ( i. e. does give the truth) in two points (the farther distant
the better) it is true in all the points of pendancy throughout, the Divisions
being equal.

CHAP. VIII. Of the four Compendiums for quadratique Equations.
IN these four Compendiums you have both the affirmative and negative Roots
symbolically expressed, z being the unknown Symbol in each Equation, (but made
known by each Solution) a being the known factor in the first term; b being the
known factor in the second term; r being the resolvend.

But if at any time an Equation shall be proposed, encumbered with vulgar
fractions, let be reduced to its least terms in whole numbers, if possible; if
not, let it be reduced to its least terms in Decimal^; and then it will fall
under one of these four Equations following.

In which Equations you must note, that if there be no known factor expressed in
the first term, then a is understood to be unity: Furthermore, it is evident,
that if any quantity shall be signed -- that then t^^ the Square Root, or the
Root of any ev^^ power of such quantity so signed, is in^^plicable: Therefore
when this shall happen in the Solution of any Equation wha^soever, that
Equation may be said to (...) impossible.

^

CHAP. IX. Of Recreative Problems.
Problem 1. To find a, b, c, three numbers under this qualification. aa= bb+
cc. ques. a? b? c?

Sol. A= nn+1. B= nn-1. C=2 n. You may put n=any number.

Probl. 2. To find a, b, c, three numbers under this qualification. ab+ bb= cc.
ques. a? b? c?

Sol. A=2 n+1. B= nn. C= nn+ n. You may put n=any number.

Probl. 3. To find a, b, c, three numbers under this qualification.

a+ ab+ bb= cc. ques. a? b? c?

Sol. A=2 n+1. B= nn-1. C= nn+ n+1. You may put n=number.

Probl. 4. To find a, b, c, d, e, five numbers under this qualification.

a+ b= c. cc- a= dd. ce- b= ec. Ques. a? b? c? d? e?

Solution ^ ^

^ ^ ^

You may put n=any whole number. But note, that every Equation is to be reduced
to its least terms, if need require.

Probl. 5. To find the Content of any Sollid made by Rotation, if you can get
the ratio of the Squares of its Ordinates, to any rank of Rect^ngles: This is
the Theorem.

If two ranks of Quantities or Numbers be proposed (in any qualification or
order whatsoever) having one common ratio between each pair of Correspondents:
Then in both ranks their Correspondent Sums o. Differences have the same common
ratio. This Theorem holds as well in Superficies if you can get the ratio of
the Ordinates to any other rank of Quantities o^ Numbers.

FINIS.
GAUGING EPITOMIZED: OR, An Abbreviation of Solid Geometry, concerning the
Business of CASK-GAUGING, taking a Cask in any of the Four Notions following.
By Michael Dary.
PREMONITION.
IF you put D=the Diameter of the Bouldge, d=the Diameter of either of the
Heads, and y=D ^ d; (...)=the length of the Axis of the Vessel, and C=the
Content thereof, the dimension being taken in Inches.

Prop. 1. If a Cask be taken as the middle Frustum of a Spheroid, intercepted
between two Planes parallel cutting the Axis at right angles: Then, 3, 82)
2DD+ddxl. (=C.

Prop. 2. If a Cask be taken as the middle Frustum of a parabolick Spindle,
intercepted between two Planes parallel, cutting the Axis at right angles:
Then, 3, 82) 2DD+dd-0, 4yy ^^(=C.

Prop. 3. If a Cask be taken as the middle Frustum of two parabolick Conods
abutting upon one Common Base, intercepted, etc. Then, 3, 82) DD+dd x1 ^.(=C.

Prop. 4. If a Cask be taken as the middle Frustum of two Cones abutting upon
one Common Base, intercepted, etc. Then, 3, 82) DD+dd-yy x1L(=C.

Now if you would have the Content in Beer Gallons, you must multiply 3, 82 by
282, makes your divisor=1077 fere: If you would have Wine Gallons, 3, 82 x 231
makes your divisor=883 fere. And from these two divisors, you may Calculate
Tables for Wine or Beer Measure: For the square of any diameter in Inches
divided by 883, is the Construction of the Wine Table; or by 1077, is the
Construction of the Beer Table: And either of these Table have their second
differences equal, therefore they will be made by an easy Collection.

If a Cask be not full ( the Axis being posited parallel to the Horizon) ^^^nd
the quantity of Liquor contained in it.

To do this, you ought to have a Table of the Segments of a Circle, who^ Area
is unity, the Diameter being divided into 10000 equal parts, and then this
Approximation is the readiest hith^ to used, which requires this Data; the
whole Content of the Cask, the Diameter at the Bouldge, and the wet Po^^on
thereof; and the Proportion runs thus:

As the whole Diameter, is to its wet Portion; so is the Diameter in the ^able,
( i.e. 10000,) to its like Portion: Which being sought in the Table of
Segments, abutts you to a Segm^^, by which if you multiply the whole Content of
the Cask, the Product is the Content of the remaining Liquor in the Cask.

Here follows an Account of some Addenda to, and Faults ^scaped in, Dary's
Miscellanies.
PAge 4. might have been added, or T)RZ-RR(=T of A. p. 11. l. 10. for right
anguled r. rectangular. l. 14. for rectanguled r. rectangular. p. 14. pr. 7.
should run thus, The 3 Angles of any Spherical Triangle being given, there are
likewise 3 sides of another Spherical Triangle given, whose Angles are equal to
the sides of the first Triangle, if you take the Complement to 180 degrees. of one
of them, but most conveniently of the greatest. p. 19. l. 1. for fact of the
sides r. fact of the sines of the sides. p. 20. after the orthographical
Projection should have followed, By this means all Circles of the Sphere
perpendicular to the Plane, are projected into Right Lines, those parallel to
it into Circles of the same bigness, and all other into Ellipses. So after the
Steriographical Projection, By this means, all great Circles of the Sphere,
passing thorough the Eye and Touch-point, are Projected into Right Lines, and
all other into Circles, and the Angles in this Projection are equal to their
Correspondent Angles on the Sphere. So after the Gnomonical Projection, By this
means, all great Circles on the Sphere perpendicular to the Plane, are
Projected into Right Lines, all those parallel to it into Circles, and all
others into Hyperbola's, Parabola's or Ellipses, accordingly as they cut or
touch that Great Circle of the Sphere which is parallel to the Plane, or do
neither. P. 23. l. 15. for Legs r. Sides. P. 25. l. 2. and 4. for 12, 5637 r.
12, 5664. P. 27 l. 1. for and Chord r. and a Chord; l. 4. for -15B r. -16B. P.
28. after Prop. 15 should have followed, The Area of a Parabola, is (...) of
the circumscribed Parallelogram of the same Base and Height; and the distance
of its Center of Gravity from its Vertex toward its Base, is of its Altitude:
Moreover in a Semiparab^la the Center of Gravity, is in a Right Line parallel
to the Base. at of the Height; and in a Right Line parallel to the Axis at
(...) of the Base. P. 19. Prop. 18. should run thus, If a Sphere be inscribed
in a Cylinder, and that Cylinder be Cut with Planes at Right Angles to its
Axis, then the intercepted Surfaces of the Cylinder are equal to the
intercepted Surfaces of the respective Segments of the Sphere. P. 31. l. 1. for
the begetting r. the Area (...) the begetting; l. 13. for 8B+7b r. 8B+^Bh^-3b.
P. 32. l. ult. and P. 35. l. 14. and 17. for 8DD+7dd r. 8DD+4Dd+3dd. P. 35.
Prop. 12. should run thus, By the word Cylindroid is meant a Solid contained
under three Surfaces (i.e.) two Planes parallel and a Peripetasma, whereof the
two Planes parallel are the Bases, and are both Circles or both Ellipses, or
else one a Circle and the other an Ellipsis, and a Right Line extended from the
Center of one Base to the Center of the other, may be called the Axis of the
Solid; and in the Peripetasma a Right Line may be any where applied from Base
to Base, being in the same Plane with the Axis of the Solid.

But if such a Cylindroid be Cut with two Planes meeting in the Centers of both
Bases, Cutting (or rather Inserting) ^ectangular Conjugate Diameters (or Axes)
in both Bases, then etc. P. 37. l. 2. for diverse r. many. P. 39. l. 3. for Zone
r. Peripetasma; l. 6. for to the foresaid Conjugates r. between themselves,
then it is a Prism or Prismoid. P. 42. l. ult. for quantity r. quantity, and
their sides proportional.

This Table of Wine Measure should have come in Page 35. of the Miscellanies.
The Names of Wine Vessels. Cubical Inches. Pints. Quarts. Gallons. Runlets.
Hogsheads. Tercions. Pipes or Butts. Tuns. 1 Tun 58212 2016 1008 252 14 4 3 2 1
1 Pipe or Butt 29106 1008 0504 12^ 07 2 1 1 1 Tercion 19404 0672 0336 084 04 1
1 1 Hogshead 14553 0504 0252 063 03 1 1 Runlet 04158 0144 0072 018 01 1 Gallon
00231 0008 0004 001 1 Quart 00057 0002 0001 1 Pint 00028 0001 1 Cubical Inch
00001


