THE EPILOGUE TO The Five Papers Lately past betwixt the Two PHYSICIANS Dr. O.
and Dr. E.

Containing some Remarks, Pleasant and Profitable, concerning that Debate, And
the Usefulness of VOMITING and PURGING in FEVERS.

By AND. BROWN, M. D.

Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni* EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid,
Anno DOM. 1699*

THE EPILOGUE, etc. OR, Some Remarks on the late Debate about the Usefulness of
VOMITING in FEVERS. etc.
THO I have been much solicited, to show my Opinion, about the Debate betwixt
the two Physicians, concerning Vomiting in Fevers, in regard of its Affinity
with the Practice of Purging in Fevers, which was mantain'd by me some years
ago, and violently opposed by a certain Club of Physicians; I yet delayed to
give my Sentiments therein, until I should see whether the Learned College of
Physicians would interpose therein, and what would be their Decision and
Suffrage: For the Eyes of all Men were upon them, expecting that they would do
something in it, whose Province it is, either to compesce or determine such
Differences among their own Members, that the World might receive Satisfaction
in these Controversies, which concern our Lives and Health; But whether they
consider not that it belongs to them, or that they know not what to do therein,
I am ignorant: For there is neither any thing done that way, nor intended so
far as I can learn: Thus in the great Concern of Life and Health, every one is
left to his own Capricious Opinion, at Hap-hazard, to take up with what he
pleases, without being beholden to them for Light and Di^ection in such
important and intricat Concerns, what to sollow or what not: As whether or not
a Patient that has been made Vomit only with Whey, may be said to have been
vomited by a Physician, and the Direction ought to be found upon the
Apothecarie's File; and whether a Vomiter being given by a Physician in a
Fever, and the Apothecarie's File referred to; One would think it had rather
been an Antimonial Vomit, than a Vomit of Whey. And whether after twice
Vomiting of a Patient with Whey, and purging him with two lenient Potions, and
two Clysters, may one Ounce of Vomiting Wine, with three drams of Syrup of
Buckthorn be given the 9 th day of a Fever? Or whether there be always as much
hazard in Plentiful Purging, as Bystanders apprehend, who never were acquainted
with the Purging Method in Fevers? And whether or not by the vain Fears of
Friends and Bystanders, a Faithful and Expert Physician may be blunder'd, and
a good Method disgraced? And whether dallying and triffling with a Fever, tho
less exceptionable, be not more dangerous, and often of more fatal consequence,
than Plentiful Purging? And whither upon any extravagant Purging, the Quieting
Medicine being a ready Remedy, since in the controverted Case it was not given
till the Ordinary's return to the Patient; May it be thought there was no need
of it before that time?

These I take to be the most material Points in this Debate, which seems to be
handled with a little more Heat and Humor, than is consistent either with the
Import of the Matter, or Dignity of the Members of so Judicious a Society, who
would be expected to treat all their Matters, and seek to advance the
Improvement of Medicine, in Candor, Amity, and Peace.

Now, if I may lawfully interpose my Sentiments in these Matters, since the
same has such Relation to the Debate about Purging in Fevers, wherein the rest
of the Physicians being concerned either as immediate Actors, Inciters, or
Connivers, so exercised me* that there passed betwixt us no fewer than eight
Pieces in Print: Which terminat in another Sub-division of the College it
self, whereby they are now split into two halfs* and parties, into Guelphs and
Gibellins, which Rent still continuing, has of late broken out into this new
Debate, whereupon there has passed five Pieces.

However others may think of all this, my humble Opinion in the first place is,
That this last Contest has made so plain, profitable, and pleasant a Discovery,
that it may atone for the Scandal of all the former Divisions, Animosities,
and Ruptures: O blessed Breach, and happy and fortunat Rent! that has brought
forth so much Light to Medicine, that does so far approve of the Usefulness of
Purging in Fevers, as to allow of Vomiting therein also, as may be seen in the
Papers on both sides; And as ex malis moribus oriuntur bonae leges, Ill manners
beget good Laws; So we may see Debates, Divisions, and Differences may bring
profitable Things to Light, which would have been otherwise hid: As Sampson
killed more Philistines at his Death, than in all his Life; So it may be hoped
that this Division and Debate may occasion the killing of more Fevers than
their Concord either ever did, or in appearance would have done. And as the
best Antidote for the Venom of the Viper is the Viper's flesh, so it is hoped
this wound may prove the true Cure of the virulent opposition this way of
treating of Fevers has formerly met with.

And who would not rejoice to see such clear Light arise in Our Horizon of
Medicine, as to behold the Credit and Authority of the Sagacious Dr: Sydenham,
avouched and mantained, and his Judgment and Candor in his Writtings fully
asserted by both Parties: And especially his method of Treating Fevers by
purging, which had been too long and too much opposed by many in this place, to
the unspeakable loss of Medicine, and Detriment of Mankind.

And tho Dr. Sydenham in his last work, his Schedula monitoria, only appoints
purging in Fevers, and does not go the length of Vomiting. Those disputants
seem so far to approve thereof, that both of them allow of giving Vomits, in
some cases also; for which the Authority's brought by the One, seem to be
needless, since it is not denied by the other party; But since these
Authorities may make the Reader apprehend that the Purging in Fevers, is no new
Method and Practice: and that it was in use before Dr. Sydenhams time. It is to
be remarked, that Purging and Vomiting in Fevers, were used only now and then
before his time, and as some Indications did Require, but were not used
generally, or in great and dangerous Fevers, because the Commotion often times
raised by the Operation of the Purgative or Vomitive, did frequently Exasperat
the Fever, which made the Physician often times Repent his use thereof; And so
Purging and Vomiting, was wholly laid aside with us, and the Cure Committed to
Cooling ptisans, Emulsions, Clysters, Cordial, Iuleps, etc. And that often times
with as little Reason as Success: For the Disease going to a Crisis, the
Patients Life was always in hazard, because in every Crisis, Nature stands as
it were Hovering and In suspense, as it were with an equal Balance,
indifferent to Life or Death, which may be casten as with a grain, and he that
suffers the Disease to go to a Crisis, does just as if he would throw the Dice
upon his Patients Life: Whereas Dr: Sydenham considered that the Evacuation of
the Morbifick Matter, did profitably intercept the Crisis, and was the thing
indicated and required in the Cure of Fevers, and that it could be done by
Purging and that any Commotion raised by the Operation of the Purge might be
Commodiously allayed, by giving the Paregorick, Pacisick, or Quieting Medicine,
and thus the Morbifique matter, might be Evacuated, and a Hazardous Crisis,
profitably prevented, without any Superveeuing Commotion, or the Exasperating
the Fever, whereby the Patient had the direct Benefit of the Purging, without
the accidental and Noxious effect thereof.

And as there are two ways of these Fevers, so there are two several ways of
practicing of this Method, for sometime these Fevers are more Slow, Long, and
Chronical in their Motion and progress; And sometimes they are more Rapid,
quick and Peracute, and come quickly to an end either to Health or Death; In
the Slow and Long Fever. Gentle Purges Repeated at intervals are most
Convenient, and there the quieting Medicine is Scarce needed: but in the quick
and Peracute Fevers, sharp Purges and Vomiters which work speedily, must
without delay be given: For the Slow and Lenitive Method, in a Peracute and
quick Fever, never stops its Course nor obviats its Carrier: And as this seems
most reasonable and suitable to Experience, so it is very conform to the
Practice of an Eminent Author Dr. Panthot President of the College at Lions,
who in a Book lately emitted by him, shows that as the frequent use of
Cordials, in Fevers is very hurtful, because moving the Humors with a fretful
Agitation, they Drive them to the head. So he used only Bleeding and frequent
Purgatives with a Laxative Ptisan taken several times a day, without delaying
Purging, as Hippocrates teaches, to the end of the Fever: And if Dosings,
Ravings, Convulsions or any other Frightful Symptoms did arise, then instantly,
and without Hesitation, he appoints Emetique Wine to be given, than which he
knows not a better Remedy. And there is an Abstract of his Book to be seen in
the Miscellany Letters of the works of the Learned Emitted at London May 1695.

Now as to the controverted case betwixt the two Disputants. If, Dr: O: when he
came to the Patient, who was treated before only with gentle Purgatives, and
found him under any pressing Symptoms, and the Fever growing, I humbly suppose
he did not amiss, to give Emetique Wine, and in such a dose as the Patient
could bear. And to say the truth* the doses of Emetique Wine are very various,
according to the Disposition of Patients, and their Easiness to be moved, some
taking two ounces for a dose, and other only two drams.

And considering that upon any exorbitant effect of the Purgative or Vomitive,
the Pacifique or Quieting Medicine is instantly to be given* and in regard in
this case, it was not given till the Ordinaries return, we may construct in
Charity that there was no need there obefore, and the Bystanders and Friends
their apprehensions and fears about the patient might be groundless, they never
having seen any in a Fever treated so, for the Purging method in Fevers had
always been Disguised and couched by Physicians; and the Bystanders keept
always in ignorance about it, (As witness somes calling the effect of a
Purgative quietly given, a Natural looseness which would carry off the
Disease,) and if these Fears were improven by any upon sinistrous designs, they
could not do a more wicked thing, that being the way to fright timorous People
from the use of this profitable practice of purging in Fevers. And both Reason
and Experience will show to these that are acquainted with this way of Cure,
that there is more Danger often times in the neglect of plentiful Evacuations, than
by the use of them, But as it is not good to overact a Cure, so it is not safe
to Dally and triffle away time, which is sometimes very Precious, Occasio
praeceps, Opportunity Slips and Medio Tutissimus ibis, the middle way is the
Safest, But in my humble opinion a Patient that survived so great and so
Plentiful Evacuations, would not probably have been cured without pretty
considerable ones, and some more they Dalling and Triffling or Couching and
Dissembling the method. But since our Disputants seem to be agreed about the
substantials of this way of treating Fevers by Purging and Vomiting, Pray let
them not squable about the Circumstantials, and let them strive to out do on
another in Effectual and Speedy Curing, without either overacting the Method,
or shooting short of it: And I can tell them from Experience, that its hard to
be believed, how great Evacuations in many cases are not only tolerable, but
also required in the Cure of Fevers, which we may the more freely venture upon,
having the Quieting Medicine always at hand, to check any Exorbitancy that way.

But by the by, it may be observed how pretty Divertising it is,
notwithstanding the great Opposition made to this way of curing Fevers, to
behold the Reception it now has, and to see persons at such Variance, yet
substantially agree in this Practice, which is indeed no small Argument for it,
like the Jews and Christians, who both agree to the Authority of the Old
Testament: And if we narrowly observe several Physicians Practice, we will see
some may be catched stealing into this Practice, and some too Cavalierly
marching into it, some like Firrets and Moles working under Ground, and some
frolicking and vapouring it.

As it has been the Fate of all new discoveries, and Discoverers, to meet with
opposition, and Contradiction, witness the opposition made to the Circulation
of the Blood, and the Cure of Agues by the Jesuits Bark, no wonder this
improvement of thus treating Fevers, should meet with the same Lot, especially
when it Receded so much from the common Road, which treated them only with
Cooling Ptisans, Emulsions, Clysters, Cordial Iuleps, etc. But when ever such
improvments come to take place, Physicians either Jugle or Labor to Disguise
them, or with more Resolution than Reason, strives who shall be fore-most
therein, and extend them farthest, as was done with the Jesuits Bark, which was
not only rashly used in all continual Fevers, but by some most Proposterously,
to the Cure of most Diseases.

I hope then it will not be unpleasing, that I offer my humble Sentiments, in
Relation to the Solution of this Moral Phenomenon, these strange appearances
of the Actions of Men, in their Opposing, Shifting, or Streaching things at
this Rate, to the great Detriment of Medicine in particular, and of Mankind in
general.

In regard new Discoveries in Medicine appear not at first to every one so
plain and clear, as to silence Contradiction, they are sure to meet with
opposition from the weak and less Perspicacious, and with Quible and Cavil from
a Spirit of Detraction in Elder Physicians, who are Jealous that new improvement
Derogate from them, or their Experience, or that they are in hazard thereby to
be reduced to the same level with younger Physicians, and be put to go to
School again to learn a new, and with all they abominate any thing that may be
in hazard to convict their former practice of Error or mistake; Tho such an
error seems Venial until the occasion of delivery from it appear, but the
Mischief is, that the pride of Self-seeking Men is such, that before they will
Acknowledge the least Bleemish or Infirmity they will run the hazard of being
the greatest Criminals Under Covert, not only by the Mischief they do by their
own Contempt of such Practical Improvments but by their Example and Authority,
drawing many younger Physicians after them, some following them out of
Reverence, and others out of Fear.

But for the more full clearing this Matter, it would be considered, That as
all Men may be divided into these four sorts, so Physicians are likewise
divisible into as many kinds -- The first sort are of these who have a great
Stock of Sense and Learning; And withal, no less Ingenuity and Candor. The
second sort are these who have much Ingenuity and Honesty, but little Sense and
Learning. The third sort are these who have much Sense, etc. but little Candor
and Ingenuity. The fourth are these who have little Learning and Sense, and as
little Ingenuity and Candor.

For the first sort, as they will quickly discern, take up, and follow new
Improvements, they will as readily own, maintain, and endeavor to propagate
them.

For the second sort, tho they be long in discovering such Improvements, yet
their Honesty makes them Modest and Doubtful, and keeps them from opposing
them, waiting until their weakness comprehend them.

For the third sort, tho they quickly discern such Improvements, yet for By
respects, and Sinister Ends, they are shy in falling in with them, or if they
do it, they Iugle and Dissemble the Use of them, and labor to disguise them,
in so much, that by their hidden and reserved following them, they are so
straightened, that they never come to any Perfection in them.

For the fourth sort, as they are slow in taking them up, so they are long in
owning them, after they take them up, and as they are the most constant, so
they are the most violent Opposers of them, and always until it be a Scandal so
to do, their Judgment taking as much time to be Convinced, as their Honesty to
be engaged to own or Defend them.

And I may say of these two last Sorts, if they shall also be Cursed with any
considerable Degree of Credit or Reputation, to plague the World, and to hinder
the Good of Mankind, by the propagation of such an Improvement as this. ( for
Fortune never bestows her Gifts so blindly as upon Physicians) When ever such
come to discern and follow it, unless they be past feeling, and have their
Consciences wholly Seered, they will be affected with a Torture and Remorse,
proportionable to their guilt, and their accession to so many Deaths, as has
been caused through their contempt of this Method, and that not only within the
Verge of their own practice, but also within the Sphere of Activity of their
Credit and Authority, which may perhaps be no small precinct to some, it being
very plain that he that neglects the right way to cure his Patient, while it is
in the power of Art to help him, is as guilty as he that directly maletreats
him unto death.

And there is no Physician who rightly understands the import, weight, and
intricacy of his Employment, and the great Charge lying on him to be
accomplished therein, so far as is possible for Study, Enquiry and Search to go,
who will leave any stone unturned, to find out a more effectual cure of Fevers,
than that which has been commonly used, by Bleeding, Cooling Ptisans,
Emulsions, Clysters, Cordial Iuleps, etc. which every Apothecarys Boy can by
Rote tell, as perfectly as the Physician himself; And which can be made evident
to do more hurt than good, beside the loss of time spent upon such triffling.

Now if every Physician would be pleased to Examine himself, and consider what
his behavior has been, in Relation to this Improvement, he may thereby know
what place he may take in the foresaid Scale, for according to his Approbation
or Opposition of this Improvement, his Iugling, Shuffling or Plain dealing
therein, he must necessarly be ranked; But all Men may see, what place our two
Disputants have, who notwithstanding of their Animosity and difference, do both
in their practice and Writings, own and maintain Dr. Sydenham and his Writings,
wherein he delivers this way of Treating Fevers, and they being of two
different parties, Guelphs and Gibellins, we may also guess at the Sentiments
of their Respective Associats.

So it is hoped now, no Physician in this place will any longer Bogle or Scar
at this way of Treating* Fevers or Shuffle Iugle, or Dissemble it, to the
scandal of their Profession, the straitning of themselves, and the marring of
their own and others accomplishment in this practice, For I am certainly
informed, that the Apothecaries begin to practice it, with the greatest Freedom
and Success; And One of them told me, that he has not only seen many others
cured that way, but that also he himself was Cured of a most desperate Fever,
by Purging: And that he was happily treated that way, by the Joint Advice of
the Physicians who waited on him, and that at that time few Physicians approved
of, or publicly owned that way.

And tho as both our Disputants remark, Dr Sydenham in his last work, the
Monitory Schedule, only says, This Method is preferable to all others in very
many kinds of Fevers, yet thereafter he told to my self, and to several others,
that he doubted not, but it would agree with all continual Fevers, tho he did
not think fit, to publish all that he thought of it, because it might derogat
from some of his former Writings, and he judged it would never be left off,
when once it came in use, because he doubted not but it would be always more
succesful than any other way, and through all constitutions of years, and as he
had practiced it several years before the last Edition of the Schedula 1687; so
I have practiced it with the greatest success ever since, being 12 years: and a
Cure that has holden so many years, it is not to be doubted but it will hold
good always, tho in difficult and dangerous Cases, it requires great Care,
Diligence and Caution, and Dexterity therein, can only be acquired by exact
Attention and Consideration, and due Experience; and this may be a Reason why
some Physicians are unwilling to take up with it, as being averse to give the
Attendance sometimes requisite in this Cure, and these who want Experience
therein, can only bungle at it, and know not how to go through with it; For in
difficult and dangerous Cases, like the Management of a Ship in a Storm, where
the Master must not only always be at the Helm, but also be well acquainted
with the way he ought to take; So it requires not only the Physician to be
close at his Post, but likewise to be no Stranger to the Way he ought to take.
And especially in the Fevers that reign at this time, which are most part Quick
and peracute, and cut off in a few days persons of impure Bodies: And as I
have used this Method by Vomiting and Purging in many, and most successfully,
at this time, so I have had lately considerable Experience thereof in my own
Family, Wherein Four of my Children, and Ten Servants had the Fever, and
blessed be GOD, all are Recovered; By repeated Vomiting, with Antimonial
Vomits, and frequent Purgings; Except two Servants, the one having gotten a
great Stress at work, who bragging of his strength, did contend with his
Neighbor at the Mowing of Hay, and presently sickned, and died the sixth day,
and whom I saw not till the day before he dyed, and found him in such a
condition, that I could not give him either Vomit or Purge; and the other was
his Neighbor who strove with him, being a Man of a most Impure and Emaciate
Body, who had endured want and Stress before he came to my Service, and who got
not all was necessary, because he had not the occasion of due Attendance, all
my Servants being sick at the time, And as both my Children and Servants that
recovered, were Vomited several times with Antimonial Vomits, besides frequent
Purging* so it was astonishing to consider the quantity and Corruption and
Virulency of the Matter Vomited up by them, and as I have in this matter
sincerely told the Truth, which is also for the most part nottour in the place:
So every one may judge how Malicious the Reports industriously spread abroad of
me, Are, Viz. That seven of my Servants are lately Dead in Fevers, under this
Cure, Whereas tho I have kept Servants near these Thirty years, Except these
two, I had never any before that Dyed in my Service, tho the Fever has several
times before been in my Family, and among my Servants and Children, I hope the
Reader will not think this Digression altogether impertinent, or out of Vanity,
since it is both for my own Just and Necessary Vindication, and the defense of
this profitable Practice.

Yea I hope I might be also allowed to say something now also by the by, about
other Calumnies and Slanders raised, and Propogate against me about the cure of
the Gout, Especially by a certain Person ^ho keeps a Publick-house, and whom I
^erved most diligently, without any other Grarification, but Slander and
Backbiting, for the Errors committed most unreasonably by the Patient, and
which slanders some Physicians also take pleasure to Trumpet abroad, tho many
other Gentlemen may from their Experience testify the help I have given them in
that Disease, if they please; And the Balsome I use, therein is the same with
that used at London, and aproven by ^0 Members of the College of Physicians
there* as has been frequently mentioned in the Gazette; But of this enough at
this time: Another time if there be any more Reason for it, may do as well, and
verbum Sapienti sat est, a word is enough to a wise Man.

But to return to the purpose, it is further to be remarked that as Persons of
impure Bodies and abounding with vicious humors are most subject to these
Epidemical Fevers, so they are in most peril thereby, wherefore all such
Persons would be admonished, that by the Advice an able Physician, in such an
Epidemical time, they would make use of fit means for Prevention, whereby th^^
may either escape the Fever, or if they be seized, it may thereby prove more
Benign and easily curable, and among all the remedys for Prevention, as well
as for cure, I know none more effectual as is mentioned in the Letter insert in
Dr. Os. last piece than Antimonial Vomits, which notwithstanding the fear some
People have of them, may be so ordered, that they will work with as much
security and ease, as a Purgative Medicine, and such Vomits not only prepare,
and open the way, for the more effectual operation of Purges, But also one
Vomit has more effect, than two Purges; which is of considerable advantage in
Peracute and quick Fevers, which still require a speedy remedy by Evacuation,
and no alteratives or Correctors of vicious Humors, can so suddenly restore,
and alter such a corrupt mass of Humors, as are usually evacuat in Fevers by
such Vomits.

Now considering this whole matter, the Opposition this practice has met with,
and progress it has made, (the full and clear History whereof, may perhaps
hereafter be published for satisfaction of the curious,) it is humbly proposed
and referred to the serious consideration, of all Physicians, whether or not
they ought to be very wary and tender in their behavior, about the
Discoveries, Inventions and Experiences of others, and whether or not they
rather ought, to inquire, ponder, and Modestly be informed about them, than be
rashly driven by a spirit of Pride, Humor and Caprice, to run them down by all
their power, and all Younger Physicians especially, would be exhorted to beware
whom they take for Patrons and Examples, for ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius,
the best Stock of Natural Sense and Learning being little enough for a
Foundation to make a competent Physician; and without it, tho they grow old in
practice, they will never acquire true Skill and Real Experience in this
difficult, intricate, and important Art, and Fame, and Reputation more rarely
accompanyes real Merit in this Faculty and Function, than in any other
whatsoever. The Vulgar upon whose noise Fame depends, being more competent
Judges in any thing, than in the intrigues of this hidden Art.

If some younger Physicians shall be pleased here to enquire, since they have
not Experience themselves, and that they must lean to the Experience of Others,
how shall they discern the Men of Real Experience, true Skill and Merit; and
distinguish them from Men of mere Vogue and Fame: For the Satisfaction of such,
and as a mean to prevent their being initiated in the Errors and Mistakes of
Others, which being once taken up, are not easily forgone. I hope I may be
allowed to make a little Digression to admonish them, that they ought to be
very cautious how they are led by the Dictates and Sentiments of these three or
four sorts, whatever Vogue and Reputation they have. The first are these, who
by driwing the Trade of Commeradship, Good Fellowship, and Bon-Companionrie
have gotten many Familiars and Acquaintance* who will cry them up for great
Physicians, for all know how generally acceptable such Conversation is, and
what a Noise so many Mouths well tuned up this way make.

The second Sort are, These who are High flowne or bigoted to a Party, either
in Religion or State, and these who make more than an Ordinary Semblance and
show of Probity, whether Real, or Affected only I will not determine, but the
Opinion of a Goodman, a Man of Probity or Integrity, tho they also know him to
be a very weak man, goes a great way with the Vulgar to make a good Physician;
especially the Vulgar of the Respective Parties they are of.

The third Sort are, These interested in some great Families, as having been
Domestics, etc. Or otherwise concerned therein, and who thereby come to
Reputation, Great Persons being called Gods, no wonder they aim at Creation,
and the making Men out of Nothing, and in no Faculty such an Exploit as this
seems so easy, as in Physic. There is also a fourth sort, that by a Gentile
mien screw themselves into Peoples Liking and Familiarity* or by a Facetious
Conversation, by making Sports, and by telling little quirck knacks and
Mimical-Stories, to divert whereby they gain the Opinion of being thought Witty
and fine Men, while there is nothing solid or profitable to be found in their
Conversation; but since the most part are more delighted with shows or with
vain and froathy Discourse, than with what is serious, solid, and useful, and
that Fame Buoyes up gliter things, letting the weightier fall to the bottom, no
wonder such be easily carr^ed on the Wings of the Wind.

But to insist too much upon such things may be rather constructed an Invective
against the Elder, than an Admonition to younger Physicians. Certain yet it is
the profession must be fallen into a strange Declination and Deliquium, which
makes it so much Depretiated, and Vilipended, that not only weak Physicians,
but any either He or She, without Exception, come to be Trusted in the most
Intricat and important concern of our Lives and Health, and that with, or
before the most Accomplished Physician, yea, and without any other
Qualification, but an impudent pretending to understand the thing* which is
impossible for them to Comprehend, Whereas there is no thinking person, that
makes a due Reflection upon the Intricary, difficulty and Danger, attending
Medicinal Practice, that will think it so easy a thing, to have true Experience
therein, tho every on Braggs of their Experience. Experience being a Faculty or
Power acquired by constant and serious Observation, whereby the Physician is
able rightly to Father the given Phenomena, or Visible effects upon their
propper, ^o hidden Causes. And felix qui potuit ^erum Cognoscere causas, the
link betwixt Cause and Effect, lies often too deep for Vulgar Eyes to discover
it. And Consequently there is no Judicious Person but must Confess, that there
is none Capable of any competent degree of Skill, or true Experience in this
Art, who is not endued with the most Extraordinary Enduements of Mind, a most
Penetrating Wit, an enlarged and most Comprehensive Genius, Capable to Reach,
View, and Ponder the State and Concurrence of all Circumstances of things and
their Productive Capacities, relating to Experience in Practice, a ready Wite
to Canvasse, and Examine, and a Solid and Sure Wit, to make Happy-hits, and he
that is Pregnant in Medicine, where ever he shall turn his Eyes, whatever Object
he Surveys, or subject, he shall bend his Mind upon, by his Pregnancy of
Spirit, he will be Capable of making therein the like clear Discoveries and
Just Hits. Solid and Sound Reasoning, makes Solid and Sound Acting; Those that
Clinsh and Quible, that Wrangle and Cavil in their Reasonings, as all
Weak-headed People do, are apt to do so in Action and Practice, about whatever
Subject they meddle. A great General, Politician or Lawyer would upon
Application that way make a Good Physician and vice versa, a Qualified
Physician, had he followed any of these Studys, would have been Exquisite
therein; And as we may give the pre-eminence for difficulty and Intricacy to
Physic, beyond all other Studys, so it is clear that Physic may be allowed to
need the greatest Pregnancy of Wit and Judgment of any other Studys, and
wherever the Young Physician sees not these in the Physician he follows; It
is in vain for him to expect their Real Accomplishment, True Skill, or
Experience.

The Physician not only being a Moderator of the secret works, and of the hid
intrigues of Nature, but is also put upon the rack and hard task of Governing
and Disciplinating Peoples Humors, prejudices, and Caprices, and has often
more difficulty to graple with these, than with the diseases of the body, yea
not only the Patients, but the Friends and Bystanders by their mistakes and
prejudices must give him needless Work and trouble; But in this part of the
Employment, the best Physician is often outdone by the Weakest, who is more
successful herein, than the ablest, Quia Aquila non captat Muscas, the Eagle
never catches Gnats, he that is taken up with, and most Conversant in, the
Difficultys and Misterys of that Art, and has his mind in sublime, to him, it
is tedious to stoop to the Servile Trivial and mean-work of crouching to every
Caprice and lying at Catch upon Peoples Humors, or waiting and Watching the
Tides and turns thereof; And this Studying and Serving Peoples Humors, has to
the Scandal of the Profession, made some Physicians forego the Study of Nature,
and take themselves to the Study and Exercise of Politic complaisance, and
Sycophantish Humouring Persons: not finding the true study* and practice of
Physic, able to recommend them, and so instead of following Medicinal
Prudence, to treat Diseases with due Circumspection, Caution and Art, they
follow a kind of Bastard prudence, or rather Artifice and Cunning, to Cajole
the Humors, and strike in with the Fancies and Whimzies of Weak persons, and
Young Physicians would be admonished that they follow not the Example of such.

Thus as Vulgar opinion Error and mistake as given occasion to the Deradence
and De^y of Medicine: So these vices ought not ^o be obtruded on the Art of
Physic, being thus brought thereinto, Neither let the uncertointy or
Conjecturalness thereof, be objected, since it is thus also made a great deal
more so: than otherwise it would have been, Neither are the Differences and
Disagreement among Physicians to the Disparagement of true Medicine, seeing
vulgar errors, etc. has given too much occasion for these also.

Tho Physic of its own nature has no more Uncertainly or Conjecturalues than
these other noble and useful Proffessions of War, Law, Politics, Navigation:
in all which the event can be no more predicted or ascertained than in Physic,
and all that the Artist is Accomptable for, being the Rational and Prudent
conduct, that nothing be Overdone or Undone, that was Possible to have been
done; or that Art and Skill could suggest, nevertheless through the many
Diversions and discouragments Physicians ly under, from Vulgar Prejudice Errors
and Mistaks, the practiss thereof is made a great deal more both Uncertain and
Uusuccessful then otherwise it would be. And for the Debates and Differences
among Physicians, when they break the bonds of Charity and Humanity, they are
only the faults of Men not of the Art, but when they are only in opinion, they
are no more than what is incident to all other Professions, that are versant
about particular Events, and pertinent debaits are a token of great industry
and of a laudable Emulation. And when Men's Wits are all of one Size, their
Penetration and Comprehension of the same Reach, and their Judgment of the same
vigor, then may we expect their Opinions shall Iump; And I doubt if the 15
Lords of Session are always Unanimous in there Votes and Decisions or if the
Council of state, or a Council of War are all of one Mind, and yet no body
takes occasion from that to disparage there procedure.

And for the most part, these Differences and Debates among Physicians, proceed
from the Pride, Self-conceit and Envy of some Physicians, whom Vulgar Opinion
has mounted upon a Higher pinnacle of fame, and Reputation, than their true
worth and Merit, can Maintain and Suport, and whose Real Weakness and Emptynes
chaffes and rages to see any worthy thing done in Physic but in dependence
upon them fearing they may be overtoped by others whom their Eminence used to
look down upon, whereas the Ab* Candid and Honest Physician, will soon discern
and Cordialy welcome what is worthy in Medicine, from whomsoever it chances to
come, but that which he thinks Futile and Trivial will nothing move him, nor
will he ever make it the Ball of Contention, as some have most unmercifully
done, by my sincere, tho weak Endeavors for the Advancement of Medicine. But
Thanks be to GOD, who favoring my honest purposes, has helped me to weather
out so many storms raised against me, for my plain Dealing about some Dismal
Sinister and Self-seeking Designs, and some dangerous Vulgar Errors Prejudices
and Caprices, such being of mischievous Consequence in Medicine, more than in
any other Profession, as they are in Public Societies, and Governments more
than in private Cases.

And tho the evil Spirit that raged against me, be not yet quite subdued and
Conquered, yet I hope the Edge thereof is considerably blunted; Providence
having brough(...) about some considerable things to disc(...)ver my Innocence,
and the Folly and Wicked ness of these Secret Works, hatcheed so much in the
dark to control my Endeavors, that they can now scarce find a Father to own
them, every one denying they(...) Accession to the Lybels printed on th(...)
Subject, and shifting them from one to another, except one poor Creature, who,
call(...)ing himself a Stripling aged 27 Summer did most unhappily put his Name
to h(...) Elaborat six days Work: But this Striplin(...) reckoning his Age by
the Summers, as th(...) Horses Age uses to be reckoned by th(...) Grass, must
needs be a Kin to that Animal, and it is no wonder, than if a Young Colt, has
been more foolhardy than the Rest.

Whoever shall narrowly view how thing(...) often go in the World, may be in a
Horror to think that in many Cases there is no Convincing Men, that they are in
the wrong Way, without the most lamentable and woeful Experiences, and that so
man(...) Deaths, so much Destruction and irreparabl(...) Ruin, is sometimes
needful to open Men(...) Eyes, and the dearest bought Experienc(...) to cure
their Blindness, and that ov(...) Belly of Somes Zealous and constant
Endeavors, to convince them of their Mistakes and Errors, as may be eminently
seen i^ this Case, and I fear it be not the on^ Case.

He that takes upon him to be an At(...), because he takes on him the Office or
a Preacher to the World, according to the Opinion of some, he ought to have
these 3 Qualifications. First, The Courage of a Soldier, to encounter and
combat Ignorance, Errors, and Caprices, these obstinat Enemies of all Virtue,
Justice and Truth. The 2 d. The Sense and Solidity of a Statesman, that he
cumber not the World with any thing Trivial or unworthy. The 3 d. The Sincerity
and Integrity of a Dying Man, that he impose nothing false, or sophisticate in
point of Fact or Reasoning. And how my Performances in this, and my former
Essays, have answered these Qualifications; I must submit to my Readers, who
seeing they are not all alike capable, to the weakest sort of them I crave
Liberry to propose these following Considerations, before they give their
Sentence, as first, That they would be pleased to consider the strange Schock
of (...) and Universal Opposition, I have had the small assistance of any Man,
as (...) my first Book, predict and expect. ^dly. What estimate and value may
be upon my Subject, which is a more ^^tual way of treating these Formidable
^^uers, which are a Terror to many Persons ^^d Families, and which now seems to
have (...)rage of the most decerning part of (...) here.

But for the third Qualification, since it is ^ot so obvious to Men, I Bless GOD
I have (...) clear Conscience that I never told any thing but Truth in the
Commendation, and instances of the Success of this way of treating Fevers, and
even from my very Heart and Soul, and that by innumerable and repeated
Instances, and Experiences these 12 Years confirmed.

Now in the next place, it is but Reason^^le I should whisper my Enemies in the
(...)r how many of these Qua^^^ications they ^^n make good to Vindicate their
Be^omming Authors, for I fear if their Read^rs lay aside the Cavilling and
quibling ^he Bitter and Malicious Invectives and Slanders, there will be little
left (...) Books, either Good or ill.

I shall only give the Reader one of they(...) mildest Bourds, because they
thought i(...) Master-peice of Wit, and it is in the end (...) their Dialogue
thus, that they would no allow me to come into the Rank of Authors, with the
Infamous Tartaretus, who wrote de modo Cacandi, because, say they, with a
Perverted Authority, Mihi ex pejori luto finxit proecordia Titan, but whoever
will take the Pains, to view the whole of the Treatment in this matter will,
surely see it was not the Itch of Writing took these Men, it has been the Scab,
the Leprosy, and Botch of Writing, or rather Scribbling and Blotting that
seized them; Such Blunders against any Man, tho only Verbal are Scandalous
enough. But if for well doing they are Divellish, as being not only the
brandeing the Innocent but Truth and Righteousness it self(...) But Committed
to Print, they fix Eternally and ^^^elibly the Blackest stain on the Auth(...)
and Abettors, both in the Eyes of (...) and Man, unless it be wiped off, as I
pray it may be, by their sincere and hearty Repentence. But let them kno(...)
is no true Repentance without a Pr(...) Amendment, and endeavor (...) (...) of
the Damnage they ha(...) ^one the thing, not me, I mean.

Non tollitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THE Vindicatory Schedule concerning the new cure of ^^vers, etc.

De Febribus continuis Tentamen Theoretica-Practicum. etc. both showing the
Nature and Cure of Fevers, by the Author of this Epilogue; Sold by John
Vallance Bookseller near the Cross, Edinburgh.


