MIRACLES WORK'S Above and Contrary to NATURE: OR, An Answer to a late
Translation out of Spinoza's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, Mr. Hobb's
Leviathan, etc. Published to undermine the Truth and Authority of Miracles,
Scripture, and Religion, in a Treatise ENTITLED MIRACLES no Violation of the
LAWS of NATVRE.

Sicut non fuit impossible Deo quas voluit instituere, sit ei non est
impossible in quicquid voluerit quas instituit mutare Naturas. D. August. de
Civitate Dei, l. 21. cap. 8. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith at the Princes
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

MIRACLES WORKS Above and Contrary to NATURE: OR, An Answer to a TRANSLATION,
etc. In a TREATISE Entitled MIRACLES no Violations of the LAWS of NATVRE.
TO the Compiler of this Treatise we are engaged for two things. The Treatise
about Miracles a Translation out of several Authors.
1. The Collection of the several parts of his Work out of several Authors, and
the tacking of them together. 2. The Translation of each part out of the Latin:
A Method much in use of late, to Copy out the pernicious Authors, as well as
Practices, of former times, and instead of sitting down and putting their own
Invention upon the Rack, to take a more easy and compendious way of doing
Mischief, by Transcribing or Translating for the greedy reception of the
present Age, whatever has been formerly written tending to the subversion
either of Religion or Civil Authority. The former of these is unquestionably
the Design of this Treatise; since the asserting, That there is no such thing
as a Miracle, i. e. a Work above Nature, undermines the Foundations of both Law
and Gospel, overthrows the Credit and Authority of Divine Revelation, and
remits us either to a bare Religion of Nature and Morality, or to none at all.

The Authors Spinoza, Mr. Hobbs, and Mr. Burnett.
The Book (to Assign to each Author his share in it) consists of Two Parts. The
latter, which is the main, from the middle of the third Page to the end of the
Book, is wholly (except two or three Authorities in the last page) a bare
Translation of the Sixth Chapter of the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, written
by Spinoza. Which Chapter he seems to have made choice of out of that Author,
as effectual by it self to compass the design of his whole Treatise: viz. To
instill the Principles of Deisme or Atheism into the minds of his Readers. The
other part, which takes up the two first Pages and half of the third, is a
Translation likewise of part of Mr. Hobbs's Chapter about Miracles in his
Leviathan, Part 3. cap. 37.
from whence he has taken as much as he thought would make for his purpose, and
seem to be of a piece with the other Translation out of Spinoza, to which he
has prefixed it.

Introductory to the Book there is a Premonition to the Reader. And here we
might justly expect from him to speak himself, and to give us a free and
ingenuous Account of his Authors, his Translation, and the Design of it. But
the greatest part of this too is Borrowed (or Translated, whether you please)
out of Mr. Burnett's Telluris Theoria Sacra, Lib. 1. c. 11. p. 114.
and the rest only some brief Touches of what he has after more at large out of
Spinoza.

Of his Three Authors, the last I believe, Mr. Hobbs and Mr. Burnett against
the opinion for which they are produced.
is not very proud of the company of the other two; and therefore is not much
obliged to his Translator for clapping him and them together as Confederates
and Brethren in Opinion. But it is more pertinent to observe, that two of the
three are clearly against him in their sense about the main point in
Controversy. Spinoza indeed is the great Patron of his Assertion, viz. That
there is no such thing as a Miracle, if we take the word to signify a Work
above or beside Nature. But Mr. Burnett and Mr. Hobbs are point blank of the
contrary mind, and therefore either they must speak very inconsistently, nay in
effect contradict themselves, or what he here produces out of them cannot be
drawn to favor his and Spinoza's Opinion; and so the co-herence of the several
parts of the Collection will not appear to be very great, nor the Harmony very
agreeable, to any that shall first consider each as they stand apart in the
distinct Authors, before he examine them as they are here associated in the
Rhapsody of this Treatise.

To begin with Mr. Hobbs, whom we have least reason to suspect to have any
wrong done him, we have no more to do but to read the rest of that Chapter,
where the Translator leaves him, and we shall soon find that he admits and
supposes Miracles in that very sense, wherein he is produced to deny them here.
For, First, He defines a Miracle to be, A work of God beside his Operation by
the way of Nature ordained in the Creation; which is flatly contradictory to
that Assertion, That nothing can fall out but according to the order of Nature.
2. He infers from that Definition, That a Miracle is not the effect of any
Virtue in the Prophet whose Doctrine it confirms, but of the immediate hand of
God: and that no Devil, Angel, or created Spirit can work a Miracle. Which
Positions (however questionable if understood of a delegated Power in Men or
Angels) are sufficient to demonstrate that it is his sense, that there are
Miracles or Works above Nature. For if there are Works wrought which no finite
Spirit, nothing but the immediate hand of God can effect, these certainly must
surpass the force of Nature, she working by second Causes in all her Operations.

How Mr. Hobbs's Doctrine destroys the Authority of Miracles.
It is to be confessed, That Mr. Hobbs does in his own way, as well as Spinoza,
destroy the Authority of Miracles by his Doctrine: in as much as he does not
admit them for sufficient Credentials of the Divine Mission of any Prophet,
when the Doctrine he reveals does not square with the Religion established by
the Civil Magistrate. So that all the Miracles of our Savior and his Apostles
were of no force, because the Doctrine they taught contradicted the established
Tenets of the superstitious Jews, and the Idolatrous Gentiles. Yet, though
these two Authors (equally to be honored for the good Service they have done
the Christian Religion) agree very well in the main Design, they differ
notwithstanding very widely in the way of compassing it, as far as the opposite
parts of a contradiction can set them at odds: the one Asserting that there are
works above Nature, the other denying it: So that the Author of this Collection
was not very well advised to think they would cotton so well together; and
ought rather to have tried first how far the Work might be done by one of them
singly, and to have reserved the other for a new expedient if the former had
failed.

Mr. Hobbs then, we see, asserts there are Miracles. And so does Mr. Burnett in
Words most express, and in the very same Paragraph, part whereof he has quoted
out of him in the Latin in his last Page, and at very little distance from the
very Words, there quoted to represent him as an abettor of the contrary
opinion, Lib. 1. c. 11. p. 138.
Certissimum est (says he) a Divina Providentia ( pendere res omnes cujuscunque
ordinis and ab eadem) vera miracula edita esse.

It is, I think, a sufficient prejudice against the opinion which he produces
these Authors to insinuate and patronize, or at least his judgment in the
choice of his Authors, that two out of three declare flatly against him in that
Point. Yet it is possible that, as he produces them here, they may both better
consist with him and Spinoza than with themselves. This therefore comes to be
examined, and will lead us gradually to give a particular Answer to each part
of the whole Work. We begin therefore with the Premonition to the Reader, he
there with Mr. Burnett.

What he takes from Mr. Burnett, The first part of the Premonition taken out of
Mr. Burnett.
is out of the eleventh and last chapter of the first book of his Theory. Mr.
Burnetts Words are these, In ea sum equidem sententia, Authors Sacros cum de
rebus Naturalibus Sermones habent, etc. Upon these the Translator thus varies
in the first Words of his Premonition, It is the judgment of most of the
Ancient Fathers of the Christian Faith, and of the most learned Theologues of
the Moderns, that the Authors of the Holy Scriptures when they speak of Natural
things, etc. And so goes on with the rest of that Page, which he translates
more faithfully: what he designed in this amplification, whether to amuze his
Reader, oblige Mr. Burnet, or to make a fair show of his own great reading, I
shall not enquire.

The Sum of it.
The Sum of what he has out of Mr. Burnett is this, That the Authors of the
Holy Scriptures where they speak of Natural things, design only to excite Piety
and Devotion in us, not to improve us in the knowledge of Nature. That agreeably
to this Design, they explain the visible Works of God in a manner suitable to
the received opinions of the vulgar: they wrest the general causes and ends of
the whole Creation in favor of the Peoples prejudices, as if all things were
ordained only for the good and benefit of mankind: they do not make mention of
the ordinary train of second causes in the productions of Nature, but recur
immediately to God himself, the first Cause, Author and President of it, and
compendiously refer all things to his immediate Power, and to his irresistible
Will and Command.

The design of Mr. Burnett in what he speaks there.
All Mr. Burnett's design in this, is to excuse himself for giving a
Philosophical and Mechanical account of the Deluge and other grand Effects in
the Sublunary World; as the Original of the Mountains, Rocks, Islands, Ocean,
Rivers, etc. in the Terraqueous Globe. The production of all these the
Scripture immediately refers to God: and Divines ordinarily speak of them as
Effects supernatural and miraculous; viz. That God by the same powerful Word,
whereby he created Heaven and Earth, cast up the Mountains, and cut out the
Channels for the Rivers, and that vast cavity for the immense Ocean, commanded
the waters into one place, Genesis 1. v. 9.
and made the dry land appear. And by the like command, Gen 6. v. ^, 1^.
when the wickedness of man was great upon the Earth, and the end of all flesh
was come before him, opened the Catarrhacts of Heaven, Genesis 7. v. 11.
and broke up the Fountains of the Deep, and destroyed all mankind, except
eight persons, by a deluge of Waters. To this Mr. Burnetts Answer is, That it
is in no wise necessary that these effects should be conceived to have been
wrought by miracle. For the Scripture, that it does not appear that they are
recorded for Miracles there, because the Scripture immediately refers effects
purely Natural to God, and makes no mention of the train of second causes
subservient to God in their production: the design of the sacred Writers, when
they speak of natural things, being not to instruct us in the knowledge of
Nature by giving us a Philosophical account of their mediate causes, but to
excite in us Piety and Devotion, by working in our minds a true sense of the
Power and Providence of Almighty God, to which all things owe their original.

This is the intent, scope, The conclusion which the Translator draws from Mr.
Burnett's principles.
and drift of Mr. Burnett's Words, as they stand at home in their proper place;
but here they are applied to far different purposes, as appears by the
Conclusion the Translator draws from them, when he comes to speak himself: viz.
That these things considered.

1. We are not to admire, if we find in the Holy Scripture many memorable
things related as miracles, which notwithstanding proceeded from the fixed and
immutable order of Nature, etc.

2. (Which is but the application of the former) We ought not rashly to accuse
any Man of Infidelity, only because he refuses to believe, that those Miracles
were effected by the immediate Power of God, etc. Which conclusion of his

1. Is just the quite contrary to Mr. Burnett's.

2. Destroys the authority of Scripture, and leaves us free to disbelieve any
Miracle recorded in it for such.

This conclusion* quite contrary to Mr. Burnett's.
1. It is quite contrary to Mr Burnett's. Mr. Burnett's way of Arguing is this,
The Scripture immediately refers to God things which are purely the effects of
Nature. Ergo, we cannot justly conclude, that what effects the Scripture
immediately refers to God, those it records for miracles. Yes (says the
Translator upon the same grounds) we may conclude that it records them for
Miracles, and this too we may conclude over and above, that the Scripture
records such effects for Miracles which really are the Effects of Nature.

It destroys the authority of the Scripture, and the belief of Miracles.
2. It destroys the authority of Scripture, and leaves us free to disbelieve any
Miracle recorded in it for such. For first it makes the Holy Scripture guilty
of Imposture, and that not in a small matter, but such whereupon depends the
authority of all the revelations made therein by God to mankind: for upon the
truth of those relations in Scripture, wherein these Miracles are recorded as
matter of Fact, depends the certainty of the Divine Mission, of Moses and the
Prophets, our Blessed Savior and his Apostles, and consequently the authority
of the Doctrine which they revealed. 2dly, It takes away the only (...) which
we have, to discern whether the effect it relates be a Miracle or not. The only
thing whereby we can know it is from the Scriptures manner of relating it: if
it relates one thing for a Miracle* which is not, all may be, for ought we
know, of the same Nature. And so farewell both the belief of Miracles and the
Scripture it self.

I presume that he does not play with us in a matter of this importance, i. e.
That he does not mean by the Scriptures relating such things as Miracles, only
that it relates the production of them in such Terms, as Idiots and Illiterate
Persons may from thence conceive that they are supernatural Effects (for then
all he says will be very true, but withal very impertinent) but that it sets
them down for Effects Miraculous and Supernatural as much as any in the whole
Bible. And if he means thus, I have already hinted the ill Consequences of his
Doctrine, It does not follow from Mr. Burnett's Principles.
and how disagreeable his Conclusion from Mr. Burnett's Principles is to that
which Mr. Burnett himself draws from them, and shall proceed now to show how
unnaturally it is drawn from such premises.

I shall not stand to make any tedious Reflection upon each particular in the
summary Account which I have given above of what he has out of Mr. Burnett; How
far each Particular, in what he has from Mr. Burnett, is true.
but I shall apply my self chiefly to the Consideration of that whereupon he
seems wholly to build his Conclusion. All that I shall say to the rest is this,
Touching the design of the Sacred Writers when they speak of natural things, I
grant it to be such as is there suggested: And, That in subordination to that
Design, they may be conceived to explain the visible Works of God in a manner
suitable to the received Opinions of the Vulgar; i. e. To speak their Sense and
Dialect about Natural Things, when they do occasionally speak of them, and to
comply therein with their common prejudices; as Moses seem to do Genesis 1.16.
where he ranks the Moon with the Sun as the other great light, i. e. the next
or only one besides of considerable magnitude; speaking there agreeably to the
appearance of sense, and the apprehension of the vulgar grounded thereupon. Yet
not that they are obliged to comply with all their prejudices neither; For this
is one, That every considerable Effect in Nature is miraculous and
supernatural: And the Design of the Sacred Writers does not oblige them to
condescend so far to the apprehensions of the vulgar, as to relate every effect
for Miraculous which they conceive to be so. Their Design is, Not to instruct
us in the knowledge of Nature, but to excite Piety and Devotion in us. The
utmost therefore that Design will oblige them to, in this regard, is to make no
mention of the Train of second Causes in the Productions of Nature (which
effectually answers the first part of their Design) and to ascribe all Effects
to God as their Author (which as fully answers the second) and nothing of all
this amounts to a Relation of the Effects of Nature for Miracles, as will
appear immediately.

To the next thing, That they wrest the general causes and ends of the whole
Creation in favor of the peoples prejudices, as if all things were ordained
only for the good and benefit of Mankind: I deny that the Scripture wrests the
ends of the Creation; for this were to make the parts of the World be Created
by God for other ends and purposes than he created them for. All the Scripture
does is, that it mentions only those ends of Nature (out of many for which it
is ordained in the Divine Wisdom) that relate to the good and benefit of
Mankind (as for instance those ends only of the Heavenly Bodies, Genesis 1.14, 15.
That they are for lights in the Firmament of Heaven, and for Signs, and for
Seasons, and for Days, and for Years) yet it does not deny but that there may
be many other which to consider is not pertinent to its purpose. The Principle
from whence he draws his Conclusion.


But the Principle from whence he draws his Conclusion, is in the last words of
what he has out of Mr. Burnett: viz. That the Authors of the Holy Scriptures
make no mention of the ordinary Train of second Causes in the productions of
Nature, but recur immediately to God himself, the first Cause, Author, and
President of it, and compendiously refer all things to his immediate Power, and
to his irresistible Will and Command. Their recurring immediately to God
himself, and referring all things to his immediate Power, is to be understood
in this sense, Not that the Scripture declares these Effects to proceed from
nothing but the immediate hand of God (for this is to declare them to be
spernatural, and such then they are unquestionably.) But, That it ascribes them
only to God, and makes no mention of any Train of second Causes subservient to
him in their production. For Instance, the Scripture immediately refers the
Effects of Nature to God himself, in those places of the 147th Psalm where it
says, Psalm 47. v. 16, 17, 18.
He gives snow like wool; he scatters the hoar-frost like ashes. He casts
forth his ice like morsels. -- He sends out his word and melts them, he
blows with his wind and the waters flow. So when God says to Noah, I do set
my bow in the cloud, Genesis 9.13 1 Samuel 9.16.
and to Samuel, To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the
land of Benjamin. These Instances are his and Spinoza's, as appears p. 17th and
18th below in his Treatise. And the Scripture refers these Effects immediately
to God, as it mentions him only as the Author of them, and no other mediate
cause; not that it says that he alone Acts in the production of them, for this
were to relate them for Miracles.

The ground of the Connection of his Conclusion, with the Principle from whence
he draws it.
This therefore being stated, his way of Arguing will appear to be this, The
Authors of the Holy Scriptures make no mention of the ordinary Train of second
Causes in the Productions of Nature, but recur immediately to God himself, etc.
Ergo, they relate many things as Miracles, which yet notwithstanding are the
Effects of Nature. The Connection of this antecedent and consequent is by Virtue
of this Proposition, That the Authors of the Holy Scripture must be conceived
to relate those Effects as Miracles, which they immediately ascribe to God,
without mention of any second Causes subservient to him in their production.
The falsehood whereof I shall evidently discover. 1. By Instance. 2. From the
natural import of the words. 3. From the reason of the thing it self. 4. By
showing in some Instances what it is for the Holy Scripture to relate any thing
as a Miracle.

This ground proved to be false, 1. By Instance.
1. By Instance. Infinite would be the number of Miracles Recorded in Scripture,
if this were the (...) whereby we are to know what Effects are related therein
as such. The Scripture teaches us (from the mouth of our Blessed Savior) to
pray to God immediately for our daily Bread, for our Food and Raiment, for the
annual increase of our Corn, Wine, and Oil, for the former and latter Rain in
their Season. It takes no notice of the ordinary way whereby Nature it self
supplies us with these Necessaries, how our Corn grows in our Fields, how the
Vine sends forth her Grapes, how the Clouds drop Fatness: Psalm. 65. 9, 11.
But in a word, refers all to God without any more ado. He, it says, Visits
the Earth and blesses it: He makes it very plenteous: he crowns the year
with his goodness. In a word, Psalm. 145.16.
He opens his hand and fills all things living with plenteousness. Yet, I
suppose, it were very hard to infer that the Scripture sets down all this as
supernatural and miraculous: That it obliges us to conceive (not the Flood
only, but even) the former and latter rain to come down by Miracle: That it
prompts us to expect as supernatural a provision of our daily bread, as the
Israelites had in the Wilderness, Elijah in Horeb when the Ravens were his
Purveyours, the Widow with whom he lodged, whose Barrel of Meal was preserved
from wasting; or lastly, the four or five thousand fed by our Savior in the
Gospel, which I suppose was a work of Nature, but related in Scripture as a
Miracle, because it mentions not how the Corn grew in the hands and mouths of
them that did eat it.

2. The Natural import of the Words disproves this conceit. To be related as a
Miracle, 2. From the Natural import of the words.
is to be recorded for an effect of God's own immediate Hand and supernatural
Power. To be immediately referred or ascribed to God, without mention of a Train
of mediate causes, is quite another thing. There it is expressly or by
consequence declared; that the Work is above Nature; here it is left in Medio,
without any determination from the manner wherein it is related, whether it be
a natural or supernatural effect of the Divine Power. For instance, the
Scripture says in one place, Thou make Darkness, and it is Night. in another,
Psalm. 104. v. 20, 105. v. 28.
He sent Darkness, and made it Dark. In the former it speaks of the ordinary,
in the latter of the Egyptian darkness; and both it immediately refers to God,
mentioning no natural causes of the one or the other. Both of them it may thus
ascribe to God, though the one be the Effect of Nature, and the other a
Miracle; and therefore to ascribe any Effect immediately to God, is not to
relate it as a Miracle.

^. From the reason of the thing.
3. This will farther appear from the very reason of the thing it self. The
Scripture may justly ascribe to God all the Effects of Nature without
mentioning any train of suborbordinate causes, and yet cannot thereupon be
justly concluded to relate these things as Miracles. And this because first God
is the Author of Nature, by his Power, and the Governor and President of it by
his superintending Providence: therefore every Effect in Nature may be justly
ascribed to him as it is Author. 2dly, The Scriptures designs to speak of the
Effects of Nature only with regard to the Power and Providence of Almighty God;
therefore it may justly ascribe them to him without mention of the train of
natural Causes whereby he mediately produces them. If then any Effect may be in
this manner ascribed to God, and yet he be no farther the Cause of it, than as
he is the Author and Governor of Nature by his Power and Providence: if so,
then it is no just Conclusion, That the sacred Writers relate any thing as a
Miracle, because they immediately refer it to God without meniion of the train
of natural Causes subservient to him in the Production of it.

What it is for the Scripture to relate any thing as a Miracle.
4. But to give as full satisfaction as may be in this Point, (and withal to
show that, all this notwithstanding, there are some Effects so related in the
Holy Scripture, as that it may be justly conceived to have recorded them for
Miracles) I shall state, What it is for the Scripture to relate any thing as a
Miracle. It is not enough (as we have seen already) that it ascribes the Effect
to God as its Author: nor that it immediately ascribes it to him, without
mention that it is produced by the mediation of second Causes. For every thing
proceeds from him, whether it be by the course of Nature* or a Work of his
supernatural Power, and therefore is to be ascribed to him: and the Scriptures
ascribing of it to God without mention any other Cause, does not necessarily
imply, that no other Cause had any hand in the Production of it. But to relate
a thing as a Miracle, is to relate it for an Effect of Gods own immediate Hand,
or, an Effect above, beside, or contrary to Nature. And this may be done two
ways: 1. By express Declaration: 2. By relating it in such a manner and with
such circumstances as from thence we may rationally conclude the Effect to be
miraculous. For the first, there may seem to be very few instances if any,
wherein we can certainly assure our selves, that the Holy Scripture declares
any Effect to be a Work above Nature. For though it may and often does use the
Word Miracle, yet, that being Ambiguous, it may still be uncertain whether it
be to be taken for any thing more than an Effect Wonderful and Surprising
indeed, yet purely Natural. All which notwithstanding, in some places we may
truly vouch the express declaration of the Holy Scripture, that such and such
Effects are miraculous. Joh. 2.11. After the relation of our blessed Savior's
Turning the Water into Wine, the Text says, This beginning of Miracles did
Jesus. So also John 4.54. after the Cure of the Nobleman's Son, This is again
the second Miracle that Jesus did. In these two places the Scripture does in a
manner reflect upon the Works it had related, and declares them to be
supernatural. But by the Word Miracle may possibly be meant no more than an
Effect Strange and Wonderful, not a Work above Nature: unless we can give some
certain proof of the contrary. And I think this one Consideration may be
sufficient to evince it. The Design of the Scripture in relating these Works of
our blessed Savior, is to propound them to us as undoubted Evidences of his
Divine Mission. Now Evidences of that they could not be unless they were Works
above Nature, because an Effect of Nature cannot prove Gods immediate power and
presence, nor consequently confirm the truth of any Prophets Commission from
Heaven to reveal his Doctrine. For the Scripture therefore to relate these
Works of our Blessed Savior, as undoubted Evidences of his Divine Mission,
will argue that the Scripture where it styles these Works Miracles, Signs, and
Wonders, must mean strictly such as exceed the power of Nature: Otherwise it
would impose upon our belief, and oblige us under pain of Damnation to embrace
a Doctrine as Divine, upon such Evidences, as are in no wise sufficient to
confirm the Authority of the Person that reveals it. And upon this Ground we
might discover many more instances of Effects, expressly declared in Scripture
to proceed from God's immediate extraordinary Power. For it holds as well in
the Miracles of the Apostles as our Blessed Savior's, and in Moses's too, the
Scripture relating them as wrought to evidence his Commission from Heaven to
institute the Law, as well as those of our Savior and his Apostles to evidence
their Authority to Preach and Plant the Gospel. But if there were no such
express Declaration in the Holy Scripture, there are yet, 2. Many relations of
Matters of Fact couched in such Terms, as that we may justly conclude from
thence that the Effects there spoken of are related as Miraculous and
Supernatural. As, 1. Where the Effect is related as done without the use of
Means. So in our Saviors curing Diseases (and indeed Working most of his
Miracles) by the Word of his Mouth, turning the Water into Wine by the internal
tacit Act of his Will, etc. 2. Where Mention is made of Means used, but those
such as cannot be conceived to be in their own Nature proper or sufficient to
produce the Effect. As the Clay wherewith our Savior cured the Eyes of the
Person born Blind, the Spittle wherewith he loosed the tongue of the other that
was Dumb, etc. These effects may be justly affirmed to be related in Scripture
as Miracles: not upon this account, that the Scripture refers them immediately
to God without mention of any train of Natural Causes subservient to him in
their Production: it appears we have some surer Grounds whereupon to proceed in
examining what Effects in Scripture are related as Miracles, though that which
he would possess his Readers with the Opinion that it is the only (...) we
have, be (as has been showed) not only false, but ridiculous and absurd.

From what has been said, I may rationally draw these two consequences.

1. That for the Scripture to refer any Effect immediately to God, Corollary 1.
is not for it to relate the Effect as Miraculous: and therefore from its
referring the Effects of Nature immediately to God, we cannot infer (as he
does) that the Scripture relates many memorable things as Miracles, which yet
notwithstanding proceeded from the fixed and immutable Order of Nature.

^^^^llary ^.
2. That there are yet many Effects plainly related in Scripture for Miracles;
by it is express Declaration, and it is relating of them in such Terms, from
whence we may by undeniable Consequence gather as much. And so (supposing that
the Scripture is a true History, for which we have infinitely more evidence
than for any other History in the World) it follows evidently (against his main
Assertion) from the relations of these miraculous Effects in Scripture, that
there really have been Miracles in the sense wherein he denies them, i. e.
Works beside, above, and contrary to Nature.

But this Corollary (though very pertinent to our purpose) is ex abundanti: All
that we were obliged to, was to show, that the Conclusion which he draws from
the Principles he takes out of Mr. Burnett is false and illogical. Since
therefore Mr. Burnett asserts positively that there are Miracles, as is showed
above, and nothing here produced out of him can infer or insinuate the
contrary: we may justly demand both in his Name, and in behalf both of
Religion, Reason, and good Logique, that this part of the Premonition be
returned into the Place from whence it came, where it may stand with more Truth
and Coherence; and the Conclusion of the Translator left to stand apart by it
self, as a bold and (I may say) Impious Assertion without any Proof.

The rest of the Premonition considered.
But, not to wrong him, he has some Succedaneous Arguments in the close of the
Premonition: but these' as I before hinted, are only some brief Touches of what
we have after more at large out of Spinoza. viz. That for God to work by a
power immediate (or supernatural) is inconsistent with and Point Blank
repugnant the Fundamental Laws and Constistutions of Nature. (It sounds
somewhat like to the King's Prerogative being inconsistent with the Fundamental
Laws of Property and Privilege.) That these Laws are the Acts of the Divine
Wisdom, and extend themselves to whatever events he has Willed and Decreed:
that the power of Nature is infinite, as being one and the same with the Power
of God. He has one thing which he asserts besides, that among all the Miracles
related to be done in favor of the Israelites, there is not one that can be
apodictically Demonstrated to be repugnant to the established Order of Nature.
Now here I am not bound to Demonstrate it for his sake, for two Reasons. 1.
Because it were to prove a Negative, 2. Because his main Ground (or Spinoza's
rather) why he denies all supernatural Effects, is not upon account of his own
great reach in Natural Philosophy, whereby he could undertake to solve
Mechanically all the effects related in Scripture for Miraculous; but from
Arguments purely Metaphysical proving in his Opinion, the impossibility of any
such thing as a Work above Nature. For to this he holds and not the other, as
appears from p. 21. of the Treatise where he concludes absolutely (from his
Arguments against the possibility of Miracles.) That all the Events that are
truly related in Scripture to have come to pass, proceeded necessarily
according to the immutable Laws of Nature: And that if any thing be found which
can be apodictically Demonstrated to be repugnant to those Laws, or not to have
followed from them, we may safely and piously believe the same not to have been
dictated by Divine inspiration, but impiously added to the Sacred Volumes by
sacrilegious Men. So that unless the Scripture Miracles will submit to his
Touchstone, unless they will come and lay open their Occult Qualities, and the
whole plot and confederacy of those natural Causes that combined to Effect
them, he has an Index Expurgatorius to blot their Names out of the holy
Scripture, and a Court of Inquisition for those that relate them, to arraign
them for Sacrilege and Impiety: But I pass on to consider each part of the
Treatise in order.

The Sum of what he has from Mr. Hobb's in the beginning of the Treatise.
The Treatise is divided between Mr. Hobbs and Spinoza. Mr. Hobbs speaks as far
as to the middle of the third page, out of the Chapter about Miracles, in the
third Part of his Leviathan. He first explains the signification of the Word,
from its Etymology, and other words in sacred and profane Writers of like
import with it. From its Etymology he deduces that it signifies, A Work of God
which men admire or wonder at. Then proposes to enquire what works are such,
and reduces them to two kinds. 1. Such as are rare, and the like thereof seldom
or never seen. 2. Such as we cannot conceive to be produced by natural Causes,
but only by Gods immediate hand. He gives some Instances of both: An Ox or an
Horse speaking, Treat. p. 2.
preter-natural Births, the Conversion of a man into Stone, and the first
Rainbow that appeared. That such Effects as these seem Miraculous, because
rare, or no natural cause of them conceivable. On the contrary, the Works of
Art, however wonderful, not reputed to be Miracles, because their Causes known.

Upon the same ground he observes, That the same thing may seem to be a Miracle
to one Man, and not to another, in proportion to their different degrees of
Knowledge and Experience. So, Eclipses Miracles to the vulgar, not to
Philosophers: Simple Men made to believe that others can know their most secret
Actions by Inspiration, when the more wary and prudent perceive the juggle. So
far Mr. Hobbs here, in his Leviathan he proceeds to assign another property of
a Miracle, viz. That it be wrought to confirm the Divine Mission of some
Prophet or other, and then to give a definition of it: but there his Translator
leaves him, and passes on to Spinoza.

Before we follow him thither, Reflection upon what Mr Hobb's says.
we may reflect a little. 1. Upon Mr. Hobbs's Doctrine. 2. Upon the use whereto
he applies it. Mr. Hobbs informs us, What Works are by Men wondered at and
reputed miraculous: He shows by Instance, That they are such as are rare and
unusual, or such as we cannot conceive to proceed from Natural Causes.

He does not say, That this is all that goes to the making of a Miracle, nor
that this is the only Rule we have whereby to discern what Effects are such:
but that this is enough to make things seem to men to be miraculous, and that a
true Miracle is indeed an Effect rare and inexplicable, and somewhat more. If
he mean otherwise, he contradicts himself soon after, when he defines a Miracle
to be a Work of God (not conceived only, but really) beside his Operation by
the way of Nature ordained in the Creation: and infers from thence, That it
cannot be the Effect of any thing but the immediate hand of God. Yet, to clear
all; That a man cannot conceive such an Effect to proceed from Natural Causes,
may bear a double sense. 1. That he is not capable of assigning the Natural
Cause of it, or farther, of apprehending how it can be effected by any. 2. That
he clearly and distinctly perceives that it is impossible to be produced by the
Course of Nature. I grant that this is enough to assure a man that it is a
Miracle; but if he concludes it to be so in the other case, he is guilty of
presumption in measuring the extent of the force of Nature by the narrow reach
of his own knowledge or capacity.

The use whereto the Traslator applies what he takes from Mr. Hobb's.
This may prepare us to consider the use whereto Mr. Hobbs's Doctrine is applied
by his Translator. His Design is, before he come to Spinoza's Arguments against
the belief of Miracles, to make a discovery of the Causes that introduced this
grand Mistake into the World. Tr. p. 3.
And the first, as a Corollary from Mr. Hobb's Doctrine, he makes to be,
Admiration, and that proceeding from these two Causes, Rarity and Ignorance.
That is, all the effects which the deluded World has mistaken for Miracles, are
such as are only rare and unusual, and inexplicrable: and the Causes which make
mankind so prone to admit them for Miraculous, are our ignorance of the Causes,
and want of experience and observation of the Effects of Nature.

Where he takes Spinoza in hand.
The second cause which he Assigns of the belief of Miracles, is Superstition,
viz. That it is our hopes and fears which make us conceive every unusual Event
in Nature to be the effect of an extraordinary Divine Power, fore-bodding to us
some good or evil. And here he takes Spinoza in hand, and we come at length to
the main part of his Work, to which the rest is only Preliminary, and with what
Coherence and how much to his purpose, has already been showed. Before I join
Issue with him about the main Point in Controversy, I shall premise only this
short observation, in regard to what he says of the Causes of the belief of
Miracles. It may very well be granted him, that the generality of Mankind, who
are the Ignorant and unthinking Sort, are very prone to admire and wonder at
every considerable Effect of Nature, and to look upon it as proceeding from an
extraordinary Power, and the immediate hand of God: And that the Causes of this
may be their want of knowledge and experience, and their superstitious Hopes and
Fears. But to insinuate thereupon the same to be the only ground of the belief
of any Miracles, is very Presumptuous as well as Irrational: unless it could be
evidently made out that all Miracles are impossible; and to see how effectually
that may be done is our next Work, viz. to examine the Method wherein Spinoza,
and from him the Author of this Collection, attempts to demonstrate it.

Spinoza begins with a brief Account of the chief Heads of this (as he calls
it) popular mistake, Tr. p. 3.4, 5.
and the first Authors of it. These he makes to be the People of the Jews, who
to magnify their own Nation, as under a more peculiar care of the Divine
Providence than any other, and to set forth the greatness of the God they
adored above the Gods of the Heathen, recounted to them what mighty Works he
had done for them, and how all the parts of Nature, which the Heathens
Worshipped, were under his Command and Control. The particulars of this Error
which he recounts are these, That the ordinary sort of Men think that God's
Power and Providence does then most eminently appear, when any thing happens
contrary to what they conceive to be the Course of Nature. That they think
Nature's swerving from her own Laws, to be the best Argument for the existence
of a Deity. That they take those persons for Atheists, who attempt to deduce a
Miracle from Natural Causes. That they think God sits idle when nature acts in
her usual way, and Nature is suspended, whenever God pleases to interpose. That
they form in their brain a Notion of two Powers numerically distinct, the one
of God, the other of Nature, understanding not what they mean by either. And
that all this they do partly out of superstition, partly out of a desire to
oppose themselves to Men of more Wise and Philosophical heads.

I need not stand to examine the Truth of this Account: it appears to be purely
Declamatory, and not (which might have been more justly expected) a fair
opening of the state of the Question, and a Declaration what those of his
Adversaries hold concerning it, who take up the belief of Miracles upon better
grounds than vulgar Prejudice and Superstition. I shall have Occasion to do
that for him in what follows.

Tr. p. 6.
He proceeds therefore, and proposes to do four things.

Four Propositons laid down by Spinoza.
1. To prove, that nothing in the World happens contrary to Nature, but that
Nature keeps an eternal, fixed, and immutable Order.

2. To prove, that by Miracles we cannot know the Essence nor the Existence,
nor consequently the Providence of God: but that all these may be better known
by the fixed and immutable Order of Nature.

3. To show by instances out of the Scripture, that by the Decrees and
Volitions, and consequently the Providence of God, it understands nothing else
but the very Order of Nature, which necessarily follows from his eternal Laws.

4. To treat of the manner of interpreting the Scripture Miracles, and what is
chiefly to be observed in the Relations about them; or (as the Traslator) to
show that most Men have erred in the manner of interpreting the Miracles
recorded in the holy Scriptures.

Of these Four, the first only tends directly to prove his Assertion: the
second Obliquely strikes at the being of Miracles, as it makes them no
Evidences of the immediate Power and Presence of God, and so wholely useless
and insignificant, as no Proofs of what they are designed for. The other two
tend only either to draw the Scripture to his side, or to elude the force of
the Arguments brought from thence against him.

1. He is to prove, 1. Proposition.
That nothing in the World happens contrary to Nature, but that Nature keeps an
eternal, fixed, and immutable Order. Before I come to examine his Arguments, I
shall 1. State what is meant by Nature, and the Laws of it, in this
Controversy. 2. Lay down the main Grounds whereupon the possibility of Miracles
depends.

1. What is the meaning of the Word Nature, What is here meant by Nature and
the Laws of it.
and the Laws of it in this Controversy. A Miracle in the common acceptance of
the Word, which Spinoza opposes, is taken for a Work beside, above, or contrary
to Nature, beside the order, above the force, and contrary to the Laws of it.
Now the Word Nature may be taken in many Significations. Eeither 1. For the
Essence of any, but properly of Material and Corruptible Beings. Or 2. For the
Aggregate of them, the Material World. Or 3. For the Author of Nature, God
himself, called thence Natura Naturans. Or Lastly, For the Order of the several
Bodies, as they act amongst one another, according to their innate Powers and
Dispositions.

Now the acception of the Word here, is for the Aggregate of Bodies in the
World, and the Order wherein they act amongst one another: And so the Laws of
Nature must be, such as determine the Manner wherein Natural bodies act among
themselves; whether they be the general Laws of Motion, which determine how
each part of Matter must be moved upon the occurrence of other Bodies, or
particular Laws impressed upon their several Natures, determining each to act
in such or such a particular manner. The question therefore about the
possibility of Miracles, must be this, Whether there can be any such Effects in
the Material World, as are beside, above, or contrary to the Order wherein
Natural Bodies are determined to act among themselves: i. e. such Effects as
transcend their Power and Efficacy, and deviate from or are repugnant to the
general or particular Laws of motion determining them to act.

The Ground of the Possibility of Miracles.
2. The Question therefore thus stated, I am to show, what are the main Grounds
whereupon the Possibility of Miracles depends. And I think it may be rationally
deduced from these Principles. God is able to effect any thing which neither
does, 1. Imply a Contradiction in the Nature of the thing it self; nor 2. Is
repugnant to the Nature of God and his infinite Perfection. Omnipotence is
properly a Power to bring any thing to Effect which does not imply a
Contradiction: and the Contradiction must lie in one or the other of these two.
I am to show therefore that a Miracle, or a Work above Nature is, not
impossible upon either Account.

1. A Miracle does not imply a Contradiction in the Nature of the Thing. A
Miracles implies no Contradiction in the Nature of the thing.
Every Miraculous effect is either a Production of something by a Supernatural
Power or a Suspension or utter Abolition of its Being. The thing produced or
destroyed by Miracle, is either Matter it self, or a Form, Quality, Motion, or
any other Accident of it. 1. Matter; as suppose a new Portion of it created,
beyond the extent of this World; or the Matter of this World; or any
determinate Portion of it reduced to nothing. 2. A Form, Quality, Motion or any
other Accident of Matter; as suppose, 1. God should endue any part of Matter
with a Form, Quality, or any other Accident, above or contrary to what it other
wise might or should have, by the course of Nature. 2. God should divest any
part of Matter of any Form, Quality, Motion, etc. which otherwise it must have
by the course of Nature. Two kinds of Miracles therefore we have here: 1. When
a portion of Matter is created anew, or reduced to nothing. 2. When a Form,
Quality, or Motion, or aany other Accident of Matter, is produced, suspended,
or destoyed in a Supernatural Manner. And to these two are reducible all
Effects above or contrary to the Order of Nature; as the whole Frame and Order
of Nature, is made up of Matter, and the Forms, Qualities, Motions, and other
Accidents thereof.

Now neither of these implies a Contradiction in the Nature of The thing; It
implies no Contradiction for Matter to be (...).
1. It does not imply a Contradiction for a Portion of Matter to be created
anew, or to be reduced to nothing.

Matter in its own Nature is a Being possible and contingent: Possible, because
its Idea or Conception is not a mere Chimaera and a Notion that destroys it
self: contingent, because it is Idea or Conception does not include necessity of
Existence. If matter therefore be in its own Nature a thing possible, then
(unless the Matter of the present World be extended in infinitum (which is a
Contradiction) there is still room and possibility for more to be created: but
this must be by Miracle, quia ex nihilo nihil fit naturaliter. Again, if matter
be in its own Nature a contingent being, the Matter of the World, or any
determinate Portion of it may cease to be, or be reduce to nothing, but this
too must be by Miracle, quia in nihilum nihil revertitur naturaliter. Possibile
therefore it is in the Nature of the thing for a Portion of Matter to be
created anew, or reduced to nothing.

2. It does not imply a Contradiction for a Form, Quality, Nor for the Form
Sec. of Natural Bodies to be Supernaturally produced, or destroyed. Ex^d (...).
John 2.
Motion, or other Accident of Matter to be produced, suspended, or destroyed in
a Supernatural manner. For instance, the Form of a Serpent to be produced, and
again destroyed, in Aarons Rod: the form and qualities of Blood, in the Waters
of the Nile; of Lice, in the Dust of the Earth; of Wine, in the Water at the
Marriage Feast at Cana of Galilee. The qualities and powers of Sight in the
Blind, Hearing in the Deaf, Speech in the Dumb, Strengh in the Lame, Health in
the Sick, Life in the Dead: lastly the form of Bread, or the very Humane Nature
it self in the matter of a Stone: The motion of Ten degrees backward, in the
Sun, for a Sign to Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.^.11.
and the Suspension of his Natural Motion for a considerable time, at the
request of Joshua. Josh. 10. v. 13.
the production or determination of Fire from Heaven, at the Word and Prayer of
Elijah, upon his Sacrifice, 1 Kings 18.38.
and the Captains etc. sent to apprehend him: and the suspension of the action
of Fire in Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace. 2 Kings 1.9, 12.

Dan. 3.27.


The production or determination of the Wind to bring the Locusts, and drive
them back, and to force back the Waters of the Red Sea: Exodus 10.12, 14.21.
at the stretching forth of Moses's Rod: And the ceasing of the Wind and Storm
at our Saviors command.

In all these Instances there is nothing done, but only a Form, Quality,
Motion, or the like, produced, suspended, or destroyed in the parts of Matter,
by a Power above Nature. And that nothing of all this implies any Contradiction
in the Nature of the thing, may be thus made to appear. Matter in its own
Nature is indifferently susceptible of any Form or Qualities imaginable, and
therefore is in it self capable at any time of being without those Forms and
Qualities which it has, or of having any others instead thereof. Capable it is
of being without any particular Forms and Qualities which it has, because they
are each of them contingent and accidental to Matter considered in its own
Nature: For instance, that it should have such Magnitude, Figure, Texture,
Order and Situation, Motion or Rest of its sensible or insensible parts, and
constitute a Body of such a particular Nature, endowed with such and such
Qualities peculiar to it. Capable likewise it is at any time of having any
Forms or Qualities indifferently, because in its own Nature considered it is
susceptible of any, and in it is own Nature considered, not determined to
receive any one more than another. Now if this be so, it is then possible for
any Form or Quality to be produced, in any part of Matter, at any time; or to
be suspended, or destroyed utterly, in that Body which is endued with it: and
consequently for any part of Matter to be endued with such a Form or Quality,
which otherwise it could or ought not to have by the Course of Nature; or, on
the other hand to be divested of that Form or Quality, which otherwise by the
Course of Nature it must have had and kept* For instance, the water at the
Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee, could not at the bare Word or Will of Christ
by the Course of Nature have its Form changed into the Form of Wine, and yet
the Matter in it is own Nature was capable of receiving the Form of Wine, and
capable too of being without the Form of Water, though left to it self and the
Order of Nature it must have kept it. If capable of losing the one and
receiving the other, then it was possible for it to be turned from the one into
the other: if possible, then within the Sphere of Omnipotence to effect it: by
a Miracle though, Quia quid lilibet non fit ex quolibet Naturaliter.

All Motion in Matter capable of being suspended or destroyed.
The like may be said of Motion in Matter: it is wholely contingent and
accidential to it. It might in it is own Nature considered have for ever been
without it, and so have continued one great unwieldy Mass: now it has so great
a quantity of Motion impressed, yet all it is part may be again reduced to rest,
not by the Course of Nature indeed, but yet by a Power working above and
contrary to Nature. To press this further home, The whole order of Nature, ever
since the Production of it, has depended upon the Motion first impressed upon
the parts of Matters and the Power given them to transfer their Motions from
one to another: for hereupon depends all the Variety of Forms and Qualities,
all the various Productions in the World, wherein the Order of Nature consists.
Now this Motion, and this Power of transferring and communicating it, was at
first contingent, and so might not have been impressed upon Matter, is
contingent still, and so may be now destroyed, and then what b^^omes of the
Order of Nature.

There are therefore things possible which it is above the power of Nature to
effect, as the creation of Matter, etc. Other things which are contrary to
Nature and it is established Order, as the annihilation of the Matter of the
whole World, the suspension of that Motion in the parts of Matter, whereupon
the whole Order of Nature depends, the Production of any Form or Qualities in
Matter, howsoever in the Order of Nature unqualified to receive them, etc. In a
Word, The Matter of the whole World, and every Form, Quality, and Motion of
Bodies therein are things contingent, and so capable either not to be, or to be
othewise. And consequently the whole Frame and Order of Nature may be altered,
suspended, or reduced into nothing. A Miracle therefore, which is some of these
Effects, does not imply a Contradiction in the Nature of the Thing.

2. A Miracle is not repugnant to the Nature of God, The production of a
Miracle not repugnant to the Nature of God.
and his infinite Perfections. Not to his Power, because it is the Effect of
it, and not of a Principle opposing it self to him. Not to his Justice, because
all Nature is his own: nor his Goodness, because never made use of but to the
best purposes. But rather highly Serviceable to both, as it pleases him to make
use of it either to execute Judgment upon notorious Sinners in an exemplary
manner, or to defend and protect the Innocent and Pious Man by the most signal
instances of Providence and mercy. Not to his Wisdom, because the frame and
order of Nature is admirably fitted to the ends of it: but Miracles are
ordained for higher purposes and special and emergent occasions. For instance,
if God be pleased to reveal himself to Man in an extraordinary manner, to enter
into a new Covenant with us, and to propound to us new Terms of favor and
reconciliation; to authorize some holy and inspired Persons to be his
Messengers and Ambassadors from Heaven, and to attest their Commission by his
Letters of Credence; nay to cloth himself with Humane Nature, and yet to dart
forth the Rays of his Divinity through the vail of Flesh. Upon these grand and
important occasions, what sure and infallible Evidence can we have that God
himself speaks to us either by his Prophets or his Son, but by a Miracle? but
by Nature's sitting down and being suspended a while, to show that one greater
than Nature is there, that God himself is then present by his immediate
extraordinary Power as well as Revelation? It is not therefore (as Spinoza
below profanely suggests) that God has created Nature so impotent, P. 7
and given her Laws and Rules so barren, as that he is compelled sometimes to
help her by new Ordinances and Supplies of Virtue, in order to her Support and
Conservation, and that things may succeed according to his intentention and
design: It is not, I say, upon this Account that God has obliged himself to
Work a Miracle upon special occasions; but because Nature was only fitted to
the ends of Nature, and supernatural and extraordinary means provided for Ends
extraordinary and supernatural. Nor lastly, Is the Working of a Miracle in any
wise repugnant to the immutability of the Divine Nature or Counsel, as if he
Acted therein de novo, ex tempore, and upon the sudden: because he has by one
eternal immutable Act of his Will, settled the Order of all events Natural or
above Nature. But this will appear more clearly in the Answer I shall give to
his Arguments, to which I now come.

His Proposition to be proved is, That nothing happens contrary to Nature, but
Nature keeps an eternal, fixed, and immutable Order.

His Arguments for the proof of this Proposition are two. Tr. p. 6.


1. Because the Laws of Nature are the Decrees of God, Spinoza's Arguments for
the Truth of his first Proposition.
and therefore involve eternal necessity and truth.

2. Because the Power of Nature is the Power of God, and therefore as infinite
as God himself.

1. Because the Laws of Nature are the Decrees of God, etc.

In the prosecution of this Argument; Arg. 1.
it will appear:

1. That he takes the Word Nature in another sense than this Question properly
admits.

2. That his Argument as it proceeds upon his own Principles, terminates
directly in flat Atheism or Idolatry.

3. That, setting aside his own Principles, his Argument may in some sense be
true, and yet not infer the truth of his Conclusion.

1. He takes the Word Nature in another sense than this Question properly
admits. In this Argument he takes the Word Nature in another sense than the
Question admits.
By Nature (as I showed above) is meant here, the whole aggregate and compages
of Bodies in the World, and the Order wherein they act amongst one another. In
this sense therefore Spinoza must be presumed to prove, That nothing happens
contrary to Nature, which whether he does or no will immediately appear. In the
Conclusion of this first Argument, to these Words, Nihil igitur in Natura
contingit, Tractat. Theolog. Polit. c. ^. p. 100.
quod ipsius Legibus universalibus repugnat, etc. He subjoyns this Marginal
Note, N. B. me hic per Naturam non intelligere solam materiam ejusque
affectiones, sed praeter materiam alia infinita. The Translator, I confess, has
it not (whether omitted as impertinent only, or as that which would too openly
discover the weakness of his reasoning, I do not determine) but I shall take
leave to consider what he has as Spinoza's and not his own.

His Proposition true, if he take the Word in this sense, but not to the
Question.
Now if Spinoza take the Word Nature in so great a Latitude as to understand by
it an infinite number of other things besides Matter, he may find it pretty
easy to reduce all things within its compass: and if he make the Laws of
Nature in his sense of so great extent, it may be hard for any thing not to
fall within their Circuit and Jurisdiction: but then the Philosopher's way of
Arguing will be as much beside the Question, as a Miracle is beside Nature.

The Schoolmen where they treat of Laws, make the first division of them into
the Eternal Law, and those that are derived from it. The Eternal twofold. 1.
The Order whereby God eternally decreed to do all things. 2. The Order which he
decreed to prescribe to his Creatures, to be observed by them according to
their several Natures and Conditions. The latter is branched out in these
particulars, the Law of Natural Agents, of Angels* and Men; and this, either
the Law of Natural Reason, Divine Revelation, or Humane Institution. This
second Eternal Law, and the branches of it, are such as that the several Agents
to whom they were given, may swerve from and not Act in a constant and uniform
obedience to them. So the Angels first violated their Law; then Mankind theirs,
as they daily do all Laws Natural and Positive, Divine and Humane. The natural
Agents indeed, as not endued with freedom of Will, observe one constant Order
and Tenor if left to themselves: yet may either cease to Act, or Act otherwise,
if God in his eternal purpose think fit to interpose, who can then either
suspend their Operations, or determine them to act beyond their Sphere, beside
their usual course, and contrary to their natural tendencies and the Laws of
their Motion. But the first Eternal Laws is of universal extent, and holds
inviolably. Nothing can fall out beside, above, or contrary to it. It directs
to its own grand purposes whatever strayes from the particular Laws of its
Creation, draws good out of evil, and makes all Events conspire to the setting
forth of the Glory of God. It ordains the sins of lapsed Angels and Men, to the
irrevokable Damnation of the first, and the Redemption of the latter, by the
most surprising and mysterious Methods of love and mercy. It provides for a
suppliment to the lost or decayed light of Nature, the Revelations of Law and
Gospel by Moses and the Prophets, our blessed Savior and his Apostles; and to
attest their Divine Authority and Mission, ordains Nature to act above or
contrary to her self by an obediential Power. The same eternal Act of the
Divine Counsel decreeing the production of miraculous Effects upon emergent
occasions, which first determined into Act the whole Frame and Order of Nature.

We see here an Universal Law from whence all things follow, and contrary to
which nothing does or can fall out. An Order eternal, fixed and immutable, set
down with himself by that Supreme being, Ephesians. 1. v. 11.
who works all things (...). That by this he has appointed times for
Miraculous and Supernatural Effects, as well as this lasting Period for the
constant and settled operations of Nature. If this be Spinoza's Law of Nature,
where he extends the Signification of that Word infinitely beyond the compass
of the material World, and the order whereby Natural Bodies act therein; his
Proposition may be true, That nothing falls out contrary to Nature, but Nature
keeps an eternal, fixed, and immutable Order. But then, 1. He takes the Word
Nature in a different sense from all the World besides; 2. Wholely leaves the
Question about the possibility of Miracles, that being consistent with the
Truth of his Proposition if taken in that sense.

His Argument (...) proceeds upon his own Principles terminates in flat
Atheism or Idolatry.
And I wish his sense were so Orthodox as this I have hinted, and that all his
fault were only that he has mistaken the state of the Question, and the meaning
of the Terms of it. But it will appear far otherwise when we come to examine
upon what Principles his Argument proceeds.

His Argument is this, The Laws of Nature are the Decrees of God, and therefore
involve eternal necessity and truth. Ergo, nothing can fall out contrary to
Nature, but Nature keeps an eternal, fixed, and immutable Order. The ground of
the Argument lies in this, That whatever God Wills or Decrees, involves eternal
necessity and truth. For the proof whereof Spinoza referrs us to his Fourth
Chapter. Tractat Theologico* Polit. c. 4. p. 70.
The Argument which he brings for it there, is drawn from the Identity (...)
the Divine Will and Understanding, and it proceeds thus, All the difference
between the Understanding and Will of God is, he says, only in our conception,
and that in this manner, We conceive God to understand any thing, as, for
instance, the Nature of a Triangle, when we regard only this, That the Nature
(v. c.) of a Triangle is contained eternally in the Divine Nature as an eternal
Truth. We conceive God to will the same thing, when we regard this farther,
That the Nature (v. c.) of a Triangle is so contained in the Divine, not upon
account of the necessity of the nature of a Triangle it self, but upon account
of the necessity of the Divine Nature: and that all the necessity of the nature
of a Triangle and its properties, as they are conceived as eternal Truths,
depends not upon the necessity of its own Nature, but the Divine. So that for
God to Will or Decree any thing, is for the same to be contained necessarily in
the Divine Nature, by reason of the necessity of it, as an eternal truth: And
therefore, Whatever God wills or decrees involves eternal truth and necessity.

This is his Principle, which he borrows from his Fourth Chapter, and we see it
is grounded upon a particular Notion which he had formed in his Brain of the
Divine Will and Understanding. This conceit he does not farther explain or make
out in his Tractatus Theologico-Politicus; and therefore, to run up his
Argument to the head, I shall consult his Opera Posthuma for a Scheme of his
Principles from whence to deduce it. There, in the First Part of his Ethics,
which treats de Deo, Ethic. p. 1. P^op. 1^, 1^, 16.
he has this Doctrine, That there is but one Substance in the World, and that
is God. That God is a Substance absolutely infinite, i. e. a Substance endued
with an infinite number of Attributes, each infinite, each displaying his
infinite Essence: two whereof are known to us, Cogitation and Extension. That
from the necessity of the infinite Essence and Attributes of God do proceed (as
properties from an emanative cause) infinite Modes wherein the Divine Nature
and Attributes do subsist and act. That Nature and all created Beings are only
these various Modes wherein the Divine Essence and Attributes do necessarily
display themselves: In particular that all Bodies and finite Spirits are only
various Modes of those two infinite Attributes in God, Extension and Cogitation.

And from these Principles we may indeed deduce not only his conception of what
it is in God to understand and to will: but many other Consequences admirably
agreeable to Religion and Right Reason. As, 1. That God is an extended
Substance, and extension infinite. 2. That God is the emanative cause of all
finite Beings, and they therefore really and identically contained in the
Divine Nature, and the same with him. 3. That God subsists in all Bodies and
finite Spirits, as a Substance under its necessary Modes flowing from its
Essence: and therefore both he himself material and bodily, as being extended,
and every body in Nature a part of him. So that now we clearly see the ground
whereupon Spinoza asserts, That nothing can happen contrary to Nature: viz.
because God and Nature are one and the same, God Nature subsistent, and Nature
God modified. And why he says, That for God to will or decree any thing, is for
the thing to be contained in his Nature as an eternal truth flowing from the
necessity of it, viz. because his Will is only that of an emanative cause, and
every thing which we conceive produced by the Divine Will, is so only in regard
that it flows necessarily from his Essence, as light in the Sun, and heat in
the Fire from their very nature. And so likewise his understanding of the same
thing, is only that he sees its necessary Existence proceeding from the
necessity of his own Nature.

Here we have a full discovery of his Sense and Scope in this Argument; and it
plainly terminates in one of these two, Atheism or Idolatry. For to make God
and Nature the same thing, is either to advance a Creature into the place of
God, or (what Tully says of Epicurus) Oratione relinquere Deum, re tollere. De
Natura Deorum l. 1.
I shall not therefore prosecute his Argument, so far, as to confute him
through the whole Set of his Principles: nor take my self to be obliged, in
order to prove the possibility of a Work above Nature, to go so far about as to
prove first the Being of a God above it. His Argument, setting aside his
Principles, may be true, and yet not infer the truth of his Conclusion.
But his Argument may deserve a little Consideration, setting aside his
Principles, and that only in order to state how far the Laws of Nature may be
granted to be the Decrees and Volitions of God, and whether and how far
thereupon they involve eternal necessity and truth.

His Argument therefore is in form this, Whatever God Wills or Decrees,
involves eternal necessity and truth. The Laws of Nature are the Decrees and
Volitions of God. E. They involve eternal necessity and truth. E. Nothing can
fall out contrary to them.

The Laws of Nature may be considered as in Nature it self, or as in the Author
of it. In Nature it self they signify the determinations of Bodies to act in
such or such a manner. In the Author of it they signify those Decrees whereby
the Order of Nature is established, and particular Bodies determined to act in
such a particular manner. In this Sense, I grant that the Laws of Nature are
the Decrees and Volitions of God. And how they are so, and how far thereupon
they may be conceived to involve eternal necessity and truth, may appear from
these Considerations:

How the Laws of Nature are the Decrees of God, and eternal Truth.
1. That there is one grand Universal Law, Decree, and Purpose of the Divine
Will, whereby he eternally set down with himself the Order wherein to work all
things. This Conception is most agreeable to the simplicity and immutability of
the Divine Nature. To his simplicity, that as his Nature, so the Act of his
Will, should be perfectly one, and not multiplied in infinitum in proportion to
the variety of Effects ordained and regulated by it. To his immutability, that
we should not suppose him to be daily enacting new Laws and Decrees, but that
he works all things by a Decree coeternal to himself. And this Conception is
cleared by our parallel apprehensions about the Divine Understanding. The
Objects thereof are temporary, yet the Act of his Knowledge whereby he sees them
eternal: they are manifold and various, yet that simple and uniform. Therefore
as by one Act of his Understanding he sees ab aeterno all things future in
their several times, so by one Act of his Will he ordains them all.

2. That in this universal Law are included, Secundum nostrum concipiendi
modum, many particular Laws and Decrees establishing the Order of particular
Events, necessary and contingent, natural and above Nature, in their particular
times and places.

3. That these particular Laws and Decrees have each (in subordination to the
universal) a limited and determinate compass of times, places, and events,
wherein they take effect.

4. That yet each of them does certainly take effect within that determinate
compass to which it is limited. And therefore

5. That a Proposition declaring that such a Law and Decree will certainly take
effect, is true; and the truth of it necessary and ab aeterno by virtue of that
Law and Decree.

6. That yet as the Law it self and the Decree is, so is the necessary and
eternal Truth of that Proposition: viz. It is necessary and true ab aeterno*
that this Law and Decree shall take effect within that determinate compass of
times, places, and events, whereto it is limited, and no further.

Now the Laws and Decrees by which the Order of Nature is established, are such
particular Laws and Decrees; and such is their eternal Truth and Necessity. For
Instance, The motion of the Sun is an Ordinance in Nature, proceeding from Gods
Will and Decree: Yet so limited (in subordination to his universal Law and
Purpose) to a determinate compass, as not to take effect at some points of time
within that period for which Nature is established: I mean at that time, when
the Sun stood still at Joshua's word, and when it went back so many degrees for
a sign to King Hezekiah. So that the same universal Purpose and Decrees of God
might settle the order of the Suns motion, and thereupon it be necessary and
true ab aeterno that the Sun shall move in this Order; and yet withal ordain,
that at such times notwithstanding the Sun should stand still or go back, and
thereupon it be as necessary and true ab aeterno, that at those points of time
the Sun should go back or stand still. The Laws therefore of Natural Agents may
in this sense be the Decrees of God, and involve eternal necessity and truth;
and yet it may be possible for some certain effects to fall out contrary to
them, viz. without that compass within which they are limited to take effect,
and no farther. But if Spinoza will have it, That whatever God wills to come to
pass in such a time, must therefore be always; or, that whatever Order God
settles for such a determinate compass, must, because he wills and settles it,
hold eternally: I deny that in this sense every Law and Decree of God involves
eternal Necessity and Truth.

It is eternally necessary and true, That whatever God Decrees to be, shall be:
if he decree any thing to be and endure to perpetuity, it is eternally true and
necessary that it shall be perpetually; if he decree it to such a compass, it
is ab aeterno necessary and true that it shall hold so long, and his Decree or
the truth and necessity of the Effect, consequent thereupon, is not violated if
it hold no longer.

So much therefore may be said in Answer to his first Argument to prove that
Nothing can happen contrary to Nature, etc. The Sum is, That he mistakes the
meaning of the Terms of the Question. That he makes Nature the same with God,
and so (besides his taking the word in a sense of his own) he in effect rejects
the Existence of a Deity in Order to overthrow the belief of Miracles. Lastly,
That in the sense wherein I have considered his Argument, it may be true, and
yet his Conclusion not follow from it.

His Second Argument is, Spinoza's second Argument for his first Proposition.

Tr. p. 7.


Because the Power of Nature is the power of God, and therefore as infinite as
himself. E. Nothing can fall out without its compass, or contrary to it.

His ground whereupon he proceeds in this Argument is to be sure the very same
conception of the Divine Nature, viz. That Nature is nothing but an infinite
variety of Modifications of the Divine Essence, and the power of it
consequently nothing but the infinite fecundity of the Divine Essence
determining it necessarily to exert it self in all the infinite variety of the
modes of its being. I shall therefore only give this Argument so much
consideration as it may require, setting aside his Principles. The power of
Nature is the force that natural causes have to act each in their several
manners, and the virtue and efficacy of the whole arising from the joint
concurrence of the several parts in their distinct Operations: This, to speak
properly, is all resolved into a Vismotrix impressed upon matter, enabled to
act by Gods Power, and determined to do it by his Will. This therefore
certainly must be different from the power of its Author, in as much as the
powers must be different if the Subjects differ to which they belong. But
granting that the power of Nature is virtually and origionally (though not
formally) the Divine Power exerting it self in Nature as its Instrument: Yet it
no more follows thereupon, that the power of Nature must be infinite, then it
follows that because the motion of the Sun is the motion of Nature, therefore
it is of as great extent as the motion of the whole frame of Nature besides. Or
because the Power that moves the hand is the power of the Soul, that therefore
the whole Sphere of the Souls Power in the Body is no larger than the hand. The
Argument is from a particular to an universal. Gods power, though simple and
indivisible, is yet unlimited. It may act far beyond that compass wherein it
does, and therefore infinitely beyond the limits of Nature. It exerts it self
both in a natural and supernatural way; and both kinds of effects proceed from
one and the same indivisible omnipotence: which is no more multiplied by the
variety of effects that flow from it, than the power of the Soul as it moves
the hands, and the feet, the eye, and the tongue.

These are all the Arguments he brings for the proof of his first Proposition.
Tr p. 8
The rest is the Conclusion he draws from the whole, viz. What a Miracle is:
That (it being proved that all Supernatural Effects are impossible) a Miracle
can be only an effect inexplicable by our own observation, or the Principle of
Nature known to us. Having therefore proved that supernatural Effects are not
impossible, and answered his Arguments for the contrary, I may take leave to
draw a Conclusion contradictory to his, That a Miracle is not only what he
says, but an Effect beside, above, or contrary to the Order of Nature.

Proposition 2. Tr. P. 2.
The second thing he undertakes is, To prove that by Miracles we cannot know the
Essence, Existence, or Providence of God: but that all these may be better
known by the fixed and immutable Order of Nature. In the framing of this
Proposition he mistakes the end for which Miracles are designed.
His Design in this seems to be to destroy the Authority and Credit of
Miracles, by showing that they are not proofs sufficient of what they are
designed for. But in the framing of this Proposition, he mistakes the end, for
which they are designed. For 1. The design of Miracles is not to make a
discovevery (at least immediately and by themselves) of the Essence of God.
They are proper and meet evidences of the truth of any Revelation, and if in
that Revelation it please God to make any supernatural display of his own
Nature, then Miracles may be said mediately to discover to us the Essence of
God; otherways they demonstrate no other Attribute of God but his power, viz.
as it is able to suspend the Operations of Nature, or to act above it.

2. Neither do they tend in any peculiar manner to prove the Existence of a
Deity, but rather suppose it: viz. That there is a Supreme Being who is the
Author of Nature, who gave it such a Power and set it such Laws whereby to act;
which Power and which Laws, a Miracle being either above or contrary to, proves
thereupon (not that God is, but) that it is he who then acts by his own
immediate hand, and not Nature. But, for any proof it gives us of the Being of
a God, it is only in the same way that every natural Effect demonstrates it,
by leading us to a first Cause.

3. Miracles are indeed sufficient Evidences of the Divine Providence; that God
does take upon him and actually exercise the Government of the World; that he
does not leave Nature to her self, but sometimes interposes and sets her aside:
That he does not sit an unconcerned Spectator of the Actions of Men, but
sometimes in a most signal manner rewards or punishes them here in this life.
Yet the demonstration of Gods Providence is not the proper and primary end of
supernatural Effects, but

4. A Miracle is properly intended to prove, 1. Immediately, the immediate
power and presence of God Acting himself in an extraordinary manner in the
working of it. 2. (By Virtue of this evident Demonstration of Gods immediate
extraordinary presence) the Divine Authority and Mission of that person whom
God has been pleased to make his Instrument in the effecting of it; at whose
word or request the Order of Nature is suspended, which we cannot suppose God
would permit either for no end at all, or for one so repugnant to his Sanctity
and Goodness, as to assist an Imposture.

Thus much therefore we may know by miracles, not what God is in his Nature,
nor his Existence any better than we may know it by any Effect of Nature: but
his Providence, his extraordinary presence and power, and the Authority of that
person whose Divine Mission it attests. We are next to enquire whether his
Arguments are more sufficient to disprove the authority of Miracles in this
regard.

His Arguments for his 2. Propos. from Reason, and Scripture.
His arguments for the Truth of his second Proposition are from Reason and
Scripture. From Reason he attempts to prove it three ways.

1. Because the belief of the possibility of a Miracle does vertually introduce
mere Scepticisme, and consequently is so far from proving the Essence,
Existence, or Providence of God, that it takes away the certainty both of the
existence of a Deity and every thing else.

2. Because a Miracle is a work that transcends our Capacity to understand it,
and therefore what we understand not, it self cannot lead us to the
understanding of any thing else.

3. Because a Miracle is a thing finite, and therefore cannot be a fit Medium
to prove the being of an Agent of infinite Power.

1. The belief of the possibility of a Miracle virtually introduces mere
Scepticisme, His first Argument for his 2 Propos. from Reason.
and so takes away the certainty both of the being of God and every thing else.
This Argument strikes as much at the belief of Miracles themselves as of any
thing else upon their Credit and Authority: for there can be no Reason to
believe any thing, which to believe obliges me to doubt of every thing else as
impossible to be certainly known. The ground whereupon he asserts that the
belief of Miracles, leads us to Scepticisme, is, because it takes away the
certain Truth of those Notions from whence we conclude the being of a God or
any thing else that we know; and that this it does in as much as it supposes a
Power in God able to alter the Truth of these Notions, for this too he must be
able to do, if able to change the course of Nature.

By these Notions may be understood two things; The belief of Miracles does not
introduce Scepticisme.
1. The Principles of Truth where upon we build all our knowledge. 2. Our own
Idea's and apprehensions of things. The former are either the common Principles
of Natural Light, viz. Axioms evident upon the first apprehension of the Terms,
as That a thing cannot be and not be at the same time, the whole is greater
than any part, etc. Or 2. the definitions of things, and propositions ascribing
to them their Nature and Properties: as (...) rationale, Triangulum habet tres
angulos aequales duobus rectis, etc. Or 3. Propositions containing the mutual
respects of things, as that Cruelty and Injustice are repugnant to the Nature
of God, Theft and Murder to the Nature of a sociable Creature, etc. Now these
principles of Truth are all necessary, and immutable, and the Truth of them
does not depend upon the being or order of Nature: a possibility therefore of
change in the order of Nature does not imply that by the same Power the truth
of these Notions may be altered. They are, first, necessary and immutable,
because it implies a contradiction for them to be false, v. c. for the whole to
be no greater than any part, Man not to be a rational creature, God to be cruel
or unjust, etc. 2. They are true independently upon the being or order of
Nature. If God should destroy the whole frame of Nature, yet it were true
notwithstanding, that the whole Body were bigger than any part. If he should
reduce Mankind into nothing, it were still true notwithstanding, That the
nature of Man consists in the Union of a rational Soul, and a Body endued with
life and sense. God may turn one thing into another, and make the same Matter
appear under a Form above or contrary to what it should have by the course of
Nature, but he cannot make it be and not be, be of this Nature and of another,
at the same time. He can suspend the Actions of his Creatures, but yet cannot
make them Act and not Act both together. In short, however God by his Power may
alter or suspend the Order of Generations in Nature, yet this Principle will
hold true, that in an order of successive generations of Men there must be some
first Man, and this first Man must have a Cause that is not Man, and this Cause
must either be it self, or lead us at last to, an infinite Supreme Being. So
that the existence of a God may be deduced from certain and necessary
Principles, though the Order of Nature be capable of being changed by his
Almighty Power.

The altering therefore of the course of Nature, makes no alteration in the
principles of Knowledge. But does it not infer a Power in God to change our
Notions and Apprehensions of them and of every thing else? A Physical Power
indeed it does, as it proves him Omnipotent: but this will not drive us to
Scepticisme, while we are certain that it is as much repugnant to his Veracity
and Goodness as compatible to his Power barely considered. For it is impossible
that a Being infinitely Good and Holy should impose upon his Creatures, and
implant such Notions in their Minds as would necessarily induce them to believe
a Lie, or so alter their apprehensions of things, as to make it impossible for
them to make a true Judgment by the use of their own reason.

The belief of Miracles therefore does not lead us unto Scepticisme, and so
does not take away the certainty of the Being of a God, but yet perhaps it may
not be a fit Medium to prove either his Existence, or his Proovidence, or to
declare bis Nature to us. Arg* 2. Tr. p. 10.
And this upon two Accounts. 1. Because a Miracle is a Work that transcends our
capacity to understand it, and therefore what we understand not it self, cannot
lead us to the understanding of any thing else. Arg. 2. Tr. p. 11.
2. Because a Miracle is a thing finite, and therefore cannot be a fit Medium
to prove the being of an Agent of infinite Power. To the First, a Miracle is a
Work that transcends our capacity to understand it; i. e. it is beyond the
compass of our Knowledge to deduce it from natural Causes, and good reason,
because it is beyond their power and efficacy to Effect it. But yet so far it
is within our Capacity, that it is possible for us to know whether it be an
effect supernatural or not, and when it is known to be such it is sufficient to
demonstrate the immediate operation of God's Power and Providence.

To the Second, nothing is more false or groundless than that Assertion. It is
so far from being true, that a finite Effect cannot be a Proof of an infinite
Cause, that every finite Effect is so; either immediately, as when the Effect
though finite exceeds the force and efficacy of any finite being in the Order
and Sphere wherein it acts, or mediately when the Effect is produced by a train
of finite Causes, which yet must have had their own being and their first
motion or power to act from an infinite Agent. The argument for an Infinite
from the existence of finite beings, proceeds thus, every finite being is
contingent, and so might not have been; therefore the reason of its being must
not be in it self, but in something else, viz. the Cause that produced it.
Again, every finite being has limits of Perfection; these cannot be set by it
self, but by something else which gave it such a degree of Perfection and no
greater; and this must be the cause that produced it. If this Cause be finite
too, it must proceed from another, and the Question will recur till we stop, at
last in a Cause self-existent and infinite.

So much therefore may be said in answer to his Arguments from reason for the
former part of his second Proposition, viz. That by Miracles we cannot know the
Essence, Existence or Providence of God. To what he says for the other part,
viz. That all these may be better known by the fixed and immutable Order of
Nature, the Answer may be shorter. His reason is, because the Laws of Nature
are infinite, eternal, and immutable, and therefore in some measure indicate to
us the infinity, eternity, and immutability of God: or rather (to make him
speak more plainly out of his Opera Posthuma) because God and Nature are all
one, and the more I know of Nature the more I understand of the modifications
of the Divine Essence. But if he tells us that the belief of Miracles leads us
to Scepticisme, we may reply that this Discovery of the Divine Essence which he
pretends to make from Nature, will rather carry us either to Atheism or
Idolatry.

I proceed to his Arguments from Scripture, which are two.

1. He argues from Deuteronomy 13. v. 1, 2, 3. Because a Miracle (as is plain from
that place) may be wrought by a Person that designs to introduce the worship of
a false God.

2. He argues from the corrupt notions the Israelites had of God and his
Providence, notwithstanding so many Miracles wrought among them.

The words in Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1, 2, 3. are these. Arg. 1. from Scripture. Tr. p.
13.
If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a
Sign or a Wonder, and the Sign or Wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto
thee, saying, let us go after other Gods (which thou have not known) and let us
serve them; thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or Dreamer
of Dreams; for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God with all your Heart and with all your Soul. And that Prophet or that
Dreamer of Dreams shall be put to death, etc. From hence he argues, a Miracle
may be wrought by one that designs to introduce the Worship of a false God.
Ergo, by Miracles we may be as easily induced to embrace the Worship of a false
God, as of the true. E. God cannot be made known to us by Miracles.

Though a false Prophet may work a Miracle, yet Miracles sufficient evidences
of a true Prophet.
This is a difficulty commonly propounded for these Words in Deuteronomy. viz. How
Miracles can be an undoubted evidence of the authority of a Prophet and the
truth of his Doctrine, and yet it be possible for a Miracle to be wrought by a
false Prophet in the highest degree: viz. a Preacher of Idolatry. And the best
way to give a clear and satisfactory Answer to it, will be to consider the
utmost force of it as it is urged from this place. The Israelites to whom these
Words were spoken, had already a Law given them, and the Authority of it
attested by unquestionable Miracles; the same Law repeated again in this book
of Deuteronomy. with a repetition likewise of the History of those mighty Works which
had been wrought for it is confirmation. Their Religion therefore being thus
settled, to fortify them against all Temptations that might draw them to the
Worship of the Gods of the Nations round about them, they are forewarned in
this place not to give ear to any Person that should entice them to Idolatry,
though he should work a Miracle to confirm the Authority of his false Doctrine;
for that God might possibly permit such a Person to work a Miracle merely to
try the stedfastness of their Faith and Adherence to his Worship. This is the
Case wherein those Words ( Deuteronomy. 13.) must be understood to be spoken; and this
is all that can be rationally drawn from them, that God may permit a Miracle to
be wrought by a false Prophet after he has established the true Religion, and
forewarned his people not to believe a Miracle against it. We are to enquire
therefore whether if this be possible, Miracles can be sufficient evidences of
a true Prophet.

The Argument is in form this, If God after he has established the true
Religion, and forewarned his people not to believe a Miracle against it, may
permit a false Prophet to work a Miracle to try the stedfastness of their
faith; then Miracles are not sufficient Evidences of a true Prophet. But God
may in this case permit a Miracle to be wrought by a false Prophet. Ergo. If
the consequence is, That Miracles are not always sufficient Evidences, or not
in this particular Case, I readily grant it: If, That they never are in any
case (which must be the Conclusion if to the purpose.) I deny it: and the
reason of my denial of it is this, because notwithstanding an Impostor may work
a Miracle in this case, and so the Miracle he works be no evidence of a true
Prophet: yet in any other case (notwithstanding the force of these words) it
may be (and I may positively say is) impossible for a true Miracle to be
wrought by an Impostor; and therefore all other Miracles which are not
reducible to this Case may be certain and infallible Evidences of a true
Prophet. For Instance, two sorts of Miracles are excepted from this Case. 1.
Those Miracles (suppose) that were wrought among the Israelites, after this
warning given them not to believe any person that would seduce them to
Idolatry, though he should work a Miracle, by persons that did not attempt to
seduce them from the Worship of the true God. 2. Those Miracles which were
wrought at any time by any persons whose Doctrine the people before whom they
were wrought had not been forewarned by God not to believe. And that neither
of these could be wrought by an Impostor, but both were sufficient Evidences of
a true Prophet, I shall demonstrate evidently from these Principles.

1. In every Miracle or supernatural Effect, God must be present (not
consenting and assisting only, but) working it himself by his extraordinary
Power.

2. This God cannot do ( viz. alter the course of Nature) for no end, or for
any that is mean and trivial.

3. Nor can his end be to deceive or impose upon those persons before whom it
is wrought.

4. If his end cannot be to deceive us, and yet he cannot Work a Miracle, but
for some great end: it follows, That every Miracle wrought by any person
pretending thereupon a Commission to reveal any Doctrine, must either be
ordained by God to ratify and confirm his Commission, and this Miracle cannot
be wrought by a false Prophet: or if it be not ordained by God to confirm his
Commission, but may be done by him though he be a false Prophet, it must be
only in such a case where sufficient warning has been given to those before
whom the Miracle is wrought, that they are not to believe the Authority or
Doctrine of that Prophet though he work a Miracle.

5. Therefore in this one Case (where sufficient warning is given us not to
believe such a person though he work a Miracle) God may work a Miracle by a
false Prophet, and therefore it is no sufficient Evidence of a true: In any
other case it is impossible he should work it by a false Prophet, and therefore
it is not sufficient Evidence of a true.

All this necessarily follows from the Wisdom, Veracity, and Holiness of God.
His Wisdom cannot permit him to work a Miracle by any man for nothing or upon
any trivial account: and his Veraciy and Holiness cannot permit him to bear
witness to a Liar and Seducer (working a Miracle and pretending thereupon to a
Commission from Heaven to Preach his Doctrine) which he does in working a
Miracle by him, unless in such a Case where he gives us warning not to believe
him upon the Authority of his Miracle: And in that Case he does not bear
Witness to a Liar, because he fore-warns us that his Miracle is not done to
attest the Authority of that Person by whom he does it: And so though it were
the setting of his Seal to his Commission (to use that expression) yet we are
sufficiently secured from being imposed upon thereby, because forewarned that
in this case his Seal is to be no Evidence to us, though otherwise it be the
cleerest and most convincing Evidence imaginable. A Miracle therefore, where
warning beforehand is given against it, may be wrought by a Seducer and
Impostor, but where we are not forewarned against it, it must be wrought by a
true: Ergo, Though in that Case a Miracle is no Evidence of a true Prophet, yet
in every other Case it certainly is, and consequently, Though an Impostor may
work a Miracle, yet a Miracle is in most cases an undoubted Evidence of a true
Prophet.

Now the warning or notice given us in this case, may be either expressed, or
implied. Expressed as in the place forementioned, Deuteronomy. 13.
under the Law; or where we are forbidden to hearken to false Prophets and
false Christ's, Matt 24.24. Gal. 1.8.
which shall do great Signs and Wonders; or to an Angel from Heaven that should
Preach another Doctrine, then that we have received under the Gospel. Heb. 1,
2.7.16, 17.
Implied, as where the Doctrine and Institution of the Gospel is declared to be
the last Will of Almighty God, and a Law to endure without alteration or repeal
to the end of the World; for if God declare it to be such, this implies that no
Doctrine contrary to it, no other Doctrine, is to be embraced, though the
person preaching it should work a Miracle to confirm his Authority.

All other Miracles therefore are Evidences of a true Prophet, except where
such warning is given. And those I reduced to two sorts:

1. Those that were wrought among the Israelites after the warning given them
Deuteronomy. 13. by any person that did not attempt to seduce them from the Worship of
the true God; for against such a person working a Miracle they had no warning,
and therefore his Miracle was enough to command their belief.

2. Those wrought at any time by any persons against whose Doctrine there had
been no warning eign to the persons before whom the Miracles were wrought. And
under these two kinds are placed all the Miracles whose Authority Spinoza would
destroy by this Argument. To begin with Moses's, they were wrought before the
Isralites had any warning to reject the Authority of any Miracles whatsoever:
and if after, they were wrought not to sedvce them to Idolatry but with the
contrary design, viz. to settle the Worship of the true God among them. So also
Elijah's, to reclaim that people from Idolatry. And the Miracles of our blessed
Savior and his Apostles, will not I suppose be said by any one to be wrought
to seduce the Jews from the Worship of the true God. So that if all these
Miracles must be excepted from the Case wherein a Miracle may be wrought by a
false Prophet, his Argument from the possibility of it (out of Deuteronomy. 13.)
against the authority of all Miracles, falls to the ground.

His other Argument from Scripture is from the corrupt Notions the Israelites
had of God and Providence, Argument 2. from Scripture.

Tr. p. 14.


notwithstanding all the Miracles wrought among them. He instances in their
Worshipping the Calf in Moses's absence: In the doubts the Author of the 73
Psalm says he had about a Providence; and Solomon's Opinion that all things
were governed by chance, which he confesses he once held. To this I answer, 1.
I have already intimated that Miracles in themselves do not discover to us what
God is in his Nature, any farther than as it is done in the Revelaion which
they confirm. 2. Therefore I hope he will not say that the Revelation which the
Israelites had concerning God, was such as was not sufficient if they would
have attended to it, to have taught them that God was not to be Worshipped
under the resemblance of a Creature, Psalm. 106.20.
much less his glory to be turned into the similitude of a Calf. 3. The mighty
Works that God did for the Children of Israel, were such as might easily have
convinced them, that such a base Creature was not the God that brought them
forth out of the land of Egypt. Exodus 22.4.
4. Therefore he ought rather to impute it to the great stupidity and blindness
of that People, there being newly converted from the worship of the Egyptian
Apis, Psalm. 106.21.
and their forgeting of God their Savior who had done so great things for
them, than to any insufficiency either in the Miracles to demonstrate God's
Power and Providence to them, or in the Law he had newly given them to instruct
them how he was to be Worshipped. I pass by what he says of Solomon and the
Author of the 73 Psalm: their doubts were about such things wherein Miracles
were not proper means to inform them: viz. Why the wicked prosper in this life?

What he has besides under this Head, is, 1. A profane abuse of the Scripture,
Tr. p. 15.
instead of an Answer to those plain Expressions therein, where God is said to
have wrought his Miracles, that he might make his power to be known, Psalm.
106.8. Ex. 10.2.
and that the Israelites might know that he was God. This, he says, is not as
if the Scripture meant, that Miracles are in themselves convincing Arguments,
but only that the Holy Spirit makes use of them as Arguments ad hominem, that
is (for want of better Evidences) he is fain to take all the advantage he can
of their pre-conceived Opinions, however irrational and absurd, and makes these
his Topics, as most effectual to persuade or convince them, and in this sense
he interprets what St. Paul says, that to the Jews he became as a Jew, to the
Greeks as a Oreek, that is, argued with both not from any true and rational
Principles, but by making the best use he could of their prejudices and
prepossessions to gain them to his side.

2. That it is not consistent with true Philosophy, Tr. p. 16.
that God in the Order and Course of his Providence should be conceived to take
greater care of one person or Nation than another; viz. he is not only bound to
provide for all whatsoever means are necessary for their happiness, but also
obliged not to give any one Man over and above any degree of Grace which he
does not equally impart to all the World. To answer these two Positions fully,
we should be obliged to examine Spinoza's second and third Chapter of his
Tractatus Theologico-Polit. whereto he refers us for the demonstration of both.

I pass on therefore to the third thing he proposes to make out: Proposition 3.
Tr. p. 16.
viz. That the Scripture by the Decrees and Commands, and consequently the
Providence of God understands nothing else but the fixed and immutable Order of
Nature. This he attempts to prove two ways, 1. By Instance. 2. Because the
Scriptute relates several Circumstances in the production of those Effects that
are commonly held to be supernatural. Arg. 1.
His Instances are some that I mentioned above in my Answer to the Premonition,
Tr. p. 17.

1 Samuel 9.15, 16.


viz. God telling Samuel, He would send him a Man out of the land of Benjamin,
which was only Saul's coming to him to enquire about the Asses. Psalm. 105.24.
Ex. 1.
God being said to turn the hearts of the Egyptians, so that they hated the
Israelites, who yet it appears, were moved to hate them upon Politic
Accounts. Gods saying, He would set his Bow in the Sky, Genesis 9.13. Tr. p. 18.
and yet the Rainbow, and undoubted Effect of Nature. So also the melting of
the Snow called Gods Word, Psalm. 108.18. and 104.4.
and the Wind and Fire his Ministers.

I grant that the Scripture in these Instances, by Gods Decrees or Commands
means no more than the Laws of Nature: but his Argument ought to conclude
universally, for which a few instances in such particulars wherein it holds,
are not sufficient. It is enough for me to name some things which the Scripture
relates as the Decrees and Purposes of God, which yet could never take effect
by the mere Course of Nature. As for Instance, That a Virgin should conceive
and bear a Child, Is. 7.14. Dan. 3.
That three Men should be cast into Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, and the same Fire
kill those persons that came so near to the Mouth of the Furnace as to throw
them in, and yet not so much as singe a hair of their heads, though thrown into
the midst of it. That the Sun should stand still at the word of a Man; Josh. 10.
Fire come down from Heaven at the command of another; the Sea be stilled, the
Dead raised, the Devils cast out, at the Word, Touch, and Shadow of others. All
these Effects the Scripture sets down as wrought by the Decree and Order of
Almighty God, but not, I presume, by the Course of Nature. In a word, the
Answer has been given before: That the Scripture a: scribes all Effects to God,
natural or above Nature and as, from it is ascribing the Effects of Nature to
God, without mentioning how he produces them, we cannot justly conclude that it
records them for miraculous; so on the other hand, from its speaking of
supernatural Effects in the same manner, we have as little reason to infer,
that it means nothing by them but the Order of Nature.

His second Reason is, Arg. 2. Tr. p. 19.
because the Scripture relates several Circumstances in the production of
Miracles; which Circumstances, he says do show that these Miracles required
Natural Causes. So the Sprinkling of Ashes required to produce the Plague of
Scabs, Ex. 9, 8.10.14.14.21
an East Wind to bring the Locusts, and a West Wind to drive them away; an East
Wind likewise to drive back the Red Sea. Elijah's laying his Body upon the Body
of the Shunamites Child, 2 Kings 4.34.
in order to raise it to life again.

If he argue to the purpose, he must grant that these Circumstances, which he
makes requisite in the Order of Nature to produce these Effects, were also
proper and suffi^ient in the Order of Nature to produce them either wholely or
in part.

And indeed the Wind may seem a very proper Instrument to bring and carry away
the Locusts, and to drive back the Sea: but the raising of the Wind, and
determination of it is ascribed to another Circumstance not very proper to be
the efficient Cause of it, viz. the stretching out of Moses's Hand and his Rod.
And this commonly was the first Circumstance in every Miracle which Moses
wrought, and therefore though it were not sufficient to produce those Effects
immediately and by it self, yet it must be supposed proper to set all the other
subordinate Causes on Motion. For their requiring natural Causes, because
related with some Circumstances concurring to their production, must imply that
these Circumstances were the Natural Causes requisite. And if so, then Moses's
Rod had many great, many occult, yet Natural Qualities, very-hard indeed to
explain or conceive, and very admirable though not miraculous* as of raising
and laying Winds and Storms of Thunder and Hail, turning the Water into Blood,
bringing Frogs out of the River, producing Lace out of the Dust, Water out of
the Rock, etc.

To be short, the Circumstances commonly mentioned as concurrent to the
production of Miracles, are so far from proving that they had Natural Causes,
that they prove the contrary. For if they had any Natural Causes, these
Circumstances must be all or part of them: but they are such as are in no wise
qualified to produce the Effects ascribed to them in the Order of Nature,
therefore must be qualified for it by a Supernatural Power, which can produce
quidlibet ex quolibet, and make any thing instrumental to what Purposes and
Effects it pleases.

For Instance, the Clay and the Spittle were the immediate Instruments applied
by our Savior to the Eyes of the Blind, and Tongue of the Dumb-man, The
mention whereof in the account of these Miracles, if it prove that they
required Natural Causes, then these were the Causes requisite, these they had,
and these immediately produced the Effects. This they could not by the force of
Nature, therefore by Miracle; and so his Argument destroys it self.

But farther, what if many are produced without any Circumstances at all, but
purely at the Word and Will of the person that works them? This he says we
cannot be assured of from the Scripture, because there may have been some
though not mentioned there (he refers to Exodus 14.27. compared with Ex. 15.10.)
But what if the Scripture does not only not make mention of any, but in a
manner declares there were none? So in our Saviors stilling the Storm, Luk 8.
v. 25.
the very Reflection that his Disciples make upon that Miracle, proves that it
was wrought by his bare Word, and not by the Application of any Means, much
less, Natural. Tr. po. 2
Before he draws his Conclusion from these Arguments, he answers an Objection
from Scripture, viz. That Famins are said to be caused by the sins of Men, and
the like: and Rain and Plenty restored by their Prayers, etc. His Answer is,
that the Scripture does here speak ad hominem, and with the same Propriety as
when it says that God is angry, sorrowful, repents, or the like; and that it is
not true that any of these are the Causes of the Effects ascribed to them. Here
1. Methinks he is wary in his Answer. He might have granted that Famine is sent
for the sins of Men, and Rain and fruitful Seasons for a return to their
Prayers and Repentance, and yet have denied that either of these is wrought by
Miracle. For Nature is ordered and directed by the Wisdom and Providence of
Almighty God, as well as preserved and upheld by his Power; and therefore his
Wisdom may so direct it, as often even by the Course of Nature to execute his
divine purposes whether of Judgment or Mercy. He sees our Actions and hears our
Prayers from all eternity, and therefore may, as he has the whole Order of
Nature before his eyes, direct and determine the certain and necessary Events
of it to their proper Seasons, and make them Instrumental to the accomplishing
of his purposes, whether of showing favor or executing wrath upon the Sons of
Men. Thus therefore he need not be so strict as to deny any possibility of
God's punishing us for our sins in the Order of Nature, for fear lest it should
betray him unawares to the concession of a Miracle. Natural Causes indeed our
Sins or P^ayers are not of these Effects, nor yet Supernatural neither, but
moral only and meritorious, as God upon view of either determines to punish or
reward us. But suppose it were not so, 2. He gives but a very mean Solution of
the difficulty that the Scripture speaks improperly here, and in condescension
to the Capacities and Opinions of the Vulgar, as it does when it says that God
is angry, sorrowful or repents. We grant the Scripture may be conceived to be
obliged to speak in this manner, concerning the incomprehensible Nature of God,
and such of his Perfections the modes whereof it is not necessary we should
have explained to us, how they are and act in him: but yet it is not necessary
that it should speak of every thing in the same manner, or that every thing
that it says should be shuffled off by this or the like suggestion. Nothing is
more natural and easy to be conceived, than that God does punish or reward our
good or bad Actions, and that in this life, and that his Justice and Wisdom
will oblige him to do it as he takes upon him the Government of the World:
though it be very hard for the Vulgar to conceive how he does it without anger
or displeasure and the contrary affections. Therefore the Scripture may be
conceived to speak of the one in condescension to our Capacities, though yet no
reason why it should be presumed to speak of the other in like manner.

Proposition 4. Tr. p. 21.
I proceed to his fourth and last undertaking, viz. To treat of the manner of
interpreting the Scripture Miracles, and what things are chiefly to be observed
in the Relations about them. Or (as the Translator) to show that most Men have
erred in their way of interpreting the Miracles recorded in the Holy Scripture.
To set us right he directs us in the reading of the Scripture-narrations about
Miracles, to enquire into two things, 1. The particular Opinions and Prejudices
of the Relator: 2. The Idioms, Phrases and Tropes, of the Hebrew Tongue. The
first, because generally all Historians relate the events they speak of
suitable to their own Conjectures, Opinions, and Prejudices. The other, because
otherwise we may, from the Scripture-Style, conceive some things to be related
for Miracles which really are not. For the first he instances in Joshua 10. v.
12, 13. where the Account of the extraordinary length of that Day is given
according to the common opinion of the Sun's and not the Earth's motion. For
the Second, in some, allegorical places out of the Prophets. Zachariah 14. v.
7. Isa. 13. v. 10.48. v. ult. By these two insinuations he would elude the
force of all the clear and plain narrations about miracles in Scripture. To the
first, and the instance he brings for it, I answer, the truth of the Miracle
which Joshua relates is not at all prejudiced though it were true that the
Earth moves, and not the Sun; for the course of Nature was stopped, whether in
the motion of the Sun or the Earth, and therein consists the truth of the
Miracle: As to the relation of it, it was not necessary either that Joshua
should himself be so great a Philosopher or so far instructed by an
extraordinary Revelation, as to put up his request to God that the Earth should
stand still and not the Sun; or that the Account of it which he gives should be
otherwise than according to the appearance of sense, and the apprehensions of
the Vulgar grounded thereupon.

To the second, the truth of the Scripture-Miracles depends not upon any
allegorical expressions in the Prophets, but upon the naked Relations of
matters of Fact in the Historical Writers; so that though in the former we are
to proceed with some Caution, and not to take every thing for Miraculous, which
is spoken of in an high strain of expression: yet in the latter we find no such
danger of being imposed upon by the Tropes and Figures of the Hebrew Tongue,
all things being delivered in the Historical part of Scripture with the
greatest plainness and simplicity.

I have run through the main of Spinoza's Chapter, which consists in the proof
of his four Propositions at first laid down. Tr. p. 26.
What is behind, is, 1. An account of his different Method in this Chapter from
that which he takes in his first and second Chapters about Prophecy and
Prophets: but this is proper to his Tractatus Theologico Polit. Tr. p. 27.
2. He attempts to prove from Scripture the Immutability of the Order of
Nature, repeating also some of his former Arguments for it; 3. He closes all
with a passage out of Josephus, agreeable to his Opinion His places of
Scripture which he alleges, are, Psalm. 148. v. 6. He has established them for
ever: he has made a decree, which shall not pass; Eccl. 1. v. 9. That there is
no new thing under the Sun, and other places parallel to them. To the first,
the Order of Nature may be said to be established for ever, and yet that Term
imply no uninterrupted or eternal duration of it: see Exodus 21.6. 1 Samuel 1.22.
Deuteronomy. 29.29. Levit. 23.14, etc. To the second, it is possible, notwithstanding
that place, that there may something new happen even according to the Order of
Nature, for Solomon observes there no more than this, that ordinarily in Nature
there is a constant vicissitude, a coming and returning of the several Species
of Things: for all which, it is possible within the Period of Six thousand
years that Nature may produce something new and not seen or heard of before:
and if by Nature something thus new may be produced, there is no Reason from
this place but the like may be done by Miracle too.

To Josephus's Authority it is enough to oppose the learned Mr. Gregory's
remark of him in his Opera Posthuma, p. 33. That he makes it his business to
lessen and detract from the greatness of the Miracle which he relates out of
the Scripture, only to gain a more easy approbation of his History among the
Heathen: and this Mr. Gregory makes out by several instances, one whereof is
the passage here quoted by Spinoza.

To Spinoza's Quotation out of Josephus, the Translator adds one or two more
out of Valesius, St. Austin, Mr. Burnett, and Dr. Sprat. Mr. Burnett, I have
showed above, in the very next Words almost to those which here he quotes out
of him, asserts possitively that there are Miracles. I need not tire my self to
examine whether the rest are as directly against him, as I make no question
they are.

Upon the whole then I have made it appear, that the whole Treatise is only a
Collection out of other Authors. That all of them, except Spinoza, are against
the opinion for which they are produced. And whether I have given a full Answer
to his Arguments, I leave to the candid and impartial Reader to determine.

FINIS.

