THE Salamanca Wedding: OR, A True Account of a Swearing Doctor's Marriage with
a Muggletonian Widow in Breadstreet. London, August 18 th. 1693.
In a Letter to a Gentleman in the Country.
SIR,
THE only News of importance I have to communicate to you at present, is, That
the famous and never-to-be-forgotten Dr. O -- ts was married the beginning of
this week. You know, for a person of his Constitution, that always expressed,
and perhaps inherited an aversion to the Fair Sex; and ^esides, had found out a
Back door to bestow his (...) and Strength elsewhere, (...) himself at last to
the and Duties of Matrimony, is as unnatural (...) unexpected a Change as for
an Old Miser to turn Prodigal; and this perhaps was the surprising Revolution
which most of our Almanacks both at home and abroad threatened us with in the
month of August. I remember I happened to be at Garraway's, when a Gentleman
came in, and told us the News. Immediately all other discourse ceased,
East India Actions, the price of Pepper, and rising of Currants; not a word of
our Army in Flanders, or the Seige of Belgrade, the Turkey Fleet, and the Battle
at Landen were not mentioned in two hours after. Nay, the Duke of Savoy, who is
now working miracles for us in Piedmont, was wholly laid aside. Every body
stood amazed, and it was a considerable time before they could recover
themselves out of this astonishment. At last, an Old Gentleman at the upper end
of the Table, broke the silence, and made himself and the Company very merry at
the Doctor's Expense. Says he, I remember I have somewhere read, that when
Erasmus heard that Martin Luther, of blessed Memory; was married, he should say
in a j^sting manner, That if, according to the Old Tradition, Antichrist was to
be got between a Monk and a Nun, the World was now in a fair way to have a
Litter of the sort. Not that I would by any means (continues he) apply this
story to the Doctor, for God forbid that we should ever live to see a Brood of
Sucking Antichrists come out of the Doctor's Loins. My meaning is only this,
That since the Savior of the Nation has joined his Saving Faculty with a
Damming Talent (for you are to understand his Lady is a Muggletonian, and those
people pretend to have the power of Damnation) we may now expect to see a
Motley Race of half Saviors and half Dammers. Hold you there, cries another
Gentleman, you ought to have said half Dammers and half Saviors; for since the
Mother's is the surest side, if the Doctor lives to have Children, they will Damm
in all likelihood before they will Save.

The Doctor (as I have been acquainted by several of his intimate Friends) had
Two Reasons to incline him to marry in his Old Age. The first was his great
Grief and Concern to see the Noble Army of Evidences defeated, Bedlow, Dugdale
and Dangerfield, sleeping with their Fathers; viz. the Witnesses that swore
against Sus^nna, and those that stoned St. Stephen. Fuller, who with good
management, would have made a clever fellow, buried alive in a Prison,
Etcoetera Young, his Virtuous Companion, routed, past all hopes of rallying.
Others, at the sight of a Pillory, or Whipp^ng-post, utter^y discountenanced,
and ashamed of their Profession. So the Doctor finding the whole hopes of the
Family of Evidences centring in himself, and that if due care were not taken
the Species would be entirely lost, resolved, as far as in him lay, to prevent
its utter extinction, and to raise up Seed to the Popish Plot himself.

In the Second place, the Doctor was touched in Conscience for some Juvenile
Gambols that shall be Nameless. It seems, though he had quitted the other
Corruptions of Popery, yet he still fancied Cardinalism. Now all the World
knows Conscience is a sad terrible thing. What says the Doctor's Friend St.
Austin? Why, Conscientia mill Testes, Conscience is a thousand Witnesses. Is
it therefore to be admited if the Doctor, who, make the be^^ of him, is but one
single Witness, and scarce that, sound himself forced to yield to a thousand?
So then, as I said before, his Conscience perpetually alarming and disturbing
him, the Doctor at last, merely for his own ease and quiet, made a Vow to sow
his Wild Oats, and not to hide the Talent which God had plentifully given him,
in an Italian Napkin.

No sooner was this pious Resolution communicated to his Friends, who were
mightily pleased at the News, but they looked out sharp to find him a proper
Yoke Fellow. It was represented to him that a Maid was by no means for his
turn, the D. was Fat and Pursy, a Maidenhead was not to be got with out much
drudging for it; and besides 'twas now just the Dog days, and who knew but the
D. Reins might receive great damage in case of a violent Encounter. At last an
Independent Minister advised him to Mrs. Margaret W -- of Breadstreet (whose
former Husband was a Muggletonian, and she continued of the same Persuasion)
urging this Argument in her behalf, that in her the D. might have open and free
ingress, egress and regress as often as he pleased, that as he might enjoy her
without the sweat of, so he might eternally Live with her without the least
peril of his Brows, she being no Charmer, and consequently would not equip him
with a pair of Horns, which he knew the D. abominated, as being Marks of the
Beast, and all together Popish. The D. liked the Proposal, and at the first
interview, was so extremely smitten with the Gravity and Goodness of her
Person, that he could neither Eat (which was much) nor Drink (which was more)
till the business was concluded.

A Comical passage happened at the Commons, which I think very well worth the
sending to you. The D. going thither for a License, two scurvey Questions were
asked him. The first was, whether he would have a License to marry a Boy or a
Girl; the second whether he would have a License for Behind or Before. At this
the D. lost all Patience, held up his Cane, and thundered out You Raskal as
thick as Hops, till upon the Proctor's crying Pecavi, the Sky cleared up again.

The Articles of Marriage were as follows.
Imprimis, The D. promises in verbo Sacerdotis, to keep never a Male Servant in
his House under Sixty, and to hang up the Picture of the Destruction of Sodom
in his Bedchamber ad reficandam memoriam, and to teach his Children to swear
as soon as they can speak,

Item, The D. promises that he will never offer to attack either in Bed, or
Couch, Jointstool, or Table, the Body of the aforesaid Mrs. Margaret W -- a
part post, but to comfort, refresh, and relieve her a part ante, giving the
aforesaid Mrs. Margaret W -- in case he offends after that manner, full leave
to make her self amends before, as she pleases; as also upon a second Trespass,
to burn his Peacemaker. However with this Proviso, that whenever the aforesaid
Mrs. Margaret W -- happens to be under the Dominion of the Moon, that is to
say, whenever it is Term-time with the aforesaid Mrs. Margaret W -- then the
abovementioned D. shall have full power, liberty and Authority ^o enter the
Westminster Hall of her Body at which door he pleases. This last Clause was not
obtained till after a Stiff Dispute on the D's part, who threatened to break off
if it were denied him. The other Articles a^ less considerable, I pass over, to
come to the main business in hand, the Marriage.

On the 17th of this present August the Dr. was new Washed and Trimmed, with a
large Sacerdotal Rose in his (...)* and all his other Clergy ^^^page, came to
the House of an Anabaptist (...) in the City* where in (...) of a numerous
A^sembly, consisting of all (...) divisions, and sub-divisions of Protestants,
he was Married to (...). Margaret W -- The D. was observed to be very merry all
Dinner time, (...) of his Face, meaning his Chin, moved (...). There stood
(...) against him a mighty Surloin of Beef, to which he showed (...) to the
(...) in the Reign of the P^^t. After Dinner six fifth Monarch-Men, larded with
as many Ranters Danced a Spiritual Jig, and a dozen sweet-Singers of Israel
employed their Melodious Qu^il-pipes all the while. But Madam Salamanca (for so
we m^st now ca^l her) seemed not to be much affected with this Diversion, but
looked very Disconsolate and Melancholy. One of the Sisterhood asked her why
on a day of Rejoicing she expressed so much Sorrow in her looks? To which Madam
O. after two or three deep sighs, answered, That she very much doubted (like
the Staffordshire Miller that M^unted King Charles after Worcester Fight upon
one of his sorry Horses) whether she should be able to bear the weight of the
Savior of three Nations.

Thus the time was agreeably spent till Ten, at which time a Bell rung to
Prayers, and afterward (his Spouse, after the landable custom of England
having gone before) the D. resolutely marched toward the place of Execution.
There was no Sack Posset, nor throwing of Stockings, both those Ceremonies
being judged to be Superstituous, and things of mere human Invention. The Bed
continued in a trembling fit most part of the Night, which I suppose occasioned
the report of an Earthquake, which the next Neighbors said they felt that
(...) Night. It Is not doubted but the D. behaved himself with great Gallantry,
(...) Madam O. told her Midwife that is to be, that the D. Fought out all his
^^inger, and she already begins to Puke, and be out of Order, like Women in a
Breeding condition. An Astrologer (...) Morefield, having been consulted upon
this occasion, has Prophesied it will prove a Boy, which makes the D. take up
all the Hebrew Genealogies in the old Testament, to find out a pat name for him.

FINIS.
London, Printed in the Year 1693.


