A VINDICATORY SCHEDULE, Concerning the New CURE of FEVERS: CONTAINING A
Disquisition Theoretical and Practical, of the New and most Effectual Method of
Cureing continual Fevers, first invented and Delivered, by the Sagacious Dr.
Tho: Sydenham.

ALSO SHOWING, By way of Preliminary, the Indispensible Charge lying on
Physicians, to Improve themselves, and the ART, with the Reasons why many
palpable Improvements in Medicine, make so little progress.

Where a new Hypothesis of Fevers, for establishing this Method, is laid down,
and several Phoenomena are clearly Resolved; Applied, and brought home to the
Confirmation thereof.

With an Appendix of Sanctorius his Medicina Statica, for clearing the Doctrine
of Insensible Perspiration, whereupon that Hypothesis is founded.

By ANDREW BROVN, M. D.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by JOHN REID, at his Printing House in Bell Wynd, at the
head of the Court of Guard, 1691. To be sold be John Mackie. In the Parliament
Closs.

TO The Right Honorable JAMES LORD VISCOUNT of STAIR Lord GLENLVCE and
STRANRAVER, LORD PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE of JUSTICE.
My LORD,
THAT this Essay comes not from Rallery, or Picque, and to pay home the World
in its own coin; nor yet in an ostentuous manner to impose upon Men, in a
matter of such moment, I know no such effectual way to evince; as by first
su^j^cting it to the Touchstone of so exquisit and solid a Judgment as your
Lps, you my L^being the great Master of Justice and Reasoning, must also be a
Judge most sufficient, of what is Relevant or Consequential here: And further
your learned Elucubrations in Natural Knowledge (so very near of Kin to
Medicine) giving evidence that your Lordship is no Judge incompetent whither or
not there be any sound Philosophy in mine.

By very good consequence then, your Lordships publict Character, bringing your
eminent Qualifications upon the public Stage, to exert themselves for general
Utility, (the only Heroic Action Man is capable of,) at once giving you the
opportunity, and making it your concern, to contribute all your Talents for the
public good and as a no small mean to that end for the Improvement of Medicine
also, does notably both qualify your Lp: a very fit Patron for such a Subject;
and encourage me to implore your protection thereto life and health being so
great Blissings and Benefits to Mankind, makes it indeed no small part of the
Politicians Interest, to lay out himself all manner of ways consistent with his
Capacity and Function, for the advancement of Medicine, in relation to the
preservation and procurement thereof to the People: as was lately done by the
Viceroy of Naples, in ordaining several consults to that purpose.

Now besides such Consults as these to be authorized by the public, I know no
such effectual course for the growth and improvement of Medicine, as that your
Lordship and others in Authority, endued with capacity, would be pleased to set
a part some piece of your time, to pry into the Medical Art; and indeed this is
so far, from a digression from your main work, that being an extraordinary
piece of service for the Public, it seems no small part thereof: f^r thus
being in a manner Censors over Physicians, you would both excite their
Industry, and Scar such as Labor to Shelter themselves there, out of the
Starting Holes of Artifice and Prudence.

And thus may be in part, Recompensced the Detriment that Medicine, and in
Consequence the Public Sustaines, by that Arts being under the misfortune to
be Rivaled of the most pregnant Spirits by these other Studies of Law and
Policy; Such being for the most part allured to the Culture of these
Disciplines, leaving Medicine to these of a lower Rank.

And indeed in this Branch of the Politicians duty, that most Stupenduous
Wit, the Lord Verulam has so successfully Labored, that giving a President,
he has also given a Pattern hereof; For that Fulgent Beam of Learning amidst so
many dispatches and blandishments of the Court, did not only display a great
many Resplendent Rays of the first andtrue Experimental Philosophy, and
descending into, ^aked up the Bowels of all Arts and Sciences: but dived so
deep into the Penetralia of Medicine, as may give us an earnest (to be
remembered with regrate, that his Stares did not dispose him alone to that
Study) what such an acute and Penetrating Spirit was Capable of in that Art,
had the whole edge of his Vivacious Ingine been bended to Medicine, the Force
indeed of the mind like all other things being diffused giving more Faint Hitts
then being recolected and Intent upon one Subject it is able to do.

And seeing your Lordships Stars has disposed you also beside Medicine, and
conducted you unto the spacious Feilds of the Law, where you have made such
ample Excursions and Progress to the great Honor and Credit of this Nation,
albeit with less general Advantage to the whole world, then if you had been a
Son and Cultivator of this our Art; Yet it must be Confessed that you have done
Noblely, and made a Notable Essay to repair that Damnage to Medicine, that
having several Sons, all of most pregnant Spirits (the eldest whereof, called
thereto by the greatest of Men, who must also be the best Judge of Men
deservedly sits at the Helm of this Nation,) Your Lordship has bestowed one to
labor in this Art also, who having already given so eminent a specimen of
Sagacity, by his imbraceing this method of the Cure of Fevers, it cannot be
questioned, but time will complete in him all these Expectations becoming the
Son of such a Father.

Emulation and Envy notwithstanding of al^ the Attempts they are capable of,
can never be able to cloud Your Lordships auspicious conduct, suitable to the
station that Providence put you then in; and that in the times of greatest
danger this Nation was in; your Lordship being like another Joseph by
Providence kept at that time in the Government to allay and wand off the
current of the oppression of these times, but when designs became to be
poussed with that violence, that they were too hard for such mild measures,
your Lordships Station then made you capable of; another cast of Providence, as
a proper expedient, sent you into that Country where was contrived, adjusted,
and from which shortly thereafter was brought over, Our Deliverance. What your
Lordship's part was in this Transaction, tho reason of State may still conceal,
yet the care and concern with which that great Instrument of Our Liberation
still follows your Lordship, gives full evidence that you did act a part
suitable to your self in that Juncture also.

And indeed your Lordships Family falling under so benevolent Aspect of that
Heroic PRINCE (Now our Sovereign) has a notable opportunity put into your
hands, to signalize your Nobility with a true and radient Luster, in your being
Instrumental to bring about such Improvements as are suitable to the Soil and
Genious of this Country, by such culture as your Lp: and other public Spirits,
knows it by Industry or Reformation capable of and would quite change the
figure of this languishing Nation: And among others the Improvement of the
desolate state of Medicine also, of which upon some representation made by me
thereof, your Lordship was very sensible, and to this purpose its humbly
represented, as a propper expedient, that public Authority would be pleased to
Incite and Encourage the College of Physicians here, by authorizing them to
such Consults as these lately held at Naples, to make all apposit Overtures for
the Instauration of Medical Practice.

If I had borrowed to this Essay any materials from the rich Mine of your
Physiologia, this critical Age might have constructed it a forestalling of your
Lordships Patronage, and attributed your protection rather to recompense, than
to the product of an unbayessed Judgment, and withal as your Lordships
exquisite Thoughts are incapable of any accession from my minuteness, so I
humbly depositate mine at your Feet as a Testimony of my Veneration, and take
the liberty to Subscribe my self,

Your Lordships, Most Humble, Obedient, AND Faithful Servant, ANDREW BROUN.
From my Study, Edinburgh, the 13th. of July. 1691.
TO ALL INGENIOUS AND FAITHFUL Physicians.
IF we consult Antiquity, it will be found, that the generality of Physicians
for a succession of Ages, did rather rely on the discoveries already made by
the immortal Hippocrates, than endeavor to find out new ones. They esteemed
themselves sufficiently qualified for their Office by the knowledge of his
Writtings, in which they believed all Medical Skill ^as comprehended; so that
in process of time they came to be of such Auth^rity that to entertain
Sentiments of the Nature and Cure of Diseases differing from these already
received, was a Heterodony not to be tolerated. And (...) obtained till Galen's
days, who had the confidence to dissent from Hippocrates, the great Restorer
of Medicine, about the Nature and Cure of Several Diseases, which for the most
part he strains to a Theory agreeable to the Philosophy of his time, that
pesters not only Medicine, bu^ Theology likewise, and that to this day. And tho
in the Aetimology of Diseases he wreasts the Symptoms to his pre-conceived
Notions; yet such was the genius of the succeeding Ages, that they were content
to follow him as a Pattern, and to acknowledge him for a Text; so his Works in
succession of time came to be equally esteemed with Hippocrat's, and then
nothing was to be received that was not agreeable unto them. And as this for
some Ages did manifestly hinder all advance in Medicine, so of necessity it
creates a vast Opposition to all new Inventions; of which the Physiological
Discoveries in the beginning of this Age are an Instance with a witness. And
tho they had the demonstration of our Senses to support them; yet the Credit
and Reputation of the ancient Theory, (that was quite overturned by them) was
such, that with difficulty they were brought to have reception. If it so fared
than with the Discoveries that were not only reasonable, but demonstrable by
our Senses; what can we expect shall be the Fate of those that have not that
advantage to pretend to? especially if we consider that what we plead for, is,
A new Cure of Fevers, that is, to encounter the opposition of the received
practice of all former Ages; which generally speaking was far more solid than
the Theory.

I should indeed then both fail of my design, and evacuate the Merit of my
Attempt, (so be it may justly challenge any) if I should offer this my Mite to
the advancement of Medicine, and not do it with all the imaginable
Circumspection, and Observation capable to mitigate that opposition, and make
it acceptable; As first, not to present and submit it to you, whose Experience
in Medicine, is able, solidly to determine whether the reasoning here be
conclusive or not: And whose Probity and Candor, will never suffer you in a
matter of such import, to be biased from proferring the Sentiments of a well
balanced judgment; to you then I offer it to be seriously considered, whether
or not the method I here endeavor to vindicate, shall not only through time,
be without censure, but at length, (as some of the most eminent Physicians in
this place, are already of Opinion) will wholly prevail, to the great Credit of
Medicine and the inestimable good of Mankind* which will indeed fully satisfy
the longing wish^s of him that is.

A Real Well wisher of You, and the ART, A. B.

AN ATTESTATION Of the Mr. of FORBES His Case.
Edinburgh, 7 August, 1691.
THE Master of Forbes coming from London falls sick of a Fever at Newcastle,
where he lay three weeks, and parting from that before his Recovery, he fell
again exceeding ill at Edinburgh; where considering his own desperate
condition, and the multitude of ineffectual remedies used in his last Fever,
for a whole month together; And further hearing that there was a New Method of
^ureing FEVERS, practiced by some in that place; he resolved with Advice of his
Honorable Relations, in this Extremity to try the New Method, and accordingly
Dr. Broun was called, so with Dr. Burnet, the Ordinary, and Dr. Bruce, their
Advice, that Method was prosecuted, as in a very dangerous Case; so by the
Blessing of GOD, with very good success, upon that Noble Patient: And now
because some persons envious of the good of Mankind, and the improvement of
Medicine; would smother this singular Instance of the Efficacy of that Method;
And do therefore maliciously give it out, That this Noble Patient was under no
Fever: But the symptoms under which he labored, being conspicuous to all that
visited him, are here Represented to the Curious, attested by himself and his
Lady, who attended him constantly; And by several other Persons of Honor and
Credit, who did frequently Visit him, As follows, A Frequent Pulse. Watching
and Raveing. Continual Vomiting. Frequent Fainting, and total Dejection of
Apetite. Extreme Weakness, and heavy Sickness.


ALSO,

Such excessive drought, that he thought he burned within, and was so
unquenchable, that he drank Four Scots Pynts, and more, of cold Water, in
twenty four hours.

All was remitted, and Cured by Bleeding once, and Purging him five times, and
quieting after each time, till all the Symptoms abated.

There having been some debate among the Physicians, concerning the method of
Curing this Fever, is a Demonstration, that it was no weak one: Besides, that
such of them as now have the confidence, to say, It was no Fever. Did
frequently in most of our presence own it to be such,

Sic Subscribitur,
WILL. Mr. of FORBES. ANNA FORBES. TO. GORDON of Gordonstoun. JA. FORBES, Coll.
J. BRODIE, of that Ilk. SAM. FORBES of Foveran. DA. FORBES, Advocat. JOHN
FORBES, of Forbestoun.


THE PREFACE
IF any shall marvel why, unto the great number and bulk of Books under which,
as a surcharge, this World in a manner groans; I should add one: Let him know,
that this reprimand does very little concern the Physicians of this Nation; for
while the Physicians of all places besides, has liberally proffered to the World
their s^ntiments in Medicine, ours has been so little taken with the Itch of
writing on that subject, that they have modestly kept their thoughts to
themselves. And indeed I, as one of the least, should have been swallowed up
with silence, in the vast gulf of time with the rest; unless the like case,
that is reported to have befallen the Son of Craesus, had befallen me: For he
having been from his birth dumb; seeing a Soldier set upon his Father, (the
vehement fervency breaking the bonds that kept his Tongue fettered) cried
out, Soldier do not kill Craesus! and indeed the like seeming to have hapened
to me, has had likewayes the same effect: For I having been always Tonguetied
as to this manner of speaking (that is writting) until I perceived the
Endeavors of some, to attack not only my Name and Fame, but which is far more;
to assault with Calumnies and Reproaches, the most genuine and solid Methods of
Medicine, about the Cure of Continual Fevers, invented and delivered by that
Expert Dr Thomas Sydenham, and very earnestly embraced by me, as having found
them most succesful by experience: In so much, that for some time bygone, in
which Fevers have been very fatal to this place, there has been few that died
thereof, which fame (as much tenacious of depraved fictions as a Messenger of
Truth) has not scattered far and wide, to have been destroyed by me, or this
Method: Whence fearing a danger yet more from ^his, that by the neglect of this
most excellent Method, in this manner noted with Infamy, many of my
Contrymen and Neighbors may be endangered or lost; what wonder is it then,
if so great evils private and public, excite in me such an ardor, as brusting
the bonds of my Tongue also, make me pour forth these faltering words.

And further, as in some cases evil manners use to beget good Laws; so perhaps
in this caise, Reproaches and Calumnies producing Defenses against them, may
also produce and display more plainly the truth and real improvements.

Since then my Reputation seems to suffer Martyrdom for the Public Concern
and Safety, all kind of reproaches being liberally bestowed on me, for this
Cause, and seeing I despise my Private utility in respect of the public
Commodity; And neglect the dictats of Self-interest, that whispers to me, that
it were easier to go in the broad way with the multitude; or at least to keep
such a notable Improvement to my self, then to have left that way; and invite
all to be partakers with me in that discovery: I hope then what I write will
be the more acceptable to all good and ingenuous Men.

Having also set before me that mark and more Noble Aim, the general good of
Mankind; I suppose I may reach it the more happily by treading the path of true
Virtue; and injuring or reproaching no Man: Yea, not so much as indirectly;
unless when I am hampered in the difficulty, requiring private Reputation or
Commodity to be offered up for public safety: As when these offer to start up
in the way to bar^ out this or any other Improvement.

As few in this place, are ignorant of the occasion which gave rise to the
Calumnies with which I complain this Method and my self to be blundered, so
there is few that know the real truth and Circumstances of the thing as it was
acted: Wherefore I presume it will not be unacceptable to ingenious Persons to
hear a faithful Relation of the whole matter.

If by virtue of the advancement with which the writings of the Sagacious Dr.
Sydenham had before enriched Medicine, the rest of his dictats should vindicate
to themselves as their due, authority and trust; I, for my part, did always
think that these were most deservedly to be bestowed upon them: Especially
since I had found his former Improvements, being subjected to the Touchstone of
Experience and Practice, so seldom to defeat the expectation and wishes.

But in the Year 1687 perusing the first Edition of his Schedula Monito^ia,
where he delivers as confirmed by manifold experience, not only a new, but a
quite contrary Method to the common, of Curing Continual Fevers: I did long
hesitat, thinking that either he, or all other Physicians were grossly deceived,
about the Cure of Fevers; if not, as their Patients use to be, they were in an
high Delirium; and lest the preconceived opinion that I had of the Man's
Ingenuity should so far impose upon my Credulity, as to draw me into an error
likewayes with him; and make me to experiment that method, when I knew not but
I might run the hazard to sacrifice some to my Temerity; nothing could settle
my tossed thoughts below the sight and knowledge of the thing it self.

Presently therefore hastening to London, and having met with the Man, and
exposed the occasion of my coming, I found all these tokens concerning him and
his Practice, that use to beget in warry and prudent People making serious
Inquiry, Trust and Knowledge. Then after some Months spent in this Society,
returning home as much overjoyed as I had gotten a Treasure; I presently set my
self to that Practice: Which has proved so succesful to me, that since that
time, of the many Fevers that I have treated, none were unoured, except my Lord
Creichton, whose case is related here: And another Woman, whose dangerous
circumstances made her condition hopeless.

And among those that were cured, as there were some afflicted with that
disproportion of the Symptoms and other ^ircumstances commonly denoting
malignity; which may ext^l the efficacy of the Method: So there were some of my
nearest Relations, as my Wife and six of my Children, taken also with
pernicious Fevers thereby likewayes cured, which is an evidence of my
sufficient proof of the Method: But in the mean time what proportion of these
that are medicate by the common Method is lost? which whither it be by the
force of the Disease, or by the Method, it seems highly the Physicians concern
to enquire.

Coming then to my Lord Creichton the sixteenth day of his Fever, when he was
given over by all for dead, his Grave Clothes being prepared, I did reason with
my self, if, exposing the credit of this Method; yet in the Infancy to such an
hazard, it should receive the foil, it would surely be a difficult task to
bring it in grace; especially with the Vulgar: But on the other hand weighing,
if I could astipulate the Method with one or more of such Instances of success,
that this would by great steps, and more then the ordinary progress of many
Years, elevate its Authority and Credit; And so I should, hastening that pace of
Improvement to the great benefit of Mankind, superate these obstinate
difficulties put by humane Infirmity, not to say worse, making such always
slow in advance: For in so far only as they have Authority, the best and most
salutiferous Methods do only streach their Protection and Safeguard. And
further, I being seized with a most ardent desire of the safety of that Noble
Person, there was scarce any thing that I esteemed too much to expose to
hazard, if it did bring any glimses of hope of his Recovery: For all the hope
that remained with me of his Health, seemed to ly in the prosecution of that
Method as the caise would bear.

But surely Divine Providence esteeming me unworthy of such auspicious success,
or to work so stupenduous a miracle; And also finding me altogether Incapable
to bear so prodigious a Fortune, did therefore suppress and defeat my hope, and
perhapes Ambition, in the Fate of that Noble Person.

Now follows the History of his Disease from the time that I did first see him.

In the 16th day of his Fever (the chief symptom whereof being a high and
difficult breathing, threatening suffocation, and that all along the Disease.)
He was taken with a grievious Paroxism, wherein he lay several hours Dumb and
Deaf, neither (like a Man expiring,) did he know these standing about him,
under this fit his asthmatick Paroxism did remitt, by the use of an
antiparalitick electuary his Speech and Hearing returned, but accompanied with
a high Delirium. This morbifick Matter being now turgide and moveable, and
further Fluctuating from one place to another, and the translation thereof into
the Lungs being again impendent, by asthamatick and anhelous Symptoms
beginning; seemed to insinuate the Indication of Derivation and Evacuation of
that Matter, and that not only according to the rules of this Method, but also
of the common Method, both coninciding in this point of Indication in a Body
(Especially such as this patient had) filled with viscuous Humors; his Strength
and appetite being moderatly consistent, and some glimpses likewayes of
Concoction appearing in the Urine.

There is then Administered to him in the 18th. day, a lenient potion in
partited Doses, which gave several Stools without any Pain or prostration of
Strength; after which the anbelosity and Fever seemed much to be alleviat, and
the Delirium altogether to be gone, in the Evening a sleepiness seized him, and
in the night he had several stools; Neither the day following was the looseness
altogether stoped, now his strength and appetite being consistent, and the
dejections being more urgent in frequency then quantity; No Indication did yet
perswad the interposing a check to them; And the sleepiness continuing
admonished caution in the use of the Paregorick; Yet toward night it was
determined by he use thereof to Moderat, but not to stop the looseness. Here the
Curative Indication in respect of the disease, and Conservative Indication in
respect of the Strength interferring, required great Caution, least aiming at
the Cure of the Disease by indulging the looseness, the Strength might be
infringed, or on the other hand, when the Strength should be consulted by
binding up of the Belly, the Disease and Morbifick matter should become more
Impacted, and Regurgitate on the Pulmons, then having exhibit that night two
small Doses of the Paregorick, I seemed to hitt the mark: With which Method
throw the whole course of the Disease he was treated: Giving less or more Vent
to his Belly by the counsel of the more pressing Indications, and that by the
use or abstinence of the Paregorick interposing a Moderately warm Diet, and
expectorating Lohoch, restaceous Pouders, and volatile Salts, in small partited
Doses. And indeed this Method seemed in so far succesful that every one that
visited him had great hopes of his Recovery, until the 24th. day of his
Sickness in the morning, the Morbifick matter falling again precipitantly into
the Lungs, (notwithstanding his Belly being soluble, and neither, in respect of
the most pressing Indication, too much) raised again an high and Vebement
breathing, most difficult expectoration of viscid Phlegm, which threatened to
stiffle him, with an intension of the Fever, all which increassing, toward
midday, this Noble Person Expired.

And here it comes to be observed, for the Influence it might have upon this
Patient, that, that day the Air was infected with the thickest Mist has been
seen, now how much such Air Influences many Bodies Disposed to receive the
impressions thereof, notwithstanding the closness of Roumes and Fires, many can
testify by the effects thereof in themselves, and is further very clear from
the Doctrine of Perspiration, by which appears how much the Impurity of the Air
contributes both to stop the perspirable matter, and to difficultate the Bloods
passage throw the Lungs; As will be clear afterward.

In the Body being opened all the Bowels and solid Parts were found to be
sound, and his Disease to be only in the Fluides, for the Wind-pipes in the
Lungs were so puffed up with viscide phlegm, that aTub being fixed to the
Trach-artery, and blown as hard as one of the bystanders could do, yet the
Lungs could not be streatched to any further dimension.

This then is the case that has raised such a Storm of Calumny against this
Method: And indeed least Men should think that there is no case so full of
difficulty and danger, which will not yield to an effectual Method, therefore
this, although in many it has been formerly effectual, could only prolong his Life
for eight days; and make such a turn in his condition, as to give no small
signs of recovery; with a perfect tranquillity all that time both in his Body
and mind.

But now to return to the Method, which can be no more convelled by this
singular Instance, yea by many more if they could be given, then other methods
may be, under which there are so very many that daily miscarry, especially
seeing this method is so much confirmed by the experiences of many Physicians
both at London, and here Practicing it so succesfully; that it is rare if at
all, any Person does dye under it: By which its use and security is
sufficiently confirmed.

Moreover, in this Essay, I have further attempted to show how rational a
Method it is; And that in favors of such Pallats, as can relish nothing
without that.

And the Reasonableness thereof will be more obvious to any that will with me
perpend the progress of the Operation of the oeconomie, and remarke that the
animal economy is founded in a Mechanic structure, to wit, in matter and
motion: Upon whose Integrity and Vigor the soundness of the oeconomie, and
from whose Labefaction, the vitiation thereof depends, and so this Machine like
other Engines has a principle measure and end of its motion: The principle is
the first Impellent or Impetum Faciens, according to Hypocrates, or the Archeus
according to Helmont, or the Spirits according to the common opinion, the
necessity whereof is clear in the sequel of this discourse: to the measure of
the motion there is required the due Energie of the Impellent, and the Aptitude
and Sequacity of the moveable matter; To which when it is liquide, there is
required also the due Aperture and Smothness of the passages throw which the
motion is to be made.

The Energie of the Impellent vitiate is either primarie, and not depending
upon the Fault of the moveable matter, and this seems a case altogether beyond
Art to repair: Or its Fault is dependent, and that is either when its Energie
is augmented, as when the Humors or Organs do not yield to its due Impulse,
then to attain its end, it adds more force; Which often making the motion to
be propagated beside the design, terminates in Collisions and Reflections; As
if the Impellent were affected with Fury or Anger: As is seen in Convulsions,
and Histerick Affects, and in Fevers.

Or the Impellent may be vitiated by its Energie diminished, as when it is
stupefied and Inviscat by gross Humores, as is seen in many Chronick Affects.

The Aptitude of the moveable matter in the solid parts is vitiate by their
rigidity, which depends upon gross Humors that fill up their Fibers, or their
Junctures or Hinges, upon which in their motion they are turned: the fault in
the liquide parts, such as the Humors, whither Alimentitious or
Excrementitious, depends upon there grosness or viscosity also: which soon
begets slowness, Imprinting a blemish upon the functions, and eluding the end
of the economy; Notwithstanding the Incitation of the Impellent, and its
outmost Effort to attain the end of the economy.

The faults of the Channels and Vessels consists either in their straitning
obstructing or Scabricity? Which always depend, unless when they are from an
external and compressing Cause, upon the same grosness of Humors stuffing their
Chanells, Coats, or Fibers.

So the fundamental cause of most, if not all, Diseases, seems to be the
grosness of the Humores causing their slowness, making soon bad Impressions
upon the functions; To overcome which, providing the Impellent be veget and not
Inviscat, it stirs up struglings, whence comes Orgasimes, Reflections and other
depravations of motion, as consequential to the attemps for obtaining the due
measures of its motion.

Now from this Easy and Obvious Hypothesis the Nature of Fevers is here
clearly enucleat, whilst Authors feign many Chimerical Phantasmes to explain
the Phenomenon, by which they become rather the more Intricat.

It seems likewayes not improbable that the moveable fluide Matter, being
deprived of its due motion, acquires various Configurations of its minute parts
which make it troublesome to the Fibers or Channels of the Vessels: and this
seems withal to be the Immediate Material cause of many Depravations of motion,
such as Refractions, Reflections, and Collision raised by the incitation of the
Impellent; and so from the complication of these, the variety of symptoms, and
the indefinite multitude of Diseases is begotten.

And even as that motion of the blood, commonly called Circulation or Circuit
of the blood, did strangely ly in the dark, for many Ages; and was with
difficulty received by many, because, which was often brought to its reproach,
that although it seemed to illustrate the Theorie of Medicine, yet it made no
improvement in the practice thereof: so now that noble invention will not only
be delivered from that reproach, but will be yet further imbellished, if we can
evince this motion of the blood vitiated, viz. its slowness depending upon
grosness to be, if not of most diseases, yet the nearest and continent cause of
continual Fevers: And moreover if it can be shown of what Concatenation or
Complication of causes this nearest cause by order or congress is fomented; how
many fruitful and solid indications altogether formerly in the dark, may there
be drawn from thence? especially seeing we may be furnished with sufficient
means to satisfy these indications and that either by the correction,
intercepting, or eradicating of those causes being distinctlie known.

And so I have expede this method of the famous Sydenham Theoretically and
Practically with as much Brevitie and Perspicuitie as I could: but with what
fruit or fate I know not; but if this essay be received with the same
Ingenuitie it is offered, if it do not reach to the full design, it will at
least as is hoped be favourablie constructed: For many may run at a prize, but
only one enjoyes it: And amongst all that have attempted to make discoveries,
none has been so happy as to discover all; but one has found out one thing; and
another an other thing: And Chance rather than Art has led many Searchers
beyond their Intensions to discover notable things: Some whereof may bring
light, and other some may bring Fruit to medicine; out of which the succeeding
Ages by a prudent choice, may perhaps gather materials to compile a more
solid Systeme, especially of Practical medicine; then is yet extant: To which
whither or not this attempt may contribute any thing, let others judge; but not
these, that by their precipitant sentences against this method, have made
themselves parties in this Plea.

If no other advantage come of this design, this at least I hope may be the
effect of it, that as the barking of the little Dogs raises the courage of the
great ones, so these aims may rouse to the more profound diving into the
sublime and obscure Nature of Fevers; these. Quibus ex meliori luto finxit
praecordia Titan. But whatsomever benefit or advantage may come to the Public
by this design, unto my self praise, or advantage, I expect none; because
herein having engaged against so many, who perhaps esteeming themselves
obscured, and consequence not a little injured, will necessarlie therefore
become picqued; and follow closs the opportunity and advantages of their
resentment.

It being also very certain that in proportion as this Essay appears fraught
with any benefit to Mankind, that the wicked Serpentine brood still big with
malice, and envious of the good of Men, and which was never more Dominant then
at this time; Will rake all the corners of Hell for Venom to bespatter it with;
And this may be a Grave mark, by which Honest Men that are not so very
Penetrating, may Judge whither it contains any thing useful or not.

And as it falls out for the most part in the World, that man makes but a sorry
bargain, who gratifies one to the (although but supposed) detriment of another;
the resentment of the injury often proving more heavy, then the result of
gratitude for the benefit done can any ways allay: Reveng being a natural, is
also a rank thriving-weed in the mind of man; Whereas gratitude being like an
exotic plant requires diligent culture to make it grow there.

But above all, benefits done to the public, meeting with least acknowledgment
and recompense, (having so many concerned have for the most part therefore none
concerned) do therefore strangly expose the Benefactor to the resentments of
th^se that suppose themselves injured, for private and public Interest seem to
be always at war, where the public receives the foill: And indeed therefore I
might have consulted my own praise and profit more, by treading the broad way,
and beaten path with the multitude, tho with ever so much hurt to Mankind.

But this is not all, for the World is no more Barren of gratitude and
acknowledgment, than it is fertile and productive of Calumnies and slanders: And
these levelling at reputation and Goodname, throw them oftentimes wounding our
Fortunes, (the Integrity and Increase of the one depending much on the
soundness of the other) makes him that steals ones Goods, only so much the less
faulter, than him that wrongs their name, in respect he that steals does it
with design rather to advantage himself, than to wrong his neighbor: but he
that wounds ones name, doing it maliciously, has nothing for most part by the
loss, and even this atrocious crime, being of deeper die, has also many more
entangled therein, then people are well awar: for not only the first broaching
and venting of calumnies with design, is culpable, but also all that propagate
the same; since it is no more certain, that fire dies without feuel, than that
injurious calumnies and slanders die without their being kept in life, by their
being propagate and handed from one to another: the heaviest part then of the
guilt seems to lie in that propagating, and so on the Propagator: And the want
of an injurious design in them that do it, can no more excuse here (all the
strength of excuse lying in the like stupid inconsideration of the necessary
consequences of such deeds) than he that either hands, or trains with fuel a
Fire, tho kindled by another, into the Thatch of a Man's house, can be excused
by pretending Inadvertance or incon^ideration; the effects of the one being as
obvious as the other: And so the matter being duly considered, makes the one
case of no less atrocious guilt than the other.

IF any quarrel the Language, or Style, let him remember the case of the Son of
Craesus: This being the first Essay I have made to speak after this manner, no
wonder, it be not so very Articulate, as Use (which perfites all things) would
have made it.

But however defective it seems to be in this point; yet some Judicious and
Ingenious persons have given such a Testimony of it, as may perhaps make me be
lifted up, above measure; Wherefore I hear there is sent a Messenger of Satan
to buffet me, which being likely necessary, is not unacceptable to me,
loftiness of mind, indeed blasting the best and noblest Actions of Men.

The Contents.
EQuity and Law makes the Unskillfulness of Physicians highly culpable. Page 1.
Qualifications requisite to acquire Skill, are first Acuteness. Page 3. Next
their being sequestrat from other Employments or Divertisements. page 5.
Diligence and Industry also requisite. ibid. The causes of their Negligence,
either the impunity of it here. page 6. Or, The Ignorance of the strickness of
the obligation lying on them to diligence. page 7. The Nature and extent of
that obligation cleared from Law and Equity. page 7. The great difficulty he
has in his Practice to avoid both the extremes, first of hurting, next neglect
of the Means ought to have been used, make the utmost diligence necessary. page
9. A Model of the Physicians Diligence, and first, The general Diligence of
accomplishment. page 15. Nixt, The particular Diligence described, and how it
begets experience. page 19. To which is required, A Iournal of the Physicians
Practice. page 22. Where, by the way, the vanity of many observations in
Medicine is remarked. First, Because Diseases are not sufficiently unmasked.
page 25. Next Diseases are not sufficiently specified. page 27. The Benefit and
Necessity of the Physicians diligence illustrated further. page 28. Why Recent
Writters especially Sydenham* have afforded the best means of Improvement page
29. The evil consequences of Sloth in Physicians. page 30. Too great throng of
Practice hinders Improvement. page 32. The success of Artifice and Personal
Prudence hinders Improvement in Physicians, and some means thereof described.
page 34 The accession that the Vulgar have by their errors about Medicinal
Practice to hinder the Physicians Improvement cleared: And first, By their
groundless and preconceaved Opinions of Physicians. page 38. And that
especially founded of their wrong notion they have of Experienced Physicians;
where Experience in Medicine is descrived. page 42. The Vulgar opinion of the
vanity and uselesness of Medicine an enemy to Improvement; where that Opinion
is fully considered and confuted. page 49 The uncertainty of Prognostic in
Medicine. a great pillar of that Error considered and removed. page 56. Upon
what the Arbitriment concerning Medicinal Practice does d^pend. page 60. The
disparity betwixt the Arbitriment concerning the practice of Policy or Law, and
that of Physic. page 62 Only from practice comes Improvement in Medicine as in
the Philosophy called experimental, and the great necessity to improve medicine
farther that way, but especially to improve that part of Medicine Concerning
the Cure of Continual Fevers which is a Disease of such ^^titude extent and
danger. page 67. The common and Diaphoretick Method in Fevers considered and
rejected. page 71. Refrigerants, Temperers of Acrimony, Aperients and Inciders
considered and rej^cted. page 74. The most probable Method proposed. page 76.
Motives to this Method from the Authors Sydenhams Ingenuity and Sagacity and
the Prodigious Dangers he escaped: and the Reputation be at length got both
Abroad and at Home. p. 78. Where Dr. Morton and Harris their Praise of the
Author is related. page 90. To confirm more and illustrate this Method further
to the Curious, there is an Essay made to fit it with an adequat Theory; which
leads to the inv^stigating the Nature of Fevers, and for that purpose to
discuss all former Opinions about them, and first the common Opinion discussed.
page 93. The Opinion of Willis, Cartesius, Paracelsus, Helmont, Silvius and
Barbet, all proposed and discussed. page 96. A New and Mechanical Hypothesis of
Fevers suitable to Bonteko, proposed. page 100. The Foundation of the Mechanical
Scheme, laid down. page 101. Some Difficulties about the Hypothesis answered.
page 106. And that Scheme further traced. page 109. How Heat is generated in
Fevers cleared by this Scheme. page 111. The consideration of the Concatenation
of the causes of Fevers confirm also this Scheme. page 117. Where Insensible
Perspiration is descrived, and the accession which its lesion has to generate
Fevers, confirms further the Hypothesis. page 118. The rest of the remote
causes and their progress to the generation of Fevers considered where a
Mechanical Hypothesis of Digestion in the ventricle, is proposed. page 131 The
Natural Phenomenon in Fevers made to confirm this Hypothesis in Fevers, such as
Thrist Pains, Inquiettude, Anxieties, Dilirium, and Spots. page 138. The
Phenomenon of Helper^ and Hurters also considered, confirm the same, and how
Bleeding confirms it, and several curious Phenomenon concerning Bleeding,
solved conform thereto as page 143. How Bleeding helps in Hemorhagies. page
147. The reason why the worst Blood is first evacuate. page 152. Why ill Blood
comes sometimes first sometimes last. page 152. Why People ly down upon the
aproach of a fit of sickness. page 153. Why its easiest to bear Blood-letting
lying on a Bed. page 154. An Objection from the Bloods not coagulating when
drawn in Fevers answered: p. 155 Purging in Fevers considered from Reason and
Authority, page 156 Some practical cautions concerning purging in Fevers, page
161 The benefit and season of using Paregoriques in Fevers, page 165 The hurt
of mere Diaphoretiques in Fevers. page 166 The hurt of a method direct to A
crisis, p. 167 A difficulty taken from the Authors Constitutions answered,
showing that this method agrees with all constitutions of years: p: 168 The
further Helpers and Hurters in Fevers considered, confirm this Hypothesis, as
Salts, volatile and fixed, Alcalin and Testaceous Concrets: page 170 The
Benefit of Cuppings, Leeches and Frictions confirm the same. page 174. The
Phenomenon of Hutters confirm this Hypothesis, as l^ing always in the naked
Bed. page 176. Why Hurtful to ly with the Head too low, showen by this
Hypothesis. page 178. Some other difficulties concerning the Hypothesis
answered, at first how the Blood gives no signs of that grosness in its
passage through the Lungs. page 179. Where by the way the progress of
Sanguification is considered. page 180. As also how A pthisis or Consumption is
bred; with some signs of the approach of this Disease taken out of Mortouns
Pthisiologia. page 182. The Phenomenon of a Fever in A pthisis* confirms this
Hypothesis. page 184 Another difficulty how this Grosness of the Blood does not
rather produce Tumors and Inflammations, than Fevers, answered. page 185. An
Appendix of the Statical Doctrine of Sanctorius, with the description and use
of the weighing Chair. page 189. Of the Weight and Nature of insensible
Perspiration. page 190. Concerning Air and Waters influence thereon. page 192.
Of the influence Aliements Meat and Drink has thereon. page 20^. Of Sleeping
and Walking. page 203 Of Exercise and Rest. page 205. Of Venery. page 207 Of
the passions of the mind. page 20^
ERRATA
Epistle to Physicians page 1. line ult. read Heterodo^y, p. ^ l. 24 for that,
r the, p. 4. l. 3. del. the, p. ^. l. 8. for choiching r. choosing. p. 16. l.
7. for choicing r. choosing. p. 17. l. 10. for samen r. same. p. 21 l. 12. del.
be. p. 24. l. 16. for stirring r. steering: p. 25. l. r. for enter r. center,
p. 26. l. 27, del. of th^se. p. 28. l. 11. r. comprehend, ibid. l. 24. r.
affects, p. ^2. l. 25. r. too. p. 38 l. 6 r. chioce, p. 42 l. r ^ r. their p.
48 l. ult. r. therefore, p. 54 l. 10 r. of p. 61 l. 7 r. subsidiary, p. 62 l.
21 r. measures p. 65 l. 17^. one. p. 66 l. ^ r. through for throw all
throughout. p. 67 l. 19 del. to, p. 72 l. 25 r. from ratio cination only, p. 90
l 3 r. had never, p. 103 l. 11. dele. proportionable, p. 104 l. 5 r its, ibid:
l: 9. r. ordinary, p. 107 l. penult. dele. their, p. 119 l. 2, for which r. so
this. p. 131 l. 20 r. of the, p. 135 l. 8 r. infirmity, p. 140 l. 13. visive,
p. 143 l. 16 r. it be. l. 22. dele. a. p. 145 l. 1 r. was near, for throw, r.
all along through.

Epistle to the Physicians, page 2. lin. 9. for Et^mology Etiology, in the
Preface, page 13. lin. 2. for Or^simes, Or^asm^, page 13. lin. 12. for Approve,
r: Dis^pprove, page ^10. lin. 1. for Evacuationly, read Evac^u^^^ ^^ly.

Act of Council.
AT Edinburgh the Twenty third Day of July 1691 Years, anent the Supplication
given in to the LORDS of Their MAJESTY'S Privy Council, be Mr. Andrew Broun
Doctor of Medicine; Showing, That, where the Petitioner has Compyled and
Printed a Treatise, entitled, A Vindicatory Schedule about the New Cure of
Fevers, he humbly conceaved, their Lordships would not deny him the ordinary
Privilege allowed to Authors, and Composers of Books: And therefore, humbly
Supplicating the said LORDS would be pleased upon consideration of the
Premises to give an^ grant sole Privilege and License of the Printing of the
foresaid Treatise, in whatsomever Language, to the Petitioner, or his Order,
for the space of Nineteen Years: And to Discharge all Persons from Printing.
Re-printing, or Importing, and Vending of any of the said Books within this
Kingdom for the said space, without the special License of the Petitioner, or
his Executors, or Assigness; And that under the pain of Confiscation thereof,
to his, or their behove, beside what farther Punishment their Lordships should
think fit, as the said Petition bears. The LORDS of Their MAJESTY'S Privy
Council, having considered the above Petition, given in to them be Mr. Andrew
Brown, Doctor of Medicine; They grant the desire thereof.

Extracted by me, DA. MONCRIEF Cles. Sti. Concilii.

A TABLE For explaining the hard words of this Book to the Vulgar.
Abdomen, (signifies) The paunch or rim of the belly, including the skine, fat,
and muscules thereof. Attrition, A grinding or braying. Antecedent cause, The
cause of a disease immediately before the nearest cause. Capillary vessels, As
small as hairs, Cathartick, A purgative Medicine. Coagulation, Congealing.
Crisis, The sudden termination of a disease. Crase, The temper of the parts or
blood. Concatenation, A chaining of causes, and effects. Continent cause, The
immediate cause of a disease. Diaphoresis, A breathing out through the superfice
of the body by sweat or otherwise. Diaphragma, The Midrife. Endemical disease,
Which is very common in a place Fibers, The small shreds constituting the
fleshy or nervous parts. Fomes, The feuel of a disease. Glands, Kernels.
Globuls, Little balls such the blood are full of. Grumafite, The solid parts of
the blood that subsides, Hemoragies. Fluxes of Blood. Heterogeneous, Another
kind. Hypothesis, A supposition, or the plate form of any thing represented.
Identitions, The same. Idea, The representation of any thing in the mind.
Inte^tines, The guts. First impellent, The first mover in the body. Lixivial,
Belonging to lie made of ashes. Maze, A labyrinth. Muriatique, Briny.
Mesentery, The membran keeping the guts together
Neotericks, New Writers. Orgas^e, A tumult or commotion, oesophage, The
w^sane. Animaloecono^^^, the order in government of the animal.
Paregorick, A quieting Medicine. Paroxisme. A sit of a disease. Perspiration,
The great evacuation continually made throw the pores o^ the body. Pulmonick,
Belonging to the lungs. Phe^ome^^, Appearances or effects of hidden causes.
Phlebotomy, Bloodletting. Regimen. The government of the six things called not
natural. Scabrieity, Roughness. Scheme, A figure or representation of a thing.
Smegmatique, Belonging to soap. Spumosity, Fro^hiness. Staguation, The pooling
of running liquor. Systole and Diastole. Contraction and Dilatation.
Susceptibility, Capacity of receiving impressions. Specify. so particularise.
Specifique, Proper. Serosity, The watery part of the Blood or Humors. Tone, The
fi^mness of the parts as to their contracting and dilating. Tenuity, Thinness.
Trach-artery, The Windpipe. Vatillant. Tottering. Viscuous, Glewy. Venivicle,
Stomach. Ve^^section, Blood-letting.
A VINDICATORY SCHEDULE, CONTAINING A Disquisition Theoretical, and Practical,
of the New, but most Effectual Method of Curing Continual Fevers, Invented, etc.
SECT. I. Clearing, that the infallible Principles of Law, Equity, and Reason,
and the necessary consequences thereof, applicable to the Physician* does both
oblige and direct him to get light in this subject, and in the other means of
his Improvement.
IF the Profession, that seems most deservedly, to be entrusted with the
Standard of Justice, whereby Humane Actions are commensurable, Equity and Law,
makes the unskilfulness of Phisicians, highly culpable.
does give out, and determine, that to be a quasi delict, or kind of Crime,
when a Judge, through unskilfulness, gives an unjust Sentence, tho thereby we
only suffer in our Goods and that Damnage be also reparable, by a Revise, or
the cognizance of an higher Tribunal: And further if that Profession, does
calculate the Attrocity of Crimes, according to the degree of hurt done,
together with the the kind of Negligence occasioning it, which if Supine and
Affected, and in matters of great moment, and trust, makes then so gross an
fault, that being equivalent to fraud or dole; and thus giving the essential
thereof, it constitutes likewise a a true Crime:

May not truly then, the unskilfulness of Phisicians, arising from incapacity
or negligence; especially, when supine and pertinacicious, and that also under
a trust so great, either bringing, or permitting, (while it is in the power of
Art to prevent it) the irrecoverable loss of Life, justly carry the taint of a
true, and no small Crime: Tho withal such, as rather for want of competent
Judges, then for want of sufficient and crying Guilt, is reserved wholly to the
last Tribunal.

And it being also very sure, that by how much the danger and loss, from the
unskilful performance of Medicinal practice, is greater; and the difficulty of
attaining to skill therein, is also more, then in that of the Judge, or any
other offices whatsomever; by so much it requires both greater Judgment, and
more Labor, and Industry in the Undertakers; and that as well for their
accomplishment therein, as for the particular discharge thereof: And indeed
such as are rather suitable to the Import and Difficulty of the work, than to
the Capacity, or Ability of the Operator. It seems therefore, that the only
Innocence capable to protect, from the Imputation, and Impeachment of this
Crime, is commensuarable in proportion to the vigor of the understanding, and
activity of Industry, in prosecuting the Qualifications requisite, for the
particular, and faithful discharge of this practice.

Whence seem Trespassers here, all those, who not being above the ordinary
gifts of Mind, Acuteness requisite in Phisicians.
nor endued with a singular Acuteness; although altogether unapt; yet do ingire
themselves into this Study, and Practice. That the saying of Petrar^h de Remede
Vtr. Fortun. Lib. 1. Dial. 7. Tha^ nothing is more odious to wisdom, then too
great Acuteness, may have its due use in Morals, and Conversation, where the
observation, and stopping at every Punctillio, does rather amusing retard, then
enlightening direct: Yet the self same exactness, and penetrating, which tho in
Moralls, and perchance also in Common Prudence, is debased into Preciseness,
and Caprice, in Medicne, (as exalted to Medical Prudence) does really adopt the
true Sons of Art; For in taking a Survey of the works of Techy Nature, in
relation to become a Moderator therein, nothing being so Minute, and Latent,
but (as capable of, so often signal for influence,) deserves likewayes
expiscation and eventilation: The practice therefore of Medicine requiring, as
a large and full, so a distinct and acurate prospect; to comprehend all things,
that can instruct the Physician, in relation to the knowledge and cure of
Diseases, and many of these, by their Minuteness as well as Sublimity, escaping
the less curious inquiry. It seems then, its only the most exact dyveing, (as
liable to the fewest of such escapes) that can of right entitle, to any degree
of eminency, and perhaps sufficiency in this Employ; Or at least, nothing can
propitiate for the defect of this, but the proportionable increase of Industry
and Diligence, sometimes equaling this acuteness in search and discovery.

In the next place seem culpable here, these who albeit endued with pregnancie
of Wit, 3. And they being sequestrate from other Imployes, or Divertisements.
yet do exercise the practice, by way of parergon, or by-work; and labor
therein, following an other employ, or study; perhaps also of that
perplexedness, and moment, requiring likewise their whole endeavors: and thus
serving two rigide Masters, and parting their labor betwixt them, they do most
unworthily, apprehend themselves, to discharge sufficiently the diligence
agreeable to Medicine, which, considering the Intricacy and Import thereof; can
be satisfied with nothing less, than the continual, and vigorous bending, and
intension, even of the most acute and perspicacious mind thereupon; and without
notable and injurious impairment, can never suffer any such invasion of its
right, or to be rivaled by considerable wast of time, bestowed either on
Occupation, or Diversion, beside it self: Excepting always, the care and
concern due to the chief Interest of everlasting happiness, Properly, and
Significantly, termed the general calling.

In the next degree come here censurable, 4. Diligence and Industry requisite.
any who although appearing of competent enduements of mind; and further, exercise
this Practice alone, yet (as the craving importance and intricacy of this Art
altogether requires) are so far from the due and closs following, or by serious
inquiry, from the careful anticipating, all the expedients of Improvement, that
they shift and decline the opportunities; yea already dressed improvements, laid
to their hand: these indeed giving a semblance to have sloth for their
ascendant, and pertinacie for their predominant, come thereby so far short of
the necessary and possible progress, that they are still Stationary; And while
the Art it self is in advance, they may be said in a manner to be retrograde,
in true and solid skill.

Now these being either more knowing persons, and consequently, conscious of
the fault of their negligence, yet presumeing the altogether impunity thereof,
5.. The causes of their negligence either the impunity thereof here.
they easily venture on the perpetration of any crime, escaping the tribunal of
Men; or being less knowing, and so less conscious and wicked; then laboring
under fundamental errors and mistakes; no wonder they make only such a
superstructure thereon, as is suitable to the Laws of incuriousness and ease.

For they being altogether in the dark, as to the Nature of that Obligation, 6.
Or ignorance of the strictness of the Obligation lying on them.
they put upon themselves, by undertakeing a Profession, that does certainly
obliege them, to such exact discharge, as makes the least errors, both of
Commission, and Neglect, especially when (as often they are) of dangerous, and
Fatal Purport; to be placeable to the undertakers acount: If by any
qualification from Capacity, Diligence, and Scrutiny, these might have been
evited, no wonder then (since they have no distinct, and clear Impressions of
this) they should have likewayes no Stimulating Impressions from this.

Now the strictness of the Obligation, 7. The Nature and Extent of it cleared
from Law and Equity.
lying upon the Physicians, in relation to their diligence, is not only
deduceable from the nature of trust in general, which Lawyers (clearly giving
out as obliging to the diligence of prudent men,) make accountable for the
lightest errors and escapes: But also from the nature of these trusts, that
being the subject matter of a profession, seem therefore to imply as a
supervenient, so a stricter tie, than simple trusts do; the very setting up to
a profession, importing no less, then as the undertakers asserting his
Capacity, so a kind of invitation, to be trusted therein: and this certainly
putting him under ^n accountableness for mere neglect, of any sort; seems to
put him likewayes under a stricter obligation, to accomplishment, then these
trusts do others, which being the subject of no profession, are indifferently
committed unto, and administered by any: for the Mandator choicing a person that
by no character of profession, gives out himself qualified for the trust, he
can expect or exact no more from him, but suitable to the Skill and
Qualifications he really has: Now Medicine, beside what is common to it, with
other both trusts, and professions implies yet a stricter Tie: for almost in
all other employments, the Qualifications being so far discernable, that
importing the Imployers acquiescence, from his choice, in that measure of
skill, he finds or might find, him he trusts, endued with; he cannot justly
charge him with the escapes, especially of Skill, he saw or might easily
perceive him liable to: but in the Profession of Medicine, the Qualifications
lying so deep, that it is hard to perceive, whether they be there, or not; this
makes it difficult likewayes, to make a solid election, where to place that
Trust: Here therefore being Trust, upon Trust. Viz. Not only the Patients
trusting himself, to the Physicians Skill; but also the tru^ting the
sufficiency of that Skill, to the Phisician himself: This must therefore
necessarly, put the Physician likewayes, under the double obligation, as well
to sufficient capacity in his Employ, as the faithful di^charge thereon: For
could the Patient clearly descern, where the most eminent qualities, deserving
such a Trust, were lodged; he would only choice to lodge there likewise, the
Trust of the great concern of his Health, and it may be Life also. Now if
simple Trust, oblige to such exactness, as makes the least Errors chargeable,
what accuracy does this agregation of Trust, (as being the subject both of a
Profession, and of one so momentuous, and intricat, that it includes a double
trust) oblige unto.

The espcapes of mere Neglect tho (rather for want of the Phisicians sufficient
Sense,. 8.
than through his Innocence) giving no check; yet these being often equally,
fatal here, with errors of Commission, should not this undoubtedly therefore,
prompt him to such an Indefatigable, Vigorous, and Universal Search, as may
justly give him, the infallible Assurances, that even these escapes, (under the
qualification of might, and should have helped,) shall never rise in judgment
against him, it being a very sure, tho sad and frequently incurred
Certification, that in so far, as the Phisician fails, in this diligence, in
the proportion to the consequence of the Escapes, arising from the neglect
thereof; he is undoubtedly rendered guilty, even of a Criminal tho secret
deceit in his trust.

. 9.
The Phisician in his Practice, being to march in an extraordinary narrow path,
environed on the one hand, with the dangers of escape, and neglect; and on the
other hand, with the perils of positive and plain hurting: So then he often
studying too cautiously, or rather ignorantly; to avoid hurting, may be
miserably frighted into, the timorous neglect of the eradicating, and only
effectual Remedies, and contrarywayes, by serious Incumbency on these, he may
rub on the other extreme of hurting: There seems therefore to be nothing, but
the sure evidences, and plain instructions, of this assiduous, and serious
Application, that can obtain to him a full and positive exoneration, bearing,
that he has altogether freed both these, (indeed very close lying together)
extrems: Or that any declension, ^o either side; (whose frequency is as
certain, as it self is secret) is so much venial, that being unavoidable, and
therefore of the nature of casual, he can nowayes be made acountable for it,
however, that the difficulty to avoid hurting the Patient, is more than is
commonly apprehended, will be plain, by considering that these Remedies that to
a mean Tincture of Skill, appear innocent, (and this tho a silly one, is the
best Commendation many can, and do give, their Remedies and Methods) yet these
innocent Remedies, may by a greater degree of Knowledge, discovering much
enveaglement of crossing circumstances in the Disease, be discryed really
dangerous; and farther, another Remedy, that this degree of Knowledge, may in
place of these acquiese in, by an higher pitch of Skill, (armed with more
perspicacity) may justly be repudiat: And so through all the degrees, unto the
farthest attainable pitch of humane Art, (which unto a degree of farther Skill
may also yet appear short) the greater may still see more, than the lesser: So
it is plain, that as no attainable proportion of knowledge can absolutely
secure the Artist even from real hurting, so its only the outmost attainable
proportion, can atone for the guilt of it.

And on the other hand, if we turn to the consideration of neglect; we will
find it may ly in a point not a whit less Nice, In how nice a point neglect may
ly and the coming under the possibility thereof, alarms sufficiently to inquiry.
and Important: As when a Patient is (notwithstanding of all the Physicians
endeavors) lost; yet if there could have been any Remedy in Nature or Art,
which serious application, consideration, or other diligence, might have made
known to the Physician; and by which he might have saved his Patient, then and
in this case, of whom, and of what dies the Patient, I pray you?

Now this bare possibility of Neglect, albeit overly considered, and under the
Notion of a Peradventure only; it gives small impression on the mind; yet the
concernment it carries to the saving or loosing the Life of Man, being closely
laid home, cannot but raise such an anxiety in any thinking or tender
Physician, (especially under the clamorous Rumors, seeming to impeach him of
so important and gross negligence) as nothing can calm, but a serious,
impartial, and through Inquiry, at experience. And this the rather he may be
prompted to, because such experience lying open to his view, as the result of
other Men's Industry, does not oblige him to try by himself what he reckons
dangerous and new experiments; and then it is not doubted, but the issue of
this will (putting off all ambiguity) resolve this peradventure into a
certainty: Unless it happen as may reasonably be feared, that such a restiness,
as needs to be so hard spurred on to the duty of Inquiry, will also in trifling
the Survey of Experience, altogether defeat the hopes of true discovery: But at
length as there seems to be nothing that can approve these Remedies, given out
by the sure experience of others to be of all yet known the most effectual; but
as palpable evidences of their ineffectualness, built on the like exact
experience; so it is hoped none will let their logic out go their honesty so
far, as to bring any such agrument against them. And withal it would be
noticed, (as it frequently falls out in other matters) that although such mistakes
as (in these that are willing to be informed by evidence) are easily curable;
yet the longer they be wilfully and tenaciously maintained against light;
(beside the execution and havoc they in the mean time do make) they do thereby
become the more confirmed and habitual; and make the delivery therefrom, if
ever, always with more difficulty, torture, and remorse; than otherwise it
would be.

Now from all these, as it is certain that palpable inconsideration,
inconcernedness, and neglegence; may equipe out plain incurious ignorance, and
inconvinceable pertinacy under the colors of discreet and warry caution; so
the conclusion of the whole terminates in this, that the only directive light
the understanding is capable of, does arise from the sparkles made by the
collision, and smart strokes of this brisk scrutiny; and also that the alone
solid peace the mind is calmed by, flows from the Reflection and Conscience
of this ingenuous labor and inquiry thoroughly and sincerely performed.

SECT. II. Containing a Model of the Phisicians diligen^e by which it will be
plain, that Industry alone furnishes the Motives, Opportunities, and Means of
Improvement.
FOr further manifesting of all this, it seems necessary to give a scheme and
draw a Land-skip of this diligence; which being plainly done will serve as a
Directive to the Physician in this dangerous and difficult road: for it being
thus in whole subjected to his vieu, will manifest the proportion symmetry, and
direct tendency of all the parts of this diligence to the great end of his
Inprovement, and to the Discharge of these strict Ties lying upon him by his
trust and profession. But such a Figure being only obvious and taking to the
eye of a perspicacious mind, any other never being able to discern Order or Use
herein, (because rather replenished with prejudices against Industry, than
susceptible of any persuasive Impressions of its conduceableness to true
knowledge and skill) will let it pass both in portraiture and in the life
altogether uncopied and unregarded.

In prosecution then of this, The general diligence of his accomplishment.
it comes to be remarked, that tho the trust of the Physician, as being always
versant in particulars, may seem likewayes acquitted by a diligence and
discharge also particular; yet this particular in its Qualification and due
Exercise, altogether depending upon and being the product of a diligence more
general, and of accomplishment; the delineating then of this seems first to be
required.

This diligence then of accomplishment equally respecting all the Subjects of
Medicinal practice seems to consist in acquiring such a stock of Learning and
Knowledge, as may serve for particular exercise and discharge; and this
Knowledge by the accession of all New Practical discoveries is still to be on
the improving hand, for when Advance is possible, (it being always necessary;)
this diligence cannot endure any measure of Skill to be stationary: And
moreover this knowledge only consists in the Imprinting the mind with such
solid and genuine notions of the operations of Nature, in the production,
various fa^eing, and cure of diseases; as will direct in choicing and following
the most effectual measures also to their cure by Art; and these directive
impressions may be most compleately and effectually gotten, (beside what the
Physicians own particular and serious contemplation affords him) by the
diligent quest of, exact search into, and profound meditation upon (for
perfunctorious triffling and scruffing is never more unseasonable then here)
the works and writings of such Authors, who having given the truest Histories
of Diseases, and therein unraveling Natures Intrigues have proven thereby the
best Interpreters of her mysteries, and of such as have descended into the
farthest and lowest specifications of diseases, by bringing most light to the
knowledge thereof, have also brought most fruit of practical and methodical
Cure: And further of such as by the native clearness and succinctness of their
method of treating these things, illustrate the mind with a more clear and
durable impression thereof: and moreover there being several notable practical
Observations incidently occurring in Authors, who deliver the same in no
systematical method of Diseases, and also to be met with in common Medical
conversation; Now these to serve their prope^ expedients, being difficult to be
fallen on, and more diffi^ult to be exactly remembered; by means of this gen^ral
diligence deserve (being picked out) to be orderly classed up; beside, the
light that the samen so disposed (increasing the stock of Knowledge) do bring
to Theory, that (being thus in order also more easily run over) they may be
more expeditely brought forth upon their proper and par^icular Exigencies of
future practice.

And indeed this Concupiscence in the Phisician,. 2. The benefit of this
Diligence.
thus to appropriate the Labors of others, to pluck the better Fruits of their
Lives, to drain the sweet, and extract the quintessence of their Works; is so
far from any injury unto them, that with the grateful acknowledgement of their
Merit and Praise, it is the most due retribution of Justice; and there seems
nothing left us to palliat our ingratitude if we neglect this, but with a
Criminal breach of our Trust, Cruelty to Mankind, and Unkindness to our selves:
That inquiry and search being the only apposite mean of our improvement, and
including so comprehensive a Benefit, as to be the only proper Expedient, in
proportion to our Diligence herein to lengthen the short Life, (our compiling
together the acquisition of many Life's, at least compensing the disadvantage of
the shortness thereof) and also after this manner overcoming the length and
difficulties of this long Art, to shorten the length thereof by our speedy
disciplinating therein. And further the Nourishment and Vigor of the Mind,
being thus also promov'd, this Labor and Exercise stands in the same relation
of Vtility and Necessity thereunto, as the natural Appetite, Assumption, and
Digestion of Aliement does to the Body; for without this Food of the Mind taken
in and digested; tho under the visard of a polite Personal, prudence, some
personating Skill and Learning, are by undiscerning Persons esteemed for well
furnished, robust, and quadrate Champions in Medicine, and so do easily
fa^cinat the Mobile, in most of things (but most of all in this abstruse Art)
grasping at shaddows for substances; yet to the discerning how squalide,
languishing, and truly enervate a Figure do these make.

The other kind of Diligence required in the Phisician, The particular
Diligence begets experience.
because versant about particular and individual cases called particular (and
also in its due Qualification, depending upon the former accurately discharged:
and farther by its exact exercise reciprocally advancing the general stock of
knowledge by experience for fabricando fabri fimus) does consist first in that
outward care and attendance due by the Physician; but the neglect of this
reflecting too sure, sensible, and pungent inconveniences on the Physician
himself, makes for the most part, upon that account, the sensible Diligence to
be sufficiently intent and bended; unless sometimes when Age and Prudence,
pretending Value, and thereby Right, have procured a patent of Reputation from
Opinion, (which rarely consults Merit) to raise the price thereof, then with
Advantage and Safety it may, and for keeping of its Honor it must, become more
remiss, and be made a rarity of: Tho Medicine gives no Monopolising
Prehemenencies by vulgar Opinion; and this Diligence gives neither Dispensation
nor Privilege, but suitable to the necessity of the present exigency. And
next, but withal, more especially this particular Diligence does consist, in
the secret, inward, and conscientious Industry, making an exact Expiscation of
all concurring outward and visible causes, and other circumstances, with the
accurate observation of all the Phoenomena and narrow consideration likewise,
of the disposition of the Body; by which Light may be brought to, or a genuin
idea given of, the continent cause, or essence of the Disease in hand; This
Cause always lying invisible and secretly couched, in the disposition of the
Body, betwixt these two visibles of outward causes and Phoenomena. And this
Diligence here also requires the consigning of these to Writing; that with more
leisure and effect (all being duly pondered) there may be farther discovered,
what effects the given causes are apt to produce in the Body; for by the
Contemplation of their Nature, may be known what will be the consequence of
such seditious Disturbers their invading the oeconomie; where comes likewise to
be considered the disposition of the Body, and its susceptibility either of
impressions altogether different from, or of more grave effects, then these
ordinary resulting from such causes use to be; this commonly resolving in an
Idiosyncrasia or Propriety of temperament: and thus also the Physician, may
consider fully the Phoenomena, what News and Report they do bring from the
inward troubled state of the Oeconomie; where it is also observable, tho these
Phoenomena being often in disguise, impose upon, and deceive the Unexpert; yet
being soon unvisarded by the sagacious Artist, they may be made to tell,
(without dissimulation) the truth: So by making a judicious calcule of the
given causes, disposition of the Body, and appearances; there may be in most
cases more then a probable computation also be made, and a true Idea thereby
had, wherein the discomposure of the Economy does immediately consist: and for
restoring of it, solid and sure Measures adjusted and taken, and that either by
means of the Phisicians proper, but solidly founded experience, or that of the
more eminent Practitioners likewise being consulted. And this method of
consigning the Patients case to write, and for the same use and end, was the
custom and practice of that famous Practitioner Theodor: D. Maynerne of whom
Harres in his Pharmocologia anti Empyrica, relates, That in Chronical cases,
especially such as would permit deliberation, he used not to shake his
Consultation out of his Sleive, but committed all the circumstances and
Phoenomena of the disease to his Diaries, about which he consulted his dumb
Doctors, and by summing up all their Councils, having gotten a true Idea of the
Disease, he did thence take his indications.

Moreover this exact consignation of the Patients case to writing,. 4.
being equally conduceable to the Physician, seems to be of far more necessity
to him (by reason of the far greater import and difficulty of his Practice)
than that usual exactness in Lawyers, their taking up the state of their
Clients causes likewise in writing, is unto them: For the damnages of their
negligence tho more perceiveable, are yet more tolerable and reparable then
the same in Medicine; where it is scarce permitted to fault twice, and over the
Brink the dearest Life is irrecoverably precipitated.

This particular industry does farther require the inserting also into a
journal as a proper conservatory thereof,. 5. An journal of the Physicians
practice requisite.
the whole history of the Physicians daily practice^ therein being particularly
comprehended the Medicines given to each Patient, with the effects thereof: For
by such an exact History; he will be surely directed, how to take his measures,
and make more safe and ready hitts, in their cases, who having been formerly
his Patients, stand there recorded as the subjects of any remarkable
circumstances, or scene of medical Practice: There being truly few but
something various and singular in their Temper, does discover it self; which
concerning their security and safety, concern also the Physicians diligence and
fidelity, to be carefully put in record, and without this record as a compass
to steer by, he will be in hazard either to commit some error of precipitancy,
or to lose time (which the quick current of some cases may render extraordinary
value able and precious) in reiterating those irksome and Nauseous (tho
hovering Trials) to familiarize their nature, temper, and constitution, that at
first his caution did necessarly put him upon. And such Physicians who
neglecting this, (especially under the throng of many Patients, or considerable
intervention of time) do not more carefully take up and preserve such
Lineaments, of their Patients Constitutions, as their occasions of medicating
them does afford; save what alone their Memory can give them thereof; since
thereby they seem altogether to transgress and violate the only condition
inferring the benefit of their being the ordinary, deserve they not likewise to
forfeit that endearing relation and the privileges thereof; which like Love
tho it should cover many of the Physicians Infirmities; yet scarce any of such
important and gross Negligence, where for so small and easy coast, they forego
so great a Benefit to their Patients.

And moreover, this Iournal serving the Physician for a Map of the various
uniformity of the operations of Nature, and these even by his own Survey drawn
from the Life; the serious and frequent view thereof, (by giving him more
solid, full, and bright Ideas of Diseases and their ^ures only begets that so
much talked of (but rarely found) experimental Knowledge, which in proportion
to its solidity will surely direct the steady stirring of his Course in after
practice: And that the solid experience in Medicine (tho after never so much
practice) can nowayes so fully and exactly be produced as by such an exact
Historiography, is altogether clear from the multiplicite complexity,
inveiglement, and variety medical Caises are always circumstantiat with, which
undoubtedly therefore require to be most exactly and fully collected,
represented, and specified, to imprint and conserve in the Mind all these
genuine Ideas, that are necessary to bottom all these reflexive, comparative,
and discursive Acts of the Judgment, requisite to compute, conclude, and enter
in, true and consequential experience. Moreover, this diligence of compiling an
exact History of his Practice, (wherein that of others faithfully communicate
to him, may also be comprehended) is clearly resembled in its method, and also
in its utility confirmed by that diligent care of Lawyers, when they do collect
and digest into certain classes and heads, all Decisions and Practices of
particular Cases: These indeed being seriously considered and pondered; by
imbrightning, unravilling and specifying their notions of Law, does give them
the truest Impressions of Right, which (denoting also experience in Law) must
undoubtedly enable them by more certain Hitts, to make the most solid
application of these legittimate Notions to particular occasions.

But it may perhaps, 6. Whence is the vanity of the many Observations in
Medicine, diseases not being sufficiently unmasked.
and not unreasonably, be objected, that the palpable multitude and vanity of
such Observations in Medicine, wherewith the World is pestered, would therefore
seem to discharge any farther progress in that road: But if it be narrowly
canvassed, whence it is that so few of those Observations being brought again
to be reacted on the Stage, of Practice, does either answer the Authors Brages,
or our expectation founded thereon: Not to call in question the Authors
Ingenuity, the true reason of this will be rather found to be their want of
sufficient Skill, to have set down the Diseases in these Observations, both
sufficiently unmasqued, and specified: This surely has in the re-experimenting
these Observations, often evacuate the Cure: For first, community of Symptoms
and Phoenomena in Diseases in these Observations, always has been found to
class them under one common Type; while many times the Diseases of one Type,
really disguise themselves under the Phoenomena of another Type, so, thus the
diagnostick and Disease being mistaken, the Cure falls to be so in consequence;
and this as it is mentioned and observed, so it is exemplified by our eminent
Author, who has indeed been the first that suitable to the true genious
thereof, has showed the Proteus like nature and fashion of Histerique affects,
that disguise themselves under the appearances and symptoms of many other
Diseases, as under these of these of the Colic, Gravel, etc. and abundance of
others and which being plied with the Remedies appropriate for these Diseases
are indeed more exasperat than lenified, but soon yield to an Antihisterick
method.

And next many Diseases which in these observations go under one general type
as a species,. 7. Next Diseases not being sufficiently specified.
and they made only numerically distinct, are really rather distinct species
under that Type as a Genus; and may differ as much among themselves, as one
Type does from another: No wonder then that Diseases and their Remedies being
set down in Observations, with little regard to this particular specification,
if the proper Remedy of one species (often being mistaken) prove ineffectual
to cure another species: And this important and farther specification is first
also observed and instanced by the same Author, in the Small Pox, which all
antiquity had without distinction of the two species of distinct and confluent
confusedly treated: For beside the different Therapeia evincing this
distinction and specification, that notable Symptom of a diarhaea so noxious
in the distinct, and nothing so, but rather beneficial, in the confluent, with
sundry other differences betwixt them, does more fully make this appear.

So that to do any thing effectually in way of observation, Diseases require
both to be most curiously and carefully unmasked, and more particularly and
farther specified, and the cures which before were in gross bulk and confusion,
ought specially to be sorted by detail: viz. To every real Disease and proper
Species, its own true genuine and particular Cure.

The serious exercise of this double Diligence, The benefit and necessity of
this diligence.
does not only comprehended the Improvement of younger Phisicians, but more
eminently, pointing thereat, does recommend the charge of the Elder, yea Eldest
Ones: These being altogether capable by larger and firmer steps, to make both
surer and farther advance in this road, the only way leading to any pitch of
Skill, in this inexhaustable Art.

And Moreover while Natures fecundity (especially impregnat by Men's
Exorbitances and accidental Contingencies) does alarm us with continual
Inundations of complicat, disguised, and obstinat Effects; should not then
Humane Wit and Sagacity, impregnat also by Labor, Search, and Industry, prove
as broody to discover and obviat both their violent and subtle Assaults.

And surely herein as in all the forgoing means of our Improvement, the recent
Writers seem to have most succesfully labored, Why recent Writters afford the
best means of Improvement.
it being those that alone having had the great advantage to be set on their
Predecessors Shoulders, must undoubtedly therefore have a larger and better
prospect of things; although withal some of them by reason of that prospect, found
it altogether necessary for making true survey and more happy discoveries in
some Diseases, to take up altogether better ground, and new stations, and have
in consequence laid down more solid and sure measures of practice; and the
advantage of others of them being in that they themselves have been
Contemporary with the discovery and Specification of the true Cure of some
Diseases: while some others qualify their advantages and fortunes yet higher,
by having had the sagacity to be the Discoverers of these themselves: The great
merit of D Sydenham.
Now every one of these circumstances singlely, being ground sufficient to
recommend recent Writters, (each whereof from these Advantages has made some
peculiar improvement) how much then must the Combination of them all, in the
person of the Noble and Famous D. Sydenham, (who seems indeed to have made the
same proportion of Improvement with these his Advantages, as the suffrage of
several learned Physicians hereafter to be mentioned bears witness) recommend
and endear these his Labors to all that are mainly either concerned for the
benefit of Mankind, or curious of the Improvement of Medicine: But these indeed
are too vast capacious and laborious designs, to be hampered within (and
perhapes also interferring with) the narrow, petty, and homeward Proj^cts, the
far greatest part are only capable of.

From all which it will be plain,. 9. The evil consequences of Sloat^.
that as on the one hand these that travel in the way of Diligence, (catching
the Opportunities, spurred on by the Motives, and guided by the Means, and thus
being in the straight road) will certainly both land in Accomplishment, and
likewise necessarly take in their way thereto all profitable Discoveries: So on
the other hand, these that slight Diligence, (baulking the Opportunities,
sitting the Motives, evacuating the Means, and being therefore clearly out of
the way to accomplishment,) No wonder, that (never meeting therewith) they be
neither capable nor sensible of excellent Improvements.

And farther, as these that earnestly contend in this way of Diligence, by
tracing sure and clear steps, can only get these true and genuine Impressions
of things, that will enable them to make the solidest Decretory Judgment
concerning the validity of any Improvement, and whereupon they may found true
Experience: So these that linger and deviat, are thereby prone to have their
judgment (which restles must still be forming some Ideas, tho Chimerieal ones)
so depraved and wrested, by the alay of vain Hypotheses, and Prejudices of
empty Theory; that they necessarly do carress and substitute a partial,
unexact, and suppositious, in place of true Experience: Not much unlike a
Garden, that without diligent Culture, becoming naturally all overspread with
useless and noxious Weeds, yields neither Pleasure nor Profit. And thus it
seems may be unridl'd that Paradox, why some Physicians notwithstanding of all
the Light, Certainty, and Profit therein, may yet remain unprosalyted to
excellent Methods: And also, that they may (at a blind Adventure, levell^ng at
Innovations) be really found to hitt and beat down excellent Improvements.

SECT. III. Showing that too great throng of Practice, hinders both
Improvement, and faithful Discharge of the Physicians Employment; And that
Reputation the occasion of that hindrance is rather the effect of Artifice; and
popular Errors then of true Industry.
AS a necessary consequence of all has been said comes the Censure of such
Ph^sicians, who (because thereby also straying from the true method and means
of Improvement) although endued with understanding, and nowayes ^loathful; yet
undertake at once, the Cure and Care of more Patients then their Ability; yea,
that of the most complete Artist, according to the due steps and measures can
thoroughly expedite: And thus that bottom that would otherwise carry through,
and land safely a convenient number may (being impestered and thronged) be so
overloaded, as to loss or hazard all. Every Pasture may be overlaid with too
many Cattle; and every Field may be exhausted by two much Corn growing thereon;
every Cart or Ship may be overburdened: Yea, every particular Artificer whose
work when it is incomplete all perceive to be so; may also undertake more then
he can dispatch; and no hurt comes thereby to any but delay: But only the
Physician and Lawyer (and sometimes by a plurality or largeness of the
Benifice, also the Clergymen) setting down no bounds of their capacity and
undertaking; but conform to the limits of their Trust; profess such a kind of
transcendent ability as is like a little Omnipotency: Because forsooth for the
most part no evidence can be had, but their Faith; that the Trust is honestly
discharged. And tho it be hard to set down positive bounds in this matter,
their capacity being the true measure of every Ones undertaking; and although the
Sagacity of some be improveable to that hight of dexterity, that they can make
surer hitts on the wing, then others do poring from their rests; yet this seems
to be far from warranding by too much undertaking, to lay a necessity on
themselves to be always extemporaneous in their Resolutions, and to mar the
evident and possible advantage of such Sagacity, that rather pointing thereat,
it does encourage, yea oblige, to the fulfilling the great expectation, that
the uttermost Improvement of that Acuteness by sufficient deliberation does
really promise.

Whosoever then is involved in more Business and Practice, then will permit him
to discharge the Diligence due to every Case and Patient, and that both in the
general and particular course, as he thus baulks the means of his
accomplishment, and never meets with occasions of Improvement, so he necessarly
bungles and scruits his work, and deceives his Trust: and seems to have
reputation rather the conquest of his Artifice then merit: And such (tho
hurried unto precipitancy by a pretended necessity, and straitness of time, but
really by avarice) shall undoubtedly be charged with the consequences of their
Errors (tho covered with the earth) no less then the rest of the unqualified
Laborers in Medicine.

So then in the last and most eminent degree seem Criminal all such, who from
Incapacity or Negligence, wanting Skill, do yet (as a succedaneum thereof)
succesfully bestow all their Wit, Industry, and Care, in the Improvement and
Artifice of Personal Prudence, The success of Artifice and personal Prudence
hinders Improvement.
rather than Medical Prudence; in laying down measures to acquire Fame and
Reputation, rather then by true Knowledge or Merit to deserve them: all that
such commonly find proper to aspire unto in Medicine, is first, a great Busle
of external care, and a most obsequious, and delectable Compliance (for if
their Skill be not very sufficient, they give it both cheerfully and also in
good measure) unless when the adult Grandour of mere Reputation is improven to
that degree by Artifice also, to enfranchise from such truckling; and then any
thing looking that way, becomes so Meritorious, that it goes on the borders of
Supererogation and Munificence: And the next Artifice such follow, is to be
Masters and accurate Displayers of some plausible and common tho false Scheme
of Theorie; exactly calculate for the Meridian of vulgar Capacity and
Curiosity: Now this is enough to show it quite Antipods to Truth and Nature it
self, common Capacity being never able to reach the Mysteries of Nature, nor
depths of the Medical Art: To which Theorie by a dexterity sufficient to subdue
popular Rudity, they make all the Phoenomena in Diseases and the Method of Cure
exactly to stoup; and thus gratifying vulgar Curiosity, they amuse easy
credulity into a profound veneration of their Learning and Skill; and that
indeed by a learned and flourishing discourse, which unto common people clinks
as good articulate and clear sense, as the Bell does to the Fool.

Now these being only garnished with the outside, and wanting the Soul and Life
of a Physician, seem much to resemble the like in Religion going under the Name
of Hypocrites, for as they under the masque thereof, simulating true Piety, and
escaping all Humane eyes, are only unvailed to the Searcher of Hearts; even so
does Medicine nourish the like spurious brood, close wrapped up in the glistering
Vail of empty appearance, dazzling the eyes of such as see no more than Skin
deep, and only discoverable by the Sons of Apollo: Neither is Piety it self, or
at least the profession thereof, esteemed so sacred by some as to be exeemed
from being a proper expedient of this Artifice, the vulgar having so great an
esteem of a Physician with probity; under the Banner therefore of Religion, the
shortest and easiest cut to esteem and Reputation in this profession seems to
ly: But Religion can indeed give no more Improvement in this then any other
Art, where it may happily for Conscience sake quicken Industry, and better the
Heart; but little the Head: Yea, the only spurr that stimulats to bear out
against the tedium of laborious Scrutiny, seems to ly in the perspicacious
glances of the mind clearly discerning the utility, yea and necessity of labor
and diligence; for indeed grosser Heads, tho with honest Hearts; easily closing
with every thing, find neither the pungency of need nor profit, to subject
their received sentiments to the Touch stone of accurate examination.

And moreover, all these Artifices and many more most commonly and succesfully
being exercised by the weaker sort of Physicians, who are also themselves weak
Men, and even over the weaker sort of People, such as Women, and even the
weakest of these also, do owe their success to this, that the Physicians
Judgment and Capacity, being much of a size with theirs, breeds first Simpathy
and Concord, next brings forth Affection, and at last, trains them up to a firm
adherence to the Physician: And this tho a less glorious, is no ungainful
Conquest: For these being thus gained to his side, by reason of their multitude
and noise, together with their ordinary privileges of Importunity and
Opportunity, with their frequent usurpations of Impertinency, prove no
unsuccesful nor contemptible Trumpets of his Reputation.

But on the other hand, this unskilfulness in ingenious or good Men, when under
the Vail of any Arti^ice, does also catch the wary and prudent in a more
latent, and consequently more dangerous hazard in their choose of a Physician,
because judicious Persons by a short and easy reasoning are able to establish
sound Conclusions against weaker Men exercising this Practice, but to draw just
consequences against these of more parts, the Bowels of Art must necessarly be
searched into, which by way of By work to do, is above the most profound
Judgments, especially under the diversion of other Occupations.

And as in most other Crimes beside the principal Actors, The p^ecipitant
Judgment of the vulgar and their preconcei^ed opinion hinder improvement and is
fatal to people, tho it be the basis of Reputation.
there are oftentimes also Accomplices, who according to the degree of their
accession, are likewise culpable, and make the Principal in some manner
excusable; how much then think you does contribute to foment and cherish, and
consequently to extenuate this unskilfulness in Physicians, the precipitant
headless and ignorant Judgment of People frequently Interposed concerning
Physicians and their Practice, with the fruits of whose Unskilfulness upon this
account they themselves not undeservedly seem to be chastised: For Opinion
being the Monarch, bearing greatest sway in the minds of Men, has his Dominion
upheld for most part by appearances, mistakes and errors, these being the most
Plausible wares and Passable Coin in that state; conform therefore to the
same measures, the Honors and Dignities of that Court fame, and Popular
applause, and the apanages thereof, are entailed on shadows rather then the
substances of true merit: And this Empire likewise extending it self over the
Province of Medicine, through the misrepresentations brought therefrom to that
court, in depressing true merit to exalt the umbrage thereof, exercises most of
its Tyrrany and arbitrary Government there: For vulgar capacity the only
Inteligencer comeing with news from Medicine, never being able to descend into
the depthes and unfold the mysteries of Medical prudence, is in stead thereof
taken and deceived with the Prudence of the Physician only commensurable to
that capacity, and for Juno Embracing the Cloud brings very false reports of
desert from the Medical state: thus the way to Skill and Reputation being far
laid asunder, lays also on the Physician an invincible necessity, suitable to
the Laws of another great Monarch of this world interest, to improve personal
Prudence glistering Ware in the Court of Opinion, and thereby also is loosed,
or slackned his Allegiance to Medicine, by his being put under the constraint
to neglect the study and exercise of Medical prudence, because it is
circumstantiate with tedious uselesness here, and perhaps noxious by its
frequent interfeiring with the profitable Art and use of Personal Prudence.

Mankind also being for the most part rather delighted with the Freedom and
Liberty of ease, (especially it without loss and not Impeaching on Interest)
then with the Yoke of honest labor, and bending of serious Industry, and there
being in all human affairs no case so much favoring, yea Inviteing, yea
Tempting to sloth, as Medicinal Practice is, (the fruits and effects of all
other Arts and Labors carrying a more obvious impress of Industry and Skill
then this Practice does, where it is truly difficult to mark the subtle, and
fine Steps, by which Art sets the cause a going to produce the effect; or to
observe the secret and hidden Concurse it has to Facilitate it, this for the
most part both makes Spectators ignorant, whither Art, Nature, or chance
produces the effect, and cools the Physicians industry. And further, such being
the Apish humor of popular ignorance, that inimitation of its direct contrary
knowledge, it must still be judging, sentencing, and drawing conclusions, by a
reasoning, so ill counterfeit that it bears rather the Character of Madness;
The vulgar (being apt to mistake every consequent in Medicine, for the effect
of Skill) often confound by their sentences, the chances or sequels of the
Ignorant, with the effects of the Skilled, and so becomeing Prodigal wasters of
the reward due to Skill, by misplaceing that recompense upon its contrary
Ignorance, they take off the allurement, to Industry the Parent of Skill, thus
adding to its difficulty, they deprive Mankind for the most part of the benefit
thereof. And moreover the favorable Judgment of the vulgar concerning the
Physician turning always to the bias of a forestalled Opinion, that is to be
Imposed on them either by his Prudence, or some other by-respect (it being very
hard to have true knowledge of his skill) makes it altogether necessary for the
Physician to endeavor by Artifice, and Culture to become one of the most modish
and plausible Gallants in the Court of opinion.

And so People madly choosing rather to be artificially Imposed on, than
honestly and Skilfully dealt with all, and being willing to purchase the
gratification of their humors, curiosity, and capric^, tho at the cost of their
better concerns, health and life, comes to be the great tentation of Physicians
to wast their Spirits and time, in studying and exerciseing Practice on the
humors of the mind rather then these of the Body, to obtain favor, and esteem
to themselves, rather then health to there Patients, in the mean time
neglecting as nothing contributive to these Purposes, all study and care of
acquireing true and solid Skill or Medical Prudence, pre-conceived and
pre-acquired opinion serving as a refuge and sanctuary from all effects of
Unskilfulness, and scarce any real Skill or Innocence being able to weather out
the blasts of an evil and ground, less opinion, without the help of Artifice.

And further years in the Physician seldom fail to contribute a good Equipage
for a preconceived Opinion, and that under the notion of Experienced; The
vulgar Errors of the preconceived opinion of experienced, discovered.
these indeed serving with little other assistance to set up the Aged on some
pinnacle, of fame: Such being the fond Opinion of the populace, because Nature
brings all things to maturity and ripeness through time, therefore they think
this Relation and Ally of Nature the Physician however insipide, vapide and
crabbed stuff he be compact'd of, that he must be mellowed and brought to the
Ripeness of Experienced also through time: But a quite other thing is
Experience, then is commonly conceived, and not being always the product of
time in a Physician it seems rather to be the Product of sagacious Industry
(after a long contemplating) making such an exact Observation of all the
concurring Causes and Circumstances going to make up any Phoenomena or Effects,
as may begett in the Physician an habitual Promptitude (so far as human Power
can reach) to produce or ward off these effects or Phoenomena, Pro re nata; And
this Experience is only gotten (as was before Intimated) by the Considering and
Pondering the most exact, clear, and full Histories of Natures Operations, and
Phoenomena, whereby the best Notions of her Laws, Customs, and Constitutions
being Imprinted in the mind; The surest Directive Ideas likewayes will arise
therefrom, how to moderate Supply and Regulat her as the case requires.

For in the conduct of Nature, as the onward concurring and visible causes do
empty and wast themselves in the production of the nearest Continent Cause of
the Phoenomena, and with concurrence of, and allowance to the Susceptibility of
the subject they do further stamp their Effigies thereon, so does that
Continent Cause (with the same Concurrence and allowance) manifest and
characterise it self by these Phoenomena: And Nature having (tho exceedingly
various and multiplicite) yet a Certain Uniformity herein, and the
Comprehension thereof only rendering her in proportion thereto tractable by the
Artist, this most surely be the alone thing that denominats Experience in
Medicine: And further as the study of these Histories is the road only leading
to experience, whosoever then takes any other way, with how much so ever
Assiduity and Application he contend to make progress toward Experience, shall
be found walking at random and widening his distance always to stray the more
therefrom.

That a long and constant Practice is not alone sufficient to acquire this
dexterity and experience, will be farther plain by considering the difficile
delicate and untractable Genius of Nature, not improperly comparable to that of
a Captious tetchie and easily irritate master, which makes his service as the
exercise of a very Circumspect Prudence, so an exceeding hard task: Yet this
Master having a servant, who by his diligence and Caution observes Curiously
what things, and by what order and concurse of circumstances, either in his
Master or the things themselves, these making their impression him, use (by
grating or cherishing him) to excite or lenifie his evil Humor or Canker: And
who likewayes faithfully treasures up in his mind or otherwise, these his
observations to be employed as directives for the advantage of his future
service, this servant is not only capable to perform to his Master pleasant and
profitable Service, but calming his severities, moderating and governing him,
may exercise a kind of dominion over him: (as it has been observed that some
wyllie Servants in the like circumstances have done) When another Servant void
of this warrieness and prudence, tho growing old in his service, through
inadvertancy or carelessness, misguiding his Affairs, does still exasperate him,
and shall never render him placable, nor any thing mitigate the nature of his
despotical dominion: The same very way the prudent and cautious Physician,
Natures Minister, carefully observing her genius, and by his circumspection
diligently catching and using all the opportunities to serve her (thereby
sopiting all her severities) will undoubtedly become a Moderator and Arbiter
thereof, and in consequence have his prudent Service recompensed by Natures
subjecting unto the political dominion of the Physician. Whence, it is clear,
that Experience and Skill being almost identified and acquired and exercised by
the same conditions and measures, old age therefore in a Physician, is no more
capable alone to produce Experience, then in other Men it begets Wisdom and
Prudence in the rest of Humane Affairs.

Yea, Years are very far from bringing on apace with them such a deep rooted
and solid experience in Medicine as may yield a fruitful Harvest of effectual
Practice, where the Aged (and Age bringing on apace with it sloth) have only
grown old in these Hypotheses of Theory, and Methods of Practice founded
thereon (now of late perhaps both convict'd of error) in which they were at
first instituted, they sticking as closs by these as others to the Religion, in
which from their Infancy they have been educated, such indeed being the power
of education, which upon most has a dominion and empire, but upon these
exercises a tyranny, in keeping them manacled in the chains of chimerical
prejudices, and fetters of theoretical errors so much the more hurtful to
Mankind, as being really damages under the pretext and show of profitable
helps: Especially where sloth and ease is in the play which freights them to go
to School again, or enter into a new Apprentiship; or Vanity and Pride, which
lays aside the professing any thing importing the reproach of that vain
knowledge that did formerly puff them up: Which indeed would not so much
depress them as the perseverance therein, does both them and the Common good of
Mankind. To err indeed is Humane, but to preserve therein, notwithstanding of
the Light, and in a matter of much import, seems Diabolical.

From all which, it is plain, that as Artifice in the Physician and Error in
the people is the best soil and compost in the natural climat of Opinion of the
most fragrant and luxuriant Reputation, so real Improvement and Art
transplanted into that clime, are likely (as exotic Plants) to give a very
flaccid and languishing Figure.

How deplorable then is it, That Medicine which being for the solace of our
Miseries should be, and that by our own faults, so depraved as to conspire with
them against us, and prove but a miserable and deceitful* Comforter, in so far
as the Artist is put under the strong land invincible necessity, by its being
most easy, advantageous, and honorable, to prosecute his own ends, although with
the neglect of these of his Art: And that he should be put under the pusling
difficulty to consult both his own credit and his Patients Health, he being
obliged to acquire and exercise at once qualifications wholly satisfieing and
advancing his reputation, but of no further use. Any other Skill apearing
perplexed intricat and superflous, from the care whereof vulgar Opinion and
Error has wholly Emancipated him: Because interfeiring with his esteem at least
nothing advanceing it.

The vulgar Error of the vanity of Medicine considered and disproved.
Neither seems Medical industry and Improvement under any better circumstances
of thriveing or advance, by another Opinion that being pretty triumphant in
the world is Endemical to those, who think themselves wiser, as being less
credulous or apt to be Imposed upon by Artifice and Prudence then the former
sort: Such thereof only look on Medicine as an Art big with great Pretensions,
which being brought forth without the Mid-wifery of simple Credulity amount to
nothing worth the while; and so run to the other Extreme (the Badge likewise of
professed Ignorance) of doubting and diffidence, and consequently, Contempt of
all Medical Endeavors: Now this opinion deems the conduct of our Lives toward
their Period, committed either to Rigid and Inexorable Fate, incapable in its
Carrier of any Stop, or to Tottering and Wavering Chance unmanageable by the
discretest conduct; and therefore it excludes as vain all means of Health and
Life: The former Opinion despirits and depraves Industry; this taking aim at
Personal Prudence, quite extinguishes and kills Medical Prudence: That tempts
to Imposture this Brands the most serious and succesful Endeavors therewith:
That incourages hopes from the Physicians Endeavors, (since all Dangers under
the visage of evitable, confound less then the same allayed with no measure of
hopes to escape) and this sterving all hopes is enough alone to kill the
Patient, and make the King of Terrors more terrible, and fearful, implying the
ground he has advanced unto, to be recoverable only at his discretion, and his
earnest assaults to be past remedy: And it is indeed from no small mixture of
this base Allay in the Opinion of some, who using the Physicians help, and
altogether incapable of Privacy to their Escapes, by putting so small value on
their Pains and Industry, that the aspiring Improvement in this Art is
likewayes clogged.

But indeed this robbing of Art, to enlarge and dignifie Natures Empire over
and with all effects, may be properly both resembled and confuted, by taking a
glance of that grosness which possessed the Indians, when they took Ships for
great Animals, here being nothing but the not comprehending the Artificial
Intrigue of their structure (the chief cause of their Phoenomena) that gave
rise to that Mistake and Error.

So likewise, there being many products that to a shallow and overly view,
although they bear the Resemblance rather of Nature than Art; (as a Watch appeared
to a certain King of the Indians to be a living Creature, when he asked what
kind of Food it lived on) yet such Products, to those having the Eyes of the
Mind capable by a more diving, sagacious, and polished Inquiry, to make exact
and full survey, will impress and display their true Nature: This Capacity
being the absolute condition to get true Knowledge without mixture of Imposture;
no wonder then, through want thereof, that the busy, active, and restless part
of Man, which is still judging be precipitat unto Mistakes and Errors in the
Dark.

And indeed this Turkish fixing of Fate, in spite of all Endeavors, did it
ever hinder any to pull his drowning Friend out of the water, or a Choking
bone out of his Throat? the stop put to Death in his full Carrier and the
warding of the most potent and direct Thrusts of Fate being here conspicuous,
and Diseases being as certain, tho more private, and hardly stopped Leaks to let
in Death at, which never makes passages, but only enters in at these which
Nature has left open, when Art fails to observe and close them; and also seeing
the facultys of the Mind as well as the Organs of the Body, by their natural
Strength and Exercise, by Application, or other Artificial Helps, may attain to
many degrees of Perspicacity, Activity, and Perfection, beyond what they will
be without these, or in one Man under the Advantages of these, more then in any
other without them, that the difference (especially in sensible things) is even
Stupenduous: Why may not then such Improvement (upon the ground of Natural
Vigor) make the Mind Susceptible of many Impressions giving both Light and
Knowledge to espy these private Posterns Death makes use of, and also to find
the means to stop and close them, and here also be had as certain evidences of
warding off death, as in the other caise, tho as proper only to these having
such enduements, as the seeing the danger and relief of a drowning Man is
proper only to these that are not blind.

And that Conspiracy frequently entered into against our Lives, by Deaths
Agents, second Causes, tho through its depth, and cunning its above the Vulgar
sight to discover and capacity to prevent and stop, yet as it may be reached by
the eye of the sagatious circumspect Medical Politician, may also be
counteracted by his power and Art.

And it being also very probable, that (the Body seeming a curious machine)
motion is the main ingredient, if not the very Essence of our Lives, the period
whereof consists in a total and permanent stop put thereto, and the Integrity
of that motion depending on the soundness of the first mover, the matter moved,
and the passages through which motion is made, it seems this Machine is as well
as others subject to many disorders, and as other engines have their particular
Arts subservient to their Regulation and Redintegration, which by picking out
the causes thereof, may by convenient instruments and means remove their Stops
and help their Disorders, why may not Art likewise take place, in relation to
the distempers of the oeconomie of man, were it for no more then to save the
Irritancy of a great part of the Creation, which seem pregnant with these
advantages to Mankind, but being rejected for Instruments, or Means here, seem
of little or no use at all: And further what great difference both in the
Advantage and Pleasure may be perceived betwixt Nature going wild at random and
liberty, and the same subjected to Artificial Culture and Improvement: As may
be seen in the difference betwixt wild Fields and well cultivat Gardens; yet
such as neither perceive, nor know Arts Influence here, would certainly give
the honor of these improvements only to Nature.

And as Nature furnishes Matter in some cases for Art to work on, tho in others
Nature furnishes only occasion by its stopps, and disorders, into which it may
be brought rather from other causes, then any thing within it self; And so may
not Art be useful as a Confederate and alley to help and rectify Nature in the
Straits and D^sorders of the machine of our Bodies: And as in the Regulating
and Helping of all other Engynes there may be employed several degrees of Art
and Skill, as for example in a most Curious and Ingenious clock, the disorders
especially such as come by misguiding, may some o^ them be restored by the
proper Skill of the owner while for others that are more difficult, he must
borrow the Advice Help and Instruments of a more Expert Artist, yet these that
does not know or belive there are any more expert must conclude that the
Masters proper Skill and Instruments always does the Fait: Why may it not be
just so about this machine the keeper and master whereof Nature, making
considerable Efforts and Essays for redentigration of it is disorders, but when
these are frustraneous then the acce^sion of the Skill and Tools of the Expert
Physician is seasonable, unless it fall out here as likewayes in other Machines
it often times falls out, that the disorder tending to it is dissolution, be in
the order of Reparation incurable, and so requiring the Capacity and Skill of
an yet higher Artist, contriver and maker of that Engyne, import rather the
Creation of a New then the Reparation of the Old one: Neither does this so much
disparage the skill of the lesser Artist as extol the admirable and inimitable
Art of the first and chief Architeck, in displaying so much Stupenduous Skill
in that curious Contrivance of a piece of work, which being maimed in it is
substantial and Essential parts and motions is nowayes Redintigrable by minor
Artists.

Now the fruitlesness of Physicians endeavors resolves always in some of
these; (viz.) Either in the want of dew administration of such promising helps
as the Art does really afford, and that either by the fault of the Patients or
other assistants: This is by an unjust Ignorance Pinned on the Physician: And
nixt it may depend on the Physicians not discovering and curing what through
Art and Industry, being perceiveable, is also cureable: And this does indeed
taint him with a certain, tho most part secret Guilt, which the Critics in
Medicine suspecting, at adventure by an Ignorant Justice may casually Hitt, but
scarcely know: Or finally the unsuccesfulness of Physicians Practice depends
upon the case, being by Art and Industry, either Indiscoverable or Incureable
or both, especially such as sudden Accidents and Essential Breaches which do no
more concern him to repair, then to be a Creator. Now the most conceited
Pretenders to the Arbitriment of the Physicians Fame, are altogether in the
mist justly to determine them, when such caises do occurr.

And farther, there seems nothing more persuasive of the vanity of his
Endeavors, then the discreet Physicians unwillingness to be brought on the
Rack of Prognostic of the event of the Disease, The uncertainty of
Prognostic, a great pillar of that Error ^onsidered, and removed
this being the question he is first and most importuned with, and a quack
Expedient extraordinarly gratifying Curiosity, seems also to be the earnest of
a more solid Skill: And if he venture thereon, as he luckily hitts, or
unluckily misses, it does not fail accordingly either to add to, or pare, both
his Authority, and that of the Art: But the wiser being shye therein, it is
constructed by most, to spring from a consciousness of such uncertainty in the
Art and Practitioner, as puts all Endeavors on the borders of Frustraneous and
Vain, and that the Cure when it falls out must be rather an effect of Nature or
^hance, then of Art and Skill.

But surely, Prognostic seems to contribute no more to the Cure of Diseases,
then Palmistry does to the conduct of our Lives and Fortunes, and any Dexterous
Hitt therein is improven more to advance the Physicians Personal Value and
Ends, then these of his Art, and raises more a tottering Reputation, then is
either the Product or Manefesto of any solid Skill: And Prognostic being
always most sure on the worst side, let all therefore beware that put too much
stress thereon, lest they get their doubts cured to their greater coast, and
put the Physician sometime in the strait (to save the credit of his Reputation
built on that of his Prediction) to neglect, not to say worse, the plausible
means of Cure: Or at least, that these satisfying marks of his Skill, be rather
suitable to the usual events of the vain and empty Methods he makes use of in
the like cases.

Now farther, although Medicine be seated with much more disadvantage for a
Prospect to make a certain Praediction, then other Professions, in which the
claim laid to the wished effect cannot be denied, yet these cannot contend with
Medicine in the certainty of Prognostic: As for example, in Law where the
Rights or Strength of both Parties is fully laid open; yet there is often as
much diffidence and uncertainty to which side the Balance will cast: And in
War where circumstances concurring to bring Light to Prediction, may be yet
more in the Dark then in Law, but not so much as in Medicine, for tho the
Strength and Courage of both sides, with sundry other considerations affording
probable Conjectures toward a conclusion concerning the event, may be
discerned; yet there may be unseen Stratagems, and accidental Contingences,
which may make promising Victory both to hover and light on the unexpected
side: And yet all these difficulties, or uncertainties in the determining the
event, do not so much disparage and make appear vain the Endeavoures of these
useful and noble Professions, as they serve to quicken the Eyes of
Circumspection, and raise the value and glory of brave and ingenious Behavior
in disperate and dangerous Cases, whither succesful or not: But indeed in these
Arts the wit and direction in the conduct being palpable, where the miscarriage
of the success may be pinned, is also alike visible. Now Medicine tho as to
Prediction it has equal certainty with these Arts, yet it has the misfortune to
be under far worse circumstances, yea, and even under insuperable difficulties
as to the certain and axact knowledge of the present posture and state of
Affairs about which it is to be an Actor: For being often to act a Scene within
the Curtain, when it self stands without, and having none to consult therein,
but very subtle and infidious Intelligencers the Phoenomen^ and Symptoms, (for
true and sure Intelligence, being the life of War; Is likewayes the Soul of
Medicine) and because there is much diffi^ulty, there is need of great sagacity
to unridle and decypher the mysterious appearances bringing Light to the
present condition of Affairs, and any Light gotten, should rather put the
Artist upon just measures how to act then to predict; and make his endeavors
^un in this, that his hands may not come too short to help such timous
discoveries as are made by his Eyes.

But in sum, all this matter being both acted in masquerade, and among such a
croude of common Enemies second causes roving up and down, (and having more
power and influence then is perceived require also always stricter Guards then
is believed) some whereof either by inadvertance or mere accident, may impinge
one and overturn the fairest appearances of Escape and Recovery; no wonder then
that there can be no more certainty either in the Conduct or Prediction, then
the circumstances and the unalterable nature of the thing does determine and
allow: And the Inference of the vanity and emptiness of Medicine in its conduct
from the uncertainty of Prediction of the event of that conduct, equally
militating against other known and commendable Arts, seems of no more import in
the one then the other case.

It being never considered among all this Busle of Totturing and Wresting
Medicine to the Touchstone of very incompetent Judgments, Upon what does the
Arbitriment concerning the Medicinal Practice depend.
that the only Solid and Prudent knowledge in Medicine turns upon the Cardanal
hinge of the true understanding and uptaking of the genuine and true
propagation of effects from their causes; In the due comprehension whereof as
the Physicians Skill is eminently denoted, so the same gives only right and
title to the Arbitriment of the Physicians Fame and Merit: And sometimes
matters here are so obscure from their depth or sublimity, that the quickest
perspicacity of profoundest Artists will falter and hallucinate, and be
modestly ambitious of the Epithet due to the happy Inquirer.

Faelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. (...) while blind Ignorance and
Percipitant Imprudence Spurrs on, almost every one to arrogat to be an Arbiter
therein, but how deservedly will appear, if we consider that Health and
Recovery is still the work of Nature primarly, and the subsidary Help of the
Physician is designed only to remove Impediments, now how does this Arbiter of
Physicians know whither the Direful s^mtomes arrising in a Disease, be the
effects of obstacles put by the preposterous Ignorance of the Physician and
Regimen, rather then the Native products of the Disease; Yet after the recovery
from this Disease, when perchance, nature attacqued both by the Malady and the
method, was almost brought to succumb, and only by the vigor of temperament
escapes, notwithstanding by mean^ of the Physicians Prudence, never calling
Nature to the plea, this Arbiter precipitantly and ignorantly gives sentence
approbative of the Cure, as redeeming from a prodigious Danger, but in the mean
time if any Interpreter or Proxy were admitted or sent from Nature to expound
and speak, it would clearly evince that the Method made all these terrifying
symptoms, which is evident and palpable from this, that in some diseases as
for example, the Small Pox (which is little noticed by the most part) in so far
as you indulge a hot and Cordial Method and Regimen, which indeed is the most
usual in this Disease, all the horrible dangerous symtomes fall on
proportionably, which Disease being treated with a contrary Method and Regimen,
all these do evanish or lessen; Unless the former error has engraven them too
deep.

Justice, Law, and Policy consist in the consideration of what contributs to
the good and integrity of the Society, The disparity betwixt the Arbitriment
Concerning Practice and Policy* and that of Physicians
wherein is comprehended that of every single Person; The due prosecution
whereof, by these entrusted therewith is obvious to the prespicacious Judgment
of most if not all, and tho some endeavor to Mountebank it also in State, and
with the stock of public Authority, favor and influence drive private and
by-trade, yet the tendencie of the measures being by the Balance of sound
reason examinable, there can scarce be any considerable or lasting deception
therein, every Man almost being Master of as much reason as may with a little
education qualify him to judge therein, so the honest Practitioners of these
Disciplines are rarely destitute of their due merit and applause, or Impostors
or Ignorants under any Mask able to rival them.

But it is far other ways in Medicine which consisting all in matters of fact
and experiment drawn out of the Phenomenon of Nature and Practice bears no
other trial of reason then what is Commensurable by them: for as Nature has its
proper Laws and Customs, so Medicine that Moderats Nature, has its proper
Measures for attaining its ends, suited to these, the adequatness whereof are
only conspicuous to the Adept and Sons of Art, and these genuine and true Sons
of Art are only among themselves (as its talked of the Brethren of the Rosy
Cross) mutually conspicuous, escaping the sharpest sighted of all others seeing
no more but Skine deep in this Cryptick Art.

Hence it is that these have only usurped Fame and Reputation in this Art, who
having strained and violently bended Medicine by excogitating or feinging
Specious and Rational Theories, by which, although without real foundation, the
wits of learned Men have been extremely charmed, and the Inventers have thereby
enhanced greatFame and Reputation to themselves, but whosoever having their
heads stuffed with such rational Theories shall attempt to Practice conform and
pylote by them, will find they are nothing but wild fire leading into devious
and dangerous paths: It Is therefore only Solid and Sound Practice that must
yield a true Theory, Only from Practice comes Improvement in Medicine.
and such will altogether quadrate with practice, and be farther useful
thereto, as is plain in several Mechanic Arts E:G: In dyeing where the variety
of colors, and their Multiplicit Generation and Conversion furnishes the
Philosopher with fine Speculations, but none of these are solid, Profitable, or
for the further improvement of the Art, unless such as are taken from the
practice, or agreeable thereto, so the Mechanic gives Laws to the Philosopher.

And indeed this method of beginning at experiments to establish Theorie has
given both name and solidity to the Philosophy of this Age, As it is in
Philosophy called Experimental.
and discovered the vanity and infirmity of that of the former Ages.

Neither was Philosophy more empty, which from Aristotle's days, until of late
received small Improvement, then was Medicine which from Hippocrates time so
much strayed from advancement, that leaving his Methods, to wit, of discribing
the true Histories of Diseases, and drawing Indications therefrom; All Writers
almost deliver the Histories of Diseases superficially, without particular
branching, or descending into their Specifications, but comprehend under one
Type these that differ much from one another; as also, what they deliver, being
according to their Theoretical Hipotheses, is more to confirm these, then to
illustrate the Disease in its Natural Figure and Shape, from which can only be
drawn Indications that are tottering: and to supply these defects, they heap up
so great a Mass of Receipts, that the wavering Election, mistaking the Remedy
of o^e Species for another, rarely hitts the Mark: And farther, the most part
following close the footsteps of their Predecessors seem rather to have Copied
then Written.

Does not then Medicine wrapped up many Ages with Philosophy, in the same Fate of
Obscurity, by the mist of empty Theory? require likewise with it to be
experimentally enlightened and advanced; for it is not to be judged, that time
which has rypned and brought to perfection all other Arts, should leave
Medicine altogether Stationary, as incapable of farther Culture, becomes it not
therefore all generous and sagacious Physicians, having entered the right path
of Diligence leading to true Improvement, with all their might to liberate this
noble Art, from the chains of Errors and Fetters of Prejudices, and to make it
splendidly triumph over all Calumnies and Detractions, to which it has been so
long, esp^cially throw vain Theories, obnoxious; and that by inquiring, so far
as Natures Light whetted with Industry will go, into a solid and experimental
Improvement, and only by such safe conditions and measures as are adequat and
propper for acquiring thereof, and thereupon to found a genuin and solid
Theory: which will not only enlighten the understanding with true Impressions
how these experiments are produced, but will also give direction to apply the
same true Notions to farther experimental Improvements.

SECT. IV. That the great advantage and import of the Improvement of the Cure
of Continual Fevers, making it highly the Physicians concern, to advance it,
makes also what is already said, as a Praeliminary; not improper: where also is
shown that the common Indications and Diaphoretick Method, Commonly used in
Fevers, being considered, ought to be disaproved; and that the Authors Method
proposed being also considered, ought to be embraced.
AS in all Humane and Wordly concerns, there is nothing more Valuable and
Precious to Men, then the Life and Health of themselves, and their dearest
Relations, without which all other Wordly Comforts are unrelishing; So among
all humane studies and Arts (the effects of Men's endeavors to ward off, or
alleviat to their Miseries, and Calamities) there is none whose due Prosecution
and Improvement is more acceptable then Medicine: In like manner, there seems
to be no subject in that Art, that partaking more of the general advantage,
requires more to be Improven, then this Subject of Continual Fevers does: And
that by reason of its extent, (for with its Pendicles it takes up the half of
all the Diseases that Men are afflicted with) and of its danger and Precipitant
invasion; It being the Disease that by a Sudden eruption and Devastation, in a
trice overturnes our Hopes and Comforts, does therefore make the loss of Life
more bitter and grievous; This Disease seeming to Envy and Prevent other
Languishing Distempers, or Wrinckled Age, in the spoil of Beauty, and ruin of
Strength, triumphs in their Sudden and Unexpected downfall; And by the cruel
Ravage it makes, outdoes a leisurely dissolution in dismal effects both upon
the Souls and Estates of many Mortals; Men being thereby in surprise hailed out
off the arms of seemingly perfect Health, and Security, and throw the vale of
miserable delirium stupidity, or Distraction, precipitated into the Shades of
the other World: life here being taken by furious storm, has all the dreadful
effects of a Pitiful saccage, while a leisurly dissolution gives opportunity for
Preparation to make Peace with the great Monarch whose Messenger Death is, and
for a honorable and happy Surrender: And now since all this is done under the
Presidence of a Government, whose trust makes it the concernment thereof to
inquire narrowly, whither negligence or mistake may give occasio to the Course
of so sudden a Devastation, this makes it no less the Credit of Faithful
Physicians, then the Common interest of Mankind, to put the Cure of this
disease to appear in the first rank for Trial, Reformation, and Improvement;
And may also show the reason and necessity of our going so far back and making
a Ramble, to rally up the whole force of that obligation lying on the Physician
to diligence and Improvement, and to conjure down negligence, and araigne all
vulgar errors and mistakes capable to stiffle or deprave Improvement in this
particular Subject, or any other in that Art; Such indeed seeming to stand like
Mountains in the way, by serious consideration therefore deserve first to be
removed and levelled

In Pursuing then of this Improvement of the Cure of continual Fevers, it
comes to be observed, that although the remote and Antecedent cause of this, and
most part of other Diseases, seems to be a load of Humors often viscide, yet
scarce do we understand the specifical essence of this or that humor, which
excites this or that symptom, and produces the variety of diseases, except in
so far as the nature of the place it clogs produces the symptoms, (and this
being a purely Mechanical reason gives but little light to the specifique
quality thereof) far less can we tame these noxious humors with specifique or
appropriate Remedies, which were indeed the best expe^imental improvement, were
it known; unless in so much as the cortex pernvianus seeming to be the
specifique of intermittents is known; And although some essay to explain the
essence of Diseases, and lodge it in such modification of the figure, quantity,
and motion of the particles of matter, in respect of the pores, fibers, and
channels of any Bowel or Organe; which make obstruction, impression of pain
irritation, convulsion, and the rest of the s^mptoms competent to this or that
Organe, which modifications seeing they cannot as yet be determined, and pitched
on, as by their subtilty escaping the Edge of the sharpest Ingine, neither can
these be reached or subdued by way of Indication.

Therefore as yet all our certain cure and curative indications, are directed
not against the continent and nearest cause, but only against the ant^^edent
cause, or fuel of the disease; to wit, to carry off the load of humors, and
not to attacque its specifique, and evil quality, that being seldom if ever
hit, and if at any time, but by a very faint blow* and although the specifique
cure providing it were known, would be both the shortest and surest, yet this
cure might ly open to the like hazard that sometimes falls out in the Cure of
intermittents, by the copious use of the bark, which as our worthy Author
observes are sometimes thereby translated into a scrobutique rhumatisme, the
morbifique matter, being divested of one specification or modification, puts on
another.

Seeing there is no specifique cure pretended to, in continual Fevers, their
cure must then lean on some indication; The common and diaphoretique method
considered.
which false Theory and long custom, has made to degress and decline to the
satisfying the common indication of attenuation of the Febril matter, and
expulsion thereof throw the pores of the skine; some forceing it by a milder,
some by a stronger, and all urging it by some degree of Diaphoresis but still
without any triumphant or solid, yea rather, with many lamentable and funest
experiences.

This indeed were no unfit Design or Method if the morbifique matter were so
thin and little, and sticking in the superfice of the Body; that it might
easily yield to the impulse of Diaphoretiques: But on the other hand where the
matter or at least the fuel of the Disease is copious, viscide, and besets the
first ways the Ventricle, intestines, and mesentery; in so far as you
attenuate and force that matter by Diaphoretiques in proportion ye shall
translate and turn the antecedent cause lurcking there, into the continent and
nearest cause of the Disease, to wit, by subliming that viscide and obstructing
matter into the mass of Blood, and habit of the Body; which shall further
exasperate the tumult of the Fever, and overwhelm the natural efflux and reflux
of the Blood, and thereafter this matter being carried from the mass of Blood
into Head, and region of the nerves; will likewise excite there symptoms
competent to them being so infested, till at length nature unable to wrestle
under such a load of viscous matter poured in upon the Blood and Nerves, wholly
despirited and overwhelmed must succumb.

And that such an viscous, slimy, and copious Matter is at least the antecedent
cause and fuel of many Fevers, The Fomes in Fevers considered
perchance also of all, can be made evident not from any Ratiocination, but
from Antopsia or Sense it self.

For in several Fevers, especially these accompanied with delirium or raving,
there has frequently been seen a great quantity of such touch phlegm, sometimes
evacuat by stooll, sometimes by Vomit; and that only by putting the Finger into
the Throat; after which evacuation almost an total ease of all the Symptoms,
but chiefly of the delirum or raving did follow; until that after some days
the matter re^ruiting and regurgitating, and bringing the same Symptoms
required a reitera^ed evacuation; which was signalised with the former benefit;
and so forth, as the plenty of the matter required, until a perfect Evacuation
Cured the Disease: What novice in Medicine will judge such plenty of Viscidity
and Slime could be with advantage or safety forced into the Mass of Blood, to
be expelled throw the Pores of the Skin; or that it can be so attenuate,
especially under the languid natural Heat of Persons in Fevers, that it be
noways hurtful or obstructing, when it comes to the small capillar Vessels.

As to the rest of Medicaments used in Fevers, as Refrigerants subservient to
the indication of Refrigeration; Refrigerants considered.
since it can be shown that heat is nothing of the essence of Fevers, and that
their proper effect is to increase the viscidity and tenaciousness of the
humors (perhaps the continent cause of Fevers) they do rather hurt then help:
As likewise, these that are called Temperers of Acrimony, and Sweetners of the
Blood seem to be no more profitable, Temperers of Acrimony and sweetners of the
blood
in regard Acrimony consists in such a modification of the particles of Matter,
in their figure or motion, in relation to the texture of the Organs or Bowels,
bringing trouble or pain thereto; and we scarce knowing where in that
Modification making the discrepancy betwixt the Agent and Patient does consist,
we can hardly form thereto an adaequat Indication: And although this mitigative
Indication could be found and satisfied, since it does naught to the Disease or
its Cause, by prosecuting thereof, you advantage no more, then if ye should
apply Anodyne Balsoms to the ^kin, sore with whipping; and yet still whipp one.

And farther, since all these Symptoms commonly supposed to arise from
Acrimony, are only the result of the efforts of Nature struggling to ride it
self of the Disease, and are raised various according to the genius of the
matter besetting, and the organe besett; although these could be perfectly
subdued, when the Disease and its cause are untouched, what if the Disease
restrained in one Symptom, shall break out into a more dangerous one; so
little coercible or obsequious proves Nature to any preposterous and undiscret
management, that thereby rather are transla^ed, then extinguished or directed,
its irregular and impetuous motions; not very unlike as when a Dam of water is
kept up by a Bank, without drying up, or diverting the source that increases
it, as it is stopped at one breach, it will always make or find another.

As for Aperients and Inciders, Aperients and inciders.
they being much about the same Nature, have the same Inconvenience with
Diaphoretiques; Especially where there is a Copious fomes, or great
Obstructions in the Capillar Veins; For by there grating and grinding off
Particles from the mass of gross and viscide Humores, they must exceedingly
increase these obstructions; every little particle seeming to be of a like
Nature with the whole, and scarce, when in any quantity, subjugable by the
motion of the Blood, or capable to be so attenuate as to pass easily the
smallest channels of the Vesells; Such then being brought there, cannot but
have an obstructing effect. And farther these things being narrowly considered
will also make the Truth of that Observation of of our Noble Author past all
doubt, that many and most dangerous Symtpomes of Fevers, are the native effects
of the method, rather than of the Disease.

Leaving then this Diaphoretique method, The true method proposed that is most
probable.
until we find out a specifique cure of Fevers, since we cannot level directly
a^ the essence of the Disease, we being most part in the dark as to that, what
hinders us as is usual and succesful in many other diseases, and which
impartial well balanced experience has found to be also so here, but that we
may prosecute the Indication taken from the antecedent cause or fuel of the
Malady, by purging; and so by intercepting the sustenance, to sterve that Enemy
we cannot get within handy blows of: Is it because in Fevers the tumult and
commotions in the regions of the Body, in that tottering state of the Economy
would be so hightned by the spurrs off the Purgative, as to brake out into more
furious and incompescib^e Symptoms? and the Orgasm that was formerly only in
the Mass of Blood, should thereby break over also into the Region of the Nerves
and Head, and so beset, pervert, and overwhelm the first springs of Motion and
Life.

Now although this difficulty seems not impertinently to be started, yet whosoever
shall lay a great weight thereon, will betray great inconsideration and
inadvertance to what our Noble Author has delivered concerning the
reasonableness of this Cure, for he clearly shows both by reason and
experience, that the Inconvenience and tumult arising from the irritation of
the purgative, is very efficaciously restained by the immediately preceding
Phlebotomie, and the subsequent use of the Paregorick; and how happily the
Catharick is administered under this double check, these that have never tried
it cannot so much as dream; Notwithstanding what ever is said to the contrary
by famous Authors concerning the use of Purgers and Paregoricks in Fevers:
which although it be true in the case (which is that mentioned by them) where
these are administered separatly and without respect to this order and method of
our Author, that they may not only be unprofitable but hurtful, but according
to this his Method, these means are in that order Connected and Ranked, that
they become wholly beneficial; For the preceding Phlebotomie, and Cathartick
paves the way to, and makes safe the effecacy of the Paregorick, and the
Preceding Ph^ebotomie and subsequent Paregorick infallibly Checks and Bridles
any noxious Energie of the Cathartick; As more fully shall be be shown
afterward. But in the mean time it may be considered that these Practical
Phenomenon, beside the rational appearances they bear, are by such repeated
acurate and evident experience confirmed, that they can no more by A^guments be
convelled, or their evidence by reasoning stiffled, then the most sensible and
palpable experiments in Nature can be.

SECT. V. Motives to this Method from the Authors Ingenuity Ability, and the
prodigious Hazards he escaped, and also from his Reputation both at Home and
Abroad.
SInce then it is obvious to all that the usual manner of the cure of continual
Fevers is so uncertain and unsuccesful, that it should prompt all good and wise
Physicians, at least from commiseration of Mankind, to search and try all ways
for a better, yea, and when Men worthy of Trust, whose ability and intergrity
may not only deserve, but command Trust, do from their undoubted and certain
experience, complement them with laying to their hand a more sure and complete
Method of cure: the Inaptitude or Impropriety whereof none can, save from
fictitious and chimerical prejudices affirm or assert, but noways from
knowledge or experience; in which case as its the part of (even the most
rigorous) caution, to suspend Judgment, so it gives the most grave and
profound marks of Folly and Arrogance, to pronounce peremptorly any thing
concerning a matter of Fact and Experiment, altogether unknown to them. He then
that wants Courage or Faith to Experiment it himself, necessarly must watch the
occasion to behold the Practice of others having this Method for conduct, and
so getting a Mature and deliberate knowledge of the thing, he may then with some
reason pronounce his Opinion concerning it.

Whosoever then shall do otherways, and either chide or Condemn this Method or
only contemn or neglect it; Let him have a care, least being suported by
prejudicate Opinions and Errors, he be found to lay an Ambush for, and assault
the truth, and to Sacrifice to his contumacy and sloth the Life's of the Sick,
and the Tears of their Friends: this matter being now so circumstantiat by such
clear Evidences and Proofs, that an Error or mistake therein cannot be as
invincible Ignorance excusable, but as affected, supine, and contumacious
negligence, representing a true and attrocious Crime is culpable; In respect
this method is as clearly (as the Sun at noon) displayed in the last writtings,
(emitted at length with the Approbation of the College of Physicians of
London; And likewise by the private experience of other eminent Physicians
approven) of that incomparible, sagatious, and expert Practitioner, D: D:
Sydenham, Who, Alace! to the great loss of Medicine, departed this life the 29
December, 1689* Whose former Writings being most acceptable to the learned
World, and acknowledged to have brought no more pleasure than profit, most
deservedly ought to concilitate Favor, Trust and Authority to this his last
Schedule, as to his Letter will and Testament: Neither can it go well away with
good Men to think, that this great Man so often by strange and special
Providence plucked out of the very jaws of Death, has be^n preserved for an
Imposture, so dismale to Mankind: Tho I cannot stay to reckon all the Dangers
among the Calamities of the late Civil Wars, (where he was an Actor) that
passed with great difficulty over his head, An unparalleled danger he escaped.
as his being left in the Field among the dead, and many other dangers he met
with: yet there is one that representing rather a miracle than a common
providence, cannot be passed over, which as I had from his own mouth, is thus,
at the same time of these Civil Wars, where he discharged the office of a
Captain, he being in his lodging at London, and going to bed at night, with his
Clothes loosed, a mad drunk fellow, a Soldier likewise in the same lodging,
entering the Room, with one hand griping him by the breast of his Shirt, with
the other discharged a laden Pistol in his bosom, yet, o strange! without any
hurt to him, most wonderfully indeed, by such a narrow shield as the edge of
the Soldiers hand, was his breast defended; for the admirable providence of
God placed and fixed the tottering hand that gripped the Shirt into that place
and posture, that the edge thereof and all the Bones of the metacarpe that make
up the Breadth of the hand, were Situate in a right line betwixt the mouth of
the Pistol and his Breast, and so the Bullet discharged neither declining to
the one side nor to the other, but keeping its way thorrow all these Bones, in
crushing them lost its force and fell at his Feet, O! Wonderful Situation of
the hand, And more Wonderful course of the Bullet! by any Industry or Art never
again Imitable! And moreover within a few days the Soldier, taken with a fever
arising from so Dangerous and Complicat a Wound, died; surely providence does
not bring forth so Stupenduous Miracles, but for some great and equivalent end.

And further can it be thought that this great Man, His Sagacity and Ingenuity
marred his Reputation.
who in all the course of his life, gave so full evidence of an ingenuous
generous and perspicatious Spirit, would or could die an Impostor and Murderer
of Mankind (which imputation to deserve, he frequently professed, would be more
heavy to him, then any Punishment could be) for he it was, dispising the
blandishments of the world, popular applause, Riches and Honor, yea his own
Health wasted with intense and assiduous Meditations and thoughfulness, that
liberally sacrificed them all for the Public good; In so far, that after he
had long weighed and expended the common and received Methods of curing most
Diseases and therrfore had forsaken and relinquished them as vain and improper,
and after his intimate search into the bowels of Nature he had discovered
others more aposite and Powerful; He thereby only gained the sad and unjust
recompense of calumny and ignominy; and that from the emulation of some of his
collegiate Brethren, and others, whose indignation at length did culminat to
that hight, that they endeavored to banish him, as guilty of Medicinal heresy,
out of that illustrious Society: and by the whisperings of others he was
baulked the Employment in the Royal Family, where before that he was called
among the first Phy^icians. Behold now the World governed not by Opinion, but
by perverse Prejudice and mistakes* And not only the due Fame and Praise of
Virtue and Worth smothered, but Virtue it self oppressed: But what wonder that
his Noble discoveries should be tossed with the same fate, among many other
notable Inventions, the discovery of the Circulation of the Blood long was;
which although it did illustrate and embellish; and, beside the the self evidence
it bare, did most extraordinarly inlighten the theorie of Medicine, yet was it
long kept at the door; and that throw the prejudice of Men, occasioned by their
uncuriousness to be at any Pains for discoveries themselves; and by Pride,
hating to receive light from; or to be beholden therefore, to the labors of
others; and thus they choice to part with any improvement, before they hazard
ever so little of their esteem: after the same manner, and from the very same
Principle, but with much more loss and detriment to Men (by the same,
proportion that real profit exceeds mere Pleasure, and that Practical and
useful inventions do exceed mere Theoretical ones) seemed his useful and
Practical Observations and discoveries to have been treated.

And tho it may be thought that the courage of this Magnanimous Man, which
being rather whetted then dashed, did still persevere in his begun Methods,
soon might have weathered out this Storm, which not being universal but rather
endemical, was only within the confines of one City, and perhaps but of one
Tribe and class of Men; yea and it may be only of one faction of that Tribe;
yet often such is the force of calumny, that the malevolent endeavors of a very
few, and these very weak Men may, like one that can faster pull down, then
twenty can rear up, so far blast Reputation as to make it very hard for
Innocence, yea for the greatest merit it self, to set up the head; and that by
reason of the Rude and Ignorant vulgars quick and ready susception of false
aspersions, in the production whereof the World is verry broody, which
therefore being in plenty, are cheap, and easily come by; Few being willing or
able to purchase knowledge or the true representation of things, at the coast
of serious inquiry examination and trial, the neat price thereof. But at length
as truth and light after they are smothered in one place, do break out with
more brightness in another, so these efforts carried his Fame and Renown throw
all the Corners of England, and also into foraigne Nations: and the opposition
he got, inspiring with commiseration of suffering merit some no small Men,
brought several such over to a constant and faithful adherence to him: although at
the coast of some piece of Reputation, (that requiring to be buoyed up with a
complacency oftentimes interfeiring with honesty) and among the first, that
favored him, as the truly eminent and worthy D. Goodall, had the sagacity to
receive the best Characters of him, and of his practice: So had he the
ingenuity and courage, to be the chief, that in his behalf Cartelling ignorance
and malice, made way for the due propagation of his most deserved fame: And
indeed in process of time Sydenham was by Letters from many eminent Physicians
through England, saluted the worthy Improver and Restorer of Medicine; As (among
many others,) by D. Brady, Professor of Medi^ine in the University of
Cambridge: And by D: Paman, Publict Orator of that University, and Professor of
Medicine in Gresham College, and by Dr. Cole, Physi^ian in Worchester, as may
be seen in there Epistles ^mitted with his works.

And to show how his Writings were received abroad, among many other
testimonies can be given, these few may suffice; In Ettmullerus, the famous
Professor of the University of Lipsick his works, he is frequently made
honorable mention of, by the Character of the Accurate and Elegant Sydenham.

And Doleus the chief Physician to the Lantgraue of Hess, being to put forth
his Encyclopedeia Medica, by an Epistle directed to D. Sydenham, entreated that
he would give him an Encomium to prefix to his Book; To which he answered, that
he was ready to give such as he thought the Book after it was perused by him
could deserve, which delay Doleus being, it seems, a little impatient of, the
Book, containing also very honorable mention of Sydenham, was set forth with a
fictitious Elogium under his name: Now it being always precious, and not
common and mean things that use to be forged or stolen, this seems not an
impertinent Argument of the Fame and Authority of Sydenham, both with him, and
wherever he might expect his Books would come.

In France likewayes, the worthy D: D: Spon Physician at Lions, in his Epistle
written in 1681, to the Abbot of Sylvecane does wonderfully extol his praise;
especially, his dexterity of cureing Fevers, which he says, are so constantly
cured by him at London; that he goes under the name of the Fever cureing
Doctor: Yet Spon does wonder that his methods are so little either there, or
any other where, followed by others.

At length, even in London it self, time did, as it does in most other things,
help to ripen and promote Truth, and settle these tumults that were raised in
Men's minds and hindered its appearance, because not only a new but a contrary
method in cureing most Diseases, and which appeared to charge the most part
also with ignorance, and error, seemed to be obtruded be obtruded on them:
andno wonder that Men puffed up with self-love, did with difficulty swallow
over such an harsh morsel: but the rancor being somewhat remitted, there wanted
not several ingenious and honest Physicians, that did acknowledge his merit,
among whom was that Famous D: Michelthwait, who when near death, (the time that
the fume of passions being evanished, gives both a more clear perception, and
ingenuous and sincere expression of truth,) did profess that notwithstanding of
the attempts of severals against the methods of Sydenham, yet these would yet
prevail and triumph over all other methods.

Neither wanted there another Class of Physicians, who tho they had no less wit
and understanding, yet had much less honesty then the former; these indeed
perceiving the efficacy of his practice, did readily imitate it themselves, but
were so much Plagiaries, that far from acknowledging the Author, they were the
foremost to calumniate him, and it may be his methods too; and least they
should be taken in the crime, had also the sub^erfuge, either of adding some
triffling thing to his inventions, or saying, they were Masters of these
methods before he did write or publish them.

Then at length, Truth by its native force prevailing wholly over Error, as
Light does over Darkness, by the help also of time, brought forth in the year
1688. The second Edition of his Schedula Monitoria, (as the first Edition was,
likewise under Protection and Patronage of the worthy D: Goodal, who had been
an assistant to him in much of tha^ Practice) and also sealed with the College
of Physicians at London, their Approbation annexed to the Book: Where the
Author delivers this new Method of the Cure of Fevers, most faithfully and
clearly, and even that very same which the first Edition contained, and came
forth without their Approbation: But it seems the short space of an year or
thereby, betwixt the first and second Edition of that Schedule, did conciliate
so much favor to the Author, and the work, that they declared the second
edition and the Method therein contained, to be worthy and useful; and not
pernicious; As some ridiculously affirm, preferring their private judgment
taken on a Superficial view, and perhaps only by Hearsay; To the mature and
deliberate Judgment of that Honorable and learned Society.

But the Honesty and Justice of others more Eminently Displaying it self, does
elevate his Praise somewhat suitable to his desert, and give him such
Panegyricks, as without sufficient merit in the Subject, have never been
consigned to Books or Letters, by such Wise Prudent and Learned Men, as these
do evidently in their late Writtings manifest themselves to be; And because in
the mouth of two or three witnesses every thing is established, so many, whose
works are now at hand with us, may therefore suffice.

The first is then, that Famous D. Morton, D. Morton his Elogium of D. Sydenham,
in his Treatise of Pthisical Diseases or consumptions lately emitted, where
like another Hercules, he does indeed assault that Herc^lean Disease, with a
Method both new and profitable: For according to that common axiom, Qui been
distinguit been docet; he has most judiciously instituted the several species
and degrees of that disease, according to which he has most reasonably
instituted the Indications, and ^ure to be varied: And when in his preface to
the Reader, he is proposing the several means of the Improvement of Medicine,
he judges and that very rationally, that it consists alone in practical
Observations, describing Diseases in their real and true Appearances; and
therefore he chides the sloth of some Physicians, that seem to bury with
themselves a great treasure of practice, which they might have acquired: Then
he concludes, saying, if I were able to hold forth the renown of so great a Man
as our Sydenham, I should extol his name to the skies, and set him for a noble
Example for the most experienced Practitioner to walk by? For this Man, being
of great Age, and having his natural sagacity, wherewith he is extraordinarly
endued, further polished with long use and experience; never ceases to improve
and illustrate with his Learned Writings, the practical part of Medicine, both
to the great comfort of the sick, and the great Credit and Advantage of the
Art: And that these praises did proceed from nothing, but the very conscience
of the merit of the Man; This Book came forth when Sydenham had almost bidden
adieu to the world, and Dr: Morton was scarcely known to him by the face.

The other Testimony is of that notable London practitioner D: Harris, D.
Harris his Elogium.
in his Book lately emitted, concerning The acute Diseases of Children, which
containing several remarkable Observations, do also contain his Testimony from
the page 45. unto the 51. In these words, saying, after I had used for some
years the like Method in Cure of Childrens Fevers I durst not venture on the
same in adult Persons, until I most happily met with the first edition of the
Monitory Schedule of that incomparable Practitioner D. Sydenham, and finding
that Method approven of in adult Persons by the experience of that most
Sagacious Man, as much overjoyed as I had gotten a great favor from Heaven, I
presently set on to try that Method in adult Persons also, and found it no less
succesful then I had found it before in Children, and a little after he
proceeds, saying, For his discovery of the Cure of Fevers, and many other his
notable Improvements, I hope that every Age, so long as Medicine shall
flourish, shall publish his Name; for the great Ornament and Light of this Age.
Sydenham has with an extraordinary Courage and Ingenuity completed the Cure of
Fevers, both by sufficient Reason, and by Experience, and Practice, concerning
which, others have given nothing but words.

SECT VI. Containing the Opinion of some Authors concerning the Nature of
Continual Fevers, and the same from Reason rejected, which makes it necessary
to inquire for a more probable one, in relation to the clearing their nature,
and this Method of their Cure.
NOw to make this Method every way complete, it is convenient as was insinuate
in the beginning, after the manner that a practical Discipline ought to be
treated, to essay, if from this Experiment and Method of Cure of Fevers, we can
draw any unstrained and probable Theory: Which inquiry necessarly presuposes
the Nature and Essence of Fevers, seeming yet altogether to ly in the dark, to
be narrowly searched into and exposed: Having first weighed and eventilate what
the Ancients and Neotericks has delivered concerning the Nature and Essence
thereof.

The first then, and which is the Opinion common to most Authors, placing the
Essence of a Fever in a Preternatural heat kindled in the heart, The Opinion
that Fevers consist in heat.
and diffused by the Blood through all the Body? indeed seems a very improper
Metaphorical Description: For the Heart is compared unto a Chimney, neither is
there a fuel capable of accension determined, there being no fuel in the Body
proper to foment a Fire but all as liquid and aqueous contrary thereunto: And
although in a Fever there be a great heat, the same can be made clearly to
depend upon another Principle, then any thing of accension, as shall be
afterward shown: and also seeing intense Heat is only accidental to a Fever,
and may be absent therefrom or present therewith; It can be nothing of its
essence, more then the rest of the symptoms are; for in the cold Paroxisme of
Intermittents it is absent for a while, with the presence of an Intense cold:
And in some algid Fevers it is always absent; yea, in fevers that are esteemed
malignant, it is very mild, and nothing beyond the degree usual in health; for
its reckoned commonly a sign of malignity when the heat does not rise
proportionably with the other Symptoms. And farther if Heat were of the Essence
of Fevers, in respect there is no distinct Species of Heat, but all the
difference thereof is gradual by Intention or Remisson, it must undoubtedly
follow that there can be no distinct Species of Fevers, but only that they are
gradually different; which is against the commonly received Opinion.

As to that qualification of Heat, that it is preternatural: It may be obvious
to any that seriously perpend the matter, that no Heat is pre^ernatural. tho
its cause may be said to be so: For Heat is nothing else but a natural and
genuine Passion, imprinted in the ^ense by the presence and energy of a
calorifique Efficient: Neither can it be any more said to be against Nature,
then pain can be: It being most natural for pain to be raised upon the action
of a dolorifique Efficient: And so forth, necessarly and naturally all the rest
of the Passions are made by impressions of the object impressing, in the
subject receiving. But that the speculation of Heat must be more subtle, then
to be enlightened by the common and dark explications thereof, may appear from
that common Phoenomenon of the breath, which being leisurely blown out,
imprints upon ^he hand a sense of Heat when this same breath with force blown
out, gives a sense of coldness thereon: this diversification insinuates the
Impression of Heat to consist in a modification of the motion of the Particles,
perhaps in a thwart, transverse, and tottering motion, some thing resembling
Refraction, or Reflection; And that cold on the other hand is Imprinted by a
direct motion: from which a true Idea of Heat subservient to the true
explication of Fevers, may be perhaps clearly drawn afterward.

Nixt follows the opinion of Willis, Willis his Opinion of effervescence in
Fevers.
who reasonably rejecting that of the Ancients, placed his in a notable
^ffervescence of the blood and humors: This ingenious Philosophical Physician
does with great fervor bend both his own Brain and the Subject, to establish a
certain effervescence in the blood of the Feverish persons, proportionable to
the Fermentation of Liquors: He nowayes taking notice that all the
Circumstances and Conditions requisite to the fermentation of Liquors, are not
only wanting in the generation of Fevers, but the contrary are present free
eventilation, and rest of Liquors to be fermented, being necessary conditions:
But in the blood the eventilation stopped, frequently is the cause and
condition of Fevers: And further, the circuit motion of the blood will hinder
its fermentation; as it falls out in Liquors which are to be fermented
requiring rest: Neither did any ever see in the Blood of Persons in Fevers, any
signs of fermentation, but rather tokens of viscosity and grosness; Signifying
coagulation: Neither can the Phenomenon in Fevers, be so commodiously explained
from that Effervescence, as from the contrary Coaleseence; of which afterward.

There is another Opinion of Cartesius affirming a Fever to be the Perturbate
mixture of the Blood, Cartesius his Opinion.
which description does rather darken the subject, unless he should teach us in
what the Natural mixture did consist; And how the Perturbation thereof should
excite a Fever, and the manner of the dependence of the Phenomenon upon that
Perturbation; And seeing he seems to insinuat a determinate Order and Position,
to be naturally requisite to the Particles of the Blood, and the Disturbance of
these to make a Fever; It is very difficult to understand, how the Particles of
the Blood should be carried from the Heart so rapidly throw the small branches
of the Artry's, and keep that Order; or how they should again make up their
ranks in their reflux throw the Veins back again to the Heart.

As for the Opinion of Paracelsus Paracelsus and Helmon^ their Opi^ions.
making a Fever to be the accension of Sulphur and Niter or an Universal
Excandescence of the Bal^om and Mercury of life; and that of Helmont making it
an Imparity of one part of the Archeus that thereby is affected with Wrath and
Indignation; Because they seem altogether enigmatical and vain, and bring more
obscurity then light to this dark Subject, therefore we leave them both.

Next follows the Opinion of that Hero in Medicine, Sylvius, who has placed the
Pathognomick sign of a Fever in the Pulse preternaturaly frequent, having
conjoined therewith Trouble, Pain, or the blemish of any function requisite for
the felicity and ease of Life: The cause whereof, which makes to him the
Essence of Fevers, is either first a too great and Permanent Rarefaction of the
Blood made by a violent Heat breaking out of the Effervescence of the Blood? Or
secondly, any Acrimonius, Acide, Lixivial, or Muriatique salt carried through
the Veins, together with the Blood and gnawing the Parenchyma of the Heart: or
thirdly, any flatulent halitous Matter brought with the Blood to the Heart, and
augmenting the expansion thereof: Fourthly, any sharp or hard thing in the
Pericardium, or other ways externally grating upon the Heart. This Great-Man
to whom Medicine this day is much indebted, as being the first that clearly
discovered the Errors and Dilusions of the Schools, has also found out a more
efficatious and sure practice in many Diseases: Yet he (there being none able
for all things) has fallen into some Errors of Theory, about his triumvirat
Humor, and the effervescence of these Humors in the Intestines and Heart; and
about the motion of the Bile toward the Heart: All which subsequent and more
acurate anatomical Inspection having found to be otherwise: his Hypothesis of
Fevers being established upon these, must necessarly fall: Yet these that
reject this his Theory do embrace his Practice in the Cure of Fevers.

In the last place, follows the Opinion of Barbet, placing a Fever in the
circulation of the Blood increased; which Opinion since it seems directly
contrary to what we think most probable, with the confirmation then thereof, it
will necessarly of it self evanish.

SECT. VII. Containing a New and Mechanical Hypothesis of the Essence of
Fevers, with the cause efficient and occasional of the frequency of the Pulse,
and that matterial or occasional cause also farther Mechanically traced.
IT seems very probable, that all the Physicians holding the former Opinions
have Erred, The occasion of these Errores discovered.
and the Fountain of all their mistakes appears to be that fundamental error,
as the acurate Bontikoe observes, that they took the immediate efficient cause
of the motion of the heart to be the blood, and that the frequent motion
thereof and the Arteries, did always depend upon some alteration of that
blood; but that this must be otherwise seems plain, because the Heart of some
Animals being cut out when they are alive, and holden in the hand, will beat a
long time without a drop of Blood: So the motion of the Heart seems not to
depend on the Blood, but on some other cause, perhaps on the influx of the
animal Spirits, proceeding from the Brain, by the remainder whereof inviscate
in the Heart, the motion seems to be continued after the separation thereof
from the Body.

The next fundamental Error, and observed likewayes by the same Author, seems
to be, that they esteemed the intension of Heat always to depend on the rapide
efflux or circulation of the Blood; and that it was both a sign and effect
thereof: The contracy of which appears by an Inflammation or Tumor, where the
Member affected is vexed with a great Heat, and kind of Fever* which is often
times communicate to the whole Body, and here it is clear, that the Blood is
rather stagnant then swiftly moved, and the Fever that is communicate from the
Inflammation, certainly showing a near resemblance betwixt them, persuades that
a certain degree of Incrassation from this Fountain of Co-agulation: And
accompanied also with a frequent Pulse, does affect the Blood, as the Ignorance
then of the concurring occasional cause of that frequency of the Pulse, gave
rise to all the Errors about this subject, so the bringing to Light the true
cause thereof, will make all these Errors evanish.

For clearing then of this, The Scheme of the New hypolsices of Fevers laid
down.
it is to be considered, that the Body of Man being a curious Machine the
motion wherewith it is en^ue^, like other Machines as it has an efficient
cause, so it has a final cause thereof; And in respect the final cause is
always the reason of placing the efficient cause, and that the Idea thereof is
still in the mind of the Architeck before the Idea of the efficient; This makes
the Idea of the efficient to be always shaped subservient to the Idea of the
final Cause; And must also make the structure of the efficient in the Fabric
of the machine to be molded to that final Cause likewise, and instructed and
qualified Suitable to attain the end of the motion, that is to say, that it may
have a faculty of Intension and Remission to be regulate and moderate according
to the exigence and necessity of the final, to be productive of the end of its
being put there; At least in so far as the Contrivance of a Mechanism will go:
As in a Watch whose Spring is so contrived that it may be Bended or Slackned
for attaining the end of its motion. And it seems also probable that in every
motion in Nature, its only the end that both puts the Efficient, and sets it a
going; and therefore it must be still by that end, that the motion must be
regulate, Hightned or diminished: As it is seen when Mariners do exercise the
Pump of the Ship, its always with respect to the breaking in of Water at the
Leaks; Which being in great quantity does excite to frequent and vigorous
Pumping to save the Ship.

Much after the same manner it seems probable that this motion of the Heart
which is nothing but a Pump designed to lay in the alimentitious Juice, and so
has for its end a proportionable proportional reparation of the functions and
parts suitable to their Consumptsion and Waste; And that by the sending to them
throw the Channels of the Arteries the arterial Blood, which is to be dispersed
in such quantity and time, as may answer to the reparation of their
Consumptsion and Waste; The Body consisting, which seems to deny it all
consistance, in a continual Flux, and succession of new parts coming in place
of the old that are wasted, like a River which has nothing Identitious but the
Channel: And so this final cause would seem to require an efficient whither
that be the first Impellent, the Archeus or Spirits endued with a capacity and
aptitude not only to continue, but also to incite and quicken this motion
according to the exigence of the final, as when the Intervention of any stops
or Impediments of the motions of the Blood does Interveen, to overcome which
its necessary that the efficient of the motion be bended to Superate these
stops and gain it is end, then it must necessarly double its Force and Strokes?
Otherwise every light Impediment or Obstacle which were equivalent to, and of
equal moment, and Force with, the moderate and odinare career of the motion of
the Blood would put a stop thereto: And indeed there is in a River something of
a resemblance of this faculty, tho from an other kind of efficient, yet for the
same or the like end; For any Impediments put to bar or dam up a River are
soon overpoised by the swelling Force of the Water above them, till in
proportion it overcome the strength of the stop: Now if it were otherwise,
every Impediment equivalent only to the present current of the River, either
put by Accident, or Design would interrupt their course, to the great hurt of
Mankind, and the blemish of the Worlds fabric.

Seeing then the returns of Reparation to the parts and functions ought to be
made, both in time and quantity in proportion to the waste, by the efflux of
the Arterial Blood from the Heart as the vehicle, and through the arterys, as
the conduites of these recruites; When this is done vegetlie, integrally,
without any stop or delay, then redounds felicity, ease, and integrity, of the
functions and life: But when that efflux is retarded or stopped, either by reason
of the Blood it self, or some stopage in the extremities and small channels of
the vessels; or by reason of immoderate and unusual waste beyond the proportion
of the ordinary supply, (as falls out in immoderate exercise and motion;) And,
so I say, when by reason of any these causes, the heart cannot convey and lay
in the desired suppliment in due proportion and timeously, by strokes repeated
at the usual intervals, then it does, by precipitating the strokes, and
straiting the intervals of the pulsations, endeavor, what in it lies, to
overcome the slowness of the motion of the Blood, and to come so near as it can
to the due and proportional distribution of nutriment* in respect of the wa^te:
But if, notwithstanding of these sedulous endeavors of the heart by the
redoubling of the pulsations, that slowness of the Blood, shall by a gradual
increase of the thickness, and of obstructions in the capillary vessels, prove
yet so obstinare as still to be augmented, then this leads straight to the
porch and gate of Death; Death being nothing else but a total and permanent
cessa^ion, and defect of this distribution.

If there remain yet any difficulty to comprehend this Scheme, An objection
against this Hypothesis answered.
because this incitation of the pulse, being only a natural action, and proper
to the Animal part, thus circumstantiate, is made too like an effect of Reason,
and savours too much the acting for an end, or of a voluntary motion, to be
applicable here: To answer this reasonable doubt, since it is very plain that
Nature in the structure of the outward parts of Animals has acted so much
Reason and Design, as importing clearly that the Idea of their end has regulate
their fabric; has also made the structure of all their parts terminate into
such a perfection of the Animal, that the most rigide survey can find nothing
wanting: As is most ingeniously displayed by the Honorable and Learned Boil,
in his Treatise of the Final Causes of natural things: Why should not the same
Architect also have instructed the Function and inward parts with faculties to
be exerted less or more, according to the particular exigence of the Animal:
But especially that radical and fundamental one of supplying all the rest with
sufficient provision and nou^ishment; that it should be endued with a faculty
to accelerate, when the n^urishment either by its fault or immoderate waste, is
more then it ought, in its Returns, delayed: Otherwise every light cause that
did retard the accession of reparation or did waste it much beyond the ordinary
recruite; would soon precipitate the Animal into inevitable ruin.

And also, seeing most Animals are endued with swifness beyond their ordinary
pace, whereby they flee dangers; why should they not be endued with the like
inward faculty, to escape dangers internal that frequently threaten them. And
indeed all these efforts which we call from Irritation giving a Resemblance of
such a faculty as this, argue as much reason and acting for an end as this,
that is here laid down does; For the Impression made in the place, being
resented in the Brain the Fountain of Sense and motion; the Irritation or
endeavor to be rid of the offending cause has its effects in the place first
invaded or beset: and why should not the starving of the parts as much
querelous as the surcharge of them is, be as well heard, and have also its
releif; so far at their least, as motion can help them.

And there is yet a clearer resemblance of such a natural Action as this to be
seen in the Pupil of the Eye, which without consent of the will Contracts and
delates it self so much as is needful for the comodity of seeing, viz. Dilating
where there is too little Light to let in more, and convey the Species into the
Eye; and Contracting when there is too much Light, and letting in only so much
Light, as is necessary to Paint the Species in the Eye.

And although there is a Phenomenon and case in Fevers which seems to oppugn
this Hipothesis, yet it is hoped that the same being duly considered, Another
deficulty solved
will rather confirm and clear it and the Cas^ is this, in some Fevers the
Pulse is not altered as to the frequency or Vigor yet these portend great and
imminent danger: which Phenomenon or slowness of the Pulse comes from this,
that although the final Cause of its motion be here craving enough of the
acceleration of the Pulse for reparation in proportion to the waste, yet it
seems the efficient or Impellent of this motion or the first spring thereof
that should answer exactly the exegencies of the final; Is either stupefied,
attacqued, or befettered; and so there is no strugle or essay to overcome the
Impediments, and Supply proportionably the waste: And as this case is of all
Fevers the most dangerous, commonly giving the name of malignant, so it brings
the oeconomie, for the most part, soon to dissolution.

To unfold yet further this paradoxical Hypothesis, if any desire to know upon
what nearest and immediate cause this slowness of the motion of the arterial
blood, or delay of Reparation which excites the pulse to acceleration does
depend; unto this not impertinent inquiry that an apposite answer may be made;
it is to be adverted, that the blood is made up of innumerable little globules
swiming in a limpide watery serum: As, being observed by Loewenhoek, with help
of the microscop, is also delivered and described by him: and as its very
probable that these Globules do naturally require to be of such a bulk, figure
and number, and the serosity wherein these swim, does also require to be of
such tenuity and quantity, as may best facilitate the motion and course of the
Blood throw the small channels and conduites betwixt the Arteries and veins: In
which passage for the most part it depositates its nutritious parts, or
particles: So it is very probable that slowness of the bloods motion, to
overcome which the heart excites frequent pulses, does for the most part
proceed either from the number or magnitude of these Globules augmented, or
some vi^iation of their spherical figure, as their scabricity, and the like; Or
further, through the viscidity of the serum into which as a vehicle they swim,
and are carried: And tho from any of these alone this slowness of the blood may
clearly proceed, yet it is certain that the ingemination and complication of
these causes, rendering the groseness of the Blood more intense; may also render
the slowness of its motion more contumacious.

To conclude then, as by this scheme here laid down, seems indeed may be given
pretty clearly, both a rational discovery, and a Mechanical solution of the
nature and phenomena of Fevers; so it appears that former explications thereof,
having raised so many fumy efferveseences, and turbid fermentations concerning
them, could never yet bring the matter to a digested, pellucide, and defecat
conclusion but having clouded the eyes with the mist of ^iry phantasmes, still
left the mind boiling and working in the tumult of commotion, doubt and
difficulty.

SECT. VIII. Showing that the Heat in Fevers is the ^ffect of the slow Motion
of the Blood: And how Heat is made, and may be consistent with that slowness.
SInce by what is said the rapid Circulation of the Blood in Fevers seems to be
overturned; And that the rapid motion thereof was the only adequate Reason
commonly given, to solve the Phenomenon of Heat in Fevers; Because swift and
violent motions used often times to produce Heat in Bodies: although we perceive
motion to produce Heat in no bodies; but where it is acompanied with grating and
grinding of hard and solid parts on upon another; but never in fluids; and so
we find the violent motion of the Body produces Heat therein by the at^rition
which the Museules make on themselves, and the adjacent parts: Which also
produces a thickness of the Blood, and in consequence slackens its motion: It
remains to inquire to what parent this off spring of Intenss and Feverish Heat
can be most properly legitimate: The inquiry into this Phenomenon may not only
discover how Heat is made, but will perhaps also further establish the
Hipothesis of Fevers already laid down: For if we take a view, and find that
all these things which as external causes bring Imoderate Heat, that the same
do bring on a pace with them thickness and crassness of the Blood; Which is
necessarly followed with the slowness of its motion; And so to supply the parts
with proportionable reparation suitable to the waste that is made, the
Acceleration is stimulated, and frequent pulses are excited, in proportion to
that thickness and slowness of the Blood: as it falls out in vehement motions
of Body and Mind; Great and long heat of the Sun, and fire; the excessive
abuse of strong Liquors, and in perspiration impeded, etc.

In the vehement motion of the Body, beside the above mentioned grateing of the
muscles upon one another, and upon the parts adjacent exciting heat, there is
also such a waste of spirits and particles of the Blood and humors which in
motion do exhale, that, to make proportionable supply and refocillation with
the arterial blood, the heart is made to mend its pace; As also that copious
eruption of exhalations, which sometimes comes to the degree of sweat, leaving
the Blood, and Humors more gross and thickened, must necessarily also increase
the slowness of its motion, which therefore crave greater and repeated force to
squeeze it forward into these narrow Channels: And so from all these
circumstances, in violent motion there is raised a paroxisme as to Heat and
Pulse altogether resembling a Fever: Which is much after the same manner also
produced by all the rest of external causes exciting Heat; but with this
difference, that the Heat coming from the abuse of spirituous Liquors (as
apears by the Spirit of Wine, which being poured upon Blood does immediately
co-agulate the same) comes from their immediate incrassating and coagulating
effect upon the Blood: Which Incrassation has likewayes and for the same cause,
that stimulating effect upon the Heart. And how stopped perspiration produces
Heat shall be in its due place shown.

Whence we may conclude, that all Intense Heat grivous to the Body, is the
genuin effect of the grosness of the Blood; as it is clear by the contemplation
of the Community of the Causes, and the Community of the Phoenomena Natural and
Practical belonging to both, and shall afterward more fully be shown.

Having thus far premised, It remains to clear how this Thickness and Grossness
of the Blood produces also intense Heat: And that the same Heat does not
establish, but rather evert both the Effervessence of the Blood and the
swiftness of that motion thereof, by some called the circulation, and by others
the circuit of the Blood.

In prosecution whereof, it is to be noticed, that in the natural state of
Health, the Heat is more strong and veget, then in the valetudinary state,
where it is fretting and with trouble felt: For in the state of Health the
Rays of Heat (now whither or not these be thickly compacted together troops of
Spirits it seems not worth the while to contend) these Rays (I say) do
cheerfully and pleasantly glide with the arterial Blood throw the Channels of
the Arteries, in a fluid, sequacious and yiedling enough; and by passages open
sufficiently, toward all the Bowels, Organs, and Habit of the Body; for their
refoccilation, in which for the most part they are consumed: And so from the
continual efflux of these Rays cheerfully accomplshed, does result the
faelicity and ease of Life, and integrity of the functions of the Economy.

But in the state of sickness, and chiefly in the heat of Fevers, these rays
or Companies of Spirits flowing throw a viseuous and crass-medium, such as the
arterial Blood then is, and also approaching the narrow Channels of the
arteries partly obstructed and partly beset with scabricity by means of this
viscous Blood; these rays (I say) must undoubtedly, in there passage throw
that viscid and unequal Medium, suffer refraction; And in their approach to the
extremities of the arteries thus obstructed or vitiated they must suffer
Reflection or Collision: Such modifications then of the rays of heat seem
likely to produce the same effect on the sense, that the like modifications of
the rays of Light and of Sight do: It being known that the diversity or
inequality of the medium throw which these pass, and by which they are
refracted; Or the variety of the superficial textures on which these inciding;
are therefrom also reflected; does occasion Impressions on the organe of Sight,
whereby the object is represented either some way depraved or greater, or more
multiplied, then it would be represented without such refractions or
reflections: So it seems not very Improbable, that the rays of Heat passing
throw the medium of crass unequal and not sufficiently Diaphanous Blood, that
they should be several ways refracted, and so coming to the Organe of feeling,
that is, the nerves dispersed every where throw the Body, that therefore they
should imprint therein a greater sense of Heat then usual: Or otherwise by
reflection, which comes to the same purpose, as when these rays are darted
throw the trunes of the Arteries, and incid upon the small Channels obstructed
either in whole or in part by this crass Blood, they must necessarly, being
reflected several ways impinge on the Nervs the sensorie of Heat; and affect
them with more brisk twitches then if they did glide smoothly along the trunks,
and by open passages were dispersed, and exhausted in there designed ends.

And that the sense of intense heat is made much after the same manner, seems
clear by the Instance mentioned before, to wit when the breath is with a wide
mouth slowly exhaled, it gives the sense of heat upon the hand; Because the
Particles of the breath are not carried straight and directly forward, but being
dispersed by an Oblique transvorse and rec^illing motion, they undergo a
Modification much resembling refraction; And coming so modified to the nerves
of the hand, imprint thereon the sense of heat when these very same Particles
flowing out forcibly, give no sense of Heat, but of Cold: The Particles being
straight and direct in their motion undergo no such modifications.

SECT. IX. Showing that Fevers being treaced up to their Fountain. viz. The
outward causes, in that quest this grossness of the Blood and Humors presents
it self. Where insensible Perspiration is touched, and how much the same lesed
contributes the generation of Fevers. And how indigestion of the Stomach is
also accessory thereto, with a new Hypothesis of digestion proposed.
TO comprehend more fully and clearly this dark subject of Fevers, its
necessary to trace the same up to the very fountain and spring, according to
the Concatenation of causes and effects, which termmate in that production
called a Fever; And whose presence is testified by all the various Phenomenon,
that as Irradiations and beams are darted therefrom: Now if in this
Inquisition we find all such causes concur^ing and concateuat as produce that
thickness and grosness of the Blood, and that these Phenomenon can be nowayes
so comodiously resolved; As by there being made likewise depending on that
grosness and the product thereof: and also that the Practical Phenomenon of
Hurters and Helpers have their immediate effect, in respect of this grosness or
what depends always thereon, the slowness of the Blood; then with a certainty
little below a demonstration, we may conclude according to the alleged
Hipothesis.

Here then the Procatartick and external causes, as first in operation deserve
the first consideration; Such are errors about the six things commonly called
not Natural, viz. Air, Aliment, Motion and Rest, Sleeping and Watching,
Excretion and Retention, and Passions of the mind: For the errors about some
of these using to generate, and about others of them to retain and accumulate,
crudities Piece meal which serve for the antecedent or potential cause of a
disease; and this ante^edent cause gradually by its own tendency, and sometimes
more quickly by some great error superveining favoring this or that disease; Is
acuate and formed into the continent cause or very essence of the disease it
self.

And even as the life of Man through Infirmity and Misfortune is encumbered and
involved in manifold straits difficulties, Insensible Perspiration.
and sometimes necessities, whereby he must transgress the measure and bounds
and run into the excess or defects, of the use of these things; Which would
surely make his life both very miserable, and without any comfort; but that it
would likewise be very short: Were it not that the bountiful architect, giveing
as well an evidence of Providence and Art as of Commiseration, and tenderness
has contrived these bodies exceedingly commodious in the multiplicity and
convenient situation of excretory passages, by which the noxious matter
accumulate being expelled, the errors hapening about these none natural things
might be amended; and that not only throw the Gutts and Bladder, these sensible
and patent ways, (serving also sometimes for extraordinary turns as well as
for their ordinary and natural Excretions;) but by another indeed most ocult,
and obscure; yet no less certain and obvious to the mind and reason, and more
adequat and oftener serving, to these extraordinary, tho necessary Excretions:
And that is insensible Perspiration, which sends forth continually throw the
Pores of the whole Skin such a quantity of excrementitious Rays, as does twice
exceed all other sensible Evacuations; and is the Excrements of the third and
last Conco^tion.

And indeed such a wonderful work of Nature should by lurking always not have
had as much certainty and evidence as it demonstrats sagacity and providence;
and so the Ignorance of Men should have intercepted, and smothered their
admiration and gratitude; if the most ingenius Sanctorious a Sanctorio
Physician and Professor of Padua, by divine Influence had not above all
exception demonstrat to the world the reality, necessity, and measure, together
with Rules for the regulation, of this Perspiration insensible: After whom for
Forty Years almost now since elapsed, Mortals have so much forgot themselves,
that they have not only neglected (in so far as I know) to improve this
Doctrine delivered by him (perhaps tending more to the conservation and also to
the recove^y of Health, then all other means whatsomever preservative or
curative) but also to receive or make any Benefit or Fruit of his Industry and
Discovery: Except what the most acure Bellinus Physician and Professor of Pisa,
and Ettmullerus Professor in Lypsick have observed of it. And indeed that most
acurate and piercing wit Sanctorious, delivers all his Observations approven to
the eve by the Balance; for having weighed the Body and all the aliment taken,
in 24 Hours time, the next Morning, he again weighes the Body before the
Excretiones sensible of Belly and Bladder, and after the evacuations does the
same again, and the difference betwixt these two last weights goes to make the
weight of the Excrements, which is much within the weight of the aliement taken
in, the weight of the Body remaining the same it was the former day: As for
example, Suppose the weight of the whole aliment be 8 pound, the next morning
the Body being weighed before and after evacuation of the Belly and Urine, the
difference making the weight of the Excrements may be about 3 pound: The rest
of the 8, being 5, evaportating by insensible Perspiration: But in this
computation some consideration is to be had to the Urine excerned the former
day, which in sober People is little, and for the most part the recre^ment of
the Liquors taken in the third day before, and as that most exact observer by
thirty years Experience found the business so or so to hold in the state and
continuation of health; it was likewise very obvious unto him, and may be so
too unto any considering person seriously pondering the matter that this
subtle, insensible, and because little noticed often times vitiated
evacuation, (...) although but in part, any long time lesed, that it must, heaping
up copious morbifique matter, sow the seeds and become the fuel of manifold
Diseases; which any slender and dispositive cause may soon precipitate into the
continent and immediate cause of a Disease: Therefore that sagacious Man
observes from statical Experience, that the foreseeing of the approach of
Diseases is more certain and timeous, by the observation of the perspiration,
then from the Lesions, of the Actions.

The due expulsion of this perspirable matter depends upon the integrity of all
the concurring causes thereof, whither efficient, matterial, or instrumental:
And as an efficient here (beside the first impellent the common efficient of
all the motions of the Body) the Air by its elasticity and expansive power
seems to have no small influence thereupon, for the Air being in the act of
inspiration drawn into the lungs, and the vesicles thereof filled thereby, by
the Heat of the lungs it is also rarefied, and thereby requiring a greater
room, does also by its force distend these vesicles; whose structure being with
a narrow entry and large cavity, the Air therein contained and in expiration
compressed, is not all in proportion to that compression expelled at the
orifice of the vesicle; but some thereof must be forced also into the small
branches of the pulmonick vessels; and be mixed with the Blood in the pulmonick
vein returning to the heart; and this air being once gotten into the capillar
Veins of these pulmonick Vessels by the continual expansion and contraction of
the Lungs throw which these Vessels are interspersed; that air is pressed and
driven on with the Blood toward the greater trunks of that Vein: For the
motion therein being made from a lesser cavity unto a greater; is by that
structure of the Organ more easy; and the Bloods advance facilitated and its
regress hindered: So that by the motion of the Lungs alone, and without any
Pulses; it is not only thus carried to the left ventricle of the Heart; but
receives its whole complement and perfection in the progress, by the continual
agitation of the Lungs, which do attenuat and grind and most intimately commix
it with the air, as appears by the Blood in that Pulmonick Vein, which has its
color more florid and is it self more spumose, and rarefied then before its
ingress in the Lungs, and that alone by the Airs congress and agitation
therewith. And further, the mixture of the Air with the arterial Blood is
clear, by that Experiment of Mayow, Page 144. who putting venal Blood into the
pneumatick engine, and pumping of the Air therefrom found it made only a small
ebulition: But having used arterial blood so, it made a wonderful expansion and
boiled up into a great deal of spumosity, and that by reason of the great
Quantity of Air contained therein, which expanding upon the weakening the
pressure of the ambient Air, does dilate it self, and the Blood in which it is
inviscate in proportion to the pressure of the Air that remained after the
Pumping. And further the ingress of the Air into, and mixture thereof with the
blood, is clear by this phenomenon, that the superfice and extremities of the
body, become tumified when the body is heated by motion; for then there are
ordinarily more frequent and greater inspirations of Air into the Lungs, which
the violent motion of the Body disperses through the several Members. As also,
the same is made further evident, because the Hypothesis gives only the clear
solution how the skine rises upon the application of cuping glasses, for the
Air within the Body finding the Air within the Glass, not of equal resistance,
does by its elasticity expand it self and raise the flesh therewith. And
moreover the Airs influence and activity for promoving of perspiration as an
efficient, is plain, by the abovementioned experiment of Mayow, for the
arterial blood appears turgid with such arerious particles, because these by
their volatility serve to sweep off the perspirable matter: And further, that
same blood exhausted and stripp't off these aerious particles, is by the Veins
carried back to the Lungs, to be of new impregnate therewith. And likewise, the
Necessity and Utility of the Aires sweeping and sifting through the Body, by its
entry at the Lungs and going throw the Arteries, and out again at the pores
disperse devery where throw the superfice of the Body; appears from this as
Helmont observes tractat de blas hum* that heat alone is not sufficient to
expel all these re^rements that are in the Blood and Body; For Heat in its
operation, as in destellation leaves always a great remander or caput mortuum:
Yea, as Boil observes in the origin of forms the most limpide rain water being
a hundred times redistilled leaves always some Earthy and fixed recrements,
that can be altered by no vehemence of fire, so that to eliminate and expel
this perspirable matter, without recrements; beside the action of heat, there
is further required some other proper volatilising efficient, which the Air may
be clearly judged to be: For as Helmont and Tachenius observes, timber
putriefying in the free Air gives by calcining little or no fixed Salt: And dry
Herbs give far less quantity thereof, then green Herbs do; For this reason,
that the Air being the proper menstruum of that Salt; Yea even of the same Salt
within our Body does dissolve and extract it. And likewise the influence that
pure Air has upon our Bodies, and which is observed by Helmont, must be also
from this reason; For in serene and cold Air we eat and digest better Because
that Air not being Saturat with fuliginous and noxious Particles; In running
its course throw the Body, sweeps out powerfully the perspirable matter, and
for the like reason these that Sail long on the Sea, eat very much and have
fewer sensible excrements then otherwise: Because the continual and swift
motion of the Body not only promoves digestion and distribution of the aliement
(as will be shown afterward) but also promoves perspiration, by the continual
agitation and shaking of the Body; Which looses any of the Particles of the
perspirable matter that incline to stick in the passages and pores, and so the
Air more easily sweeps off that perspirable matter. And also, (as our worthy
Author Sydenham observes) long riding has the same effect and it may be thought
for the same reason, and the effects of both these motions, are likewise
observed by Sanctorius, in his Aphorisms, Sect 7. where he shows that ryding
respects most the expulsion of the perspirable matter above the Loins: And
that ambling is most wholesome, but trotting unwholesome: and that the being long
carried in a Boat or in a Litter is also most wholesome as disposing to
perspiration.

It follows next to be shown that the due expulsion of this perspirable matter
seems further to depend upon the integrity of the instrumental, matterial and
nearest causes thereof, such as, The strength and firmness of the Fibers and
Glands of the skine, The convenient aperture of these passages and pores through
which it must go. And lastly, the sufficient tenuity and sequacity of that
perspirable matter. But what things help or hurt here, will be too great a
Digression to mention, seeing the Author Sanctorius may be consulted concerning
it himself; and because that very useful Treatise is scarce to be had; we have
therefore placed down after all, a select parcel of his Statical Aphorisms: It
remains then only now to show, that one or more of these requisites to
perspiration being vitiated; that perspirable Matter may be retained and
accumulate about the borders of the capillary vessels; until by its burden and
bulk it provok the Fibers to its expulsion by sweat, all sweat especially
giving ease coming from a great and undue collection of perspirable Matter,
seems therefore never to be a Natural Excretion, or to have place or use in
perfect Health, and is only profitable in so far as it shuns a greater evil,
and carries the same respect to the Excrements of the third concoction, that a
Flux of the Belly does to these of the first or second; and those that sweat
most, perspire least in the Natural order and manner, as Sanctorius shows
Aphoris. Sect. 1. That Sweating is not good, because it abates the strength of
the Fibers, yet seeing it diverts a worse evil, it may be called respectively
good.

But if Nature, either out of Sluggishness or Weakness, do not provide against
the retention of this perspirable Matter by Sweat or some otherwise, it being
still farther accumulate threatens a Disease, and very often a Fever, after
this manner; for this perspirable Matter retained, being wholly excrementitious
and unapt to be endued with Spirits degenerates into viscosity, and it may be
into Purulency: and lying into the confines of the Veins, among the fibers of
the Flesh, which being irritated by its bulk and uselessness, do wring it out
into the Channells of these Veins: And so being easily absorbed by the
refluent Blood, it infects by its viscidity and Purulency the Particles and
globuls of the Blood; Increassing there bigness and vitiatng there Spherical
figure: Which Blood thus vitiat, being carried back to the Heart by the Veins,
and from it into the Arteries to be dispersed throw the whole Body, is with
much difficulty admitted into the small capillary vessels, by reason of the
disproportion of these globuls unto the conduites, or their scabricity; making
their passage difficult: so that the heart is forced to double its pulses to
drive on the Blood, to supply the craving parts with their due nourishment. And
albeit oftentimes the heart does by this assiduous labor overcome these
obstructions, (for the vigorous agitation of the Blood, and of these globuls
upon an another, does so attenuate and polish them, that they are made to pass
without sticking, and so many thereof as are not redintegrable, as perspirable
matter are expelled:) Yet sometimes these obstructions by their obstinacy from
the copious Retention and the continual Accession of perspi^able Matter, may
not only elude these strenuous endeavors of the Heart, but also be so
increased, that, sterving all the Functions, they may overwhelm the Oeconomie,
and put a total and permanent stop to the motion of the Blood; which really and
formally makes extinction of Life.

Now that the Progress and Pedigree of a Fever may be after this manner, is
much more probable, because it is very consonant to the Sentiment of
Sanctorius, who in the first Section of his Aphorisms, declares, That, the
perspirable Matter retained, neither being discussed by Nature nor by a Fever
superveening, presently disposes the Body to a Malignant Fever: By the which
may be understood a Fever of the highest degree; that depends upon contumacious
Obstructions, and is extraordinary dangerous: And in the next Aphorism, he
says, Such as are in Fevers grow worse and worse if their perspiration be
diverted by excessive applications of Medicines from an unskilful Physician.

And so seems to be acted the first seen of a fever, which seldom proves
tragical, unless by a preposterous officiousness: For by the strength of Nature
alone, or by some little Art, viz. By Sweating, Bleeding, and other easy
means, it is for the most part brought to an happy conclusion.

Unless, which very often falls out, a Mass of crude Matter generated from the
Errors in the other Non-natural things, and lodged in the first ways, as the
Ventricle, Intestines, Meseraick Veins, becoming (as it is very apt to do) a
fuel to this Disease make it both long and dangerous: Now this Crude Matter
seems to be nothing else but the Recrements of the imperfect and perfunctorious
Digestion of the Stomach and other Bowels: the search therefore into the cause
of such Recrements amassed up, directly lead us in relation to the discovery,
first to make inquiry how perfect and natural Digestion is made.

Then passing over the commonly received Fermentation the Aliments in the
Stomach, A mechanical Hypothesis of Digestion.
which seems justly to be rejected here for the same Reason that Effervescence
is repudiat in Fevers, this operation not only succeeding always without
Eventilation or Rest, the requisites to Fermentation, but altogether refusing
them: And so this action of the Stomach seeming much more intelligible to be
made Mechanical, does rather consist in a grinding or attenuation of the
Aliments, by which they are made chyle, for the requisites to completely expede
Digestion are first the contraction of the Ventricle, and closs embracing of
the contained Aliment: and next the gentle and continual compressive rolling of
the Aliment already closs embraced by the Stomach; and that by the continual
motion of the Diaphragma depressing it, and the motion of the abdomen again
repressing it: Which motions reciprocally coming and going upon the Aliment
close Embraced in the Stomach, may be thought to have upon it the like
mellowing effect that the rolling of the hand upon an Aple or other fruit
always has; and that by the continual attrition the Particles of the Aliment
have upon one another, they are mellowed into Chyle. And further what may be
the Joint effect of the Stomachs Embracing and Contracting it self closs upon
the Aliment to promove this atrition of the Particles, will further appear, by
the consideration of the effect of Monsieure Papines digester, by which bones
are softened, with no other artifice but by the vessel so contrived, that it
Embraces the contained matter with compression upon all sides; by which these
Stems and Vapors, which in ordinary boiling break out, being Imprisoned, do
make their Rambles throw the whole contained matter, and give such twitches
thereon, that they do so far attenuate the Bones as to make Iellie of them.

Now beside this compression and rolling of the Aliment contained in the
Stomach by the Diaphragma and abdomen the chief Instruments to make the Chyle,
the pouring in of certain Liquors from the Glands, to macerate the Aliment,
seems likewise to cooperate to the same purpose: As also the continual influx
of Spirits by the great Nerves that comes to the Stomach, seems as well the
promovers of that intestine motion bringing first Attrition, next Concoction,
as they are Authors of other admirable actions in the Body done by their
stupenduous Elasticity, such as the motion of the Muscles. And beside all
these, there seems to contribute likewise to the Concoction of the Aliments,
there being impregnat with Aereous Particles, while they are chewed in the
mouth, these also serving to subtilize and rarifie them: And for this use the
Wind-bladder in Fishes which is always filled with air, has a Conduite to
their ventricle, as is observed by Needham: And for this reason also it may be,
that serene and clear air does contribute exceedingly both to Appetite and
Digestion: And the Meat thus impregnat with the air coming to the Stomach is
the fitter to be acted upon, and volatized by the Spirits, which also are of an
aereal nature, and the Spirits influence to Concoction is plain by this, that
these that are affected with Intense Grief and Sadness, or indulge anxiety and
thought fullness, by which the Spirits are diverted from the Office of
Chylification, do not digest, but find a weight about their Stomach, and have
likewise the other tokens of bad Digestion upon their Body, and also
Appoplectick Persons do eat and digest double the quantity of Aliment that they
do when they are whole; which seems to be only for this reason because the
influx of the animal Spirits, being denied throw the rest of the Nerves, takes
the course more liberally throw the wandering pair and intercostal Nerves going
to the Stomach and Bowels (whose safety Nature studies longest to maintain) so
these places being most copiously imbued with Spirits, do perform their Actions
more vegetly. All which is learnedly treated, with the reasons for rejecting of
Fermentation in Digestion, by Conradus Brunuerus in his Diatriba de Lympha and
usu Pancreatis.

Now from this it would seem to follow that these belchings that happen in bad
digestion, are as well the cause as the sign thereof: for the stomach sending
up throw the oesophage these Steemes that with their Careers throw the Mass of
the contained Aliment should attenuate and comminute it into Chyle, is a clear
Argument of the laxity and infirmness of its Tone; And that it is not able to
Imprison them, and by strait Embracing the Aliment and them-to keep them
there, in Inviscate at there work: and this contraction of the Stomach to
Embrace the Aliment upon all sides is so necessary, that any vacuity how ever
little betwixt the Aliment and the Stomach, is frequently the cause and
occasion both of indigestion and of the sending up of these eructations: that
vacuity being a receptacle for these steemes which finding themselves at
liberty from the Embraces of the Aliment, by their volatility and expansiveness
distend the Ventricle, thus proving troublesome to it, they force their passage
at the mouth thereof, and are voided by way of belching and ructation: And this
is also observed by Sanctorius in his Staticks where he finds that less
quantity of Aliment then the usual being taken in, does neither digest nor
perspire, because the Stomach scarce contracting more then its ordinray is not
so far constricted as to touch the Aliment on all sides.

Moreover to confirm this Hypothesis of the Stomachs Digestion by gentle
rolling of the contained Aliment, the benefit that in most chronick Diseases
comes by long riding seems to be no small adminicle: For these Diseases for
most part coming from crudity and the recrements of the Indigestion, which
beget obstruction, by this continual motion and jogging of the Body in riding,
are not only removed, but actual Digestion is thereby extraordinarly promoved;
and that by agitation of the contained Aliment making Atrition of the parts
thereof upon one another: And what alterations motion and agitation alone is
able to produce in liquids is seen in the churning of Milk, whereby Butter is
made; and that without any Fermentation or Effervescence.

Having thus far digressed to essay how Digestion is made; it plainly follows
that Indigestion leaving the Particles of the Aliment less comminuted,
attenuat, and mellowed, resolves in the Congestion of a Mass of crude Humors
lodged into the first ways, and ready to be a Fuel to begin or increase any
Disease, especially a Fever, For although any part of this crude Matter being
carried into the Blood, while it is under a Brisk and Vigorous circuit, Efflux
and Reflux, for the most part is soon attenuated and subjugated, and by that
sprightful motion eliminated by insensible Perspiration; Yet in the case when
the Blood is acting the former scene, these gross Particles and Viscous matter,
being carried into the Mass of Blood, do both augment the Number and grossness,
and vitiat the figures of the globuls of the Blood, and so putting more
obstructions in the small vessels, puts also more Contumacious bars to the
motion: and thus the Lungs, the Forge, and the Heart the Pump of the motion of
the Blood making life, being beset on both sides, viz. By the crudities
ascending by the lacteal Vessels on the on side, and by the perspirable matter
retained on the other Hand both hindering by obstruction the effectual making
and distribution of the arterial Blood; Comes all these Phenomenon arguing the
presence of a Fever; and for the most part one of the highest degree or first
rate.

SECT. X. The Natural Phenomenon in Fevers made to confirm this Hipothesis,
such as Thrist, Pains, Inquietudes, Anxieties, Delirium, and Spots.
ANd that a Fever proceeds from Obstruction, especially in the Capillary
Vessels, may be easily conceived by any who were ever taken with a Fever
themselves, if it did not ascend to that height to bring along with it
Stupidity, for they cannot forget the continual and frequent Pulsations,
wherewith they were then afflicted in the Head, Back, and all the Extremities;
which certainly denotes Obstructions, and difficult passage of the Blood throw
the small Vessels of these parts, upon which the Blood, endeavoring to open
these closs doors, did continually batter and beat; when in the state of Health
no such thing is felt; because the Blood enjoyes a free passage through these
Channels clear and open.

But to confirm this Hypothesis farther, it remains to show how the most
ordinary Natural Phenomenon in Fevers may be made to agree therewith.

And first as to Thrist in Fevers, it seems not to be an effect of Heat, as is
commonly believed; but is another Branch which springs from the same Root of
grossness of the Blood, and of Obstruction depending thereon, that Heat it self
does likewayes come from: It is not therefore the Heat that dries the Tongue,
Iaws, Throat, Oesophage, and Ventricle; but it is the defect of the watering
these places with the Lymph and Spittle; because the Lymphal and Salival
Glandes, being in like manner affected with the same Obstruction from the
crasness of the Humors, either do not secerne their proper liquor from the
Blood, or do not excerne and squeeze it out on these parts.

The Phenomenon of Pains of all sorts inquietudes, and anxieties, may also be
resolved in that same fountain of obstructions; For the rays of Heat, or
Spirits not being able to run their course, and carreer; by reason of the gross
Medium and obstructions; do therefore resile and recoile on all hands, and by
their brisk twitches on the membranous parts endued with exquisite sense, they
raise pains, and uneasiness: and acting their scenes in every organ they do
excite S^mptomes Competent thereunto.

And in the Brain Delirium or Raving seems to be raised much after the same
manner, How delirium is made
for it appears only to be the Direct and Regular motion of the Spirits by
Refraction and Collision perverted, imprnting a Troubled Chattered and False
Imagination; Much after the same manner as there is a deception Imprinted in
the Fancy, when an Oar appears broken, the one half thereof ^eing only in the
Water; And that because of the Refraction or Distortion of the visible rays
coming to the Eye: So then it is very probable the Spirits within the Brain, at
the least the nervous juice their vehicle or medium, being generate of that
crass and unequal Blood the parent of these Refractions and Perversions acted
in the Mass of Blood, that thereof also may be generated such nervous juice as
will make the Spirits obnoxious likewayes, by Refractions and Depravations of
their motion, to produce all these Phenomenon competent to the region of the
Brain and Nerves: And that by reason of the Obscurities or Inequalities of
their medium, that is the nervous juice, throw which these Spirits do pass.

And that these Delusions are raised much after this manner is farther clear,
by pondering that familiar deception of the Touch, which is made and exercised
by crossing the Foremost finger with the Mid-finger of the same Hand above it;
and with the points of the two fingers thus placed, if ye shall touch any
little Ball, you will not only think, but swear it to be two, neither will you
any ways be delivered from this error but by the Eyes: The true reason of this
delusion seems to be from the distortion of the nerves, which necessarly induce
a depravation of the Impressions made and conveyed by the nerves unto the
Brain: And as this distortion in its manner and effect resembles very much the
refraction of the visive rays misrepresenting the object in the Organe, so it
bespeaks a delirium or depraved Imagination to come from some refraction of the
spirits within the Brain As concerning the eruption of spots in Fevers, How
spots are made
there seems nothing more persuasive to confirm the Hypothesis: For these
altogether resemble the marks made by strokes on the Skine; And these marks
are also made by the stagnation and coagulation of the Blood in the small
Channells bruised and distorted; which remain until new Blood superveening,
both cleanse and repair these Channels, and restore to the skine its usual
color; which is soon done when the Mass of Blood is entire and not infected
with an obstructing Grossness: After the same manner these Spots in Fevers
happen; but with this difference, that they come not from the bruising of the
Channels; but from the thick and gross Blood stoping and coagulating in these
Channels; and tinging the Skine with blewness or redness: And in Fevers the
difference betwixt red and purple Spots as to the cause is the same, that is
betwixt these from an external cause: Blew Spots being from a greater stroke
and contusion, beget a more intense Coagulation of the Blood; and the red from
a less, produce a lesser effect; for every Light external cause is apt to make
the Skin red; as the bits of the Fleas often do: And so a lesser coagulation in
Fevers begets red spots, and a greater makes purple Spots.

SECT. XI. That the Phenomenon of Helpers and Hurters, in Fevers confirm this
Hypothesis: And first how Bleeding a Helper confirms the same: And several
other Phenomenon concerning Bleeding, ^leared according to this Hypothesis.
THE nixt point both bringing light to the Theorie and fruit to the Practice of
the Cure of Fevers, is the exact consideration of the Practical Phenomenon, the
Helpers and Hurters in Fevers; And how they do the same.

And the first is Bleeding, which by the consent of almost all is granted to be
very beneficial; but if by this Theory is be cleared how it is so, it may
perhaps have its effect further improven also thereby; Now its certain that for
the most part Bleeding Cooles the Body, Calmes and slackens the Pulse, and
allays almost all violent Symptoms? In so much that being celebrate to one in
the Fury and Fever of a Drunkenness it allays that also; But how it does this
is to be inquired: Its certain that the immediate effect of Blooding is the
Emptying or depletion of the vein that is cut, and the nixt effect to this must
be that the Blood that is poured forth of the Vein that is cut, not going back to
the Vena Cava or great Vein, must be in consequence a proportionable Depletion
of that Vein also; Because the usual accession of Blood from that Vein cut is
intercepted; Now this Ebb made in that great Vein must certainly make the rest
of the Veins that feed it flow with greater Force and Quantity thereunto
likewayes; Because the moment of Resistance in the great Vein thereby being
less then it was, is also less then the Pressure of the Veins feeding it, which
must make them empty themselves therein with greater freedom and force then
they did before. And this in consequence, diminishing the pressure of the Blood
in the whole Veins which lay against the Arterial Blood, must make the arterial
Blood from all the Arteries go into all the Veins with more freedom also: When
before the whole Veins being choke full, by the resistance and contranitence of
the venal against the arterial Blood, the arteries emptyed themselves with
dificulty into the veins and any obstructions betwixt the Arteries and Veins
could not easily yield to the Pressure of the Arterial Blood; Because the Venal
Blood being throng, and Regurgitating its Resistance was equivalent to the
Pressure of the Arterial Blood: And so little or no advance being made in the
motion of the Arterial Blood toward the Veins, it could not sweep and clear
these passages betwixt them and the Veins: Not very unlike, as when a
Mill-Wheell stands still and has its motion stoped by back Water, there being
an equivalent weight with that which should force it about hinging on the other
side of it; But when the back Water is removed off, or falls low, then the
motion goes on as before: even so it is here that any sudden Depletion of the
Veins, as taking away the Resistance, gives the Arteries freedom to squirt the
Arterial Blood more freely into the Veins; And consequently to sweep away all
stopes and rubbish in the way.

But it is to be observed here, that upon the opening of any Vein, this
scouring of the Passages is most effectually performed in these conduits that
are betwixt the Arteries and that Vein: These Arteries being first, and most
sensible of the removeal of the counter Balance that lay against them, catch
the opportunity, by emptying themselves precipitantly into that Vein, to sweep
powerfully the interjacent Passages.

From this may be offered a proposal for improvement of Phlebotomy, A Proposal
for improvement of Phlebotomy.
to wit, if it may not be thought the most effectual and most universal way to
clear the Obstructions throw the whole Body, that in place of Bleeding in one
Member the same were used at the four Extremities: And also in the same
quantity which is used in one Bleeding; and that by opening the Vein in each
Arm and in each Foot: For thus there being at once made a depletion of so many
Veins containing a counter Balance against the Arteries answering to them, the
Arterial Blood would, by its quick springing into these Veins, powerfully
scour all these Passages betwixt them and these Veins: from which would follow
a sudden, cheerful, and universal efflux of the Blood from, and Reflux thereof
back again to, the Heart; which motion was before slowly, partially, and
superficially performed; for the Arteries not emptying themselves cleaverly
enough into the Veins, there is little room made in them to receive the
returning Venal Blood, so there follows almost a stagnation in both:
Notwithstanding of the frequent and assiduous attempts of pulsation of the
Heart.

If we consider further the other Phoenomena of Phlebotomy, we will also find
that they concur both to the establishment of this Solution, and of the
principal Hypothesis: As the benefit thereof in Hemorhagies, How Blooding helps
in hemorhagies.
which has been violently strained by the patrons of Effervescence, and of the
rapide motion of the Blood to favor their Theories, but being narrowly
pondered, will appear both to evert theirs, and establish this: For
Hemorhagies, especially these in Fevers, come most part from the Arteries, not
because the Blood then circulates more rapidly, for in that case meeting with
no obstruction* it would have no occasion to burst the Vessels: But rather
because it is not received a pace into the Veins as it is sent from the
Arteries, breaking its bounds and brusting its Vessels, its poured out another
way: And the proper Remedy of this being Phlebotomy does clear this; because it
diminishes the pressure of the venal Blood lying on the Borders of the
Arteries, whereby they overcome and work off any obstructions betwixt them and
the Veins; and emptying themselves easily therein, the Blood does no more
deviat into those Ruptures. But that this Remedy may be more speedily
effectual, it would seem to require the opening of the Vein that directly
answers to the Artery that is broken, as more immediately taking of the
contranitency lying on it: At least this would be done after the opening of one
at more distance, which although oftentimes at first is to be done, yet sometimes
it falls out to be done without effect, and then this immediate Vein ought to
be opened.

And farther, an Hemorhagy from the venal Blood turgent, and brusting the
Vessels, or from Acrimony contracted by its Stagnancy, corroding them, yielding
likeways to this Remedy gives also the same Confirmation: For the Stagnation of
Blood in great quantity in the Veins, does not only swell their Coats and
weaken their Tone, (by which they contract to thrust the Blood back to the
Heart;) but may also so far streach them, as to make a Rupture: And this is
most effectually cured by Phlebotomy, for the Veins being emptied, the Coats
shrink in, and the Rupture is closed: And farther the Blood upon that emptying,
making its Circuit more quick to and from the Heart, is nowayes apt to devia^
or secede again into these Ruptures. And here by the way may be observed, why
an Hemorhagy from the Veins, is not so usual as from the Arteries, and if it
fall out it is more easily stop^d in them then the Arteries: the reason of
which is both from the different Nature of the Blood contained in these Vessels
and the different structure also of the Vessels themselves, in respect of the
motion of the blood therein: For the Arterial Blood being more spirituous and
volatile is easily evacuate at any chink: Other Phoenomena of the motion of the
Blood cleared.
As also the Blood in the Arteries, making its progress from a wide place of
the Channel unto a narrower, any obstructing matter it meets with, is by its
motion more impacted and rivetted into the narrower part of the Channel: Which
occasions the Arterial Blood to burst its passage another way: Whereas the
motion of the Blood in the Veins is from a narrower place of the Channel into a
wider; so any obstruction is easily carried before the Blood. As also it
occurrs here to be observed, that for the self same reason the Arterial Blood,
tho it make no faster advance from the Heart, then the Venal makes its return
to it; and also although it be more spirituous and volatile then the Venal; Yet it
needs the help of Pulsation to carry it on which the Venal needs not: The
reason of this seems to be the same different structure of these Vessels in
respect of the Bloods motion in them: For the Arterial Blood making its
progress; as is said, always from a wider place of the Artery unto a narrower,
needs the force of the Pulse to drive it foreward: But the Venal contrarywayes
moving from a narrower place of the Vein into a broader, is served with less
force; the contraction of the Coats of the Vessels, with the help of
Respiration at every turn pressing on the great Veins within the Trunk of the
Body, and the Valves hindering its return, is sufficient alone to carry it back
to the heart.

There is moreover another Benefit to be remarked in Phlebotomy, beside the
simple depletion of the Veins and the former beneficial consequence thereof,
The reason why the worst Blood is first evacuated.
and that is this, if the Vessels or the Arteries situated beyond the Orifice
made in the Vein, do contain any Labefacted, Rheumatick, or Purulent Blood,
such is most part voided; the more opime and pure being retained: The reason of
this Phoenomenon appears to be thus, when the circuit of the Blood is not
throwly perfected, many of the Globuls or Particles thereof, stagnating become
torpid and purulent, and such for the most part are accumulat toward the inner
Superfice of the Trunk's of the Vessels, the more Opime Part being carried in
the middle of the Channel toward the Heart: As is observed in a River or
Torrent which always drives Heterogeneous and grosser Bodies toward the Brink:
This seems the true state and disposition of the Blood in the Veins, when
Phlebotomie being used, exhibites such Blood, for the Vein being opened, such
Blood as is nearest the Superfice of the Vessel comes first out, which
diminishing the Pressure of the venal Blood on the borders of the Arteries
adjacent, the Arteriall Blood rushing into the veins, Embraces and caries along
with it the opime Particles of the Blood unto the heart, leaving these behind
that are unapt or incongrous to the genius motion and Embraces of the Spirits:
Whence it happens that more of these, vitiat Particles are heaped up together
toward the side of the Channel; For such by their congruity and similitude
involved in mutual Embraces stick closs by others; And so this stream of
labefacted Particles coming first out at the orifice of the Vein does not only
close it to the opimer Blood; but they following close stick to one another and
make like a Thread Spun out at the Orifice.

And it is known with how much the greater Stream the Blood springs forth of
the Vein cut, by so much the more it appears Labefacted, and the Patient has
also more ease thereby: Because the Blood stagnating and turgent in the Veins,
the Labefacted part thereof no ways obeying the motion of the Spirits, and of
the Opime Blood but deviating into corners is easily thrust out at Chinks and
Holes.

In so far as Concerns the first and last coming out of this vitiated Blood,
Why the ill Blood comes first or last.
and the appearing thereof also thus different in the measures receiving it; It
would seem when it comes first out that these Particles either lay most in the
Veins, or that the Contranitencie of the venal Blood, against the Arteries
being lesser, such Particles are also soon casten off from the Arterial Blood
coming into the Veins: But on the other hand when these Particles ly deeper in
the Arteries or Capillary vessels? Or where the Stagnation or Cantranitence of
the venal Blood being more, yields only to a greater effusion of Blood, the
segregation and expulsion of these Particles is slower, and the labefaction
apears most in the last measures. For which reason, and also in the case where
the Patient can more easily bear the same quantity of Blood to be evacuat by
degrees, rather then all at once; it would not be impertinent always to make
some stops of the Orifice, till the Blood being cooled give the marks of its
temper; whence may be made a computation of the due measure and quantity of the
present Evacuation.

From all these things thus transacted, it is evident that the integrity of the
Functions, and the serenity of Health does depend on this motion and circuit of
the Blood duly performed; except it be in the affects of the Brain and Nerves,
the Foundation w^ereof is also laid by some latent vice of this motion of the
Blood: And farther that this course may throwly proceed, and that the reflux of
the Venal Blood may not only furnish matter to the efflux of the Arterial
Blood, but also that the Venal by its stagnating may not overballance it, or
with its weight hinder the arterial Blood to squeeze out any obstacles of its
motion sticking into the Channels of the Veins; Why People ly down upon a fit
of sickness.
such is the wonderful providence of nature (I say to dispatc^ the encumbrance
of this Motion, epecially from the weight of the venal Blood pressing against
the Arteries) that sick People without considering so much, are put at once
under the Remedies and effects of their evils, by their lying down upon the
approach (...) of any fit of Sickness: For, as the Famous D. Lower has
observed in Tractatu de Cord, the native Gravity of the venal Blood below the
Heart augments its pressure against the arteries more when the Body is upright,
than when that situation is changed into a plain level posture, by lying down;
for then the venal Blood flowing like a River in a l^vel Channel; and so being
more easily carried back to the Heart, both takes off the contranitencie from
the Arterial Blood, and does at the same time supply the Heart with Matter for
new Arterial Blood; and also hands about the motion of the Arterial Blood into
the veins, and thus the Symptoms impendent are warded off.

And much for the same reason it is, Why Blood letting i^ easiest when lying a
bed.
as is observed to good purpose by several Practitioners, that sick People can
with more safety and ease endure Phlebotomy lying on a Bed, then sitting
upright, because in that situation the Pressure of the venal Blood against the
Arterial being less, is not only with less quantity of Blood let out taken off;
but also the intercepted course of the venal Blood to the Heart in that posture
is sooner redintegrated.

If there shall yet remain any doubt of the Verity or Probability of the
Hypothesis of the slowness of the Blood in Fevers from the viscosity and
crassness and the obstruction of the Channels thereby, An Objection of the
Bloods not coagulating when drawn in Fevers answered.
because the blood drawn off feverish persons oftimes remains without any solid
coagulation: from which many Authors have deduced the tenuity of the Blood.

But the more closs consideration of this Phenomenon will show it far
otherwise, for it is certain, that Blood drawn does coagulate, the crass and
heavy Particles subsiding, and the thinn and watery Parts sweeming above, upon
this very reason that the serosity is endued with suitable Levity and Tenuity,
and the clotty parts have their due ponderosity and crasness, with such
dimension in respect of the tenuity of the serosity, as may make the
separation: So that by the Levity and Tenuity of the Serum, the grumous parts
fall to the bottom; and on the other hand by the gravity and proportionable
dimension of grumosity the serosity sweems on the top: But if after
refrigeration the Blood remain without distinct serosity and grumosity, it
truly denotes either the tenuity of the serum to be vitiated, and its
viscosity augmented; Or the gr^vity, at least the dimensions, of the solid
Particles in respect of the serosity to be altered! And so the Solid Parts and
Globuls of the Blood are kept in the Embraces of the serosity; Each balancing
another so equally that no Percipitation or Secretion of the Crass from the
thinner parts is made.

SECT. XII. Purging in Fevers considered from Reason and Authority.
THE next practical Phenomenon to be considered with its use and utility in
Fevers, and how it clears the supposed Hypothesis is Purging, as coming in the
Method of our Author immediately after Phlebotomy: And is only required when
there is plenty of Fuel to nourish the Disease lodged in the first ways, the
Stomach, Intestines, Mesentere: Which by its emitting of Crudities into the
Region of the Blood introduces new Obstructions, the former being scarce well
subjugat and subdued; and causes the continuance of the former Scenes in a
Theater very much disposed thereto: And that by joining forces with the
Perspirable matter retained, scarce yet eliminated: whose choke Nature
severally and separate would be able to sustain; but being altogether unequal
to their joint assault, without fresh supplies she must thereto yield and
succumb: Then is most welcome the aproach of the Cathartick with its force and
power, as only sufficient to intercept and divert the Enemies Provision and
Forage from this Coast.

But farther, to evince the security, utility, yea necessity of this Auxiliarie
of Nature in this Intestine War; it is to be considered that this Method of our
Author is not only exactly adapted to the Concatenation and Complication of
causes making and ^omenting this War; but thereby all the Auxiliaries are drawn
up and planted in that Order and Battalion Form, that each of them does both
back and make good each others assault; And bridle and restrain their
Depradation, Ravageries and Exorbitancies: For the Cathartick and Paregorick
Forces charging the Enemy severally and alone, instead of Auxiliaries often
prove Depredatory: So then in the first place comes Phlebotomy, whereof the
proper and direct effect is not more to be considered, then the Respective and
preparative relation it has to the cathartick, (often times to be given on the
back of it;) comes to be remarked: Which in that order administered as it
operats; gently and without tumult; So does it more efficaciously then being
administrat otherwise. And this as it is observed by the most famous Silvius
is comunicat as a remarke very useful in Practice. And tho there can be no such
p^rswasive Arguments for this as experience; Yet for satisfaction of the
curious inquirer of the reason thereof, and that they may have an adequat idea
of the Phenomenon (perhaps also bringing light as well in other cases as this,)
I shall make this essay to give a reason therefore.

It seems probable that all tumult and commotion in the Body, with anxieties
and trouble accompanying it, has its rise from the complication of their causes,
and according to their Intension or remission is more or less, viz. From the
energie of the Impellent faculty or explosion of the Spirits, exciting
frustraneous Essays to pass themselves throw their Medium* or to carry matter
throw proper passages destinate for that end: and these Essays are
frustraneous either because of indisposition and inaptitude of the matter throw
viscosity or grosness; Or because of the closness or Scabricity of the
passages: And so these explosive motions of the Spirits terminate in
collisions, repercussions, and irksome touches of themselves; Or of that
moveable matter upon the Walls, and Fibers of the Vessels and Bowels inducing
therein Irritations, spasms, anxieties, and troublesome sense: some being
affected principally and some by consent: in which tumultuating state the
Functions deprived of their due Incomes and Recruites, do also languish; and
consequently become lank in their office: So then on the approach of the
Adventitious irritating and stimulating force of the Cathartick, either under a
present Orgasme through the foresaid cause, or under a Disposition or Proclivity
thereunto; there must necessarly a Tumult arise; or one already begun be
heightened; there being so much of an additional cause put, as the Commotion of
the remainder of the crude humors stirred up by the Purgative; which being
thereby somewhat atenuate, are easily carried into the Blood; and do by their
viscosity and gros^ness, which makes their unaptitude to go throw the small
Channels and Vessels, stop and close these Channels.

But by Venesection, the Obstructions as was shown, being much resolved, and
the course of the Blood in a manner restored, these Spirits incitat and
irritate by the Purgative enjoying a free course throw a pure medium, (...) do
excite no tumults, and also these particles of commoved matter meeting with a
brisk motion of the Blood and patent channels, are soon dissipate, scattered
and expelled by perspiration insensible.

And the Benefit of Connecting immediately together Phlebotomie and Catharticks
in Fevers has been the succesful Practice of many famous ancient Authors (yet
none thereof adverted the beneficial use of the Paregorick after the
Cathartick) as Riverius in his Practice of medicine, Authorities purging for in
Fevers.
Lib: xvi. Of the pestilent Fever, chap 1. In that most cruel Fever that raged
at Montpelier which took away the half of these that were infected therewith,
although the sick People had the eruption of parotides, and were brought to
extreme weakness, yet he, induced with the unsuccesfulne^s of all other Methods
Cured them with Bleeding and Purging: So that none that were so treated by him
died. And Sylvius Delaboe that, deservedly to this day famous, professor and
Practitioner of Medicine at Leyden, does in the first Book of his practice,
Chap: 29. Institute his Cure, yea of Burning Fevers with Blooding and purging;
the purge to be given even* within an hour after the Blooding: And he appoints
both to be reiterated till the Fever become much thereby subdued. And Donckers
that Famous Practitioner in Cologne in his treatise of the Petechial Fever,
which is the same with a Malignant Fever, does follow much the same Method,
beginning with Purging and Bleeding in that Fever: and gives with all this
Practical Caution in the use of Purgatives, that, especialy to these whose
Constitutions and Strength are not known; Some Practical Cautions Concernig
Purging in Fevers.
they be administered, not in one whole Dose; but in partited Doses: For a
larger quantity that way given, will have a more mild and a far more effectual
operation, then a less quantity by the third given at one Dose will have. But
above all which I have yet observed to contribute to the secure and effectual
present operation of Catharticks in Fevers, Other Cautions.
there is nothing to be compared to volatile Salts, with which the Doses given
to Febricitants being well imbued; The anxieties, tumults, and faintings; Using
to arise during the time of the operation are extraordinatly checked and
supressed: But yet if by the present disposition of the Body, there be such a
proclivity to Orgasmes and Anxieties, in the time of the operation; That these
volatiles given in this manner are not sufficient to Bridle them: It may be
surely as I have frequently observed, and to great surprise, as it were like an
Enchantment done, by the reiterated administration of these volatiles at that
time in a convenient vehicle: Which has seldom or never been observed to faill
of the designed effect; And makes the purgative absolve its operation without
any troublesome or hurtful symptom; And the reason of their effects seems to
be by the intimately commixing the Volatile Salt with the Cathartiek, or the
Superadding it, so that wherever the Cathartick coming exerts its stimulating
force and operation with uneasieness, it is attended also with the opening and
atenuating efficacy of the volatile making its operation easy.

SECT. XIII. The benefit and season of using Paregoricques in Fevers: and there
Diaphoretique virtue commended, and the danger of other Diaphoretiques: with a
doubt from the Author Sydenham's Constitutions of years answered, and this
Method shown to be common to all Constitutions.
BUT at length when the Fuel or matter being the antecedent cause of the
disease is so plentiful and Contumacious, that being only raked up and
troubled by the Purgative, it therefore does send into the Blood more crudities
and viscosities then the Motion and Crasis of the Blood only newly restored can
fully subdue, and which appears always most sensibly and palpably by an
Ingruescence of anxieties uneasiness, and sickness after the Purgative: Then
does most oportunely come the third and last auxilliary, (the sole invention of
our Noble Author Sydenham) to be at this season used: and this occasion does
not only securely bear, but Invites and Implores for the use of the Paregorick;
By which not only are stroaked and repressed these stimulating Impressions
stamped on the Spirits, by the commotion of the crudities diffused throw all
the Regions of the Body, which are thereby contaminated with viscosity and
obstruction; But also a sequacity, attenuation and yiedling in that viscide and
obstruent matter, is obtained by the Paregorick; Which, bringing on sleep and
rest does refocillate and recruit all the functions, whose Integrity and Vigor
cannot miss to perform piece meal the attenuation of the relicts of that
viscide matter. And thus the Tumult apt to arise upon the Purgative being
intercepted by the Paregorick; an other Cathartick may be administered under the
pacification obtained by the former Paregorick which having also brought off
some of the Fuel of the disease, its Tumultuary effect may be likewayes
preveened by a subseqent Paregorick: And so comodiously and safely we may Purge
and Quiet by turns, as the quanti^y and tenacity of the matter requires, and
make the Purgative exert its desired effect without any Noxious one; Until the
evacuation of the whole fomes, and in consequence the Famishing of the
continent cause of the disease: And for any small relicts of the matter, that
escaping the Purge having got in, do fluctuat in the Mass of Blood and yet do
molest and trouble it; These will be easily and safely eliminated by the
diaphoretick force of the paregorick still to be continued: with which
diaphoretick virtue it is clearly testified to be endued, by several famous
Authors, from their sure experience, As Wedelius in his Opiologia, and
Ettmullerus in his Treatise de vi Diaphoretica opii, both (avouching many other
Authorities for it) clearly manifest the same.

And how acceptable must the use of the paregorick be unto Nature, in respect
of its quieting virtue, under this confusion and imminent consternation of the
oeconomie? For it may be easily supposed that Nature, wearied by wresling with
the diseas, would very gladly embrace and cherish a truce; as if she would hold
a Counsel to deliberate; (which now may be securely done, the strength of the
Enemy being in some measure broken and intercepted by the Cathartick) and to
put to execution her resolutions, unto which sleep and rest is eminently
subservient, especially coming in this order.

But that which more evidently contributes to this purpose, The hurt of mere
Diaphoretiques in Fevers.
and commends the use of the Paregorick, is its having the joint virtue to be
both Quieting and Diaphoretick; in which it excels all other Diaphoretick,
which by their Impetuous and Precipitant Stimulating crude Matter toward
obstructed Channels, do both raise a great confusion there, and rivet and fix
that matter more therein: Much after the like manner, as when a House suppose a
Church is filled with People* and this People being struct with some sudden
terror, should all strive to go out together; this sudden and universal press
of going out, will certainly both beget such a Confusion, that each will
hinder* other attempts to get out, and make the essay of all to be in vain,
every one proving like a wedge to keep in one another: While after the usual
and ordinary way, Patience, Order, and Quietness, will afford to all an easy
egress; by making these at more distance from the Doors, to wait until a way
be open to them, by the removal of these that are nearest thereunto. So much
after the same manner it may be apprehended, that a great and p^rrilous
Confusion will arise in the Body filled with crude and viscuous Humors, whereby
the impulse of Diaphoreticks, they are all carried in Choke toward the
superfice of the Body: In which journey the more crude and viscuous Matter
lurking in the first wa^es, as obnoxious to the first and most valide impulse
of the Diaphoreticks is propelled into the Blood; by which is motion already
vitiat or vaccillant comes to be more obstructed: And beside there is also
thereby more Matter driven toward the Pores already stoped and distorted, then
can be expelled by them; which must be sent back again in the Blood, and from
that to the Head and Nerves, where it will act dangerous Tragedies. But to make
this Evacuation happily by Diapho^eticks, Nature and Reason seems to dictat
that it ought to be gone about the just contrary way; first by opening the
Pores and roborating the Fibers, to invite the nearest and perspirable Matter
sticking in the supersice of the Body to exhale; then that which is next and
mixed with the Blood, by a patent way may be solicited to perspire; and at
length if ever happily, the Crudities in the first ways may be enticed forth
by this path with Diaphoreticks.

And it is not to be questioned, The hurt of a method directed to a Crisis.
but many of the Symptoms; and these most dangerous ones in Fevers, has their
rise from the Method and Regimen directed toward the course of a crisis: which
will be evident both by pondering what is already said, and also if it be
observed, how many dangers attend on all hands, in the course of a Crisis, made
either by Nature or Art, because for the most part Nature stands hovering with
an equal Balance, whither to determine the Crisis to Life or Death: For often
the plenty or tenacity of the Matter, makes Natures endeavors terminate either
in no Concoction, or in one without excretion: But if by hard toil it elaborate
an Excretion, it is often intercepted by a Funest, or at the least by an
Irksome Translation into an other Disease; as by the morbi^ick Matters being
poured out upon some Noble and Internal part: Whereas the Method of our Noble
Author, being free of all th^e Dangers and Labyrinths, never tarries on the
Crisis; but smothering the Disease in the Egg, suffers it not to run its usual
Tragedies.

Moreover, it is here seasonably and seriously to be noticed, A difficulty
answered showing that this Method agrees with all constitutions of years.
by all that will consider the bene^it of this Method, that it must not be
supposed bounded within the narrow limits of the Fever of one Constitution;
and that it does not enlarge its Jurisdiction and Empire over all Continual
Fevers: For when our Expert Author did at the first draw his sagacious
Observations, concerning acute Diseases, from the prototype Nature, he did most
properly then impress the variety of Symptoms, and Cures of Diseases befalling
several Setts of Years, with the name of distinct Constitutions: Tho the
variety and differences of the Diseases of these Constitutions seem to import
no more but what might depend on the more or less plenty or contumacy of the
morbisick Matter, which made its easy or difficult Concoction or Elimination:
Therefore according to the Method of a Crisis, he levelled in these
Constitutions, as the genius of that Intention would permit: So it was only the
difference of the Cures by way of a Crisis that did with him entitle different
Constitutions of these Years.

But in the last Constitution of which he treats in his Schedula, most happily
falling on a method that did sure with that constituon; and expending it
further, he did find it a method that did quite alter all the former measures,
and conduct of the cure of Fevers, and consequently his constitutions: and that
it was a method which made the practice of the cure to run in an other channel,
and which did take up different indications, and passed over the needless and
dangerous conduct of Nature throw the maze of a crise; As that this method did
save the strength of Nature, from a laborious prodigal and uncertain profusion:
and was a method that profitably and securely anticipated the crise, he did
therefore most reasonably judge it, as I received it from his own mouth, that
it would agree with all manner of continual Fevers: neither can there be yet
any solid experience brought into the field, that will weaken this Conclusion,
while the daily practice of sundry Physicians offers it self to all that will
notice it, clearly establishing the efficacy of this method.

SECT. XIV. The further Helpers in Fevers considered, and how they work and
confirm the Hypothesis; such as fixed and volatile Salts, Alcaline and
Testaceous Concrets; and also Cuppings, Leeches, and Frictions. Wherealso some
Phoenomena of Hurters are considered; as the continual Sweats in Fevers: And
the continual lying in bed: And lying with the head much Depressed: For all
which, Reasons are given confirming the Hypothesis.
IT remains in the next place to enquire into other Helpers and Hurters in
Fevers, how they Operate, and if the explication of such Phoenomena can bring
any light to the foresaid Hypothesis: And first, as for helpers volatile, and
fixed salts, are by the consent of all granted to be very effectual, which
although in the case of a copious fomes they seem not to be ^afe, yet the clearing
how they work, may show as that they are effectual, so when they are fit: then
to answer this it would be noticed, that as the state or crasis of the blood
may be vitiate two ways, so there may be so many ways stops and bolts put so
the motion thereof inducing its slowness and making it need more frequent or
greater pulses to drive it on to distribution; And first, when the serosity of
the Blood, endued with due tenuity serves for a fit vehicle for the globuls,
but these globuls are vitiated either by their bulk, number, or in their
figure; that is by scabricity, all which vi^es severally, much more when they
are complicate, makes these globuls stick and stop in the small passages and
channels of the vessels; and so baricade up the course of the Blood, that there
are raised frequent and violent pulses of the heart and arteries to remove
them, and carry on the blood. The next fault in the crase of the Blood is, when
the due proportion in the number, bulk and figure of these globuls is kept; yet
the tenuity of the serum is vitiated by viscidity; and this fault also makes
the Blood slow in its passage throw the small vessels; to overcome which the
heart does excite great and frequent pulses likewise; In the first case, where
the globuls are only vitiated, and the serum entire; the sick are infested and
weakened with sweats; Because the frequent pulses drive away the serosity of
the Blood out at the pores, (which is called the dissolution of the crase of
the blood) leaving the globuls cruded up together in the small vessels.

And in this case fixed and Alcaline salts, testaceous and marine concrets,
made in subtle powder seem much to help, because all these concrets consisting
(as is known) of particles very rough, scabrous and rigide, the minutest
particles whereof, where ever they go carrying that Figure with them: so then
such being mixed with the blood and carried along with it must necessarly,
impinging on the obstructions and scabricities in the small channels, not only
scour and clear them, but likewise by their continual Attrition of the Globuls
of the Blood, they must polish and grind these globuls, and make them fit for
passage through these channels.

As to the other state and crase of the Blood where the Serosity being viscide
makes the slowness of the Bloods motion, here as there are no sweats, so it is
difficult to raise, and dangerous to attempt them.

Before any remedy can be justly levelled for the removal of this fault of the
Blood, it must be first inquired in what this viscosity does consist: it seems
then that viscosity being a degree of Solidity and Firmness, and the first step
from Fluidity thereunto, and that Fluidity consisting in the actual and due
Motion of minutest parts of the Liquors, viscidity then must Import some
abatement and diminution, as of their due Fluidity, so of their Motion; And
that either from the weakness of the Principle of that Motion or the unaptitude
of the matter to receive and obey Impressions of that Principle; As having some
glewy viscous matter mixed therewith: But whatever it proceids from, it is
certain that the outward or sensible Rest in Liquores that naturally ought to
be moved, is a concurring Cause to there viscosity, so the agitation of Liquors
does altogether take off there viscosity; As may be seen in the example of Ale,
which being ropie and viscuous is by tossing and agitating th^reof in a Bottle
closs stoped, soon brought to leave its viscosity: So then the viscosity of the
serum of the Blood seems to be the effect of its want of due motion; And is
further a cause to hinder that due motion of the efflux and reflux; And as this
visco^ity seems originaly to depend upon the serum not being duly Impregnat
and Irradiat by the Spirits, which do make it diaphanous and subtle; so the
want of this irradiation, may depend upon its viscosity, hindering that
irradiation, and so as these causes may hinder its due motion; that want of due
motion also does exceedingly contribute to its viscosity, and check the influx
of the Spirits: And thus every one of these are mutually causes and effects to
one another. Yet unto these Ef^ects from whatsomever of these causes they be
produced, seem much conducible all such things which give copious Matter to the
generation of Spirits; and also which give them being generated also Spurrs;
such as are all volatile Salts, which for this reason are known to break and
attenuate all viscosity: But these are indeed to be used with moderation and
warriness in Fevers, least we should spurr faster than we open and clear the
way; and so these Spirits too much incited should waken up or exasperat all
these Scenes of Confusions and Tumults to which the Blood is very prone under
this state.

It is certain, that long experience has found the use of Cuppings, Leitches,
and Frictions to be very beneficial in these Fevers: The cause wherereof being
enquired into, will also confirm this Hypothesis: For these being used in
several places of the Body, as they always are when beneficial, by their
raising the Flesh and Skin, they do shake and loose throw all the circumambient
parts, that congealed and clotted Blood obstructing the capillary Veins; which
does fac^litate the arterial Blood to run more easily throw them, and that by
clearing these Passages of Obstruction. And for Frication and Rubbing of the
Skin, that makes such Impressions on the capillary Vessels, by pressing them
hither and thither, that it must necessarly force the obstructing Matter into
motion again: And moreover the benefit, that even in Fevers, has redounded to
some by riding, yea when the Patient was necessitate to be held on Horseback
for a while, can be no other ways accountable, but by the Impressions that the
jogging of the Body makes on the fixed and coagulated Humores, to set them
again a going.

Now as to these Phenomenon which are hurtful in Fevers, it is no less certain
that these being duly pondered, will also confirm this Hypothesis, for it is
clear that in many Fevers the sick are poured forth all in Sweats; And that
without any ease thereby, but rather with great hurt and weakening: Therefore
as our experimented Author observes these ought not to be indulged, but rather
checked.

Now this Phenomenon may be easily solved, by considering that the serosity of
the Blood is in this case, by the frequent Pulses squeezed out from the
Globuls, whereby the Blood being much thickened, the obstructions are
increassed: while Sweats called critical and giving ease (which rarely fall
out in long and great Fevers: Because these are nourished of a copious and
viscide fuel in the first ways:) fall out in diseases only caused by
perspirable matter first attenuat and comminuted and nixt expelled by Sweat,
and as this evacuation, is altogether the effect of Nature, so it rarely
succeeds happily by stimulating Medicines: Which after its wisely argued, is
most reasonbly concluded by Sydenham in his Schedula Monitoria.

And further as our Author observes and daily experience also confirms,
Continual lying in the naked Bed why hurtful in Fevers
it is very much Hurtful to Persons in Fevers to ly continually in the naked
Bed: For the continual Heat of the Bed does exceedingly lash, enervat, and
relax the tone and firmness of the pores and fibers; Whereby they shrink and
creep in; And so retain the perspirable matter which ought to be evacuate throw
them, and this matter retained recoiling on the Blood does much increase all
the tumult and disorders there: But by exposing of the Body to a moderat
refrigeration by putting on the Clothes some Hours in the day, the Natural
Heat is both Concentrate to expel that perspirable Matter; and the Tone and
Firmness of the Pores and Fibers are restored to give a free passage to it. And
this is very suitable to the Experimental doctrine of Sanctorius, who finds and
Declares reasonably that, the inward heat being by the external heat too much
diffused, is not sufficiently Concentrate, and bended to expel the perspirable
matter; as it happens in Aestival heat that is very troublesome to the Body,
not so much because of any vehement Impressions it makes thereon, For every
part of the Body is hotter of it self then the external heat affecting it; But
because of the detension of the Perspirable matter through the defect of
sufficient Concentration of the Internal heat to expel it. And indeed this
state of the internal heat does also render i^ subject to several indirect and
refractive Motions, instead of the direct motion by which the perspirable
matter should be sweeped ^orward, and expelled: so the lesion of perspiration
upon these reasons seems in this case to be amended by the Patients keeping
out of the naked Bed several hours of the day, and lying on the top of the Bed
with their Clothes on: And in that Situation rather than the upright posture of
the Body, the vacillant reflux of the Blood unto the heart is also promoved as
was shown.

And also as our Author observes, Why hurtful to lie with the head too low.
it is hurtful in Fevers and several other Diseases to ly with the Head much
depressed; it being more conducible to ly with it raised somewhat; because in
that posture the lighter and finner Particles of the Blood, De pass. anim part.
1. cap. 10.
as Des Carts thinks are sublimed up to the brain for the generation of nervous
Liquor and Spirits; and the grosser and heavier parts are carried by a descent
downward: And so in that posture only there is an ascent of the Blood throw the
Arteries unto the Head, in so much that the subtilest Particles thereof, prove
alone obsequious to the Impulse: And if it chance that any grosser parts mixed
therewith, do endeavor likewayes to ascend; they secede and turn off at the
axillarie Branches: So that nothing but the most sublime parts of the Blood in
this posture does ascend, like the subtle Spirits of Wine which are only
carried so high, as is fit to separate them from the Phlegm: But when the head
lies level with the Body, and that especially in Sickness, and when the Blood
is vitiated in its Particles and Motion; because then and in that posture there
is no ascent to the Head, nor descent to the rest of the Body; the grosser
parts of the Blood being carried indifferently to the Head do there generate
Obstructions: Which must certainly produce all such Phoenomena as are competent
to the Brain and Nerves being affected.

SECT. XV. Some Difficulties concerning the Hypothesis Answered.
IF perhaps there remain any difficulty in the mind concerning this Scheme,
because it may be thought that the Blood being always first strained throw the
narrow Vessels of the Lungs, before it come to have difficult passage in the
small Vessels betwixt the Arteries and the Veins, that it should leave or
Imprint some marks of its grosness in the Lungs: To Answer this difficulty it
is fit to premise something concerning the progress and pedigree of
Sanguification: And therefore it may be reasonably thought very likely that the
Lungs are not only the Colatory for, and Test of, the Bloods sufficient
Attrition and Comminution; but also they by their Braying and Levigating
thereof, give the same the outmost Perfection and Complement: The manner of
Sanguification.
which they do by their continual motion and agitation: For their contraction
and dilatation meeting with the Pulse of the Blood coming from the Heart into
the Lungs, must necessarly make such impressions on the Particles of the Blood
going throw the Arteries of the Lungs, as will attenuate, smooth, and polish
them, and thereafter the Lungs sends them thus levigated and intimately mixed
with the Air back again, and that under the notion and name of Arterial Blood
unto the Heart, to be dispersed by it as a Pump throw the whole Body.

And indeed that the Blood receives its outmost perfection in the Lungs, and
not in the Heart; As is commonly accounted, is clear from this, that the Blood
which is sent from the right Ventricle of the Heart by pulsation unto the
Lungs, is nothing different from the rest of the Venal Blood; While the same
Blood being immediately sent back to the left ventricle of the Heart from the
Lungs, has before it enter the heart, both the color, consistence, and
rarefaction proper to the Arterial Blood; And differs nothing from the Arterial
Blood in the Aorta or great artery.

Now in the case of a Fever although the grosser Particles or Globuls of the
clotted Blood returning from the Veins into the Lungs, are grinded and levigate
over again, and then the Blood gives small token of its fault; Because being so
near, it is also under the brisk impressions of the Hearts motion, and also
being crumbled by its passage throw innumerable ramifications, and small
capillary vessels in the Lungs, while they are likewayes under a perpetual
Systole and Diastole; it is so attenua^ and grinded that any tendency to
coagulation or obstruction is soon put off; But yet when such Blood comes to
the extremities of great Arteries, where the force and strength of pulsation
cannot be propagated in proportion to the Bloods slowness, there then it must
loyter and stop.

And moreover in some Fevers, which are indeed very dangerous ones, the
slowness of the Blood's passage even throw the vessels of the lungs is
conspicuous; that always making high, difficult, and frequent breathing.

And moreover the Blood is also depurate and defecate from its crudities and
viscosities by its passage through the Lungs; And so by their taking care of
the whole, and endeavoring to repair the faults of the other functions they
smart for them, and become the Seat of many Diseas^s themselves: for that same
viscosity and grosness of the Humores does frequently make blemishing
Impressions on them, by obstructing and tumefying their glands, many of which
obstructions are shaken off by the force of respiration, but not always. For
although the Motion of the Systole and Diastole of Lungs, contrarying always the
direct Motion of the Blood in the vessels of the Lungs must subtilize and
attenuat the Blood; So that it sticks not easily in the Channels of the Lungs:
yet often the fault of the former functions is so deep ingrained, that the
Blood sent here cannot be sufficiently attenuated, and the crudities and
viscosities expelled by the glands of the Lungs; But does obstruct and tumefie
them; And breeds that disease called P^hisis, or Comsumption of the Lungs: Now
this Disease being of as universal extent among Chronick Diseases, as a Fever
is among acute ones; is most Learnedly treated by Dr: Morton in his
Pthifilogia: But alas! as he wisely observes, the Practice in this Disease is
rarely attended with success; For this reason that the Disease steals on the
Patient unawares; And before he pe^ceives he is irrecoverably taken with the
Distemper; It is then hoped, it will be thought no impertinent or useless
digression, if to instruct every one against the surprise of such a remediless
attack, there be transferred here from his work, which is in Latin, such
apposite signs, as may admonish every one of the aproach of that Disease; and
put them upon their guard in case of imminent danger, to pr^vide the timeous
help of a faithful and skilful Physician. The first sign he gives is, The signs
of an i^^minent Consumption given by D Morton.
The Descent from Parents that have been Pthisical: For this Disease seems most
hereditary of all Distempers. (2) An evil frame of the Breast, whether natural,
or a^cidental; and that is either narrow or strait. (3) A small Voice and
H^low. (4) White and soft Skin, with a thin habit of Body. (5) A soft and
Phlegmatic^ habit of the Muscules.) (6) Oppression or Weight in the Breast. (7)
Thoughtfulness, anxiety, sadness, and anger without a manifest cause. (8.) The
Suppression of usual evacuation by Issues, old Ulcers or any other usual. (9)
Spitting of Blood. (10) A continual haughing of Viscide and black plegm in the
^orning. (11) Salt or sharp phlegm haughted up. (12) A pronness to copious
evacuation of spittle, either with or without an evident cause. (13) An
continued and increasing prostration of appetite without any other Disease
accompanying it, and with oppression of the Stomach, and Spontaneous La^^itude
in time of digestion. (14) A Troublesome and continual Heat especially in the
Soles of the Feet, and Palms of the Hands, chei^ly after meat with a Pulse
something too frequent. (15) A shortness of Breath with difficulty of
respiration. (16) A great disposition to the Cough, which is brought on
frequently, either by a slender or no evident Cause at all, which is the most
evident sign of an imminent Pthisis. And the more of these signs there be,
the more still is the danger.

Now this Disease having always a Fever accompaning it, The Phenomenon of the
Fever in a consumption confirms the Hypothesis.
and that with an exacerbation some hours after Meat answering exactly to the
time when the Chyle comes to the Blood, does also confirm the foresaid
Hypothesis of Fevers: For the chyle coming with the Venal Blood unto the Lungs
to receive there its attrition and perfection; While they are affected with
obstructions and tumors in their glands, that must be superfic^ally done; And
many of the Particles of the Blood do therefore return back to the Heart
without sufficient elaboration, which coming to the small Channels o^ the
Arteries betwixt them and the veins, pass there also with difficulty: So that
to distribut the nourishment a f^equent Pulse is raised, until the Particles,
by often passing that way, be yet farther polished and attenuated: And so
passing with greater ease the Fever and Pulse is remitted.

If any shall yet judge that this grosness of the Blood should be rather
productive of tumors and inflammations, Another difficulty about the supposed
Hypo^hesis answered.
then of Fevers: It is to be considered that Fevers and Inflammations have that
common to them both, that they use to be generate together: And also Fevers do
depend on tumors and inflammations, which shows they are near of Kin to one
another: but yet they seem to differ in this, that Fevers depend on an
universal, although lesser grosness of the Blood, which makes it with difficulty
pass the small vessels; and tremors depend as upon greater grosness, so upon
total obstruction of the Blood or other Liquores in some particular vessel; And
oftentimes they are generate and propagate by compression: And perhaps it is
the perverse figuration of some particles of the Blod, or humors in respect of
the Pores and Channels of a vessel, which wholly stoping makes a total
stagnation therein: and this stagnation making a compression on the
neighboring vessels, and these again upon the next adjacent, affects them all
with stagnation likewayes. And thus that obstruction that begins in a point,
may have the sphere of its activity so extended as to infect all the
neig^ouring parts with that tumor, as is seen in a Thorn which pricking the
Flesh do^s compress the next adjacent vess^ls, and makes the Blood to stagnate
therein; And they again compressing these nixt to them, produce therein the
like effect; And so forth until the compression spend its Impression and force.
Now in this case these Tumors being made of the Blood and Humors. That should
slip throw the Channels when they do stop and coagulate there the humors are
again set a going by the use of these things that add Spurrs to the Spirits and
attenuate viscosity, such as volatile Salts, and also by such things as grate
and grind gross Humors such as fixed salts, etc. which internally used are all
dissolvers of tumors. And farther* as we find that the impurities which do
cleave to garments worn, called sweatiness, and which being bred of the
perspirable matter sticking there, do yield to nothing but smegmatique
mixtures, so the coagulations therefrom within the body may yield to such
internally used.

And indeed it seems that there is as much forcein the grosness and viscosity
of the humors, and obstruction depending thereupon as will produce not only
Fevers; but the most of all chronick Diseases also: But that the various faces
with which Diseases appear, proceeds as from the Deg^ee of grosness and
obstruction, and from the nature of the place or organe aff^cted therewith; so
from the impression that is thereby made on the impellent or the disposition of
the Body, exciting either resentment and irritation; or only grief and
languishing; And although in Fevers from the present disposition, the impellent is
for the most part irritated, and strives to shake off the cause of the malady;
yet in chronick Distempers, from another disposition, it is less commoved, and
rather groans under, then resents the invasion and oppression; And these
d^fferent effects from the like occasional cause in the natural body, are
paralelled by the like different consequences springing from the same
occasional causes in the body politic; For Tyrrany and Arbitrary Government
exercised upon a Heroic and Generous spirited People; uses to beget War; but
all the impression it makes on a servile and despirited Nation, resolves only
in languishing and depopulation: And the parallel may be yet carried farther,
for as tyrrany and oppression of a People is often shaken off by civil Wars;
and they thereby brought into a vegete and flourishing state; so Chronick
distempers in the natural body, are often loosed by a superveening Fever, and
the body thereby is brought into a sound and healthy condition.

An APPENDIX concerning The Statical Doctrine of Sanctorius.
NOw in regard the due comprehension both of this Hypothesis; and of the
Practice of the Cure of Fevers; and also of almost the whole Theory of
Medicine; seems to depend upon the right and full understanding of the Doctrine
of insensible Perspiration; the whole fundamental conclusions whereof are
demonstrable to the Eye by the Ball^nce. Also the due observation and
regulation The Weighting. Chair.
of that Evacuation and Indications taken therefrom, contributing more to the
preservation of Health and Cure of Diseases, than all other indications or
means whatsomever: it will be then not thought superfluous to insert here the
description and use of Sanctorius's Weighting Chair, and also some select
Theorems taken out of his Staticks, whereby, the Reader having got a Tincture
of that Doctrine, may be fully cleared of its use and fruitfulness.

The Description and Use of the WEIGHING CHAIR.
THe Chair is hung about two inches from the Floor upon the short end of the
Balance, and the Weight on the long end of it being removeable hither and
thither, serves for two uses; first having placed our selves therein we find
out the daily insensible Perspiration of the Body, and next seating our selves
likewise in this Chair during the time of our Repast, and placing the Weight in
such a place of the Balance as answers to the quantity of Aliment we intend to
take, we perceive by the Chairs coming to the ground when we have taken the due
proportion of Mear and Drink, beyond which, and short of which, we are always
prejudiced.

Now the Balance may be fastened to a Beam in the Room above that where you
take Refection: For it may be thought unseemly in the same Room; especially by
reason of the Unlearned to whom all things unusual seem ridiculous.

SECT. I. Of the Weight, Measure, and Nature of Insensible Perspiration.
Aphorism First.

IF the addition of these things that are deficient, and the substraction of
those that are exuberant, be daily made as to Quantity and Quality such as it
ought to be; lost Health would be recovered, and the present preserved.

II. If the Physician be only capable of judging the sensible Addition and
Evacuation, and knows not to regulate the insensible Perspiration; he does not
Cure, but deceives his Patients.

III. If the Aliment taken in one day amounts to eight pound weight, the
insensible Perspiration amounts to five pound, or thereabout; yet there is some
variety therein according to the diversity of Natures, Climats, Seasons, Age,
Aliment, etc.

IV. And this may be easily computed having weighed the Aliments taken in by
sitting in the Chair, having duly placed the Weight: then weighing the Body the
nixt morning before and after sensible Excretion: The weight of the sensible
being only found to come to three pound or thereby, the rest being five must of
necessity go by insensible Perspiration.

V. This insensible Perspiration is made throw the Pores of the Body, which are
transpirable in all its parts: Or by respiration performed by the Mouth coming
out with the breath, which commonly amounts to half a pound a day.

VI. What quantity of perspiration is convenient for every One in order to
continue his Health may be found out thus, observing in the Morning after a
somewhat plentiful Supper over Night what the Perspiration in the space of
twelve hours comes to, suppose it comes to 50 Ounces, then another Morning
after Fasting over Night, but with this condition, that thou did not exceed
at Dinner the day before, make the same observation, as suppose the
Perspiration to have amounted to 20 Ounces: So having made these observations,
pitch upon that proportion of Meat and other Non-natural causes which may
reduce the perspiration to the mean betwixt 50 and 20 Ounces, and that will be
35 ounces: thus may thou live a long and healthful life, and happily an
hundred years.

VII. The weight of the body being augmented without increasing the aliment, or
the retention of the sensible excrements, is a sign of wanting perspiration.

VIII. If the body be brought to the same weight that it was formerly by more
copious urine, or stools, then the ordinary; it begins to decline from health.

IX. Plenty of perspiration, and much sensible evacuations are inconsistent
together: and copious sensible evacuations with perspiration deficient are evil.

X. That weight of the Body is the standard of health, when one can ascend a
steep place with ease.

XI. The weight of the Body is diminished by the evacuation either of sensible
or insensible crude matter, or by sensible or insensible concocted Matter: The
latter conduces to health; and the former takes away the Excess, but leaves an
evil quality behind.

XII. Insensible Perspiration attended with sweating is not good, because
sweating abates the strength of the Fibers: Yet it may be accounted good in
respect it ma^es a diversion from a greater evil.

XIII. Insensible perspiration is visible, when the nutriment is too copious,
or when the natural heat is languishing, or throw violent motion.

XIV. To apprehend ones self to be lighter when really they are not so, is a
most wholesome state.

XV. The first seeds of Diseases are sooner known by the alterations of
perspiration, then from the lesion of the Actions.

XVI. The perspirable matter retained, neither being resolved by Nature, nor by
a Fever superveening, disposes the body presently to a malignant fever.

XVII. Labor and pain of the body hinders Perspiration.

XVIII. The least cold in the night time hinders Perspiration.

XIX. Frequent tossing in the Bed in the Summer time hinders Perspir^tion.

XX. The internal causes hindering Perspiration, are, either the occupation of
Nature any otherwise: Or the diversion of the perspirable Matter some other
way; or the weakness of the strength to expel it.

XXI. Clothes very burdensome hinder Perspiration.

XXII. After the twelfth hour from the taking of Meat there is scarce perspired
half a pound, and then is the season of giving Aliment, or Medicaments.

XXIII. To Aliment or Medicat in the hours of the Morning before that, which is
the time of the greatest Perspiration, does hurt; because it diverts the
Perspiration.

XXIV. The external causes hindering Perspiration, are, Air Cold, Foggie, and
Moist: Swimming in cold water, Meats Grass and Viscide, Intermission, of
Exercise of Body and Mind; and in robust Persons, abstinence from venerie.

XXV. The external cold hinders Perspiration in weak Persons; but augments it
in robust Persons.

XXVI. By Yawning and Streatching of the Joints there is great endeavors of
Nature to void the perspirable matter retained.

XXVII. The summer heat is very troublesome, when Perspiration is retained.

XXVIII. Venerie, actual frigidity of the Body, too plentiful drinking, and
supping as Young Men do, too great Anger, and much Exercise; All these shorten
the Lives of old Men.

XXIX. Insensible perspiration being quite obstructed in the Brain, causes
Apoplexy: in the Heart causes palpitation, and in the Matrix causes
Suffocation, and in the ignoble parts causes Gangren.

XXX. Vomiting diverts both urin and perspiration.

XXXI. The Knees being actually Hot, helps both Sleep and perspiration.

XXXII. The Flux of the Belly is Cured by promoving perspiration viz: By
Bathing:

XXXIII. These that urin more than that they Drink, perspire little.

XXXIV. Hypochondriack Persons are much eased, if their Bodies be rendered
perspirable by frequent Baths, and by a Moistning diet.

XXXV. Insensible Perspiration being promoved by Fomentations, before the Body
be purged, draws more to the superfice thereof than it can perspire.

XXXVI. Any place of the Body being very cold in the winter, hinders the
Perspiration of the whole.

XXXVII. To ly in the Summer time with the Body uncovered, hinders Perspiration.

SECT. II. Concerning Air and Water.
1 COld Air and washing with cold Water, does heat robust Bodies, but
refrigerates weak ones.

2 Warm Air and warm washing unless Crudities gain-stand, help Perspiration,
and refrigerate the internal Bowels.

3 Water that is heavy and Air that is foggie, turn the perspirable Matter into
an Ichor or sharp Matter; which for the most part causes a Cachexy, or evil
disposition of the Body.

4 In a cold and clear Air Perspiration is likewayes stoped, because the Pores
are condensed: Yet because the Fibers are also roborated, therefore the
retained perspirable Matter is neither felt, nor does hurt.

5 In a foggie Air the perspirable Matter is retained, and the Pores are
filled, and not condensed, and the Fibers are relaxed, and not roborated: And
therefore the perspirable Matter retained both hurts and is felt.

6 A cold superveening to a warm day, especially the usual quantity of drink
being taken, stops about a third part of the Perspiration that day.

7 Weak persons are most hurt by the sudden approach of cold.

8 A pleasant Cool coming upon Bodies heated, hurts them more then the greatest
coldness of Air or Water; because the first obstructs and relaxes the Pores;
and the last obstructs and ^oborats them.

9 A pleasant ^outherly Air with violent exercise, is often times very dangerous;
for the Air brings the stoping of the Perspiration, and the exercise brings the
acrimony thereof.

10 Weak persons in the Winter evacuat the Perspirable Matter retained by
Urine, and robust Persons in Summer.

11 Long Droughts are wholesomer than continual Rains, for they make the Body
lighter.

12 In the Summer we are troubled with heat, not because of the heat of the
Air, for every place of our Body is hotter then the Air; but because the Summer
Air does not sufficiently concentrat the internal heat; but suffers it to
diffuse, whereby it is less powerful to dispel the perspirable Matter; which
being retained becomes Acrimonious, and so becomes troublesome to us.

In the Summer in the day time, but in the Winter in the night time, robust
Bodies perspire most.

14 Want of Perspiration in the Summer brings a Malign Fever; but in the
Winter scarce brings any hurt: The perspirable Matter retained turning far
sooner Acrimonious in the Summer, than in the Winter.

15 Sleeping in the open Air in the Summer with the Body uncovered, hindering
very much Perspiration, proves exceedingly dangerous.

16 The perspirable Matter retained, is not apt soon to hurt the internal
Bowels, unless it become acrimonious by external heat, by violent motion, or by
its long stay.

17 The hurt of immoderate Venery is in some manner alla^ed by cold immediately
succeeding heat, which concentrats the internal heat.

18 In the Summer nights by the variety of the temper of the Air, Bodies are
very much disposed to Fevers.

19 From the Autumnal Equinoctial, until the Winter So^^tice, there is every
day about a pound of perspirable matter retained.

20. Autumnal Diseases shall be escaped, if your body be not of more weight in
Autumn than it was in Summer.

21. You shall be troubled with no Disease in the autumn if ^ou meet the
supervenient cold with sufficient clothing, and by the use of Diuretics, keep
the body in the same weight it was before.

22 Those that are troubled with diseases in the Winter arising from the plenty
of humors, are to be purged in the Autumn, but not in the Spring: and are to be
brought to the weight that they had in the beginning of Summer.

23 When Diseases come from an evil quality, the Body is to be purged in the
Spring; for the Summer increases most the evil quality.

24 Those that throw off their clothes early in the Spring, or are too long in
putting them on in the Autumn, do fall into Fevers in the Summer, and into
Distillations and Defluxions in the Winter.

25 Health would be preserved even to the extremity of Age, if the Body were
kept in an usual weight all the four Seasons of the year.

26 The increase of weight is always in the beginning of Autumn, and the
diminution thereof in the beginning of Summer; and there is more danger in the
increase, than in the diminution.

27 Air too moist or windy hinders Perspiration.

SECT. III. Of Aliments, Meat and Drink.
1. ALiments that make the Body heavy, are such as are taken copiously, or such
as are difficult to digest: and these that keep the Body light, are such as we
are accustomed to, and such as are easily evaporated.

2. A full and a void Stomach both divert Perspiration; the full Stomach by
Corruption of the Meat, and the void Stomach attracts it* that it may be filled.

3. Robust Persons do discuss too great plenty of Meat eaten by Perspiration,
less robust Persons by Urine, but weak Persons turn the Chyle into Corruption.

4: If the usual Super be intermitted, the Stomach being empty, the perspirable
Matter is both retained, and becomes acrimonious, and so the Body is disposed
to hot Diseases.

5. Unusual abstinence from Aliment does sometime hurt.

6. The use of Swines flesh, especially dried in the smoke, hinders
Perspiration.

7. That kind of Meat perspires best, whose weight is least found in the
Stomach; for where there is a difficulty of Digestion, there is also a
difficulty of Perspiration.

8. That Meat gives the best Perspiration, whose Excrements come away
consistent and solid.

9. The time when the Body has lest Perspiration, is when the Body is full of
Meat especially of variety.

10. Drinking of water hinders insensible perspiration, but advances sensible.

11. To eat presently after immoderat exercise of Body or Mind is hurtful.

12 Eating and Drinking copiously, does oftentimes obtund the Acrimony of the
perspirable Matter retained, and does hide the infirmities of the inward parts,
which oftentimes upon abstinence or purging of these Bodies does break out.

13. Meat that easily perspires (though of small nourishment) does better
repair the strength decayed by too much venery, than Meat of greater
nourishment, but of difficult perspiration.

14, Onions Garlic, Wedder Mutton and Phesants flesh but especially the
Cyreniack juice, help the perspiration of Meats that are difficult to perspire.

15. Meat very little in quantity not being embraced by the Stomach, neither
digests nor restores the Body, nor perspires well.

16 Insensible perspiration is the excrement of the third Concoction, so that
the first not being perfected, the third cannot be accomplished.

17. The corruption of Meat makes weariness, because it diverts perspiration,
and this corruption is known by a Celiack Flux, by which the Meat comes away
with the excrements undigested.

18. The Coldness and Clamminess of the juice of Cucumbers is kept in the
Veins; And other unwholesome juices, tho of easy concoction, by obstructing
perspiration, cause Malignant Fevers.

19. None will fall into a disease, if they be careful to provide against the
heaping up of Crudities.

20. The Supper taken with the mind troubled, does not digest.

21. To drink betwixt the Dinner and Supper is hurtful, but if so much the
drink be less at Supper, the hurt is diminished.

22. An uniform Diet wants the benefit of one that exceeds sometimes twice or
thrice a Month, for the Expultrix faculty being stirred up by the redundancy,
excites so great a perspiration, as without the Statickes none would believe.

23. In a cold Body, Honey nourishes, and perspires well, but in a hot, turning
to Bile, it hurts.

24. There is nothing that hurts perspiration more, than to drink when the
Chyle is making in the Stomach

SECT. IIII. Of Sleeping and Waking.
1. THE perspiration in Sleep accompanied with sweeting, is no more than it use
to be without it.

2. In quiet Sleep there is a greater persp^ration than in violent Exercises.

3. A weariness after Sleep is a sign that the Body is of greater weight than
the Body can long bear.

4. Perspiration is more impeded in Sleep by a Southerly cold Air, than it is
hindered in those that are awake by the greatest cold.

5. Those that go to Bed with the Stomach empty, perspires less by a third than
they would do otherways.

6. Sleep is most proper four hours after Meat, for them the first concoction
is near absolved, and perspiration succeeds best.

7 When the sleep is shorter then the usual, there is something of perspirable
matter retained, which unless it be expelled afterward puts them in hazard of a
Fever.

8. Streaching of the Joints after sleep is made by the plenty of perspirable
matter well prepa^ed for expulsion: So there is more perspired in half an hour
then, than in three hours at another time.

9. Those that give to sick People Medicines two hours after sleep (which is
the season of most plentiful perspiration) does rather hurt then help them.

10. If there be any thing of the last days perspirable matter remaining* and
that be not excerned by an afternoons sl^ep, after that sleep the head is
affected with a weighty pain.

11. If four hours after the beginning of sleep the Meat corrupt in the Stomach
then is perspiration stopped and watching succeeds.

12. There is no reason that oftener makes watching than the corruption of the
Meat in the stomach.

13. Sleep is more profitable in the Winter than in Summer; For in the Winter
by the dawning of the day the Body becomes more warm, and perspires better than
it does in the Summer.

14. A little of any generous Wine or of Garlic procures sleep and
perspiration, but too much of either of them hinders it, and causes sweating.

SECT. V. Of Exercise and Rest.
1. In violent motion the perspiration is for the most part of crude and
inconeocted juices.

2. Sweat is always from a violent cause and hinders due perspiration.

3. The Body perspires more in rest then when it is often turned from side to
side by frequent agitation.

4. In a long jurney those that are cheerful or angry, weary least.

5. Exercise after the seventh unto the twelth hour from taking Meat, resolves
more in the space of an hour, than three hours of another time does.

6. Rest disposes Bodies extraordinarly to perspiration, yet long rest makes
sick Bodies heavier, which fomenting their sickness, brings death.

7. Pains of the Feet coming from long lying are cured by walking, but these
that come by much walking are cured by rest.

8. The exercise of the Body evacuats sensible Excrements; but that of the mind
insensible ones.

9 By too much exercise the Excrements of the first and second Concoction are
eliminate by the superfice of the Body, which binds the Belly.

10. Continual exercise of both Body and mind makes Bodies lighter, brings
quickly old Age, and untimely Death.

11. Violent exercise in Bodies filled with crude Juices, evacuates less than
usual of sensible Excrements, but of the insensible, almost nothing.

12. In sleep the Body perspires more than in exercise, and thereby the Belly
is also made soluble.

13. Frictions and Cupping Glasses in those filled with crude Juices hinder
perspiration.

14. Violent exercise where the wind blows is evil, for the wind stops the
perspiration, and the motion makes it acrimonious.

15. Riding promoves the perspiration most in the parts above the Loins:
Ambling is most wholesome, but Trotting unwholesome.

16. The motion of a Boat or a Litter long used, disposes extraordinarly to
perspiration.

17 Violent motion of a Coach, evacuates the unconcocted perspirable Matter,
and hurts the solid Parts and the Reins.

18. The exercise of the Pennystone disposes very much to perspiration.

19. Perspiration wanting to persons in health is promoved by Exercise.

20. By immoderate exercise the Fibers grow hard, whence comes old Age; but
softness of the Fibers, keeping them open, makes long life.

21. A Youthful Face is long preserved by avoiding sweating or perspiring too
much throw heat.

SECT. VI. Of VENERY.
1. TOo much Abstinence, and too much Use, both hinder Perspiration.

2. Venery does good, when after the next sleep there is no weariness found.

3. Immoderat Venery with a Person very much desired, hurts least.

4. After an inclination to Venery to forbear, does bring agility of the Body.

5. The present effect of immoderat Venery is the Refrigerating the Stomach;
and the subsequent is the hindering of Perspiration: Whence come Palpitations in
the Eyebrows, and in the Ioints, and thereafter in the principal Members.

^. Immoderat Venery hurts most in the Summer.

7. Those that in Venery purposely do not emit Sperm, fall into tumors of the
Testicles.

8. Immoderat Venery after the Stomach hurts the Eyes, generates the Stone,
Catha^hes, and Palpitation of the heart.

9. Flatulent Aliments after Venery, such as Oysters and New Wine, are
pernicious.

10. While Venery is to be used, little or nothing is to be eaten: And while
you must eat, little or no Venery.

11. Venery prompted by Nature is beneficial, but prompted by the mind, hurts
both mind and memory.

12. After exercise venery is unwholesome; After Meat not so much, but after
sleep it is most wholesome of all.

SECT. VII. Of the Affections of the Mind.
1 BY Sadness and Fear the light^ of the perspirable matter only is p^^spired,
the weightier remaining: by Gla^ness and Anger both perspire: whence Sadn^^ and
Grief breeds obstructions, Hardness (...) the Parts, and H^pochondriack affects.

2. Nothing makes Perspiration more fr^^ than a Contented Mind.

3. Sadness and Grief hinders the gross^ pe^spirable matter to be evacuat; And
the retained, by every light Cause bege^ Fear and Sadness.

4. The Acrimony of the perspirable mat^^ retained by Grief, is taken off by
Chearfu^ness.

5. These that go to Bed sad at nig^^ perspire little.

6. Melancholy is overcome either by (...) free perspiration or by continual
consolation of the Mind.

7. Cheerfulness without an evide^^ Cause that proceeds from the Perspirati^^
succeeding well, makes the Body beco^^ lighter

8. Moderate Joy evacuationly the superfluous Matter; but Immoderate Joy that
that is useful.

9. A Surprising Joy hurts more than that which is foreseen: for it makes the
Spirits totally exhale.

10. Joy persevering many days hinders Sleep, and dissolves the Strength.

11 Aliments that promove Perspiration make Cheerfulness, and these that hinder
it make Sadness.

12. These that are of a Chollerick Nature are much hurt by immoderat Exercise:
so Hyppocrates forbad such to use frictions and wrestlings.

13. The Body at rest perspires more, if ^he Mind be exercised: Then when the
Body is exercised and the Mind idle.

14. So the immoderat Exercise of the ^ind, hurts more than that of the Body.

15. The Body would wither and perish without the exercise of the Mind, but not
^ontrary ways.

16. A vehement motion of the Mind is neither settled by Rest nor Sleep.

17. Such as in Game do very earnestly ^esire to gain, do not Play but Labor,
and (...) exceedingly divert Perspiration.

18. A Moderat Victory is more wholesome than a Glorious One.

19. Study with change of Affections is longer endured, than under one
Affection of the Mind.

20. Study without all Affections scarce endures an hour, with on Affection
scarce four; with frequent change of Affections, as in the the play of the
Dice, it will be endured Days and Nights

21. To be sometimes Merry, sometimes Sad, and then again Angry, and nixt
afraid This change of Affections helps Perspiration more then one of the best
Affections always continuing does.

FINIS.

