Novus Reformator Vapulans: OR, THE Welsh Levite Tossed in a BLANKET.

IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Hick -- -- of Colchester, David I -- -- nes AND THE
Ghost of Will. Pryn.

Quid immerentes hospites vexas Canis
Ignavus adversum Lupos?
Quin huc inanes, si potes, vertis minas,
Et me remorsurum petis?
Hor. LONDON: Printed for the Assigns of Will. Pryn, next Door to the Devil.
MDCXCI.

THE PREFACE.
IT was the celebrated Saying of a certain Dutch Minister at Rotterdam, That to
drink Mum in a Morning was the same thing in effect, as to put on one's
Nightcap in a Morning. The Gentleman's meaning, I suppose, was this, That Mum
was an heavy, dull sort of a Liquor, that disposed People to be sleepy
afterward; and of this Nature, according to some Persons, are all stupid
Treatises, and all insipid Pamphlets. To read a Page or two of 'em is literally
and really all one with putting on one's Nightcap; they are true Opiates, and
ought to visit the World at first in the very same place, in which they
generally take their farewell of it, viz. In a Drugster's Shop. But I, that
could read over the late famous Sermon of the Vicar of Bray, who, to his Honor
be it spoken, still keeps up the Reputation of his Place, and does not in the
least degenerate from the Noble Virtues of his great Predecessors; and what was
a greater Trial both of my Patience, and the strength of my Constitution, I
that could read over Mr. N -- rris's Essay about the Vanity of Humane Learning,
which he dedicates to a blind Lady, with Ichabod, the Answer to the Vox Cleri,
the Mundus Muliebris, the Weekly Observator, the Rector of Exeter's Case penned
by himself, the Latin Translation of Milton's Paradise, all the late Plays, and
other numberless Compositions of the same Stamp and Dignity, and all this
without the least inclination to take a Nap, thought my self secure from the
ill influences of one single Sermon, though it were never so well stored with
Opium, and therefore made no difficulty at all of giving it a perusal. What
gave me the greater Curiosity to examine it at my leisure hours, was to see
whether it deserved the mighty Character, that abundance of People about the
Town were pleased to confer upon it. For to my own knowledge several persons
commended it for a piece of great Eloquence and Ingenuity, that have not Sense
enough to distinguish between the No-Language and No-Rhetoric of Baxter's
Everlasting Rest, and the solid beautiful reasoning of the Whole Duty of Man.
And again, it past universally in Dick's Coffee-House for a Discourse of great
Piety and Sincerity, amongst an Herd of Men, who have no other way to show
their concern for the Protestant Religion, but by railing at the Priesthood all
the World over; or their Zeal for the present Monarchy, but by perpetually
asserting the Deposing Power; Men that without the greatest assurance
imaginable can make no Pretensions either to Piety or Sincerity, and who before
this time could never endure any Public Harangue that was guilty of having
two such unpalatable Ingredients in it.

One would indeed wonder, if he could condescend to wonder at any particular
Passage in so strange an Author, to find so tedious and impertinent a
Digression about Pluralities and Non-Residence, and other Clergy-sins, in a
Sermon that was purely calculated for a City Auditory, and designed for another
end; unless the Author was resolved beforehand to bilk his Text, viz. The
discountenancing of Pride. A man that is altogether unacquainted with this
Pindarick way of Preaching, would no more expect to find a long Catalogue of
Levitical Enormities in a Discourse of that nature, than to meet a formal
Harangue against Flattery in a Book of Heraldry, or a sober Reproof of Perjury
in a Plot-mongers Narrative: Or lastly, a Caution against Simony in a
White-Chappel Treatise. I remember I knew a certain frugal Gentleman some years
ago, who was only Master of one Simile, and that served him upon all occasions:
So with him a Man smoked like a Dragon, and drank like a Dragon, and eat like
a Dragon; in fine, slept, walked, fought, rode, jok'd like a Dragon, and did
every thing you can name like a Dragon. After the same manner there are several
persons in the World of great Malice, but barren Inventions, that are tolerably
well stored with one sort of Satyr and Invective, and this they very
judiciously apply to all Subjects, and use before all Companies, though for the
most part it comes as ill-favouredly and odly into the Discourse, as Charon and
his Boat into Michael Angelo's Piece of the last Judgment. Our Author is one of
this number. I dare engage (for the Reader must understand I am no Stranger
either to his Person or Character) that if he were to preach before Civilians,
Soldiers, Tarpawlins, Citizens or Courtiers, at the Temple, the Spittle, Wappin
or Whitehall; nay, were it at a County Feast, or at the Head of a Drum, or an
Alderman's Burial, this same Clamor about Pluralities and Non-residence would
make up the better part of the Entertainment with him. He treats his Prelates
with as little of his good Breeding as Jo. Hindmarsh does his Authors, and can
no more forbear to rail at his Superiors, whenever they fall in his way, than a
Barber at those Gentlemen that trim themselves by their own Looking-glasses; or
the City Porters at the first Projector of the Penny-Post Office. This surly
Brutal Principle is partly owing to the sowerness of his Constitution, and has
been since improved and advanced into an habit, by that just ill usage and
universal Contempt that his own Arrogance and insupportable Temper have drawn
down upon him.

I would not willingly be thought guilty of so much Impertinence, as to pretend
to advise a Man of his invincible and steadfast Obstinacy; or otherwise I would
counsel him, if ever he designs to plague the Book seller with any more of his
Productions, and withal would pass incognito, to lay aside his celebrated
Talent of censuring and railing, for a while, and speak just as other Men do
when they have a mind to appear in Public: For this I can tell him for his
comfort, he will be as effectually disguised in his Civility and good Manners,
as an Alsatian Bully is by washing his Face, and putting on a clean Cravat.
Indeed, as he has ordered matters, I am afraid this Conduct will be somewhat
too late for him to use in the Pulpit; he has drawn an heavy Rentcharge of
Scandal and Railery upon himself, which now every body expects at his hands;
and the Town will no more relish any of his Doctrine without a good lusty
Invective against the Clergy to recommend it, than they will endure to hear a
Mountebank's tedious Cant, without the preceding Diversion of a Farce, or a
Man of Sense would do Penance in D -- rfy's Company without the Amends of his
singing. His Shoals of Prentices, blew Aprons, and other Auditors of that Noble
Figure are a severe sort of Taskmasters; if they should ever hear that he has
Apostatized from Calumny, and suffered himself to be perverted and debauched
into Civil Language, away they would go and abandon him for a Reprobate: Nay,
if he should go about to disappoint, or rather to cheat 'em of never so little
of their accustomed portion in slander and backbiting, they would as certainly
leave him, as they do the House, where they are denied a full-pot, and
Eleemosynary Tobacco. For in short he has used them to this fulsom diet, and
now he is bound in honor to furnish his Table with it still, which I confess
he can do at a cheaper rate than any of his Brethren; people go on purpose to
hear him for the sake of that defamation and ribbaldry he constantly provides
for them, as the Sparks of the other end of the Town visit B -- rgesse's
Coventicle to be diverted with tall Metaphors and everlasting Grimace, so that
a Sermon of his would no more pass without the usual Ragoust of reviling and
reproving, than a Smithfield Show without a Ghost or a Devil; and if he has
ever a mind to change his Style, he must at the same time resolve to change his
County.

The truth on it is, both the Author and his Sermon are of so low and
inconsiderable a Character in the World, that if it were not for the two
following Reasons I had never troubled my head either with the one, or the
other. He is pleased to say page 8. of his Sermon, That to let a Man go
unreproved, in his Sins, is to flatter him: Now because I would not lie under
the severe imputation of flattering our Author (for I had much rather the World
should think me guilty of all the seven deadly Sins, than of that single
scandal,) I was easily prevailed upon to give him a Chastisement, and that too
in as public a manner as his Crimes deserved. In the next place, he had
unhappily, I cannot tell how, deceived some ignorant people into a great opinion
of his probity and learning, and I was resolved to undeceive them. If he
seriously designs the discouraging of Vice, and the promoting of piety, why
then does he amuse his Auditors with things that have no relation to 'em, nay
things that in all probability will render the rest of his Doctrine of no
effect? or why does he busy himself in a province where he is no more concerned,
than our present unweildy Elephant of a Laureat in any of the City
Dancing-Schools? To pretend to reform Men's manners, and yet instruct 'em how to
rail at their Pastors with a better grace, is as ill-contrived a piece of
Stupidity, as to encourage a Boy in his Books, and yet at the same time to tell
him that his Master is either a Raskal or a Blockhead. Will his mighty
bellowing against Non-residence oblige the Tradesman to a closer attendance of
his Shop, or make him visit the Tavern less? Will his condemning of Pluralities
make the Surgeon leave prescribing of Physic, or deter the Shooemakers from
invading the Corn-cutter's business, or fright the wicked Coffee-Man from
dealing in Cherry-Brandy and Vsquebagh? Will his arraigning the Clergy for
removing from a poor to a rich Benefice, have that effect upon the Mercers, and
Lace Men, as to keep 'em in the City, and hinder them from exchanging
Paternoster Row for the Piazza's in Covent Garden? Or lastly, Will the
perpetual reproaches that he bestows so liberally upon his Ecclesiastical
Governors, persuade the Republican party to Sacrifice their Old seditious
principles, and talk with more respect of a Monarchy for the future? And now
after all, if he has no farther designs in his head, than to be advanced to the
next vacant Curacy or Reader's place, since by his insufferable behavior he
has lost all his expectations elsewhere, I can only tell him he is exceedingly
out in his Politics, and that he has taken as rude and unmannerly a course to
get himself preferred, as the City Marshals by keeping a horrid noise with
their damned Drums at people's doors, to make 'em remember their
Christmass-Box. For my own part I must needs declare, that I look upon want of
preferment to be the chief, if not the only reason of our Young Reformer's
inveighing so zealously against the rest of his Brethren: Whatever the matter
is, I could never entertain any great opinion of that Man's Sanctity, let his
life be never so austere, and his pretenses never so specious, that places the
better part of his Religion in libelling and traducing his Superiors: Besides
it is a true observation, that no one rails at Pluralities so strenuously, as he
that cannot arrive to one single Benefice; as we see no Member of the House
falls upon the Court party with that heat and vigor, as the Man that designs
to be made a Minister of State for his pains: And it is an usual thing for those
that are forced to trudge it a foot in the dirt, to wish the Devil had all
those Persons that ride by in their Glass-coaches.

He quotes Aristotle's Rhetoric page the 17th, for that memorable saying of
his, That Riches make Men haughty and insolent, (though it seems, Poverty has had
the same Effects upon himself) and thus a St. Bernard or a St. Austin's Name
have been used in a Country Pulpit to prove that Patience is an excellent
Virtue, or to justify any of the most common received, notorious Truths. But
however with Reverence be it spoken, a Man that will give himself the trouble
to read his Sermon, would no more suspect that he was acquainted with
Aristotle's Rhetoric, than that Mr. H -- rris or Mr. P -- well, or any of the
Modern Play-writing Actors are acquainted with Aristotle's Criticisms upon
Poetry. There Is a continued vein of vicious Language and Reasoning that runs
through all the Discourse; and were it not, that the whole Sermon from the
beginning to the end is exactly of the same Piece and Contexture, I would cull
out some of the most remarkable Passages in it for the Reader's Diversion as
well as his farther Satisfaction. But now I think better on it, we were not to
expect any such thing as Rhetoric from our Author, for page 6. he very gravely
rebukes all those Ministers that come to Church to make Speeches, and to preach
Themselves, and turn the Church into a Theater and the Pulpit into a Rostrum.
We know well enough for whom this surly Reproof was meant, but for this once
let it fall upon our Authors dearest Friends the Fanatic Divines, for I am
certain they deserve it best. Those that now and then go to hear 'em, know that
they make Speeches, and fine ones too, if the Hourglass may be allowed to be
Judge; and that they preach Themselves, especially toward the end of a
Quarter, when the People are to be reminded of their Contribution-Mony, and
that to Mr. Betterton's loss, by their several ridiculous Postures and Actions
they turn the Church into a Theater; and where is the wonder? for their devout
Forefathers used to turn 'em into Stables. I must confess, I am no passionate
admirer of any formal set Discourses, where one meets a great deal of good
Language, but very sorry Sense or Thought at the bottom; and yet I cannot
endure to see a noble Subject labor under the weight of barbarous Expressions,
nor can I possibly bring my self to be of the same opinion with the generality
of the Nonconformist Ministers amongst us, who either out of ignorance or
design lard their lean Sermons with the most fulsom Metaphors, and the meanest
Words they can meet, or if they have none of these ready to their hands, make
no more scruple of coining new ones of the same quality (such as Nothingness,
Self-savingness, etc.) than the Modern Soldiery of stamping one of their
Pewter Buttons into a Farthing. To think that the Christian Religion is
profaned by good Language, or that clean Eloquence in a Discourse of Piety is
as insignificant as (if I may borrow a Simile from the Apocrypha) a Scarecrow
is in a Garden of Cucumbers, is a gross ridiculous piece of Superstition; and
can only be excused by the sottish Reveries of the Capuchins, and other doting
Orders in the Church of Rome, who place the greatest part of their Devotion in
being nasty and slovenly, and fancy they dishonor God Almighty by wearing a
clean Shirt.

I have dwelt the longer upon our Author in the Preface, because I was resolved
to allow him but a very small share in the Dialogue. His two Companions Mr.
Pryn, and the blustering Theologue of Colchester, as they are too well known by
their Works to put any one to the expense of writing their Characters, so they
were persons of better Sense and Malice, and consequently more likely to
entertain the Reader with their Conversation. When I was talking of the most
memorable occurrences that lately happened, I cowd not forbear to enlarge a
little about the Merits of the Comprehension, and when my Hand was in there, to
bestow a visit upon my old Friend of White-Chappel. No sensible man I presume
will be angry with me, if I have not treated him with that Respect and Decorum
that ought to be used toward Persons of his Function and Station: For if this
sort of Style is criminal, it must be remembered that he gave the occasion and
that I have only copied from his Answer to the Vox Cleri. It would raise any
Man's Indignation, that is not altogether composed of those two very bad
Monosyllables, Phlegm and Schism, to find him there so barbarously insulting
upon the Ashes of the late blessed Royal Martyr^, and insinuating that the
Immortal Portraiture is a spurious piece; but to our comfort be it observed, he
has past the same Censure upon St. Ignatius's Epistles. In the same Book with
his usual good Manners and Breeding he scurrilously reflects upon two as
eminent Men as any we have in the Church, who are as much above his little
Invectives, as they scorn the little Tribute of his Panegyricks. And he
likewise abuses two other great Ornaments of our Nation, after another way,
that is, with a great deal of his nauseous thredbare Flattery, in hope, I
suppose, of being preferred by them. But this, in my Opinion, is the most
scandalous, and if I may so call it, the most Vncanonical Simony any Man can be
guilty of. For my own Particular, I must needs confess, That as Augustus was
pleased to say of K. Herod, That he would rather choose to be his Hog than his
Son: So in relation to the abovementioned Dr. I would rather choose to be his
Adversary than his Friend. As I was his Adversary I could only lie open to the
feeble Efforts of his Malice, which can injure no body: But if I were so
unfortunate as to be thought his Friend, I could not promise my self to be
secure from his Panegyricks, which, as they may render a Man's Reputation
suspected, so they are the most dreadful terrible things in the whole World.

If I have done any thing for which I am to beg the Reader's pardon, it is for
suffering so inconsiderable a Trifle to sleep so long in my hands. Not to
conceal any of my Infirmities from the World, I am sometimes possessed with the
Spirit of Laziness as well as other People, especially when it is my fortune to
light upon a dull Subject, and then I use to retard and delay the Affair, as
naturally, as a Lawyer does an unpaying Clients Cause. But of all things in the
World I should never desire to be forgiven for pursuing my Argument with too
much Severity, if I had done it, as indeed I have not. For besides that some
Parties as well as Persons I could name, deserve no Quarter at an Enemies Hand,
so a weak impotent Performance is full as inexcusable in Raillery, as it is in
the business of Love: And an Adversary, let his Character be what it will, is
like a Nettle; if you touch him gently, he certainly pricks and stings you for
your Civility; but if you squeeze him hard, it is ten to one you hear no more of
him.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Hick -- and David, and Pryn's Ghost.
Pryn. BLESS me! Whereabouts am I? Have I mistaken my way or no? Well, I am
resolved to enquire of the next Man I meet, that I may be satisfied. See, here
one comes, but he is a Levite I perceive by his garb, and they are a sort of
People I never much fancied in all my Life, no more than the rest of my
Profession. I Will venture however to accost him -- Reverend Sir, your humble
Servant. If your occasions are not very pressing, I would desire the favor of
you to satisfy me in a certain scruple that troubles me.


Hick. A very odd formal Fellow this! Satisfy you in a certain Scruple do you
say? Come then, dispatch honest Friend as soon as you can; Dispatch I say out
of hand. For --


Pryn. Nay, Sir, 'twill be soon resolved, there is no great difficulty in the
question, I can assure you.


Hick. Prithee Friend don't banter me with any of your assure me's. I tell you
my name is Hick -- of Colchester, and therefore don't amuse me with any
tedious, flourishes at your peril. If you have any Scruple about the Legality
of the Spiritual Courts, why here is my Naked Truth for you: or if your Scruple
has any relation to the Liturgy, then make use of my Ceremony-Monger.


Pryn. No, I thank you Sir, it is nothing of that nature -- In short Sir, I
would only request you to inform me where I am, and what is the name of this
place?


Hick. Sure this old fashioned Gentleman designs to put a trick upon me, but
I Will soon cure him of his jesting humor Why really honest Friend, this Question
of yours, as you told me, carries no great difficulty with it; but what would
you say to me now, if I should give my self the trouble to beat you most
immoderately, if I should pull you by your worshipful Nose, or bestow a
perpetual Almanac upon you Bones, before I go?


Pryn. I deserve no such usage from your hands. Upon my Sincerity, Reverend
Sir, I meant you no harm by my question. It Is not my way to impose upon any
Man. I am really ignorant of the name of this place, and must once more desire
you to tell me where I am. I find I must give my Levite good Words. It Is a huge
thundering two handed Theologue.


Hick. Aside. Stay, let me consider a little. By that sanctified Aspect, and
formal Band he should be none of those persons that use to make sport with
People in the Streets. It Is certainly some Scotch Minister or other that lost
himself in a Vision last night, and is not yet recovered. -- Well Sir, I
believe your Intentions are honest, and that you had no design to Put the
Doctor upon me, as the saying is. You must know then you are in London, but I
profess I wonder in my heart how you could be ignorant of it? You are a
Stranger to this City without question.


Pryn. No Sir, that is your mistake. I have a great deal of reason, I am sure,
to remember it. I lived the better part of my Life in this place, and I can
never reflect upon it without the most sensible concern in the World. If you
were acquainted with my Name and History, you would say the same.


Hick. Why this is stranger and stranger still. Could you pass the better part
of your Life in this Town, and yet not know the Name of it? Not to use any
Ceremony with you, Honest Friend, in my opinion you must be either drunk or
mad, choose which you please.


Pryn. Neither Sir, I am the Ghost of William Pryn, formerly Utter Barrister of
Lincoln's Inn yonder, a Man that made no insignificant figure in the World. I
presume a person of your years and gravity cannot be unacquainted with my
Writings and Sufferings here. Judge you then, whether I have not reason enough
to remember this City; only the new Buildings and strange Alterations every
where so surprised me at first, that I could not positively determine where I
was.


Hick. And are you the Ghost then of William Pryn of happy Memory? I profess I
am ravished with joy to behold you. How can I ever thank my Stars sufficiently
for furnishing me with so favorable an interview! Though I have some business of
great moment and consequence that calls me to the other end of the Town, yet I
am resolved to sacrifice it for this time to enjoy the happiness of your
learned Conversation. -- Well Mr. Pryn, I must needs own, you have reason
enough in all conscience to remember this sinful wicked Town; Here, unless the
Chronicle misinforms me, you lost a pair of Ears to the Indignation of a cruel
persecuting Archbishop: Here you encountered with Prelacy and Superstition,
and here you erected an everlasting Trophy upon the demolished Abomination of
high places. It Is impossible for me to tell you, what an exceeding pleasure I
take in seeing you; and I am inclined to flatter my self, that my Company would
not be altogether disagreeable to you, if you were better acquainted with my
Character.


Pryn. You Will extremely oblige me, dear Sir, if you will be pleased to give me
a relation of your Life. But may a Stranger make so bold as to request this
favor at your hands?


Hick. As I told you before, Hick -- is my Name, and Colchester is the place of
my Habitation. I have in my time wrestled with a mighty Prelate as well as your
self, and declaimed as heartily against the Exactions of Doctors Commons, as
ever you did against the illegal Oppressions of the Star Chamber. It Is true,
the Books I have wrote for the common cause are not as yet arrived to a
Cart-load; but then give me leave to tell you they are full as tuant, and as
well stored with Invectives as any of yours. I have as great an Aversion to
Episcopacy as your voluminous self, and never failed to bellow against the
Ceremonies and Discipline of the Church as often as I had an opportunity to do
it. Indeed as to the point of Sufferings, I must own my self inferior to you,
though that was none of my fault. A short Imprisonment, a Suspension and the
Formality of making a Recantation. (which I had the grace to disown the very
next moment) were the utmost of my punishment; but then as for a hearty,
through-paced inclination to the Cause, I cannot prevail with my self to allow
you the precedence.


Pryn. I am glad to meet with a Person of my own Complexion and Humor: But
Sir, now we are here, between our selves, is it not unnatural and odd for a Man
of the Indelible Character, to rail at his Brethren of the same Profession?
Does it not sound ill in the World, for a Son of the Church, and one that gets
his Bread by the Church, to rail openly at his Mother, and endeavor to
undermine her Settlement? You know what the Satyrist long ago observed, Parcit
cognatis maculis similis fera. Now as for my self, I was a Lawyer, and we
Lawyers as all the World can tell you, could never set our Horses with the
Clergy. We look upon you as a generation of Men, that have established a
distinct interest from that of the Civil Government; for when ever you find any
extremities from that quarter, you presently betake your selves to the
Sanctuary of your Spiritual Kingdom. Besides, not to recount the Quarrels we
have to your Civilians, and the Managers of your Ecclesiastical Thunder, we
hate all your Tribe for spoiling so many good Lawsuits as you do; by Preaching
up those old, musty Doctrins of Love and Unity, and promoting so many
References and Arbitrations amongst the People, to the grief and prejudice of
all the poor Suffering Sons of Cook upon Littleton.


Hick. I never expected such a Reprimand from Mr. Pryn: If you were but
tolerably acquainted with my History, I am sure you would never Tax me with the
guilt of propagating Peace and Unity in my Parish. Indeed if a Pious endeavor
to set all Mankind together by the Ears, is the way to advance Peace and Unity
in the World, I will willingly submit to all the scandal of your imputation.
But is it possible Mr. Pryn, that you are so far altered from what you were
formerly, as to reproach me with following your own Copy, that is, with railing
at the Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church, and siding with the Fanatic
Party?


Pryn. No, No, Heroic Sir, you have quite mistaken my meaning; I only made
bold to tell you, that it looks a little unnatural methinks, to see a Clergyman
expose the miscarriages of the Men of his own order; but at the same time I was
very far from quarrelling with you in the least upon that score. You may take
my word, (and you have no reason to think that any of the Dead would be guilty
of Flattery) that I heartily caress and thank you for the good Services you
have done us; for I was always of Opinion, that there is no way so effectual to
ruin the Church, as by engaging some of her own Members to carry on the Design.


Hick. You say right, it is indeed the securest way in the World to bring about
such an undertaking; for when any of the Laity bestow their Invectives very
liberally upon the Church, the People are apt to suspect that Devotion and
Honesty have ^ very little share in the matter, but that either a Principle of
Malice, or some particular picque or other has embittered them against the
Clergy: But now it is a different case with those of my Function; if we reproach
our Brethren with their Ignorance, we purchase our selves the Reputation of
Learned, Able Men; if we accuse 'em of a Persecuting Spirit, we are presently
extolled for Persons of Moderation; if we rail at them for their Immoralities,
O what a Sober Primitive Minister is this, though perhaps he takes off his half
Dozen Bottles of Claret before he goes to Bed. If we keep a great Pother about
Pluralities and Non-residence, why here is a true Labourer in the Vineyard for
you; and if we tell our People that Ceremonies are but Foolish, Impertinent
things, and mere Human Inventions, the Congregation immediately cries us up for
Pastors that have the Power of Godliness, and are disingaged from all the
prejudices of Superstition and Will Worship.


Pryn. I find, Dear Sir, you are not to learn your Trade from me; you are
infinitely above any of my poor instructions.


Hick. It Is true, the discerning part of Mankind, are too wise to be shamm'd
after this rate; they are sensible enough, that it is either want of Preferment,
or some private grudge that makes us take up the Cudgels against our Brethren;
but then their Number is too small, and consequently too contemptible to be
regarded; and you know it is our Business to gain the Hearts of the Mobb, and
not to angle for Wise Men. I am sure I have abundantly found the benefit of
this Conduct; the People every where take me for an Oracle, and what is ten
times more surprising, they are such invincible Fools, as to cheat themselves
into a belief of my great Zeal and Sincerity. Thus I have so far compassed my
Designs, that the Church is generally disrespected for my sake; and that, I
need not tell you, is no small advance toward its Ruin. At the same time I am
obliged to tell you, that I received no inconsiderable assistance in this
affair, from a sort of Men who are styled in the Modern Language, Sons of
Comprehension; who if they had been permitted to have pursued the Reformation
they designed, had certainly ruined the Established Church, which thing you
know the Dissenters have been zealously driving at all this last Century.


Pryn. Sons of Comprehension do you say? I cannot imagine what you mean by the
word. Is it then a spick and span new Faction in the State, or an old one newly
furbish'd up? What do these Men design, or to what Church do they pretend to
belong?


Hick. Why truly honest Mr. Pryn, they all of 'em give out that they are
Zealous Members of the Established Church, and yet no Men ever contributed more
to the Ruin and Destruction of it than they have done. Their business in short
was this; to remove some of those Ceremonies that were Eye-sores to the
Brethren ever since the Reformation,; to castrate the Liturgy; to abdicate the
Apocrypha; to enervate the Ecclesiastical Discipline; to reduce Episcopal
Jurisdiction into narrower Bounds, and extend that of the Inferior Presbyters:
In fine, to leave it to the Discretion of the Minister, to read as few or as
many of the public Prayers as he should judge convenient.


Pryn. Well, I find Miracles are not ceased amongst you here in this World; but
who could ever imagine that any of those Gentlemen, who some Years ago
defended every Ceremony of the Church with so much Pains and Zeal against the
Attaques of their Adversaries, should be so strangely altered on the sudden, as
to part with them freely, and thereby give an occasion to the ill-natured
World, to conclude that they were all this while in the wrong, and their
Enemies in the right?


Hick. Nay, I cannot forbear Laughing, as often as I think of the Conceit: Some
of 'em were well-meaning Men, and hoped by these Alterations to bring over the
most considerable part of the Dissenters to Church. Others found their interest
in this Conduct; for since the late Revolution, the Court, you must understand,
seemed to favor those Persons who were for advancing the Comprehension.
Lastly, others (in which number I reckon my self,) were willing to be revenged
of the Church for its ill-usage of 'em formerly, and now had as favorable an
opportunity as Men could possibly wish, to effect their Design. Thus you see
that Indiscretion in some, Ambition in others; but in the most a spirit of
Malice or Revenge, promoted the affair. It would take up too much time to tell
you with what intreague and vigor this Blessed work, as 'twas commonly called,
was recommended to the pious care of the Convocation that was convened for this
purpose. One County petitioned to have Tobit's Dog lashed out of the Church;
another presented their Grievance against Bell and the Dragon. Some were
earnest to have the Athanasian Creed discarded; some were for Purging the
Service of Matrimony from Obscenity; others desired to have a new Set of
Collects, because the old ones were worn Threadbare with continual wearing;
some thought the Prayers too tedious, others thought them too short. One
quarrelled at the Cross in Baptism; a Second found out down right Conjuring in
the Litany; a third made his exceptions at Kneeling at the Sacrament. Nay,
rather than stand out, some were willing to play at such small Game, as to pick
Faults with the Calendar, and so desired to have St. George and the rest of his
Dreaming useless Brethren turned out of their Freehold there.


Pryn. It Is very surprising, I confess, what you have told me.


Hick. All this while Comprehension was the word in City and Country.
Comprehension was still the burden of the Song in Taverns, and Comprehension
filled up all the Idle, Impertinent Conversation of the Coffee-Houses; 'twas
almost as bad as Treason to speak the least ill word of the Comprehension. Nay
would you believe it? the very Butchers on the other side Aldgate had got the
word amongst them, and made excellent sport with it; if they happened to meet
with a furly, morose, ill-bred sort of an Ox, that was not over-forward to have
any Alterations made in his Body, or to let a Reforming Knife strip him of his
Ceremonious Hide, knock him down, Cried the whole Fraternity of 'em, dash out
his Brains, cut his Throat there; it is a Prelatical Ox, he will not suffer himself
to be comprehended in a Halter.


Pryn. If I were not a Ghost now, in spite of my gravity, and the severity of
my temper, I could half kill my self with Laughing at these Stories.


Hick. I remember I was once at a Merry Meeting at White-Chappel, where you are
to know this same business of the Comprehension very was zealously set on foot;
and the Master of the House who gave us the entertainment, represented the
whole Mystery of the Comprehension in a Bowl of Punch.


Pryn. I have frequently conversed with some Dutch Divines in the other World,
who were often talking of the great Virtues of Punch, and so I am not
altogether (...) to the Composition of that Liquor: But pray inform me how
'twas possible to represent the Comprehension in it?


Hick. Listen then. Says our Friend, Come Gentlemen, you know I promised you a
bowl of Punch which that I may make Secundum Artem, as our Doctor has it, and
that you who are my Acquaintance, may be likewise (...) to do the same at any
other time, pray take notice of the following Prescriptions* (...), Here is a
Gallon of poor Passive Church of England Water, a (...), unedifying Element,
the Lord knows, and good for nothing of itself, till there is an Union o^
Alliance made between it, and some other noble dissenting Ingredients. Into
this, do ye mind me Gentlememen, I pour one Half Pint of good, sharp,
Independent Lime Juice; and afterward add one Pound of Superfine Addressing
Pensilvanian Sugar. Now, says he, lend me the Sieve of Election, and the Ladle
of Accommodation, and you shall see what a Noble Sherbet I have made you.


Pryn. There Is more (...) and (...) I perceive, to build one of these Bowls
(...) it, than a Man would at first imagine: I find he must be a Master of his
Trade.


Hick. A Pox on it, cries our Friend, this Foolish, Insignificant Church of
England Water is too strong as yet for the Independent Lime-Juice, and the
Pensylvanian Sugar; and therefore to correct, or rather to destroy the
unpalatable relish of it for all intents and purposes; I must, says he,
according to our Learned Doctor's Method, pour in Two Quarts of Lusty and
Potent Presbyterian Brandy. Now give me, continues he, yonder well-grown
Anabaptist Tossed, a Tossed of Years and Discretion, a Tossed that can answer for
himself, and so forth. But first of all, let us gently rub him over with the
Nutmeg of Affability, and then dip him over Head and Ears in this Regenerating
Liquor: It Is done Gentlemen, the Town's our own; but Lord (cries he) how it
rejoices my Heart to see how this Powerful Presbyterian Brandy Insults and
Rides upon the poor Passive Hierarchical Water! Pray Gentlemen, come and see
this goodly Sight, quickly, quickly, here; so we all peeped into the Bowl, and
Laughed till we were ready to burst our Hoops asunder with the Conceit.


Pryn. Nay, I cannot discommend you for it; 'twas a Scene of Mirth enough to
divert the most heavy Phlegmatic Creature in the World.


Hick. As a certain Spark in the Room very well observed, we only wanted a
Consort of the sweet Singers of Israel, to have sung some Spiritual
Latitudinarian Hymn or other, to the Tune of the Gods and the Goddesses, and
our Entertainment had been Complete; but we supplied that defect in a manner by
the choiceness of our Healths; for first we drank a good Health to the Scotch
Covenant; then we remembered our Friends of Amsterdam, and all our Trusty
Fellow Laborers near the Lake Lemane. After this we made a step to the other
side of the Globe, and there visited the poor Churches in New England. Lastly,
we concluded all with Health, Wealth and Prosperity to all the Sons of
Comprehension, and all the Daughters of Latitude in Christendom.


Pryn. Well, but I forgot to enquire of you, whether the Dissenting Party gave
any great encouragement to this Project of the Comprehension; for unless they
promised to come in, as soon as these Alterations were made; to what purpose
was all this trouble taken? They could not be so vain as to imagine that this
conduct would be very acceptable to their own side, and therefore unless they
had moral Assurances of bringing over the Dissenters, I think they reckoned all
this while without their Host, not to take notice that they made themselves
cheap and contemptible into the bargain.


Hick. What some few of the topping Leaders amongst the Dissenters might
promise to do, in case such Alterations were consented to, I cannot resolve
you; but as for the generality both of the Pastors and the People, I don't
believe they would have budged a foot for the matter. Perhaps to two or three
of their chief Levites, a Bishopric of Two Thousand Pounds per Annum, with a
very few Amendments, might have become palatable enough; but as then such
choice Blessings could not be distributed to all, and besides were few in
number in comparison of more inconsiderable Places; so there is all the reason
in the World to conclude, that but very few would have quitted their Station.


Pryn. I am clearly of your opinion; for Interest you know is the great
business of all Mankind. The Fanatic Divines for their part follow their own
Interest with as zealous an Application as any other Persons; and I am assured,
that if they found no advantage in the Comprehension, they would never comply
with it.


Hick. It Is very apparent that their Interest advised them to continue where
they were; and I wonder why the other Party were such Blockheads, as to believe
that they should be ever prevailed upon to sacrifice their old beloved
Principle; 'twas endeavoring to Hedge the Cuckoe, even according to the
Letter. Can you Mr. Pryn believe, that a Man of any tolerable discretion would
ever leave his Congregation, where he reigns as absolute as the Mufti does at
Constantinople; where he Hangs, Draws and Quarters as he thinks convenient;
where he commands the People's Consciences, and consequently their Purses;
where he can melt them into Tears as often as he pleases; where he is caressed
and treated every day with as much Ceremony, as a young Heir is at the first
Moment when he comes to his Estate: Can you believe, I say, that he would quit
all these mighty advantages, to come to a Church where he is not secure of
meeting half this Respect and Veneration; where his tall Metaphors and
impertinent Harangues will make no impression; where his Theatrical Grimaces
will be all exploded; where he must renounce his extempore Talent, and put
himself to the severe expense of talking intelligibly, unless there were a
certain prospect of a larger Revenue to make him swallow all these mortifying
Considerations? No, no, Mr. Pryn the dissenting Ministers are Masters of more
Discretion than for the sake of a foolish Complement or two to relinquish their
real Interest, and quit so advantageous a Post as they are already placed in.


Pryn. What you have observed of their Divines, may I suppose be as reasonably
concluded of the Laity. As matters were ordered in my time, and I believe they
are not altered since, the Merits of the Separation were but very superficially
examined by the People; for most of 'em considered that being of that party
helped 'em to a good Trade, and what was more tempting helped 'em to the
reputation of Sanctity, with certain hopes of a Saintship into the bargain, and
so what wonder is it, if they continued firm to the Interests of that Church,
where there was a good Trade, and a good Reputation, and a good Saintship
besides to be had at such reasonable pennyworths? Besides there is a certain
sort of a titillation, which only those who have experimented it can describe,
in refusing to submit to whatsoever is publicly established. Men love to
indulge their own humors, and cannot endure to have the Government prescribe any
rules to 'em. In fine, it is the only sign of Discretion and a mature Judgment
with some persons to dissent from all Mankind, and carve for themselves. I had
almost like to have forgot that when we meet in corners to worship, it looks as
if we were the little Flock of the Elect that the heat of Persecution had
driven into those retreats; but then all this mighty Zeal and Devotion that is
kept alive by sweating and crowding, and being everlastingly bored by our
Neighbor's Elbows, would certainly evaporate and expire in a large Church. So
upon the whole matter I find no ground to believe that the People would ever
have been inclined to leave their old way of Worship, in case their Ministers
had forsaken them, and therefore it is I confess a surprising thing to me that
the Church of England should ever attempt to new model their Constitution, when
they could propose so little benefit to themselves from doing it.


Hick. They expected, you must understand, to have proselyted the whole body of
Dissenters, though you and I have sufficiently observed what an unpracticable ill
grounded Chymaera it was, and it would appear a thousand times more impossible
to be effected, if we should take a full view of the other Separatists, as
Quakers, Independents, Anabaptists, and so forth, whereas we have only been
talking about the Presbyterians. But however impracticable the design be, yet
those persons who were engaged in the Affair, either believed it to be very
feasible, or else they would have persuaded the World that they thought it so.
For in order to receive this vast number of People they expected, they were
contriving how to enlarge the Church-Porches beforehand; by the same token
that I could never hear any mention made of that Project, but it immediately
put me in mind of a certain remarkable saying of Diogenes.


Pryn. What was that I pray?


Hick. As the story goes, that itinerant Philosopher came by chance to a damned
little raskally Town in Rhodes with a huge swinging pair of Gates to it, so he
ran to the Market place, and cries as loud as ever he was able: Good People
lock up your Gates, shut 'em I say immediately, for fear your Town should take
a frolic and run out of them.


Pryn. So you imagined then that if the Church-Porches had been widen'd, the
Congregation would have presently run out at the Doors, did you not?


Hick. Why truly Mr. Pryn I did, and I don't question but that if the
Comprehension had succeeded, I had been found a true Prophet as to this
particular. Though I wish the design had taken effect, because I pray for the
Church's Destruction, and don't know any way so effectual* to have produced it
as what I am discoursing of, yet I cannot forbear to rail at the Blindness and
Indiscretion of those People who labored so mightily to bring an unavoidable
Ruin and Scandal upon themselves. To quit a firm establishment and throw up the
Fences of a well compacted Discipline, in order to get a little fulsome popular
Applause for a moment, and oblige some of Johannes de Nubibus's wise Relations,
was in my opinion as gross a piece of Stupidity, as it would have been in
Sampson, if he were now alive, to cut off his Hair wherein his Strength
depended, and for no other design than to wear a Perruque, and qualify himself
for keeping company with the Beaux of Covent Garden.


Pryn. So it was; but how came the business to miscarry at last?


Hick. Though we had several persons of great Interest and Authority that joined
with us, and besides the late turn of Affairs seemed very favorable to put
this design in excution, yet the major part were of a different opinion. They
pretended, that it was below the Dignity of the Church to alter Establishments
for the sake of those People, who had taken care to give the World invincible
assurances of their being contented with nothing but a throwing up of the
whole. That a Faction within the Church (which they apprehended might arise in
case the Comprehension succeeded) was infinitely more dangerous than the Schism
without. That if some Concessions were made in favor of one Party, as soon as
that was done, another Party might demand to have the like Indulgence shown to
them, and perhaps with as much reason, or at least with as much pretense. In
fine, that those Alterations might have very ill Effects with the Members of
their own Communion, and oblige them to seek that Steadiness and Constancy in
another Church, which they could not find at home. Thus our Plea was overruled
at last, and that hopeful project which had employed so many sucking,
Sermon-printing Authors to recommend it to the World, came unfortunately to
nothing, to the great mortification and disappointment of several persons who
had amused themselves with no ordinary expectations for their good Services in
promoting it. But Sir, if you please, we'll wave this Subject, which gives me
abandance of uneasy Thoughts as often as I reflect upon it. -- And now honest
Mr. Pryn let me desire you to inform me, what weighty Concern it is, that has
drawn you from the peaceful Mansions of the Dead to revisit the World, was it
only to indulge your Curiosity, or is there a private Intreague at the bottom?


Pryn. Nothing of that nature upon my word. I was desirous to know whether
Prelacy was abolished, and consequently the whole Train of Superstition
banished and discarded; how Affairs stood with the sober godly part of the
Nation; and lastly, what were the crying prevailing Sins of the Age. This was
the true and only occasion of my journey, and I need not tell you, how far you
would oblige me by giving me a full account of all these matters.


Hick. Alas Mr. Pryn, your are come in a very unlucky moment! I am sorry that I
have nothing of Consolation to entertain you with. Prelacy was never the
darling of the People so much as at present; it is too far owned and supported
by the Government to be ever undermined or ruined. Nay what is the most
miserable case of all, it has so conspicuously deserved of the Protestant
Interest in general, as well as of the particular Liberty and Property of the
Subject, that we cannot attacque it with the least colorable Reproach or
Calumny.


Pryn. How! And is it impossible then to trump the old Card of Popery, and so
forth, upon them?


Hick. Why, truly Mr. Pryn it is even so. We must take our everlasting farewell
of that Argument, it will do us no farther service I can assure you. It has
been the perpetual cry of the Saints, you know, ever since the beginning, that
when ever a favorable opportunity showed it self, the Prelates and all that
Party would immediately list themselves in the Service of the Man of Sin.


Pryn. I remember it very well, by the same token, that this aspersion did our
Cause no inconsiderable service in the late Wars, when we traduced 'em all for
being Babylonishly affected; by Virtue of which Scandal we made a shift to get
an Archbishop sacrificed on Tower Hill, and the whole Fraternity totally
extirpated.


Hick. What you say is indeed very true. But alas! I cannot think upon it
without considering at the same time how unfortunate we their Posterity are,
who cannot presume to perform such glorious Exploits. The only thing we can do,
is to make a little Clamor about Prelatical Persecution; but even this pretense
vanishes and makes no impression, as soon as People reflect upon the Rigor and
iron Yoke of Presbytery, when by the Pious Efforts of the Parliament in Forty
Three, it was advanced to the Chair. But as I hinted to you before, we must
take our everlasting Farewell of our old dearly beloved Topic of Popery, for we
cannot mention it without reproaching our selves to the highest degree, and
doing them the greatest Honor in the World.


Pryn. Though I must confess I have an incurable hatred to Episcopacy, as I
believe all Persons have that are deeply tinctured with my Principles, yet I
cannot forbear to acquaint you, that if what you say is really true, it would
oblige me to abate a great deal of my old Severity and Prejudices against them.


Hick. The late King you must understand was a zealous Bigot for the Popish
Religion, and endeavored by all the ways in the World to introduce it into the
Kingdom; and as this Design was not to be executed, considering the posture of
Affairs at that time, without making use of an unlimited Arbitrary Power, and
carrying the Prerogative to greater heights than any of his Predecessors had
done; so the only Obstacle he met with, both in regard to Popery and the
Dispensing Power, was from the Established Church. Not a single Pamphlet
appeared, either from the Savoy or St. James's, but immediately all its little
Artifices were laid open, and all the Arguments answered with that perspicuity
of Thought, that beauty of Language, that variety of Learning, and above all,
that respect to the Sovereign then in being, that I, even I, who am a Professed
Enemy to the whole Tribe, and hate them as heartily as the Apothecaries hate
the Surgeons that entrench upon their Trade; yet cannot forbear to do them
this undeniable piece of Justice. Nay would you believe it? Seven of the
Prelates chose a voluntary Imprisonment, rather than contribute the least
either to the introducing of Popery, or the Slavery of their Country; so that
that Religion had in a manner abdicated a long time before its Monarch. All
this while the Dissenters --


Pryn. -- Ay, what did they do? for you know they use to smell Popery at as
great a distance as --


Hick. As they say a certain Peer's Horse can smell Fire.


Pryn. And besides hate Popery and all its wicked Works as mortally.


Hick. As an itinerant begging Levite does Pluralities, or a Griping old Cit
does a Lecture against Oppression. Why all this while, Mr. Pryn. the Dissenters
sat as mute as a new Sea-Chaplain in an Engagement; and notwithstanding there
were every day fresh advances made in behalf of the Romish Religion, yet they
seemed to apprehend the danger of Popery no more, than Noah and his Family did
the Conflagration, when they were stowed up in the Ark.


Pryn. You have certainly a Design to amuse me with Impossibilities, for in my
time I am sure the Dissenters were another sort of Men; rather than not find
Popery some where or another, they could then find it out in Christmas-Pies and
Plum-Porridge; and rather than not quarrel with Idolatry, they could then
quarrel with the Will Worship of Maypoles.


Hick. Upon my word, Mr. Pryn, it is every Syllable true what I have told you;
you need not entertain any such ill-grounded a suspicion of me, as to imagine
that I would slander them in the least. To reassume my Discourse, I don't know
of one single Sheet of Paper that was written either by any of their Divines,
or so much as a Lay Elder against the common Adversary; nor did I ever hear of
the least inclination they showed to oppose Popery by way of Discourse, unless
it were a certain Minister of that stamp here in Town, who as often as he
mentioned King James in his Prayers, very honestly prayed that he might become
the terror of Rome.


Pryn. What? that a Popish King might become the terror of Rome; O
Incorrigible Sot! And why not as well that he might become the Scourge of
Constantinople? Nay why did he not carry his ridiculous Banter farther, and
Pray as follows? Viz. May he fall foul upon the Skirts of the Great Mogul, and
confound the Devices of the Cham of Tartary. May the Bey of Algiers truckle to
him, and the Mad King of Madagascar be his most Humble Servant. May his
West India Plantations never fail to send his Subjects the best Tobacco, and
his East India Factories never fail to send them the best Spices to put in
their Bottled Ale. All this Stuff might have been as pertinently prayed for, as
that a Popish King might become the Terror of Rome. And was this all they did?


Hick. You shall hear. Instead of encountering our professed Enemies, who were
every day gaining ground upon us, the Dissenters employed themselves in nothing
else but charging the Church of England with a Spirit of Persecution, though what
they suffered was, between Friends I may say it, rather upon the score of an
open plain Conspiracy, than for their Religion; and besides, was not to be
named in the same Year with what the Episcopal Party had without any pretense
of Equity, suffered under their Dominion formerly.


Pryn. These undiscreet Proceedings gave admirable Sport and Entertainment to
the Priests, without question. But pray proceed.


Hick. Shortly after this, the late King for Reasons obvious and evident
enough, was pleased to issue out a Free Toleration to all his loving Subjects
of what Persuasion soever; and though the Dissenters, if they had had but half
the Understanding of an Humble-Bee, might have easily perceived the drift and
meaning of that Indulgence, yet they either really were, or what is full as
stupid, pretended to be altogether insensible of the design. You cannot imagine
how dutifully they swallowed this Bait, though it scarce served to cover the
Hook. Every Gazette was so crowded wtth their fulsome Addresses, that a Man,
unless he had a particular Interest at Court, could scarce prevail to get a
strayed Horse, or a deserting Prentice into the Advertisements. You Would almost
have sworn, it had rained Complements for a Twelve month together, as Livy says
it rained Stones before the Punick War; and such indeed these Complements were,
for they proved as fatal at last to the deluded Prince, as the Brickbats did to
St. Stephen. No young fluttering Coxcomb ever deified his Mistress after so
prodigal a rate, no hungry Poet ever squandered away so much nauseous Flattery
and Rhetoric upon a liberal Patron, as they did upon the mistaken Monarch for
his No gift of a Toleration. In short, if they had had all Arabia in their
hands, it would not have furnished them with Incense enough upon this occasion:
by their frequent Correspondence with the other Party, they were got too into
their Dialect, and so talked of nothing else but Oblations and Sacrifices. And
what were their Sacrifices? even those goodly Things called Lives and Fortunes.
Though by the by, Mr. Pryn, they sacrificed them as really, and as much according
to the Letter, as the Roman Priests do their Savior in the Sacrifice of the
Mass.


Pryn. You have perfectly astonished me with your News. Oh the degeneracy of
this profligate Age. Their Forefathers I am sure, were Men of another kidney.
They could scarce be brought to acknowledge the Lawful Rights of Princes; and
here their graceless unworthy Sons pay a servile Adoration to a confessed
Arbitrary Power. -- Well, I find, I must make all the have I can to the other
World, to converse again with the Hero's of the last Age; for I have not
Patience enough to tarry a moment longer in this.


Hick. Nay, nay, Mr. Pryn, prithee don't be so eager. If you will listen a while,
you will see the Dissenters are not a Pack of such reprobate Creatures, as you
concluded them at first to be. The Saints you know may sometimes have their
backslidings, and who can help it: but then the Saints by virtue of a small
Repentance, may soon recover their Reputation again in the World. To be short,
Mr. Pryn, the Dissenters as they are no Raskals, so they are no Fools; they
knew better things, than to stand by a Dispensing Monarchy when it came to the
trial; they believed, and still believe no more of the Iure Divino of
King-ship, than they do of the Iure Divino of the Alcoran; and though they made
so many specious repeated Promises of sacrificing you know what, yet to their
immortal Honor be it spoken, when they came to consider cooly and soberly of
the Matter, they found there was rank Popery in the Word. Indeed, if a Man had
not known them, and their Principles somewhat better, he might have been apt to
think the same thing of them, as the Gentleman did of a certain Rake-hell of a
Levite, whom he found very strenuously declaiming against Leudness, viz. that
they had been in earnest: but alas, Mr. Pryn, they designed nothing in the
World but a Jest, a mere Jest, when they made so many Solemn Vows of their
Sincerity and Allegiance; and if their Conduct in the late Reign was a little
obnoxious to Censure, and so forth; yet by their behavior under this, they
have made a sufficient atonement for it. Since the late Revolution they have
asserted the Deposing Power with as much freedom and vigor, as ever they did
between Forty One and the Restoration. The Rights of our Sovereign Lords The
People are publicly maintained; and there is never a Pulpit-Thrummer of that
Character here in the Town, but has as often told his Congregation, That Kings
are accountable to the Subject for every miscarriage: as he has whispered to
the Women, that unless they rifle their Husband's Pockets to pay the Minister,
they are to expect nothing but Fire and Brimstone in another World.


Pryn. Why this makes me some amends for what you told me before.


Hick. What is more, Mr. Pryn, all the bold public spirited Pamphlets that
visited the World in the late blessed Times of Liberty and Property, have been
lately Reprinted, and cried about the Streets; and Scandal, God be thanked, is
as much in fashion every where, as Flattery and Dissimulation at the Court, or
Cheating in the City, as Whoredom in Venice, or an Insensibility for one's
Religion in Holland. Secret Histories are as ready Money to the godly
Booksellers, as a secret Reserve of Claret to the Vintner. The Covenant begins
to regain its credit with the World, and a Commonwealth, or what is the same, a
precarious Monarchy, is not talked of so disrespectfully as formerly. Nay,
rather than want Scandal to furnish our Customers with, we have traveled as
far as Scotland to provide ourselves of so precious a Commodity, and now we
have enough upon our hands to supply all the Markets in Christendom. Not to be
tedious with you, Mr. Pryn, the Dissenters are the very same Men as to this
particular concern, as ever they were; and though, as in Interest bound, they
pretend to have the greatest veneration imaginable for their present Majesty's,
yet to keep them in awe, and make them mindful of their Stewardship, they treat
their Royal Predecessors with as little Ceremony, and as much Freedom, as a Man
would a common Porter or Scavenger in the Streets. Their private Failings and
Infirmities have been exposed to the World as publicly as the Votes of the
House, and what never fails to be done upon such occasions, they have lost
nothing at all in the relation.


Pryn. That I believe. And now, Sir, let me tell you, this latter part of your
Discourse has as it were revived me, if a Ghost may be allowed to use such an
expression. The truth on it is, I have in the other World heard most of the
things you have been pleased to relate to me; but then the account of Affairs
that we have below is so very uncertain, and withal reported so differently,
according to the particular genius and inclination of the Relator, that one
cannot tell whom to believe, or what News to depend upon. This was partly the
occasion why I imposed upon myself this troublesome Journey; and I shall always
reckon myself indebted to my good Stars, for giving me the opportunity to
satisfy all my Doubts, from the Conversation of so worthy a Person as
yourself, whose Sincerity I have no more reason to question, than I have to
deny the great Obligations of your Civility to a Stranger.


Hick. Oh fie, Mr. Pryn! I must desire you to forbear these Complements. I vow
to God, you will make me blush now, if you advance 'em any farther upon your
humble Servant.


Pryn. Indeed I must needs own, it rejoices me exceedingly to hear that our old
Friends have not apostatized from their Ancient Principles and Tenets about
Government; but what troubles me at the same time is, that they have dropped the
old Pretense and Charge of Popery, which is to my knowledge, the best Jewel
they have in their Crown. Their Ancestors I am confident would sooner have
renounced their Magna Charta, and Hopkins into the bargain, than have parted
with so advantageous, and so popular a Calumny. I remember those blessed Times,
and the remembrance of 'em is the greatest entertainment I have to relieve all
my pensive Moments in the Shades below, when every thing in the World that was
displeasing and offensive to the Brethren, went under the Name of horrid,
abominable Popish Superstition. Organs and Maypoles, Bishops Courts and the
Bear-Garden, Surplices and Long Hair, Cathedrals and Play Houses, Set Forms
and painted Glass, Fonts and Apostles Spoons, Church-Musick and Bull-baiting,
Altar-Rails and Rosemary on Brawn; nay, Fiddles, Whitson-Ale, Pig at
Bartholomew-Fair, Plum-porrige, Puppet-shows, Carriers Bells, Figures in
Gingerbread, and at last Moses and Aaron, the Decalogue, the Creeds, and the
Lord's Prayer --


Hick. Passed all for antichristian carnal Devices, Rags of Popery, Things of
human Invention, set up by the Man of Sin to scandalize the Saints, and pervert
the unstable.


Pryn. You say right; and so was every thing you can name, except a black
Satin Cap.


Hick. Because it savoureth of Gravity.


Pryn. A Sack-posset.


Hick. For lo! it encourages the Minister in his Ministry.


Pryn. A Surloyn of Beef.


Hick. Because the Saints are verily gross Feeders.


Pryn. A long Cloak.


Hick. Because, like Charity, it covers a multitude of Sins.


Pryn. A long Prayer.


Hick. Because Widows and Orphans are not palatable without 'em.


Pryn. A long Allegory.


Hick. For behold it is very refreshing to the White Aprons. Likewise except
long Ears, Mr. Pryn. There I think I have bobbed you.


Pryn. Aside. An Extempore Sermon.


Hick. Because Extempore Nonsense, is more excusable than studied Nonsense.


Pryn. An Ordinance of Both Houses.


Hick. Because a King is virtually included in them.


Pryn. A fat Capon and a Bag-pipe.


Hick. Because the one is a Geneva Dish, and the other a Scotch Covenanting
Instrument. Lastly, Mr. Pryn, to sum up all the Evidence together, because we
would not lose time, except Committee Men and Lay Elders, Battle and Murder,
Free Quarter and Famine, Sequestrations and Decimations, Compositions and
Monthly Excise: And all this was but necessary and requisite, in order to
humble the Profane, to mortify the Ungodly, and pull down the Pride of the
wicked Malignants, that so being sequestered from the Vanities of this World,
they might have nothing else to mind, but how to lick themselves whole in
another.


Pryn. Then my dear Friend, we carried on the blessed Work of the Reformation,
as far as Zeal inspired with Interest could carry it. We reformed the
Almanacks, new Christened the Festivals, Unsainted the Apostles, set the Chimes
to Psalm-Tunes, and gutted the Bible of the Service Book and Apocrypha. A
Crown, a Cross, an Angel and Bishop's Head could not be endured, so much as in
a Sign. Our Garters, Bellows, and Warming-Pans wore godly Motto's, our
Band-boxes were lined with wholesome Instructions, and even our Trunks with the
Assembly-mens Sayings. Ribbons were converted to Bible-strings.


Hick. And so were Graces to Long-Prayers, and Churches to Stables.


Pryn. Nay, in our Zeal we visited the Gardens and Apothecaries Shops. So
Unguentum Apostolicum was commanded to take a new Name, and besides, to find
Security for its good behavior for the future. Carduus Benedictus, Angelica,
St. Iohn's-wort, and our Ladies Thistle were summoned before a Class, and
forthwith ordered to distinguish themselves by more sanctified Appellations.
Thus by the plausible appearance of our great Piety, and our zealous
Performances in rooting out Popery and Superstition, we got an absolute
ascendant over the Hearts of the People, and managed them just as we pleased.
But alas, these Golden Times are clearly gone, and I am afraid we are to expect
'em no more.


Hick. I told you before, Mr. Pryn, it is to no purpose to charge the Church of
England with any more Popery. What they did in the late Reign has made such an
effectual impression upon every body, that so ridiculous a Calumny is never to
be used, at least as long as this Generation is alive. Besides, to tell you the
truth, the People are somewhat wiser in this Age, than to take every thing for
Popery, which a formal Thing in a little Band, and a black Cloak calls by that
Name.


Pryn. Why then we must bethink ourselves of some other expedient. I remember a
pleasant Story of a Fellow in my time, that had a Show at a Fair, so it seems
the business in hand required a little Snow: says the Master of the Booth to
the Fellow that managed Affairs behind the Curtain, Why don't you Snow there?
Sir, says the Fellow aloud to him, all the White Paper's gone. Why then you
Blookhead, cries the Master, Snow in some Brown Paper. And therefore Mr. Hick
--, since the old Clamor about Popery will be no longer serviceable to us, let
us conjure up something else to promote our Cause.


Hick. That Is well enough considered. And who so fit to draw up the Indictment
against the Prelatick Party, as the experienced Mr. Pryn? Your Talent I am sure
lies in Scandal, and unless the other World has altered you for the worse, you
are not unprovided of Malice to encourage you to do it.


Pryn. What think you then, if we should tax 'em with Ignorance, and want of
Learning?


Hick. It would do very well, I confess, if you could but persuade the
Booksellers to burn all the Books and Sermons they have Printed within these
twenty Years; for those are like to be so many speaking Evidences against us:
and then you must be sure to clap a Padlock upon most of the Conventicles here
in Town; for if our Enemies should take occosion to peep in there, it is ten to
one, but they will return the Charge back again upon those that began it; There Is
first of all Mr. Burg -- ss, yonder in Covent Garden, must be desired to hold
his Peace; for you cannot imagine how strangly People talk of him, for the
freedom he uses in his Pulpit, and particularly saying, a Sunday or two ago,
That our Savior was the Second Edition of God Almighty's Will with Amendments.
Then we must likewise silence poor Mr. Mayow, at Colledge-Hill, he that in the
Days of Yore held a Brew House in Commendam with a Conventicle, by the same
Token that the Ungodly railed at him for keeping Pluralities, not knowing that
the Saints ought to have Grains of Allowance given 'em. And lastly the zealous
Mr. Timothy Cr-s-r must be served after the same manner, a plain unaffected
Preacher, it is true, and one that values himself as much upon the score of his
being unacquainted with the Fathers, as a jealous Cheapside Cit hugs himself
for being unacquainted with any of the borrowing Courtiers. He was haranguing
the other day about the late Rapes, and told his Auditory, That so manifold and
sundry were the Rapes committed in and about the Town, that it looked as if the
great Enemy of Mankind the Devil, had sown the City with Rape-seed. This has
sunk his Reputation somewhat in the World. There are several others in the same
predicament with these; but it would be as troublesome to enlarge upon their
Characters, as to acquaint you with all the variety of Night-Caps, Flannel
Shirts, Wastcoats, Doublets, and Upper-Coats a certain Noble Peer wears in the
Winter.


Pryn. I find by what you have told me, it will not be so very convenient to
muster up the Charge of Ignorance. But what say you now to the old Imputation
of Debauchery and Profaneness.


Hick. I am afraid, Mr. Pryn, this same business will do us as little service
as the former, it is a two-edged Sword, and cuts either way. We still call
ourselves indeed, the sober godly part of the Nation; for the same reason, I
suppose, as the Kings of England style themselves Kings of France, viz. because
our Forefathers were so: But they, a shame take 'em for it, wore their
Hypocrisy to Rags, and so their Sons were cheated of their Inheritance, and
have only the Name to boast of. A pious Sister can now pass by a Church, even
when the Organ is playing, and yet fall into no Fits, or be discomposed at the
matter: And a moody Brother can ride his Horse by a May Pole, and yet the
insensible Beast never starts, or offers to throw his Master; even singing of
Psalms in private Families is as much out of fashion, as paying of Debts with
the Men of Alsatia; a Man may go through the Poultry, or any of the most
sanctified Streets about the Town a hundred times, and hear none of the
comfortable Poetry of Sternhold, and Wisdom. Lay Elders send their Daughters to
Dancing Schools, and their Sons wear Long Hair, and set up for Sparks of the
Town. It Is a sad observation, Mr. Pryn, but a very true one, that as a Miser
generally begets a Prodigal, so a Saint begets a Rake-hell.


Pryn. Alas, I am sorry to hear it, and is there then never a public spirited
Son of Thunder in the whole Tribe, that has Courage and Hardiness enough to
lash the degeneracy of the Age, and awake People to a sense of their Duty?


Hick. No Mr. Pryn, since you left the Earth, we have been destitute of such
brave, fiery, resolute Patriots. There is indeed one Mr. Stephens a
Poultry-Author, that has very lately attempted something of this nature, but
through his too zealous management of the Affair it happened to miscarry. He
proposed to the Parliament, to have the beginning or pledging of a Health,
punished with the same Penalty as he sets Reflections upon the discarriages of
the Navy. Printed by J. Harris.
upon Swearing, which is the precise Sum of twenty shillings, and in case of
disability, to have those notorious Offenders put in the Stocks and whipped. So
likewise, for any one that should presume to keep an Organ in a Public House,
to be fined 20 l. and made incapable of being an Ale-draper for the future. But
Mr. St -- did not think this punishment was sufficient for 'em, so he humbly
requested to have 'em excommunicated into the bargain, and not to be absolved
without doing Public Penance?


Pryn. And did so pious a Project as this come to nothing do you say.


Hick. It Is very true, Mr. Pryn, it was nipt in the bud. Not to be tedious with
you, there are none of the Dissenters that make any tolerable pretense to their
ancient Austerity but the Quakers, and even they begin to decline by degrees
from their primitive Institution. They still make a shift to retain their
distinguishing Garb, their little Cravats, broad-brim'd Hats, short Hair, and
Coats without Pockets before; but as for the rest of the Separatists, they have
clearly lost all their Ear-marks; you may meet with twenty and twenty of 'em in
the Streets, and yet not be able to distinguish 'em from the profane part of
Mankind, by any exterior appearances. And to say the truth, their Forefathers
are to be blamed for it; they wore their Hypocrisy, as they say a Welch-man
wears a Shirt, till it drop off from their shoulders; they did not leave
Hypocrisy, but Hypocrisy left them.


Pryn. Well, I should utterly despair of ever hearing that Presbytery would
make a figure again in the World, unless it were for some comfortable News that
I have learned of a Scotch Ghost in the other World. He informed me of the
miraculous Turn of Affairs in that Kingdom, how Episcopacy was abolished, and
Christianity in its puris naturalibus set up in the room of it; and what is yet
more material, how the Covenant, the Covenant of blessed Memory is still looked
upon as obligatory. So I am in good hopes our dear Brethren there will cross
the Tweed, one of these days, to remove the accursed thing, to propagate the
Cause, and establish the great Works of Righteousness and Truth.


Hick. Take my word for it, Mr. Pryn, that Turn of Affairs, as you call it, in
Scotland, is not so much for our advantage as you imagine. For my part, I Am so
far from thinking it will contribute any thing to our Interest, that on the
other hand, I fear it has broke the Neck of our Reputation, or rather of our
Juggling. They have carried on the Reformation in that Kingdom with so much
heat and rigor, not to call it cruelty, that although their Brethren of the same
Persuasion here in England have made a horrid noise about the persecuting
Spirit of the Established Church, and daily talk of Moderation, and giving
Quarter to those of a different Religion; yet it is breath foolishly spent, for
every body believes they would Copy from their dear Brethren of Scotland, if
ever they should arrive to have the Power in their hands. Such an ill favored
Accident as this happened in the late Reign: The Jesuits were willing to wipe
off some of the most popular Scandal from Popery, so they prevailed with the
King to grant Liberty of Conscience to all his Subjects, and then they fell a
magnifying the Charity and Bowels of the Church of Rome, after a wonderful
manner. At the same time those of the Society in France, were playing the Devil
at the expense of the poor Hugonets; so it was a very comical Scene to observe
with what flourishes the Priests recommended Love and Unity, and Forbearance to
us here at home, when there daily came over such shoals of French Refugee's to
contradict every Syllable they said; and it is no small diversion to our Enemies
without doubt, to hear our Dissenting Parsons talk of Peaceableness and
Gentleness, and the Lord knows what, when our streets are crowded with so many
of the Episcopal Clergy of the other Kingdom, whom the Presbyterian Moderation
has forced to seek their Bread in another Climate. -- But stay, who comes here,
it is one of my own Cloth David J -- appears. I perceive. I Will say that for
him, he is a brave lusty well built Fellow. But he mutters with himself, like a
bilked Coachman, or a disappointed Projector, and looks as fierce and furious
as if he had some strange design or other upon Daniel and the Revelations.


David. What to be thus ridiculed and affronted, for the sake of an innocent
well-meaning Sermon! to be crossed and tossed from Doctors-Commons to Fulham, and
at last to have an Ecclesiastical Padlock set upon my Mouth, it is hard, nay
barbarous, nay Paganish, and Unchristian.


Pryn. What does the Fellow mean, I wonder.


David. When sins do once begin to grow to an head, and to become in fashion,
they are to be roughly and severely dealt withal. An ordinary concern in such a
case, Page 8. of his Sermon.
is no better than silence, and silence in such a case is no better than
downright flattery. And to hold our Peace in such a case is all one, as to cry
aloud, Peace, peace.


Pryn. That is as much as to say, it is all one to speak, and to say nothing.
This young Sir Roger, I perceive, besides his other laudable Qualities, has a
pretty Talent at quibling.


David. But people will say, Alas poor Man! These Times will never bear it. But
to these I answer, These Times will, and must, and shall bear it, if I say the
word. Page 9.
Iniquity, let it be distinguished by what Titles it will, shall feel the
severity of my Indignation, and Prelates shall learn by my Example, what Vices
to lash, and what Sins to preach against.


Hick. Bravely resolved, I protest: He Is one of us, I perceive, Brother Pryn,
IN faith I long to be acquainted with him.


David. To think that a little foolish Admonition would prevail with me so far,
as to make me neglect my Duty, and the Salvation of Souls! 'twas mere stuff.
No, I Will roar against Sin louder than Euroclydon in the Acts, I Will bestride the
Dragon upon Bow, and from thence denounce Perdition and Desolation to the whole
City.


Hick. Nay, now I begin to melt. Something within whispers me, that this young
Boanerges and I were cast in the same Mold. It Is a tough brawny fighting Carle
I warrant him, he would make you nothing of a dozen Porters or Watermen at a time.
I wish I had him at Colchester to read Prayers, and fight my Battles for me.


David. All Mankind is my Diocese, and every particular Sin subject to my
Visitation: Before the Courtiers I Will preach against false Promises, and no
Payments. Before the Town-Ladies, against hiring a Friend to join 'em with some
noted Gallant in a Lampoon, and carrying their Patch-Boxes, and
Pocket-Looking-glasses to Church. Before the Foot-Guards, against building of
Sconces, and rubbing out of Milk-scores. Before the Beaux of Covent Garden,
against Lamblacking of Signs, and bilking Hackney-Coaches. Before the Poets --


Hick. If you can get 'em into the Church, I suppose, otherwise not.


David. Against stealing from one another, flattering their Patrons, and
shamming their Booksellers. Before Porters, against Whipping the Snake, and
squandering away their precious time at Putt, and All-Fours.


Pryn. Just of my own humor and inclination, I vow. I can scarce forbear
interrupting him.


David. Thus I Will discharge my indispensable Duty, without all fear or favor
[p. 10.]. I Will reprove the Lawyers for prolonging their Lawsuits; the
Physicians for prolonging their Cures, the Vintners for selling Claret for
Barcelona, and the City-Aldermen for forgetting their Leather-Breeches.


Hick. I find he will make his words good. He Will visit all Mankind before he has
done.


David. Merchants shall find the severity of my wrath, for their taking 20 per
Cent. Military Officers for making false Musters; the City-Justices for
conniving at Fornication in Satin, and punishing it in Grape: Chamber-Maids
for telling Tales behind their Master's back; Gentlemen Ushers for carrying
such small pitiful Legs about them, to the great scandal of their Ladies, as
if they had drained 'em. Schoolmasters for suffering their Boys to be mere
Arrians in Grammar, and confound the Three Persons; the two Universities for
neglecting Aristotle, and preferring Men of no merit; and lastly Divines for a
whole Cart-load, nay a Multitude, nay an Ocean of --


Hick. I can hold no longer an' I were to be hanged. He has won the heart of me
for ever. Worthy Sir, I am your most humble Servant. My Friend and I here made
bold to over-hear your Discourse, and are perfectly ravished to find, that
there is a young Man of such rare integrity, and boldness in the Nation, from
whom we are to expect such Miracles and Prodigies.


David. Sir, you are both Strangers. I don't understand how --


Hick. Come, come, dear Heart, I know thy meaning as well as if I had been in
the Belly of thee. Thou wast going to tell us, that thy Parts do not lie much
in Complementing; no more do mine, I Will assure thee. Why, Child, I am of the
same kidney with thy dear self. I am as gruff, and testy, and proud, and
ill-natured a Fellow as thou could wish for. But to let thee see, my young
Drawcansir, that thou art not fallen into bad Company, that is the Ghost of the
famous William Pryn, and I am the no less famous Hick -- of Colchester.


David. Oh the unexpected Happiness that my good Fortune has thrown upon me!
That I should be so happy, as to meet with two such celebrated Persons at a
time. And art thou then the Ghost of the indefatigable, irrefragable,
invincible Mr. Pryn, for whose Writings and other Virtues I have ever had so
great a veneration.


Pryn. The very same, dear Sir: and I shall not think my Journey into this
World ill bestowed, since it has furnished me with the opportunity of seeing so
accomplished a Person.


David. And art thou likewise the puissant, Polemic Divine of Colchester, Edm.
Hick -- by Name, with Heart of Oak, and Lungs of Leather? Oh thou true Mirror
of Ecclesiastical Chivalry!


Hick. I am he, my Noble Son of Thunder, for want of a better. And shall not we
have one civil touch at Fifty-cuffs, or so, before we part. Odd I long mightily
to exercise my hand. But dear Rogue, we'll only batter one another in jest.


Pryn. Well Sir, I hope you are satisfied with your Company. Not to amuse you
then with any farther Ceremonies, which is always needless and impertinent
amongst Friends, I would willingly be acquainted with your present Condition
and Circumstances. You may assure your self, I shall ever be ready to do you
what Service I can, which is to give you a good Character beforehand, in the
other World; and as for my Friend there, I don't question but he will employ all
his Interest for you, whenever he is favored with an opportunity.


Hick. Ay, ay, you may swear I Will do him all the kindness I can. I Will make a
Dean, a Bishop, an Archdeacon, the Lord knows what of thee, one of these days,
my dear Lad. Though may Small beer, and no Brandy be my portion, if I have
Interest enough to help him to any higher Preferment, than to be Chaplain to a
Market-Boat. Aside.


David. Truly Gentlemen, I take you both for a couple of civil virtuous
Persons, Men of my own complexion and temper, and therefore shall not conceal
the least material passage of my Life from you. -- To begin then, Wales is my
Native Country.


Hick. I am glad to hear it, my bold Britain, with all my heart. Unless my
Memory fails me, we are indebted to that place for Pelagius, and the more
modern Martin Mar-Prelate, besides thy heroic self.


David. Oxford the Scene of my Education, where I have still a small foolish
Trifle, which another Man perhaps would value, but I hate and despise. At
present my Residence is in London, where I design two things: First, To put in
for the next vacant Lecture, or Reader's place; and Secondly; in order to that,
To rail and bellow at all the visible and invisible Vice in the Nation.


Hick. Very politickly contrived, dear Heart. But may I make so bold with you,
as to enquire, why the University is not honored with your Company;
especially, since to use your own expression, you have a certain Trifle there,
which one would think, might oblige you to continue upon the spot, a year or
two longer.


David. Sir, you have put a question to me, which it goes somewhat against the
grain to answer; but since I promised to conceal nothing from you, I must tell
you then, that my Life was so very uneasy to me there, that I would much
rather choose to live in Green-land, or a Tobacco-Plantation, than in the
University.


Pryn. And what might be the occasion of that, my dearly beloved Son.


David. Nothing in the World as I know of, but only my plain dealing humor;
for if a Doctor or so chanced to preach a dull Sermon, I could not forbear to
quarrel with him upon that score: or, if a Head of a House preferred an
undeserving Fellow, I was sure to make all the Coffee-Houses in the Town ring
with the News; or if a Professor made a public Speech, 'twas ten to one but I
found out either false Latin, or no Philosophy in it; or if such a Man used to
take his Bottle of Wine before he went to Bed, why it is very likely I taxed him
with the Sin of Drunkenness. In short, there was nothing acted in the
University, either of a public or private nature, but I according to the open
frankness of my humor, made bold to examine, and generally to find fault with.
The great Men there, were too much conceited of themselves, to consult my
Advice, and so let 'em share the blame amongst 'em. But 'twas none of my fault,
I daily told 'em of their Duty.


Hick. A very free plain-dealing sort of a temper this, as one may say. But to
pursue the Discourse, how have thou spent thy time since, thou Heir Apparent to
my Prowess, and Fortitude.


David. After a year or two's continuance in the Country, I removed to London,
where I presumed I might have a fairer opportunity of showing my Parts, than
Wales could afford. Here I have preached for some time, as often as my Friends
would accommodate me with a Pulpit, and though I say it, that should not, not
without the general approbation of the People here in the City. But now I am
afraid I must take my last Farewell of Preaching, for I can prevail with no
body almost to lend me a Pulpit. They are as afraid of lending it.


Hick. As a Citizen is of lending his Wife to a Courtier. And say thou so
dear Heart! it is no great matter. I dare engage any of the Conventicles here in
Town, would be glad to receive a Youth of such commendable Qualities. But
prithee, how comes it about, that People are so shie to venture thee in their
Pulpits.


David. The same frank open humor that made me so remarkable at Oxford, has
attended me to this City. So if the Clergyman for whom I preach was famous for
his Talent of Oratory, and so forth, I never failed to wipe him for preaching
up himself, and turning the Pulpit into a Rostrum: or if he was a Noble-man's
Chaplain, and visited the Court but once a Month, he was sure to be chastised
for degrading the Royal Priesthood, for serving Tables, and ascending downwards
to Temporal Iudicatures [pag. 14.].


Hick. A very ingenious Expression that of Ascending downwards to Temporal
Iudicatures.


David. Well then, this is all, upon my word, Gentlemen.


Hick. And enough in Conscience. But after this open, free-hearted manner (as
Erasmus tells us) the Mendicant Friars were used to serve the Secular Clergy.
If the Parish Priest, of whom they begged a Nights Lodging, was so civil as to
break the Saturday-Fast for their sakes, and give 'em a far Capon for Supper,
to be sure these plain-dealing People requited him next Morning for his
Hospitality, and acquainted the whole Congregation with the story of the Capon.


David. I have likewise disobliged my Brethren with a Sermon that I lately
printed; but let 'em say what they please, I am sure there is nothing in it,
which a conscientious honest Man may be ashamed to own -- Stay, let me see, I
think I have a couple of 'em or more in my Pocket. Mr. Pryn, will you
condescend to accept so small a Trifle from your Humble Admirer? Here Is another
for you, Mr. Hick --


Hick. Hold, what have we here? A Sermon preached at Christ-Church, London,
Nov. 2. 1690. By David Jones, Student of Christ-Church in Oxford. What, have we
more still in the Title Page? Published at the Request of his Friends. Nay then
it cannot fail to be an Excellent one indeed. But pray, Sir, what may be the
drift, the meaning, and the design of your Sermon?


David. To make all the Clergymen odious and contemptible to the Laity. It Is
no more than what they deserve you know.


Hick. Why then your Friends, at whose Request it was published, are, I
suppose, the Dissenters, or some who would not be sorry to see all the Parsons
in the Kingdom turned out of all, and reduced to Beggary.


David. It Is an universal, bold-spirited Satyr, and touches the whole
Fraternity one way or other. Imprimis, It Is a Satyr against Eloquence.


Hick. I love thee dearly for that: For I hate Eloquence in a Sermon as
heartily as I do a Citation from Doctors-Commons. I will certainly make thee
Heir to my old, trusty, serviceable Cane, and my more serviceable Concordance
for this.


David. In the next place, it is a Satyr against Pluralities and Non-Residence.


Hick. Well, I must needs say this, we pitiful sorry Rascals, that have either
no Benefice at all, or what is as bad, a very small one, rail at Pluralities
with the best grace of any man breathing: And thus we rail at Eloquence in
other People, because we are not Masters of it our selves.


Pryn. This same Clamor about Pluralities was ever used by the Saints, though
when they came to get the Power in their hands they practiced it themselves.
For I remember honest Mr. Marshal inveighed very furiously against this sin,
even when he carried three Steeples in his Pocket, as the wicked Malignants
observed.


Hick. However I commend thee dear Heart for Preaching against Pluralities here
in England, and not in thy own Country; for though it may be a sin here, it is not
so I am confident in Wales. If holding of two Benefices, where one of 'em does
not afford a competent Maintenance, is no Crime at all, then in Wales a Man may
tack half a Diocese together, and yet not be charged with holding Pluralities.
A dozen Vicaridges there, even with the Sunday advantage of a Bear and a
Fiddle, will scarce keep the Minister, especially if he is married.


David. Lastly, It Is a Satyr against Eating or Drinking in a Lord's Family, but
especially against Pride.


Pryn. And that is a sin, under the Rose be it spoken, which we Reformers are
as much guilty of, as any Men in the Universe. But my dear Son, are there no
civil touches at Ceremonies and Superstition, and Altars in your Discourse.


Hick. Hold Mr. Pryn, that is no civil Question. You know the old saying, Nemo
repent fuit, and so forth. Come, come, Rome was not built in a day, a Man must
have time to refine and cultivate himself; Mr. I-nes is a young Man, and one of
these days will have a fling at all those paw things you have named; if he has
not done it already. I think he has given us enough in all Conscience for one
single Sermon.


Pryn. Nay, there I close with you. The Sermon by what account we have heard of
it, is a very commendable worthy Sermon, and so great a value have I for it,
that as soon as ever I arrive at the other World, I design to communicate it to
all my choice Acquaintance there.


David. That will be an extraordinary Honor I can assure you. Here Is another
of 'em for you, and pray present it from me, to my Countryman Pelagius.


Hick. And when your hand is in, you may tell him, That the Author of it will
make as great a bustle in the world as ever he did.


Pryn. You need not question but I Will perform my Message very punctually. And
now my dear Son (for by that Name I must call you for the future) to make you
some small amends for this kind voluntary Gift of a Sermon that you have made
me, I will make bold to give you a little Advice; it is all I can do at present
for you; and to make it find the greater welcome with you, I must in the first
place tell you, that it is the very same Advice that a late famous Assembly-man
gave to a Nephew of his, a little before his going into the Vineyard.


David. With all my heart, honored Sir, I shall listen to it with a great deal
of attention.


Pryn. It was a constant saying with this Assembly man, That it was the
principal part of a Divine's Office, to know how to manage Hell well.


David. Manage Hell well! In the Name of Wonder what did he mean by it.


Pryn. You shall hear. As this learned Gentleman well observed, Hell consists
chiefly in two Punishments, Roasting and Freezing, and a Minister ought to take
special care when to terrify the People with Roasting, and when with Freezing.
For instance, says he: Suppose a Man in the heat of Summer, when we sweat and
drip, and are ready to faint away, should talk of the freezing or gnashing of
Teeth that is in Hell, People would be apt to conclude it is no such
uncomfortable place as they imagined, but mistake it for a Grotto: And then
again in the midst of Winter, if he should indiscreetly talk of roasting and
fiting, they would certainly think it neither better nor worse than a Bagnio.
By this means Hell would lose most of its terror, and terror, according to
the Doctrine of the Triers, is the first motive of a Man's Conversion.
Therefore, Nephew, says he, whenever you preach, that you may frighten your
Auditors into a true apprehension of the Torments of the other World, be sure
you always apply your Roasting in the Summer, and your Freezing in the Winter.


Hick. Very pretty Advice upon my word. But not to be behind hand with my
Brother Pryn, pray take a little Advice from me too. You tell us, my young
Drawcansir, that you have a design upon some Preferment here in the City; and
it is a very laudable design I own: So you may rail at the Bishops and the
Clergy till your heart aches, and the Cits will take thee for a Cherubim
incarnate. But then hark you in my ear, not a word of Rebellion or Oppression,
or cheating or griping; or devouring of Widows, or swallowing of Orphans, as
you love your self; not one single Syllable of all this, do you mind me.


David. Well Gentlemen, I thank you heartily for your good Advice, which to say
the truth, comes very seasonably at present, to support me under the heavy load
of my Afflictions. Not to make a tedious recital of my Misfortunes, no Man has
suffered more than myself, and less deserved it.


Hick. Fie, fie, my Son of Thunder, You a Sufferer? You an Alderman as well;
What it may come to in time, if you still preserve your virtuous Principles, I
cannot tell: But alas! what you have already suffered, does not deserve a
mentioning. What! you have been ill spoken of, I warrant; And have not all your
Predecessors in the Noble Army of Reformers been abused that way ten times more
than yourself? Or has an Ecclesiastical Padlock, as you call it, been clapped
upon your Mouth? Why it is easily removed with a little sham Repentance. You had
no Estate to lose, and no Preferment to forfeit. Therefore if ever you talk of
Sufferers, then talk of me, and my Brother Pryn there.


Pryn. Nay, now you are out of your Road, Brother Hick. You are not to be named
in the same Year with myself, as to the point of Suffering. The utmost you
underwent was a small Confinement and a small Suspension, Things really not fit
to be called Sufferings in any Language. Whereas I was fined and imprisoned,
and to complete my Losses, lost my Ears at length.


Hick. What you say is very true. You lost your Ears indeed; But what of all
that? You made the poor Archbishop that ordered em to be cut off, to lose his
Head, and was not that a sufficient Recompense? For my own part, I protest to
you (and I dare swear the young Reformer is of my mind) that if I could have
half that Revenge upon a certain Prelate that shall be nameless, I could
willingly submit to lose my Ears, nay, and be circumcised into the bargain.


Pryn. That may be. But my time is now expired, and I can tarry no longer.
Continue steadfast to your Principles. Farewell Brother Hick: dear Son Adieu.


FINIS.

