PROPOSALS By way of CONTRIBUTION, For Writing A Natural History OF YORKSHIRE.
By Jo. Brown, Dr. of Laws and Physic.
FIrst of all, The Author proposes to take into Consideration the disposition
of the Heavens, and Temperatu^e of the Air in respect to the various Changes
and Alterations therein; and first the Longitude and Latitude of the Country
shall be reckoned in respect of London: likewise the usual salubrity or
insalubrity of the Air, and with what constitutions it agrees better or worse
than others.

2dly. The water will be considered, as First Rivers with their Bigness, Course
and Inundasions, with all the different species of Plants, Insects and Fishes,
that are to be found in them: Likewise Lakes, Ponds, Springs; and especially
Mineral-waters, as of what Medicinal use they are of, what sorts of Earth they
run through; their Kinds, Qualities and Virtues, and how examined.

3dly, The Earth shall be observed, and first in its self, as to its
Dimentions, Situation, Figure, or the like, its plain Hills or Valleys, with
the several kind of Soyls, that are there; as of Clay, Sand, Gravel, etc. what
are its Products as to Minerals, Vegetables, or Animals; Moreover, how all or
any of these are, or may be further improved for the benefit of Man. Then 2dly,
The Inhabitants themselves will be considered, that have been long setlled
there, particularly as to their Ingenuity, Diet, Inclinations, etc. whith what
Improvements of Arts have been made in those parts of late years: And further,
the Products of the Earth will be more nicely examined, with all the
Pecularities observable therein; as Plants, Trees, Fruits, Animals, and Insects
of all sorts; with Clays, Marles, Boles, Earths, Axungiae, Coals, Salts, Aloms,
Vitriols, Sulphers, and all other Minerals of what kind soever that the earth
yields; and to what use they are, or may be applied, either to Meat, Physic or
any other kind.

4thly, All Gentlemen of the same County, that Contribute to this Work, shall
have the Sum contributed specified, with their Names, Arms, and Titles
inserted, and more particular Descriptions given of their several Houses and
Families, and exact Prospects taken of every Gentleman's Seat that are
Contributors.

5thly, All Burough, Towns, Towns-Corporate, and other Market Towns, shall have
Prospects and particular Observations taken with their several Towns and
respective Constitutions faithfully described, if they be Contributors hereto;
for the design is not intended a Geographical, but Natural History.

6thly, The Author Proposes to make Exact Maps of every Wapon-take, or Hundred;
which, with the several other Cuts necessary to be Inserted, will take above
150 Copper Plates; for that he has, and further designs to take an Impartial
Survey of all Towns and Places, so that he may Impose nothing credulously upon
the World from the unexamined Traditions of the Ancients, but true and just
Observations, taken from the Natural State of things, faithfully represented;
so that by this Means, he cannot Perfect such a vast Work without great Time
and Expenses.

7thly, Contributions will be received by Mr. Smith and Mr. Walford, at the
Princes Arms in Paul's Churchyard, Mr. Bentley, in Covent Garden, Mr. Bosvile,
at the Dial over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, London, by Mr.
Clark Bookseller, and the Author in York, who will give Receipts to all
Contributors that their Money shall be returned to them again, if the
Undertaking be not finished within ^ years.

Note, The Design has already received very good Encouragement from several
Persons of Quality.

FINIS.

