A Catalogue of the Mathematical Works of the Learned Mr. Thomas Baker, Rector
of Bishop Nympton in Devonshire, with a Proposal about printing the same; and
first one entitled the GEOMETRICAL KEY, or the Gate of Aequations Unlockt.
A New Discovery of the Constructious of all Aequations howsoever affected, not
exceeding the 4th degree; viz. Of Linears, Quadratics, Cubics, and
Biquadratics, and the finding of all their Roots as well true as negative,
without the use of Mesolabe, and Trisection of Angles; without Reduction,
Depression, or any other praevious preparation of Aequations, by a Circle and
any (and that but one only) Parabole: and this by one only general Rule. than
which a more simple, more perfect, more general, more easy to be understood, or
more fit for practice, cannot be devised or wished for.

Fortified with Demonstrations, Illustrated with Figures to each Aequation,
which are Exemplyfied with numeral Aequations, (according to all the varieties
of Cases) adapted to each Figure, for the use of young Mathematicians; a work
hitherto defired.

THe Treatise consists of about a Quire of Paper, the Discourse whereof (but
not the Algebraick Calculus) is both in Latin and English, the better to
promote its foreign vend; and this does not render it above three Sheets the
larger than it would have been in one of these Languages. Besides which, there
is belonging to it diverse Draughts of Schemes to be engraven, and one Folio
Draught, whereto the literal Calculus for settling the Center, and finding the
Raedius of the Circle that is to intersect the Parabole is expressed in
readiness for all Cases.

How Des Carts and all other famous Analysts came to miss this general Rule,
and himself to fall upon it, he acquaints the Reader in the middle of his
Discourse; namely, that they considered the Axe of a Parabole and not its
Diameter: and affirms, that if it had been his or their hap to have described a
Circle from any Point in Position given, passing through the Vertex of any
Diameter in the Parabole, and had taken into consideration a certain propriety
than which none could so have suited the design) belonging to the Diameter of
any Parabole, they could not but with greatest ease, have made a full discovery
of the Universal Rule.

The excellency of which Invention appears, in that it discovers not only the
Geometrical Construction of all Aequations as abovesaid, by one only standing
measure and Scheme, and that by one only general rule, with the exact number of
Roots as well true as negative, but also by giving a fair prospect toward
their Arithmetical Calculus, or numerous Resolution, by making a Discovery of
their two first figures or numbers; namely, by applying the Compasses to the
several Roots Geometrically found in the Scheme, and comparing them with that
very Scale from which the said Scheme (suited to the proposed Aequation) was
drawn, the residue of which roots, (though not precisely, yet sufficient nearly
approximating to the true) may diverse ways in Decimals be found out, which the
Author (as he intimated in a Letter of April 1682, to Mr. Collins) is willing
to impart; but as to the Invention of these residuals (to be entailed to the
two first figures or Numbers of this Author thus findable. The Learned Mr.
Isaac Newton Professor of Mathematics in Cambridge (in a Letter long since
communicated to the aforesaid Mr. Collins) has as to this purpose performed
the same (as is conceived) by a different method, namely, that when a root of
any Aequation is by any Method (which by the Authors aforesaid it may be) so
near found that it does not differ above a tenth part of its self from the true
root sought, the residue of the root inquired will be easily calculated by aid
of some terms or Fractional parts of an infinite Series or rank of continual
Proportionals, derived from the difference between the Resolvend of the known
part of the Root, and that whose Root is sought. By which means by raising
Resolvends out of any assumed Roots with an easy approach, without raising the
respective powers of the said Roots, we are delivered from the most toilsom
Drudgery of Mathematical Calculations, by finding the Roots of Aequations in
numbers, by Vietas general method; a thing utterly unknown to the Ancients.
However this is not said to disparage that Method which Victa so greatly
esteemed, that when he had obtained it, he gave Algebra this high Encomium,
that it did Nullum non Problema solvere, in his numerical Method Mr. Oughtred
and Harriot have taken commendable pains. But now last of all, to perform in
Species as Mr. Isaac Newton has done, seems a new Invention never to be
sufficiently praised; for out of a literal Aequation of five Dimensions,
supposing all the terms extant and affirmed, he has given a Series for the
Root in Species, and such a one as shall serve for finding the Roots of all
Equations of 3, 4 or 5 Dimensions, by only altering the signs according as as
the Aequation is affected, and expunging such parts as relate to Deficient
terms in an incomplete Aequation proposed.

Now that this admirable Doctrine may come to light, and the Learned Author
(who has many other Treatises worthy public view) may be incited to impart
the same, encouragements for the promoting thereof (seeing Undertakers are not
to be had without) must be propounded.

It is therefore humbly offered, that the Royal Society by their Treasurer etc.
enter into Bond to such Bookseller as shall be the Undertaker, to take of 60 of
these Books in Quires at 1 d. each Sheet, and as much each Plate, as soon as
printed.

The Treatise it self and the Proposal, is approved and agreed to by the
Council of the Royal Society.

And in regard such a Subscription is not sufficient to incite an Undertaker,
that the respective Members endeavor by virtue of this Narrative, to obtain as
many more Subscribers as they can procure amongst others that are not of the
Society, each of them to advance half a Crown in hand, in part of the former
price: upon which encouragements, Robert Clavel Bookseller at the (...) in St.
Paul's Church Yard, is ready to give reciprocal (...) for the performance
according to this Proposal, hoping the like encouragement will be given toward
printing the rest of the Treatise of this most Learned Author, whereof take the
ensuing Catalogue.

1. The Hyperbolic Key, or the Geometrical Construction of Cubic and
Biquadratic Aequations; by a Circle and an equilateral Hyperbole; whereof the
one moiety (exactly) viz. of eight Cubicks and four and twenty Biquadratics;
(as is expressed in the former treatise) namely,

1. Of all those Cubicks; wherein 1. The quantity (q) is wanting; and p and r
affected with diverse Signs. 2. The quantity (p) is wanting, and in the
Aequation be had - q. 3. None of the terms are wanting, and in the Aequation be
had + q,


2. Of all those Biquadratic Aequations in which are had + s, by the demission
of Perpendiculars, from the points of Intersections of the Circle and Hyperbole
to the Assymptote; part of the other moiety, by the demission of perpendiculars
from the aforesaid interfections to the axe; etc. with Schemes adapted to each
Aequation, etc. with a Synopsis of the whole, wherein the Literal Rule for
fixing the Center, and finding the Radius of the Circle, that is to intersect
the Aequilateral Hyperbole (the easiest way of the Construction of which is
likewise therein discovered) is expressed in readiness for all Cases.

This method of Construction (were it not, that for every Case a new Hyperbole
must be described) would not be inferior to that by a Parabole, but rather
exceed it; in that the Circle does not arcuate the same way which the figure
does, but crosses it the other way; by which means a clearer discovery (as to
the one moiety) of the points of intersection of the Circle with the Hyperbole
is obtained, than what can possibly be had in any other Coni-section.

3. The Geometrical Construction of some Aequations which ascend to the 5th and
6th power, with the finding of their Roots, by a Curve of the third degree;
namely by the first kind (for there are two kinds) of a Paraboleid and a
Circle, illustrated with Schemes to each Aequation, and numeral Aequations
adapted to them; with a Synopsis to the same for placing the Center and finding
the Radius, and a general little Table, for the describing of both kinds of
Paraboleids.

4. The Construction of all Cubick Aequations howsoever affected by a Circle
only, Geometricaliy upon Supposition, that one Postulatum be granted to be
Geometrical (which indeed is but a Supplement to Geometrical defects;) viz.
That from any point assigned in the circumference of a Circle (that is normaly
quadrisected) may be drawn a right Line, so that the parts intercepted both
ways by the Circumference and Diameter, may be equal to the Radios of the
Circle: this way (though not so purely Geometrical as the rest) is not to be
despised, since that these Lines may sufficient precisely be so drawn.

5. The Geometrical Construction of all Cubic Aequations according to the Rule
found out by Franciscus a Shooten, mentioned in his Commentaries on Des Carts,
Lib. 3. Page 328, 329, 330, illustrated with Figures and Numeral Aequations
adapted to each Figure, etc.

6. The Resolution of all Cubick Aequations in numbers not only by a general
Rule (by the assistance of any Figure resolving them Geometrically etc. but by
a more particular method far exceeding any extant in numbers or by help of
tables; illustrated with Figures and Examples in numbers, suited to each figure
and Aequation.

7. Mixed or Compound Trigonometry; in many instances far exceeding the simple,
as finding two Quaesitas (as it were) by one operation, or by two at most; with
a Synopsis of the admirable harmony between Plain and Sphaerical Triangles: for
instance,

In plain Rectangular Triangles, the e under half the sum of the Hypotenuse and
one side: and half their difference, is equal to the Square of the other side,
so in Sphaerical Rectangular Triangles. The under the Tangents of half the sum
and half the difference of the Hypotenuse and one side: is equal to the square
of the Tangent of half the other side.

Again in Obliquangular Plain Triangles.

^

Thus likewise in Sphaerical Obliquangular Triangles.

^

Again in plain Triangles. Basis. Z crurum, X crurum, X of the Segments of the
Base.

In Sphaerical also.

t, Basis. t, Z Crurum, t, X Crurum, t, X Segmentorum basis, with infinite
other alike harmonious.

To which is added the Geometrical Construction of all Sphaerical Triangles, by
a most plain and easy uniform way, which is indeed of singular use.

Also a discovery of the Method by which Vieta (Lib. 8 p. 431 etc.) found out
his Canonical Analogy of Sphaerical Triangles, which he has left
undemonstrated, but in this Treatise is discovered.

8. Cardanus Promotus, or Cardans Rules, or Vieta's duplicata Hypostasis, in
infinitum, carried on with a Table for the composition in infinitum of such
Aequations. By which means such Canons are generally composed for Aequations of
two Nomes (and in many Cases for more) equal to a Resolvend given.

9. A Continuation of Vietas Apollonius Gallus, Appendicula; 1. And his
Problemes otherwise demonstrated, wherein the Base and Angle opposite to the
Base are always two of the Data's, and the other, either the perpendicular or
the difference of the Segments of the Base, or the difference of the squares of
the sides, or the sum of the Squares of the sides, or the Sum of the sides, or
the difference of the sides or their, whose Geometrical effection was
altogether unknown to the ancient Analysts, Vieta ibid.

10. Vera and Genuina Symmetrica Climactismus, by which means all Asymmetries
in Algebraics may be wiped off, and an Aequation found in any one of the
unknown magnitudes proposed, which shall never ascend higher, than the double
of the highest power first proposed, (...) which also that most peplexing
entangling inextricable way of Vieta may be laid aside as useless, and
inefficacious, though hitherto it has been the only remedy. Adversus vitium
Asymmetriae, this treatise was many years since composed and laid aside; but
the Author lately meeting with the opera Posthuma of Monsciur de Fermat,
treating on the same Subject in his ( Varia opera Mathematica page 58, 59,
etc.) and finding that though he rightly hits the mark; yet that he goes not in
a straight Line to it, has revised his old Copy, and compared it with Fermats;
and which of the two, has gone the Simpler way, the Author leaves to the
judgment of others, being loath in the least to take up the Gantlets against
such a famous man whom all the world admires.

11. Apollonius magnus Gregorianus, or a Treaiise of four Geometrical
proportionals, wherein diverse ways are found to solve that Grand problem, which
has so amused the world, (viz.)

Having the sum of all the Squares, and the sum of all the Cubes, of four
Geometrical Proportionals to find the Proportionals themselves; with questions
of the like nature, by low Aequations, without aid of Analytick Store.

11. Of Triangular Sections by a different method than what Anderson has
performed it by, in Vieta, with a discovery of the falsehood (as to angular
Sections) of Mr. Oughtreds 1st. Rule, in his Clavis Mathem. c. 16. p. 14.

12. The finding out of Aequations which may infinitely ascend, whose Roots are
either in Arithmetical or Geometrical proportion which may be found out in
numbers by extracting the Square and Cube Root, with surd Canons adapted to
that purpose, and to many other Aequations.

13. A Miscellancy of the solution of many knotty Problemes, namely, such as
have been found difficult to be brought to any Equation, or else would mount
very high in Ordine Scalae, with a new method of Depressing them, by aid of one
or two Aequations, raised by altering the Data, and putting two unknown
quantities, by which means the adjutant Aequations as having the same common
root, depress the Aequation that otherwise should be resolved.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Author herein supposes the Reader to understand the use of common Symbols
described in his first Book; ziz. cs, for Cosine, s, for Sine, Z for Sum, X for
difference, for Angle, for Angles. And the Reader must be informed, that as the
whole seems novel, so a brief Demonstration of those Proposals in Sec. 7. to
hold in Sphaericals is most desirable; and if others be not wanting in their
encouragements, its not to be feared the Royal Society will be slow in theirs.


