A true and full copy of yt which was most imperfectly and Surreptitiously
printed baefore under the name of Religio Medici: the 8 Edition Printed at
London. 1682.



RELIGIO MEDICI. The Eighth Edition, Corrected and Amended. WITH ANNOTATIONS
Never before Published, Upon all the obscure passages therein. ALSO
OBSERVATIONS By Sir KENELM DIGBY, Now newly added.

LONDON, Printed for R. Scot, T. Basset, J. Wright, R. Chiswell, 1682.

A Letter sent upon the Information of Animadversions to come forth, upon the
imperfect and surreptitious Copy of Religio Medici, whilst this true one was
going to Press.
Honored Sir,
GIve your Servant, who has ever honored you, leave to take notice of a Book
at present in the Press, entitled (as I am informed) Animadversions upon a
Treatise lately printed under the name of Religio Medici; hereof, I am
advertised, you have descended to be the Author. Worthy Sir, permit your
Servant to affirm there is contained therein nothing that can deserve the
Reason of your Contradictions, much less the Candor of your Animadversions: and
to certify the truth thereof, That Book (whereof I do acknowledge my self the
Author) was penned many years past, and (what cannot escape your apprehension)
with no intention for the Press, or the least desire to oblige the Faith of any
man to its assertions. But what has more especially emboldened my Pen unto you
at present, is, That the same Piece, contrived in my private study and as an
Exercise unto my self, rather than an Exercitation for any other, having past
from my hand under a broken and imperfect Copy, by frequent transcription it
still run forward into corruption, and after the addition of some things,
omission of others, and transposition of many, without my assent or privacy,
the liberty of these times committed it unto the Press; whence it issued so
disguised, the Author without distinction could not acknowledge it. Having thus
miscarried, within a few weeks I shall, God willing, deliver unto the Press the
true and intended Original (whereof in the mean time your worthy Self may
command a view;) otherwise when ever that Copy shall be extant, it will most
clearly appear how far the Text has been mistaken, and all Observations,
Glosses, or Exercitations thereon, will in a great part impugn the Printer or
Transcriber, rather than the Author. If after that, you shall esteem it worth
your vacant hours to discourse thereon, you shall but take that liberty which I
assume my self, that is, freely to abound in your sense as I have done in my
own. However you shall determine, you shall sufficiently honor me in the
Vouchsafe of your Refute, and I oblige the whole World in the occasion of your
Pen.

Norwich. March 3. 1642. Your Servant. T. B.

Worthy Sir,
SPeedily upon the Receipt of your Letter of the third Current, I sent to find
out the Printer that Mr. Crook (who delivered me yours) told me was printing
something under my name, concerning your Treatise of Religio Medici, and to
forbid him any further proceeding therein; but my Servant could not meet with
him; whereupon I have left with Mr. Crook a Note to that purpose, entreating
him to deliver it to the Printer. I verily believe there is some mistake in the
information given you, and that what is printing must be from some other Pen
than mine; for such reflections as I made upon your learned and ingenious
discourse, are so far from meriting the Press, as they can tempt no body to a
serious reading of them; they were Notes hastily set down, as I suddenly ran
over your excellent Piece, which is of so weighty subject, and so strongly
penned, as requires much time, and sharp attention but to comprehend it;
whereas what I writ was the employment but of one sitting; and there was not
twenty four hours between my receiving my Lord of Dorset's Letter that
occasioned what I said, and the finishing my Answer to him; and yet part of
that time was taken up in procuring your Book, which he desired me to read and
give him an account of, for till then I was so unhappy as never to have heard
of that worthy discourse. If that Letter ever come to your view you will see
the high value I set upon your great parts: and if it should be thought I have
been something too bold in differing from your sense, I hope I shall easily
obtain pardon, when it shall be considered, That his Lordship assigned it me as
an Exercitation to oppose in it, for entertainment, such passages as I might
judge capable thereof; wherein what liberty I took, is to be attributed to the
security of a private Letter, and to my not knowing (nor my Lord's) the person
whom it concerned.

But Sir, now that I am so happy as to have that knowledge, I dare assure you,
that nothing shall ever issue from me but savouring of all honor, esteem, and
reverence both to your felf, and that worthy production of yours. If I had the
vanity to give my self reputation by entering the Lists in public with so
eminent and learned a man as you are, yet I know right well, I am no ways able
to do it; it would be a very unequal progress: I pretend not to learning; those
slender notions I have, are but disjoynted pieces I have by chance gleaned up
here and there. To encounter such a sinewy Opposite, or make Animadversions
upon so smart a Piece as yours is, requires such a solid stock and exercise
in School-learning. My superficial besprinkling will serve only for a private
Letter, or a familiar discourse with Lady-auditors. With longing I expect the
coming abroad of the true Copy of that Book, whose false and stolen one has
already given me so much delight. And so assuring you I shall deem it a great
good fortune to deserve your favor and friendship, I kiss your hand and rest

Winchester House, March 26. 1642. Your most humble Servant, Kenelm Digby.

To the Reader.
CErtainly that man were greedy of Life, who should desire to live when all the
world were at an end; and he must needs be very impatient, who would repine at
death in the society of all things that suffer under it. Had not almost every
man suffered by the Press or were not the tyranny thereof become universal, I
had not wanted reason for complaint: but in times wherein I have lived to
behold the highest perversion of that excellent invention, the name of his
Majesty defamed, the Honor of Parliament depraved, the Writings of both
depravedly, anticipatively, counterfeitly imprinted; complaints may seem
ridiculous in private persons; and men of my condition may be as incapable of
affronts, as hopeless of their reparations. And truly had not the duty I owe
unto the importunity of friends, and the allegiance I must ever acknowledge
unto truth, prevailed with me; the inactivity of my disposition might have made
these sufferings continual, and time that brings other things to light, should
have satisfied me in the remedy of its oblivion. But because things evidently
false are not only printed, but many things of truth most falsely set forth, in
this latter I could not but think my self engaged. For though we have no power
to redress the former, yet in the other, reparation being within our selves, I
have at present represented unto the world a full and intended Copy of that
Piece, which was most imperfectly and surreptitiously published before.

This I confess, about seven years past, with some others of affinity thereto,
for my private exercise and satisfaction, I had at leisurable hours composed;
which being communicated unto one, it became common unto many, and was by
Transcription successively corrupted, until it arrived in a most depraved Copy
at the Press. He that shall peruse that Work, and shall take notice of sundry
particulars and personal expressions therein, will easily discern the intention
was not public: and being a private Exercise directed to my self, what is
delivered therein, was rather a memorial unto me, than an Example or Rule unto
any other: and therefore if there be any singularity therein correspondent unto
the private conceptions of any man, it does not advantage them: or if
dissentaneous thereunto, it no way overthrows them. It was penned in such a
place, and with such disadvantage, that (I protest) from the first setting of
pen unto paper, I had not the assistance of any good Book, whereby to promote
my invention, or relieve my memory; and therefore there might be many real
lapses therein, which others might take notice of, and more that I suspected my
self. It was set down many years past, and was the sense of my conception at
that time, not an immutable Law unto my advancing judgment at all times; and
therefore there might be many things therein plausible unto my passed
apprehension, which are not agreeable unto my present self. There are many
things delivered Rhetorically, many expressions therein merely Tropical, and as
they best illustrate my intention; and therefore also there are many things to
be taken in a soft and flexible sense, and not to be called unto the rigid test
of Reason. Lastly, all that is contained therein, is in submission unto maturer
discernments; and as I have declared, shall no further father them than the
best and learned judgments shall authorize them: under favor of which
considerations I have made its secrecy public, and committed the truth there
to every Ingenuous Reader.

Tho. Brown.

RELIGIO MEDICI.
in the Religion of my Country: But having in my riper years and confirmed
Judgment, seen and examined all, I find my self obliged by the Principles of
Grace, and the Law of mine own Reason, to embrace no other Name but this:
Neither does herein my zeal so far make me forget the general Charity I owe
unto Humanity, as rather to hate than pity Turks, Infidels, and (what is worse)
Jews; rather contenting my self to enjoy that happy Style, than maligning those
who refuse so glorious a Title.

and the Martyrs confirmed, but by the sinister ends of Princes, the ambition
and avarice of Prelates, and the fatal corruption of times, so decayed,
impaired, and fallen from its native Beauty, that it required the careful and
charitable hands of these times to restore it to its primitive Integrity. Now
the accidental occasion whereupon, the slender means whereby the low and abject
condition of the Person by whom so good a work was set on foot, which in our
Adversaries beget contempt and scorn, fills me with wonder, and is the very
same Objection the insolent Pagans first cast at Christ and his Disciples.

stand in Diameter and Swords point with them: We have reformed from them, not
against them; for omitting those Improperations, and Terms of Scurrility
betwixt us, which only difference our Affections, and not our Cause, there is
between us one common Name and Appellation, one Faith and necessary body of
Principles common to us both; and therefore I am not scrupulous to converse and
live with them. to enter their Churches in defect of ours, and either pray with
them, or for them: I could never perceive any rational Consequence from those
many Texts which prohibit the Children of Israel to pollute themselves with the
Temples of the Heathens; we being all Christians, and not divided by such
detested impieties as might profane our Prayers, or the place wherein we make
them; or that a resolved Conscience may not adore her Creator any where,
especially in places devoted to his Service; where if their Devotions offend
him, mine may please him; if theirs profane it, mine may hollow it: Holy Water
and Crucifix (dangerous to the common people) deceive not my judgment, nor
abuse my devotion at all: I am, I confess, naturally inclined to that, which
misguided Zeal terms Superstition: my common conversation I do acknowledge
austere, my behavior full of rigor, sometimes not without morosity; yet at my
Devotion I love to use the civility of my knee, my hat, and hand, with all
those outward and sensible motions which may express or promote my invisible
Devotion. I should violate my own arm rather than a Church, nor willingly
deface the name of Saint or Martyr. At the fight of a Cross or Crucifix I can
dispense with my hat, but scarce with the thought or memory of my Savior: I
cannot laugh at, but rather pity the fruitless journeys of Pilgrims, or contemn
the miserable condition of Friars; for though misplaced in Circumstances, there
is something in it of Devotion. I could never hear the A Church Bell that tolls
every day at six and twelve of the Clock; at the hearing whereof, every one in
what place soever, either of House or Street, betakes himself to his prayer,
which is commonly directed to the Virgin.
Ave-Mary Bell without an elevation, or think it a sufficient warrant, because
they erred in one circumstance, for me to err in all, that is, in silence and
dumb contempt; whilst therefore they direct their Devotions to Her, I offered
mine to God, and rectify the Errors of their Prayers, by rightly ordering mine
own: At a solemn Procession I have wept abundantly, while my consorts blind
with opposition and prejudice; have fallen into an excess of scorn and
laughter: There are questionless both in Greek, Roman, and African Churches,
Solemnities and Ceremonies, whereof the wiser Zeals do make a Christian use,
and stand condemned by us, not as evil in themselves, but as allurements and
baits of superstition to those vulgar heads that look asquint on the face of
Truth, and those unstable Judgments that cannot resist in the narrow point and
center of Virtue without a reel or stagger to the Circumference.



and as it were framed to my particular Devotion, as this whereof I hold my
Belief, the Church of England, to whose Faith I am a sworn Subject; and
therefore in a double Obligation subscribe unto her Articles, and endeavor to
observe her Constitutions; what soever is, beyond, as points indifferent, I
observe according to the rules of my private reason, or the humor and fashion
of my Devotion; neither believing this, because Luther affirmed it, or
disproving that, because Calvin has disavouched it. I condemn not all things
in the Council of Trent, nor approve all in the Synod of Dort. In brief, where
the Scripture is silent, the Church is my Text; where that speaks, it is but my
Comment: where there is a joint silence of both, I borrow not the rules of my
Religion from Rome or Geneva, but the dictates of my own reason. It is an
urjust scandal of our adversaries, and a gross error in our selves, to compute
the Narivity of our Religion from Henry the Eighth, who though he rejected the
Pope, refused not the faith of Rome, and effected no more than what his own
Predecessors desired and assayed in Ages past, and was conceived the State of
Venice would have attempted in our days. It is as uncharitable a point in us to
fall upon those popular scurrilities and opprobrious scoffs of the Bishop of
Rome, to whom as temporal Prince, we owe the duty of good language: I confess
there is a cause of passion between us; by his sentence I stand excommunicated,
Heretic is the best language he affords me; yet can no ear witness, I ever
returned him the name of Antichrist, Man of sin, or Whore of Babylon. It is the
method of Charity to suffer without reaction: Those usual Satyrs and
invectives, of the Pulpit may perchance produce a good effect on the vulgar,
whose ears are opener to Rhetoric than Logic; yet do they in no wise confirm
the faith of wiser Believers, who know that a good cause needs not to be
pardoned by passion, but can sustain it self upon a temperate dispute.

an inconsiderate Zeal unto Truth, have too rashly charged the Troops of Error,
and remain as Trophies unto the enemies of Truth: A man may be in as just
possession of Truth as of a City, and yet be forced to surrender; it is
therefore far better to enjoy her with peace, than to hazard her on a battle:
if therefore there rise any doubts in my way, I do forget them, or at least
defer them, till my better settled judgment, and more manly reason be able to
resolve them, for I perceive every man's own reason is his best Oedipus, and
will upon a reasonable truce, find a way to loose those bonds wherewith the
subtleties of error have enchained our more flexible and tender judgments. In
Philosophy, where Truth seems double faced, there is no man more Paradoxical
than my self; but in Divinity I love to keep the Road; and though not in an,
implicit, yet an humble faith, follow the great wheel of the Church, by which
I move, not reserving any proper Poles or motion from the Epicycle of my own
brain; by this means I have no gap for Heresy, Schisms, or Errors, of which
at present I hope I shall not injure Truth to say I have no taint or tincture:
I must confess my greener studies have been polluted with two or three, not any
begotten in the latter Centuries, but old and obsolete, such as could never
have been revived, but by such extravagant and irregular heads as mine; for
indeed Heresies perish not with their Authors, but like the River Arethusa,
though they lose their currents in one place, they rise up again in another:
One general Council is not able to extirpate one single Heresy; it may be
cancelled for the present, but revolution of time, and the like aspects from
Heaven, will restore it, when it will flourish till it be condemned again. For
as though there were Metempsuchosis, and the soul of one man passed into
another; Opinions do find after certain Revolutions, men and minds like those
that first begat them. To see our selves again, we need not look for A
revolution of certain thousand years, when all things should return unto
theirformer estate, and he be teaching again in his School as when he delivered
this Opinion.
Plato's year: every man is not only himself; there has been many Diogenes,
and as many Timons, though but few of that name; men are lived over again, the
world is now as it was in Ages past; there was none then, but there has been
some one since that Parallels him, and as it were his revived self.

Now the first of mine was that of the Arabians, That the Souls of men perished
with their Bodies, but should yet be raised again at the last day: not that I
did absolutely conceive a mortality of the Soul; but if that were, which Faith,
not Philosophy has yet thoroughly disproved, and that both entered the grave
together, yet I held the same conceit thereof that we all do for the body, that
it rile again. Surely it is but the merits of our unworthy Natures, if we sleep
in darkness until the last Alarm. A serious reflex upon my own unworthiness did
make me backward from challenging this prerogative of my Soul; so that I might
enjoy my Savior at the last, I could with patience be nothing almost unto
Eternity. The second was that of Origin, That God would not persist in his
vengeance for ever, but after a definite time of his wrath, he would release
the damned Souls from torture: which error I fell into upon a serious
contemplation of the great Attribute of God, his Mercy; and did a little
cherish it in my self, because I found therein no malice, and a ready weight to
sway me from the other extreme of despair, whereunto Melancholy and
Contemplative Natures are too easily disposed. A third there is which I did
never positively maintain or practice, but have often wished it had been
consonant to Truth, and not offensive to my Religion, and that is the Prayer
for the dead; whereunto I was inclined from some charitable inducements,
whereby I could scarce contain my Prayers for a friend at the ringing of a
Bell, or behold his Corpse without an Orison for his Corpse: 'Twas a good way
methought to be remembered by posterity, and far more noble than an History.
These opinions I never maintained with pertinacy, or endeavored to enveagle
any man's belief unto mine, nor so much as ever revealed or disputed them with
my dearest friends; by which means I neither propagated them in others, nor
confirmed them in my self; but suffering them to flame upon their own
substance, without addition of new fuel, they went out insensibly of
themselves. therefore these Opinions, though condemned by lawful Councels, were
not Heresies in me, but bare Errors, and single Lapses of my understanding
without a joint depravity of my will: Those have not only depraved
understandings, but diseased affections, which cannot enjoy a singularity
without an Heresy, or be the Author of an Opinion without they be of a Sect
also; this was the Villainy of the first Schism of Lucifer, who was not content
to err alone, but drew into his Faction many Legions, and upon this experience
he tempted only Eve, as well understanding the Communicable nature of Sin, and
that to deceive but one, was tacitly and upon consequence to delude them both.

nor contented with a general breach or dichotomy with their Church, do
subdivide and mince themselves almost into Atoms. It Is true, that men of
singular parts and humors have not been free from singular opinions and
conceits in all Ages; retaining something not only beside the opinion of his
own Church or any other, but also any I particular Author; which
notwithstanding a sober Judgment may do without offense or heresy; for there
is yet, after all the Decrees of Councils, and the niceties of Schools, many
things untouched, unimagin'd, wherein the liberty of an honest reason may play
and expatiate with security, and far without the circle of an Heresy.

Pia Matter of mine; methinks there be not impossibilities enough in Religion,
for an active faith; the deepest Mysteries ours contains, have not only been
illustrated, but maintained by Sylogism, and the rule of Reason: I love to lose
my self in a mystery, to pursue my Reason to an O altitudo! It Is my solitary
recreation to pose my apprehension with those involved Aenigma's and riddles of
the Trinity, with Incarnation and Resurrection. I can answer all the Objections
of Satan and my rebellious reason, with that odd resolution I learned of
Tertullian, Certum est quia impossible est. I desire to exercise my faith in
the difficultest point; for to credit ordinary and visible objects, is not
faith, but persuasion. Some believe the better for seeing Christ's Sepulcher;
and when they have seen the Red Sea, doubt not of the Miracle. Now contrarily,
I bless my self, and am thankful that I lived not in the days of Miracles, that
I never saw Christ nor his Disciples; I would not have been one of those
Israelites that passed the Red Sea, nor one of Christ's patients on whom he
wrought his wonders; then had my faith been thrust upon me; nor should I enjoy
that greater blessing pronounced to all that believe and saw not. It Is an easy
and necessary belief, to credit what our eye and sense has examined: I believe
he was dead and buried, and rose again; and desire to see him in his glory,
rather than to contemplate him in his Cenotaphe, or Sepulcher. Nor is this much
to believe; as we have reason, we owe this faith unto History: they only had
the advantage of a bold and noble Faith, who lived before his coming, who upon
obscure prophesies and mystical Types could raise a belief, and expect apparent
impossibilities.

know we knew nothing, my reason has been more pliable to the will of Faith; I
am now content to understand a mystery without a rigid definition, in an easy
and Platonic description. That Sphaera cujus centrum ubique,
circumferentianullibi.
allegorical description of Hermes, pleases me beyond all the Metaphysical
definitions of Divines; where I cannot satisfy my reason, I love to humor my
fancy: I had as live you tell me that anima est angelus hominis, est Corpus
Dei, as Entelechia; Lux est umbra Dei, as actus perspicui; where there is an
obscurity too deep for our Reason, it is good to sit down with a description,
periphrasis, or adumbration; for by acquainting our reason how unable it is to
display the visible and obvious effects of nature, it becomes more humble and
submissive unto the subtleties of Faith; and thus I teach my haggard and
unreclaimed reason to stoop unto the lure of Faith. I believe there was already
a tree whose fruit our unhappy Parents tasted, though in the same Chapter when
God forbids it, it is positively said, the plants of the fields were not yet
grown; for God had not caused it to rain upon the earth. I believe that the
Serpent (if we shall literally understand it) from his proper form and figure
made his motion on his belly before the curse. I find the trial of the
Pucellage and virginity of Women, which God ordained the Jews, is very
fallible. Experience and History informs me, that not only many particular
Women, bur likewise whole Nations have escaped the curse of Childbirth, which
God seems to pronounce upon the whole Sex; yet do I believe that all this is
true, which indeed my Reason would persuade me to be false; and this I think is
no vulgar part of Faith, to believe a thing not only above, but contrary to
Reason, and against the Arguments of our proper Senses.

Neque enim cum porticus, aut me lectulus accepit desum mihi) I remember I am
not alone, and therefore forget not to contemplate him and his Attributes who
is ever with me, especially those two mighty ones, his Wisdom and Eternity;
with the one I recreate, with the other I confound my understanding: for who
can speak of Eternity without a soloecism, or think thereof without an Ecstasy?
Time we may comprehend: it is but five days elder then our selves, and has the
same Horoscope with the World; but to retire so far back as to apprehend a
beginning, to give such an infinite start forwards as to conceive an end in an
essence that we affirm has neither the one nor the other, it puts my Reason to
St. Paul's Sanctuary: my Philosophy dares not say the Angels can do it; God
has not made a Creature that can comprehend him; it is a privilege of his own
nature: I am that I am, was his own definition unto Moses; and 'twas a short
one, to confound mortality, that durst question God, or ask him what he was;
indeed he only is; all others have and shall be: but in Eternity there is no
distinction of Tenses; and therefore that terrible term Predestination, which
has troubled so many weak heads to conceive, and the wisest to explain, is in
respect to God no prescious determination of our Estates to come, but a
definitive blast of his Will already fulfilled, and at the instant that he
first decreed it; for to his Eternity which is indivisible, and all together
the last Trump is already sounded, the reprobates in the flame, and the blessed
in Abraham's bosom. St. Peter speaks modestly, when he says, a thousand years
to God are but as one day: for to speak like a Philosopher, those continued
instances of time which flow into a thousand years, make not to him one moment;
what to us is to come, to his Eternity is present, his whole duration being but
one permanent point, without Succession, Parts, Flux, or Division.

more difficulty to the mystery of the Trinity, where, though in a relative way
of Father and Son, we must deny a priority. I wonder how Aristotle could
conceive the World-eternal, or how he could make good two Eternities: his
similitude of a Triangle, comprehended in a square, does somewhat illustrate
the Trinity of our Souls, and that the Triple Unity of God; for there is in us
not three, but a Trinity of Souls, because there is in us, if not three
distinct Souls, yet differing faculties, that can, and do subsist apart in
different Subjects, and yet in us are thus united as to make but one Soul and
substance: if one Soul were so perfect as to inform three distinct Bodies, that
were a petty Trinity: conceive, the distinct number of three, not divided nor
separated by the Intellect, but actually comprehended in its Unity, and that is
a perfect Trinity. I have often admired the mystical way of Pythagoras, and the
secret Magic of numbers. Beware of Philosophy, is a precept not to be received
in too large a sense; for in this Mass of Nature there is a set of things that
carry in their Front, though not in Capital Letters, yet in Stenography, and
short Characters, something of Divinity, which to wiser Reasons serve as
Luminaries in the Abyss of Knowledge, and to judicious beliefs, as Scales and
Roundles to mount the Pinacles and highest pieces of Divinity The severe
Schools shall never laugh me out of the Philosophy of Hermes, that this visible
World is but a Picture of the invisible, wherein as in a Pourtraict, things are
not truly, but in equivocal shapes, and as they counterfeit some real
substance in that invisible Fabric.

content and happiness I conceive therein, is an ample recompense for all my
endeavors, in what part of knowledge soever. Wisdom is his most beauteous
Attribute, no man can attain unto it, yet Solomon pleased God when he desired
it. He is wise, because he knows all things; and he knows all things, because
he made them all: but his greatest knowledge is in comprehending that he made
not, that is, himself. And this is also the greatest knowledge in man. For this
do I honor my own profession, and embrace the Counsel even of the Devil
himself: had he read such a Lecture in Paradise, as he did at (...), Nosce
teipsum.
Delphos, we had better known our selves; nor had we stood in fear to know him.
I know he is wise in all, wonderful in what we conceive, but far more in what
we comprehend not; for we behold him but asquint, upon reflex or shadow; our
understanding is dimmer than Moses Eye; we are ignorant of the back-parts or
lower side of his Divinity; therefore to pry into the maze of his Counsels, is
not only folly in man, but presumption even in Angels; like us, they are his
Servants, not his Senators; he holds no Counsel, but that mystical one of the
Trinity, wherein though there be three Persons, there is but one mind that
decrees without Contradiction: nor needs he any; his actions are not begot with
deliberation, his Wisdom naturally knows what is best; his intellect stands
ready fraught with the Superlative and purest Idea's of goodness; consultation
and election, which are two motions in us, make but one in him; his action
springing from his power, at the first touch of his will. These are
Contemplations Metaphysical: my humble speculations have another Method, and
are content to trace and discover those expressions he has left in his
Creatures, and* the obvious effects of Nature; there is no danger to profound
these mysteries, no sanctum sanctorum in Philosophy: the World was made to be
inhabited by Beasts; but studied and contemplated by Man: it is the Debt of our
Reason we owe unto God, and the homage we pay for not being Beasts; without
this, the World is still as though it had not been, or as it was before the
sixth day, when as yet there was not a Creature that could conceive, or say
there was a World. The wisdom of God receives small honor from those vulgar
Heads that rudely stare about, and with a gross rusticity admire his works;
those highly magnify him, whose judicious inquiry into his Acts, and
deliberate research into his Creatures, return the duty of a devout and learned
admiration.

Therefore,

Search while thou will, and let thy reason go
To ransom truth even to the Abyss below;
Rally the scattered Causes; and that line
Which Nature twists, be able to untwine:
It is thy Makers will, for unto none,
But unto reason can he e're be known.
The Devils do know thee, but those damned Meteors
Build not thy Glory, but confound thy Creatures.
Teach my endeavors so thy works to read,
That learning them in thee, I may proceed.
Give thou my reason that instructive flight,
Whose weary wings may on thy hands still light.
Teach me so to soar aloft, yet ever so,
When near the Sun, to stoop again below.
Thus shall my humble Feathers safely hover,
And though near Earth, more than the Heavens discover.
And then at last, when homeward l shall drive
Rich with the Spoils of nature to my Hive,
There will I sit like that industrious Fly,
Buzzing thy praises, which shall never die,
Till death abrupts them, and succeeding Glory
Bid me go on in a more lasting story.
And this is almost all wherein an humble Creature may endeavor to requite,
and some way to retribute unto his Creator: for if not he that says, Lord,
Lord, but he that does the will of his Father, shall be saved; certainly our
wills must be our performances, and our intents make out our Actions; otherwise
our pious labors shall find anxiety in our Graves, and our best endeavors not
hope, but fear a resurrection.

piece of Reason, and a diviner point of Philosophy; therefore sometimes, and
in some things, there appears to me as much Divinity in Galen his Books De usu
partium, as in Suarez Metaphysics: Had Aristotle been as curious in the
enquiry of this cause as he was of the other, he had not left behind him an
imperfect piece of Philosophy, but an absolute tract of Divinity.

Natura nihil aget frustra, is the only indisputed Axiom in Philosophy; there
are no Grotesques in nature; not any thing framed to fill up empty Cantons, and
unnecessary spaces: in the most imperfect Creatures, and such as were not
preserved in the Ark, but having their Seeds and Principles in the womb of
Nature, are every where, where the power of the Sun is; in these is the Wisdom
of his hand discovered: Out of this rank Solomon chose the object of
admiration; indeed what reason may not go to School to the wisdom of Bees,
Ants, and Spiders? what wise hand teaches them to do what reason cannot teach
us? ruder heads stand amazed at those prodigious pieces of Nature, Whales,
Elephants, Dromidaries and Camels; these, I confess, are the Colossus and
Majestic pieces of her hand: but in these narrow Engines there is more curious
Mathematics; and the civility of these little Citizens, more neatly sets forth
the wisdom of their Maker. Who admires not Regio Montanus his Fly beyond his
Eagle, or wonders not more at the operation of two Souls in those little
Bodies, than but one in the Trunk of a Cedar? I could never content my
contemplation with those general pieces of wonder, the Flux and Reflux of the
Sea, the increase of Nile, the conversion of the Needle to the North; and have
studied to match and parallel those in the more obvious and neglected pieces of
Nature, which without further travel I can do in the Cosmography of my self; we
carry with us the wonders we seek without us: There is is all Africa and her
prodigies in us; we are that bold and adventurous piece of nature, which he
that studies wisely learns in a compendium, what others labor at in a divided
piece and endless volume.

Thus there are two Books from whence I collect my Divinity; besides that
written one of God, another of his servant Nature, that universal and public
Manuscript, that lies expans'd unto the Eyes of all, those that never saw him
in the one, have discoveerd him in the other: this was the Scripture and
Theology of the Heathens; the natural motion of the Sun made them more admire
him, than its supernatural station did the Children of Israel; the ordinary
effects of nature wrought more admiration in them, than in the other all his
Miracles; surely the Heathens knew better how to join and read these mystical
Letters, than we Chiristians, who cast a more careless Eye on these common
Hieroglyphics, and disdain to suck Divinity from the flowers of Nature. Nor do
I so forget God as to adore the name of Nature; which I define not with the
Schools, to be the principle of motion and rest, but that straight and regular
line, that settled and constant course the wisdom of God has ordained the
actions of his creatures, according to their several kinds. To make a
revolution every day, is the Nature of the Sun, because of that necessary
course which God has ordained it, from which it cannot swerve, by a faculty
from that voice which first did give it motion. Now this course of Nature God
seldom alters or perverts, but like an excellent Artist has so contrived his
work, that with the self same instrument, without a new creation, he may effect
his obscurest designs. Thus he sweetneth the Water with a Word, preserves the
Creatures in the Ark, which the blast of his mouth might have as easily
created; for God is like a skilful Geometrician who when more easily, and with
one stroke of his Compass he I might describe or divide a right line, had yet
rather do this in a circle or longer way; according to the constituted and
fore-laid principles of his Art: yet this rule of his he does sometimes
pervert, to acquaint the World with his Prerogative, lest the arrogance of our
reason should question his power, and conclude he could not: and thus I call
the effects of Nature the works of God, whose hand and instrument she only is;
and therefore to ascribe his actions unto her, is to devolve the honor of the
principal agent, upon the instrument; which if with reason we may do, then let
our hammers rise up and boast they have built our houses, and our pens receive
the honor of our writing. I hold there is a general beauty in the works of
God, and therefore no deformity in any kind of species of creature whatsoever:
I cannot tell by what Logic I we call a Toad, a Bear, or an Elephant ugly,
they being created in those outward shapes and figures which best express those
actions of their inward forms. And having past that general Visitation of God,
who saw that all that he had made was good, that is, conformable to his Will,
which abhors deformity, and is the rule of order and beauty; there is no
deformity but in Monstrosity, wherein notwithstanding there is a kind of
Beauty. Nature so ingeniously contriving the irregular parts, as they become
sometimes more remarkable than the principal Fabric. To speak yet more
narrowly, there was never any thing ugly or misshapen, but the Chaos; wherein
notwithstanding, to speak strictly, there was no deformity, because no form,
nor was it yet impregnant by the voice of God; Now nature is not at variance
with Art, nor art with Nature; they being both servants of his providence: Art
is the perfection of Nature: were the World now as it was the sixth day, there
were yet, a Chaos: Nature has made one World, and Art another. In brief, all
things are artificial; for Nature is the Art of God.

This is the ordinary and open way of his providence, which Art and Industry
have in a good part discovered, whose effects we may foretell without an Oracle:
to foreshew these, is not Prophecy, but Pognostication. There is another way
full of Meanders and Labyrinths, whereof the Devil and Spirits have no exact
Ephimerides, and that is a more particular and obscure method of his
providence, directing the operations of individuals and single Essences: this
we call Fortune, that serpentine and crooked line, whereby he draws those
actions his wisdom intends in a more unknown and secret way: This cryptick and
involved method of his providence have I ever admired, nor can I relate the
History of my life, the occurrences of my days, the escapes of dangers, and
hits of chance, with a Bezo las Manos to Fortune, or a bare Gramercy to my good
Stars: Abraham might have thought the Ram in the thicket came thither by
accident; humane reason would have said, that mere chance conveyed Moses in the
Ark to the sight of Pharaoh's Daughter: What a Labyrinth is there in the story
of Joseph, able to convert a Stoic? Surely there are in every man's Life
certain rubs, doublings and wrenches, which pass a while under the effects of
chance, but at the last well examined, prove the mere hand of God. 'Twas not
dumb chance, that to discover the Fougade or Powder Plot, contrived a
miscarriage in the Letter. I like the Victory of 88. the better for that one
occurrence which our enemies imputed to our dishonor, and the partiality of
Fortune, to wit, the tempests and contrariety of Winds, King Philip did not
detract from the Nation, when he said, he sent his Armado to fight with men,
and not to combat with the Winds. Where there is a manifest disproportion
between the powers and forces of two several agents, upon a Maxim of reason we
may promise the Victory to the Superior; but when unexpected accidents slip
in, and unthought of occurrences intervene, these must proceed from a power
that owes no obedience to those Axioms: where, as in the writing upon the wall,
we may behold the hand, but see not the spring that moves it. The success of
that petty Province of Holland (of which the Grand Seignour proudly said, If
they should trouble him as they did the Spaniard, he would send his men with
shovels and pick axes, and throw it into the Sea) I cannot altogether ascribe
to the ingenuity and industry of the people, but the mercy of God, that has
disposed them to such a thriving Genius; and to the will of his Providence,
that disposes her favor to each Country in their pre-ordinate season. All
cannot be happy at once; for because the glory of one State depends upon the
ruin of another, there is a revolution and vicissitude of their greatness, and
must obey the swing of that wheel, not moved, by Intelligences, but by the hand
of God, whereby all Estates arise to their Zenith and Vertical points,
according to their predestined periods. For the lives, not only of men, but
of Commonwealths and the whole World, run not upon a Helix that still
enlarges; but on a Circle, where arriving to their Meridian, they decline in
obscurity, and fall under the Horizon again.

even in sortiligies and matters of greatest uncertainty, there is a settled and
pre-ordered course of effects. It is we that are blind, not Fortune: because
our Eye is too dim to discover the mystery of her effects, we foolishly paint
her blind, and hoodwink the Providence of the Almighty. I cannot justify that
contemptible Proverb, That fools only are Fortunate; or that insolent Paradox,
That a wise man is cut of the reach of Fortune; much less those opprobrious
Epithets of Poets, Whore, Bawd, and Strumpet. It Is, I confess, the common fate
of men of singular gifts of mind, to be destitute of those of Fortune; which
does not any way deject the Spirit of wiser judgments, who thoroughly
understand the justice of this proceeding; and being enriched with higher
donatives, cast a more careless eye on these vulgar parts of felicity. It is a
most unjust ambition to desire to engross the mercies of the Almighty, not to
be content with the goods of mind, without a possession of those of body or
Fortune: and it is an error worse than heresy, to adore these complemental and
circumstantial pieces of felicity, and undervalue those perfections and
essential points of happiness, wherein we resemble our Maker. To wiser desires
it is satisfaction enough to deserve, though not to enjoy the favors of
Fortune; let Providence provide for Fools: it is not partiality, but equity in
God, who deals with us but as our natural Parents; those that are able of Body
and Mind, he leaves to their deserts; to those of weaker merits he imparts a
larger portion, and pieces out the defect of one, by the access of the other.
Thus have we no just quarrel with Nature, for leaving us naked; or to envy the
Horns, Hoofs, Skins and Furs of other Creatures, being provided with Reason,
that can supply them all. We need not labor with so many Arguments to confute
Judicial Astrology; for if there be a truth therein, it does not injure
Divinity: if to be born under Mercury disposes us to be witty, under Jupiter
to be wealthy; I do not owe a Knee unto these, but unto that merciful Hand that
has ordered my indifferent and uncertain nativity unto such benevolous
Aspects. Those that hold that all things are governed by Fortune, had not
erred, had they not persisted there: The Romans that erected a Temple to
Fortune, acknowledged therein, though in a blinder way, somewhat of Divinity;
for in a wise supputation all things begin and end in the Almighty. There is a
nearer way to Heaven than Homer's Chain; an easy Logic may conjoyn Heaven and
Earth, in one Argument, and with less than a Sorites resolve all things into
God. Far though we christen effects by their most sensible and nearest Causes,
yet is God the true and infallible Cause of all, whose concourse though it be
general, yet does it subdivide it self into the particular Actions of every
thing, and is that Spirit, by which each singular Essence not only subsists,
but performs its operation.

Rome.

As Reason is a Rebel unto Faith, so Passion unto Reason: As the Propositions
of Faith seem absurd unto Reason, so the Theorems of Reason unto Passion, and
both unto Reason; yet a moderate and peaceable discretion may so state and
order the matter, that they may be all Kings, and yet make but one Monarchy,
every one exercising his Sovereignty and Prerogative in a due time and place,
according to the restraint and limit of circumstance, There is, as in
Philosophy, so in Divinity, sturdy doubts, and boisterous Objections, wherewith
the unhappiness of our knowledge too nearly acquainteth us. More of these no
man has known than my self, which I confess I conquered, not in a martial
posture, but on my Knees. For our endeavors are not only to combat with
doubts, but always to dispute with the Devil: the villainy of that Spirit takes
a hint of Infidelity from our Studies, and by demonstrating a naturality in one
way, makes us mistrust a miracle in another. Thus having, perused the
Archidoxes, and read the secret Sympathies of things, he would dissuade my
belief from the miracle of the Brazen Serpent, make me conceit that Image
worked by Sympathy, and was but an Egyptian trick to cure their Diseases
without a miracle. Again, having seen some experiments of Bitumen, and having
read far more of Naphtha, he whispered to my curiosity the fire of the Altar
might be natural: and bid me mistrust a miracle in Elias, when he entrenched
the Altar round with Water: for that inflamable substance yields not easily
unto Water, but flames in the Arms of its Antagonist. And thus would he
inveagle my belief to think the combustion of Sodom might be natural, and that
there was an Asphaltick and Bituminous nature in that Lake before the Fire of
Gomorrah. I know that Manna is now plentifully gathered in Calabria; and
Josephus tells me, in his days it was as plentiful in Arabia; the Devil
therefore made the quaere, Where was then the miracle in the days of Moses: the
Israelite saw but that in his time, the Natives of those Countries behold in
ours. Thus the Devil played at Chess with me, and yielding a Pawn, thought to
gain a Queen of me, taking advantage of my honest endeavors; and whilst I
labored to raise the structure of my Reason, he strived to undermine the
edifice of my Faith.

Epicurus, that denied the Providence of God, was no Atheism, but a magnificent
and high strained conceit of his Majesty, which he deemed too sublime to mind
the trivial Actions of those inferior Creatures. That fatal necessity of the
Stoics, is nothing but the immutable Law of his will. Those that heretofore
denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, have been condemned, but as Heretics;
and those that now deny our Savior (though more than Heretics) are not so
much as Atheists: for though they deny two persons in the Trinity, they hold as
we do, there is but one God.

That Villain and Secretary of Hell, that composed that miscreant piece of the
three Impostors, though divided from all Religions, and was neither Jew, Turk
nor Christian; was not a positive Atheist. I confess every Country has its
Machiavel, every Age its Lciuan, whereof common Heads must not hear, nor more
advanced Judgments too rashly venture on: It is the Rhetoric of Satan, and may
pervert a loose or prejudicate belief.

Italy, who could perfectly believe the immortality of the Soul, because Galen
seemed to make a doubt thereof. With another I was familiarly acquainted in
France, a Divine, and a man of singular parts, that on the same point was so
plunged and gravelled with Post Mortem nihil est, ipsaque Mors nihil. Mors
individua est, noxia corpori, nec patiens animae -- Toti morimur, nullaque pars
manet nostri.
three lines of Seneca, that all our Antidotes, drawn from both Scripture and
Philosophy, could not expel the poison of his error. There are a set of Heads,
that can credit the relations of Mariners, yet question the Testimonies of St.
Paul; and peremptorily maintain the traditions of Aelian or Pliny, yet in
Histories of Scripture raise Queries and Objections, believing no more than
they can parallel in humane Authors. I confess there are in Scripture Stories
that do exceed the Fables of Poets, and to a captious Reader found like
Garagantua or Bevis: Search all the Legends of times past, and the fabulous
comnceits or these present, and 'twill be hard to find one that deserves to
carry the Buckler unto Sampson; yet is all this of an easy possibility, if we
conceive a divine concourse, or an influence from the little Finger of the
Almighty. It is impossible that either in the discourse of man, or in the
infallible Voice of God, to the weakness of our apprehensions, there should not
appear irregularities, contradictions, and antinomies: my self could show a
Catalogue of doubts, never yet imagined nor questioned, as I know, which are
not resolved at the first hearing; not fantastic Queries or Objections of Air;
for I cannot hear of Atoms in Divinity. I can read the History of the Pigeon
that was sent out of the Ark, and returned no more, yet not question how she
found out her Mate that was left behind: That Lazarus was raised from the dead,
yet not demand where in the interim his Soul awaited; or raise a Law-case,
whether his Heir might lawfully detain his inheritance bequeathed unto him by
his death, and he, though restored to life, have no Plea or Title unto his
former possessions. Whether Eve was framed out of the left side of Adam, I
dispute not; because I stand not yet assured which is the right side of a man;
or whether there be any such distinction in Nature: that she Was edified out of
the Rib of Adam, I believe, yet raise no question who shall arise with that Rib
at the Resurrection: Whether Adam was an Hermaphrodite, as the Rabbis contend
upon the Letter of the Text, because it is contrary to reason, there should be
an Hermaphrodite, before there was a Woman; or a composition of two Natures,
before there was a second composed. Likewise,* whether the World was created in
Autumn, Summer, or the Spring] because it was created in them all; for
whatsoever Sign the Sun possesses, those four Seasons are actually existent:
It is the Nature of this Luminary to distinguish the several Seasons of the
year, all which it makes at one time in the whole Earth, and successively in
any part thereof. There are a bundle of curiosities, not only in Philosophy,
but in Divinity, proposed and discussed by men of most supposed abilities,
which indeed are not worthy our vacant hours, much less our serious Studies.
Pieces only fit to be placed in Pantagruel's Library, or bound up with
Tartaretus de modo Cacandi. In Rabbelais.




It Is ridiculous to put off, or down the general Flood of Noah, in that
particular inundation of Deucalion:] that there was a Deluge once, seems not to
me so great a Miracle, as that there is not one always. How all the kinds of
Creatures, not only in their own bulks, but with a competency of food and
sustenance, might be preserved in one Ark, and within the extent of three
hundred Cubits, to a reason that rightly examines, it will appear very
feasible.] There is another secret not contained in the Scripture, which is
more hard to comprehend, * and put the honest Father to the refuge of a
Miracle:] and that is, not only how the distinct pieces of the World, and
divided Islands should be first planted by men, but inhabited by Tigers,
Panthers, and Bears. How America abounded with Beasts of prey, and noxious
Animals, yet contained not in it that necessary Creature, a Horse, is very
strange. By what passage those, not only Birds, but dangerous and unwelcome
Beasts came over: How there be Creatures there, (which are not found in this
Triple Continent;) all which must needs be strange unto us, that hold but one
Ark, and that the Creatures began their progress from the Mountains of Ararat:
They who to salve this would make the Deluge particular, proceed upon a
principle that I can no way grant; not only upon the negative of holy
Scriptures, but of mine own Reason, whereby I can make it probable, that the
World was as well peopled in the time of Noah, as in ours; * and fifteen
hundred years to people the World, as full a time for them, as four thousand
years since have been to us.] There are other assertions and common Tenants
drawn from Scripture, and generally believed as Scripture, whereunto
notwithstanding, I would never betray the liberty of my Reason. It Is a Paradox
to me, that Methusalem was the longest lived of all the Children of Adam] and
no man will be able to prove it; when from the process of the Text, I can
manifest it may be otherwise. * That Judas perished by hanging himself, there
is no certainty in Scripture: though in one place it seems to affirm it, and by
a doubtful word has given occasion to translate it; yet in another place, in a
more punctual description, it makes it improbable, and seems to overthrow it.]
That our Fathers, after the Flood, erected the Tower of Babel, to preserve
th^mselves against a second Deluge, is generally opinioned and believed, yet is
there another intention of theirs expressed in Scripture: Besides, it is
improbable from the circumstance of the place, that is, a plain in the Land of
Shinar: These are no points of Faith, and therefore may admit a free dispute.
There are yet others, and those familiarly conclude from the Text, wherein
(under favor) I see no consequence: the Church of Rome, confidently proves the
opinion of Tutelary Angels, from that Answer when Peter knocked at the Door;
It Is not he, but his Angel; that is, might some say, his Messenger, or some
body from him; for so the Original signifies; and is as likely to be the
doubtful Families meaning* This exposition I once suggested to a young Divine,
that answered upon this point; to which I remember the Franciscan Opponent
replied no more; but That it was a new, and no authentic interpretation.

Word of God, for such I do believe the holy Scriptures; yet were it of man, I
could not choose but say, it was the singularest, and superlative piece that
has been extant since the Creation: were I a Pagan, I should not refrain the
Lecture of it; * and cannot but commend the judgment of Ptolomy,] that thought
not his Library complete without it. The Alcoran of the Turks (I speak without
prejudice) is an ill composed Piece, containing in it vain and ridiculous
Errors in Philosophy] impossibilities, fictions, and vanities beyond laughter,
maintained by evident and open Sophisms, the Policy of Ignorance, deposition of
Universities, and banishment of Learning; that has gotten Foot by Arms and
violence; This without a blow, has disseminated it self through the whole
Earth. It is not unremarkable what Philo first observed, That the Law of Moses
continued two thousand years without the least alteration; whereas, we see, the
Laws of other Common-weals do alter with occasions; and even those, that
pretended their Original from some Divinity, to have vanished without trace or
memory.* I believe besides Zoroaster, there were diverse that writ before Moses]
who, notwithstanding have suffered the common fate of time. Men's Works have an
age like themselves; and though they out live their Authors, yet have they a
stint and period to their duration: This only is a work too hard for the teeth
of time, and cannot perish but in the general Flames, when all things shall
confess their Ashes.

Cicero; others with as many groans deplore the combustion of the Library of
Alexandria: for my own part, I think there be too many in the World, and could
with patience behold the urn and ashes of the Vatican, could I, with a few
others, recover the perished leaves of Solomon. * I would not omit a Copy of
Enoch's Pillars, had they many nearer Authors than Josephus] or did not relish
somewhat of the Fable. Some men have written more than others have spoken;
Pineda in his Monarchica Ecclesiastica quotes one thousand and forty Authors.
Pineda quotes more Authors in one work, than are necessary in a whole World.
Of those three great inventions in Germany, there are two which are not without
their incommodities,] and it is disputable whether they exceed not their use and
commodities. It Is not a melancholy Utinam of my own, but the desires of better
beads, that there were a general Synod; not to unite the incompatible
difference of Religion, but for the benefit of learning, to reduce it as it lay
at first, in a few, and solid Authors; and to condemn to the fire those swarms
and millions of Rhapsodies begotten only to distract and abuse the weaker
judgments of Scholars, and to maintain the trade and mystery of Typographers.

Samaritans could confine their belief to the Pentateuch, or five Books, of
Moses. I am ashamed at the Rabbinical Interpretation of the Jews, upon the old
Testament, as much as their defection from the New. And truly it is beyond
wonder, how that contemptible and degenerate issue of Jacob, once so devoted to
Ethnic Superstition, and so easily seduced to the Idolatry of their
Neighbors, should now in such an obstinate and peremptory belief adhere unto
their own Doctrine expect impossibilities, and in the face and eye of the
Church, persist without the least hope of Conversion. This is a vice in them,
that were a virtue in us; for obstinacy in a bad Cause, is but constancy in a
good. And herein I must accuse those of my own Religion; for there is not any
of such a fugitive Faith, such an unstable belief, as a Christian; none that do
so often transform themselves, not unto several shapes of Christianity and of the
same Species, but unto more unnatural and contrary Forms, of Jew and Mohammedan;
that from the name of Savior, can condescend to the bare term of Prophet; and
from an old belief that he is come, fall to a new expectation of his coming. It
is the promise of Christ to make us all one Flock; but how and when this Union
shall be, is as obscure to me as the last day. Of those four Members of
Religion we hold a slender proportion; there are, I confess, some new
additions, yet small to those which accrue to our Adversaries, and those only
drawn from the revolt of Pagans, men but of negative Impieties, and such as
deny Christ, but because they never heard of him: but the Religion of the Jew
is expressly against the Christian, and the Mohammedan against both. For * the
Turk, in the bulk he now stands, he is beyond all hope of conversion:] if he
fall asunder, there may be conceived hopes, but not without strong
improbabilities. The Jew is obstinate in all fortunes; the persecution of
fifteen hundred years has but confirmed them in their Error: they have
already endured whatsoever may be inflicted, and have suffered, in a bad cause,
even to the condemnation of their enemies. Persecution is a bad and indirect
way to plant Religion; It has been the unhappy method of angry Devotions, not
only to confirm honest Religion, but wicked Heresies, and extravagant Opinions.
It was the first stone and Basis of our Faith,* none can more justly boast of
Persecutions, and glory in the number and valor of Martyrs;] For, to speak
properly, those are true and almost only examples of fortitude: Those that are
fetched from the field, or drawn from the actions of the Camp, are not
oft-times so truly precedents of valor as audacity, and at the best attain
but to some bastard piece of fortitude: If we shall strictly examine the
circumstances and requisites which Aristotle requires to true and perfect
valor, we shall find the name only in his Master Alexander, and as little in
that Roman Worthy, Julius Caesar;] and if any, in that easy and active way,
have done so nobly as to deserve that name, yet in the passive and more
terrible piece these have surpassed, and in a more heroical way may claim the
honor of that Title. It Is not in the power of every honest Faith to proceed
thus far, or pass to Heaven through the flames; every one has it not in that
full measure, nor in so audacious and resolute a temper, as to endure those
terrible tests and trials; who notwithstanding in a peaceable way do truly
adore their Savior, and have (no doubt) a Faith acceptable in the eyes of God.

Constance condemns John Huss for an Heretic; the Stories of his own Party
style him a Martyr:] He must need offend the Divinity of both, that says he was
neither the one nor the other: There are many (questionless) canonized on
earth, that shall never be Saints in Heaven; and have their names in Histories
and Martyrologies, who in the eyes of God are not so perfect Martyrs, as was *
that wise Heathen Socrates, that suffered on a fundamental point of Religion,
the Unity of God.] * I have often pitied the miserable Bishop that suffered in
the cause of Antipodes,] yet cannot choose but accuse him of as much madness,
for exposing his living on such a trifle; as those of ignorance and folly, that
condemned him. I think my, conscience will not give me the lie, if I say there
are not many extant that in a noble way fear the face of death less than my
self; yet from the moral duty I owe to the Commandment of God, and the natural,
respects that I tender unto the conservation of my essence and being, I would
not perish upon a Ceremony, Politic points, or indifferency: nor is my belief
of that untractible temper, as not to bow at their obstacles, or connive at
matters wherein there are not manifest impieties: The leaven therefore and
ferment of all, not only Civil, but Religious actions, is Wisdom; without
which, to commit our selves to the flames, is Homicide, and (I fear) but to
pass through one fire into another.

Indies; I could wish it were true, or had any other testimony than their own
Pens. They may easily believe those Miracles abroad, who daily conceive a
greater at home, the transmutation of those visible elements into the body and
blood of our Savior: for the conversion of Water into Wine, which he wrought
in Cana, or what the Devil would have had him done in the Wilderness, of Stones
into Bread, compared to this, will scarce deserve the name of a Miracle. Though
indeed to speak properly, there is not one Miracle greater than another, they
being the extraordinary effects of the Hand of God, to which all things are of
an equal facility; and to create the World as easy as one single Creature. For
this is also a Miracle, not only to produce effects against, or above Nature,
but before Nature; and to create Nature as great a Miracle, as to contradict or
transcend her. We do too narrowly define the Power of God, restraining it to
our capacities.* I hold that God can do all things; how he should work
contradictions I do not understand, yet dare not therefore deny. I cannot see
why the Angel of God should question Esdras to recall the time past, if it were
beyond his own power; or that God should pose mortality in that, which he was
not able to perform himself. I will not say God cannot, but he will not perform
many things, which we plainly affirm he cannot: this I am sure is the
mannerliest proposition, wherein, notwithstanding, I hold no Paradox. For
strictly his power is the same with his will, and they both with all the rest
do make but one God.

Helena found, and whereon Christ himself. dyed, should have power to restore
others unto life: * I excuse not Constantine from a fall off his Horse, or a
mischief from his enemies, upon the wearing those nails] on his bridle, which
our Savior bore upon the Cross in his hands. I compute among Piae frauds, nor
many degrees before consecrated Swords and Roses, that which Baldwyn King of
Jerusalem returned the Genovese for their cost and pains in his War, to wit,
the ashes of John the Baptist. Those that hold the sanctity of their souls does
leave behind a tincture and sacred faculty on their bodies, speak naturally of
Miracles, and do not salve the doubt. Now one reason I tender so little
Devotion unto Relics is, I think, the slender and doubtful respect I have
always held unto Antiquities: for that indeed which I admire is far before
Antiquity, that is, Eternity; and that is God himself; who though he be styled
the ancient of days, cannot receive the adjunct of Antiquity, who was before
the World, and shall be after it, yet is not older than it; for in his years
there is no Climacter; his duration is Eternity, and far more venerable than
Antiquity.

Miracle, the cessation of Oracles;] and in what swoun their Reasons lay, to
content themselves, and sit down with such a far-fetched and ridiculous reason
as Plutarch alleges for it. The Jews that can believe the supernatural
Solstice of the Sun in the days of Joshua, have yet the impudence to deny the
Eclipse, which every Pagan confessed, at his death: but for this, it is evident
beyond all contradiction, In his Oracle to Augustus.
the Devil himself confessed it. Certainly it is not a warrantable curiosity,
to examine the verity of Scripture by the concordance of humane history, or
seek to confirm the Chronicle of Hester or Daniel, by the authority of
Magasthenes or Herodotus, I confess I have had an unhappy curiosity this way,*
till I laughed my self out of it with a piece of Justine, where he delivers
that the Children of Israel for being scabbed were banished out of Egypt.] And
truly since I have understood the occurrences of the World, and know in what
counterfeit shapes, and deceitful vizards times present represent on the stage
things past; I do believe them little more then things to come. Some have been
of my opinion, and endeavored to write the History of their own lives; wherein
Moses has outgone them all, and left not only the story of his life, but as
some will have it, of his death also.

were but to convert them. Of all the delusions wherewith he deceives
mortality, there is not any that puzleth me more than the Legerdemain of
Changelings; I do not credit those transformations of reasonable creatures into
beasts, or that the Devil has a power to transpeciate a man into a Horse, who
tempted Christ (as a trial of his Divinity) to convert but stones into bread. I
could believe that Spirits use with man the act of carnality, and that in both
sexes; I conceive they may assume, steal, or contrive a body, wherein there may
be action enough to content decrepit lust, or passion to satisfy more active
veneries; yet in both, without a possibility of generation: and therefore that
opinion that Antichrist should be born of the Tribe of * Dan, by conjunction
with the Divil,] is ridiculous, and a conceit fitter for a Rabbin than a
Christian. I hold that the Devil does really possess some men, the spirit of
Melancholy others, the spirit of Delusion others; that as the Devil is
concealed and denied by some. so God and good Angels are pretended by others
whereof the late defection of the Maid of Germany has left a pregnant example.

Paracelsus, without an asterisk, or annotation; Thereby is meant our good
Angel appointed us from our Nativity.
Ascendens constellatum multa revelat, quaerentibus magnalia naturae, i. e.
opera Dei. I do think that many mysteries ascribed to our own inventions, have
been the courteous revelations of Spirits; for those noble essences in Heaven
bear a friendly regard unto their fellow Nature on Earth; and therefore believe
that those many prodigies and ominous prognostics, which fore-run the ruins
of States, Princes, and private persons, are the charitable premonitions of
good Angels, which more careless enquiries term but the effects of chance and
nature.

Plato, and it is yet of the Hermetical Philosophers; if there be a common
nature that unites and ties the scattered and divided individuals into one
species, why may there not be one that unites them all? However, I am sure
there is a common Spirit that plays within us, yet makes no part in us; and
that is the Spirit of God, the fire and fcintillation of that noble and mighty
Essence, which is the life and radical heat of spirits, and those essences that
know not the virtue of the Sun, a fire quite contrary to the fire of Hell: This
is that gentle heat that brooded on the waters, and in six days hatched the
World; this is that irradiation that dispels the mists of Hell, the clouds of
horror, fear, sorrow, despair; and preserves the region of the mind in
serenity: whatsoever feels not the warm gale, and gentle ventilation of this
Spirit, (though I feel his pulse) I dare not say he lives; for truly without
this, to me there is no heat under the Tropic; nor any light, though I dwelt
in the body of the Sun.

As when the laboring Sun has wrought his track
Up to the top of lofty Cancers back,
The ycie Ocean cracks, the frozen pole
Thaws with the heat of the Celestial coal;
So when thy absent beams begin to impart
Again a Solstice on my frozen heart,
My winter's over; my drooping spirits sing,
And every part revives into a Spring.
But if thy quickening beams a while decline,
And with their light bless not this Orb of mine,
A chilly frost surpriseth every member,
And in the midst of June I feel December.
O how this earthly temper does debase
The noble Soul, in this her humble place.
Whose wingy nature ever does aspire
To reach that place whence first it took its fire.
These flames I feel, which in my heart do dwell
Are not thy beams, but take their fire from Hell
O quench them all, and let thy light divine
Be as the Sun to this poor Orb of mine;
And to thy sacred Spirit convert those fires,
Whose earthly fumes choke my devout aspires.
Rome, but an old one of Pythagoras and Plato;] there is no heresy in it, and
if not manifestly defined in Scripture, yet is an opinion of a good and
wholesome use in the course and actions of a man's life, and would serve as an
Hypothesis to salve many doubts, whereof common Philosophy affords no
solution. Now if you demand my opinion and Metaphysics of their natures, I
confess them very shallow, most of them in a negative way, like that of God; or
in a comparative, between our selves and fellow creatures; for there is in this
Universe a Stair, or manifest Scale of creatures, rising not disorderly, or in
confusion, but with a comely method and proportion. Between creatures of mere
existence and things of life, there is a large disproportion of nature; between
plants and animals of creatures of sense, a wider difference; between them and
man, a far greater: and if the proportion hold one, between Man an Angels there
should be yet a greater. We do not comprehend their natures, who retain the
first definition of Porphyry, and distinguish them from our selves by
immortality; for before his Fall, it is thought, Man also was Immortal; yet must
we needs affirm that he had a different essence from the Angels; having
therefore no certain knowledge of their Natures, it is no bad method of the
Schools, whatsoever perfection we find obscurely in our selves, in a more
complete and absolute way to ascribe unto them. I believe they have an
extemporary knowledge, and upon the first motion of their reason do what we
cannot without study or deliberation; that they know things by their forms, and
define by specifical difference what we describe by accidents and properties;
and therefore probabilities to us may be demonstrations unto them: that they
have knowledge not only of the specifical, but numerical forms of individuals,
and understand by what reserved difference each single Hypostasis, (besides the
relation to its species) becomes its numerical self. That as the Soul has a
power to move the body it informs, so there is a faculty to move any, though
inform none; ours upon restraint of time, place, and distance; but that
invisible hand that conveyed Habakkuk to the Lions Den, or Philip to Azotus,
infringeth this rule, and has a secret conveyance, wherewith mortality is not
acquainted: if they have that intuitive knowledge, whereby as in reflection they
behold the thoughts of one another, I cannot peremptorily deny but they know a
great part of ours. They that to refute the Invocation of Saints, have denied
that they have any knowledge of our affairs below, have proceeded too far, and
must pardon my opinion, till I can thoroughly answer that piece of Scripture, At
the conversion of a sinner the Angels in Heaven rejoice. * I cannot with those
in that great Father securely interpret the work of the first day, Fiat lux, to
the creation of Angels.] though (I confess there is not any creature that has
so near a glympse of their nature, as light in the Sun and Elements. We style
it a bare accident, but where it subsists alone, it is a spiritual Substance,
and may be an Angel:] in brief, conceive light invisible, and that is a Spirit.

what we are but in hopes, and probability; we are only that amphibious piece
between a corporal and spiritual Essence, that middle form that links those two
together, and makes good the Method of God and Nature, that jumps not from
extremes, but unites the incompatible distances by some middle and
participating natures: that we are the breath and similitude of God, it is
indisputable, and upon record of holy Scripture; but to call our selves a
Microcosm, or little World, I thought it only a pleasant trope of Rhetoric,
till my near judgment and second thoughts told me there was a real truth
therein: for first we are a rude mass, and in the rank of creatures, which
only are, and have a dull kind of being not yet privileged with life, or
preferred to sense or reason; next we live the life of Plants, the life of
Animals, the life of Men, and at last the life of Spirits, running on in one
mysterious nature those five kinds of existences, which comprehend the
creatures not only of the World, but of the Universe: thus is man that great
and true Amphibium, whose nature is disposed to live not only like other
creatures in diverse elements, but in divided and distinguished worlds: for
though there be but one to sense, there are two to reason; the one visible, the
other invisible, whereof Moses seems to have left description, and of the other
so obscurely, that some parts thereof are yet in controversy. And truly for
the first chapters of Genesis, I must confess a great deal of obscurity; though
Divines have to the power of humane reason endeavored to make all go in a
literal meaning, yet those allegorical interpretations are also probable, and
perhaps the mystical method of Moses bred up in the Hieroglyphical Schools of
the Egyptians.

Now for that immaterial world, methinks we need not wander so far as beyond
the first moveable; for even in this material Fabric the spirits walk as
freely exempt from the affection of time, place, and motion, as beyond the
extremest circumference: do but extract from the corpulency of bodies, or
resolve things beyond their first matter, and you discover the habitation of
Angels, which if I call the ubiquitary, and omnipresent essence of God, I hope
I shall not offend Divinity: for before the Creation of the World, God was
really all things. For the Angels he created no new World, or determinate
mansion, and therefore they are everywhere where is his Essence, and do live at
a distance even in himself. That God made all things for man, is in some sense
true, yet not so far as to subordinate the Creation of those purer Creatures
unto ours, though as ministering Spirits they do, and are willing to fulfill the
will of God in these lower and sublunary affairs of man: God made all things
for himself, and it is impossible he should make them for any other end than
his own Glory; it is all he can receive, and all that is without himself: for
honor being an external adjunct, and in the honourer rather than in the person
honored, it was necessary to make a Creature, from whom he might receive his
homage, and that is in the other world Angels, in this, Man; which when we
neglect, we forget the very end of our Creation, and may justly provoke God,
not only to repent that he has made the World, but that he has sworn he
would not destroy it. That there is but one World, is a conclusion of Faith.
Aristotle with all his Philosophy has not been able to prove it, and as weakly
that the world was eternal; that dispute much troubled the Pen of the
Philosophers, * but Moses decided that question, and all is salved with the new
term of a Creation,] that is, a production of something out of nothing; and
what is that? Whatsoever is opposite to something; or more exactly, that which
is truly contrary unto God: for he only is, all others have an existence with
dependency, and are sometime but by a distinction; and herein is Divinity
conformant unto Philosophy, and generation not only founded on contrarieties,
but also creation; God being all things, is contrary unto nothing, out of which
were made all things, and so nothing became something, and Omniety informed
Nullity into an Essence.

Plato, and not a negative from Aristotle: there is another scruple cast in by
Divinity (concerning its production) much disputed in the Germane auditories,
and with that indifferency and equality of arguments, as leave the controversy
undetermined. I am not of Paracelsus mind, that boldly delivers a receipt to
make a man without conjunction; yet cannot but wonder at the multitude of heads
that do deny traduction, having no other argument to confirm their belief, then
that Rhetorical sentence, and Antimetathesis of Augustine, Creando infunditur,
infundendo creatur: either opinion will consist well enough with Religion; yet
I should rather incline to this, did not one objection haunt me, not wrung from
speculations and subtilties, but from common sense, and observation; not picked
from the leaves of any Author, but bred amongst the weeds and tares of mine own
brain: And this is a conclusion from the equivocal and monstrous productions in
the copulation of a Man with a Beast; for if the Soul of man be not
transmitted, and transfused in the seed of the Parents, why are not those
productions merely beasts, but have also an impression and tincture of reason
in as high a measure, as it can evidence it self in those improper Organs? Nor
truly can I peremptorily deny, that the Soul in this her sublunary estate, is
wholly, and in all acceptions inorganical, but that for the performance of her
ordinary actions, there is required not only a symmetry and proper disposition
of Organs, but a Crasis and temper correspondent to its operations. Yet is not
this mass of flesh and visible structure the instrument and proper corpse of the
Soul, but rather of Sense, and that the hand of Reason. * In our study of
Anatomy there is a mass of mysterious Philosophy, and such as reduced the very
Heathens to Divinity:] yet amongst all those rare discourses, and curious
pieces I find in the Fabric of man, I do not so much content my self, as in
that I find not, there is no Organ or Instrument for the rational soul: for in
the brain, which we term the seat of reason, there is not any thing of moment
more than I can discover in the crany of a beast: and this is a sensible and no
inconsiderable argument of the inorganity of the Soul, at least in that sense
we usually so conceive it. Thus we are men, and we know not how; there is
something in us that can be without us, and will be after us, though it is
strange that it has no history, what it was before us, nor cannot tell how it
entered in us.

All flesh is grass, is not only metaphorically, but literally true; for all
those creatures we behold, are but the herbs of the field, digested into flesh
in them, or more remotely carnified in our selves. Nay further, we are what we
all abhor, Anthropophagi and Cannibals, devourers not only of men, but of our
selves; and that not in an allegory, but a positive truth: for all this mass of
flesh which we behold, came in at our mouths; this frame we look upon, has
been upon our trenchers; in brief, we have devoured our selves. * I cannot
believe the wisdom of Pythagoras did ever positively, and in a literal sense
affirm his Metempsycosis, or impossible transmigration of the Souls of men into
beasts: of all Metamorphoses, or transmigrations, I believe only one, that is
of Lots wife; for that of Nebuchodonosor proceeded not so far; in all others I
conceive there is no further verity than is contained in their implicit sense
and morality. I believe that the whole frame of a beast does perish, and is
left in the tame slate after death, as before it was materialled unto life;
that the souls of men know neither contrary nor corruption; that they subsist
beyond the body, and outlive death by the privilege of their proper natures,
and without a Miracle; that the Souls of the faithful, as they leave Earth,
take possession of Heaven; that those apparitions and ghosts of departed
persons are not the wandering souls of men, but the unquiet walks of Devils,
prompting and suggesting us unto mischief, blood, and villainy, instilling, and
stealing into our hearts; that the blessed spirits are not at rest in their
graves, but wander sollicitous of the affairs of the World; but that those
phantasms appear often, and do frequent Coemeteries, Charnel-houses, and
Churches, it is because those are the dormitories of the dead, where the Devil
like an insolent Champion beholds with pride the spoils and Trophies of his
Victory over Adam.

Adam quid fecisti? I thank God I have not those strait ligaments, or narrow
obligations to the World, as to dote on life, or be convulst and tremble at the
name of death: Not that I am insensible of the dread and horror thereof, or by
raking into the bowels of the deceased, continual sight of Anatomies,
Skeletons, or Cadaverous relics, like Vespilloes, or Grave-makers, I am
become stupid, or have forgot the apprehension of Mortality; but that
marshalling all the horrors; and contemplating the extremities thereof, I find
not any thing therein able to daunt the courage of a man, much less a
well-resolved Christian. And therefore am not angry at the error of our first
Parents, or unwilling to bear a part of this common fate, and like the best of
them to dye, that is, to cease to breathe, to take a farewell of the elements,
to be a kind of nothing for a moment, to be within one instant of a spirit.
When I take a full view and circle of my self, without this reasonable
moderator, and equal piece of Justice, Death, I do conceive my self the
miserablest person extant; were there not another life that I hope for, all the
vanities of this World should not entreat a moments breath from me: could the
Devil work my belief to imagine I could never dye, I would not outlive that
very thought; I have so abject a conceit of this common way of existence, this
retaining to the Sun and Elements, I cannot think this is to be a man, or to
live according to the dignity of humanity: in exspectation of a better, I can
with patience embrace this life, yet in my best meditations do often defy
death: I honor any man that contemns it, nor can I highly love any that is
afraid of it: this makes me naturally love a Soldier, and honor those
tattered and contemptible Regiments, that will dye at the command of a
Sergeant. For a Pagan there may be some motives to be in love with life; but
for a Christian to be amazed at death, I see not how he can escape this
Dilemma, that he is too sensible of this life, or hopeless of the life to come.

Adam 30 years old at his Creation, because they suppose him created in the
perfect age and stature of man. And surely we are all out of the computation of
our age, and every man is some months elder than he bethinks him; for we live,
move, have a being, and are subject to the actions of the elements, and the
malice of diseases, in that other World, the truest Microcosm, the Womb of our
Mother. For besides that general and common existence we are conceived to hold
in our Chaos, and whilst we sleep within the bosom of our causes, we enjoy a
being and life in three distinct worlds, wherein we receive most manifest
graduations: In that obscure World and womb of our mother, our time is short,
computed by the Moon; yet longer then the days of many creatures that behold
the Sun, our selves being not yet without life, sense, and reason; though for
the manifestation of its actions, it awaits the opportunity of objects, and
seems to live there but in its root and soul of vegetation; entering afterward
upon the scene of the World, we arise up and become another creature,
performing the reasonable actions of man, and obscurely manifesting that part
of Divinity in us, but not in complement and perfection till we have once more
cast our secondine, that is, this slough of flesh, and are delivered into the
last world, that is, that ineffable place of Paul, that proper ubi of spirits.
The smattering I have of the Philosophers Stone (which is something more then
the perfect exaltation of Gold) has taught me a great deal of Divinity, and
instructed my belief, how that immortal spirit, and incorruptible substance of
my Soul may lie obscure, and sleep a while within this house of flesh. Those
strange and mystical transmigrations that I have observed in Silkworms, turned
my Philosophy into Divinity. There is in these works of nature, which seem to
puzzle reason, something Divine, and has more in it then the eye of a common
spectator does discover.

to be swallowed up in the abyss of waters; wherein I had perished unseen,
unpityed, without wondering eyes, tears of pity, Lectures of mortality, and
none had said, Quantum mutatus ab illo! Not that I am ashamed of the Anatomy of
my parts, or can accuse Nature for playing the bungler in any part of me, or my
own vicious life for contracting any shameful disease upon me, whereby I might
not call my self as, wholesome a morsel for the worms as any.

for a Monument, History, or Epitaph, not so much as the memory of my name to
be found any where, but in the universal Register of God. I am not yet so
Cynical, as to approve the Who willed his friend not to bury him, but hang him
up with a staff in his hand to fright away the Crows.
Testament of Diogenes, nor do I altogether allow that Rodomontado of Lucan; --
Coelo tegitur, qui non habet urnam.
He that unburied lies wants not his Hearse,
For unto him a Tomb's the Universe.
But commend in my calmer judgment, those ingenuous intentions that desire to
sleep by the urns of theirs Fathers, and strive to go the neatest way unto
corruption.* I do not envy the temper of Crows and Daws,] nor the numerous and
weary days of our Fathers before the Flood. If there be any truth in Astrology,
I may outlive a Jubilee; as yet I have not seen one revolution of Saturn, nor
has my pulse beat thirty years; and yet excepting one, have seen the Ashes,
and left underground, all the Kings of Europe; have been contemporary to three
Emperors, four Grand Signiours, and as many Popes: methinks I have outlived my
self, and begin to be weary of the Sun; I have shaken hands with delight: in my
warm blood and Canicular days, I perceive I do anticipate the vices of age; the
World to me is but a dream or mock-show, and we all therein but Pantalones and
Anticks, to my severer contemplations.

Methuselah. But age does not rectify, but incurvate our natures, turning bad
dispositions into worser habits, and (like diseases) brings on incurable vices;
for every day as we grow weaker in age, we grow stronger in sin; and the number
of our days does but make our sins innumerable. The same vice committed at
sixteen, is not the same, though it agrees in all other circumstances, as at
forty, but swells and doubles from that circumstance of our ages, wherein,
besides the constant and inexcusable habit of transgressing, the maturity of
our judgment cuts off pretense unto excuse or pardon: every sin the oftener it
is committed, the more it acquireth in the quality of evil; as it succeeds in
time, so it proceeds in degrees of badness; for as they proceed they ever
multiply, and like figures in Arithmetic, the last stands for more than all
that went before it. And though I think no man can live well once, but he that
could live twice, yet for my own part I would not live over my hours past, or
begin again the thread of my days:* not upon Cicero's ground, because I have
lived them well, but for fear I should live them worse:] I find my growing
Judgment daily instruct me how to be better, but my untamed affections and
confirmed vitiosity makes me daily do worse; I find in my confirmed age the
same sins I discovered in my youth; I committed many then because I was a
Child, and because I commit them still, I am yet an infant. Therefore I
perceive a man may be twice a Child before the days of dotage, and stand in
need of Aesons bath before threescore.]

Abel lived not so long as Adam. There is therefore a secret glome or bottom
of our days; 'twas his wisdom to determine them, but his perpetual and waking
providence that fulfils and accomplisheth them; wherein the spirits, our
selves, and all the creatures of God in a secret and disputed way do execute
his will. Let them not therefore complain of immaturity that dye about thirty;
they fall but like the whole World, whose solid and well-composed substance
must not expect the duration and period of its constitution: when all things
are completed in it, its age is accomplished; and the last and general fever
may as naturally destroy it before six thousand, as me before forty; there is
therefore some other hand that twines the thread of life than that of Nature:
we are not only ignorant in Antipathies and occult qualities; our ends are as
obscure as our beginnings; the line of our days is drawn by night, and the
various effects therein by a pensil that is invisible; wherein though we
confess our ignorance, I am sure we do not err if we say it is the hand of God.

of Lucan, since I have been able not only as we do at School, to construe,
but understand.

Victurosque Dei celant ut vivere durent, Felix esse mori.
We Are all deluded, vainly searching ways
To make us happy by the length of days;
For cunningly to make's protract his breath,
The Gods conceal the happiness of Death.
There be many excellent strains in that Poet, wherewith his Stoical Genius
has liberally supplied him; and truly there are singular pieces in the
Philosophy of Zeno, and doctrine of the Stoics, which I perceive, delivered in
a Pulpit, pass for current Divinity: yet herein are they in extremes, that can
allow a man to be his own Assassine, and so highly* extol the end and suicide
of Cato:] this is indeed not to fear death, but yet to be afraid of life. It is
a brave act of valor to contemn death; but where life is more terrible than
deathd, it is then the truest: valor to dare to live; and herein Religion has
taught us a noble example: For all the valiant acts of Curtius, Scevola, or
Codrus, do not parallel or match that one of Job; and sure there is no torture
to the rack of a disease; nor any Ponyards in death it self, like those in the
way or prologue to it.* Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum nihil curo;] I would
not dye, but care not to be dead. Were I of Caesar's Religion, I should be of
his desires, and wish rather to go off at one blow, then to be sawed in pieces
by the grating torture of a disease. Men that look no farther than their
outsides, think health an appurtenance unto life, and quarrel with their
constitutions for being sick; but I that have examined the parts of man, and
know upon what tender filaments that Fabric hangs, do wonder that we are not
always so; and considering the thousand doors that lead to death, do thank my
God that we can die but once. It Is not only the mischief of diseases, and
villainy of poisons, that make an end of us; we vainly accuse the fury of Guns,
and the new inventions of death; it is in the power of every hand to destroy
us, and we are beholding unto every one we meet, he does not kill us. There is
therefore but one comfort left, that though it be in the power of the weakest
arm to take away life, it is not in the strongest to deprive us of death: God
would not exempt himself from that, the misery of immortality in the flesh; he
undertook not that was immortal. Certainly there is no happiness within this
circle of flesh, nor is it in the Optics of these eyes to behold felicity; the
first day of our Jubilee is Death; the Devil has therefore failed of his
desires; we are happier with death than we should have been without it: there
is no misery but in himself, where there is no end of misery; and so indeed in
his own sense, the Stoic is in the right. He forgets that he can dye who
complains of misery; we are in the power of no calamity while death is in our
own.

those I think, not merely Metaphorical, as mortification, dying unto sin and
the World; therefore, I say, every man has a double Horoscope, one of his
humanity, his birth; another of his Christianity, his baptism, and from this do
I compute or calculate my Nativity; not reckoning those Horae combustae and odd
days, or esteeming my self any thing, before I was my Saviors, and enrolled in
the Register of Christ: Whosoever enjoys not this life, I count him but an
apparition, though he wear about him the sensible affections of flesh. In these
moral acceptions, the way to be immortal is to dye daily; nor can I think I
have the true Theory of death, when I contemplate a skull, or behold a Skeleton
with those vulgar imaginations it casts upon us; I have therefore enlarged that
common Memento mori, into a more Christian memorandum, Memento quatuor
Novissima, those four inevitable points of us all, Death, Judgment, Heaven and
Hell. Neither did the contemplations of the Heathens rest in their graves,
without further thought of Rhadamanth or some judicial proceeding after death,
though in another way, and upon suggestion of their natural reasons. I cannot
but marvail from what Sibyl or Oracle they stole the Prophecy of the worlds
destruction by fire, or whence Lucan learned to, say, Communis mundo superest
rogus, ossibus astra Mist urus. --
There yet remains to the World one common Fire,
Wherein our bones with stars shall make one Pyre.
I believe the World grows near its end, yet is neither old nor decayed, nor
shall ever perish upon the ruins of its own Principles. As the work of
Creation was above nature, so its adversary annihilation; without which the
World has not its end, but its mutation. Now what force should be able to
consume it thus far, without the breath of God, which is the truest consuming
flame, my Philosophy cannot inform me. Some believe there went not a minute to
the Worlds creation, nor shall there go to its destruction; those six days so
punctually described, make not to them one moment, but rather seem to manifest
the method and Idea of the great work of the intellect of God, than the manner
how he proceeded in its operation. I cannot dream that there should be at the
last day any such Judicial proceeding, or calling to the Bar, as indeed the
Scripture seems to imply, and the literal Commentators do conceive: for
unspeakable mysteries in the Scriptures are often delivered in a vulgar and
illustrative way; and being written unto man, are delivered, not as they truly
are, but as they may be understood; wherein notwithstanding the different
interpretations according to different capacities may stand firm with our
devotion, nor be any way prejudicial to each single edification.

Elias 6000 years,] or imagine the secret communicated to a Rabbi, which God
has denied unto his Angels? It had been an excellent Quaere to have posed the
Devil of Delphos, and must needs have forced him to some strange amphibology;
it has not only mocked the predictions of sundry Astrologers in Ages past,
but the prophesies of many melancholy heads in these present, who neither
understanding reasonably things past or present, pretend a knowledge of things
to come; heads ordained only to manifest the incredible effects of melancholy,
and to fulfill old prophecies, rather than be the authors of new. In those days
there shall come liars and false prophets.
[In those days there shall come Wars, and rumors of Wars,] to me seems no
prophecy, but a constant truth, in all times verified since it was pronounced:
There shall be signs in the Moon and Stars; how comes he then like a Thief in
the night, when he gives an item of his coming? That common sign drawn from the
revelation of Antichrist, is as obscure as any; in our common compute he has
been come these many years; but for my own part to speak freely, I am half of
opinion that Antichrist is the Philosophers stone in Divinity; for the
discovery and invention thereof, though there be prescribed rules, and probable
inductions, yet has hardly any man attained the perfect discovery thereof.
That general opinion that the World grows near its end, has possessed all ages
past as nearly as ours; I am afraid that the Souls that now depart, cannot
escape that lingering expostulation of the Saints under the Altar, Quousqae
Domine? How long, O Lord? and groan in the expectation of that great Jubilee.

must enter, to complete and make up the Catastrophe of this great piece. This
is the day whose memory has only power to make us honest in the dark, and to
be virtuous without a witness.* Ipsa sui pretium virtus sibi,] that Virtue is
her own reward, is but a cold principle, and not able to maintain our variable
resolutions in a constant and settled way of goodness. I have practiced that
honest artifice of Seneca,] and in my retired and solitary imaginations, to
detain me from the foulness of vice, have fancied to my self the presence of my
dear and worthiest friends, before whom I should lose my head, rather then be
vicious; yet herein I found that there was naught but moral honesty, and this
was not to be virtuous for his sake who must reward us at the last.

* I have tried if I could reach that great resolution of his, to be honest
without a thought of Heaven or Hell;] and indeed I found upon a natural
inclination, and inbred loyalty unto virtue, that I could serve her without a
livery; yet not in that resolved and venerable way, but that the frailty of my
nature, upon easy temptation, might be induced to forget her. The life
therefore and spirit of all our actions, is the resurrection, and a stable
apprehension that our ashes shall enjoy the fruit of our pious endeavors;
without this, all Religion is a Fallacy, and those impieties of Lucian,
Euripides, and Julian, are no blasphemies, but subtle verities,* and Atheists
have been the only Philosophers.]

and divided ashes shall unite again; that our separated dust after so many
Pilgrimages and transformations into the parts of Minerals, Plants, Animals,
Elements, shall at the Voice of God return into their primitive shapes, and
join again to make up their primary and predestinate forms. As at the Creation
there was a separation of that confused mass into its pieces; so at the
destruction thereof there shall be a separation into its distinct individuals.
As at the Creation of the World, all the distinct species that we behold, lay
involved in one mass, till the fruitful Voice of God separated this united
multitude into its several species: so at the last day, when those corrupted
relics shall be scattered in the Wilderness of forms, and seem to have forgot
their proper habits,* God by a powerful Voice shall command them back into
their proper shapes,] and call them out by their single individuals: Then shall
appear the fertility of Adam, and the magic of that sperm that has dilated
into so many millions. I have often beheld as a miracle, that artificial
resurrection and revification of Mercury, how being mortified into a thousand
shapes, it assumes again its own, and returns into its numerical self. Let us
speak naturally, and like Philosophers, the forms of alterable bodies in these
sensible corruptions perish not; nor as we imagine, wholly quit their mansions,
but retire and contract themselves into their secret and unaccessible parts,
where they may best protect themselves from the action of their Antagonist. A
plant or vegetable consumed to ashes, by a contemplative and school-Philosopher
seems utterly destroyed, and the form to have taken his leave for ever: But to
a sensible Artist the forms are not perished, but withdrawn into their
incombustible part, where they lie secure from the action of that devouring
element. This is made good by experience, which can from the Ashes of a Plant
revive the plant, and from its cinders recall it into its stalk and leaves
again. What the Art of man can do in these inferior pieces, what blasphemy is
it to affirm the finger of God cannot do in these more perfect and sensible
structures? This is that mystical Philosophy, from whence no true Scholar
becomes an Atheist, but from the visible effects of nature grows up a real
Divine; and beholds not in a dream, as Ezekiel, but in an ocular and visible
object the types of his resurrection.

which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor can enter into the heart
of man: he was translated out of himself to behold it; but being returned into
himself, could not express it. St. John's description by Emerals, Chrysolites,
and precious Stones, is too weak to express the material Heaven we behold.
Briefly therefore, where the Soul has the full measure, and complement of
happiness; where the boundless appetite of that spirit remains completely
satisfied, that it can neither desire addition nor alteration, that I think is
truly Heaven: and this can only be in the enjoyment of that essence, whose
infinite goodness is able to terminate the desires of it self, and the
unsatiable wishes of ours; wherever God will thus manifest himself, there is
Heaven though within the circle of this sensible world. Thus the Soul of man
may be in Heaven any where, even within the limits of his own proper body; and
when it cease to live in the body, it may remain in its own soul, that is,
its Creator. And thus we may say that St. Paul, whether in the body, or out of
the body, was yet in Heaven. To place it in the Empyreal, or beyond the tenth
sphere, is to forget, the worlds destruction; for when this sensible world
shall be destroyed, all shall then be here as it is now there, an Empyreal
Heaven, a quasi vacuity; when to ask where Heaven is, is to demand where the
Presence of God is, or where we have the glory of that happy vision. Moses that
was bred up in all the learning of the Egyptians, committed a gross absurdity
in Philosophy, when with these eyes of flesh he desired to see God, and
petitioned his Maker, that is truth it self, to a contradiction. Those that
imagine Heaven and Hell neighbors, and conceive a vicinity between those two
extremes, upon consequence of the Parable, where Dives discoursed with Lazarus
in Abraham's bosom, do too grossly conceive of those glorified creatures, whose
eyes shall easily out-see the Sun, and behold without a perspective the
extremest distances? for if there shall be in our glorified eyes, the faculty
of sight and reception of objects, I could think the visible species there to
be in as unlimitable a way as now the intellectual. I grant that two bodies
placed beyond the tenth sphere, of in a vacuity, according to Aristotle's
Philosophy, could not behold each other, because there wants a body or Medium
to hand and transport the visible rays of the object unto the sense; but when
there shall be a general defect of either Medium to convey, or light to prepare
and dispose that Medium, and yet a perfect vision, we must suspend the rules of
our Philosophy, and make all good by a more absolute piece of optics.

I cannot tell how to say that fire is the essence of Hell; I know not what to
make of Purgatory,* or conceive a flame that can either prey upon, or purify
the substance of a Soul:] those flames of sulphur mentioned in the Scriptures,
I take not to be understood of this present Hell, but of that to come, where
fire shall make up the complement of our tortures, and have a body or subject
wherein to manifest its tyranny. Some who have had the honor to be textuary in
Divinity, are of opinion it shall be the same specifical fire with ours. This
is hard to conceive, yet can I make good how even that may prey upon our
bodies, and yet not consume us: for in this material World, there are bodies
that persist invincible in the powerfullest flames; and though by the action of
fire they fall into ignition and liquation, yet will they never suffer a
destruction. I would gladly know how Moses with an actual fire calcined, or
burnt the Golden Calf unto powder: for that mystical metal of Gold, whose
solary and celestial nature I admire, exposed unto the violence of fire, grows
only hot and liquifies, but consumaeth not: so when the consumble and volatile
pieces of our bodies shall be refined into a more impregnable and fixed temper,
like Gold, though they suffer from the actions of flames, they shall never
perish, but lie immortal in the arms of fire. And surely if this frame must
suffer only by the action of this element, there will many bodies escape, and
not only Heaven, but Earth will not be at an end, but rather a beginning. For
at present it is not earth, but a composition of fire, water, earth, and air;
but at that time, spoiled of these ingredients, it shall appear in a substance
more like it self, its ashes. Philosophers that opinioned the worlds
destruction by fire, did never dream of annihilation, which is beyond the power
of sublunary causes; for the last action of that element is but vitrification,
or a reduction of a body into glass; and therefore some of our Chymicks
facetiously affirm, that at the last fire all shall be christallized and
reverberated into glass, which is the utmost action of that element. Nor need
we fear this term [annihilation] or wonder that God will destroy the works of
his Creation: for man subsisting, who is, and will then truly appear a
Microcosm, the world cannot be said to be destroyed. For the eyes of God, and
perhaps also of our glorified selves* shall as really behold and contemplate
the World in its Epitome or contracted essence, as now it does at large and in
its dilated substance, in the seed of a Plant, to the eyes of God, and to the
understanding of man, there exists, though in an invisible way, the perfect
leaves, flowers and fruit thereof: (for things that are in posse to the sense,
are actually existent to the understanding.) Thus God beholds all things, who
contemplates as fully his works in their Epitome, as in their full volume; and
beheld as amply the whole world in that little compendium of the sixth day, as
in the scattered and dilated pieces of those five before.

Mahomet does Heaven. This indeed makes a noise, and drums in popular ears: but
if this be the terrible piece thereof, it is not worthy to stand in diameter
with Heaven, whose happiness consists in that part that is best able to
comprehend it, that immortal essence, that translated divinity and colony of
God, the Soul. Surely though we place Hell under Earth, the Devil's walk and
purlue is about it: men speak too popularly who place it in those flaming
mountains, which to grosser apprehensions represent Hell. The heart of man is
the place the Devils dwell in; I feel sometimes a Hell within my self; Lucifer
keeps his Court in my breast; Legion is revived in me:* There are as many
Hells, as Anaxagoras conceited worlds:] there was more than one Hell in
Magdalene, when there were seven Devils; for every Devil is an Hell unto
himself; he holds enough of torture in his own ubi, and needs not the misery of
circumference to afflict him. And thus a distracted Conscience here, is a
shadow or introduction unto Hell hereafter. Who can but pity the merciful
intention of those hands that do destroy themselves? the Devil, were it in his
power, would do the like; which being impossible, his miseries are endless, and
he suffers most in that attribute wherein he is impassible, his immortality.

of the one, than endure the misery of the other; to be deprived of them, is a
perfect Hell, and needs methinks no addition to complete our afflictions; that
terrible term has never detained me from sin, nor do I owe any good action to
the name thereof: I fear God, yet am not afraid of him; his Mercies make me
ashamed of my sins, before his Judgments afraid thereof: these are the forced
and secondary method of his wisdom, which he uses but as the last remedy, and
upon provocation; a course rather to deter the wicked, than incite the virtuous
to his worship. I can hardly think there was ever any scared into Heaven; they
go the fairest way to Heaven, that would serve God without a Hell; other
Mercenaries, that crouch unto him in fear of Hell, though they term themselves
the servants, are indeed but the slaves of the Almighty.

in general to mankind, or in particular to my self: and whether out of the
prejudice of my affection, or an inverting and partial conceit of his mercies,
I know not; but those which others term crosses, afflictions, judgments,
misfortunes, to me who inquire farther into them then their visible effects,
they both appear, and in event have ever proved the secret and dissembled
favors of his affection. It is a singular piece of Wisdom to apprehend truly,
and without passion, the Works of God; and so well to distinguish his Justice
from his Mercy, as not miscall those noble Attributes: yet it is likewise an
honest piece of Logic, so to dispute and argue the proceedings of God, as to
distinguish even his judgments into mercies. For God is merciful unto all,
because better to the worst, than the best deserve; and to say he punishes
none in this World, though it be a Paradox, is no absurdity. To one that has
committed Murder, if the Judge should only ordain a Fine, it were a madness to
call this a punishment, and to repine at the sentence, rather than admire the
clemency of the Judge. Thus our offenses being mortal, and deserving not only
Death, but Damnation; if the goodness of God be content to traverse and pass
them over with a loss, misfortune, or disease; what frenzy were it to term
this a punishment, rather than an extremity of mercy; and to groan under the
rod of his Judgments, rather than admire the Scepter of his Mercies? Therefore
to adore, honor, and admire him, is a debt of gratitude due from the
obligation of our nature, states, and conditions; and with these thoughts, he
that knows them best, will not deny that I adore him. That I obtain Heaven, and
the bliss thereof, is accidental, and not the intended work of my devotion; it
being a felicity I can neither think to deserve, nor scarce in modesty to
expect. For those two ends of us all, either as rewards or punishments, are
mercifully ordained and disproportionably disposed unto our actions; the one
being so far beyond our deserts, the other so infinitely below our demerits.

Adam, when they shall suffer for him they never heard of? when they who derive
their genealogy from the Gods, shall know they are the unhappy issue of sinful
man? It is an insolent part of reason, to controvert the Works of God, or
question the Justice of his proceedings. Could Humility teach others, as it
has instructed me, to contemplate the infinite and incomprehensible distance
betwixt the Creator and the Creature; or did we seriously perpend that one
simile of St. Paul, Shall the Vessel say to the Potter, Why have thou made me
thus? it would prevent these arrogant disputes of reason, nor would we argue
the definitive sentence of God, either to Heaven or Hell. Men that live
according to the right rule and law of reason, live but in their own kind, as
beasts do in theirs; who justly obey the prescript of their natures, and
therefore cannot reasonably demand a reward of their actions, as only obeying
the natural dictates of their reason. It will therefore, and must at last
appear, that all salvation is through Christ; which verity I fear these great
examples of virtue must confirm, and make it good, how the perfectest actions
of earth have no title or claim unto Heaven.

Aristotle transgressed the rule of his own Ethics:] the Stoics that condemn
passion, and command a man to laugh in Phalaris his Bull, could not endure
without a groan a fit of the Stone or Colic. The Scepticks that affirmed they
knew nothing,] even in that opinion confute themselves, and thought they knew
more than all the World beside. Diogenes I hold to be the most vainglorious man
of his time, and more ambitious in refusing all Honors, than Alexander in
rejecting none. Vice and the Devil put a Fallacy upon our Reasons, and
provoking us too hastily to run from it, entangle and profound us deeper in
it.* The Duke of Venice, that weds himself unto the Sea, by a Ring of Gold] I
will not argue of prodigality, because it is a solemnity of good use and
consequence in the State: But the Philosopher that threw his money into the Sea
to avoid Avarice, was a notorious prodigal.] There is no road or ready way to
virtue; it is not an easy point of art to disentangle our selves from this
riddle, or web of Sin: To perfect virtue, as to Religion, there is required a
Panoplia, or complete armor; that whilst we lie at close ward against one
Vice, we lie not open to the venny of another. And indeed wiser discretions
that have the thread of reason to conduct them, offend without pardon; whereas,
under-heads may stumble without dishonor.

* There go so many circumstances to piece up one good action, that it is a
lesson to be good, and we are forced to be virtuous by the book.] Again, the
Practice of men holds not an equal pace, yea, and often runs counter to their
Theory; we naturally know what is good, but naturally pursue what is evil: the
Rhetoric wherewith I persuade another, cannot persuade my self: there is a
depraved appetite in us, that will with patience hear the learned instructions
of Reason, but yet perform no farther than agrees to its own irregular humor.
In brief, we all are monsters, that is, a composition of Man and Beast; wherein
we must endeavor to be as the Poets fancy that wise man Chiron, that is, to
have the Region of Man above that of Beast, and Sense to sit but at the feet of
Reason. Lastly, I do desire with God, that all, but yet affirm with men, that
few shall know Salvation; that the bridge is narrow, the passage straight unto
life: yet those who do confine the Church of God, either to particular Nations,
Churches or Families, have made it far narrower then our Savior ever meant it.

Strabo's cloak, and restrain it unto Europe,] seem to me as bad Geographers as
Alexander, who thought he had Conquered all the World, when he had not subdued
the half of any part thereof. For we cannot deny the Church of God both in Asia
and Africa, if we do not forget the Peregrinations of the Apostles, the deaths
of the Martyrs, the Sessions of many, and, even in our reformed judgment,
lawful Councils, held in those parts in the minority and nonage of ours. Nor
must a few differences, more remarkable in the eyes of man, than perhaps in the
judgment of God, excommunicate from Heaven one another, much less those
Christians who are in a manner all Martyrs, maintaining their Faith, in the
noble way of perfecution, and serving God in the Fire, whereas we honor him in
the Sunshine. It Is true, we all hold there is a number of Elect, and many to be
saved; yet take our Opinions together, and from the confusion thereof there
will be no such thing as salvation, nor shall any one be saved. For first, the
Church of Rome condemns us, we likewise them; the Sub-reformists and
Sectaries sentence the Doctrine of our Church as damnable; the Atomist, or
Familist, reprobates all these; and all these, them again. Thus whilst the
Mercies of God do promise us Heaven, our conceits and opinions exclude us from
that place. There must be therefore more than one St. Peter; particular
Churches and Sects usurp the gates of Heaven, and turn the key against each
other: and thus we go to Heaven against each others wills, conceits and
opinions; and with as much uncharity as ignorance, do err I fear in points not
only of our own, but one another salvation.

Solomon unto damnation,] condemn not only him, but themselves, and the whole
World; for by the Letter, and written Word of God, we are without exception in
the state of Death; but there is a prerogative of God, and an arbitrary
pleasure above the Letter of his own Law, by which alone we can pretend unto
Salvation, and through which Solomon might be as easily saved as those who
condemn him.

little Flock, does not comfort, but deject my Devotion, especially when I
reflect upon mine own unworthiness, wherein, according to my humble
apprehensions, I am below them all. I believe there shall never be an Anarchy
in Heaven, but as there are Hierarchies amongst the Angels, so shall there be
degrees of priority amongst the Saints. Yet is it (I protest) beyond my
ambition to aspire unto the first ranks; my desires only are, and I shall be
happy therein, to be but the last man, and bring up the Rere in Heaven.

doubt, that there is such a City as Constantinople; yet for me to take my Oath
thereon, were a kind of Perjury, because I hold no infallible warrant from my
own sense to confirm me in the certainty thereof: And truly, though many
pretend an absolute certainty of their Salvation, yet when an humble Soul shall
contemplate our own unworthiness, she shall meet with many doubts, and suddenly
find how little we stand in need of the Precept of St. Paul, Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling. That which is the cause of my Election, I
hold to be the cause of my Salvation, which was the mercy and beneplacit of
God, before I was, or the foundation of the World. Before Abraham was, I am, is
the saying of Christ; yet is it true in some sense, if I say it of my self; for
I was not only before my self, but Adam, that is, in the Idea of God, and the
decree of that Synod held from all Eternity. And in this sense, I say, the
World was before the Creation, and at an end before it had a beginning; and
thus was I dead before I was alive; though my grave be England, my dying place
was Paradise; and Eve miscarried of me, before she conceived of Cain.

Midianites; yet could none of those justly challenge, or imagine he deserved
that honor thereupon. I do not deny, but that true Faith, and such as God
requires, is not only a mark or token, but also a means of our Salvation; but
where to find this, is as obscure to me, as my last end. And if our Savior
could object unto his own Disciples and Favorites, a Faith, that, to the
quantity of a grain of Mustard Seed, is able to remove Mountains; surely that
which we boast of, is not any thing, or at the most, but a remove from nothing.
This is the Tenor of my belief; wherein, though there be many things singular,
and to the humor of my irregular self; yet if they square not with maturer
Judgments I disclaim them, and do no further favor them, than the learned and
best judgments shall authorize them.

The Second Part.
with all things; I have no antipathy, or rather Idio-syncrasie, in diet,
humor, air, any thing: * I wonder not at the French for their dishes of Frogs,
Snails,] and Toadstools; not at the Jews for Locusts and Grasshoppers; but
being amongst them, make them my common Viands; and I find they agree with my
Stomach as well as theirs. I could digest a Sallad gathered in a Churchyard,
as well as in a Garden. I cannot start at the presence of a Serpent, Scorpion,
Lizard, or Salamander: at the sight of a Toad or Viper, I find in me no desire
to take up a stone to destroy them. I feell not in my self those common
Antipathies that I can discover in others: Those National repugnances do not
touch me, nor do I behold with prejudice the French, Italian, Spaniard and
Dutch; but where I find their actions in balance with my Country-men's, I
honor, love, and embrace them in some degree. I was born in the eighth
Climate, but seem for to be framed and constellated unto all: I am no Plant
that will not prosper out of a Garden: All places, all airs make unto me one
Country; I am in England, every where, and under any Meridian. I have been
shipwrackt, yet am not enemy with the Sea or Winds; I can study, play, or sleep
in a Tempest. In brief, I am averse from nothing; my Conscience would give me
the lie if I should absolutely detest or hate any essence but the Devil; or so
at least abhor any thing, but that we might come to composition. If there be
any among those common objects of hatred I do contemn and laugh at, it is that
great enemy of Reason, Virtue and Religion, the Multitude; that numerous piece
of monstrosity, which taken asunder seem men, and the reasonable creatures of
God; but confused together, make but one great beast, and a monstrosity more
prodigious then Hydra: it is no breach of Charity to call these Fools; it is
the style all holy Writers have afforded them, set down by Solomon in Canonical
Scripture, and a point of our Faith to believe so. Neither in name of Multitude
do I only include the base and minor sort of people; there is a rabble even
amongst the Gentry, a sort of Plebeian heads, whose fancy moves with the same
wheel as these; men in the same Level with Mechanics, though their fortunes do
somewhat guild their infirmities, and their purses compound for their follies.
But as in casting account, three or four men together come short in account of
one man placed by himself below them: So neither are a troop of these ignorant
Doradoes, of that true esteem and value, as many a forlorn person, whose
condition does place them below their feet. Let us speak like Politicians,
there is a Nobility without Heraldry, a natural dignity, whereby one man is
ranked with another; another filed before him, according to the quality of his
Desert, and pre-eminence of his good parts: Though the corruption of these
times, and the byas of present practice wheel another way. Thus it was in the
first and primitive Commonwealths, and is yet in the integrity and Cradle of
well-ordered Polities, till corruption gets ground, ruder desires laboring
after that which wiser considerations contemn; every one having a liberty to
amass and heap up riches, and they a license or faculty to do or purchase any
thing.

miseries, nor to content mine own commiserating disposition: for this is still
but moral charity, and an act that owes more to passion than reason. He that
relieves another upon the bare suggestion and bowels of pity, does not this so
much for his sake, as for his own: for by compassion we make others misery our
own; and so by relieving them, we relieve our selves also. It is as erroneous a
conceit to redress other Men's misfortunes upon the common considerations or
merciful natures, that it may be one day our own case; for this is a sinister
and politic kind of charity, whereby we seem to bespeak the pities of men in
the like occasions: and truly I have observed that those professed
Eleemosynaries, though in a crowd or multitude, do yet direct and place their
petitions on a few and selected persons: there is surely a Physiognomy, which
those experienced and Master-Mendicants observe; whereby they instantly
discover a merciful aspect, and will single out a face, wherein they spy the
signatures and marks of Mercy: for there are mystically in our faces certain
Characters which carry in them the motto of our Souls, wherein he that can read
A. B. C. may read our natures. I hold moreover that there is a Phytognomy, or
Physiognomy, not only of Men; but of Plants and Vegetables; and in every one of
them, some outward figures which hang as signs or bushes of their inward forms.
The Finger of God has left an Inscription upon all his works, not graphical,
or composed of Letters, but of their several forms, constitutions, parts, and
operations; which aptly joined together do make one word that does express
their natures. By these Letters God calls the Stars by their names; and by this
Alphabet Adam assigned to every creature a name peculiar to its Nature. Now
there are besides these Characters in our Faces, certain mystical figures in
our Hands, which I dare not call mere dashes, strokes, a la volee, or at
random, because delineated by a Pencil that never works in vain; and hereof I
take more particular notice, because I carry that in mine own hand, which I
could never read of, nor discover in another. Aristotle I confess, in his
acute, and singular Book of Physiognomy, has made no mention of Chiromancy;
yet I believe the Egyptians, who were nearer addicted to those abstruse and
mystical sciences, had a knowledge therein; to which those vagabond and
counterfeit Egyptians did after pretend, and perhaps retained a few corrupted
principles, which sometimes might verify their prognostics.

It is the common wonder of all men, * how among so many millions of faces,
there should be none alike:] Now contrary, I wonder as much how there should be
any. He that shall consider how many thousand several words have been carelessly
and without study composed out of 24 Letters; withal, how many hundred lines
there are to be drawn in the Fabric of one Man; shall easily find that this
variety is necessary: And it will be very hard that they shall so concur, as to
make one portract like another. Let a Painter carelessly limb out a million of
Faces, and you shall find them all different; yea let him have his Copy before
him, yet after all his art there will remain a sensible distinction; for the
pattern or example of every thing is the perfectest in that kind, whereof we
still come short, though we transcend or go beyond it, because herein it is
wide, and agrees not in all points unto the Copy. Nor does the similitude of
Creatures disparage the variety of Nature, nor any way confound the Works of
God. For even in things alike there is diversity; and those that do seem to
accord, do manifestly disagree. And thus is man like God; for in the same
things that we resemble him, we are utterly different from him. There was never
any thing so like another, as in all points to concur; there will ever some
reserved difference slip in, to prevent the identity, without which, two
several things would not be alike, but the same, which is impossible.

of this virtue, as to conceive that to give Alms, is only to be Charitable,
or think a piece of Liberality can comprehend the Total of Charity. Divinity
has wisely divided the acts thereof into many branches, and has taught us in
this narrow way, many paths unto goodness: as many ways as we may do good, so
many ways we may be charitable: there are infirmities, not only of Body, but
of Soul and Fortunes, which do require the merciful hand of our abilities. I
cannot contemn a man for ignorance, but behold him with as much pity as I do
Lazarus. It is no greater Charity to cloth his body, than apparel the
nakedness of his Soul. It is an honorable object to see the reasons of other
men wear our Liveries, and their borrowed understandings do homage to the
bounty of ours: It is the cheapest way of beneficence, and like the natural
charity of the Sun, illuminates another without obscuring it self. To be
reserved and caitiff in this part of goodness, is the sordidest piece of
covetousness, and more contemptible than pecuniary Avarice. To this (as calling
my self a Scholar) I am obliged by the duty of my condition: I make not
therefore my head a grave, but a treasure of knowledge; I intend no Monopoly,
but a community in learning; I study not for my own sake only, but for theirs
that study not for themselves. I envy no man that knows more than my self, but
pity them that know less. I instruct no man as an exercise of my knowledge, or
with an intent rather to nourish and keep it alive in mine own head, then beget
and propagate it in his; and in the midst of all my endeavors, there is but
one thought that dejects me, that my acquired parts must perish with my self,
nor can be Legacied among my honored Friends. I cannot fall out, or contemn a
man for an error, or conceive why a difference in Opinion should divide an
affection: For Controversies, Disputes, and Argumentations, both in Philosophy,
and in Divinity, if they meet with discreet and peaceable natures, do not
infringe the Laws of Charity: in all disputes, so much as there is of passion,
so much there is of nothing to the purpose; for then Reason, like a bad Hound,
spends upon a false Scent, and forsakes the question first started. And this is
one reason why Controversies are never determined; for though they be amply
proposed, they are scarce at all handled, they do so swell with unnecessary
Digressions; and the Parenthesis on the party, is often as large as the main
discourse upon the subject. The Foundations of Religion are already
established, and the Principles of Salvation subscribed unto by all; there
remains not many controversies worth a Passion, and yet never any disputed
without, not only in Divinity, but inferior Arts: * What a (...) and hot
skirmish is betwixt S. and T. in Lucian:] How do Grammarians hack and slash for
the Genitive case in Jupiter? How do they break their own pates, to salve that
of Priscian: Si foret in terris, rideret Democritus. Yea, even amongst wiser
militants, how many wounds have been given, and credits slain, for the poor
victory of an opinion, or beggarly conquest of a distinction? Scholars are men
of Peace, they bear no Arms, but their tongues are sharper than Actus his
razor;] their Pens carry farther, and give a louder report tban Thunder: I had
rather stand the shock of a Basilisco, than the fury of a merciless Pen. It is
not mere Zeal to Learning, or Devotion to the Muses, that wiser Princes Patron
the Arts, and carry an indulgent aspect unto Scholars; but a desire to have
their names eternized by the memory of their writings, and a fear of the
revengeful Pen of succeeding ages: for these are the men, that when they have
played their parts, and had their exits, must step out and give the moral of
their Scenes, and deliver unto Posterity an Inventory of their Virtues and
Vices. And surely there goes a great deal of Conscience to the compiling of an
History: there is no reproach to the scandal of a Story; it is such an
authentic kind of falsehood, that with authority belies our good names to all
Nations and Posterity.

Le mutin Anglois, and le bravache Escossois;
Le bougre Italian, and le fol Francois;
Le Poultron Romani, le larron de Gasnongne,
L' Espagnol superbe, and l' Aleman yurongne.
* St. Paul, that calls the Cretians liars, does it but indirectly, and upon
quotation of their own Poet.] It is as bloody a thought in one way, as Nero's
was in another. For by a word we wound a thousand,] and at one blow assassine
the honor of a Nation. It is as complete a piece of madness to miscal and rave
against the times; or think to recall men to reason, by a fit of passion:
Democritus, that thought to laugh the times into goodness, seems to me as
deeply Hypochondriack, as Heraclitus that bewailed them. It moves not my spleen
to behold the multitude in their proper humors, that is, in their fits of
folly and madness, as well understanding that wisdom is not profaned unto the
World, and it is the privilege of a few to be Virtuous. They that endeavor to
abolish Vice, destroy also Virtue, for contraries, though they destroy one
another; are yet in life of one another. Thus Virtue (abolish vice) is an Idea:
again, the community of sin does not disparage goodness; for when Vice gains
upon the major part, Virtue, in whom it remains, becomes more excellent; and
being lost in some, multiplies its goodness in others, which remain untouched,
and persist entire in the general inundation. I can therefore behold Vice
without a Satyr, content only with an admonition, or instructive reprehension,,
for Noble Natures, and such as are capable of goodness, are railed into vice,
that might as easily be admonished into virtue; and we should be all so far the
Orators of goodness, as to protract her from the power of Vice, and maintain
the cause of injured truth. No man can justly censure or condemn another,
because indeed no man truly knows another. This I perceive in my self; for I am
in the dark to all the world, and my nearest friends behold me but in a cloud:
those that know me but superficially, think less of me than I do of my self;
those of my near acquaintance think more: God, who truly knows me, knows that I
am nothing; for he only beholds me, and all the world; who looks not on us
through a derived ray, or a trajection of a sensible species, but beholds the
substance without the helps of accidents, and the forms of things, as we their
operations. Further, no man can judge another, because no man knows himself;
for we censure others but as they disagree from that humor which we fancy
laudible in our selves, and commend others but for that wherein they seem to
quadrate and consent with us. So that in conclusion, all is but that we all
condem, Self-love. It Is the general complaint of these times, and perhaps of
those past, that charity grows cold; which I perceive most verified in those
which most do manifest the fires and flames of zeal; for it is a virtue that
best agrees with coldest natures, and such as are complexioned for humility.
But how shall we expect Charity toward others, when we are uncharitable to our
selves? Charity begins at home, is the voice of the World; yet is every man his
greatest enemy, and as it were, his own Executioner. Non occides, is the
Commandment of God, yet scarce observed by any man; for I perceive every man is
his own Atropos, and lends a hand to cut the thread of his own days. Cain was
not therefore the first Murderer, but Adam, who brought in death; whereof he
beheld the practice and example in his own son Abel, and saw that verified in
the experience of another, which faith could not persuade him in the Theory of
himself.

his own miseries less than my self, and no man that so nearly apprehends
another. I could lose an arm without a tear, and with few groans, methinks, be
quartered into pieces; yet can I weep most seriously at a Play, and receive
with true passion, the counterfeit grief of those known and professed
Impostures. It is a barbarous part of inhumanity to add unto any afflicted
parties misery, or endeavor to multiply in any man, a passion, whose single
nature is already above his patience: this was the greatest affliction of Job;
and those oblique expostulations of his Friends, a deeper injury than the
downright blows of the Devil. It is not the tears of our own eyes only, but of
our friends also, that do exhaust the current of our sorrows; which falling
into many streams, runs more peaceably, and is contented with a narrower
channel. It is an act within the power of charity, to translate a passion out
of one breast into another, and to divide a sorrow almost out of it self; for an
affliction, like a dimension, may be so divided, as if not indivisible, at
least to become insensible. Now with my friend I desire not to share or
participate, but to engross his sorrows, that by making them mine own, I may
more easily discuss them; for in mine own reason, and within my self, I can
command that, which I cannot entreat without my self, and within the circle of
another. I have often thought those noble pairs and examples of friendship not
so truly Histories of what had been, as fictions of what should be; but I now
perceive nothing in them but possibilities, nor any thing in the Heroic
examples of Damon and Pythias, Achilles and Patroclus, which methinks upon some
grounds I could not perform within the narrow compass of my self. That a man
should lay down his life for his Friend, seems strange to vulgar affections,
and such as confine themselves within that Worldly principle, Charity begins at
home. For my own part, I could never remember the relations that I held unto my
self, nor the respect that I owe unto my own nature, in the cause of God, my
Country, and my Friends. Next to these three I do embrace my self: I confess I
do not observe that order that the Schools ordain our affections, to love our
Parents, Wives, Children, and then our Friends; for excepting the injunctions
of Religior, I do not find in my self such a necessary and indissoluble
Sympathy to all those of my blood. I hope I do not break the fifth Commandment,
if I conceive I may love my friend before the nearest of my blood, even those
to whom I owe the principles of life: I never yet cast a true affection on a
woman, but I have loved my friend as I do virtue, my soul, my God. From hence
me thinks I do conceive how God loves man, what happiness there is in the love
of God. Omitting all other, there are three most mystical unions; two natures
in one person; three persons in one nature; one soul in two bodies. For though
indeed they be really divided, yet are they so united, as they seem but one,
and make rather a duality than two distinct souls.

Enigma 's, mysteries and riddles; wherein two so become one, as they both
become two: I love my friend before my self, and yet methinks I do not love him
enough: some few months hence, my multiplied affection will make me believe I
have not loved him at all: when I am from him, I am dead till I be with him;
when I am with him, I am not satisfied, but would still be nearer him. United
souls are not satisfied with embraces, but desire to be truly each other; which
being impossible, their desires are infinite, and proceed without a possibility
of satisfaction. Another misery there is in affection, that whom we truly love
like our own, we forget their looks, nor can our memory retain the Idea of
their faces; and it is no wonder: for they are our selves, and our affection
makes their looks our own. This noble affection falls not on vulgar and common
constitutions, but on such as are marked for virtue: he that can love his
friend with this noble ardour, will in a competent degree effect all. Now if we
can bring our affections to look beyond the body, and cast an eye upon the
soul, we have found out the true object, not only of friendship, but Charity;
and the greatest happiness that we can bequeath the soul, is that wherein we
all do place our last felicity, Salvation; which though it be not in our power
to bestow, it is in our charity, and pious invocations to desire, if not
procure and further. I cannot contentedly frame a prayer for my self in
particular, without a catalogue for my friends; nor request a happiness wherein
my sociable disposition does not desire the fellowship of my neighbor. I never
hear the Toll of a passing Bell, though in my mirth, without my prayers and
best wishes for the departing spirit: I cannot go to cure the body of my
patient, but I forget my profession, and call unto God for his soul: I cannot
see one say his prayers, but in stead of imitating him, I fall into a
supplication for him, who perhaps is no more to me than a common nature: and if
God has vouchsafed an ear to my supplications, there are surely many happy
that never saw me, and enjoy the blessing of mine unknown devotions. To pray
for Enemies, that is, for their salvation, is no harsh precept, but the
practice of our daily and ordinary devotions.* I cannot believe the story of
the Italian;] our bad wishes and uncharitable desires proceed no further than
this life; it is the Devil, and the uncharitable votes of Hell, that desire our
misery in the World to come.

despise our selves. I were unjust unto mine own Conscience, if I should say I
am at variance with any thing like my self. I find there are many pieces in
this one fabric of man; this frame is raised upon a mass of Antipathies: I am
one methinks, but as the World; wherein notwithstanding there are a swarm of
distinct essences, and in them another World of contrarieties; we carry private
and domestic enemies within, public and more hostile adversaries without. The
Devil, that did but buffet St. Paul, plays methinks at sharp with me. Let me be
nothing, if within the compass of my self, I do not find the battle of
Lepanto, Passion against Reason, Reason against Faith, Faith against the Devil,
and my Conscience against all. There is another man within me, that is angry
with me, rebukes, commands, and dastards me. I have no Conscience of Marble, to
resist the hammer of more heavy offenses; nor yet too soft and waxen, as to
take the impression of each single peccadillo or escape of infirmity: I am of a
strange belief, that it is as easy to be forgiven some sins, as to commit some
others. Eor my Original sin, I hold it to be washed away in my Baptism; for my
actual transgressions, I compute and reckon with God, but from my last
repentance, Sacrament, or general absolution; and therefore am not terrified
with the sins or madness of my youth. I thank the goodness of God,* I have no
sins that want a name,] I am not singular in offenses; my transgressions are
Epidemical, and from the common breath of our corruption. For there are certain
tempers of body, which matched with an humorous depravity of mind, do hatch and
produce vitiosities, whose newness and monstrosity of nature admits no name;
this was the temper of that Lecher that carnal'd with a Statua,]* and
constitution of Nero in his Spintrian recreations.] For the Heavens are not
only fruitful in new and unheard of stars, the Earth in plants and animals; but
men's minds also in villainy and vices: now the dullness of my reason, and the
vulgarity of my disposition, never prompted my invention, nor solicited my
affection unto any of those; yet even those common and quotidian infirmities
that so necessarily attend me, and do seem to be my very nature, have so
dejected me, so broken the estimation that I should have otherwise of my self,
that I repute my self the most abjectest piece of mortality. Divines prescribe
a fit of sorrow to repentance; there goes indignation, anger, sorrow, hatred,
into mine; passions of a contrary nature, which neither seem to suit with this
action, nor my proper constitution. It is no breach of charity to our selves,
to be at variance with our Vices; nor to abhor that part of us, which is an
enemy to the ground of charity, our God; wherein we do but imitate our great
selves the world, whose divided Antipathies and contrary faces do yet carry a
charitable regard unto the whole by their particular discords, preserving the
common harmony, and keeping in fetters those powers, whose rebellions once
Masters, might be the ruin of all.

Adam, I have escaped one, and that a mortal enemy to Charity, the first and
farther-sin, not only of man, but of the devil, Pride; a vice whose name is
comprehended in a Monosyllable, but in its nature not circumscribed with a
World. I have escaped it in a condition that can hardly avoid it. Those petty
acquisitions and reputed perfections that advance and elevate the conceits of
other men, add no feathers unto mine.* I have seen a Grammarian towr and plume
himself over a single line in Horace,] and show more pride in the construction
of one Ode, than the Author in the composure of the whole book. For my own
part, besides the Jargon and Patois of several Provinces, I understand no less
than six Languages; yet I protest I have no higher conceit of my self, than had
our Fathers before the consusion of Babel, when there was but one Language in
the World, and none to boast himself either Linguist or Critic. I have not
only seen several Countries, beheld the nature of their Climes, the
Chorography of their Provinces, Topography of their Cities, but understood
their several Laws, Customs and Policies; yet cannot all this persuade the
dullness of my spirit unto such an opinion of my self, as I behold in nimbler
and conceited heads, that never looked a degree beyond their Nests. I know the
names, and somewhat more, of all the constellations in my Horizon; yet I have
seen a prating Mariner, that could only name the pointers and the North Star,
out-talk me, and conceit himself a whole Sphere above me. I know most of the
Plants of my Country, and of those about me; yet methinks I do not know so
many as when I did but know a hundred, and had scarcely ever Simpled further
than Cheap Side. For indeed, heads of capacity, and such as are not full with a
handful, or easy measure of knowledge, think they know nothing, till they know
all; which being impossible, they fall upon the opinion of Socrates, and only
know they know not any thing.* I cannot think that Homer pined away upon the
riddle of the fisherman,] or that Aristotle, who understood the uncertainty of
knowledge, and confessed so often the reason of man too weak for the works of
nature, did ever drown himself upon the flux and reflux of Euripus.] We do but
learn to day, what our better advanced judgments will unteach to morrow: and
Aristotle does not instruct us, as Plato did him; that is, to confute himself.]
I have run through all sorts, yet find no rest in any: though our first studies
and junior endeavors may style us Peripateticks, Stoics, or Academicks, yet I
perceive the wisest heads prove, at last, almost all Scepticks, and stand like
Janus in the field of knowledge. I have therefore one common and authentic
Philosophy I learned in the Schools, whereby I discourse and satisfy the
reason of other men; another more reserved, and drawn from experience, whereby
I content mine own. Solomon, that complained of ignorance in the height of
knowledge, has not only humbled my conceits, but discouraged my endeavors.
There is yet another conceit that has sometimes made me shut my books, which
tells me it is a vanity to waste our days in the blind pursuit of knowledge; it
is but attending a little longer, and we shall enjoy that by instinct and
infusion, which we endeavor at hereby labor and inquisition. It is better to
sit down in a modest ignorance; and rest contented with the natural blessing of
our own reasons, than buy the uncertain knowledge of this life, with sweat and
vexation, which Death gives every fool gratis, and is an accessory of our
glorification.

man, but the twelfth part of man for woman: Man is the whole World, and the
Breath of God; Woman the Rib, and crooked piece of man. *I could be content
that we might procreate like trees] without conjunction, or that there were any
way to perpetuate the World without this trivial and vulgar way of coition; it
is the foolishest act a wise man commits in all his life, nor is there any
thing that will more deject his cooled imagination, when he shall consider what
an odd and unworthy piece of folly he has committed. I speak not in prejudice,
nor am averse from that sweet Sex, but naturally amorous of all that is
beautiful; I can look a whole day with delight upon a handsome Picture, though
it be but of an Horse. It is my temper, and I like it the better, to affect all
harmony; and sure there is music even in the beauty, and the silent note which
Cupid strikes, far sweeter than the sound of an instrument. For there is a
music where ever there is a harmony, order or proportion; and thus far we may
maintain the music of the Spears: for those well-ordered motions, and regular
paces, though they give no sound unto the ear, yet to the understanding they
strike a note most full of harmony. Whosoever is harmonically composed,
delights in harmony; which makes me much distrust the symmetry of those heads
which declaim against all Church-Musick. For my self, not only from my
obedience, but my particular Genius, I do embrace it: for even that vulgar and
Tavern-Musick, which makes one man merry, another mad, strikes in me a deep fit
of devotion, and a profound contemplation of the first Composer. There is
something in it of Divinity more than the ear discovers: it is an
Hieroglyphical and shadowed lesson of the whole World, and creatures of God;
such a melody to the ear, as the whole World well understood, would afford the
understanding. In brief, it is a sensible fit of that harmony, which
intellectually sounds in the ears of God. I will not say with Plato, the soul
is an harmony, but harmonical, and has its nearest sympathy unto Music: thus
some whose temper of body agrees, and humors the constitution of their souls,
are born Poets, though indeed all are naturally inclined unto Rhythme. Urbem
Romam in principio Reges habuere.
This made Tacitus in the very first line of his Story, fall upon a verse, and
Cicero the worst of Poets, but Pro Archia Poeta.
declaiming for a Poet, falls in the very first sentence upon a perfect
Hexameter. In qua me non inficior mediocriter esse.
I feel not in me those sordid and unchristian desires of my profession; I do
not secretly implore and wish for Plagues, rejoice at Famines, revolve
Ephemerides and Almanacks, in expectation of malignant Aspects, fatal
Conjunctions and Eclipses: I rejoice not at unwholesome Springs, nor
unseasonable Winters; my Prayer goes with the Husbandman's; I desire every
thing in its proper season, that neither men nor the times be put out of
temper. Let me be sick my self, if sometimes the malady of my patient be not a
disease unto me; I desire rather to cure his infirmities than my own
necessities: where I do him no good, methinks it is scarce honest gain; though
I confess it is but the worthy salary of our well-intended endeavors. I am not
only ashamed, but heartily sorry, that besides death, there are diseases
incurable; yet not for my own sake, or that they be beyond my Art, but for the
general cause and sake of humanity, whose common cause I apprehend as mine own.
And to speak more generally, those three Noble Professions which all civil
Commonwealths do honor, are raised upon the fall of Adam, and are not exempt
from their infirmities; there are not only diseases incurable in Physic, but
cases indissolvable in Laws, Vices incorrigible in Divinity: if general
Councils may err, I do not see why particular Courts should be infallible;
their perfectest rules are raised upon the erroneous reasons of Man; and, the
Laws of one, do but condemn the rules of another; as Aristotle oft-times the
opinions of his Predecessors, because,, though agreeable to reason, yet were
not consonant to his own rules, and Logic of his proper Principles. Again, to
speak nothing of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, whose cure not only, but
whose nature is unknown; I can cure the Gout or Stone in some, sooner than
Divinity Pride or Avarice in others. I can cure Vices by Physic, when they
remain incurable by Divinity; and shall obey my Pills, when they contemn their
precepts. I boast nothing, but plainly say, we all labor against our own cure;
for death is the cure of all diseases. There is no Catholicon or universal
remedy I know but this, which though nauseous to queasie stomachs, yet to
prepared appetites is Nectar, and a pleasant potion of immortality.

are kept within the circle of those qualities, wherein they are good; there is
no man's mind of such discordant and jarring a temper, to which a tunable
disposition may not strike a harmony. Magnae virtutes, nec minora vitia; it is
the posie of the best natures,* and may be inverted on the worst;] there are in
the most depraved and venomous dispositions, certain pieces that remain
untoucht, which by an Antiperistasis become more excellent, or by the
excellency of their antipathies are able to preserve themselves from the
contagion of their enemy vices, and persist entire beyond the general
corruption. For it is also thus in nature. The greatest Balsomes do lie
enveloped in the bodies of most powerful Corrosives; I say moreover, and I
ground upon experience, * that poisons contain within themselves their own
Antidote,] and that which preserves them from the venom of themselves, without
which they were not deleterious to others only, but to themselves also. But it
is the corruption that I fear within me, not the contagion of commerce without
me. It Is that unruly regiment within me, that will destroy me; it is I that do
infect my self, the man without a Navel yet lives in me;] I feel that original
canker corrode and devour me; and therefore Defenda me Dios de me, Lord deliver
me from my self, is a part of my Letany, and the first voice of my retired
imaginations. There is no man alone, because every man is a Microcosm, and
carries the whole World about him; Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus,/ though
it be the Apothegme of a wise man, is yet true in the mouth of a fool; indeed,
though in a Wilderness, a man is never alone, not only because he is with
himself, and his own thoughts, but because he is with the Devil; who ever
consorts with our solitude, and is that unruly rebel that musters up those
disordered motions which accompany our sequestered imaginations. And to speak
more narrowly, there is no such thing as solitude, nor any thing that can be
said to be alone, and by it self, but God, who is his own circle, and can
subsist by himself; all others, besides their dissimilary and Heterogeneous
parts, which in a manner multiply their natures, cannot subsist without the
concourse of God, and the society of that hand which does uphold their natures.
In brief, there can be nothing truly alone, and by its self, which is not truly
one; and such is only God: All others do transcend an unity, and so by
consequence are many.

outside, perusing only my condition and Fortunes, do err in my Altitude, for I
am above Atlas his shoulders. The earth is a point not only in respect of the
Heavens above us, but of that heavenly and celestial part within us: that mass
of Flesh that circumscribes me, limits not my mind: that surface that tells the
Heavens it has an end, cannot persuade me I have any: I take my circle to be
above three hundred and sixty; though the number of the Ark do measure my body,
it comprehends not my mind: whilst I study to find how I am a Microcosm or
little World, I find my self something more than the great. There is surely a
piece of Divinity in us, something that was before the Elements, and owes no
homage unto the Sun. Nature tells me I am the Image of God, as well as
Scripture: he that understands not thus much, has not his introduction or
first lesson, and is yet to begin the Alphabet of man. Let me not injure the
felicity of others, if I say I am as happy as any; Ruat coelum, Fiat voluntas
tua, salveth all; so that whatsoever happens, it is but what our daily prayers
desire. In brief, I am content, and what should providence add more? Surely
this is it we call Happiness, and this do I enjoy; with this I am happy in a
dream, and as content to enjoy a happiness in a fancy, as others in a more
apparent truth and realty. There is surely a nearer apprehension of any thing
that delights us in our dreams, than in our waked senses; without this I were
unhappy: for my awaked judgment discontents me, ever whispering unto me, that I
am from my friend; but my friendly dreams in night requite me, and make me
think I am within his arms. I thank God for my happy dreams, as I do for my
good rest, for there is a satisfaction unto reasonable desires, and such as can
be content with a fit of happiness. And surely it is not a melancholy conceit
to think we are all asleep in this World, and that the conceits of this, life
are as mere dreams to those of the next, as the Phantasms of the night, to the
conceits of the day. There is an equal delusion in both, and the one does but
seem to be the emblem or picture of the other; we are somewhat more than our
selves in our sleeps, and the slumber of the body seems to be but the waking of
the soul. It is the ligation of sense, but the liberty of reason, and our
waking conceptions do not match the Fancies of our sleeps. At my Nativity, my
Ascendant was the watery sign of Scorpius; I was born in the Planetary hour of
Saturn, and I think I have a piece of that Leaden Planet in me. I am no way
facetious, nor disposed for the mirth and galliardize of company; yet in one
dream I can compose a whole Comedy, behold the action, apprehend the justs, and
laugh my self awake at the conceits thereof: were my memory as faithful as my
reason is then fruitful, I would never study but in my dreams; and this time
also would I choose for my devotions: but * our grosser memories have then so
little hold of our abstracted understandings, that they forget the story,] and
can only relate to our awaked souls, a confused and broken tale of that that
has passed. Aristotle, who has written a singular Tract of Sleep, has not
methinks thoroughly defined it; nor yet Galen, though he seem to have corrected
it: for those Noctambuloes / and nightwalkers, though in their sleep, do yet
enjoy the action of their senses: we must therefore say that there is something
in us that is not in the jurisdiction of Morpheus; and that those abstracted
and ecstatick souls do walk about in their own corpse, as spirits with the
bodies they assume; wherein they seem to hear, and feel, though indeed the
Organs are destitute of sense, and their natures of those faculties that should
inform them. Thus it is observed, that men sometimes upon the hour of their
departure, do speak and reason above themselves, For then the soul beginning to
be freed from the ligaments of the body, begins to reason like her self, and to
discourse in a strain above mortality.

Themistocles therefore that slew his Soldier in his sleep, was a merciful
Executioner; it is a kind of punishment the mildness of no laws has invented;
*I wonder the fancy of Lucan and Seneca did not discover it.] It is that death
by which we may be literally said to dye daily; a death which Adam dyed before
his mortality; a death whereby we live a middle and moderating point between
life and death; in fine, so like death, I dare not trust it without my prayers,
and an half adieu unto the World, and take my farewell in a Colloquy with God.

The night is come, like to the day;
Depart not thou great God away.
Let not my sins, black as the night,
Eclipse the luster of thy light.
Keep still in my Horizon; for to me
The Sun makes not the day, but thee.
Thou whose nature cannot sleep,
On my temples centry keep;
Guard me against those watchful foes,
Whose eyes are open while mine close.
Let no dreams my head infest,
But such as Jacob''s temples blessed.
While I do rest, my Soul advance,
Make my sleep a holy trance.
That I may, my rest being wrought,
Awake into some holy thought;
And with as active vigor run
My course, as does the nimble Sun.
Sleep is a death; O make me try,
By sleeping, what it is to die:
And as gently lay my head
On my grave, as now my bed.
Howere I rest, great God, let me
Awake again at least with thee.
And thus assured, behold I lie
Securely, or to awake or die.
These are my drowsy days; in vain
I do now wake to sleep again:
O come that hour, when I shall never
Sleep again, but wake for ever.
This is the Dormative I take to bedward; I need no other Laudanum than this to
make me sleep; after which, I close mine eyes in security, content to take my
leave of the Sun, and sleep unto the resurrection.

Do unto others as then would he done unto thy self, I was not born unto
riches, neither is it I think my Star to be wealthy; or if it were, the freedom
of my mind, and frankness of my disposition, were able to contradict and cross
my fates. For to me avarice seems not so much a vice, as a deplorable piece of
madness; * to conceive our selves Urinals, or be persuaded that we are dead, is
not so ridiculous,] nor so many degrees beyond the power of Hellebore, as this.
The opinion of Theory, and positions of men, are not so void of reason, as
their practiced conclusions: some have held that Snow is black, that the earth
moves, that the Soul is air, fire, water; but all this is Philosophy, and there
is no delirium, if we do but speculate the folly and indisputable dotage of
avarice, to that subterraneous Idol, and God of the Earth. I do confess I am an
Atheist; I cannot persuade my self to honor that the World adores; whatsoever
virtue its prepared substance may have within my body, it has no influence nor
operation without: I would not entertain a base design, or an action that
should call me villain, for the Indies; and for this only do I love and honor
my own soul, and have methinks two arms too few to embrace my self. Aristotle
is too severe, that will not allow us to be truly liberal without wealth, and
the bountiful hand of Fortune; if this be true, I must confess I am charitable
only in my liberal intentions, and bountiful well-wishes. But if the example of
the Mite be not only an act of wonder, but an example of the noblest Charity,
surely poor men may also build Hospitals, and the rich alone have not erected
Cathedrals. I have a private method which others observe not; I take the
opportunity of my self to do good; I borrow occasion of Charity from mine own
necessities, and supply the wants of others, when I am in most need my self;
for it is an honest stratagem to make advantage of our selves, and so to
husband the acts of virtue, that where they were defective in one circumstance,
they may repay their want, and multiply their goodness in another. I have not
Peru in my desires, but a competence, and ability to perform those good works,
to which he has inclined my nature. He is rich, who has enough to be
charitable; and it is hard to be so poor, that a noble mind may not find a way
to this piece of goodness. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord;
there is more Rhetoric in that one sentence, than in a Library of Sermons; and
indeed if those Sentences were understood by the Reader, with the same Emphasis
as they are delivered by the Author, we needed not those Volumes of
instructions, but might be honest by an Epitome. Upon this motive only I cannot
behold a Beggar without relieving his Necessities with my Purse, or his Soul
with my Prayers; these scenical and accidental differences between us, cannot
make me forget that common and untoucht part of us both; there is under these
Cantoes and miserable outsides, these mutilate and semi bodies, a soul of the
same alloy with our own, whose Genealogy is Gods as well as ours, and is as
fair a way to Salvation as our selves. Statists that labor to contrive a
Commonwealth without our poverty, take away the object of charity, not
understanding only the Common wealth of Christian, but forgetting the prophecy
of Christ.

for this I think charity, to love God for himself, and our neighbor for God.
All that is truly amiable is God, or as it were a divided piece of him, that
retains a reflex or shadow of himself. Nor is it strange that we should place
affection on that which is invisible; all that we truly love is thus; what we
adore under affection of our senses, deserves not the honor of so pure a
title. Thus we adore virtue, though to the eyes of sense she be invisible: Thus
that part of our noble friends that we love, is not that part that we embrace,
but that insensible part that our arms cannot embrace. God being all goodness,
can love nothing but himself, and the traduciton of his holy Spirit. Let us
call to assize the loves of our parents, the affection of our wives and
children, and they are all dumb shows and dreams, without reality, truth or
constancy: for first, there is a strong bond of affection between us and our
Parents; yet how easily dissolved? We betake our selves to a woman, forget our
mother in a wife, and the womb that bare us, in that that shall bear our Image:
this woman blessing us with children, our affection leaves the level it held
before, and sinks from our bed unto our issue and picture of Posterity, where
affection holds no steady mansion. They, growing up in years, desire our ends;
or applying themselves to a woman, take a lawful way to love another better
than our selves. Thus I perceive a man may be buried alive, and behold his
grave in his own issue.

Copernicus will have it, above) the Sun, nor any Crambe in that repeated
verity and burden of all the wisdom of Solomon, All is vanity and vexation of
Spirit. There is no felicity in that the World adores: Aristotle whilst he
labors to resute the Idea's of Plato, falls upon one himself: for his summum
bonum is a Chimaera, and there is no such thing as his Felicity. That wherein
God himself is happy, the holy Angels are happy, in whose defect the Devils are
unhappy; that dare I call happiness: whatsoever conduces unto this, may with
an easy Metaphor deserve that name; whatsoever else the World terms Happiness,
is to me a story out of Pliny, a tale of Boccace or Malizspini; an apparition
or neat delusion, wherein there is no more of Happiness, than the name. Bless
me in this life with but peace of my Conscience, command of my affections, the
love of thy self and my dearest friends, and I shall be happy enough to pity
Caesar. These are, O Lord, the humble desires of my most reasonable ambition,
and all I dare call happiness on earth; wherein I set no rule or limit to thy
Hand of Providence; dispose of me according to the wisdom of thy pleasure.* Thy
will be done, though in my own undoing.]

FINIS.
ANNOTATIONS UPON RELIGIO MEDICI.

Nec satis est vulgasse fidem. --

Pet. Arbit. fragment. LONDON, Printed for R. Scot, T. Basset, J. Wright, R.
Chiswel. 1682.

THE ANNOTATOR TO THE READER.
A Gellius (noct. Attic. l. 20. cap. ult.) notes some Books that had strange
Titles; Pliny (Praefat. Not. Hist.) speaking of some such, could not pass them
over without a jeer: So strange (says he) are the Titles of some Books, Ut
multos ad vadimonium deserendum compellant. And Seneca says, Some such there
are, Qui patri obstetricem parturienti filiae accercenti moram injicere
possint. Of the same fate this present Tract Religio Medici has pertaken:
Exception by some has been taken to it in respect of its Inscription, which,
say they, seems to imply that Physicians have a Religion by themselves, which
is more than Theology does warrant: but it is their Inference, and not the
Title, that is to blame; for no more is meant by that, or endeavored to be
proved in the Book, then that (contrary to the opinion of the unlearned.)
Physicians have Religion as well as other men.

For the Work it self, the present Age has produced none that has had better
Reception amongst the learned; it has been received and fostered by almost all,
there having been but one that I know of (to verify that Books have their
fates from the Capacity of the Reader) that has had the face to appear against
it; that is Mr. Alexander In his Medicus Medicateus.
Rosse; but he is dead, and it is uncomely to skirmish with his shadow. It
shall be sufficient to remember to the Reader, that the noble and most learned
Knight, Sir Kenelm Digby, has delivered his Opinion of it in another sort, who
though in some things he differ from the Authors sense, yet has he most
heartily and ingeniously allowed it to be a very learned and excellent Piece;
and I think no Scholar will say there can be an approbation more authentic.
Since the time he published his Observations upon it, one Mr. Jo. Merryweather
a Master of Arts of the University of Cambridge, has deemed it worthy to be
put into the universal Language, which about the year 1644. he performed; and
that has carried the Authors name not only into the Low Countries and France
(in both which places the Book in Latin has since been Printed) but into Italy
and Germany; and in Germany it has since fallen into the hands of a Gentleman
of that Nation That he was a German, appears by his Notes, Page 35. where he
has these words, Duleissima nostra Germania, etc.
(of his Name he has given us no more than L. N. M. E. N.) who has written
learned Annotations upon it in Latin, whieh were Printed together with the Book
at Strasbourg, 1652. And for the general good Opinion the World had entertained
both of the Work and Author, this Stranger tells you: In Praefat. Annotat.
Inter alios Auctores incidi in librum cui Titulus Religio Medici, jam ante
mihi innotuerat lectionem istius libri multos praeclaros viros delectasse, imo
occupasse. Non ignorabam librum in Anglia, Galiia, Italia, Belgio, Germania
cupidissime legi; constabat mihi eum non solum in Anglia ac Batavia, set and
Parisiis cum praefatione, in qua Auctor magnis laudibus fertur esse, Typis
mandatum Compertum mihi erat, multos magnos atque eruditos viros censere
Autorem (quantum ex hoc scripto perspici potest) sanctitate vitae ac pietate
elucere, etc. But for the worth of the Book, it is so well known to every
Englishman that is fit to read it, that this attestation of a Forrainer may
seem superfluous.

The German, to do him right, has in his Annotations given a fair specimen of
his learning, showing his skill in the Languages, as well ancient as modern; as
also his acquaintance with all manner of Authors, both sacred and profane, out
of which he has amassed a world of Quotations; but yet, not to mention that he
has not observed some Errors of the Press, and one or two main ones of the
Latin Translation, whereby the Author is much injured; it cannot be denied but
he has passed over many hard places untoucht, that might deserve a Note; that
he has made Annotations on some, where no need was; in the explication of
others has gone besides the true sense.

[And were we free from all these, yet one great Fault there is, he may be
justly charged with, that is, that he cannot manum de Tabula even in matters
the most obvious: which is an affectation ill-becoming a Scholar; witness the
most learned Annotator, Claud. Minos. Divion. in prefat. commentar. Alciat.
Emblemat. praefix. Praestat ( says he) brevius omnia persequi, and leviter
attingere quae nemini esse ignota suspicari possint, quam quasi (...), perque
locos communes identidem expatiari.

I go not about by finding fault with his, obliquely to commend my own; I am as
far from that, as it is possible others will be: All I seek, by this Preface,
next to acquainting the Reader with the various entertainment of the Book, is,
that he would be advertized, that these Notes were collected ten Excepting two
or three Particulars, in which reference is made to some Books that came over
since that time.
years since, long before the German's were written; so that I am no Plagiary
(as who peruseth his Notes and mine will easily perceive:) And in the second
place, that I made this Recuil merely for mine own entertainment, and not with
any invention to evulge it; Truth is my witness, the publication proceeds
merely from the importunity of the Bookseller (my special friend) who being
acquainted with what I had done, and about to set out another Edition of the
Book, would not be denied these Notes to attex to it; it is he (not I*) that
divulgeth it, and whatever the success be, he alone is concerned in it; I only
say for my self what my Annotations bear in the Frontispiece,

Nec satis est vulgasse fidem -- That is, that it was not enough to all persons
(though pretenders to Learning) that our Physician had published his Creed,
because it wanted an exposition. I say further, that the German's is not full,
and that ( -- Quicquid sum Ego quamvis Infra Lucilli censum ingeniumque --) my
explications do in many things illustrate the text of my Author.

24 Martii, 1654.
ANNOTATIONS UPON RELIGIO MEDICI.
The Epistle to the Reader.
CErtainly that man were greedy of life, who should desire to live when all the
World were at an end.] This Mr. Merry weather has rendered thus; Cupidum esse
vitae oportet, qui universo jam expirante mundo vivere cuperet; and well
enough: but it is not amiss to remember; that we have this saying in Seneca the
Tragoedian, who gives it us thus, Vitae est avidus quisquis non vult mundo
secum pereunte mori.

There are many things delivered Rhetorically.] The Author herein imitates the
ingenuity of St. Austin, who, in his Retract, corrects himself for having
delivered some things more like a young Rhetorician than a sound Divine: but
though St. Aug. does deservedly acknowledge it a fault in himself, in that he
voluntarily published such things, yet cannot it be so in this Author, in that
he intended no publication of it, as he pofesseth in this Epistle, and in that
other to Sir Kenelm Digby.

The First PART.
THe general scandal of my Profession.] Physicians (of the number whereof it
appears by several passages in this Book the Author is one) do commonly hear
ill in this behalf. It is a common speech (but only amongst the unlearned
sort) Vbi tres Medici, duo Athei. The reasons why those of that profession (I
declare my self that I am none, but Causarum Actor mediocris, to use Horace his
phrase) may be thought to deserve that censure, the Author renders, Sect. 19.

The natural course of my studies.] The vulgar lay not the imputation of
Atheism only upon Physicians, but upon Philosophers in general, who for that
they give themselves to understand the operations of Nature, they calumniate
them, as though they rested in the second causes without any respect to the
first. Hereupon it was, that in the tenth Age Pope Silvester the second passed
for a Magician, because he understood Geometry and natural Philosophy. Baron.
Annal. 990. And Apuleius long before him labored of the same suspicion upon no
better ground; he was accused, and made a learned Apology for himself, and in
that has laid down what the ground is of such accusations, in these words:
Haec ferme communi quodam errore imperitorum Philosophis objectantur, ut partem
eorum qui corporum causas meras and simplices rimantur, irreligiosas putant,
eoque aiunt Deos abnuere, ut Anaxagoram, and Lucippum, and Democritum, and
Epicurum, caeterosque rerum naturae Patronos. Apul. in Apolog. And it is
possible that those that look upon the second causes scattered, may rest in
them and go no further, as my Lord Bacon in one of his Essays observes; but
our Author tells us there is a true Philosophy, from which no man becomes an
Atheist. Sect. 46.

The indifference of my behavior and Discourse in matters of Religion.]
Bigot's are so oversway'd by a preposterous zeal, that they hate all moderation
in discourse of Religion; they are the men forsooth -- qui solos credant
habendo^ esse Deos quos ipsi colunt. -- Erasmus upon this account makes a great
complaint to Sir Tho. More in an Epistle of his touching one Dorpius a Divine
of Lovain, who because, upon occasion of discourse betwixt them, Erasmus would
not promise him to write against Luther, told Erasmus, that he was a Lutheran,
and afterward published him for such; and yet as Erasmus was reputed no very
good Catholic, so for certain he was no Protestant.

Not that I merely owe this Title to the Font] as most do, taking up their
Religion according to the way of their Ancestors; this is to be blamed amongst
all Persons: It was practiced as well amongst Heathens as Christians.

Per caput hoc juro, per quod Pater ante solebat, says Ascanius in Virgil: and
Apuleius notes it for an absurdity. Vtrum Philosopho put as turpe scire ista,
an nescire? negligere, an curare? nosse quanta sit etiam in istis providentiae
ratio, an de diis immortalibus Matri and Patri cedere? says he in Apolog. and
so does Minutius: Vnusquisque vestrum non cogitat prius se debere deum nosse
quam colere, dum inconsulte gestiuntur patentibus obedire, dum fieri malunt
alieni erroris accessio, quam sibi credere. Minut. in Octav.

But having in my riper years examined, etc.] according to the Apostolical
Precept, Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete.

i. e. of Christian Religion, which you may see described in Mr. Brerewood's
Enquiries: he means not of the Protestant Religion; for though there be a
difference in Discipline, yet the Anglican, Scotic, Belgic, Gallican, and
Helvetic Churches differ not in any essential matter of the Doctrine, as by the
Harmony of Confessions appears, 5 Epist. Theod. Bezae Edmundo Grindallo Ep.
Londinens.

Wherein I dislike nothing but the Name] that is, Lutheran, Calvinist,
Zuinglian, etc.

Now the accidental occasion wherein, etc.] This is graphically described by
Thuanus in his History: but because his words are too large for this purpose, I
shall give it you somewhat more briefly, according to the relation of the
Author of the History of the Council of Trent. The occasion was the necessity
of Pope Leo Tenth, who by his profusion had so exhausted the Treasure of the
Church, that he was constrained to have recourse to the publishing of
Indulgences to raise moneys: some of which he had destined to his own Treasury,
and other part to his Allies, and particularly to his Sister he gave all the
money that should be raised in Saxony; and she, that she might make the best
profit of the donation, commits it to one Aremboldus, a Bishop, to appoint
Treasurers for these Indulgences. Now the custom was, that whenever these
Indulgences were sent into Saxony, they were to be divulged by the Friars
Eremites (of which Order Luther then was) but Aremboldus his agents thinking
with themselves, that the Friars Eremites were so well acquainted with the
trade, that if the business should be left to them, they should neither be able
to give so good an account of their Negotiation, nor yet get so much themselves
by it as they might do in case the business were committed to another Order;
they thereupon recommend it to (and the business is undertaken by) the
Dominican Friars, who performed it so ill, that the scandal arising both from
thence, and from the ill lives of those that set them on work, stirred up
Luther to write against the abuses of these Indulgences; which was all he did
at first; but then, not long after, being provoked by some Sermons and small
Discourses that had been published against what he had written, he rips up the
business from the beginning, and publishes xcv Theses against it at Wittenberg.
Against these, Tekel a Dominican writes; then Luther adds an explication to his
Eckius and Prierius Dominicans, thereupon take the controversy against him:
and now Luther begins to be hot; and because his adversaries could not found
the matter of Indulgences upon other foundations then the Pope's power and
infallibility, that begets a disputation betwixt them concerning the Pope's
power, which Luther insists upon as inferior to that of a general Council; and
so by degrees he came on to oppose the Popish Doctrine of Remission of Sins,
Penances, and Purgatory; and by reason of Cardinal Cajetans imprudent
management of the conference he had with him, it came to pass that he rejected
the whole body of Popish Doctrine. So that by this we may see what was the
accidental occasion, wherein the slender means whereby, and the abject
condition of the person by whom, the work of Reformation of Religion was set on
foot.

Yet I have not shaken hands with those desperate Resolutions, (Resolvers it
should be, without doubt) who had rather venture at large their dedecayed
Bottom, than bring her in to be new trimmed in the Dock; who had rather
promiscuously retain all, than abridge any; and obstinately be what they are,
than what they have been, as to stand in a diameter and at swords points with
them: we have reformed from them, not against them, etc.] These words by Mr.
Merryweather are thus rendered, sc. Nee tamen in vecordem illum pertinacium
hominum gregem memet adjungo, qui labefactatum navigium malunt fortunaoe
committere quam in navale de integro resarciendum deducere, qui malunt omnia
promiscue retinere quam quicquam inde diminuere, and pertinaciter esse qui sunt
quam qui olim fuerunt, ita uti isdem ex diametro repugnent: ab illis, non
contra illos, reformationem instituimus, etc. And the Latin Annotator sits
down very well satisfied with it, and has bestowed some Notes upon it; but
under the favor both of him and the Translator, this Translation is so far
different from the sense of the Author, that it has no sense in it; or if
there be any construction of sense in it, it is quite besides the Author's
meaning; which will appear if we consider the context, by that we shall find
that the Author in giving an account of his Religion, tells us first, that he
is a Christian, and farther, that he is of the reformed Religion; but yet he
says, in this place, he is not so rigid a Protestant, nor at defiance with
Papists so far, but that in many things he can comply with them, (the
particulars he afterward mentions in this Section) for, says he, we have
reformed from them, not against them; that is, as the Archbishop of Canterbury
against the Jesuit discourses well, We have made no new Religion nor Schism
from the old; but in calling for the old, and desiring that which was novel and
crept in might be rejected, and the Church of Rome refusing it, we have
reformed from those upstart novel Doctrines, but against none of the old: and
other sense the place cannot bear; therefore how the Latin Annotator can apply
it as though in this place the Author intended to note the Anabaptists, baptist
I see not, unless it were in respect of the expression, Vecordem pertinacium
hominum gregem, which truly is a description well befitting them, though not
intended to them in this place: howsoever, I see not any ground from hence to
conclude the Author to be any whit inclining to the Bulk of Popery (but have
great reason from many passages in this Book to believe the contrary,) as he
that prefixed a Preface to the Parisian Edition of this Book has unwarrantably
done.

But for the mistake of the Translator, it is very obvious from whence that
arose. I doubt not but it was from the mistake of the sense of the English
Phrase, Shaken hands, which he has rendered by these words, Memet adjungo,
wherein he has too much played the Scholar, and showed himself to be more
skilful in foreign and ancient customs, then in the vernacular practice and
usage of the language of his own Country; for although amongst the Latins
protension of the Hand were a Symbol and sign of Peace and Concord, (as Alex.
ab Alexandro; Manum vero protendere, pacem peti significabant, (says he) Genesis
Dier. lib. 4. cap. (...) which also is confirmed by Cicero pro Dejotaro; and
Caesar, l. 2. de Bello Gallico) and was used in their first meetings, as
appears by the Phrase, Jungere hospitio Dextras; and by that of Virgil, Oremus
pacem, and Dextras tendamus inermes.

And many like passages that occur in the Poets, to which I believe the
Translator had respect: vet in modern practice, especially with us in England,
that ceremony is used as much in our Adieu's as in the first Congress; and so
the Author meant in this place, by saying he had not shaken hands; that is,
that he had not so deserted, or bid farewell to the Romanists, as to stand at
swords point with them: and then he gives his reasons at those words, For
omitting those improperations, etc. So that instead of memet adjungo, the
Translator should have used some word or Phrase of a clean contrary
signification; and instead of ex diametro repugnent, it should be repugnem.

Henry the Eighth, though he rejected the Pope, refused not the faith of Rome.]
So much Buchanan in his own life written by himself testifies, who speaking of
his coming into England about the latter end of that King's time, says, Sed
ibitum omnia adeo erant incerta, ut eodem die, ac eodem igne (Very strange!)
utriusque factionis homines cremarentur, Henrico 8. jam seniore suae magnis
securitati quam Religionis puritati intento. And for confirmation of this
assertion of the Author, vide Stat. 31 H. 8. cap. 14.

And was conceived the State of Venice would have attempted in our days.] This
expectation was in the time of Pope Paul the Fifth, who by excommunicating that
Republique, gave occasion to the Senate to banish all such of the Clergy as
would not by reason of the Popes command administer the Sacraments; and upon
that account the Jesuits were cast out, and never since received into that
State.

I cannot think but in this expression the Author had respect to that of that
excellent French Writer, Monsieur Mountaign (in whom I often trace him.)
Combien diversement jugeons nous de chooses? Combien de fois changeons nous nos
fantasies? Ce que je tien aujourdhuy, ce que je croy, je le tien and le croy de
toute ma Creance, mais ne m'est il pas advenu non une fois mais cent, mais
mill and tous les jours d'avoir embrasse quelque autre chose? Mountaign. lib.
2. Des Essais. Chap. 12.

Every man is not a proper Champion for truth, etc. A good cause is never
betrayed more then when it is prosecuted with much eagerness, and but little
sufficiency, and therefore Zuinglius, though he were of Carolistadius his
opinion in the point of the Sacrament of the Eucharist against Luther, yet he
blamed him for undertaking the defense of that cause against Luther, not
judging him able enough for the encounter: Non satis habet humerorum, says he
of Carolostad, alluding to that of Horace, Sumite materiam vestris qui
scribitis aequam Viribus, and versate diu quid far recusent Quid valiant
humeri. -- So Minutius Foelix; Plerumque pro disserentium viribus, and
eloquentiae potestate, etiam perspicuae veritatis conditio mutetur. Minut. in
Octav. And Lactantius says, this truth is verified in Minutius himself: for
Him, Tertullian and Cyprian; he spares not to blame (all of them) as if they
had not with dexterity enough defended the Christian Cause against the
Ethniques. Lactant. de justitia, cap. 1. I could wish that those that succeeded
him had not as much cause of complaint against him: surely he is noted to have
had many errors contra fidem.

In Philosophy -- there is no man more Paradoxical than my self, but in
Divinity I love to keep the Road, etc.] Appositely to the mind of the Author,
says the Publisher of Mr. Pembel's Book de origin formarum, Certe (says he)
in locis Theologicis ne quid detrimenti capiat vel Pax, vel Veritas Christi --
a novarum opiniorum pruritu prorsus abstinendum puto usque adeo ut ad certam
requlam etiam loqui debeamus, quod pie and prudenter monet Augustinus (de Civ.
Dei, l.16. cap. 23.) [ ne verborum licentia impia vi gignat opinionem,] at in
pulvere Scholastico ubi in nullius verba juramus, and in utramvis partem sine
dispendio vel pacis, vel salutis ire liceat, major conceditur cum sentiendi tum
loquendi libertas, etc. Capet, in Ep. Dedicat. Pembel. de origin form. praef.

Heresies perish not with their Authors, but like the River Arethusa, though
they lose their Currents in one place, they rise again in another.] Who would
not think that this expression were taken from Mr. Mountaigne, l. 2. des Ess.
cap. 12. Where he has these words, Nature enserre dans les terms de son
progress ordinaire comme toutes autres chooses aussi les creances les judgments
and opinions des hommes else ont leur revolutions; and that Mountaigne took
his from Tully. Non enim hominum interitu sententiae quoque occidunt. Tull. de
not. deorum. l. 1. etc. Of the River Arethusa thus Seneca. Videbis
celebratissimum carminibus fontem Arethusam limpidissimi ac perlucidissimi ad
imum stagni gelidissimas aquas profundentem, sive illas primum nascentes
invenit, sive flumen integrum subter tot maria, and a confusione pejoris undae
servatum reddidit. Senec. de consolat. ad Martiam.

Now the first of mine was that of the Arabians.] For this Heresy, the Author
here shows what it was; they are called Arabians from the place where it was
fostered; and because the Heresiarch was not known, Eusebius. St. Aug. and
Nicephorus do all write of it: the reason of this Heresy was so specious, that
it drew Pope John 22 to be of the same persuasion. Where then was his
infallibility? Why, Bellarmine tells you he was nevertheless infallible for
that: for, says he, he maintained this opinion when he might do it without
peril of Heresy, for that no definition of the Church whereby 'twas made
Heresy, had preceded when he held that opinion. Bellar. l. 4. de Pontif.
Roman. cap. 4. Now this definition was first made ('it is true) by Pope Banedict
in the 14 Age: but then I would ask another question, that is, If 'till that
time there were nothing defined in the Church touching the beatitude of Saints,
what certainty was there touching the sanctity of any man? and upon what ground
were those Canonizations or Saints had, that were before the 14 Age?

The second was that of Origin.] Besides St. Augustine, Epiphanius, and also S.
Hierom do relate that Origin held, that not only the souls of men, but the
Devils themselves should be discharged from torture after a certain time: but
Genebrard endeavors to clear him of this. Vid. Coquaeum, in 21 lib. Aug. de
Civ. Dei, cap. 17.

These opinions, though condemned by lawful Councils, were not Heresy in me,
etc.] For to make an Heretic, there must be not only Error in intellectu, but
pertinacia in voluntate. So St. Aug. Qui sententiam suam quamvis falsam atque
perversam nulla pertinaci animositate defendunt, quaerunt autem cauta
solicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati cum invenerint, nequaquam sunt inter
Haereticos deputandi. Aug. cont. Manich. 24. qu. 3.

The deepest mysteries that ours contains, have not only been illustrated, but
maintained by Syllogism and the Rule of Reason] and since this Book was
written, by Mr. White in his Institutiones Sacrae.

And when they have seen the Red Sea, doubt not of the Miracle.] Those that
have seen it, have been better informed than Sir Henry Blount was* for he tells
us, That he desired to view the passage of Moses into the Red Sea (not being
above three days journey off,) but the Jews told him the precise place was not
known within less than the space of a days journey along the shore; wherefore
(says he) I left that as too uncertain for any Observation. In his Voyage into
the Levant.

Anima est Angelus hominis, est corpus Dei, as Entelechia; Lux est umbra Dei,
as actus perspoicui.] Great variety of opinion there has been amongst the
Ancient Philosophers touching the definition of the Soul. Thales, his was, that
it is a Nature without Repose. Asclepiades, that it is an Exercitation of
Sense. Hesiod, that it is a thing composed of Earth and Water; Parmenides
holds, of Earth and Fire; Galen that it is Heat; Hippocrates, that it is a
spirit diffused through the body. Some others have held it to be Light; Plato
says, it is a Substance moving it self; and after him comes Aristotle (whom
the Author here reproves) and goes a degree farther, and says it is
Entelechia, that is, that which naturally makes the body to move. But this
definition is as rigid as any of the other; for this tells us not what the
essence, origin or nature of the soul is, hut only marks an effect of it, and
therefore signifies no more than if he had said (as the Author's Phrase is)
that it is Angelus hominis, or an Intelligence that moves man, as he supposed
those other to do the Heavens.

Now to come to the definition of Light, in which the Author is also
unsatisfied with the School of Aristotle, he says, It satisfies him no more
to tell him that Lux est actus perspicui, than if you should tell him that it
is umbra Dei. The ground of this definition given by the Peripateticks, is
taken from a passage in Aristot. de anima, l. 2. cap. 7. where Aristtotle
says, That the color of the thing seen does move that which is perspicuum
actu (i.e. illustratam naturam quae sit in aere aliove corpore transparente)
and that that, in regard of its continuation to the eye, moves the eye, and by
its help the internal sensorium; and that so vision is performed. Now as it is
true that the Sectators of Aristotle are too blame, by fastening up onhim by
occasion of this passage, that he meant that those things that made this
impress upon the Organs are mere accidents, and have nothing of substance;
which is more than ever he meant, and cannot be maintained without violence to
Reason and his own Principles; so for Aristotle himself, no man is beholden to
him for any Science acquired by this definition; for what is any man the near
for his telling him that Color (admitting it to be a body, as indeed it is,
and in that place he does not deny) does move actu perspicuum, when as the
perspicuity is in relation to the eye; and he does not say how it comes to be
perspicuous, which is the thing enquired after, but gives it that denomination
before the eye has performed its office; so that if he had said it had been
umbra Dei, it would have been as intelligible, as what he has said. He that
would be satisfied how Vision is performed, let him see Mr. Hobbs in Tract. de
not. human. cap. 2.

For God had not caused it to rain upon the Earth.] St. Aug. de Genes. ad
literam cap. 5. 6. salves that expression from any inconvenience; but the
Author in Pseudodox. Epidemic. l. 7. cap. 1. shows that we have no reason to be
confident that this fruit was an Apple.

I believe that the Serpent (if we shall literally understand it) from his
proper form and figure made his motion on his belly before the curse,] Yet the
Author himself shows in Pseudodox. Epidemic. lib. 7.cap. 1. that the form or
kind of this Serpent is not agreed on: yet Comestor affirmed it was a Dragon,
Eugubinus a Basilisk, Delrio a Viper, and others a common Snake: but of what
kind soever it was, he shows in the same Volume, lib. 5. c. 4. that there was
no inconvenience, that the Temptation should be performed in his proper shape.

I find the trial of the Pucelage and virginity of Women, which God ordained
the Jews, is very fallible.] Locus extat. Deuteronomy. c. 22. the same is affirmed by
Laurentius in his Anatom.

Whole Nations have escaped the curse of Childbirth, which God seems to
pronounce upon the whole sex.] This is attested by Mr. Montaign, Les doleurs de
l'enfantiment par les medicines, and pardein mosme estimles grandes, and quae
nous pasons avec tant de Cetemonies, ily a des notions entieres qui ne'n fuit
mul conte. l. 1. des Ess. c. 14.

Who can speak of Eternity without a Soloecism, or think thereof without an
Ecstasy? Time we may comprehend, etc.] Touching the difference betwixt Eternity
and Time, there have been great disputes amongst Philosophers; some affirming
it to be no more than duration perpetual consisting of parts; and others (to
which opinion, it appears by what follows in this Section, the Author adheres)
affirmed (to use the Author's phrase) that it has no distinction of Tenses,
but is according to Boethius (lib. 5. consol. pros. 6.) his definition,
interminabilis vitae tota simul and perfecta possessio. For me, Non nostrum est
tantas componere lites. I shall only observe what each of them has to say
against the other. Say those of the first opinion against those that follow
Boethius his definition, That definition was taken by Boethius out of Plato's
Timaeus, and is otherwise applied, though hot by Boethius, yet by those that
follow him, than ever Plato intended it; for he did not take it in the
Abstract, but in the Concrete, for an eternal thing, a Divine substance by
which he meant God, or his Anima mundi: and this he did, to the intent to
establish this truth, That no mutation can befall the Divine Majesty, as it does
to things subject to generation and corruption; and that Plato there intended
not to define or describe any species of duration: and they say that it is
impossible to understand any such species of duration that is (according to the
Author's expression) but one permanent point.

Now that which those that follow Boethius, urge against the other definition
is, they say it does not at all difference Eternity from the nature of Time;
for they say if it be composed of many Nunc's, or many instants, by the
addition of one more, it is still increased; and by that means Infinity or
Eternity is not included, nor ought more than Time. For this, see Mr. White, de
dial. mundo, Dial. 3. Nod. 4.

Indeed he only is etc.] This the Author infers from the words of God to Moses,
I am that I am; and this to distinguish him from all others, who (he says)
have and shall be: but those that are learned in the Hebrew, affirm that the
words in that place ( Exodus 3.) do not signify, Ego sum qui sum, and qui est,
etc. but Ero qui ero, and qui erit, etc. vid. Gassend. in animad. Epicur.
Physiolog.

I wonder how Aristotle could conceive the World Eternal, or how he could make
two Eternities:] (that is, that God and the World both, were eternal.) I wonder
more at either the ignorance or incogitancy of the Conimbricenses, who in their
Comment upon the eighth Book of Aristotle's Physics treating of the matter of
Creation, when they had first said that it was possible to know it, and that
actually it was known, (for Aristotle knew it) yet for all this they afterward
affirm, That considering only the light of Nature, there is nothing can be
brought to demonstrate Creation: and yet farther, when they had defined
Creation to be the production of a thing ex nihhilo, and had proved that the
world was so created in time, and refused the arguments of the Philosophers to
the contrary, they added this, That the World might be created ab aeterno: for
having proposed this question [ Number aliquid a Deo ex Aeternitate procreari
potuit*] they defend the affirmative, and assert, That not only incorporeal
substances, as Angels; or permanent, as the celestial Bodies; or corruptible,
as Men, etc. might be produced and made ab aeterno, and be conserved by an
infinite time, ex utraque part; and that this is neither repugnant to God the
Creator, the things created, nor to the nature of Creation; for proof whereof,
they bring instances of the Sun, which if it had been eternal, had illuminated
eternally, (and the virtue of God is not less than the virtue of the Sun.)
Another instance they bring of the divine Word, which was produced ab aeterno:
in which discourse, and in the instances brought to maintain it, it is hard to
say whether the madness or impiety be greater; and certainly if Christians thus
argue, we have the more reason to pardon the poor Heathen Aristotle.

There is not three but a Trinity of Souls.] The Peripatetiques held that men
had three distinct Souls; whom the Heretics, the Anomaei, and the Jacobites,
followed. There arose a great dispute about this matter in Oxford, in the year
1276; and it was then determined against Aristotle. Daneus Christ. Eth. l. 1.
c. 4. and Suarez in his Treatise de causa formali, Quaest. An dentur plures
formae in uno composito, affirms there was a Synod that did anathematize all
that held with Aristotle in this point.

There is but one first, and four second Causes in all things.] In that he
says there is but one first cause, he speaks in opposition to the Manichees,
who held there were Duo principia; one from whom came all good, and the other
from whom came all evil: the reason of Protagoras did it seems impose upon
their understandings; he was wont to say, Si Deus non est, unde igitur bona? Si
autem est, unde mala? In that that he says, there are but four second causes,
he opposes Plato, who to the four causes, material, efficient, formal, and
final, adds for a fifth exemplar or Idaea, sc. Id ad quod respiciens artifex,
id quod destinabat, efficit: according to whose mind Boethius speaks, lib. 3.
mot. 9. de conf. Philosoph.

O qui perpetua mundum ratione guberna^,
Terrarum Coelique sator, qui tempus ab aevo
Ire jubes, stabilisque manens das cuncta moveri^
Quem non externae pepulerunt fingere causae
Materiae fluitantis opus, verum insita sum^
Forma boni livore carens: tu cuncta supera
Ducis ab exemplo, pulchrum pulcherrimus ipse
Mundum mente gerens, similique in imagi^ formans
Perfectasque jubens perfectum absolvere part^^
And St. Augustine, l. 83. quaest. 46* where (amongst other) he has these
words, Restat ergo ut omnia Ration sint condita, nec eadem ratione ho^^ qua
equus; hoc enim absurdum est existimare: singula autem propriis sunt creata
rationibus. But these ideae Plato's Scholar Aristotle would not allow to make
or constitute a different sort of cause from the formal or efficient; to which
purpose he disputes l. 7. Metaphysic. but he and his Sectators, and the Romists
also, agree (as the Author) that there are but the four remembered causes: so
that the Author in affirming there are but four, has no adversary but the
Platonists; but yet in asserting there are four (as his words imply) there are
that oppose him, and the Schools of Aristot. and Ramus. I shall bring for
instance Mr. Not. Carpenter, who in his Philosophia libera affirms, there is
no such cause as that which they call the Final cause: he argues thus; Every
cause has an influence upon its effect, but so has not the End, therefore it
is not a Cause. The major Proposition (he says) is evident, because the
influence of a cause upon its effect, is either the causality it self, or
something that is necessarily conjoined to it: and the minor as plain; for
either the End has an influence upon the effect immediately, or mediately, by
stirring up the Efficient to operate; not immediately, because so it should
enter either the constitution, or production, or conservation of the things;
but the constitution it cannot enter, because the constitution is only of
matter and form; nor the: Production, for so it should concur to the
production, either as it is simply the end, or as an exciter of the Efficient;
but not simply as the end, because the end as end does not go before, but
follows the thing produced, and therefore does not concur to its production:
if they say it does so far concur, as it is desired of the agent or efficient
cause, it should not so have an immediate influence upon the effect, but should
only first move the efficient. Lastly, says he, it does not enter the
conservation of a thing, because a thing is often conserved, when it is
frustrate of its due end, as when its converted to a new use and end. Diverse
other arguments he has to prove there is no such cause as the final cause,
Not. Carpenter Philosop. liber. Decad. 3. Exercitat. 5. But for all this, the
Author and he differ not in substance: for it is not the Author's intention to
assert that the end is in nature praeexistent to the effect, but only that
whatsoever God has made, he has made to some end or other; which he does to
oppose the Sectators of Epicurus, who maintain the contrary, as is to be seen
by this of Lucretius which follows.

Illud in his rebus vitium vehementer and istum
Effugere errorem, vitareque praemeditabor,
Lamina ne facias oculorum clara creata
Prospicere ut possimus: and ut proferre viritim
Proceros passus, ideo fastigia posse
Suraru^ ac feminum pedibus fundata plicari:
Brachia tum porro validis ex apta lacertis
Esse, manusque datas utraque ex part ministras.
Vt facere ad vitam possimus, quae foret usus:
Caetera de genere hoc, inter quae cunque precatur
Omnia perversa praepostera sunt ratione:
Nil ideo quoniam natum'st, incorpore ut uti
Possemus; sed quod natum'st, id procreat usu^,
Nec fuit ante videre oculorum lumina nata,
Nec dictis orare prius, quam lingua creata'st,
Sed potius long linguae praecessit origo
Sermonem; multoque creatae sunt prius aures
Quam sonus est auditus, and o^nia denique me^bra
Ante fuere, ut opinor, eorum, quam foret usus:
Haud igitur potuere utendi crescere causa.
Lucret. lib. 4,
So Monsr. Montaign. Il ny' a rien d'mutil en nature, non pas l' inutilite
mesmes, Rien ne s' est jugere en cet Universe que n'y tienne place opportun.
Ess. l. 3. c. 1.

Who admires not Regiomontanus his Fly beyond his Eagle?] Of these Du Bartas.

Que diray je del' aigle,
D'ont un doct Aleman honor nostre siecle
Aigle qui dislogeant de la maistresse main,
Aila loin an devant d' un Empereur Germain,
Etl'ayant recontre, soudaind' une aisle accorte
Se tour nant le suit an suel de la port
Du fort Norembergois, que lis piliers dorez,
Les tapissez chemius, les ares elabourez,
Les four droyans Canons, in la jeusnesse isnelle,
In le chenae Senate, n'honnoroit tant come elle.
Un jour, quae cetominer plus des esbats, que di mets,
En prive, festoyoit ses segnieurs plus a mees,
Vne mousche de fer, dans sa main recolee,
Prit sans aid d' autroy, sa gallard evolee:
Fit une entiere Ronde, and puis d'un cerveaulas
Come ayant jugement, se purcha sur son bras.
Thus Englished by Sylvester.

Why should I not that wooden Eagle mention?
(A learned German's late admired invention
Which mounting from his fist that framed her,
Flew far to meet an Almain Emperor:
And having met him with her nimble Train,
And weary wings turning about again,
Followed him close unto the Castle gate
Of Noremberg; whom all the shows of state,
Streets hanged with Arras, arches curious built
Loud thundering Canons, Columns richly guilt,
Gray Headed Senate, and Youth's gallantise,
Graced not so much as only this device.
Once as this Artist more with mirth than meat,
Feasted some friends that he esteemed great,
From under's hand an Iron Fly flew out,
Which having flown a perfect round about,
With weary wings returned unto her Master,
And as (judicious) on his arm she placed her.
Or wonder not more at the operation of two souls in those little bodies, than
but one in the Trunk of a Cedar?] That is, the vegetative, which, according to
the common opinion, is supposed to be in Trees, though the Epetures and
Stoiques would not allow any Soul in Plants, but Empedocles and Plato allowed
them not only a vegetative Soul, but affirmed them to be Animals. The
Manichees went farther, and attributed so much of the rational soul to them,
that they accounted it Homicide to gather either their flowers or fruit, as St.
Aug. reports.

We carry with us the wonders we seek without us.] So St. Aug l. 10. de civ. c.
3. Omni miraculo quod sit, per hominem majus miraculum est homo.

So is the description of Du Bartas 7. jour de la sepm.

Oyes ce Docteur meut est udie en ce livre Qui nuict and jour on vert to
apprendra de bien vivre.

All things are artificial, for Nature is the Art of God.] So Mr. Hobbs in his
Leviathan (in initio) Nature is the Art whereby God governs the World.

Directing the operations of single and individual Essences,etc.] Things
singular, or individuals, are in the opinion of Philosophers not to be known
but by the way of sense, or by that which knows by its Essence, and that is
only God. The Devils have no such knowledge, because whatsoever knows so, is
either the cause or effect of the thing known; thereupon Averroes concluded
that God was the cause of all things, because he understands all things by his
Essence; and Albertus Magnus concluded, That the inferior Intelligence
understands the superior, because it is an effect of the superior: but
neither of these can be said of the Devil; for it appears he is not the effect
of any of these inferior things, much less is he the cause, for the power of
Creation only belongs to God.

All cannot he happy at once, because the Glory of one State depends upon the
ruin of another.] This Theme is ingeniously handled by Mr. Montaigne livr. 1.
des Ess. cap. 22. the Title whereof is, Le profit de l' un est dommage de l'
autre.

So Petron. Arbiter. Amor ingenii neminem unquam divitem fecit, in Satyric. And
Apuleius in Apolog. Idem mihi etiam, ( says he) paupertatem opprobravit
acceptum Philosopho crimen and ultro profitendum; and then a little afterward,
he shows that it was the common fate of those that had singular gifts of
mind: Eadem enim est paupertas apud Graecos in Aristide justa, in Phocyone
benigna, in Epaminonde strenua, in Socrate sapiens, in Homero diserta.

We need not labor with so many arguments to confute judicial Astrology.]
There is nothing in judicial Astrology that may render it impious; but the
exception against it is, That it is vain and fallible; of which any man will be
convinced, that has read Tully de Divinat. and St. Aug. 5 bo^^ de Civ. Dei.

Rome.] There were two Triumvirates, by which the peace of Rom^ was distracted;
that of Crassus, Caesar and Pompey, of which Lucan, l. 1. -- Tu causam aliorum
--
Facta tribus Dominis communis Roma, (...) unquam
In turbam missi feralia foedera Regni.
and that other of Augustus, Antonius, and Lepidus, by whom says Florus,
Respublica convulsa est lacerataque, which comes somewhat near the Author's
words, and therefore I take it that he means this last Triumvirate.

Would dissuade my belief from the miracle of the brazen Serpent.] Vid. Coqueum
in l. 10. Aug. de Civ. Dei, c. 8.

And bid me mistrust a miracle in Elias, etc.] The history is 18. 1 Reg. it
should be Elijah. The Author in 15. cap. 7. lib, Pseudodox, shows it was not
performed naturally; he was (as he says) a perfect miracle.

To think the combustion of Sodom might be natural,] Of that opinion was
Strabo, whereupon he is reprehended by Genebrard in these words: Strabo falsus
est -- dum eversionem addicit sulphuri and bitumini e terra erumpentibus, quae
erat assignanda Coelo, i. e. Deo irato. Tacitus reports it according to the
Bible, fulminis ictu arsisse.

etc.] Lactantius was one of those: Religioni ergo serviendum est, quam qui non
suscipit, ipse se prosternit in terram, and vitam pecudum secutus humanitate se
abdicat. Lactant. de falls. Sapieatia, cap. 10.

The Doctrine of Epicurus that denied the Providence of God, was no Atheism,
but etc.] I doubt not but he means that delivered in his Epistle to Menecaeus,
and recorded by Diogenes Laertius, lib. 10. Quod beatum aeternumque est, id nec
habet ipsum negotii quicquam, nec exhibet alteri, itaque neqae ira, neque
gratia tenetur, quod quae talia sunt imbecillia sunt omnia; which the Epicurean
Poet has delivered almost in the same words.

Omnis enim per se divum natura necesse'st
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur,
Semota a nostris rebus sejunctaque long:
Nam privata dolor omni, privata periclis
Ipsa suis pollens opibus nihil indiga nostri
Nec been pro meritis capitur, nec tangitur ira.
Lucret. lib. 2. * That Villain and Secretary of Hell, that composed that
miscreant piece of the three Impostors.] It was Ochinus that composed this
piece; but there was no less a man than the Emperor Frederick the Second, that
was as lavish of his Tongue, as the other of his Pen; Cui saepe in ore, Tres
fuisse insignes Impostores, qui genus humanum seduxerunt, Moysem, Christum,
Mahumitem. Lips. monit. and exempl. Politic. cap. 4. And a greater than he,
Pope Leo the Tenth, was as little favorable to our Savior, when he used that
Speech which is reported of him, Quantas nobis divitias comparavit ista de
Christo fabula!

So the Author of Relig. Laici. Certe mira admodum in S. S. plus quam in
reliquis omnibus Historiis traduntur; (and then he concludes with the Author)
sed quae non retundunt intellectum, sed exercent.

Yet raise no question who shall rise with that rib at the Resurrection.] The
Author cap. 2. l. 7. Pseudodox. shows that it appears in Anatomy, that the
ribs of Men and Woman are equal.

Whether the World were created in Autumn, Summer, or the Spring, etc.] In this
matter there is a consent betwixt two learned Poets, Lucretius and Virgil, that
it begins in Spring. At novitas mundi nec frigora dura ciebat,
Nec nimios astus, nec magnis viribus auras,
Lucretius, Which he would have to be understood of Autumn, because that
resembles old age rather than Infancy. He speaks expressly of the Fowls.

Principio genus alituum variaeque volucres
Ova relinquebant exclusae tempore verno.
Lucret, Then for Virgil.

Non alios prima nascentis origin mundi
Illuxisse dies aliumve habuisse tenorem
Crediderim, ver illud erat, ver magnus agebat
Orbis, and hibernis parcebant flatibus Euri.
Virgil. 2. Georgic. But there is great difference about it betwixt
Church-Doctors, some agreeing with these Poets, and others affirming the time
to be Autumn: but truly, in strict speaking, it was not created in any one, but
all of the seasons, as the Author says here, and has showed at large,
Pseudodox. Epidemic. lib. 6. cap. 2.

Noah in that particular inundation of Deucalion,] as the Heathen some of them
sometimes did: Confuderunt igitur saepe Ethnici particularia illa diluvia, quae
long post secuta sunt, cum illo universali quod praecessit, ut ex fabulis in
Diluvio Deucalionaeo sparsis colligere licet; non tamen semper nec ubique.
Author. Observat. in Mytholog. Not. Com. Then amongst those that confound them,
he reckons Ovid and Plutarch.

How all the kinds of Creatures, not only in their own bulks, but with a
competency of food and sustenance, might be preserved in one Ark, and within
the extent of 300 Cubits, to a reason that rightly examines it will appear very
feasible.] Yet Apelles, the Disciple of Mercion, took upon him to deride the
History of Moses in this particular, alleging that it must needs be a fable,
for that it was impossible so many creatures should be contained in so small a
space. Origin and St. Aug. to answer this pretended difficulty, allege, that
Moses in this place speaks of Geometrical (and not vulgar) cubits, of which
every one was as much as six vulgar ones, and so no difficulty. But Perer. l.
10. com. in Genes. quaest. 5. de arca, rejects this opinion of Origin, as being
both against reason and Scripture: 1. Because that sort of Cubit was never in
use amongst any people, and therefore absurd to think Moses should intend it in
this place. 2. If Moses should not speak of the same Cubits here, that he
mentions in other places, there would be great aequivocation in Scripture: now
in another place, i. e. Exodus 27. he says God commanded him to make an Altar
three Cubits high; which if it should be intended of Geometrical Cubits, it
will contain 18 vulgar Cubits; which would not only render it useless, but
would be contrary to the command which he says God gave him, Exodus 20. Thou
shall not go up by steps to my Altar. For without steps what man could reach
it? it must therefore be meant of ordinary Cubits; but that being so it was
very feasible. I can more easily believe than understand it.

And put the honest Father to the Refuge of a Miracle.] This honest Father was
St. Aug. who delivers his opinion, that it might be miraculously done, lib. 16.
de Civ. Dei, cap. 7. where having proposed the question how it might be done,
he answers, Quod si homines eas captas secum adduxerunt, and eo modo ubi
habitabant earum genera instituerunt, venandi studio fieri potuisse incredibile
non est, quam jussu Dei sive permissu etiam opera Angelorum negandum non sit
potuisse transferri; but St. Aug. says not, that it could not be done without
a miracle.

And 1500 years to people the World, as full a time, etc.]

That Methusalem was the longest lived of all the children of Adam, etc.] See
both these points cleared by the Author, in Pseudodox. Epidemic. the first,
lib. 6. cap. 6. the other l. 7. cap. 3.

That Judas perished by hanging himself, there is no certainty in Scripture,
though in one place it seems to affirm it, and by a doubtful word has given
occasion to translate it; yet in another place, in a more punctual description
it makes it improbable, and seems to overthrow it.] These two places that seem
to contradict one another, are Matthew 27. 5. and Acts 1. 8. The doubtful word
he speaks of is in the place of Matthew; it is (...), which signifies
suffocation as well as hanging ((...) which may signify literally, after he
went out he was choked) but Erasmus translates it, abiens laqueo se suspendit:
the words in the Acts are, When he had thrown down himself headlong, he burst
in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out, which seems to differ much from
the expression of Matthew; yet the ancient Writers, and Fathers of the Church
do unanimously agree that he was hanged; some I shall cite. Anastas. Sinaita.
l. 7. Auagog. Contempl. Vnus latro ingratus cum esset typus Diaboli, and
Serpentis, and Judae qui se in ligno suffocavit. Gaudentius Brixiens. tract.
13. de natal. Dom. Mortem debitam laqueo sibimet intulit praeparato, etc.
Drogottoshen. de sacram. dominic. pass. Jamdiu erat quidem quod Christo
recesserat, and avaritiae laqueo se suspenderat, sed quod fecerat in occulto,
palam omnibus innotuit. S. Martialis in Ep. ad Tholosanos. Non sustinuit
poenitentiam, donec laqueo mortis seipsum consumpsit. Ignat. ad Philippens.
Diabolus laqueum ei ostendit, and suspendium docuit. Leo. Sermon. 3. de Passion.
-- ut quia facimus omnem mensuram ultionis excesserat, te haberet impietas tua
judicem, te pateretur sua paena Carnificem. Theodoret. lib. 1. haretic. fabul.
Ille protiuus strangulatus est, quae fuit merces ejus proditionis. Chrysostom.
Hom. 3. de proditore. Pependit Coelum Terramque intermedius vago funere
suffocatus, and cum flagitio fuo tumefacta, viscera crepuerunt, etc. Bernard.
sermon. 8. in Psalm. 9. Judas in aere crepuit medius.

There are those that are so particular that they acquaint us with the manner,
as that it was done with a Cord. Antiochus Laurensis. Spem omnem a se cum
abjecisset insiliente in eum inimico (sc. Diabolo) funiculo sibi praefocavit
gulam Oecumen. in Act. fracto funiculo quo erat suffocatus decidit in terram
praecipitio, 2. That it was done on a Fig Tree, Beda. Portam David
egredientibus fons occurrit in Austrum per vallem directus, ad cujus medietatem
ab occasu Judas se suspendisse narratur. Nam and ficus magna ibi and
vetustissima stat.

Juvenc. l. 4. Hist. Evangelic. Exorsusque suas laqueo sibi sumere Poenas,
Informem rapuit ficus de vertice mortem.
3. Some acquaint us with the time when it was done, viz. the next day after he
had given the kiss. So Chrysostom. Homil. 1. de proditor. and mysterio Caoen.
Dominic. Guttur prophanum quod hodie Christo extendis ad osculum, crastino es
illud extensurus ad laqueum. But there are two, that is, Euthymius and
Oecumenius, that tells us, that the hanging did not kill him; but that either
the rope broke, or that he was cut down, and afterward cast himself down
headlong, as it is related in the beforementioned place of the Acts: Agnitus a
quibusdam depositus est ne praefocaretur, denique postquam in secreto quodam
loco modico vixisset tempore praeceps factus sive praecipitatus, inflatus,
diruptus, ac diffisus est medius, and effusa sunt omnia viscera ejus; ut in
Actis. Euthym. cap. 67. in Matthew. Judas suspendio e vita non discessit, sed
supervixit, dejectus est enim priusquam praefocaretur, idque Apostolorum Acta
indicant quod pronus crepuit medius. Oecumen. in Act. And this may serve to
reconcile these two seemingly disagreeing Scriptures.

That our Fathers after the Flood erected the Tower of Babel.] For this see
what the Author says in his Pseudodox. Epidemic. l. 7. cap. 6.

And cannot but commend the judgment of Ptolemy.] He means of Ptolemaeus
Philadelphus, who founded the Library of Alexandria, which he speaks of in the
next Section, he was King of Egypt; and having built and furnished that Library
with all the choicest book he could get from any part of the World; and having
good correspondence with Eleazar the High Priest of the Jews, by reason that he
had released the Jews from Captivity, wh^ were taken by his Predecessor
Pulemaeus Lagi; he did by the advice of Demetrius Phalereus the Athenian whom
he had made his Library keeper, write to Eleazer, desiring him that he would
cause the Book of the Jews, which contained their Laws, to be translated for
him into Greek, that he might have them to put into his Library: to which the
Priest consents; and for the King's better satisfaction, sends to him Copies of
the Books, and with the same 72 Interpreters skilled both in the Greek and
Hebrew Language, to translate them for him into Greek; which afterward they
performed This is for certain; but whether they translated only the
Pentateuch, a St. Jerome would have it, or together with that the books of the
Prophets also, as Leo de Castro and Baronius contend, I undertake not to
determine: but as to that part of the story, that these Interpreters were put
into so many several Cells, whilst they were about the work of translation; and
notwithstanding they were thus severed, that they all translated it totidem
verbis; it is but reason to think with St. Jerome (notwithstanding the great
current of Authority against him) that it is no better than a fable.

The Alcoran of the Turks (I speak without prejudice) is an ill composed piece,
containing in it vain and ridiculous errors in Philosophy, etc:] It is now in
every man's hand, having been lately translated into English; I shall therefore
observe but these few particulars in it, in regard the Book it self is so
common; and indeed they are not mine own, but Lipsius his observations. He
begins, O nugas, O deliria! primum (says he) commentus est, Deum unum
solidumque ((...) Graeci exprimunt) eundemque incorporeum esse. Christum non
Deum, sed magnum vatem and prophetam, se tamen majorem, and proxime a Deo
missum; praemia qui ipsum audient Paradisum, qui post aliquot annorum millia
reserabitur, ibi quatuor flumina lacte, vino, melle, aqua fluere, ibi palatia
and aedificia gemmata atque aurata esse, carnes avium suavissimarum, furctus
omne genus quos sparsi jacentesque sub umbra arborum edent: sed caput
foelicitatis, viros foeminasque majores solito magnis Genitalibus, assidua
libidine, and ejus usu sine taedio aut fatigatione. These and some others that
are in the Alcoran he reckons up. Sed and Physica quoque mirando ( says he)
nam facit Solemn and Lunam in equis vehi, illum autem in aquam calidam vespere
mergi, and been lotu^^ ascendere atque oriri, Stellas in aere e catenis aureis
pendere: terram in bovini cornu cuspide stabilitum, and agitente se bove ac
succutiente fieri terrae motum; hominem autem exhirudine aut sanguisuga nasci,
etc. Just. Lisp. Monit. and exempl. Politic. cap. 3.

I believe besides Zoroaster, there were diverse others that wrote before
Moses.] Zoroaster was long before Moses, and of great name; he was the Father
of Ninus, Justin. l. 1. Si quamlibet modicum emolumentum probaveritis, ego ille
sim Carinondas, vet Damigeron, vel is Moses, vel Jannes, vel Appollonius, vel
ipse Dardanus, vel quicunque alius post Zoroasterm and Hostanem inter Magos
celebratus est. Apuleius in Apol.

Others with as many groans deplore the combustion of the Library of
Alexandria.] This was that Library before spoken of, set up by Ptolomeus
Philadelphus; in which it is reproted by Ammianus Marcellinus, there were 700000
volumes; it was burnt by Jul. Caesar's means, whose Navy being environed before
Alexandria, he had no means to keep off the Enemy, but by flinging of fire,
which at length caught the Library and consumed it, as Plutarch has it in Vita
Caesaris: but notwithstanding we have no reason to believe it was quite
consumed, because Sueton. in Claudius, tells us, that that Emperor added
another to it; and there must be somewhat before, if it were an addition; but
true it is, too many of the Books perished: to repair which loss, care was
taken by Domitian the Emperor, as the same Sueton. and Aurel. Victor do relate.

I would not omit a copy of Enoch 's Pillars, had they many nearer Authors than
Josephus, etc.] For this the Story is, that Enoch, or his father Seth, having
been informed by Adam, that the World was to perish once by water, and a second
time by fire, did cause two Pillars to be erected, the one of Stone against the
water, and another of Brick against the fire; and that upon those Pillars was
engraven all such learning as had been delivered to, or invented by mankind;
and that thence it came that all knowledge and learning was not lost by means
of the Flood, by reason that one of the Pillars (though the other perished) did
remain after the Flood; and Josephus witnesses, till his time, lib. 1. Antiq.
Judaic, cap. 3.

Of those three great inventions of Germany, there are two which are not
without their incommodities] those two he means are Printing and Gunpowder,
which are commonly taken to be German Inventions; but Artillery was in China
above 1500 years since, and Printing long before it was in Germany, if we may
believe Juan Concales Mendosa in his Hist. of China, lib. 3. cap. 15, 16. The
incommodities of these two inventions, are well described by Sam. Daniel, l. 6.
of the Civil Wars.

Fierce Nemesis, mother of fate and change,
Sword Bearer of the eternal providence,
Turns her stern look at last into the West,
As grieved to see on Earth such happy rest;
And for Pandora calls presently,
Pandora Jove's fair gift, that first deceived,
Poor Epimetheus in his imbecility.
That though he had a wondrous boon received,
By means whereof curious mortality
Was of all former quiet quite bereaved.
To whom being come decked with all qualities,
The wrathful goddess breaks out in this wise:
Do thou not see in what secure estate
Those flourishing fair Western parts remain?
As if they had made covenant with fate,
To be exempted free from others pain,
At one with their desires, friends with dabate,
In peace with Pride, content with their own gain.
Their bounds contain their minds, their minds applied
To have their bonds with plenty beautified.
Devotion (Mother of Obedience)
Bears such a hand on their credulity,
That it abates the spirit of eminence,
And busies them with humble piety:
For see what works, what infinite expense,
What Monuments of zeal they edify,
As if they would, so that no stop were found;
Fill all with Temples, make all holy ground.
But we must cool this all-believing zeal,
That hath' enjoyed so fair a turn so long etc.
Dislike of this first by degrees shall steal,
As upon souls of men persuaded wrong;
And that the sacred power which thin has wrought,
Shall give her self the sword to cut her throat.
Go therefore thou with all thy stirring train
Of swelling Sciences (the gifts of grief)
Go loose the links of that soul-binding chain,
Enlarge this uninquisitive Belief:
Call up men's spirits, that simpleness retain,
Enter their hearts, and knowledge make the Thief
To open all the doors to let in light,
That all may all things see, but what is right
Opinion arm against opinion (grown)
Makenew-born contradictions still arise
As if Thebes Founder ( Cadmus) tongues had sown
In stead of teeth, for greater mutinies:
Bring new defended faith against faith known
Weary the soul with contrarieties,
Till all Religion become Retrograde,
And that fair tie the mask of sin be made.
And better to effect a speedy end,
Let there be found two fatal Instruments,
The one to publish, the other to defend
Impious contention, Printing.
and proud discontents:
Make that instamped characters may send
Abroad to thousands, thousand men's intents;
And in a moment may dispatch much more,
Than could a world of pens perform before;
Whereby all quarrels, titles, secrecies
May unto all be presently made known,
Factions prepared, parties allured to rise,
Seditions under fair pretenses sown;
Whereby the vulgar may become so wise,
That with a self-presumption overgrown,
They may of deepest mysteries debate,
Control their betters, censure acts of State.
And then when this dispersed mischief shall
Have brought confusion in each mystery,
Called up contempts of State in general,
And ripened the humor of impiety,
Then take the other engine wherewithal Guns.

They may torment their self-wrought misery;
And scourge each other in so strange a wise,
As time or tyrants never could devise, etc.
See Bellermontan. in his Dissertat. politic. dissert. 29. and 30.

For the other Invention, the Latin Annotator doubts whether the Author means
Church-Organs, or Clocks? I suppose he means Clocks, because I find that
Invention reckoned by a German, with the other two, as a remarkable one. It is
by Busbequius, speaking of the Turks, who has these words: Testes majores
minoresque bombardae, multaque alia quae ex nostris excogitata ipsi ad se
avertunt; ut libros tamen typis excuderunt, horologia in public haberent,
nondum adduci potuerunt. Epist. Legate. Turcic. I suppose if he had known any
Invention which next to the other two had been greater than this, he would not
have named this; and this being the next considerable, we have no cause to
doubt but the Author meant it.

To maintain the Trade and Mystery of Typographers.] Of this, Cunaeus in his
Satyr Sardi voenales. Qui bis in anno nomen suum ad Germanorum nundinas non
transmittit, eruditionem suam in ordinem coactam credit, itaque nunquam tot
fungi una pluvia nascuntur, quot nunc libri uno die.

That is, in respect of his great strength, against which it is not probable
the Christians will prevail, as it is observed by Monsieur de Silhon. La Race
des Ottomans ( says he) quae oste a Dieu la Religion qu'ila revelee, and aux
hommes la liberte que le droit des Gens leur laisse a fait tant de progres
depuis trois Cens and quelques annees qu'il semble qu'elle n'ait plus rien a
craindre de dehorse, and que son empire ne puisse perir que par la corruption
de dedans, and par la dissolution de parties qui composent un corpse si vaste.
Mr. de Silhon en son Minist. d' Estat. l. 1. c.

None can more justly boast of persecutions, and glory in the number and valor
of martyrs.] Of the fortitude of the Christians in this particular, Minutius
Felix, in the person of the Ethnique, has these words: Permira stultitia and
incredibili audacia spernunt tormenta proaesentia, dum incerta metuunt and
futura; and dum mori post mortem timent, interim mori non timent. And
afterward, when he speaks in the person of the Christian, he says, that
Christian-women and children have in this surpassed Scaevola and Regulus: Viros
( says he) cum Mutio vel cum Atilio Regulo comparo: pueri and mulierculae
nostrae cruces and Tormenta, feras and omnes suppliciorum terriculas inspirata
patientia dolor is illudunt. Minut, in Octav. vide Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 1. c.
23, 24.

If we shall strictly examine the circumstances and requisites which Aristotle
requires to true and perfect valor, we shall find the name only in his Master
Alexander, (that is, no more than the name) and as little in that Roman Worthy
Julius Caesar.] Aristot. 3. Ethic. cap. 6. amongst other requisites, requires
to valor, that it keep a mediocrity betwixt audacity and fear; that we thrust
not our selves into danger when we need not; that we spare not to show our
valor when occasion requires: He requires for its proper object, Death; and to
any death, he prefers death in war, because thereby a man profits his Country
and Friends; and that he calls mors honesta, an honest or honorable death: and
therethereupon he defines a valiant man to be, Is qui, morte honesta proposita,
iisque omnibus quae cum sint repentina mortem adfuerunt metu vacat. So that by
the Author's saying, there was only the name in Alexander, he means only that
which is rendered in the two last words, metu vacans, and not the rest that goes
to make up the definition of a valiant man, which is very truly affirmed of
Alexander, who exposed himself to hazard many times when there was no cause
for it: As you may read in Curtius, he did, in the Siege of Tyrus, and many
other ways. Cettuy-cy semble recercher and courir a force les dangiers comme un
impeteux torrent, qui choque and attaque sans discretion, and sans chois tout
ce qu'l rencontre, says Montaign, speaking of Alexander, l. 2. des Ess. cap.
34. And for Caesar, it cannot be denied, but in his Wars he was many times
(though not so generally as Alexander) more adventurous than reason military
could warrant to him; and therefore Lucan gives him no better character than
Acer and indomitus quo spes quoque ira vocasset Far manum, etc.

Lucan. lib. 1.

To instance in some particulars: with what an inconsiderable strength did he
enterprise the Conquest of Egypt, and afterward went to attaque the Forces of
Scipio and Juba, which were ten times more than his own? after the Battle of
Pharsalia, having sent his Army before into Asia, and crossing the Hellespont
with one single vessel, he there meets Lucius Cassius with ten men of War, he
makes up to him, summons him to render, and he does it. In the famous and
furious siege of Alexia; where he had 80000 men to make defense against him,
and an Army of one hundred and nine thousand horse, and two hundred and forty
thousand foot, all marching toward him, to raise his siege; yet for all that,
he would not quit the siege, but first fought with those without, and obtained
a great Victory over them, and soon afterward brought the besieged to his
mercy.

The Council of Constance condemns John Husse for an Heretic; the Stories of
his own Party style him a Martyr.] John Husse did agree with the Papists
against us, in the point of Invocation of Saints, Prayers and Sacrifice for the
Dead, free Will, good Works, confession of Sins, seven Sacraments, etc. Gordon.
Hunt. l. contr. 3. de Sacr. Euch. cap. 17. Yet was he condemned for maintaining
certain Articles said by that Council to be heretical and seditious, and was
burnt for Heresy. Now as I will not take upon me to say he was an Heretic, so
can I not maintain that he was a Martyr, if it be but for this one Article,
which in the 15 Sess. of that Council was objected against him, which he did
acknowledge, but would not recall, i. e. Nullus est Dominus civilis, dum est in
peccato mortali. If that Doctrine should be believed, we shall have little
obedience to Civil Magistrates; and without that, how miserable is humane
condition? That which begat compassion toward Husse in those of his own Party
was, that he had a safe conduct from the Emperor Sigismund; and therefore it
was, say they, a violation of public faith in the Council and Emperor in
putting him to death.

That wise Heathen Socrates that suffered on a fundamental point of Religion,
the Unity of God.] That Socrates suffered on this point, diverse Christian
Writers do object to the Ethniques, as Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. Eusebius. l. 5. de
praeparat. Evangelic. c. 14. Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 14. and Lactant. de
justitia, cap. 15. whose words are these: Plato quidem multa de uno Deo locutus
est, a quo ait constitutum esse mundum, sed nihil de Religione; somniaverat
enim Deum, non cognoverat. Quod si justitiae defensionem vel ipse vel quilibet
alius implere voluisset, imprimis Deorum Religiones evertere debuit, quia
contrariae pietati. Quod quidem Socrates quia facere tentavit in carcerem
conjectus est, ut jam tunc appareret quid esset futurum iis hominibus qui
justitiam veram defendere, Deoque singulari servire coepissent.

I have often pitied the miserable Bishop that suffered in the cause of
Antipodes.] The suffering was, that he lost his Bishopric for denying the
Antipodes. Vid. Aventin. in Hist. Boio. Besides him, there were other Church
men of great note, that denied Antipodes, as Lactantius, Augustine; and Bid.

Who would not think the Author had taken this from Mr, Montaign, whose words
are, Ilm'a tous jours semble qu' a un homme Christien, cette sort de parter
est plein d' indiscretion and d'irreverence [Dieu ne se peut disdire,] [Dieu ne
peuit fair cecy ou cela.] je ne trouve pas bon d'enfermer ainsi la puissance
divine sous les loix de nostre parole. Et l'apparence qui s' offer a nous en
ses propositions, il la faudroit representer plus reverement, and plus
Religieusement. Live. 2. des Ess. c. 12.

I cannot see why the Angel of God should question Esdras to recall the time
past, if it were beyond his own power, or that God should pose mortality in
that which he was not able to perform himself.] Sir K. Digby in his Notes upon
this place says, There is no contradiction in this, because he says it was
but putting all things that had motion into the same state they were in at that
moment, unto which time was to be reduced back, and from thence letting it
travel on again by the same motions, ( etc. which God could do. But under
favor, the contradiction remains, if this were done that he mentions; for Time
depends not at all upon motion, but has a being altogether independent of it,
and therefore the same revolution would not bring back the same time, for that
was efflux'd before; as in the time of Joshua, when the Sun stood still, we
cannot but conceive though there were no motion of the Sun, but that there was
an efflux of Time, otherwise, how could the Text have it, That there was not
any day, before or after, that was so long as that? for the length of it must
be understood in respect of the flux of time. The reasoning of Sir Kenelme is
founded upon the opinion of Aristot. who will needs have it, that Time, cannot
be without mutation; he gives this for a reason, because when we have slept,
and cannot perceive any mutation to have been, we do therefore use to connect
the time of our sleeping and of our awaking together, and make but one of it:
to which it may be answered, although some mutation be necessary, that we may
mark the flux of time, it does not therefore follow that the mutation is
necessary to the flux it self.

Constantine from a fall off his Horse, or a mischief from his enemies, upon
the wearing those nails, etc.] Hac de re videatur P. Diac. hist. miscell.

I wonder how the curiosity of wiser heads could pass that great and
indisputable miracle, the cessation of Oracles. [There are three opinions
touching the manner how the predictions of these Oracles were performed: Some
say by vapor, some by the intelligences, or influences of the Heavens, and
others say by the assistance of the Devils. Now the indisputable miracle the
Author speaks of, is, that they ceased upon the coming of Christ; and it is
generally so believed; and the Oracle of Delphos delivered to Augustus,
mentioned by the Author in this Section, is brought to prove it, which is this:
Me puer Hebraeus divos Deus ipse gubernans
Cedere sede jubet, tristemque redire sub orcum,
Aris ergo dehinc tacitus discedito nostris.
But yet it is so far from being true that their cessation was miraculous, that
the truth is, there never were any predictions given by those Oracles at all.

That their cessation was not upon the coming of Christ, we have luculent
testimony out of Tully, in his 2. lib. de Divinat. which he writ many years
before Christ was born; who tells us that they were silent (and indeed he never
thought they were otherwise) long before that time, insomuch that they were
come into contempt: Cur isto modo jam oracula Delphis non eduntur, non modo
nostra aetate, sed jamdiu jam ut nihil possit esse contemptius. So that for
that of Delphos, which was the most famous of them all, we see we have no
reason to impute the cessation of it to Christ; Why therefore should we do so
for any of the rest?

2. For their predictions, let us consider the three several ways before
mentioned, whereby they are supposed to operate; and from thence see whether it
be probable that any such Oracles ever were.

The first Opinion is, that it was by exhalation or vapor drawn up from the
earth; and gives this for a reason of their being, that they were for a time
nourished by those exhalations; and when those ceased, and were exhausted, the
Oracles famished and died for want of their accustomed sustenance: this is the
farfetcht reason given by Plutarch for their defect; but 'twas not devised by
him, but long before, as appears, in that Tully scoffs at it, lib. de divinat.
De vino aut salsamento putes loqui (says he) quae evanescunt vetustate. This
seemed absurd to others, who do therefore say this was not to be attributed to
any power of the Earth, but to the power of the Heavens, or Intelligences
Celestial; to certain aspects, whereof, they say, the Statua's of those
Oracles were so adapted, that they might divine and foretell future events. But
yet to others, this way seems as absurd as the others; for, say they,
admitting that there were an efficacy in the Heavens, more than in the Earth;
yet how can it be that men should come by the skill to fit the Statua's to the
Aspects or influences of the Heavens? or if at any time they had such skill,
why should not the same continue the rather, because men are more skilled in
the motions of the Heavens, of later than in the former time? Again, they do
not see how it should be that the cause should be of less excellency than the
effect; for if a man (say they) can by his industry make such Oracles, why can
he not produce the same effect in another man? for if you affirm that the
Heavens influence is requisite, they will tell you that Influence may happen as
well to a man, as to a Statue of wood or stone. Therefore the third sort being
unsatisfied, which either of the former ways conclude, that this was performed
by the Devil; but for that it will appear as contrary to Reason and Philosophy,
as either of the former; for Philosophy teaches that things singular, or
individual, are to be known only by sense, or by such an Intellect, as does
know by its Essence; and Theology teaches that God only knows the heart, and
that the Devil does not know by sense, nor by essence; and since it is admitted
by all, that most of the answers that were pretended to be given by those
Oracles, were de rebus singularibus, or individuis; it is evident that these
predictions were not performed by Devils. How then? why those predictions which
the ignorant Heathen took to come from Heaven, and some Christians (not less
ignorant) from the Devil, was nothing but the juggling and impostures of the
Priests, who from within the Statua's gave the answers; which Princes connived
at, that they might upon occasion serve their turns upon the ignorance of the
people; and the learned men, for fear of their Princes, durst not speak against
it. Lucian has noted it, and so a more authentic Author, Minut. Felix, in
Octav. Authoritatem quasi praesentis numinis consequuntur dum inspirantur
interim vatibus. But in process of time, the people grew less credulous of
their Priests, and so the Oracles became to be silent: Cum jam (says he)
Apollo versus facere desiisset, cujus tunc cautum illud and ambiguum defecit
oraculum: Cum and politiores homines and minus creduli esse coeperunt. Sir H.
Blount in his Levantine voyage, says he saw the Statua of Memnon so famous of
old; he says it was hollow at top, and that he was told by the Egyptians and
Jews there with him, that they had seen some enter there, and come out at the
Pyramid, two Bows shoot off; then (says he) I soon believed the Oracle, and
believe all the rest to have been such; which indeed, is much easier to imagine
than that it was performed by any of the three ways before mentioned: St. Aug.
has composed a Book, where he handles this point at large, and concludes
that the Devils can no more foretell things to come, than they are able to
discern the thoughts that are within us. Aug. lib. de Scientia Demon.

Till I laughed my self out of it with a piece of Justin, where he delivers
that the Children of Israel for being scabbed were banished out of Egypt.]
These words of Justin are, Sed cum scabiem Aegyptii and pruriginem paterentur,
responso moniti, eum (sc. Moysen) cum aegris, we pestis ad plures serperet,
terminis Aegypti pellunt. l. 36. But he is not singular in this, for Tacitus
tells us, Hist. lib. 5. Plurimi authors consentiunt orta per Aegyptum tabe
quae corpora foedaret, Regem (Ochirum) ( he means Pharaoh) adito Hammonis
oraculo remediam petentem purgare Regnum and id genus hominum -- alias in
terras avertere jussum. Et paulo inferius, Quod ipsos scabies quondam
turpaverat.

I have ever believed, and do now know that there are Witches.] What sort of
Witches they were that the Author knew to be such, I cannot tell; for those
which he mentions in the next Section, which proceed upon the principles of
Nature, none have denied that such there are; against such it was, that the Lex
Julia de veneficiis was made, that is, those, Qui noxio poculo ant impuris
medicaminibus aliquem fuerint infectati. Al. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 3. c. 1.
But for the opinion that there are Witches which cooperate with the Devil,
there are Divines of great note, and far from any suspicion of being
irreligious, that do oppose it. Certainly there is no ground to maintain their
being from the story of Oracles, as may be seen from what has been said on the
precedent Section.

Nor have they power to be so much as Witches.] Pliny says, so it fared with
Nero, who was so hot in pursuit of the Magic Arts, that he did dedicate
himself wholly to it, and yet could never satisfy himself in that kind, though
he got all the cunning men he could from the East, for that purpose, Plin. l.
3. Not. Hist. c. 1.

By conjunction with the Devil.] Though, as the Author says, it be without a
possibility of Generation, yet there are great men that hold, that such
carnality is performed; as August. in Levit. Aquin. l* 2. de qu. 73. art. ad 2.
and Justin Martyr. Apol. 1.

It is no new opinion of the Church of Rome, but an old one of Pythagoras and
Plato.] This appears by Apuleius a Platonist, in his Book de Deo Socratis, and
elsewhere. See Mede's Apostasy of the latter times, where out of this and
other Authors, you shall see collected all the learning de Geniis.

I cannot with those in that great Father securely interpret the work of the
first day, Fiat lux, to the creation of Angels.] This great Father is S.
Chrysostom. Homil. in Genes. but yet it is his opinion, as also of Athanasius and
Theodoret, that there is express mention of the creation of Angels, so that
they need not rest upon this place, which they admit to be somewhat obscure.
The place which they take to be express, is that of the 130 Psalm, where David
begins to speak of the Majesty of God, in this manner: Confessionem sive
majestatem and decorem induisti, amictus lumine sicut vestimento: Next he
speaks of the Heavens, saying, Thou have stretched them out over us like a
Tent. Then he speaks of the Angels, Qui facis Angelos tuos spiritus. Now if it
shall be objected, that this expression is only of the time present, and
without relation to the Creation: Answer is given by Divines, that the Hebrews
have but three Tenses in their Verbs, the Preterperfect, Present, and Future
Tense; and have not the use of the Preterimperfect, and Preterpulperfect, as
the Greeks and Latins have; whence it arises, that the Present Tense with the
Hebrews, may, as the sentence will bear it, be translated by the
Preterimperfect, as also by the Preterperfect and Preterpluperfect Tense; and
this (they say) is practiced in this very passage, where the Phrase, as it is
in Hebrew, may be rendered as well qui faciebas, as qui facis Angelos, etc. Vid.
Hieronym. in Ep. ad Titum, and Thom. Aqu. 1. p. qu. 61. art. 3. The Latin
Annotator says, the Father meant by the Author, is St. Aug. and quotes him, l.
11. de Civ. Dei, cap. 9. which place I have perused, and find the expression
there used by St. Aug. is but hypothetical; for these are his words: Cum enim
dixit Fiat lux and facta est lux, si recte in hac luce creatio intelligitur
Angelorum, etc. Where you see it is but with a Si, and therefore I conceive the
Author intends not him, but Chrysostom.

Where it subsists alone, it is a Spiritual Substance, and may ne an Angel,]
Epicurus was of this opinion, and St. Aug. in Enchirid. ad Laurentium.

Moses decided that Question, and all is salved with the new term of Creation.]
That is it which Aristotle could not understand; he had learned that ex nihilo
nihil fit, and therefore when he found those that disputed that the World had a
beginning, did maintain that it was generated, and he could not understand any
generation, but out of matter prae-existent in infinitum, therefore he took
their opinion to be absurd, and upon that ground principally, concluded the
World to be eternal: whereas, if he had understood that there may be such a
thing as Creation, he had not done it, for that solves his processus in
infinitum. Take from Plato, that the World had a beginning, and from Aristot.
that it was not generated, and you have the (true) Christian opinion.

So it did Galen, who considering the order, use, and disposition of the parts
of the body, brake forth into these words: Compono hic profecto Canticum in
creatoris nostri laudem, quod ultra res suas ornare voluit melius quam ulla
art possent. Galen. 3. de usu partium.

I cannot believe the wisdom of Pythagoras did ever positively, and in a
literal sense, affirm his Metempsychosis.] In this the opinion of Grotius is
contrary to the Author, who says this opinion was begotten by occasion of the
opinion of other Philosophers, who in their discourses of the life that is to
be after this, brought such arguments, Quae non magis de homine quam de bestiis
procedunt. And therefore, says he, mirandum non est, si transitum animarum de
hominibus in bestias, de bestiis in homines alii commenti sunt. Lib. 2. de ver.
Relig. Christ. (vide etiam Annotat. ejusd.) But yet there is a shrewd objection
against the opinion of Pythagoras, if he did mean it literally, which is cast
in by the Sectators of Democritus and Epicurus, which Lucretius remembers in
these Verses: Praeterea si immortalis natura anima
Constat, and in corpus nascentibus insinuatur,
Cur super ante actam at aetatem meminisse nequimus?
Nec vestigia gestarum rerum ulla tenemus?
Nam si tantoper'st animi mutata a potestas,
Omnis ut actarum excideret retinentia rerum,
Non ut opinor ea ab laeto jam longiter errat.


This Argument, it is true, is pro falso contra falsum, but yet holds ad hominem
so far, that it is not likely (as the Author says) but Pythagoras would
observe an absurdity in the consequence of his Metempsychosis; and therefore
did not mean it literally, but desired only to express the Soul to be immortal,
which he, and the other Philosophers that were of that opinion, who had not
heard of Creation, could not conceive, unless it must be taken for truth, that
the soul were before the body; so says Lactantius of them. Non putaverunt
aliter fieri posse ut supersint animae post corpora, nisi videntur fuisse ante
corpora. De falls. Sap. c. 18.

I do not envy the temper of Crows or Daws.] As Theophrastus did, who dying,
accused Nature for giving them, to whom it could not be of any concernment, so
large a life; and to man, whom it much concerned, so short a one. Cic. Tusc.
quaest. l. 3. How long Daws live, see in Not. ad Sect. 41.

Cicero's ground, because I have lived them well.] I suppose he alludes to an
expression in an Epistle of Cicero, written in his Exile, to his wife and
children, where he has these words to his wife: Quod reliquum est, te sustenta
mea Terentia ut potes, honestissime viximus, floruimus. Non vitium nostrum sed
virtus nos afflixit, peccatum est nullum nisi quod non una animum cum
ornamentis amisimus, l. 24. Ep. 4.

And stand in need of Eson 's Bath before threescore.] Eson was the Father of
Jason, and, at his request, was by Medea, by the means of this Bath, restored
to his youth. Ingredients that went into it, and the description of Medea's
performance Ovid gives you, l. 7. Metam.

Interea calido positum medicamen aheno
Fervet and exultat, spumisque tumentibus albet.
Illic Aemonia radices valle resectas,
Seminaque and flores, and succos incoquit atros
Adjicit extremo lapides Orient petitos,
Et quas Oceani refluum mare lavit arenas:
Addidit exceptas lunae de nocte pruinas,
Et Strigis infames ipsis cum carnibus alas,
Inque virum soliti vultus mutare ferinos,
Ambigui prosecta lupi, nec defuit illi
Squamea Cinypheitenuis membrana Chelindri,
Vivacisque jecur cervi; quibus insuper addit
Ora, caputque novem cornicis secula passae.
His and mill aliis, post quam sine nomine rebus,
Propositum instruxit mortali barbara munus
Arenti ramo jampridem mitis olivae
Omnia confudit, summisque immiscuit ima.
Ecce, vetus calido ver satus stipes aheno
Fit viridis primo, nec longo tempore frondes
Induit, and subito gravidis oneratur olivis.
At quacunque cavo spumas ejecit aheno
Ignis, and in terram guttae cecidere calentes,
Vernat humus floresque and mollia pabula surgunt
Quae sunulac vidi, stricto Medea recludit.
Ense senis jugulum, veteremque extare cruorem
Passa replet succis, quos postquam combibit Aeson,
Aut ore acceptas, aut vulnere, barba comaeque
Lanitie posita, nigrum rapuere colorem.
Pulsa fugit macies: abeunt pallorque situsque:
Adjectoque cavae supplentur corpore rugae;
Membraque luxuriant. Aeson miratur, and olim
Ante quater denos hunc se reminiscitur annos
Dissimilemque animum subiit aetate relicta.
Extol the Suicide of Cato.] As does Seneca in several places; but Lactantius
says, he cast away his life, to get the reputation of a Platonic Philosopher,
and not for fear of Caesar; and it is very probable he was in no great fear of
death, when he slept so securely the night before his death, as the story
reports of him.

Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum nihil curo. Were I of Caesar 's Religion.] I
doubt not but here is a fault of the Press, and that instead of Caesar it
should be Cicero. I meet not with any such saying imputed to Caesar, nor any
thing like it, but that he preferred a sudden death, (in which he had his
option) to any other; but I meet with such a saying in Cicero, quoted out of
Epicharmus [Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum nihili aestimo.] Where Cicero
sustaineth the part of the Epicure, that there is no hurt in being dead, since
there remains nothing after it. Cic. 1. Thusc. qu. non procul ab initio.

Lucan learned to say, Communis mundo superest rogus, etc.] Why, Lucan was a
Stoique, and 'twas an opinion among them almost generally, that the World
should perish by fire; therefore without doubt from them he learned it. Coelum
quoque cum omnibus quae in coelo continentur, ita ut coepisset desinere,
fontium dulci aqua marisve nutriri in vim ignis abiturum. Stoicis constans
opinio est, quod consumpto humore mundus hic omnis ignescat. Minutius in Octav.
But Minutius should have excepted Boethius, Possidonius, Diogenes Babylonius,
and Zeno Sidonius, who were Stoiques, and yet did not think the World should be
destroyed by fire; nor yet by any other means.

Elias 6000 years, etc.] Lanctant. is very positive that the World should last
but 6000 years; but his reason for it is somewhat strange; thus it is, Quoniam
sex diebus cuncta Dei opera perfecta sunt, per secula sex, i. e. annorum sex
millia manner in hoc statu mundum necesse est. De Divino praemio, cap. 14.

It is a Stoical principle. Quaeris enim aliquid supra summum, interrogas quid
petam extra virtutem ipsam. Nihil enim habet melius pretium sui est. Senec. de
vit. beat. c. 9.

That honest artifice of Seneca.] What that artifice was, is to be seen in
Senec. l. 1. Ep. Ep. 11. Aliquis vir bonus nobis eligendus est, and semper ante
oculos habendus, ut sic tanquam illo spectante vivamus and omnia tanquam illo
vidente faciamus. Et Paulo post; Elige itaque Catonem; si hic videtur tibi
nimis rigidus, elige remissioris animi virum Loelium, etc. which though, as the
Author says, it be an honest Artifice, yet cannot I but commend the party, and
prefer the direction of him (who ever he were) who in the Margin of my Seneca,
over against those words, wrote these: Quin Deo potius qui semper omnibus omnia
agentibus non tanquam sed reipsa adest, and videt; ac etiam ut Testis, vindex
and punitor est male agentis.

I have tried, if I could reach that great Resolution of his (that is of
Seneca) to be honest without a thought of Heaven or Hell.] Tho. Aquin. in com.
in Boet. de Consolat prope ^inam.
Seneca brags he could do this, in these words: Si s^irem deos peccata
ignoscituros, and homines ignoraturos adhuc propter vilitatem peccati peccare
erubescerem. Credat Judaeus appella; non ego. --

And Atheists have been the only Philosophers.] That is, if nothing remain
after this life. St. Aug. was of this opinion. Disputabam -- Epicurum
accepturum fuisse palmam in animo meo, nisi ego credidissem post mortem restare
animae vitam, etc. Aug. l. 6. conf. cap. 16.

So Minutius. Caeterum quis tam stultus est aut brutus, ut audeat repugnare
hominem a Deo ut primum potuit fingi, ita posse denuo reformari, nihil esse
post obitum, and ante ortum nihil fuisse; sicut de nihilo nasci licuit, ita de
nihilo licere reparari. Porro difficilius est id quod sit incipere, quod quam
id quod fuerit iterare. Tu perire Deo credis, si quid nostris oculis hebetibus
subtrahitur. Corpus omne sive arescit in pulverem sive in humorem solvitur, vel
in cinerem comprimitur, vel in nidorem tenuatur, subducitur nobis, sed Deo
elementorum in custodi inseruntur* in Octav. Vide Grot. de veritate Relig.
Christian. ubi (lib. 2.) solvit objectionem, quod dissoluta corpora restitui
nequeunt.

Or conceive a flame that can either prey upon, or purify the substance of a
soul.] Upon this ground Psellus lib. 1. de energia Daemonum, c. 7. holds, That
Angels have bodies, (though he grants them to be as pure, or more pure than Air
is) otherwise he could not apprehend how they should be tormented in Hell; and
it may be upon this ground it was, that the Author fell into the error of the
Arabians, mentioned by him, Sect. 7.

There are as many Hells as Anax agoras conceited Worlds.] I assure my self
that this is false printed, and that instead of Anaxagoras it should be
Anaxarchus; for Anaxagoras is reckoned amongst those Philosophers that
maintained a Unity of the World, but Anaxarchus (according to the opinion of
Epicurus) held there were infinite Worlds. This is he that caused Alexander to
weep by telling him there were infinite Worlds, whereby Alexander it seems was
brought out of opinion of his Geography, who before that time thought there
remained nothing, or not much beyond his Conquests.

It is hard to place those Souls in Hell.] Lactantius is alike charitably
disposed toward those. Non sum equidem tam iniquus ut eos putem divinare
debuisse, ut veritatem per seipsos invenirent (quod fieri ego non posse
confiteor) sed hoc ab eis exigo, quod ratione ipsa praestare potuerunt.
Lactant. de orig. error. c. 3. which is the very same with Sir K. Digbie's
expression in his Observations on this place. I make no doubt at all (says he)
but if any followed in the whole tenor of their lives the dictaments of right
reason, but that their journey was secure to Heaven.

transgressed the Rule of his own Ethics.] And so they did all, as Lactantius
has observed at large. Aristotle is said to have been guilty of great vanity
in his Clothes, of Incontinency, of Unfaithfulness to his Master Alexander,
etc. But it is to wonder in him, if our great Seneca be also guilty, whom truly
notwithstanding St. Jerome would have him inserted into the Catalogue of
Saints, yet I think he as little deserved it, as many of the Heathens who did
not say so well as he did, for I do not think any of them lived worse: to trace
him a little. In the time of the Emperor Claudius we find he was banished for
suspicion of incontinency with Julia the daughter of Germanicus. If it be said
that this proceeded merely from the spite of Messalina, (and that Lipsius did
not complement with him in that kind Apostrophe, Non expetit in te haec culpa,
O Romani nominis and sapientiae magnae Sol. Not. in Tacit.) why then did she
not cause him to be put to death, as well as she did the other, who was her
Husband's Niece? This for certain, whatever his life were, he had paginam
lascivam, as may appear by what he has written, de Speculorum usu, l. 1. Not.
Qu. cap. 16. Which (admitting it may in a Poet, yet) how it should be excused
in a Philosopher I know not. To look upon him in his exile, we find that then
he wrote his Epistle De Consolat. to Polybius, Claudius his creature (as honest
a man as Pallas or Narcissus) and therein he extols him and the Emperor to the
Skies; in which he did grossly prevaricate, and lost much of his reputation, by
seeking a discharge of his Exile by so sordid a means. Upon Claudius his
marriage with Agrippina, he was recalled from Banishment by her means and made
Praetor; then he forgets the Emperor, having no need of him, labors all he
can to depress him, and the hopeful Britannicus, and procured his Pupil Nero to
be adopted and designed Successor, and the Emperor's own Son to be
disinherited; and against the Emperor whom he so much praised when he had need
of him, after his death he writes a scurrillous Libel. In Nero's Court, how
ungratefully does he behave himself toward Agrippina! who although she were a
wicked woman, yet she deserved well of him, and of her Son too, who yet never
was at rest till he had taken away her life, and upon suspicion cast in against
her by this man. Afterward not to mention that he made great haste to grow
rich, which should not be the business of a Philosopher, toward Nero himself,
how well did it become his Philosophy to play the Traitor against him, and to
become a complice in the Conspiracy of Piso? And then as good a Tragedian as he
was, me thinks he does in extremo actu deficere, when he must needs persuade
Paulina, that excellent Lady his wife, to die with him: what should move him to
desire it? it could in his opinion be no advantage to her, for he believed
nothing of the immortality of the Soul; I am not satisfied with the reason of
Tacitus, Ne sibi unice dilectam ad injurias relinqueret, because he discredits
it himself in almost the next words, where he says, Nero bore her no ill will
at all, (and would not suffer her to die) it must surely be then, because he
thought he had not lived long enough (being not above 114 years old, so much he
was) and had not the fortitude to die, unless he might receive some
confirmation in it by her example. Now let any man Judge what a precious Legacy
it is that he bequeaths by his nuncupative Will to his friends in Tacitus.
Conversus ad amicos (says he) quando meritis eorum refer gratiam
prohiberetur, quod unum jam tamen and pulcherrimum habebat, imaginem vitae suae
relinquere testatur. It cannot be denied of him, that he has said very well;
but yet it must as well be affirmed, that his Practice has run counter to his
Theory, to use the Author's phrase.

The Scepticks that affirmed they knew nothing.] The ancient Philosophers are
divided into three sorts, Dogmatici, Academici, Sceptici; the first were those
that delivered their opinions positively; the second left a liberty of
disputing pro and contra; the third declared that there was no knowledge of any
thing, no not of this very proposition, that there is no knowledge, according
to that, -- Nihil sciri siquis putat, id quoque nescit
An sciri possit, quod se nil scire fatetur.


The Duke of Venice that weds himself to the Sea by a Ring of Gold, etc.] The
Duke and Senate yearly on Ascension day use to go in their best attire to the
Haven at Lio, and there by throwing a Ring into the water, do take the Sea as
their spouse. Vid. Hist. Ital. by Will. Thomas Cambro brit. Busbequius reports,
that there is a custom among the Turks, which they took from the Greek Priests,
not much unlike unto this. Cum Graecorum Sacer dotibus mos sit certo veris
tempore aquas consecrando mare clausum veluti reserare, ante quod tempus non
facile se committunt fluctibus; ab ea ceremonia nec Turcae absunt. Busb. Ep. 3.
legate. Tursic.

But the Philosopher that threw his money into the Sea to avoid Avarice, etc.]
This was Apollonius Thyaneus, who threw a great quantity of Gold into the Sea
with these words, Pessundo divitias, ne pessundare ab illis. Polycrates the
Tyrant of Samos cast the best Jewel he had into the Sea, that thereby he might
learn to compose himself against the vicissitude of Fortune.

There go so many circumstances to piece up one good action.] To make an action
to be good, all the causes that concur must be good; but one bad amongst many
good ones, is enough to make it vicious, according to the rule, Bonum ex causa
integra, malum ex partiali.

Strabo's Cloak, and restrain it unto Europe.] It Is Strabonis Tunica in the
Translation, but Chlamydi would do better, which is the proper expression of
the word that Strabo uses: it is not Europe, but the known part of the World
that Strabo resembles to a Cloak, and that is it the Author here alludeth to;
but we have no reason to think that the resemblance of Strabo is very proper.
Vid. Sir Hen. Savil in not. ad Tac. in vita Agricolae.

Those who upon a rigid application of the Law, sentence Solomon unto
damnation, etc. [St. Aug. upon Psalm. 126. and in many other places, holds that
Solomon is damned; Of the same opinion is Lyra, in 2 Reg. c. 7. and Bellarm. 1.
Tom. lib. 1. Controv. c. 5.

THE SECOND PART.
Wonder not at the French for their Frogs, Snails, and Toad-stools.]
Toad-stools are not peculiar to the French; they were a great delicacy among
the Romans, as appears every where in Martial. It was conceived the Emperor
Claudius received his death by Poison, which he took in a Mushroom. Suet. and
Tac.

How among so many millions of faces, there should be none alike.] It is
reported, there have been some so much alike, that they could not be
distinguished; as King Antiochus, and one Antemon, a Plebeian of Syria, were so
much alike, that Laodice, the King's Widow, by pretending this man was the
King, dissembled the death of the King so long, till according to her own mind
a Successor was chosen. Cn. Pompeius, and one Vibius the Orator; C. Plancus,
and Rubrius the Stage Player; Cassius Severus the Orator, and one Mirmello; M.
Messala Censorius, and one Menogenes, were so much alike, that unless it were
by their habit, they could not be distinguished: but this you must take upon
the faith of Pliny, (lib. 7. c. 12.) and Solinus, (cap. 6.) who as this Author
tells elsewhere, are Authors not very infallible.

What a (...) and hot skirmish is between S. and T. in Lucian,] In his
Dialogue, judicium vocalium, where there is a large Oration made to the Vowels,
being Judges, by Sigma against Tau, complaining that Tau has bereaved him of
many words which should begin with Sigma.

Their Tongues are sharper than Actius his Razor.] Actius Navius was chief
Augur, who (as the Story says) admonishing Tarqu. Priscus that he should not
undertake any action of moment, without first consulting the Augur, the King
(showing that he had little faith in his skill) demanded of him whether by the
rules of his skill, what he had conceived in his mind might be done: to whom
when Actius had answered it might be done, he bid him take a Whetstone which he
had in his hand, and cut it in two with a Razor, which accordingly the Augur
did. Livy. And therefore we must conceive it was very sharp. Here the Adage was
crossed, (...), i. e. novacula in cotem. Vid. Erasm. Chiliad.

It is not mere Zeal to Learning, or devotion to the Muses, that wiser Princes
patronize the Arts, etc. but a desire to have their names eternized by the
memory of their Writings.] There is a great Scholar, who took the boldness to
tell a Prince so much. Est enim bonorum principum cum viris eruditis tacita
quaedam naturalisque Societas, ut alteri ab alteris illustrentur, ac dum sibi
mutuo suffragantur, and gloria principibus, and doctis authoritas concilietur.
Politian. Ep. Ludovic. Sfort. quae extat* lib. 11. Ep. ep. 1. And to this
Opinion astipulates a Countryman of our own, whose words are these: Ignotius
esset Lucilius, nisi eum Epistolae Senecae illustrarent. Laudibus Caesareis
plus Virgilius and Varus Lucanusque adjecerunt, quam immensum illud aerarium
quo Vrbem and Orbem spoliavit. Nemo prudentiam Ithaci aut Pelidae vires
agnosceret, nisi eas Homerus divino publicasset ingenio: unde nihil mihi
videtur consultius viro ad gloriam properanti fidelium favore Scriptorum. Joan.
Sarisb. Polycrat. l. 8. c. 14. And that Princes are as much beholding to the
Poets pens as their own Swords, Horace tells Censorinus with great confidence.
Od. 8. l. 4. Non incisa notis etc.

St. Paul that calls the Cretians Liars, does it but indirectly, and upon
quotation of one of their own Poets.] That is, Epimenides; the place is, Tit.
1. v. 12. where Paul uses this verse, taken out of Epimenides.

(...).

It is as bloody a thought in one way, as Nero 's was in another. For by a word
we wound a thousand.] I suppose he alludes to that passage in Sueton. in the
life of Nero, where he relates that a certain person upon a time, spoke in his
hearing these words.

(...). i. e. When I am dead let Earth be mingled with Fire. Whereupon the
Emperor uttered these words, (...), i. e. Yea whilst I live: there by one
word, he expressed a cruel thought, which I think is the thing he meant; this
is more cruel than the wish of Caligula, that the people of Rome had but one
Neck, that he might destroy them all at a blow.

I cannot believe the story of the Italian, etc.] It is reported that a certain
Italian having met with one that had highly provoked him, put a Poniard to his
breast, and unless he would blaspheme God, told him he would kill him; which
the other doing to save his life, the Italian presently killed him, to the
intent he might be damned, having no time of Repentance.

I have no sins that want a Name.] The Author in cap. ult. lib. ult. Pseudodox.
speaking of the Act of carnality exercised by the Egyptian Pollinctors with the
dead carcasses, says we want a name for this, wherein neither Petronius nor
Martial can relieve us; therefore I conceive the Author here means a venereal
sin.

This was the Temper of that Leacher that carnal'd with a Statua.) The Latin
Annotator upon this has these words; Romae refertur de Hispano quodam. But
certainly the Author means the Statue of Venus Gnidia made by Praxiteles, of
which a certain young man became so enamoured, that Pliny relates, Ferunt amore
captum cum delituisset noctu simulachro cohaesisse, ejusque cupiditatis esse
indicem maculum. Lucian also has the story in his Dialog. [ Amores.]

And the constitution of Nero in his Spintrian recreations.] The Author does
not mean the last Nero, but Tiberius the Emperor, whose name was Nero too; of
whom Sueton. Secessu vero Capreensi etiam sellariam excogitavit sedem arcanarum
libidinum, in quam undique conquisiti puellarum and exoletorum greges
monstrosique concubitus repertores, quos spintrias appellabat, triplici serie
connexi invicem incestarent se coram ipso, ut adspectu deficientes libidines
excitaret. Suet. in Tib. 43.

Horace, and show more pride, etc. Movent mihi stomachum Grammatistae quidam,
qui cum duas tenuerint vocabulorum origines ita se ostentant ita venditant, ita
circumferunt jactabundi, ut prae ipsis pro nihilo habendos Philosophos
arbitrentur. Picus Mirand. in Ep. ad HermolBarb, quae extat lib. onon Epist.
Politian.

Garsio quisque duas postquam scit jungere parts.
Sic stat, sic loquitur, velut omnes noverit arts.
I cannot think that Homer pined away upon the Riddle of the Fishermen.] The
History out of Plutarch is thus: Sailing from Thebes to the Island Ion, being
landed and set down upon the shore, there happened certain Fishermen to pass by
him, and he asking them what they had taken, they made him this Enigmatical
answer, That what they had taken, they had left behind them; and what they had
not taken, they had with them: meaning, that because they could take no Fish,
they went to loose themselves; and that all which they had taken, they had
killed, and left behind them; and all which they had not taken, they had with
them in their clothes: and that Homer being struck with a deep sadness because
he could not interpret this, pined away, and at last dyed. Pliny alludes to
this Riddle, in his Ep. to his Friend Fuscus, where giving an account of
spending his time in the Country, he tells him, Venor aliquando, sed non sine
pugillaribus, ut quamvis nihil ceperim, non nihil referam. Plin. Ep. lib. 9.
Ep. 36.

Or that Aristot. -- did ever drown himself upon the flux or reflux of
Euripus.] Laertius reports that Aristotle dyed of a disease at 63 -- years of
age. For this and the last, see the Author in Pseudodox.

Aristotle does but instruct us as Plato did him, to confute himself.] In the
matter of Idea's, Eternity of the World, etc.

There was a Physician long before the Author, that was of the same opinion,
Hippocrates; for which vide Agel. l. 19. Noct. Attic. c. 2. And so of late time
was Paracelsus, who did undertake to prescribe a way for the generation of a
man without coition. Vide Campanel de sensu rerum, in Append. ad cap. 19. l. 4.
Monsieur Montaignes words on this subject, are worth the reading; these they
are Je trouve apres tout, que l'amour n'st autre chose que la faim de cette
jouyssance, and considerant maintesfois ridicule titillation de se plaiser par
cu il nous tient, les absurdes movements, escervelez and estourdis dequoy il
agit Zenon and Cratippus, ceste rage indiscrete, ce visage inflamme de fureur
and de cruante au plus doux effect de l'amour, and puis cette morgue grave
severe and extatique en une action si folle, and que la supreme volupte aye du
trainsy and du plaintiff commer la doleur, je croye qu'au se joue de nous, and
que c'est par industry que nature nous a laisse la plus trouble de nos actions
les plus communes pour nous esgaller par la and apparier les fols and les
sages: and nous and les bestes, le plus contemplatif and prudent homme quand je
l'imagin en cette assiette je le tien pour un affronteur, de fair le prudent
and le contemplatiff, ce sont les pieds du paon qui abbatent son orgueil, nous
mangeous bien and beavous comme les bestes, mais ce ne sont pas actions, qui
empeschent les operations de nostro ame, en celles-la nous gradous nostre
advantage sur else: cettecy met tout autre pensee sans le joug abrutist and
abesiit parson imperieuse authorite taute la Theology and Philosophy, qui est
en Platon and si il ne sen plaint pas, par tout ailleurs vous pouvez garder
quelque decence toutes autres operations souffrent des Regles d' honestete
cettecy ne se peut seulement imaginer que vitieuse ou ridicule trouvezy
pourvoir un proceder sage and discret. Alexander disoit qu'il se cognossoit
principalement mortel par cette action and par le dormir: le sommeil suffoque
and supprime les facultez de nostre ame, la besoigne les absorbe and dissipe de
mesme. Certes c'est une marque non seulement de nostre corruption originelle,
mais ausi de nostre vanite and disformite. D'um cost nature nous y pousse
ayant attache a ce desire la plus noble, utile and plaisante de toutes ses
operations, and la nous laisse d* autre part accusar and fuyr romme insolent
and dishoneste, en rougir and cecommander l' abstinence, etc. Montaign live. 3.
chapit. 5.

That is, that there are none so abandoned to vice, but they have some
sprinklings of virtue. There are scarce any so vicious, but commend virtue in
those that are endued with it, and do some things laudable themselves, as Plin.
says in Panegyric. Machiavel upon Livy, lib. 1. cap. 27. sets down the ensuing
relation as a notable confirmation of this truth. Julius Pontifex, ejus nominis
secundus, anno salutis 1505. Bononiam exercitus duxit, ut Bentivolorum
familiam, quae ejus urbis imperium centum jam annos tenuerat, loco moveret.
Eademque in expeditione etiam Johannem Pagolum, Bagloneum tyrannum Perusinum
sua sede expellere decreverat, ut caeteros item, qui urbes Ecclesiae per vim
tenerent. Ejus rei causa cum ad Perusinam urbem accessisset, and notum jam
omnibus esset quid in animo haberet: tamen impatiens morae, noluit exercitus
expectare, sed inermis quasi urbem ingressus est, in quam Johannes Pagolus
defendendi sui causa, non exiguas copias contraxerat. Is autem eodem furore,
quo res suas administrare solebat, una cum milite, cui custodiam sui corporis
demandarat, sese in pontificis potestatem dededit; a quo abductus est
relictusque alius, qui Ecclesiae nomine urbem gubernaret. Hac ipsa in re
magnopere admirati sunt viri sapientes, qui Pontificem comitabantur, cum
Pontificis ipsius temeritatem, cum adjectum vilemque Johannis Pagoli animum:
nec causam intelligebant, ob quam permotus idem Pagolus, hostem suum inermem
(quod illi cum perpetua nominis sui memoria facere licebat) non subito
oppresserit, and tam pretiosa spolia diripuerit; cum Pontifex urbem ingressus
fuisset, Cardinalibus tantum suis stipatus, qui pretiosissimas quasque suarum
rerum secum habebant. Neque enim credebatur Pagolus a tanto facinore vel sua
bonitate, vel animi conscientia abstinuisse: quod in hominem sceleratum, qui
and propria sorore utebatur, and consobrinos nepotesque dominandi causa e medio
sustulerat hujusmodi pii affectus cadere non viderentur. Cum igitur hac de re
variae essent sapientum virorum sententiae; conclu^erunt tandem id ei
accidisse, quod ita comparatum sit, ut homines neque plane pravi esse queant,
neque perfect boni. Pravi perfect esse nequeant, propterea quod, ubi tale
quoddam scelus est, in quo aliquid magnifici ac generosi insit, id patrare non
audeant. Nam cum Pagolus neque incestum prius horruisset, neque patricidio
abstinuisset: tamen cum oblata esset occasio, pravi quidem sed memorabilis,
atque aeternae memoriae facinoris patrandi, id attentare non ausus fuit, cum id
sine infamia prestare licuisset, quod rei magnitudo omnia priora scelera
obtegere potuisset, and a periculo conservare. Quibus accedit, quod illi
gratulati fuissent etiam quam plurimi, si primis ausus esset Pontificibus
monstrare rationem dominandi; totiusque humanae vitae usum ab illis nimis parvi
pendi.

Poisons contain within themselves their own Antidote.] The Poison of a
Scorpion is not Poison to it self, nor the Poison of a Toad is not Poison to it
self; so that the sucking out of Poison from persons infected by Psylls, (who
are continually nourished with venomous aliment) without any prejudice to
themselves, is the less to be wondered at.

The man without a Navil yet lives in me.] The Latin Annotator has explicated
this by Homo non perfectus, by which it seems he did not comprehend the
Author's meaning; for the Author means Adam, and by a Metonymie original sin;
for the Navil being only of use to attract the aliment in utero materno, and
Adam having no mother, he had no use of a Navil, and therefore it is not to be
conceived he had any; and upon that ground the Author calls him the man without
a Navil.

Our grosser memories have then so little hold of our abstracted
understandings, that they forget the story, and can only relate to our awaked
senses a confused and broken tale of that that has passed.] For the most part
it is so. In regard of the Author's expression of forgetting the story, though
otherwise it be not very pertinent to this place, I shall set down a relation
given by an English Gentleman, of two dreams that he had, wherein he did not
forget the story, but (what is more strange) found his dreams verified. This it
is.

Whilst I lived at Prague, and one night had sit up very late drinking at a
feast, early in the morning the Sun beams glancing on my face, as I lay in my
bed, I dreamed that a shadow passing by told me that my Father was dead; at
which awaking all in a sweat, and affected with this dream, I rose and wrote
the day and hour, and all circumstances thereof in a Paper book, which book
with many other things I put into a Barrel, and sent it from Prague to Stood,
thence to be conveyed into England. And now being at Nurenburgh, a Merchant of
a noble Family well acquainted with me and my friends, arrived there, who told
me my Father dyed some two months ago. I list not to write any lies, but that
which I write, is as true as strange. When I returned into England some four
years after, I would not open the Barrel I sent from Prague, nor look into the
Paper book in which I had written this dream, till I had called my Sisters and
some friends to be witnesses, where my self and they were astonished to see my
written dream answer the very day of my Father's death.

I may lawfully swear that which my Kinsman has heard witnessed by my brother
Henry whilst he lived, that in my youth at Cambridge, I had the like dream of
my Mother's death, where my brother Henry living with me, early in the morning
I dreamed that my Mother passed by with a sad countenance, and told me that she
could not come to my Commencement: I being within five months to proceed Master
of Arts, and she having promised at that time to come to Cambridge. And when I
related this dream to my brother, both of us awaking together in a sweat, he
protested to me that he had dreamed the very same: and when we had not the
least knowledge of our Mothers sickness, neither in our youthful affections
were any whit affected with the strangeness of this dream, yet the next Carrier
brought us word of our Mothers death. Mr. Fiennes Morison in his Itinerary. I
am not over credulous of such relations, but me thinks the circumstance of
publishing it at such a time, when there were those living that might have
disproved it, if it had been false, is a great argument of the truth of it.

I wonder the fancy of Lucan and Seneca did not discover it.] Eor they had both
power from Nero to choose their deaths.

Pontan. in Attic. bellar. (Hist. 22.) Which proceeds from extremity of
melancholy.

Aristot. is too severe, that will not allow us to be truly liberal without
wealth,] Aristot. l. 1. Ethic. c. 8.

This should be the wish of every man, and is of the most wise and knowing. Le
Christien plus humble and plus sage and meux recognoissant que c'est que de lay
se rapporte a son createur de choisir and ordonner ce qu'el luy faqt. Il ne le
supply dautre chose que sa volunte sort faite. Montaign.

FINIS.
OBSERVATIONS UPON RELIGIO MEDICI.

Occasionally Written By Sr. Kenelm Digby, Knight.

The sixth Edition, Corrected and Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for R. Scot, T. Basset, J. Wright, R. Chiswel. 1682.

OBSERVATIONS UPON RELIGIO MEDICI.
To the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Dorset, Baron of Buckhurst, etc.
My Lord,
I Received yesternight, your Lordships of the nineteenth current, wherein you
are pleased to oblige me, not only by extreme gallant Expressions of favor
and kindness, but likewise by taking so far into your care the expending of my
time, during the tediousness of my restraint, as to recommend to my reading a
Book, that had received the honor and safeguard of your approbation; for both
which I most humbly thank your Lordship. And since I cannot in the way of
gratefulness express unto your Lordship as I would, those hearty sentiments I
have of your goodness to me; I will at the last endeavor, in the way of Duty
and Observance, to let you see how the little Needle of my Soul is thoroughly
touched at the great Loadstone of yours, and follows suddenly and strongly,
which way soever you becken it. In this occasion, the Magnetic motion was
impatient to have the Book in my hands, that your Lordship gave so advantageous
a Character of; whereupon I sent presently (as late as it was) to Paul's
Churchyard for this Favorite of yours, Religio Medici: which after a while
found me in a condition fit to receive a Blessing by a visit from any of such
Masterpieces, as you look upon with gracious eyes; for I was newly gotten into
my bed. This good-natured creature I could easily persuade to be my Bedfellow,
and to wake with me, as long as I had any edge to enterain my self with the
delights I sucked from so noble a conversation. And truly (my Lord) I closed
not my eyes, 'till I had enricht my self with, or at least exactly surveyed all
the treasures that are lapped up in the folds of those few sheets. To return
only a general commendation of this curious Piece, or at large to admire the
Author's spirit and smartness, were too perfunctory an account, and too slight
an one, to fo discerning and stedy an eye as yours, after so particular and
encharged a Summons to read heedfully this Discourse. I will therefore presume
to blot a Sheet or two of Paper with my reflections upon sundry passages
through the whole Context of it, as they shall occurrr to my remembrance. Which
now your Lordship knows, this Packet is not so happy as to carry with it any
one expression of my obsequiousness to you. It will be but reasonable, you
should even here give over your further trouble of reading, what my respect
ingageth me to the writing of.

Whose first step is ingenuity and a well-natur'd evenness of Judgment, shall
be sure of applause and fair hopes in all men for the rest of his Journey. And
indeed (my Lord) me thinks this Gentleman sets out excellently poised with
that happy temper; and shows a great deal of Judicious Piety in making a
right use of the blind zeal that Bigots lose themselves in. Yet I cannot
satisfy my Doubts thoroughly, how he makes good his professing to follow the
great Wheel of the Church in matters of Divinity: which surely is the solid
Basis of true Religion: for to do so, without jarring against the Conduct of
the first Mover by Eccentrical and Irregular Motions, obliges one to yield a
very dutiful obedience to the determinations of it, without arrogating to ones
self a controling Ability in liking or misliking the Eaith, Doctrine, and
Constitutions of that Church which one looks upon as their North-star:
Whereas, if I mistake not, this Author approves the Church of England, not
absolutely, but comparatively with other Reformed Churches.

My next Reflection is, concerning what he has sprinkled (most wittily) in
several places concerning the Nature and Immortality of a humane Soul, and the
Condition and State it is in, after the dissolution of the Body. And here give
me leave to observe what our Countryman Roger Bacon did long ago; That those
Students, who busy themselves much with such Notions, as reside wholly to the
fantasy, do hardly ever become Idoneous for abstracted Metaphysical
Speculations; the one having bulkie Foundation of Matter, or of the Accidents
of it, to settle upon, (at the least, with one foot:) The other flying
continually, even to a lessening pitch in the subtle Air. And accordingly, it
has been generally noted, That the exactest Mathematicians, who converse
altogether with Lines, Figures, and other Differences of Quantity, have seldom
proved eminent in Metaphysics, or Speculative Divinity. Nor again, the
Professors of these Sciences in the other Arts. Much less can it be expected
that an excellent Physician, whose fancy is always fraught with the material
Drugs that he prescribes his Apothecary to compound his Medicines of, and
whose hands are inured to the cutting up, and eyes to the inspection of
Anatomized Bodies, should easily, and with success, fly his thoughts at so
towering a Game, as a pure Intellect, a separated and unbodied Soul. Surely this
acute Author 's sharp wit, had he orderly applied his Studies that way, would
have been able to satisfy himself with less labor, and others with more
plenitude, than it has been the Lot of so dull a brain as mine, concerning the
Immortality of the Soul. And yet, I assure you (my Lord) the little Philosophy
that is allowed me for my share, demonstrateth this Proposition to me, as well
as Faith delivers it; which our Physician will not admit in his.

To make good this Assertion here were very unreasonable; since that to do it
exactly (and without exactness, it were not demonstration) requires a total
Survey of the whole Science of Bodies, and of all the operations that we are
conversant with, of a rational Creature; which I having done with all the
succinctness I have been able to explicate so knotty a subject with, has taken
me up in the first draught near two hundred sheets of Paper. I shall therefore
take leave of this Point, with only this Note, That I take the Immortality of
the Soul (under his favor) to be of that nature, that to them only that are
not versed in the ways of proving it by Reason, it is an Article of Faith; to
others, it is an evident Conclusion of demonstrative Science.

And with a like short Note, I shall observe, how if he had traced the Nature
of the Soul from its first principles, he could not have suspected it should
sleep in the Grave, 'till the Resurrection of the Body. Nor would he have
permitted his compassionative Nature to imagine it belonged to God's mercy (as
the Chiliasts did) to change its condition in those that are damned, from pain
to happiness. For where God should have done that, he must have made that
anguished Soul another creature than what it was (as to make fire cease from
being hot, requires to have it become another thing than the Element of fire;
since that to be in such a condition, as makes us understand damned souls
miserable, is a necessary effect of the temper it is in, when it goes out of
the Body, and must necessarily (out of its Nature) remain in, unvariably for
all Eternity; Though, for the Conceptions of the vulgar part of Mankind, (who
are not capable of such abstruse Nations) it be styled (and truly too) the
sentence and punishment of a severe Judge.

I am extreemly pleased with him, when he says, There are not Impossibilities
enough in Religion for an Active Faith: And no whit less, when in Philosophy he
will not be satisfied with such naked terms, as in Schools use to be obtruded,
upon easy minds, when the Master's fingers are not strong enough to untie the
Knots proposed unto them. I confess, when I enquire what Light (to use our
Author's Example) is, I should be as well contented with his silence, as with
his telling me it is Actus perspicui; unless he explicate clearly to me, what
those words mean, which I find very few go about to do. Such meat they swallow
whole, and eject it as entire. But were such things Scientifically and
Methodically declared, they would be of extreme Satisfaction and Delight. And
that work takes up the greatest part of my formerly-mentioned Treatise. For I
endeavor to show by a continued Progress, and not by Leaps, all the Motions of
Nature; and unto them to fit intelligibly the terms used by her best
Secretaries; whereby all wild fantastic Qualities and Moods (introduced for
refuges of Ignorance) are banished from Commerce.

In the next place (my Lord) I shall suspect that our Author has not
pennetrated into the bottom of those Conceptions that deep Scholars have taught
us of Eternity; Me thinks he takes it for an infinite Extension of time, and
a never ending Revolution of continual succession: which is no more like
Eternity, than a gross Body is like a pure Spirit. Nay, such an Infinity of
Revolutions, is demonstrable to be a Contradiction, and impossible. In the
state of Eternity there is no Succession, no Change, no Variety. Souls or
Angels in that condition, do not so much as change a thought. All things,
notions and actions, that ever were, are, or shall be in any creature, are
actually present to such an Intellect. And this (my Lord) I aver, not as
deriving it from Theology, and having recourse to beatifick Vision, to make
good my Tenet, (for so, only glorified creatures should enjoy such immense
knowledge) but out of the principles of Nature and Reason, and from thence
shall demonstrate it to belong to the lowest Soul of the ignorantest wretch
whilst he lived in this world, since damned in Hell. A bold undertaking, you
will say. But I confidently engage my self to it. Upon this occasion occurreth
also a great deal to be said of the nature of Predestination (which by the
short touches our Author gives of it, I doubt he quite mistakes) and how it is
an unalterable Series and Chain of Causes, producing infallible (and in respect
of them, necessary) Effects. But that is too large a Theme to unfold here; too
vast an Ocean to describe in the scant Map of a Letter. And therefore I will
refer that to a fitter opportunity, fearing I have already too much trespassed
upon your Lordship's patience; but that indeed, I hope, you have not had enough
to read thus far.

I am sure, my Lord, that you (who never forgot any thing which deserved a room
in your memory) do remember how we are told, that Abyssus abyssum invocat; so
here our Author, from the Abyss of Predestination, falls into that of the
Trinity of Persons, consistent with the Indivisibility of the Divine Nature*
And out of that (if I be not exceedingly deceived) into a third of mistaking,
when he goes about to illustrate this admirable Mystery by a wild discourse of
a Trinity in our Souls. The dint of Wit is not forcible enough to dissect such
tough Matter; wherein all the obscure glimmering we gain of that inaccessible
Light, comes to us clothed in the dark Weeds of Negations, and therefore
little can we hope to meet with any positive Examples to parallel it withal.

I doubt, he also mistaketh, and imposes upon the several Schools, when he
intimates, that they gainsay this visible worlds being but a Picture or
Shadow of the Invisible and Intellectual: which manner of Philosophizing he
attributes to Hermes Trismegistus, but is every where to be met with in Plato:
and is raised since to a greater height in the Christian Schools.

But I am sure he learned in no good School, nor sucked from any good
Philosophy to give an actual Subsistence and Being to first Matter without a
Form. He that will allow that a Real Existence in Nature is as superficially
tincted in Metaphysics, as another would be in Mathematics, that should allow
the like to a Point, a Line, or a Superficies in Figures; These, in their
strict Notions, are but Negations of further Extension, or but exact
Terminations of that Quantity, which falls under the Consideration of the
Understanding in the present purpose, no real Entities in themselves: so
likewise, the Notions of Matter, Form, Act, Power, Existence, and the like,
that are with Truth, considered by the Understanding, and have there each of
them a distinct Entity, are nevertheless no where by themselves in Nature. They
are terms which we must use in the Negotiations of our thoughts, if we will
discourse consequently, and conclude knowingly. But then again, we must be very
wary of attributing to things in their own Natures such Entities as we create
in our Understandings, when we make Pictures of them there; for there every
different consideration, arising out of the different impression which the same
thing makes upon us, has a distinct Being by it self. Whereas in the thing
there is but one single Unity, that shows (as it were in a Glass, at several
positions) those various faces in our understanding. In a word, all these words
are but artificial terms, not real things. And the not right understanding of
them; is the dangerousest Rock that Scholars suffer shipwreck against.

I go on with our Physician's Contemplations. Upon every occasion he shows
strong parts, and a vigorous brain. His wishes and aims, and what he points
at, speak him owner of a noble and a generous heart. He has reason to wish
that Aristotle had been as accurate in examining the Causes, Nature and
Affections of the great Universe he busied himself about, as his Patriarch
Galen has been in the like considerations upon this little World, Man's Body
in that admirable Work of his De Vsu Partium. But no great humane thing was
ever born and perfected at once. It may satisfy us, if one in our age,
builds that magnificent Structure upon the others foundations; and
especially, if where he finds any of them unsound, he eradicateth those, and
sixeth new unquestionable ones in their room: But so, as they still, in gross,
keep a proportion, and bear a Harmony with the other great Work. This has now,
(even now) our learned Countryman done; The knowing Mr. White, (whose name, I
believe your Lordship has met with all, in his excellent Book, De Mundo* newly
printed at Paris, where he now resideth, and is admired by the World of
Lettered men there, as the Prodigy of these latter times. Indeed his three
Dialogues upon that Subject, (if I am able to judge any thing) are full of the
profoundest Learning I ever yet met withal. And I believe, who has well read
and digested them, will persuade himself, there is no truth so abstruse, nor
hitherto conceived out of our reach, but man's wit may raise Engines to scale
and conquer. I assure my self, when our Author has studied him thoroughly, he
will not lament so loud for Aristotle's mutilated and defective Philosophy, as
in Boccaline Caesar Caporali does for the loss of Livies ship-wracked Decads.

That Logic which he quarrelleth at, for calling a Toad or Serpent ugly, will
in the end agree with his; for no body ever took them to be so, in respect of
the Universe, (in which regard he desendeth their Regularity and Symmetry) but
only as they have relation to us.

But I cannot so easily agree with him, where he affirms, that Devils or
other Spirits in the Intellectual World, have no exact Ephemerides, wherein
they may read beforehand the Stories of fortuite Accidents. For I believe,
that all Causes are so immediately chained to their Effects, as if a perfect
knowing Nature get hold but of one link, it will drive the entire Series, or
Pedigree of the whole to its utmost end; (as I think I have proved in my
forenamed Treatise) so that in truth there is no Fortuitness or Contingency of
things, in respect of themselves, but only in respect of us, that are ignorant
of their certain and necessary Causes.

Now a little Series or Chain and Complex of all outward Circumstances, (whose
highest link, Poets say prettily is fastened to Jupiter's Chair, and the lowest
is riveted to every Individual on Earth) steered and levelled by God Almighty;
at the first setting out of the first Mover; I conceive; to be that Divine
Providence and Mercy, which (to use our Author's own Example) gives a thriving
Genius to the Hollanders, and the like: And not any secret, invisible, mystical
Blessing, that falls not under the search or cognizance of a prudent
indagation.

I must needs approve our Authors Aequanimity, and I may as justly say his
Magnanimity, in being contented so cheerfully (as he says) to shake hands with
the fading Goods of Fortune, and be deprived of the joys of her most precious
blessings; so that he may in recompense possess in ample measure the true ones
of the mind; like Epictetus, that Master of moral Wisdom and Piety, who taxes
them of high injustice, that repine at Gods Distribution of his Blessings, when
he puts not into their share of goods, such things as they use no Industry
or Means to purchase. For why should that man, who above all things esteems
his own freedom, and who to enjoy that, sequestreth himself from commerce with
the vulgar of mankind; take it ill of his Stars, if such Preferments, Honors,
and Applauses meet not him, as are painfully gained, after long and tedious
Services of Princes, and brittle Dependances of humorous Favorites, and supple
Compliances with all sorts of Natures? As for what he says of Astrology; I do
not conceive, that wise men reject it so much for being repugnant to Divinity
(which he reconcileth well enough) as for having no solid Rules or ground in
Nature. To rely too far upon that vain Art, I judge to be rather folly than
impiety, unless in our censure we look to the first Origin of it; which
favors of the Idolatry of those Heathens, that worshipping the Stars and
heavenly Bodies for Deities, did in a superstitious Devotion, attribute unto
them the Causality of all Effects beneath them. And for ought I know, the
belief of solid Orbs in the Heavens, and their regularly-irregular Motions,
sprung from the same root. And a like Inanity, I should suspect in Chiromancy,
as well as Astrology, (especially, in particular contingent Effects) however
our Author, and no less a man than Aristotle, seem to attribute somewhat more
to that conjectural Art of Lines.

I should much doubt (though our Author shows himself of another mind) that
Bernardinus Ochin^s grew at the last to be a mere Atheist: When after having
been first the Institutor and Patriarch of the Capucine-Order (so violent was
his Zeal then, as no former religious Institution, This Story I have but upon
relation, yet of a very good hand.
though never so rigorous, was strict enough for him) he from thence fell to be
first an Heretic, then a Jew, and after a while became a Turk; and at the last
wrote a furious Invective against those, whom he called the three Grand
Impostors of the World, among whom he ranked our Savior Christ, as well as
Moses and Mahomet.

I doubt he mistakes in his Chronology, or the Printer in the name, when he
makes Ptolomy condemn the Alchoran.

He needs not be so scrupulous, as he seems to be in averring down-rightly,
That God cannot do contradictory things, (though peradventure it is not amiss
to sweeten the manner of the expression, and the sound of the words) for who
understands the nature of contradiction, will find Nonentity in one of the
terms, which of God were impiety not to deny peremptorily. For he being in his
proper Nature Self-Entity, all Being must immediately flow from him, and all
Not-Being be totally excluded from that Efflux. Now for the recalling of Time
past, which the Angels posed Esdras withal; there is no contradiction in that,
as is evident to them that know the essence of Time. For it is but putting
again, all things that had motion, into the same state they were in, at that
moment unto which time was to be reduced back, and from thence letting it
travel on again by the same motion, and upon the same wheels it rouled upon
before. And therefore God could do this admirable Work, though neither Esdras,
nor all the power of Creatures together could do it: And consequently it cannot
in this Question be said, that he posed Mortality with what himself was not
able to perform.

I acknowledge ingenuously, our Physician's experience has the advantage of my
Philosophy, in knowing there are Witches. Yet I am sure, I have no temptation
to doubt of the Deity; nor have any unsatisfaction in believing there are
Spirits. I do not see such a necessary conjunction between them, as that the
supposition of the one must needs infer the other. Neither do I deny there are
Witches. I only reserve my Assent, till I meet with stronger motives to carry
it. And I confess I doubt as much of the efficacy of those Magical Rules, he
speaks of, as also of the finding out of Mysteries by the courteous
Revelation of Spirits.

I doubt his Discourse of an Universal Spirit, is but a wild Fancy: and that in
the marshalling of it, he mistaketh the Hermetical Philosophers. And surely, it
is a weak argument, from a common nature, that subsisteth only in our
understanding (out of which it has no being at all) to infer by parity, an
actual Subsistence, or the like, in reality of nature (of which kind of
miscarriage in men's discoursings, I have spoken before.) And upon this
occasion, I do not see how seasonably he falls of a sudden from natural
Speculations, to a Moral Contemplation of Gods Spirit working in us. In which
also I would enquire (especially upon his sudden Poetical rapture) whether the
Solidity of the Judgment be not outweighed by the airiness of the Fancy.
Assuredly one cannot err in taking this Author for a very fine ingenious
Gentleman: But for how deep a Scholar, I leave unto them to judge, that are
abler than I am.

If he had applied himself with earnest study, and upon right grounds, to
search out the Nature of pure Intellects; I doubt not but his great Parts would
have argued more efficaciously, than he does against those, that between Men
and Angels, put only Porphyrie' difference of Mortality and Immortality. And he
would have dived further into the tenor of their Intellectual Operations; in
which there is no Succession, nor ratiocinative Discourse; for in the very
first instant of their Creation, they actually knew all that they were capable
of knowing, and they are acquainted even with all free thoughts, past, present,
and to come; for they see them in their causes, and they see them all together
at one instant; as I have in my forementioned Treatise proved at large: And I
think I have already touched thus much once before in this Letter.

I am tempted here to say a great deal concerning Light, by his taking it to be
a bare Quality. For in Physics, no Speculation is more useful, or reaches
further. But to set down such Phaenomena's of it, as I have observed, and from
whence I evidently collect the Nature of it, were too large a Theme for this
place: When your Lordship pleases, I shall show you another more orderly
Discourse upon that Subject; wherein I have sufficiently proved it to be a
solid Substance and Body.

In his proceeding to collect an Intellectual World, and in his discoursing
upon the place and habitation of Angels; as also in his consideration of the
activity of glorified Eyes, which shall be in the state of rest, whereas motion
is required to seeing; and in his subtle Speculation upon two Bodies, placed in
the Vacuity, beyond the utmost all-enclosing Superficie of Heaven (which
implies a Contradiction in Nature) methinks I hear Apelles cry out, Ne suitor
ultra Crepidam: or rather, it puts me in mind of one of the Titles in
Pantagruel's Library, (which he expresses himself conversant in) namely,
Quaestio subtilissima, utrum Chimaera in vacuo bombinans possit comedere
Secundas intentiones; with which short Note I will leave these Considerations;
in which (if time, and other circumstances allowed it) matter would spring up
of excellent Learning.

When our Author shall have read Mr. Whites Dialogue of the World, he will no
longer be of the Opinion, That the Unity of the World is a conclusion of Faith:
For it is there demonstrated by Reason.

Here the thread of the Discourse inviteth me to say a great deal of the
Production or Creation of Man's Soul. But it is too tedious, and too knotty a
piece for a Letter. Now it shall suffice to note, that it is not Ex traduce,
and yet has a strange kind of near dependence of the Body, which is, as it
were, Gods instrument to create it by. This, thus said, or rather tumbled out,
may seem harsh. But had your Lordship leisure to peruse what I have written at
full upon this Point, I doubt not but it would appear plausible enough to you.

I cannot agree with him, when he seems to impute Inconvenience to long Life,
and that length of time does rather impair, than improve us: For surely, if we
will follow the course of Nature, and of Reason, it is a mighty great blessing;
were it but in this regard, that it gives time leave to vent and boil away the
unquietnesses and turbulencies that follow our passions, and to wean our selves
gently from carnal affections, and at the last to drop with ease and
willingness, like ripe fruit from the Tree; as I remember Plotinus finely
discourses in one of his Eneads. For when before the Season, it is plucked off
with violent hands, or shaken down by rude and boisterous winds, it carries
along with it an indigested raw taste of the Wood, and has an unpleasant
aigerness it its juice, that makes it unfit for use, till long time has
mellowed it: And peradventure it may be so backward, as in stead of ripening,
it may grow rotten in the very Center. In like manner, Souls that go out of
their Bodies with affection to those Objects they leave behind them, (which
usually is as long as they can relish them) do retain still even in their
Separation, a by as, and a languishing toward them: which is the Reason why
such terrene Souls appear oftenest in Coemeteries and Charnel-houses, and not
that moral one, which our Author gives. For Life, which is union with the
body, being that which carnal souls have straightest affection to, and that
they are loathest to be separated from; their unquiet Spirit, which can never
(naturally) lose the impressions it had wrought in it at the time of its
driving out, lingereth perpetually after that dear Consort of his. The
impossibility cannot cure them of their impotent desires; they would fain be
alive again; -- Iterumque ad tarda revierti Corpora. Quae lucis miseris tam
dira cupido.

And to this cause peradventure may be reduced the strange effect, which is
frequently seen in England, When at the approach of the Murderer, the slain
body suddenly bleedeth afresh. For certainly, the Souls of them that are
treacherously murdered by surprise, use to leave their bodies with extreme
unwillingness, and with vehement indignation against them, that force them to
so unprovided and abhorred a passage. That Soul then, to wreak its evil talent
against the hated Murderer, and to draw a just and desired revenge upon his
head, would do all it can to manifest the author of the fact. To speak, it
cannot, for in it self it wants Organs of voice; and those it is parted from,
are now grown too heavy, and are too benumbed for it to give motion unto. Yet
some change it desires to make in the body, which it has so vehement
inclinations to, and therefore is the aptest for it to work upon: It must then
endeavor to cause a motion in the subtilest and most fluid parts (and
consequently, the most moveable ones) of it. This can be nothing but the Blood,
which then being violently moved, must needs gush out at those places where it
finds issues.

Our Author cannot believe, that the World will perish upon the ruins of its
own principles. But Mr. White has demonstrated the end of it upon natural
Reason. And though the precise time for that general Destruction be
inscrutable; yet he learnedly shows an ingenious Rule, whereby to measure in
some sort the duration of it, without being branded (as our Author threatens)
with convincible and Statute-madness, or with impiety. And whereas he will have
the work of this last great Day (the Summer up of all past days) to imply
annihilation and thereupon interesseth God only in it* I must beg leave to
contradict him, namely in this Point; and to affirm, that the letting loose
then of the activest Element, to destroy this face of the World, will but beget
a change in it; and that no annihilation can proceed from God Almighty: For his
Essence being (as I said before) self-existence, it is more impossible that
Not-being should flow from him, than that cold should flow immediately from
fire, or darkness from the actual presence of light.

I must needs acknowledge, that where he ballanceth Life and Death against one
another, and considers that the latter is to be a Kind of nothing for a
moment, to become a pure Spirit within one instant, and what follows of this
strong thought, is extreme handsomely said, and argues very gallant and
generous Resolutions in him.

To exemplify the Immortality of the Soul, he needs not have recourse to the
Philosophers-stone. His own store furnishes him with a most pregnant one of
reviving a Plant (the same numerical Plant) out of his own ashes. But under his
favor, I believe his experiment will fail, if under the notion of the same, he
comprehends all the Accidents that first accompanied that Plant; for since in
the ashes there remains only the fixed Salt, I am very confident, that all
the Color, and much of the Odor and Taste of it, is flown away with the
Volatile Salt.

What should I say of his making so particular a Narration of personal things*
and private thoughts of his own; the knowledge whereof cannot much conduce to
any man's betterment? (which I make account is the chief end of his writing this
Discourse.) As where he speaks of the soundness of his Body, of the course of
his Diet, of the coolness of his Blood at the Summer-Solstice of his age, of
his neglect of an Epitaph; how long he has lived, or may live; what Popes,
Emperors, Kings, Grand-Seigniors, he has been Contemporary unto, and the
like: Would it not be thought that he has a special good opinion of himself,
(and indeed he has reason) when he makes such great Princes the Landmarks in
the Chronology of himself? Surely, if he were to write by retale the
particulars of his own Story and Life, it would be a notable Romance, since he
tells us in one total Sum, it is a continued Miracle of thirty years. Though
he creeps gently upon us at the first, yet he grows a Giant, an Atlas (to
use his own expression) at the last. But I will not censure him, as he that
made Notes upon Balsac's Letters, and was angry with him for vexing his Readers
with Stories of his Cholicks, and voiding of Gravel. I leave this kind of
expressions, without looking further into them.

In the next place (my Lord) I shall take occasion from our Author's setting so
main a difference between moral Honesty and Virtue, or being virtuous (to use
his own phrase) out of an inbred loyalty to Virtue; and on the other side,
being virtuous for a rewards sake; to discourse a little concerning Virtue in
this life, and the effects of it afterward. Truly (my Lord) however he
seems to prefer this later, I cannot but value the other much before it, if
we regard the nobleness and heroickness of the nature and mind from whence they
both proceed* And if we consider the Journeys end, to which each of them
carries us, I am confident the first yields nothing to the second, but
indeed both meet in the period of Beatitude. To clear this point (which is very
well worth the wisest man's seriousest thought) we must consider, what it is
that brings us to this excellent State, to be happy in the other World of
Eternity and Immutability. It is agreed on all hands to be God's Grace and
Favor to us: But all do not agree by what steps his Grace produces this
effect. Herein I shall not trouble your Lordship with a long Discourse, how
that Grace works in us, (which yet I will in a word touch anon, that you may
conceive what I understand Grace to be) but will suppose it to have wrought its
effect in us in this life, and from thence examine what hinges they are that
turn us over to Beatitude and Glory in the next: Some consider God as a Judge,
that rewards or punishes men, according as they co-operated with, or
repugned to, the Grace he gave. That according as their actions please or
displease him, he is well affected toward them, or angry with them; and
accordingly makes them, to the purpose, and very home, feel the effects of his
kindness or indignation. Others that fly a higher pitch, and are so happy, --
Vt rerum poterint cognoscere causas, do conceive that Beatitude and misery in
the other life, are effects that necessarily and orderly flow out of the Nature
of those Causes that begot them in this life, without engaging God Almighty to
give a sentence, and act the part of a Judge, according to the state of our
Cause, as it shall appear upon the Accusations and pleadings at his great Bar.
Much of which manner of expression, is Metaphorical; and rather adapted to
contain vulgar minds in their Duties (that are awed with the thought of a
severe Judge, sifting every minute-action of theirs) than such as we must
conceive every circumstance to pass so in reality, as the literal sound of the
words seems to infer in ordinary construction: and yet all that is true too, in
its genuine sense.) But, my Lord, these more penetrating men, and that, I
conceive, are virtuous upon higher and stronger Motives (for they truly and
solidly know, why they are so) do consider, that what impressions are once made
in the spiritual Substance of a Soul, and what affections it has once
contracted, do ever remain in it, till a contrary and diametrically
contradicting judgment and affection, do obliterate it, and expel it thence.
This is the reason why Contrition, Sorrow, and Hatred for Sins past, is
encharged us. If then the Soul do go out of the Body with impressions and
affections to the Objects and pleasures of this life, it continually lingreth
after them; and as Virgil (learnedly, as well as wittily) says, -- Quae gratia
currum,
Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes
Pascere equos, eadem sequitur tellure repostos.
But that being a State wherein those Objects neither are, nor can be enjoyed,
it must needs follow that such a Soul must be in an exceeding anguish, sorrow
and affliction, for being deprived of them; and for want of that it so much
prizeth, will neglect all other contentments it might have, as not having a
relish or taste molded and prepared to the savouring of them; but like
feavorish tongues, that when they are even scorched with heat, take no delight
in the pleasingest liquors, but the sweetest drinks seem bitter to them, by
reason of their overflowing Gall: So they even hate whatsoever good is in their
power, and thus pine away a long Eternity. In which the sharpness and activity
of their pain, anguish, and sad condition, is to be measured by the
sensibleness of their Natures: which being then spiritual, is in a manner
infinitely more than any torment that in this life can be inflicted upon a dull
gross body. To this add, the vexation it must be to them, to see how
inestimable and infinite a good they have lost; and lost merely by their own
fault, and for momentary trifles, and childrens play; and that it was so easy
for them to have gained it, had they remained but in their right senses, and
governed themselves according unto Reason. And then judge in what a tortured
condition they must be, of remorse and execrating themselves for their most
resupine and senseless madness. But if on the other side, a Soul be released out
of this Prison of clay and flesh, with affections settled upon Intellectual
goods, as Truth, knowledge, and the like; and that it be grown to an irksome
dislike of the flat pleasures of this World; and look upon carnal and sensual
Objects with a disdainful eye, as discerning the contemptible Inanity in them,
that is set off only by their painted outside; and above all, that it has a
longing desire to be in the Society of that supereminent Cause of Causes, in
which they know are heaped up the Treasurers of all Beauty, Knowledge, Truth,
Delight, and good whatsoever; and therefore are impatient at the Delay, and
reckon all their Absence from him as a tedious Banishment; and in that regard
hate their Life and Body, as Cause of this Divorce: such a Soul, I say, must
necessarily, by reason of the temper it is wrought into, enjoy immediately at
the instant of the Bodies dissolution, and its liberty, more Contentment, more
Joy, more true Happiness, than it is possible for a heart of flesh to have
scarce any scantling of, much less to comprehend.

For immense Knowledge is natural to it, as I have touched before. Truth, which
is the adequated and satisfying Object of the Understanding; is there displayed
in her own Colors, or rather without any.

And that which is the Crown of all, and in respect of which all the rest is
nothing; that infinite Entity, which above all things this Soul thirsts to be
united unto, cannot for his own Goodness sake, deny his Embraces to so
affectionate a Creature, and to such an enflamed Love. If he should, then were
that Soul, for being the best, and for loving him most, condemned to be the
unhappiest. For what Joy could she have in any thing, were she barrred from
what she so infinitely loves? But since the Nature of superior and excellent
things is to shower down their propitious Influences, wheresoever there is a
Capacity of receiving them, and no Obstacle to keep them out (like the Sun that
illuminateth the whole Air, if no Cloud, or solid opacous Body intervene) it
follows clearly, that this infinite Sun of Justice, this immense Ocean of
Goodness, cannot choose but inviron with his Beams, and replenish even beyond
satiety with his delightsome Waters, a soul so prepared and tempered to receive
them.

No (my Lord) to make use of this Discourse, and apply it to what begot it; be
pleased to determine, which way will deliver us evenest and smoothest to this
happy end of our Journey: To be virtuous for hope of a Reward, and through fear
of Punishment; or to be so out of a natural and inward affection to Virtue, for
Virtues and Reasons sake? Surely one in this latter condition, not only does
those things which will bring him to Beatitude; but he is so secured, in a
manner, under an Armor of Proof, that he is almost invulnerable; he can scarce
miscarry, he has not so much as an inclination to work contrarily; the
Alluring Baits of this World tempt him not; he disliketh, he hates, even his
necessarry Commerce with them whilst he lives. On the other side, the Hireling
that steereth his course by his Reward and Punishment, does well, I confess;
but he does it with Reluctance; he carries the Ark, God's Image, his Soul,
safely home, it is true, but he loweth pitifully after his Calves, that he
leaves behind him among the Philistines. In a word, he is virtuous; but if he
might safely, he would do vicious things (And hence be the ground in Nature, if
so I might say, of our Purgatory.) Methinks two such minds may not unfitly be
compared to two Maids, whereof one has a little sprinkling of the Green
sickness, and has more mind to Ashes, Chalk or Leather, than meats of solid
and good nourishment, but forbeareth them, knowing the languishing condition of
Health it will bring her to: But the other having a ruddy, vigorous and perfect
Constitution, and enjoying a complete, entire Encrasie, delights in no food but
of good nouriture, and loathes the other Delights. Her Health is discovered in
her looks, and she is secure from any danger of that Malady, whereas the other
for all her good Diet, bears in her Complexion some sickly Testimony of her
depraved Appetite; and if she be not very wary, she is in danger of a relapse.

It falls fit in this place to examine our Authors apprehension of the end of
such honest Worthies and Philosophers (as he calls them) that died before
Christ his Incarnation, Whether any of them could be saved, or no? Truly, my
Lord, I make no doubt at all, but if any followed in the whole Tenor of their
lives, the Dictamens of right Reason, but that their journey was secure to
Heaven. Out of the former Discourse appears what temper of mind is necessary
to get thither. And, that Reason would dictate such a temper to a perfectly
judicious man, (though but in the state of Nature) as the best and most
rational for him, I make no doubt at all. But it is most true, they are
exceeding few (if any) in whom Reason works clearly, and is not overswayed by
Passion and terrene Affections; they are few that can discern what is
reasonable to be done in every Circumstance. -- Pauci, quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus,
Diis geniti, potuere. --
And fewer, that knowing what is best, can win of themselves to do accordingly;
( Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor, being most men's cases) so that after
all that can be expected at the hands of Nature and Reason in their best Habit,
since the lapse of them, we may conclude it would have been a most difficult
thing for any man, and a most impossible one for mankind, to attain unto
Beatitude, if Christ had not come to teach, and by his example to show us the
way.

And this was the Reason of his Incarnation, teaching Life and Death: For being
God, we could not doubt his Veracity, when he tolds us news of the other world;
having all things in his Power, and yet enjoying none of the Delights of this
Life, no man should stick at foregoing them, since his Example shows all men,
that such a course is best; whereas few are capable of the Reason of it: And
for his last Act, dying in such an afflicted manner; he taught us how the
securest way to step immediately into Perfect Happiness, is to be crucified to
all the desires, Delights and Contentments of this World.

But to come back to our Physician: Truly (my Lord) I must needs pay him, as a
due, the acknowledging his pious Discourses to be Excellent and Pathetical
ones, containing worthy Motives, to incite one to Virtue, and to deter one from
Vice; thereby to gain Heaven, and to avoid Hell. Assuredly he is owner of a
solid Head, and of a strong generous Heart. Where he employeth his thoughts
upon such things, as resort to no higher, or more abstruse Principles, than
such as occur in ordinary Conversation with the World, or in the common Tract
of Study and Learning; I know no man would say better. But when he meets with
such difficulties as his next, concerning the Resurrection of the Body,
(wherein after deep Meditation, upon the most abstracted Principles and
Speculations of the Metaphysics, one has much ado to solve the appearing
Contradictions in Nature) There, I do not at all wonder, he should tread a
little awry, and go astray in the dark: for I conceive his course of life has
not permitted him to allow much time unto the unwinding of such entangled and
abstracted Subtleties. But if it had, I believe his Natural parts are such, as
he might have kept the Chair from most men I know: For even where he roveth
widest, it is with so much wit and sharpness, as puts me in mind of a great
man's Censure upon Joseph Scaliger's Cyclometrica, (a matter he was not well
versed in) That he had rather err so ingeniously as he did, than hit upon Truth
in that heavy manner, as the Jesuit his Antagonist stuffeth his Books. Most
assuredly his wit and smartness in this Discourse, is of the finest Standard,
and his insight into severer Learning, will appear as piercing unto such as use
not strictly the Touchstone and the Test, to examine every piece of the
glittering Coin, he pays his Reader with. But to come to the Resurrection.
Methinks it is but a gross Conception, to think that every Atome of the present
individual Matter of a Body; every grain of Ashes of a burned Cadaver,
scattered by the Wind throughout the World, and after numerous Variations,
changed peradventure into the Body of another man, should at the sounding of
the last Trumpet be raked together again from all the corners of the Earth, and
be made up anew into the same Body it was before of the first Man. Yet if we
will be Christians, and rely upon God's Promises, we must believe that we shall
rise again with the same Body that walked about, did eat, drink, and live here
on Earth; and that we shall see our Savior and Redeemer, with the same, the
very same eyes, wherewith we now look upon the fading Glories of this
comtemptible World.

How shall these seeming Contrarieties be reconciled? If the latter be true,
why should not the former be admitted? To explicate this Riddle the better,
give me leave to ask your Lordship, if your Lordship, if you now see the
Cannons, the Ensigns, the Arms, and other Martial Preparations at Oxford, with
the same Eyes, wherewith many years agone you looked upon Porphyrie's and
Aristotle's Leases there? I doubt not but you will answer me, Assuredly with
the very same. Is that Noble and Graceful Person of yours, that begets both
Delight and Reverence in every one that looks upon it? Is that Body of yours,
that now is grown to such comely and full Dimensions, as Nature can give her
none more advantageous; the same Person, the same Body, which your Virtuous and
Excellent Mother bore nine Months in her Chaste and Honored Womb, and that your
Nurse gave suck unto? Most certainly it is the same. And yet if you consider it
well, it cannot be doubted, but that sublunary Matter, being in a perpetual
flux, and in bodies which have internal Principles of Heat and Motion, much
continually transpiring out to make room for the supply of new Aliment; at the
length, in long process of time, all is so changed, as that Ship at Athens may
as well be called the same Ship that was there two hundred years before, and
whereof (be reason of the continual reparations) not one foot of the Timber is
remaining in her that builded her at the first, as this Body now can be called
the same it was forty years agone, unless some higher consideration keep up the
Identity of it. Now what that is, let us examine, and whether or no it will
reach to our difficulty of the Resurrection. Let us consider then, how that
which gives the Numerical Individuation to a Body, is the Substantial Form. As
long as that remains the same, though the Matter be in a continual Flux and
Motion, yet the Thing is still the same. There is not one drop of the same
Water in the Thames, that ran down by White Hall yesternight; yet no man will
deny, but that is the same River that was in Queen Elizabeth's time, as long as
it is supplied from the same Common Stock, the Sea. Though this Example
reaches not home, it illustrateth the thing. If then the Form remain
absolutely the same after separation from the Matter, that it was in the
Matter, (which can happen only to Forms, that subsist by themselves, as humane
Souls) it follows then, That whenever it is united to Matter again, (all
Matter coming out of the same Common Magazine) it makes again the same Man,
with the same Eyes, and all the same Limbs that were formerly. Nay, he is
composed of the same Individual Matter; for it has the same Distinguisher and
Individuator, to wit, the same Form or Soul. Matter considered singly by it
self, has no Distinction: All Matter is in it self the same; we must fancy it,
as we do the indigested Chaos; it is a uniformly wide Ocean. Particularize a
few drops of the Sea, by filling a Glass-full of them, then that Glass-full is
distinguished from all the rest of the watery Bulk: But return back those few
drops to from whence they were taken, and the Glass-full that even now had an
Individuation by it self, loses that, and grows one and the same with the
other main Stock: Yet if you fill your Glass again, wheresoever you take it up,
so it be of the same Uniform Bulk of Water you had before, it is the same
Glass-full of Water that you had. But as I said before, this Example fitteth
entirely, no more than the other did. In such abstracted speculations, where we
must consider Matter without Form (which has no actual Being) we must not
expect adequated Examples in Nature. But enough is said to make a Speculative
man see, that if God should join the Soul of a lately dead man, (even whilst
his dead Corpse should lie entire in his winding sheet here) unto a Body made
of Earth, taken from some Mountain in America; it were most true and certain,
that the Body he should then lie by, were the same Identical Body he lived with
before his Death, and late Resurrection. It is evident, that Sameness,
Thisness, and Thatness, belongs not to Matter by it self, (for a general
Indifference runs through it all) but only as it is distinguished and
individuated by the Form. Which, in our Case, whenever the same Soul does, it
must be understood always to be the same Matter and Body.

This Point thus passed over, I may piece to it what our Author says, of a
Magazine of Subsistent Forms, residing first in the Chaos, and hereafter (when
the World shall have been destroyed by fire) in the general heap of Ashes: out
of which God's Voice did, and shall draw them out, and clothe them with Matter.
This Language were handsome for a Poet, or Rhetorician to speak; but in a
Philosopher, that should ratiocinate strictly and rigorously, I cannot admit
it. For certainly, there are no Subsistent Forms of Corporeal things;
(excepting the Soul of man, which besides being an Informing Form, has another
particular Consideration belonging to it, too long to speak of here.) But
whenever that Compound is destroyed, the Form perishes with the whole. And
for the Natural Production of Corporeal things, I conceive it to be wrought out
by the Action and Passion of the Elements among themselves; which introducing
new Tempers and Dispositions, into the Bodies where these Conflicts pass; new
Forms succeed old ones, when the Dispositions are raised to such a height, as
can no longer consist with the preceding Form, and are in the immediate Degree
to fit the succeeding one, which they usher in. The Mystery of all, which I
have at large unfolded in my abovementioned Treatise of the Immortality of the
Soul.

I shall say no more to the first Part of our Physician's Discourse after I
have observed, how his Consequence is no good one; where he infers, That if
the Devils fore-knew, who would be Damned or Saved, it would save them the
Labor, and end their work of tempting Mankind to mischief and evil. For
whatsoever their Moral Design and Success be in it, their Nature impelleth them
to be always doing it. For on the one s^de, it is Active in the highest Degree,
(as being pure Acts, that is, Spirits,) so on the other side, they are Malign
in as great an Excess: By the one they must be always working, wheresoever they
may work, (like Water in a Vessel full of holes, that will run out of every one
of them which is not stopped:) By the other, their whole Work must be malicious
and mischievous. Joining then both these Qualities together, it is evident,
they will always be tempting mankind, though they know they shall be frustrate
of their Moral End.

But were it not time that I made an end? Yes, it is more than time. And
therefore having once passed the limit that confined what was becoming, the
next step carried me into the Ocean of Error; which being Infinite, and
therefore more or less bearing no proportion in it; I will proceed a little
further, to take a short Survey of his Second Part, and hope for as easy
Pardon after this Addition, to my sudden and indigested Remarks, as if I had
enclosed them up now.

Methinks, he begins with somewhat an affected Discourse, to prove his
natural Inclination to Charity; which Virtue is the intended Theme of all the
Remainder of his Discourse. And I doubt he mistaketh the lowest Orb or Lembe
of that high Seraphick Virtue, for the top and perfection of it; and makes a
kind of humane Compassion to be Divine Charity. He will have it to be a general
way of doing good: It is true, he adds then, for God's sake; but he allayeth
that again, with saying, he will have that good done, as by Obedience, and to
accomplish God's will; and looks at the Effects it works upon our Souls,
but in a narrow compass; like one in the vulgar throng, that considers God as
a Judge, and as a Rewarder or a Punisher. Whereas perfect Charity, is that
vehement Love of God for his own sake, for his Goodness, for his Beauty, for
his Excellency, that carries all the motions of our Soul directly and
violently to Him; and makes a man disdain, or rather hate all obstacles that
may retard his journey to Him. And that Face of it that looks toward Mankind
with whom we live, and warmeth us to do others good, is but like the
overflowing of the main Stream, that swelling above its Banks runs over in a
multitude of little channels.

I am not satisfied, that in the Likeness which he puts between God and Man,
he makes the difference between them, to be but such as between two Creatures
that resemble one another. For between these, there is some proportion; but
between the others, none at all. In the examining of which Discourse, wherein
the Author observes, that no two Faces are ever seen to be perfectly alike;
nay, no two Pictures of the same Face, were exactly made so; I could take
occasion to insert a subtle and delightful Demonstration of Mr. Whites, wherein
he shows, how it is impossible that two Bodies (for example two Bouls)should
ever be made exactly like one another; nay, not rigorously equal in any one
Accident, as namely in weight, but that still there will be some little
difference and inequality between them (the Reason of which Observation, our
Author meddled not with) were it not that I have been so long already, as
Digressions were now very unseasonable.

Shall I commend or censure our Author for believing so well of his acquired
knowledge, as to be dejected at the thought of not being able to leave it a
Legacy among his Friends; Or shall I examine, whether it be not a high injury
to wise and gallant Princes, who out of the generousness and nobleness of their
Nature, do patronize Arts and learned Men, to impute their so doing to vanity
of desiring Praise, or to fear of Reproach?

But let these pass: I will not engage any that may be-friend him, in a quarrel
against him. But I may safely produce Epictetus to contradict him, when he
lets his kindness engulf him in deep afflictions for a friend: For he will
not allow his wise man to have an inward relenting, a troubled feeling, or
compassion of another misfortunes. That disordereth the one, without any good
to the other. Let him afford all the assistances and relievings in his power,
but without intermingling himself in others Woe; As Angels, that do us good,
but have no passion for us. But this Gentleman's kindness goes yet further: he
compares his love of a Friend to his love of God; the Union of Friends Souls
by affection, to the Union of the three Persons in the Trinity, and to the
Hypostatical Union of two Natures in one Christ, by the Words Incarnation. Most
certainly he expresses himself to be a right good-natured man. But if St.
Augustine retracted so severely his pathetical Expressions for the Death of his
Friend, saying, They savoured more of the Rhetorical Declamations of a young
Orator, than of the grave Confession of a devout Christian, (or somewhat to
that purpose) What censure upon himself may we expect of our Physician, if ever
he make any Retraction of this Discourse concerning his Religion?

It is no small misfortune to him, that after so much time spent, and so many
places visited in a curious Search, by traveling after the Acquisition of so
many Languages; after the wading so deep in Sciences, as appears by the ample
Inventory* and Particular he makes of himself: The result of all this should
be, to profess ingenuously he had studied enough. only to become a Sceptick;
and that having run through all sorts of Learning, he could find rest and
satisfaction in none. This, I confess, is the unlucky fate of those that light
upon wrong Principles. But Mr. White teaches us, how the Theorems and
Demonstrations of Physics may be linked and chained together, as strongly, and
as continuedly as they are in the Mathematics, if men would but apply
themselves to a right Method of Study. And I do not find that Solomon
complained of Ignorance in the height of Knowledge; (as this Gentleman says)
but only, that after he has rather acknowledged himself ignorant of nothing,
but that he understood the Natures of all Plants, from the Cedar to the Hyssop,
and was acquainted with all the ways and paths of Wisdom and Knowledge; he
exclaimeth, that all this is but Toil and vexation of spirit; and therefore
advises men, to change Humane Studies into Divine Contemplations and
Affections.

I cannot agree to his resolution of shutting his Books, and giving over the
search of Knowledge, and resigning himself up to Ignorance, upon the reason
that moves him; as though it were extreme Vanity to waste our days in the
pursuit of that, which by attending but a little longer (till Death has closed
the eyes of our Body, to open those of our Soul) we shall gain with ease, we
shall enjoy by infusion, and is an accessory of our Glorification. It is true,
as soon as Death has played the Midwife to our second Birth, our Soul shall
then see all Truths more freely, than our Corporal Eyes at our first Birth see
all Bodies and Colors, by the natural power of it, as I have touched already,
and not only upon the grounds our Author gives. Yet far be it from us, to
think that time lost. which in the mean season we shall laboriously employ, to
warm our selves with blowing a few little Sparks of that glorious fire, which
we shall afterward in one instant leap into the middle of, without danger of
Scorching. And that for two important Reasons; besides several others, too long
to mention here) the one, for the great advantage we have by Learning in this
life; the other, for the huge Contentment that the Acquisition of it here
(which applies a strong Affection to it) will be unto us in the next life. The
want of Knowledge in our first Mother (which exposed her to be easily deceived
by the Sepents cunning) was the root of all our ensuing Misery and Woe. It is
as true (which we are taught by irrefragable Authority) That Omnis peccans
ignorant: And the well head of all the calamities and mischiefs in all the
World, consists of the troubled and bitter waters of Ignorance, Folly and
Rashness; to cure which, the only Remedy and Antidote, is the Salt of true
Learning, the bitter Wood of Study, painful Meditation, and orderly
Consideration. I do not mean such Study, as armeth wrangling Champions for
clamorous Schools, where the Ability of subtle Disputing to and fro, is more
prized than the retriving of Truth: But such as fills the mind with solid and
useful notions, and does not endanger the swelling it up with windy vanities.
Besides, the sweetest Companion and entertainment of a well-tempered mind, is
to converse familiarly with the naked and bewitching beauties of those
Mistresses, those Verities and Sciences, which by fair courting of them, they
gain and enjoy; and every day bring new fresh ones to their Seraglio, where the
ancientest never grow old or stale. Is there any thing so pleasing, or so
profitable as this? -- Nil dulcius est, been quam munita tenere
Edita doctrina sapientum templa serena;
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque viam palanteis quoarere vitae.


But now if we consider the advantage we shall have in the other life by our
affection to Sciences, and conversation with them in this, it is wonderful
great. Indeed that affection is so necessary, as without it we shall enjoy
little contentment in all the knowledge we shall then be replenished with: for
every ones pleasure in the possession of a good, is to be measured by his
precedent Desire of that good, and by the equality of the taste and relish of
him that feeds upon it. We should therefore prepare and make our taste
beforehand by Assuefaction unto, and by often relishing what we shall then be
nourished with. That Englishman that can drink nothing but Beer or Ale, would
be ill bestead, were he to go into Spain or Italy, where nothing but* Wine
grows: whereas a well-experienced Goinfre, that can criticize upon the
several tastes of Liquors, would think his Palate in Paradise, among those
delicious Nectars(to use Aretines phrase upon his eating of a Lamprey.) Who was
ever delighted with Tobacco the first time he took it? And who could willingly
be without it, after he was a while habituated to the use of it; How many
examples are there daily of young men, that marrying upon their Fathers
command, not through precedent affections of their own, have little comfort in
worthy and handsome Wives, that others would passionately affect? Archimedes
lost his life, for being so ravished with the delight of a Mathematical
Demonstration, that he could not of a sudden recall his extasied Spirits to
attend the rude Soldiers Summons: But instead of him, whose mind has been
always fed with such subtle Diet, how many plain Country-Gentlemen does your
Lordship and I know, that rate the knowledge of their Husbandry at a much
higher pitch; and are extremely delighted by conversing with that; whereas the
other would be most tedious and importune to them? We may then safely conclude,
That if we will joy in the Knowledge we shall have after Death, we must in our
lifetime raise within our selves earnest affections to it, and desires of it,
which cannot be barren ones; but will press upon us to gain some Knowledge by
way of advance here; and the more we attain unto, the more we shall be in Love
with what remains behind. To this reason then adding the other, How knowledge
is the surest prop, and guide of our present life; and how it perfecteth a man
in that which constituteth a man, his Reason; and how it enableth him to tread
boldly, steadily, constantly, and knowingly in all his ways: And I am
confident, all men that shall hear the Case thus debated, will join with me in
making it a Suit to our Physician, that he will keep his Books open, and
continue that Progress he has so happily begun.

But I believe your Lordship will scarcely join with him in his wish, that we
might procreate and beget Children without the help of Women, or without any
Conjunction or Commerce with that sweet and bewitching Sex. Plato taxes his
fellow Philosopher (though otherwise a learned and brave man) for not
sacrificing to the Graces, those gentle Female Goddesses. What thinks your
Lordship of our Physitian's bitter censure of that action, which Mahomet makes
the Essence of his Paradise? Indeed, besides those his unkindnesses, or rather
frowardnesses, at that tenderhearted Sex (which must needs take it ill at his
hands) methinketh he sets Marriage at too low a rate, which is assuredly the
highest and divinest link of humane Society. And where he speaks of Cupid,
and of Beauty, it is in such a phrase, as puts me in mind of the Learned
Greek Reader in Cambridge, his courting of his Mistress out of Stephens his
Thesaurus.

My next Observation upon his Discourse, draws me to a Logical consideration
of the Nature of an exact Syllogism: which kind of reflection, though it use to
open the door in the course of Learning and Study; yet it will near shut it in
my Discourse, which my following the thread that my Author spinneth, assigns
to this place. If he had well and thoroughly considered all that is required to
that strict way of managing our Reason, he would not have censured Aristotle
for condemning the fourth Figure, out of no other motive, but because it was
not consonant to his own Principle; that it would not fit with the Foundations
himself had laid; though it do with Reason (says he) and be consonant to that,
which indeed it does not, at all times, and in all Circumstances, In a perfect
Syllogism, the Predicate must be identified with the Subject, and each extreme
with the middle term, and so consequently, all three with one another. But in
Galen's fourth Figure, the case may so fall out, as these Rules will not be
current there.

As for the good and excellency that he considers in the worst things, and
how far from Solitude any man is in a Wilderness; These are (in his Discourse)
but equivocal considerations of Good, and of Lowliness: Nor are they any ways
pertinent to the Mortality of that part, where he treats of them.

I have much ado to believe, what he speaks confidently, That he is more
beholding to Morpheus, for Learned and Rational, as well as pleasing Dreams,
than to Mercury for smart and facetious Conceptions; whom Saturn (it seems by
his relation) has looked asquint upon in his Geniture.

In his concluding Prayer, wherein he summeth up all he wishes; methinketh his
Arrow is not winged with that fire, which I should have expected from him upon
this occasion: For it is not the peace of Conscience, nor the bridling up of
ones affections, that expresses the highest dedlightfulness and happiest state
of a perfect Christian. It is love only that can give us Heaven upon Earth, as
well as in Heaven; and brings us thither too: So that the Thuscan Virgil had
reason to say, -- In alte dolcezze
Non si puo gioio, se non amando.


And this Love must be employed upon the noblest and highest Object, not
terminated in our Friends. But of this transcendent and divine part of Charity,
that looks directly and immediately upon God himself; and that is the
Intrinsecal Form, the utmost Perfection, the scope and final Period of true
Religion, (this Gentleman's intended Theme, as I conceive) I have no occasion
to speak any thing, since my Author does but transiently mention it; and that
too, in such a phrase as ordinary Catechisms speak of to vulgar Capacities.

Thus, my Lord, having run through the Book (God knows how slightly, upon so
great a sudden) which your Lordship commanded me to give you an account of,
there remains yet a weightier task upon me to perform, which is, to excuse my
self of Presumption, for daring to consider any Moles in that Face, which you
had marked for a Beauty. But who shall well consider my manner of proceeding in
these Remarks, will free me from that Censure. I offer not at Judging the
Prudence and Wisdom of this Discourse: These are fit Inquiries for your
Lordships Court of highest Appeal: In my inferior one, I meddle only with
little knotty pieces of particular Sciences ( Matinae apis instar, operosa
parvus carmina fingit.) In which it were peradventure a fault for your Lordship
to be too well versed; your Employments are of a higher and nobler Strain, and
that concerns the welfare of millions of men: Tu regere Imperio Populos
(Sackville) memento
(Hae tibi erunt Arts) pacisque imponere morem.


Such little Studies as these, belong only to those Persons that are low in
the Rank they hold in the Commonwealth; low in their Conceptions, and low in a
languishing and rusting Leisure, such an one as Virgil calls Ignobile otium,
and such an one as I am now dulled withal. If Alexander or Caesar should have
commended a tract of Land, as fit to fight a Battle in for the Empire of the
World, or to build a City upon, to be the Magazine and Staple of all the
adjacent Countries; no body could justly condemn that Husbandman, who according
to his own narrow Art and Rules, should censure the Plains of Arbela, or
Pharsalia, for being in some places sterile; or the Meadows about Alexandria,
for being sometimes subject to be overflown; or could tax ought he should say
in that kind for a contradiction unto the others commendations of those places,
which are built upon higher and larger Principles.

So (my Lord) I am confident I shall not be reproached of unmannerliness for
putting in a Demurrer unto a few little particularities in that noble
Discourse, which your Lordship gave a general Applause unto; and by doing so, I
have given your Lordship the best Account I can of my self, as well as of your
Commands. You hereby see what my entertainments are, and how I play away my
time.

-- Dorset dum magnus ad altum
Fulminat Oxonium bello, victorque volentes
Per populos dat jura; viamque affectat Olympo.
May your Counsels there be happy and successful ones, to bring about that
Peace, which if we be not quickly blessed withal, a general ruin threatens
the whole Kingdom. From Winchester-House the 22 (I think I may say the 23, for
I am sure it is Morning, and I think it is Day) of December, 1642.

Your Lordships must humble and obedient Servant, Kenelm Digby.

The Postscript.
My Lord,
LOoking over these loose Papers to point them, I perceive I have forgotten
what I promised in the eighth sheet, to touch in a word concerning Grace: I do
not conceive it to be a Quality infused by God Almighty into a Soul.

Such kind of discoursing satisfies me no more in Divinity, than in
Philosophy. I take it to be the whole Complex of such real motives (as a solid
account may be given of them) that incline a man to Virtue and Piety; and are
set on foot by God's particular Grace and Favor, to bring that work to pass.
As for Example: To a man plunged in Sensuality, some great misfortune
happens, that mouldeth his heart to a tenderness, and inclines him to much
thoughtfulness: In this temper, he meets with a Book or Preacher, that
represents lively to him the danger of his own condition; and gives him
hopes of greater contentment in other Objects, after he shall have taken leave
of his former beloved Sins. This begets further conversation with prudent
and pious men, and experienced Physicians, in curing the Souls Maladies;
whereby he is at last perfectly converted, and settled in a course of solid
Virtue and Piety.

Now these accidents of his misfortune, the gentleness and softness of his
Nature, his falling upon a good Book, his encountering with a pathetick
Preacher, the impremeditated Chance that brought him to hear his Sermon, his
meeting with other worthy men, and the whole Concatenation of all the
intervening Accidents, to work this good effect in him; and that were ranged
and disposed from all Eternity, by Gods particular goodness and providence for
his Salvation; and without which he had inevitably beer damned: This chain of
Causes, ordered by God to produce this effect, I understand to be Grace.

FINIS.

