A WORTHY SPEECH SPOKEN IN THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS IANVARIE the XVIJ.
MDCXLJ.

BY Mr. JOHN BROWN ESQUIRE, And Knight of the Shire for the County of Dorset.

WHEREIN He explains and lays open to the said House, the manifold eminent
Dangers which are like to fall upon that County, by reason of Digbies Escape,
and assistance which is to be feared will join with him in his intentions, by
reason diverse and the most part of Sherborn, Evil, Brunswick, and other Towns
of which he is Lord over, for the most part consists of Papists, Recusants and
other of his Confederates. With the Relation of diverse of the Recusants houses
that be furnished with store of Ammunition for a sudden service.

London. Printed for H. Homer. 1642.

A WORTHY SPEECH SPOKEN In the Honorable House of Commons, on Tuesday last, by
Mr. John Brown Esquire, and Knight of the shire for the County of Dorset.
Mr. SPEAKER,
IN respect the grounds of my ensuing words, concern the safety of a County: J
thought good to present to these riper capacities, and more perspicuous
understandings. Which although being but a suspicion, or fear of ensuing
danger, by and through the too many apparations of Papisticall treacheries.
This amongst the rest being more to be feared, as it is more eminent, and
apparent to the view of the world; as this Subsequent Declaration of mine shall
really testify.

Mr. Speaker, what I speak, is not for any vainglory, or desire of ^^^^lating
my betters, but out of the care and indulgent commiseration of the County, in
whose behalf I sit here, I mean the County of Dorset, who now are dependending,
betwixt fear and hope, never in so much danger as now, never so dejected, nor
ever so oppressed as at this present time, your honors were pleased upon the
discovery of the treacherous confederacy betwixt the Lord Digby and Lunsford,
to grant out a warrant for their apprehension, which although put in execution,
failed of that auspicious sequel, which we did so earnestly and assiduously
desire to our sorrow, and the greater terror of the poor County of Dorset, that
which makes us so fearful, and to apprehend the dangeriwith such vehemence, is
the greatness of his authority with us, his larg revenues and multiplicity of
tenants, who are for the most part Recusants, and impetuous resisters of the
Protestant religion: and not only so, but also by their multiplicity of Armor,
muskets, and other ammunition every particular man exceeding, having greater
and larger store, then any neighboring Protestant thereunto adjoining, their
being within ten miles distance of the said Lord Digbies house, at Sherborn,
Evil, Brunswicke, Bedminster, and other villages within the compendium of his
Lordships demeans; above seventy households of Roman Catholics, well provided
to make resistance against any that shall oppose them, I do not say that they
do but it is to be feared that they will, having a man so pernicious as
Lunsford and his confederacies to join with them in their wicked enterprises,
that may be either by him or them devised.

Mr. Speaker, these and many other considerations, force me this day to speak
so much of this matter, viz. the fear of the people, the strength of the enemy,
and the former traiterous and treacherous designs intended (although by the
divine providence of Almighty God, frustrated and made void) which if not
timely looked into, may being patrocinated and ushered in by such able and
notorious Delinquents, prove the utter ruin of the County and a means to
introduce civil wars within this Kingdom. What security, what safety, what
liberty; nay what hopes can any true Subject there inhabiting have, when as
their obnoxious, and abrogating enemy so nigh a neighbor, nay rather involved
within their bowels, one whom they know conspires Plots, and promiscuously
intends their Overthrow. Let no man think to direct us from the persuit of
Justice, by poisoning the clear streams of our intellect with zealous
expectation of truth, and reality from them, whom we have found such invective
persons, agd inveterate politicians, against both church and state.

The happy assurance of your grace and favor toward others, makes us to have
an inexpressible hope, that our loyalty will win you to tender the safety of the
people: and certainly all our pressures well weighed, these many years, and now
more dangerous and contaminous then ever: it will be found the passive loyalty
of this suffering County, has undone the active duty of all times, and
stories; and as the Poet has it, Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest, J
may as properly, and significantly say, fideliter fecimus, we have done
loyally, to suffer so patiently.

The root of all the evils already come upon us, the frustrous labor of this
industrious Parliament, the continual fears, the obstupifying Plots, and late
hell-nourished Conspiracies, and what else you may call pernicious to
Parliamentary proceedings, and necessary affairs, for settling a real peace in
this Kingdom, spring all from one current, shoot out from one root, viz.
Papisticall heresy.

And is it not high time then to grub up that root that produces such fruit? He
that intends to correct an evil tree, shall begin at the master bough, and so
crop downward, is in danger to fall himself, e're the tree fall. The safer and
more speedier way is to begin at the root, and there (with submission to better
judgment) would I lay to the Axe.

I have endeavored, and as much as in me lies, to lay open before your
honors the sudden and almost apparent danger, the said County of Dorset may
fall into: unless those that are suspected to be enemies, be disarmed of their
store of pernicious provision, and that thosew, hich are suspicious persons,
may have their houses searched, for fear of conspiracy: and in so doing, your
honors shall clear a doubt of consequence, strengthen the Protestants, and
find out such inauspicious designs, as shall be intended against them: and upon
a Report thereof, to draw up a Charge against the guilty: and then, Currat Lex,
fiat Iusticia.

FINIS.

