Imprimatur Liber cui titulus, A Letter in Answer to a Book Entitled,
Christianity not Mysterious etc.

May 6. 1697. Narcissus Dublin.

A LETTER IN Answer to a Book ENTITLED Christianity not Mysterious.

As also To all Those who Set up for REASON and EVIDENCE In Opposition to
REVELATION and MYSTERIES.

By PETER BROWN, B D. Sen: Fellow of Trin. Coll. Dub:

DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray in Essex street, for John North in Skinner row.
1697.

A LETTER In answer to a BOOK ENTITLED Christianity not Mysterious.
SIR,
WHEN I sent to borrow of you the Book Entitled, Christianity not Mysterious, I
little thought of drawing on my self any trouble beyond the bare reading of it;
but since you have desired my thoughts of the matters contained in it, I was
unwilling to resuse. Tho I must freely tell you, what you seem to own in your
Letter, that I think my self better employed. And your saying, that it is no
neglect in a Shepherd to leave his feeding of the Lambs, and go aside for a
while, to beat off any thing that comes to devour or infect them, would not have
prevailed with me, if this had caused any intermission in that business, which
I hope will turn to better account when I come to receive my Wages. But having
a little time to spare, I shall perform what you desire.

And I have done this the rather, for that you tell me the Book has made some
noise; and that the Author is countenanced, and encouraged by some Men of
Sense. I don't much wonder at it; for every Man of Sense is not a Man of true
Religion; besides it is not every Man of Reason and Integrity, has leisure to
consider it; and if they have, yet these sort of abstracted Discourses, are out
of the road of Men of Business.

What you observe is very true, that the generality of Men who write such Books
as these, and talk of them most, are those of a mixed sort of learning; Persons
of a miscelaneous education, who have some insight into most of the Sciences,
but are thoroughly vers't in none. And the talking of Idea's, and running
endless divisions upon them, is a cheap and easy way, some Men now adays have
taken up, of appearing wise and learned to the world. Whereas the bottom of it
all is no more than this, That Men of nice heads have agreed to speak of plain
things in a peculiar dialect of their own; which if they were stripped of those
terms of Art, and put into plain Language, have nothing in them more than what
is obvious to the common sense and reason of all Men. And the consequence of
using them so frequently in matters of Religion is generally, what is so
visible in this Author, that they darken the Subject; so that the Question is
lost in a multitude of Words, and then Men wander far in pursuit of Truth, when
they left it behind them at their first setting out.

But before I come to the particulars, I cannot but take notice of that
unreasonableness of People, who never think a Writer sufficiently confuted
unless we follow him in all his wanderings; whereas in a subject of this nature
it is enough to show where he left the Road, and that he is not yet returned
into it. If a Man were to demolish a Fabric, there is no necessity of doing it
stone by stone; it is abundantly enough if he undermine and destroy those
Pillars which are the main supporters of it; for then it falls to the ground,
and is no other than a heap of Rubbish, tho many of the materials were very
good in themselves.

To any reasonable considering Person it were a sufficient Answer to this whole
Book; to show in short, how he mistakes the Question, and proceeds in it, all
upon two false Suppositions: One in Logic, in the former part of his Book, viz.

That Evidence is the only ground of Persuasion.

The other in Divinity, in the latter part of it.

That now under the Gospel the Vail is perfectly removed.

This would satisfy them that he runs all the while upon a false scent; and they
would not take it ill, that we left him to wander by himself. But because these
are but few, in comparison of those who take things in the gross, and cannot so
well discern the connection and dependence of one thing upon another: And indeed
because Answers are designed for such as are not able to see into the
fallacies, and not for those who are; therefore I shall trace him step by step,
and leave nothing in him unanswered, that has any appearance of reasoning.

I shall be so far from endeavoring to contradict him in every thing, that I
shall grant him all that possibly I can. The worst of Heretics speak many
things that are true; and the more we can with justice allow them, the plainer
we shall make their Errors appear; and the more difficult it will be for them
to proceed, for this obliges them either to speak to the pinch of the
Question, or be silent.

It cannot be expected in the compass of a Letter, that I should enter into any
nice disquisitions about the nature of Faith in general; or of the mysteries of
the Gospel in particular; or of the use of Reason in Religion: For I am not now
going to write a Book upon this subject; if I were it should not be in answer
to him. I shall at present only show the weakness and ^olly of this Man's
arguing; and lay open the Cheats and Fallacies, by which he is either deceived
himself, or would impose upon others: That I may relieve the subject he treats
of, from that darkness and obscurity in which he has involved it, either
through ignorance or design.

And first, there is great deceit in the very Title of the Book; CHRISTIANITY
NOT MYSTERIOUS. For by these two words, as it appears by what follows, he would
raise a Notion in the heads of People that Christianity, as it is now generally
taught and received among us, is a Religion made up of dark aenigmatical
Allusions, and absurd irrational and unintelligible Notions; or else of the
plainest things wrapped up in mysterious Rites and Ceremonies; and in short, that
our most holy Faith, is no other than one great Riddle.

Whereas Christianity is so far from being Mysterious, that it is the plainest
Institution in the World. All the necessary Points of Faith and Practice are so
clear and obvious to every capacity, that it is a Religion calculated for all
sorts of People: And therefore it is said of the times of the Gospel* That God
would put his Law into their inward parts, and write it in their Hearts, and
they should all know him even from the least of them to the greatest. That
which this Sophister would have inferred from hence is, That every thing God
should reveal in the times of the Gospel, Men should have as full and
comprehensive a knowledge of, as they have of any thing in nature. But it is
evident this expression was designed to signify the plainess of the Gospel, as
to all matters of obligation upon Men's Consciences, in opposition to the
obscurity of the Law; which was so perplex't with a multitude of Rites and
Circumstances of Duty, that it was troublesome and tedious to learn and observe
them all. And therefore it is said in the same Text, That they should not then
teach every Man his Neighbor; saying, Know the Lord; because all the necessary
knowledge of him and his Laws, was then to be rendered plain and easy. And
accordingly this is now the glory of our Religion; and its plainess is one
great argument of its Excellence and Divinity: not but that there are some
things revealed in the Gospel, of which we are not now capable of any clear and
distinct knowledge. So that there is a great deal of difference between these
two expressions, Christianity not Mysterious, and, There are no Mysteries in
Christianity* The first is very true, and the last is absolutely false.

Or a Treatise showing, that there is nothing in the Gospel contrary to Reason.
Who among us ever said there was? but if this had not been added, his Book would
have been the shorter by Fourteen Pages; and were it not for this, and many
other things in it, as little to the purpose, it had been only a sticht
Pamphlet, and cried about with Almanacks.

Nor above reason.

This likewise is a dubious saying; for if it signifies that there are no
expressions in the Gospel, that it is impossible for us to know the meaning of,
then it is very true: For tho some passages are difficult, yet every thing in
the Gospel is intelligible; and were there any expression in it impossible to
be understood, so much of it must have been writ to no purpose. But if by not
being above reason, be meant that there is nothing spoke of in it, but what we
have as complete and perfect a knowledge of, as we have of any object of our
Senses, it is absolutely false; as I hope will sufficiently appear.

And thus the whole Title Page is nothing else, but equivocation and sophism.
However there is this to be said for it, that it suits the-Book very well; the
main drift of which is, to s^t up Natural Religion in opposition to all
Revelation; and these same Equivocations begun in the Title Page, run through
every thing he says.

His Introduction, wherein he pretends to state the Question, requires no
Answer; for we grant that the notion of a Mystery is to be taken from the Holy
Scriptures, and not from the opinion of any private Doctor, or Council, or any
infallible Head, So there are Six Pages of Impertinence cut off already.

I shall only take notice, how he sets out with a fling at the Divines, the Men
he is all along so angry with, who gravely tell us

That we must adore what we cannot comprehend.

Yes, they tell us we must adore God, and yet we cannot comprehend him. Let him
prove we can if he is able, and without giving himself or us any farther
trouble, we will put the whole Controversy to a short issue and let it lie upon
this one point. And if he does not make out, that we have as full and
comprehensive a knowledge of the Nature and Attributes of God, as we have of any
Proposition in Euclid, then what will this Man deserve for that arrogant
expression of his,

That the Divine Being himself cannot P: 87: Last Edition.
with more reason be accounted Mysterious, than the most contemptible of his
Creatures.

His business here was to have stated the Question, and let us have known what
was the true Notion of a Mystery in Scripture. But instead of this he goes a
great way about to tell us, that the true notion of a Mystery is to be taken no
where but from thenc^, which no one denies. And therefore since he has not
done it, I must: That both He and I may speak to the purpose, and neither of us
hereafter trouble the World with impertinence.

Now the clearest way I can think of, for doing of this, is to instance in some
particular Mystery of the Gospel, and in that one for all, to let us see what a
Christian Mystery is in the sense of Scripture. I shall take the first I think
of, that of the Resurrection of our Bodies.

Saint Paul speaking of this says, 1 Cor: 15: 51, 52.
Behold I show you a Mystery, we shall all be changed in the twinkling of an
eye. Again, St. John speaking of the same 1 John: 3: 2.
matter says, It does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him.

From whence we see a Christian Mystery is something which relates to another
life, which it was impossible for us to know, without Divine Revelation; and
now that it is revealed we know it but it in part, and cannot fully comprehend
it. Or shorter.

It is a Divine Truth revealed to us in part.

As particularly this of our being changed at the last day into the likeness of
Christ. It is a truth relating to another life, which could never have entered
into our heads to think of, unless it had been revealed to us from Heaven; And
now that it is revealed to us that we shall be like him, yet we know nothing of
the manner of it wherein this likeness will consist.

So that in a Christian Mystery, there is something we do understand, and
something that we are wholly ignorant of; and it is called a Mystery in respect
of both these.

1. It is called a Mystery in respect of what we do know of it; because it was
a thing so hidden from us, that it was impossible to discover it by those
powers of knowledge which we are now endu'd with. As we could never have known
from reason, that good Christians should be changed into the likeness of
Christ. Now it is this part of the Mystery which makes it an Article of Faith,
and obligatory upon our Consciences to believe it. Because we understand well
what it is for a Body to be raised, and altered for the better, and we know
perfectly what it is for one thing to be changed into the likeness of another.

2. It is called a Mystery in respect of that part of it which as yet we have
no notion of; because it is utterly impossible for us in this life to attain to
any knowledge of it by reason assisted with the greatest degree of revelation
that is afforded us. And thus it is impossible for us in this life to have any
notion of the manner of that change* into the likeness of Christ, for it is
expressly said, That it does not yet appear what we shall be. From whence I
shall infer only thus much at present, that what we do know, and what is yet
concealed from us, are in gross called the same Mystery. And that as we are
obliged to believe what is revealed of it, so likewise we are at the same time
obliged from express words of Scripture to believe, that there is more in it
than we are now able to comprehend. Nay that there is something in it which we
have no notion or Idea at all of.

This is the notion of a Mystery in the sense of Scripture; and therefore now
we see the Question is not, Whether a man can believe what he kn^ws nothing of,
which no man in his wits ever yet affirmed; for there is a flat contradiction
in the terms; and yet this is the main thing he labors to disprove, and by
which he endeavors to confound his Readers. But the Question is,

Whether there be not some things in the Gospel, concerning which we are bound
to believe, that there is much more in them than we are now able to comprehend.
If there be such things, as it appears in this instance of the Resurrection,
then there is something in the Gospel that may properly be called a Mystery;
and in so strict a sense, that nothing else can be called a Mystery with so
great propriety of Speech, as will appear more fully hereafter.

The case would have been the same, had I taken any other Mystery for an
instance, either the eternal Generation of the Son; or the Procession of the
Holy Ghost; or the Union of the Divine and Human Nature; or the Operations of
the Holy Spirit in the act of Grace; or the Felicity and Joys of Heaven, etc.
and if it be required I am ready to quit this, and take any other for an
instance which he shall pitch upon.

Now this is the thing that lay upon him to disprove; but he durst not go about
proving or disproving any thing, till he has perplex't the matter in hand, and
amused his Reader with fantastical terms and distinctions. If he had meant
honestly, and thought himself able to go through with what he undertook, he
would have spoke plain undisguis'd Reason and proceeded immediately to the
proof of the Question. But instead of this he finds it necessary to spend above
one third of his Book, in loosing of it: wherefore I must take my leave of it
for some time as he does, to rescue the subject from obscurity, and force this
Man to speak plainly and intelligibly.

And first he tells us, That reason is P. 8, 9, 10
not the man that has it; nor the things to be reasoned about; nor is it our
appetites and desires; nor is it authority. What trifling this is? he should
have added, that it was not the Head that forms the Thoughts; nor the Fingers
that write them; nor is it the Brain it self; No! nor is my Reason, the reason
of another Man. Our Readers are like to be much the wiser for this.

After this he proceeds to show P. 11.
what it is, in his second Chapter; the whole substance of which in other words
is only this; that it is not Simplex Apprehensio, nor Judicium, but that it is
Discursus that is properly called Reason. Which last he will not express by
Syllogism, the word for it that is commonly received: but he must call it, The
application of intermediate Idea's to other Idea's that are distant from one P.
13.
another, and ly too far asunder in the mind. And this he explains by the
measuring of two Houses with a line; because you cannot take one House in one
hand, and the other in another, and so clap them together, to find out which is
highest. What is this but making a Syllogism, by applying the Medius Terminus
to the parts of the Question? and to what purpose is all this, unless he thinks
that his Readers have not learned Logic?

Yes, he has a drift in it, which is very observable in all our modern Writers
against revealed Religion; for unless he first lays down false rules of
reasoning, the consequences he would make, will not appear to be true. Tho he is
in the right of it thus far, and it is no more than what is in every common
Logic; Yet what follows is his own, and is both trifling and false.

For first, his four ways of coming to the knowledge of any thing, are very ill
put together, and the distinction frivolous. The Experience of the Senses, P.
18.
the Experience of the Mind (i. e.) in usual speaking, Sense and Reason; Human
and Divine Revelation. Now at first sight who does not see? that any revelation
by God or Man, must enter into the mind by one of these two ways, either by our
Senses or our Reason; so that there are but these two ways still.

And then as to his making Authority P. 16.
a means only of Information, and To make what is to be said upon this head
more intelligible, the Reader may take notice that by Evidence he means nothing
more than the knowledge of a thing in the Mind. So that these two Expressions
are the same. Evidence is the only ground of Persuasion, and, You can give your
assent to nothing but what you know. All the difference is, that one is plain,
and the other affectedly obscure. But I must use his own Cant, otherwise tho I
speak ever so much to the purpose, he will not think himself answered.
Evidence the only ground of Persuasion; which is the fundamental Error of his
Book, and indeed of all these modern Writers who make such a stir about Reason
and Evidence; we shall see the falsity of it if we consider Authority in
respect of the Person who is informed, and of him who gives the Information.

1. In respect of the Person who is informed, I grant it is a means of
Information; for how comes any one to the knowledge of a thing he was wholly
ignorant of before, and which he could not attain of himself? why? by an others
revealing it to him.

2. When considered in the Informer, it is a ground of Persuasion; for why do I
give my assent to any Proposition related to me from another? because of the
veracity and ability of the Person that makes the Information.

But this cuning man will ask, how can that which is inseparable from another
be the ground of any assent in my mind? I Answer, It is the opinion that is in
me of his ability and veracity is the cause of my assent. The ground of this
opinion indeed is Evidence: But then this Evidence is a ground of persuasion in
respect of the worth of the Person only; and that Worth or Authority of his, is
the only ground of persuasion in respect of the substance of what he relates to
me. From whence it is plain, that though we grant that Evidence in the Mind is
a ground of persuasion, yet it is not the only ground. And therefore to make
this very clear and undeniable, let us take an instance of two Propositions,
wherein these two grounds may be considered separately.

The three angles of a Triangle are equal to two right ones. In a Person who is
able to demonstrate this Proposition, the only ground of his persuasion or
assent, is the evidence of it in the Mind: For the reason why he gives his
assent to it is; because he finds out the agreement of the extremes by
intermediate Idea's, and thus as he speaks, the demonstration at last becomes
self evident.

But as to the substance of this Proposition

When Christ appears we shall be like him.

The authority of the Person relating it, is the only ground of persuasion. For
as I should never have known this if it had not been revealed, and therefore in
this respect Authority is a means of information; so I should never have
believed it, if I had not known that this Revelation had come from God. And
therefore Authority considered in the Revealer, is the only grounds of my
assent to the substance of this Proposition.

But to make this plainer, we must consider that all natural Truths which do
not necessarily require Revelation, need no other ground of persuasion but
Evidence; but those which do, have both these grounds of persuasion, Evidence
and Authority; as will appear if we distinguish the three things in every
relation.

1. The meaning of the words. 2. The relation it self, or the very act of
revelation. 3. The To prevent all ambiguity, I do not take the word Substance
here strictly, as it is opposed to the modes and accidents of the thing, but as
it includes them.
substance of the thing intended by the Revelation.
As to the meaning of the words, and truth of the revelation in any
proposition, Evidence is the ground of persuasion: for why do I believe this
Proposition? When Christ appears we shall be like him. Because I know the
meaning of the words; and because there is an evidence in my Mind of its coming
from God, from those proofs to my Senses and Reason; which argue the Divine
Mission of the Person who relates it; and consequently the Divinity of the
relation it self. But as to the Substance of that Proposition, Authority is the
only ground of Persuasion, as indeed it is in all relations whatsoever.

And therefore it is now plain how P. 43. and 128.
Divine and Human Authority differ as well in degrees of Perspicuity as of
Certitude. And why? because when a mere man relates any thing to me, tho I
allow the veracity of the man, yet it is impossible for him to give such proof
to my Senses and my Reason of the reality and substance of what he relates, as
God can; And therefore cannot raise so great a degree of Evidence in my Mind.
Though I suppose this man's relation to be true (so that this relation of his,
and one of God's shall be upon equal Terms as to certitude, being both alike
true) yet this assent of mine to what the man relates, is more precarious and
worse founded than my faith of any divine proposition; because this is more
clear and distinct, as having a degree of Evidence in the mind which the other
wants. That which may make this Paragraph obscure, is the mistaking Evidence in
the Mind, or Knowledge, for those proofs which are only the cause of it.


I shall make this plain by an instance. A man tells me that Rome is swallowed
up by an Earthquake; I have such an opinion of the veracity of the Man, that I
give my assent to it and believe it firmly.

Let us suppose afterward that God reveals this same to me. As yet there is
the same degree of perspicuity allowing the ability and veracity of the man;
for then both God and he tell truth in this. But if God confirm the relation by
a Miracle, this shall raise an Evidence or degree of knowledge in my Mind,
beyond any thing the man is able to effect; and consequently the revelation of
the same thing from God makes it clearer, and gives it a greater degree of
perspicuity than it had before.

But it will be yet more clear, That Authority is a ground of Persuasion, if we
consider, that all Evidence in the Mind proceeds from Evidence in the Thing.
Now all Truths in themselves are equally evident; but in respect of us they are
not so: for some we are capable of knowing distinctly, and some we are not,
because they are not suited to our present capacities. In respect of those
divine truths, or of that part of them which is suited to our present
capacities, Evidence is the ground of persuasion; but in respect of that part
of it, which is not suited to our Capacities, as we have seen, Authority is.
And thus we see, how we may give our assent, to many propositions, for the
substance of which we have no Evidence in the mind. Why then says he a man
shall believe what he does not know, and that is giving his assent to nothing.
But this is a quibble and to remove it effectually, let us take up the same
propositions again.

The three angles of a Triangle are equal to two right ones.

It Is plain a man who knows what a Triangle is, and what it is for one Angle to
be equal to another, may give his assent to this proposition; though perhaps it
may be utterly impossible ever to beat the demonstration into his head. And
though he does not comprehend it, yet he cannot be said to be ignorant of it.
And the only ground of his assent is, the Authority of some person who is able
to demonstrate it.

And thus it is with a divine proposition. When Christ appears we shall be like
him. Any one who knows what it is for a body to be raised, and for one thing to
be like another, may give his assent to this proposition; though it be
impossible for him to know wherein this likeness will consist, or to
demonstrate that it will certainly be so. And therefore the Authority of God is
the only grounds of persuasion in this proposition; and no Evidence is
necessary any farther than to understand the meaning of the words, and the
truth of the revelation it self. So groundless is that main principle of his,
that a man can give his assent to nothing but what he comprehends: whereas the
contrary is as clear as the light, from what has been said.

But farther, from this supposition of his, that Authority is only a means of
Information, and Evidence the only ground of Persuasion, these two absurdities
will directly follow.

1. That a man can never be deceived in any thing; for if Evidence in the Mind
be the only ground of Perwasion, a man can never give his assent but where
there is this Evidence: for if there be but one only cause, the effect can
never proceed but from that cause; and what is evident (i: e:) what is truly
known, can never deceive.

He has no way of evading this, but by saying that the cause of error is the
giving assent where there is none, or not sufficient Evidence in the Mind;
which destroys every thing he says upon this head, for this supposes that there
may be some other cause of assent besides Evidence. But if we suppose Evidence
to be the only cause of assent, then it must vary in degrees together with it is
cause; so that a clear Evidence shall have a firm assent, and the least degree
of Evidence shall have but the least degree of assent; so that still a man can
never be deceived in any thing, or in any degree. And for him to say that we
may think we have this Evidence when we have it not, is still supposing that
there is some other ground of assent. Nay worse, it is supposing that a thing
may be Evident to us, and not Evident at the same time.

2. It will follow that no Person either God or Man, can be believed on their
word. For what they relate is evident to the Mind, or it is not; If it be, then
they give their assent to that Evidence, and not to the Person who relates it.
If it be not evident (i: e:) according to him, if he does not know it
perfectly, he must utterly reject it. And thus in a few words he destroys all
Faith, both Human and Divine. For thus he proceeds; a man can believe nothing
but what he knows; and he knows nothing but what he comprehends; and then he is
said to comprehend a thing when he has a clear and distinct Idea of it, (i:
e:) when it is as clear as a Mathematical Demonstration; or as evident as what
he sees with his Eyes, for you know seeing's believing all the World over.

Having thus made it plain that Evidence is not the only ground of Persuasion,
I come now to consider his clear and distinct Idea's which he lays down as the
ground of this Evidence. This opinion carries a face of fairness and
probability, and insinuates it self by the common inclinations of men, who are
naturally averse to all restraint in thinking as well as acting, and are as
uneasy at any fetters upon their Mind as upon their Body. They would not
willingly be obliged to give their assent to any thing but what they have clear
and distinct Idea's of; and if it be not thus in the Christian Religion, even
well meaning people are apt to wish it were so.

Now because I design this Letter in answer not only to this Book, but to all
the opposers of Revelation and Mysteries, upon the like principles of setting
up for Reason and Evidence, and clear and distinct notions of every thing they
give their assent to, I shall be very particular in the consideration of this
point. And I hope to make out plainly to them, the deep deceit that lies at the
bottom of all this; and to convince them that God, by requiring their assent to
his Revelations, does as little violence to their mind as to their body; and
that he leaves their Reason as full a scope, and as great a liberty in matters
of Religion as in any thing else. So that they will find us as great Sticklers
for clear Idea's, strict Reason, and Evidence as they can be for their hearts.

These men speak much truth, but make false inferences, never considering the
difference between these two propositions, but confounding them in all their
discourses.

Clear and distinct Idea's are the foundation of all our knowledge and assent,
which considered in a right sense is undoubtedly true. But for that other which
they make a consequence of it, it is absolutely false, viz.

That we can believe nothing but what we have a clear and distinct Idea of. For
the clear conceptions we have of some things, give us a confused and imperfect
knowledge of others; and it is upon the account of those things whereof we have
clear and distinct Idea's, that we give a firm assent to the existence of
things whereof we have no Idea at all. So that these two sayings widely differ;
as much as truth from falsehood.

I can give no assent without clear and distinct Idea's. And

I must have a clear and distinct Idea of every thing I give my assent to.

Now because this is the fundamental error of all our quaint Reasoners against
Revelation, and the fallacy w^^^^by they impose upon others, I shall express my
self as distinctly and p^^^nly in this matter as I can.

But by the way we must observe th^^ since it appears und^niably from w^^^ has
been said, that Evidence is ^o^ ^^e only ground of Persuasion, it is a direct
and immediate consequence from thence; that there is no necessity of having a
clear and distinct Idea of what I give my assent to. Not but that I allow there
is a necessity of clear and distinct Idea's of some things, to make us give our
assent to others; And therefore though Authority be a ground of Persuasion, yet
what this man would insinuate does not follow, viz: That therefore all it is
Relations, or any of them are to be received without Examen. For all the
Revelations of God admit of the strictest enquiry, and severest search of our
reason: and it is this that enables us to distinguish them from the wild
extravagancies of Enthusiast's, and the delusions of the Devil. It is by the
help of this that I now show the difference between his fallacies and the truth
of God. And in order to set them both in a clear light, I shall six the
signification of this most ambiguous word, which he has compelled me to make
so much use of, for otherwise we shall but grope for truth in the dark.

What is meant by an Adaequate Idea is sure and fixed (i: e:) a full and
comprehensive knowledge of any thing, so as to know all that is knowable in it.
But how far short, what men call a clear and distinct Idea comes of that
adaequate conception of a thing, is impossible to determine, because our
knowledge of things is varied almost in infinite degrees; insomuch that perhaps
we have not Idea's of any two things in nature, that are equally clear and
distinct. And therefore to cut of all Metaphysical nicities, and infist upon
nothing but genuine Reason; by a clear and distinct Idea, as it relates to this
controversy is signified, as clear and distinct a conception as we ordinarily
have of the things of this World. For these are the two main things he contends
for in his whole Book.

1. That we have as clear and distinct Idea's of all things revealed to us in
the Gospel, as we have of the ordinary Phenomenon of Nature. And 2. That we are
obliged to give our assent to them no farther than we have clear and distinct
Idea's of them.
In direct opposition to which, I shall lay down these two propositions.

1. That we are so far from having clear and distinct Idea's of those things of
another World which are revealed to us, that we have no proper or immediate
Idea at all of them. And 2. That though we have no proper or immediate Idea of
those things, yet we are bound to believe them; and that our assent to them,
according to his own principle, is founded upon clear and distinct Idea's.
1. As to the first by a proper and immediate Idea I mean, a conception or
notion of the thing as it is in it self, By a mediate or improper Idea I mean,
a notion we form of any thing in our Minds by Analogy or Not that worldly
Objects can have any real likeness or resemblance of the things revealed, but
they are such as God has made choice of for that purpose; and therefore we may
make this inference from his Wisdom, that they bear the greatest analogy with
them, of any things that fall within the compass of our knowledge now.
Similitude. Whether this distinction has been made use of or no I know not;
but sure I am it is a very necessary one, and of excellent use to set the bounds
and measures of our knowledge, and to lay open the true nature of our Christian
Faith: that we may clearly apprehend where Knowledge ends, and Faith proceeds
alone. And I am persuaded a due observation of this distinction, would
effectually put an end to all this controversy about mysteries.

Now what I say is this, that we have no proper Idea's of the things of another
World, but frame to our selves conceptions of them, from those things in this
World whereof we have clear and distinct Idea's. And to make this appear, let
us consider that there are but two ways of Gods revealing any thing to us;
either by giving us new faculties, or by adapting his Revelations to those we
have, which are our Senses and our Reason. He grants that it is not by giving
us any new faculties; and therefore since this is done by adapting himself to
those faculties we already have, then it is plain that he must make use of such
words and notions as fall within their proper sphere.

Now that we can have no proper or immediate Idea from Sense or Reason, of the
real nature of any thing relating to another life as it is in it self; or
indeed any other notion of them than that of Being in general, will best appear
by instancing in the particulars. I shall begin with God himself and his
Attributes, that incomprehensible Being which this bold man affirms, to have
nothing more mysterious in it than a stock or a stone.

1. And first our imagination can frame no likeness or resemblance of God, as
it can do of material and sensible Objects; and therefore the Israelites were
forbid to represent him by any figure or resemblance, because they saw no
similitude. And to the same purpose are many expressions in the Scriptures as
Is^i. 40. 18. To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare
unto him? So that I hope I have gained thus much, that God is more mysterious
than a stock or a stone, because we can frame some imagination of these, but
none at all of him.

2. But 2dly, as we can form no similitude from the Senses, so neither has the
Reason any the least glimps of his real Nature as he is in himself, for the
only way we have of forming an Idea of him is either negatively, by removing
from him all the Imperfections of the Creatures, or by enlarging those
excellencies we find in these, and attributing them to God. So that he is now
incomprehensible to us, not only as we have no clear and distinct knowledge of
him, but as we have no proper Idea at all of his real nature. And therefore
when he made a particular Revelation of himself it was only by the name I AM,
which denoted nothing more of him than barely his Existence; and plainly
intimated that it was impossible for them to conceive any thing farther of him.
For this reason it is said that hereafter we shall see him as he is, because we
have no knowledge of him now, but by mediation of those Idea's we have of the
things of this World. And to make this farther appear let us consider him in
those Attributes of his, whereof we are thought to have the most clear and
distinct Idea's. And

1. It Is revealed to us that God is a Spirit, by which we really understand
nothing more, than that he is a Being that is not matter; which is so far from
a proper immediate Idea, that it is not a positive one; for all the notion we
have of a Spirit is that it thinks, and that it moves. As to the first of
these, the only reason why we attribute it to a Spirit, is because we can
demonstrate that mere matter cannot think; And therefore we conclude it must be
something else that can, tho we have no notion at all of what it is. Besides we
cannot conceive what thinking is in a pure Spirit; we know nothing of the true
manner of that operation in them, which is answerable to knowledge in us* We can
conceive thinking now, only as it is performed by help of material Organs, and
more immediately by the Fibers of the Brain. But when we set our selves to
consider it abstractedly from these, we have no Idea at all of it. So that we
now form as gross a notion of thinking in a pure Spirit, as we do of it is
motion, when we walk by dragging one Leg after another.

And then as to it is motion, when we say a Spirit moves, we don't make this
inference from any knowledge we have of the true nature of it, but because we
can prove that matter cannot move it self, and thus by denying it to matter, we
really do nothing more than give it to something else; but what that something
is we know not. For we know not how it moves, or how it communicates this
motion to matter. Nor indeed can we distinguish Thought and Motion in a Spirit;
and as far as we may make a conjecture of what we have no Idea of, in all
likelihood they are the same. And therefore I cannot but wonder that any one
Lock of H. U. B. 2. C. 23.
should affirm, that we have as clear and distinct an Idea of Spirit as of Body.
That we have as good proof for it is existence, as we have for that of matter I
grant; but to say our Idea's of their Modes and Properties are equally clear
and distinct, appears to be a very groundless assertion.

2. As for Infinity another Attribute of God, the only way we are said to form
a notion of this, is by continued accumulation, and then a confused Idea of
what remains when we are weary of this. But it is plain there is not one
addition we make but ipso facto we destroy it is being; the very thought of
addition, does of all things in the World carry the Mind farthest from the real
nature of it. And how little this will help us to any immediate positive Idea
of it is plain, because that when we have imagined all the Atoms that go to the
composition of the Universe, told as many times over as we can heap up numbers
for it, we are as far from any true Idea of Infinity, as when we began to
reckon Two. Had I said One, we should in all likelihood have been nearer it; as
an instant of time has been found a better representation of Eternity, than
the successions of numberless. Ages. And therefore it were more conducive Lock
of H. U.
to true knowledge, to own our ignorance, and say it is a perfection which we
know nothing of, but we form a gross, a scanty notion of it by perpetual
addition to the widest space, or greatest number, or longest duration we can
think of.

3. As to his Omnipresence we have no Idea at all of it, for it is utterly
impossible for us to conceive, how the same thing should be here, and there, and
every where in the same instant: and therefore we frame to our selves a gross
notion of it by that of continued extension; tho at the same time we are sure
this must be utterly inconsistent with the real Nature of God.

4. And as for the Prescience of God, we are so far from having any notion of
it, that it cannot enter into our heads to think how God should actually see a
thing that has no being: for God sees things to come, as we see what is now.
So that we can no more conceive it, than we can conceive how a thing may be,
and not be at the same time; and therefore we frame to our selves the best Idea
we can of it (i. e.) from those previous Idea's of things in our Mind; which
does not at all represent this Attribute of Prescience as it is in God, who
sees them actually and ex part rei. Nor can we conceive how this Prescience of
his is reconcilable with the contingency of things, tho we are sure it is so,
from those Prophecies of very minute circumstances, many hundreds of years
before they came to pass.

I might thus run through all the Attributes of God, and show in every one of
them, how we make to our selves some representations of them, by compounding
and enlarging those Idea's we have either of sensible Objects, or of the
operations of our own Minds. And thus we represent the Wisdom, and Power, and
Justice, and Holiness, and Mercy, etc. of God, from the scanty notions we have
of these things in our selves, tho they exhibit to us no more of the real
nature of these things as they are in God, than continued extension does of his
Omnipresence; or a great number does of his Infinity; or many ages of his
Eternity. So that in all our thoughts of that divine Being we don't proceed
thus. The nature of God is such, therefore these things follow. But these
things are the greatest perfections we are able to conceive, and therefore by
help of these we form the best and most honorable Idea of God, that is
possible for us in this condition of infirmity and blindness that we are now
in. Not but that after we have framed the biggest Idea of God our Minds are
capable of, by the greatest enlargement of these perfections, after all, it is
as gross a representation of him as Darkness is of Light: and expresses
nothing of the real nature of that incomprehensible Being to us, nor do they
give us the least glimps of him as he is in himself.

2. But 2dly, As we can have no such proper and immediate Idea of God himself,
so neither have we such Idea's of any thing relating to another World. And
therefore it is that the Glory of Heaven, is revealed to us under the notion of
Light; the greatness and splendor of that place, by that of a Kingdom; and the
joys of Heaven by sensual pleasures, such as Eating and Drinking; the operation
of Grace, by the nourishment of our Bodies, etc. and when God himself is spoke
of, it is always by analogy with the Members of a Human Body, and the operations
of our Minds. Thus he is mentioned as having Hands and Feet, as Seeing, and
Hearing, and as being affected with all the passions of a Human Soul; because
he has no other way to speak of himself to us now, since we have neither Words
nor Idea's, to think or speak of him after any other manner; or indeed of any
other Objects of another World.

And therefore it is that the Spirit of God in all his Revelations, has made
use, not only of the Words and Phrases commonly received and understood; but
likewise of those common notions in the minds of Men, of things in this World,
to represent Truths, which are in respect of us now unconceivable; and for
which there are as yet no capacities in our nature. So that in truth all the
Idea's we at present have of the things of another World, are no other than a
sort of Types and Figures of things, the real nature of which is totally
obscured from us.

And this is the literal meaning of 1. Cor. 13. 12.
those words of St. Paul, That now we see through a Glass darkly, (i. e.) by
analogy only with the things of this World. But then Face to Face (i. e.) we
shall have as immediate a view of those heavenly Objects, as we have now of
these things which only represent them to us. So that when we are said to have
these divine Truths revealed to us in part, the meaning is not, that any real
part of the thing as it is in it self is exhibited to our view, and the rest
obscured; or that we have any indistinct view of the thing it self, as we see
an Object at a great distance. But the meaning is, that the whole is revealed
to us under the resemblance of some things in this World, whereof we have clear
and distinct* Idea's.

And thus it is plain that tho we may be said to have Idea's of God and Divine
things, yet they are not immediate or proper ones, but a sort of composition we
make up from our Idea's of Wordly Objects; which at the utmost amounts to no
more than a Type or Figure, by which something in another World is signified,
of which we have no more notion than a Blind-man has of Light. And now that I
am fallen into this Metaphor, which seems well to explain the nature of the
thing, let us pursue it a little; and suppose, that to a Man who had never seen
or heard any thing of it, it were to be revealed that there was such a thing as
Light. This man as yet has neither a name nor a notion for it, nor any
capacity of conceiving what it is in it self. It Is plain therefore God would not
reveal this to him by the name of Light, a word wholly unknown to him; nor by
stamping on his Mind any immediate Idea of the thing it self: for then it were
utterly impossible for him to communicate this Revelation to others as blind as
himself; for nothing but the same Almighty impression could do that. So that
this Revelation must be made by Words and Notions which are already in him. And
accordingly when he is told, that it is a thing which can diffuse it self in an
instant many thousands of miles round; and enable him to know in a moment what
order all things lay at a great distance from him, and what proportion they
bore one to another; nay that it could make him know where the Heavens lay; and
by the help of this he should there discern at once, a vast and almost infinite
number of very pleasant Bodies; and in short that without the help of his Stick
or his Hand he should know every thing that lay before him. After all, it is
plain this Man would form to himself an Idea of Light from his Touch, he would
think it very like feeling, and perhaps call it by that name; because this was
the best way he had of distinguishing one thing from another: and therefore
would conclude that those Bodies he heard of, must needs be wondrous soft and
smooth.

Just thus do we conceive the things of another World, so that we may rack our
invention, and turn and wind all those Idea's we have into ten Thousand
different shapes, and yet never make up any likeness or similitude, of the real
Nature of those Objects of another World.

And now I hope, he will grant it a thing possible for God to make such a
Revelation as this to a Blind man. And yet by this concession he destroys his
whole Book. For upon his Principles it were a thing utterly impossible for any
man that was born Blind, to believe there is such a thing as Light, upon the
testimony either of God or Man, for without the use of one of his Eyes at
least, he is so far from having any clear and distinct Idea of it, that he could
have no Idea at all of it as it is in it self; and therefore must never believe
that there is such a thing. Now it were a very pretty way of revealing the
nature of Light to this Man, by opening of his Eyes. Then I must confess Light
would be no longer a Mystery to him. And when this Man makes us understand (as
he has undertaken) the nature of God, and the things of another World, as
perfectly as that man does the nature of Light when his Eyes are opened, I will
yield. But till then, I must freely own ours to be the case of that Blind man,
in respect of all the Mysteries of our Religion: and before this wonderful Book
of his comes out, I am very positive that nothing less than the Almighty Power
of God is able to perform what he promises, since it requires the alteration of
our whole Nature, and the enlargement of all our Faculties.

But perhaps he will object here, If it be a thing thus impossible for us to
have any proper Idea's of these things of another World, what necessity was
there for any revelation at all of them? would not the immediate Objects of
Sense and Reason have done as well, without farther reference to any thing
beyond them? I answer, no. For the discovery of the things of another World
even thus far, is absolutely necessary to make men good and virtuous. Tho we
had ever so great a conviction of the innate excellency of Virtue it self, yet
this would bind us but like a Spider's Webb. We might perhaps have admired it
for it is delicate and excellent contexture, but it would have been of no
strength, to restrain the unruly inclinations of our Nature. The excellencies
of Virtue, without these Revelations, had been a sort of Bonds and Fetters
which would have sat as loose upon us as the Air; they would have served at
best only to have raised our admiration, but never to have influenced our
practice. And therefore since they were thus necessary, and that we are not
capable of any knowledge of them by direct and immediate intuition, there was
no other way of revealing them to us, but by analogy with the things of this
World. And this Imperfect way of Revelation is sufficient to answer all the
ends of God, since it is abundantly enough to all the purposes of Virtue and
Holiness: as the motions of the heavenly Bodies represented in a Sphere, is
sufficient to answer all the ends of human life, tho the Hypothesis be all very
different from it, and represents nothing less to us, than the reality of the
thing.

It being, as I hope by this time very plain, that we have no such proper or
immediate Idea's, either of God or the things of another World, as of the
things in this; we may from hence see the specious trifling of those abstracted
Metaphysical Brains, who bend their endeavors to bring down these hidden
things to the level of our present capacities of knowledge: whereas the finding
out a way of commerce with the Moon, or how to make a visit to the sixth Stars,
is a grave and serious thought to it.

The other Proposition I laid down in direct opposition to him was,

2. That tho we have no proper or immediate Ideas of these things, yet that we
are bound to believe them. And, That our belief of them is founded upon clear
and distinct Idea's. Not of themselves, but of those things by which they are
represented to us, and because of those proofs we have from thence of their
existence to our Senses and our Reason.

And here we are to observe what I made out before, viz. That in every Mystery
there are two things to be considered. 1. Something that we do comprehend
fully, and 2dly Something that we have no notion at all of. As to this latter
part of it, it is wholly exempted from the disquisition of Reason, and Faith
alone can reach it, for our Reason fails us where we have no Idea's. So that in
respect of this part of the Mystery, these and such like expressions of his are
very true, viz.

That the intermediate Idea can be no P. 14.
proof, where the agreement with both Idea's of the question is not evident.
And again.

That when we have no Notions or Idea's of a thing we cannot Reason about it at
all. For, as I have shown, we have no proper immediate Idea's of the things
revealed to us in the Gospel; and therefore we cannot speak one word of sense
about the real nature of them, as they are in themselves.

All beyond this World, as yet, is but a dark and empty Void to us; and we may
send out our Reason to range it backward and forward incestantly, till Soul and
Body part, and never discover the least glimps of light, into the true nature
of any thing beyond this scanty Sphere of ours. We have no intermediate Ideas
to make Inferences concerning them, and if we had, there could be no
application of them to things whereof we have no notion. So that thus far every
thing of another World is a mystery to us, and a new born Infant knows as much
of them, bating their existence only, as the learned man in the world.

But as to that other part of them which is knowable by us ( i. e.) as far as
we are able to conceive these divine things, by analogy with the things of this
World, either under the similitude of sensible Objects, or the Operations of
our own Mind, they fall entirely under the consideration of our Reason. Thus
far we have as clear and distinct Ideas of them, as we have of other ordinary
worldly Objects. And in respect of this part of our Christian Mysteries, all
these sayings of his are very true, viz.

That nothing revealed is more exempted from the disquisitions of Reason, than
the ordinary Pha^nomena of Nature. And

That nothing in the Gospel is contrary to Reason, or above it.

For all the Revelations of God are in a way suitable to those powers of
knowledge we have, and he requires us to believe nothing, but what is just and
reasonable. For as he says, To act tyrannically does only become the Devil. In
respect of this part of the Mystery, all that he contends for holds true. We
must have clear and distinct Idea's of the things; we must have intermediate
Idea's to find out the agreement between the Extremes. What need I instance in
any more particulars? I allow him thus far, all the Clearness, Perspicuity,
Evidence and Reason any man can wish for. And all the request I would make to
these Men of Reason is, That they would cease to ask for a rational account, of
what neither they nor we can have any notion of; and that as to every thing
else in Religion, they would be as exact, and critical, and severe in their
Reasonings as possible they can. And unless they find more reason to believe
the truth of those things revealed in the Gospel, than it is possible for them
to have for what any Man says, then I will allow them to be the only Men of
Sense, and that we are only soft and credulous fools.

It Is every man's native Right and Privilege to judge and examine every thing,
before he gives his assent to it; and it is this alone which distinguishes our
Christian Faith from blind Credulity, because it admits of such enquiry. For
tho we have no notion of the things themselves, yet we are sufficiently assured
of the truth of them, from those things we fully understand: And the constant
method of arguing in divine things is this; from the things whereof we have
clear and distinct Idea's, we infer the existence of those things whereof we
have no Idea at all. As for instance in this Proposition.

This Corruptible shall put on Incorruption.

I have a clear and distinct Idea of what it is for a Body to corrupt and rot;
and likewise I know what an athletick habit of body is, and for a person to
have a firm constitution, and to remain always in the utmost beauty and vigor
of a blooming Youth, which is the best Idea of Incorruption that I can frame to
myself now. And the reason I give my assent to this Proposition, is not because
I have any, the least notion of that immutable state of perfection which a Body
shall be raised to, and which is here represented under the notion of
Incorruption. But because I have sufficient proof for the truth of it, in this
Type or Figure by which it is represented to me, that it is possible for me to
have, ( i. e.) the concurring testimonies of Prophecies, Miracles, and the
Excellency of that Doctrine which they preached, who were made the instruments
of revealing this to me.

And thus likewise, tho we have no Idea of God as he is in himself, yet we
infer his Existence from those clear and distinct Ideas we have of the things
of Nature; which is the very meaning of the Apostle when he says, All that was
to be known of God was manifested in them, for the invisible Romans 1. 19.
things of him from the creation of the World are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made. It was for want of some Idea of him as
he is, that made the Heathen World run into Idolatry, and represent him under
the similitude of some of the meanest of his Creatures. And now by Revelation,
what we come to know more of him is, that we can have no Idea at all of him as
he is in himself: and as it follows it is this will one day render all Infidels
without excuse, because tho they had no clear and distinct Ideas of the things
of another World, yet God did not leave them without sufficient proof of their
existence; nay greater than it was possible for them to have for any thing else.

From whence we see, that there is an essential difference between Human and
Divine Faith, because the proof on which one is grounded is fallible, and that
of the other infallible; and consequently a greater degree of knowledge in the
one than in the other. This is one reason of using these two words Faith and
Knowledge so promiscuously in some places of the New Testament, because our
belief of a mere man, is but a precarious assent, but the Christian Faith may
be called Knowledge in a more peculiar sense, because we are obliged to believe
nothing, but what we have infallible prooffor. Which again shows the falsity of
that saying of his, which he lays such a stress upon. That Divine and Human
Revelations do not differ in degrees o^ perspicuity. For where there is a
greater degree of Knowledge, there is a greater degree of Perspecuity, but in
the Christian Faith there is a greater degree of Knowledge, Ergo.

And now we see plainly the error of those men, who out of a mistaken zeal for
the Mysteries of Christianity, have set themselves to defend them, by bringing
them down to the level of a man: and endeavor by thin spun notions, to solve
the greatest difficulties in them upon the Principles of Reason. These are very
rash and inconsiderate attempts; and when all is done, their failing in what
they aim at, is the best defense of our Christian Mysteries. If we had not a
determinate sense for the words wherein they are revealed, they could be no
Articles of Faith, And if they could be fully solved and explained, they would
cease to be Mysteries. This has given the Enemies of our Religion a great
advantage, for when they find they are not to be thoroughly accounted for (as
indeed they are not) upon the strength of Reason, together with the assistance
of that degree of Revelation we now have, they utterly reject them, as
inconsistent with those powers of knowledge which God has given us. Never
distinguishing between that part of a Mystery, which we understand clearly and
distinctly, and will admit of the strictest enquiry of the mor^sest Reasoner;
and the substance of the thing signified by it, whereof we have no Idea at all,
and therefore nothing can be more absurd than to raise any Disputes about it.

It would certainly be very pleasant, to hear two such quicksighted blind men
as I spoke of, dispute warmly concerning the nature of Light, and how many
seeming contradictions they would start concerning it, as, How any thing could
be in every point of such a vast space in the same instant? How it was possible
for them to touch so many millions of Objects at once? Since this was their
chief way of distinguishing one thing from another, etc. and fall out about
these imaginary difficulties irreconcilably. Whereas upon supposition, that it
was revealed to them that there was such a thing; which should make them very
happy some time or other, when God should open their eyes: Their business was
not to consider, whether they were able clearly and distinctly to comprehend
the nature of this thing; but whether it were really revealed to them, under
the notion of such things whereof they had clear and Distinct Idea's. If it
were divinely revealed, and they had sufficient testimonies for the reality and
existence of it, then they would have sufficient reason to believe it, without
any clear and distinct Idea of the thing it self.

So that we take a wrong method, against all the Opposers of Revelation and
Mysteries, when we go about to explain to them what is really inexplicable by
us now; many such profane and impious Books as these have been the consequence
of it. We are neither able to apprehend any thing of these Mysteries, nor if we
knew them, could we explain them so as to make other people understand us. It Is
the greatest Folly, because it is impossible; and the greatest Boldness,
because it is searching into what is hidden from us; and all these elaborate
Intricacies are but mischievous ^rifling. And when Men talk so much, o^ what
they have no Idea of, it must always end in darkness and confusion. That part
of a Christian Mystery which is intelligible and plain, was ever so; and that
part which is mysterious, notwithstanding all their vain endeavors, will ever
be so till we co^^ to another World.

Therefore our way to deal with these men is, to fix the right sense and
meaning of those Propositions, wherein the Mysteries of the Gospel are revealed
to us; and then to insist upon the Proofs we have for the truth of the
Revelation, and show that they are such as ought to convince any reasonable
unprejudiced man; insomuch that if they do not give their assent to them, they
shall be without excuse when they come to be tried for their Infidelity. Thus
we should turn the course of our Thoughts into a right Chanel, and confound all
these Enemies of our excellent Religion. For by freely owning (as becomes us)
that we have no notion at all of these mysterious things as they are in
themselves, we cut off a multitude of frivolous and impertinent Objections. And
show these men, that our Christian Faith however is no lazy credulity, or blind
implicit assent, since it is built upon a better foundation, than is possible
for any man to lay, without the concurrence of the Almighty Power of God:
insomuch that we are ready to join issue with them, upon the Principles of
Reason, in every point of our Christian Faith, as far as the things revealed
fall within the compass of it.

And therefore were I to give a reason of my belief of the TRINITY, laying
aside all affectation of hard words, and abstruse Metaphysical Notions, I would
do it thus.

I am fully persuaded of the necessity of Revelation in general, in order to
all the purposes of Virtue and Piety in this life; and I am convinced that
those Revelations of the things of another World, which are made in the Gospel,
have better proofs of their Divinity than any other whatsoever. They have such
testimonies of their coming from God, from Prophecies, and Miracles, and the
agreeableness of the Doctrines therein contained, to our common Notions, that
if I use my Reason with the same impartiality in these that I do in other
things, I must give my assent to them.

In those writings I find this Proposition,

There are Three that bear Record in 1 John 57.
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are one.

Tho we grant this Text was not quoted by the Nicene Council against the
Arrians, and is not found in many ancient Copies. Nay tho we should grant that
it was not originally in the Epistle of St. John, it is however a good Argument
for the Doctrine of the Trinity. For

If it was a Marginal Note, and so crept into the Text, this however shows it
to have been the Opinion of the most Ancient and Primitive Christians, who put
this Comment to the Text.

If they say this was put in by the Orthodox, it was done in opposition to
Heretics, and this was a sufficient evidence of their firm belief of the
Doctrine of the Trinity then.

But if this Text was expunged by the Arrians, who, as St. Ambrose observes of
them, were remarkable for this sort of fraudulent dealing with the Scriptures,
then there was a great deal of reason for restoring of it.

Tho it be not in some Copies, yet it is in others, and those very ancient And
that which may give us a strong presumption that it is genuine, is that it was
quoted by St. Cyprian a considerable time before the Nicene Council: and before
the Arrian Heresy ran so high, or that it was so much for the interest of any
party either to insert, or expunge it.

But however this be, we are sure the Scriptures with it are all of a piece,
and very consistent with themselves. For the substance of this Text is plainly
expressed in other places, which they don't deny to be genuine. And we make no
question but if it were in the power of our modern Heretics of the same rank,
these too would be left out of all those Copies, which should be transmitted to
posterity.


From whence, and from many other passages in the Scriptures, I find that there
is a Distinction made in the Godhead, under these three names of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, which the Church has expressed, altogether by the word Trinity,
and singly by the word Person. And I think these terms proper enough, to
express all that we know of this Mystery.

Now I find no account of the Manner and Nature of this Distinction in the holy
Scriptures, any otherwise than that the Son was begotten, and that the Holy
Ghost comes from the Father and the Son. I conclude there is something more
than a mere Nominal Distinction, because we are said to be Baptized, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Which must needs
import something more than if that Commission had run thus. Go Baptize all
Nations in the name of Jehovah, and of Elohim, and of Adonai. And if there were
not something more intended, than barely that they should do it in the name of
God, this were a needless tautology.

Again, I conclude that they are not three distinct different Spirits, for then
there must be three Gods, contrary to Reason and Scripture. From all which I
infer, there is in the Godhead something more than a mere nominal Distinction,
and something less than that of three different Spirits. And because I find
each Person seperatly as well as jointly mentioned as God, and Divine Worship
allowed and paid to them. Therefore as that excellent Creed expresses it, I
worship the Trinity in Unity, Athe.
and Unity in Trinity; neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the
Substance,

Now at the same time I make this profession of my Faith, I allow I have not
the least knowledge how strict this Union is, nor how great the Distinction. It
is as much beyond my Reason, as the Glory of God is beyond my Sight; and any
man who strives to conceive it himself, or takes pains to explain it to others,
is guilty of such a folly, that I cannot think of any action in nature
extravagant enough to match it. If we saw a Man stretching up his hand with a
great deal of Vehemence to pull down a Star, we should certainly conclude him
distracted; because it is utterly impossible for him to reach it, or grasp it if
he could. It Is the very case of those men, who go about to account for the
manner of that Unity, and Distinction for which they have neither Words nor
Idea's.

And therefore I say it again, in opposition to this Insolent Man, that I thus
adore what I cannot comprehend. This is one of those Mysteries revealed in the
Gospel, and it is never the less a Mystery for any thing he has yet said, or
ever will say; for the Union is inexplicable, and will be so to the end of the
World. However my assent to this is not precarious and implicit* or any easy
blind Credulity; but is ^ounded upon clear and distinct Idea's. For there are
three things to be done by every reasonable thinking man, concerning any
Proposition wherein a Mystery is revealed.

1. To be sure that he understand well the meaning of the Words. 2. That he
discern no Contradiction in them. 3. That he has sufficient evidence of the
Revelations coming from God.
1. As to the first of these, in respect of the Mystery I am now upon, I
understand very well the meaning of the Words wherein it is revealed; and they
themselves who oppose this Doctrine understand them as well as I; for if they
did not know what was meant by the Words, they would never set themselves to
argue against it; for there is no other way of con^uting Nonsense, but saying
it is such. So that thus far, if it prove to be true, these Propositions
wherein the Trinity is revealed, will hold good against them at the day of
Judgment, and render them without Excuse.

2. As to the second thing, I see no Contradiction in it; and if there were, I
would utterly reject it. For to say that Three are One, is so far from being a
contradiction, that there is nothing more common in ordinary discourse, than
for any one to say, that Three or any other greater number of things, are but
one; and if every man who spoke such seeming contradictions, were caught up
immediately, and forced to explain himself upon all such occasions, it would
make conversation very troublesome. As if one should say, that there are three
distinct things in a Man, a Body, the Animal Spirits, and an Immaterial
Substance, and yet these three are but one; and he should be forced to explain
himself and say, that his meaning is not, that three men are one man, or that
one man is three men. They who cry there is a Contradiction in this Mystery,
seem to me neither to know what a Contradiction is, nor what is the Christian
Faith concerning the Trinity. For we don't believe that the Divinity is One and
Three in the same sense; then indeed it would be a contradiction. But we affirm
the quite contrary, viz. that the Godhead is One and Three in different
respects. So that all this noise of Contradiction vanishes, and the whole force
of the Objection amounts to no more than this, viz. That we are not able to
conceive, in what respect he is one, and in what respect he is three; and
therefore because we have no clear and distinct Idea of this, we must utterly
reject it. I grant we are not able to account for this, and it is this that
makes it a Mystery, and if I could clearly solve the manner of this Union and
Distinction it would ^^a^e to be such. Thus much of it is purely the Object of
my Faith, and the Authority of God is the only ground of my assent to this part
of it. But then

3. I have sufficient proof of this Revelation's coming from God. I have for
This, all the proof that I have for the Truth of the Scriptures, and the Divine
Mission of the Persons who wrote them; so that I must either reject all
revealed Religion, or allow This to be an Article of my Faith.

But perhaps this man will Object, that tho he should grant it to be an Article
of Faith, yet it is so no farther than we can comprehend it. But I have already
made it out at the beginning, that both what we do, and what we cannot know are
both in gross called the same Mystery; and that my assent to what I do not
apprehend, is founded upon the Authority of God, but my assent to what I do
apprehend is founded upon Evidence: The first assent is properly Faith, the
last is Knowledge.

And so likewise if I were to give an account of my belief of the DIVINITY OF
THE SON, it should be thus.

I am convinced by the Completion of Prophecies, the Miracles he wrought, and
the agreablness of his Doctrine to the natural sentiments of our Minds, that
whatever Jesus Christ was, He came from God. I find him in many places,
assuming to himself the Name, and Titles, and Worship of God. In discoursing
with the Jews he uses this form of Speech, Before Abraham was I AM, on purpose
to signify to them, that he was that very Divine Being which was revealed to
Moses under that Name. And sometime after he tells them, that as he was the Son
of God, so He and the Father were one. That the Jews understood him in this
sense I am sure, because they took up Stones at each of these sayings, to stone
him as a Blasphemer, because he made himself equal with God. If these
expressions were not to be understood in the sense they took them, he would
certainly have undeceived them, and have made it known, that he was not God in
the sense they understood him; but that he was only a God by Deputation,
according to the wild notion of the Socinians. But he ^poke the Truth, and the
Jews understood him right, That he was eternal God equal with the Father, the
very same God who was signified by that sacred name I AM. And he has never
undeceived either them or us to this day; but instead thereof has used many
expressions to countenance and encourage this notion of him; and therefore if I
act like a reasonable man, I am under a necessity either of giving my assent to
this* or of utterly rejecting him as an Impostor.

Now had he been and Impostor, God who showed himself always very jealous of
his Honor, would never have confirmed this Doctrine of his with such repeated
Testimonies. If we suppose him to be only a Messenger come from God, and a mere
Man who spoke only by his Spirit and Commission, he would never have used such
expressions as must naturally be misunderstood, and lead thousands into the
gross sin of Idolatry, which of all others is the most detestable to God. Moses
was never suffered to enter into the Land of Canaan, for a much less suspicious
expression, and in the heat of passion too Must we bring water out of the Rock?
which was a vainglorious insinuation, that they wrought that Miracle by their
own immediate power, and proper efficacy. This comes much short of these
expressions of our Savior's, destroy this Temple, and in three days I will
raise it again. I have power to lay down my li^e, and I have power to take it
up. And before Abraham was I am. And indeed that passage concerning Moses,
seems to have been upon Record by the special providence of God for this very
purpose, that it might be a good argument of conviction to the Jews of the
Divinity of the Son, since this inference was very natural and obvious from it,
viz.

If God was so incensed with Moses for making use of one expression, which
seemed to encroach upon his Prerogative; then how far would he have been from
giving testimony, of much more frequent and greater Miracles, to a Person who
by many plainer expressions, assumed to himself the full power and perfection
of the Godhead; if he were not really what he gave himself out to be.

For this reason I say because I cannot reject him as an Impostor, therefore I
believe this Proposition, and confess, the blessed Jesus the Son of God to be
Eternal God equal with the Father.

Now thus far I proceed in this Mystery upon the strictest rules of Reason and
Evidence, and my Faith of this Proposition is founded upon clear and distinct
Idea's; for I know clearly who I mean by Jesus Christ, ( i. e.) that Person who
was born of the Virgin Mary, and Crucified under Pontius Pilate; I have a clear
and distinct Idea of what it is for one thing to be equal to another; and I
apprehend very well what is signified by the name of God here, ( i. e.) that
Divine Being whose necessary Existence, I infer from that clear knowledge I have
of his Creatures: And of whose Nature, tho I have not the least notion as it is
in it self, yet I form the best Idea of him I can by enlarging all the
Perfections that are discernable in the Creatures. And I have a clear and
distinct Idea, of what it is for one Person to be the Son of another. Thus I
understand the meaning of the words; nor is there any thing in them
contradictory to my reason. And lastly I have clear and distinct Idea's of
those miraculous proofs to the senses of men; and of those completions of
Prophecies; and the excellency of that Doctrine they confirm, the agreableness
of it to the common notions of Men, and it is natural tendency to make men easy
and pleasant and useful to one another. All which raise such an Evidence or
Knowledge in my mind of the Divinity of his Mission who revealed this
Proposition to me, that I must do violence to my Reason if I do not give my
assent to it. And thus far it is not so properly and strictly a Mystery.

But when I think of this Proposition again, Jesus the Son of God, is God equal
with the Father. I must own at the same time I give my assent to it, I have no
knowledge at all of that Eternal Generation, which I form an improper Idea of
from the Procreation of one Man from another. Nor have I any notion of this
wonderful Union of the Human nature with the Divinity. Nor can I in the least
imagine wherein this Equality consists. These and all other things relating to
the manner of it, are wholly out of the reach of all my Capacities, and totally
obscured from me. These are the things which make it a Mystery, and in respect
of this part of it, the Authority or Veracity of God, is the only ground of my
Persuasion; and my Christian Faith of this Article consists, in thus giving my
assent to the existence of things which I have no notion of, when he has taken
care to give me undoubted Testimonies, of the revelation's coming from him. And
I trust he will accept of it, because it is no rash inconsiderate assent, but
that I use those powers of knowledge I have, as strictly and impartially in
this, as I would do in any affair which immediately concerned my life.

And thus I hope it plainly appears, how little reason these people have to
talk to us of a blind implicit assent or easy credulity, since in our
Christian Faith we proceed upon the strictest rules of Reason, and build our
assent upon no foundation but what we know to be firm.

And now before I proceed to the other part of his Book, I shall repeat in
short the Principles he lays down ^or himself to go upon in this, and the
following Books which he threatens the World with.

The whole sum of his Logic in short then is this.

1. Evidence is the only ground of Persuasion (i. e.) you can never give your
assent even to the reallity or existence of any thing, but when you know as
much of it as you do of any thing in the World; and comprehend it as fully and
perfectly as that 2 and 3 make 5. which is plainly to say, you can never
believe any thing, but when it is so clearly known to you, that you cannot help
believing it; for no man can hinder his assent to a thing he knows perfectly
well: as no man can help believing that 2 and 2 make 4. A thing may be very
true indeed, and you not believe it; but if this truth be evident to you, your
assent must necessarily follow. So that you can believe nothing, but when you
cannot help it; and when you cannot avoid it, then you must believe it; P. 22.
for God has taken it out of our power to dissent from an evident Proposition.
and our kind Disposer has put us under P. 23.
a Law, of bowing before the Light and Majesty of Evidence, and therefore this
Man must make such an Idol of it as totally to exclude all deefrence, or assent
to the Word of the true God. For another Principle of his is

2. That Authority is only a means of Information, (i. e.) you can believe
neither God, nor Man upon their Word, for they can only relate a thing to you,
but neither of them can influence your Mind to an assent. So that to speak
plainly, it is all one in respect of your assent whether God, or Man, or the
Devil tells you a thing, for tho you are convinced that God always tells truth,
and the Devil is a Liar; yet still you believe the thing never the more because
it comes from God. Alas! the veracity of God is not to be regarded in the case;
no, you must bow before the Light and Majesty of Evidence only.

But suppose God and the Devil speak two contrary Propositions, as in the case
of Eve. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely Die. And, Thou
shall not surely Die. The words of these two Propositions were equally clear to
her; she understood the substance of them alike; and her Idea's of the things
spoke of were equally clear and distinct. What then was the ground of her
assent to the latter* it could not be Evidence, for according to him, both
these Propositions, had equal pretense to her It may be thought that I have
taken a wrong Instance, because at first sight, it looks as if it was the
consent only of her Will without any delusion of her Understanding. But on
second thoughts you will find, this is no other than to disbelieve the truth of
the History, which records this false persuasion of her Understanding as the
temptation which prevailed upon her; for the consent of her Will did not
follow, till the Devil had removed her Objection from that saying of Gods, in
the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye.
assent upon this score; and therefore nothing remains to be the ground of her
assent, but the Authority either of God or of the Devil. And we find by sad
experience it was the Authority of the latter that swayed her.

But it is plain, she had a greater degree of Evidence or Knowledge of the truth
of the former Proposition, because she kn^w it came from God who could not lie;
and yet we find she rebelled against this Evidence. Whereas had she been under
such a necessity of bowing before the Light and Majesty of Evidence, she would
not in all likelihood have transgressed as she did; and then he had not now
been falling down thus prostrate to Igno rance and Error.

That which shows the ridiculousness of these two Principles is, that upon them
we can never believe any thing that is to come, tho it were the next hour. For
tho we understand the meaning of the Words, and that the Prophecy be
concerning any of the most familiar Objects of Sense and Reason, so that you
have the clearest Knowledge of the thing foretold: yet unless you will allow
Authority to be a ground of Persuasion, you can never believe the truth of the
Relation; for no man can have any knowledge or Evidence of this till the thing
comes to pass. So that as to the truth of the Relation there is nothing left to
be the ground of assent, but the Veracity or Authority of some Person or
another. And thus he utterly destroys the Faith of all Prophecies; for tho they
may be true, yet we can never believe them so, till the relation is evident to
us; and this can never be evident to us, till the things actually come to pass.
So that this is a short way of destroying the credit of every thing in the
Gospel, which for the most part speaks of things to come.

I said before that in Divine Propositions, Evidence was a ground of Persuasion
in respect of the Relation it self, or act of Revelation; and here I say that
in respect of the very same, Authority is a ground of Persuasion. They are both
true; and therefore to make this whole Discourse more clear, and prevent all
mistakes as far as I am able, I shall once for all, show the diffe rence
between Divine and Human Revelations in respect of those three things, which I
said were to be considered in every Revelation.

1. As to the meaning of the Words, Divine and Human Revelations are upon equal
terms. They must be both intelligible alike, and thus far Evidence or Knowledge
is the only ground of Persuasion in each of them.

2. As to the substance of the thing revealed, in many cases they both agree in
this too, viz. That they are equally intelligible; for some of the Revelations
of God, are concerning things as knowable by us, as the ordinary Phenomenon of
Nature. But in respect of a revealed Mystery, Divine and Human Revelations are
directly opposite, for the substance of the thing intended by the revelation,
in one must be always intelligible, but in the other it is totally obscured. But

3. As to the truth of the Relation it self, or the very act of Revelation
there is this difference; that in all Human Revelations Authority is the only
ground of Persuasion; because no mere Man can give any proof, which shall
amount to more than a probability or strong presumption. But in Divine
Propositions, the truth of the Relation is founded both upon Evidence and
Authority. 1. Upon Evidence, as the truth of it is confirmed by Testimonies
which are certain and infallible, as Prophecy, or Miracles, etc. which can come
from none but God, and therefore create a degree of Knowledge beyond what is
possible to be had of any relation merely Human. 2dly. Upon Authority, as this
Knowledge is not directly of the thing it self, and therefore that we do not
know the truth of it by any direct or immediate intuition. So that these
Testimonies are only to convince us that the Revelation comes from God, and
then we give our assent to the truth of them, purely upon the account of his
Veracity. A third Principle of his is. That

3. Divine and Human Revelations differ not as to Perspicuity. (i. e.) You must
understand the meaning of the Words in Divine Propositions as well P. 42.
as Human; for as for unintelligible Relations, we can no more believe them
from the Revelation of God, than from that of Man. A very subtle piece of
Logic indeed, if he had designed no more than he spoke. But he has a farther
drift in it; he knew it was not every Reader would distinguish between the
Sense and Meaning of the Proposition, which we grant must be equally clear and
perspicuous in both, in order to an assent; and, The reality and existence of
the thing, and truth of the Revelation, in respect of which, the Revelations of
God always carry a greater degree of Perspicuity; because of that Evidence in
the Mind, occasioned by such proofs which it is impossible for man to give.
What I spoke of this before, I levelled at his design rather than his words, as
I am forced to do in several other instances.

But he will say perhaps, these proofs may make the Revelation more certain,
but not more clear. I grant they don't explain the words of it. But it is plain
the Proofs make the Revelation never the more true or certain in it self: But
it is in respect of us they make it more certain. And to make a Revelation more
certain in respect of us, is to make it more clear; and that is to add a
greater degree of Perspicuiry to it.

4. We can give our assent to nothing, but what we have clear and distinct
Idea's of. ( i. e) We can believe nothing but what we have the immediate
perception of Sense, or Demonstration for, or know by direct and immediate
Intuition.

Such stuff as this he lays down for Logic, and if you will argue with him, it
must be in his own Method, and upon his own Principles; and then to be sure he
will be too hard for you. But if you put him out of his Biass, and keep him to
plain undisguis'd Reason, and the received rules of Arguing, you spoil him
quite.

Now by this time who so blind as not to see? That the design of this Book is
To strike at the Root and Foundation of all revealed Religion. And now I have
thus brought this Man out of the Clouds, I need not spend much time in striping
him of his disguise; for the inferences he would have people make from these
Principles, are so glaring and open, that every body may see them. If Authority
be no ground of Persuasion, then we must not believe the truth of any
Revelation or Prophecy. And if we must give our assent to nothing, but what we
have clear and distinct Idea's of, then farewell all Religion both natural and
revealed. For we know all Religion natural and revealed is ^ounded upon the
belief of a Deity, of the Immortality of the Soul, and of Rewards and
Punishments in another World; but it is impossible for us now to have as clear
and distinct Idea's of these, as we have of a Stock or a Stone; but we infer
these truths only from those things whereof we have clear and distinct Idea's;
and therefore upon his Principles we must utterly reject them all.

And then since by clear and distinct Idea's he means, As exact and clear a
notion as we have even of sensible Objects, in one sentence he excludes all
assent even to the reality and existence of every thing in the Gospel that
respects another World; and rejects all those Methods of our Salvation, which
are spoke of in the Bible, as so many Dreams and Fictions. Thus we must
disbelieve the Resurrection and Change of our Bodies; the Happiness of the
blessed in Heaven; the Incarnation and Divinity of the Son; the Trinity of
Persons in the Godhead; the Operations of the Holy Ghost, etc. nay the whole
Christian Religion: Because, as I have sufficiently shown, we have not such
clear and distinct Idea's of these things, as we have of the ordinary
Phenomenon of nature.

He could not but see this, and therefore we may well conclude this was his
drift. But he did not consider atthe same time, that this would cut off all
assent to the very Being of God. And tho I am fully convinced, that he is the
most inveterate Enemy to revealed Religion, that has lately appeared in Print;
however I can scarce think he is arrived to that height of Atheism yet, as to
deny the existence of God, tho he has not as clear and distinct an Idea of him,
as he has of a Stock or a Stone.

As for his second Section, it is all Sect. 2.
foreign to the matter; and all that he says about seeming contradictions, is
plainly levelled at the Doctrine of the Trinity, tho Transubstantiation be the
instance he makes use of. And he proceeds upon the same fundamental Error he
has hitherto done, That we can believe nothing but what we have a clear and
distinct Idea of.

We say as well as he, That there is P. 25.
nothing contrary to Reason in the Gospel. P. 26.
That there is no contradiction in any point of Doctrine in it. That
Christianity P. 46.
is a Rational and Intelligible Religion, which are the things he insists upon
in this Section, and goes a great way about to prove very aukwardly. And
therefore what can he mean by it, unless it be to make unthinking People fancy
we deny all this. If he has any thing to object against our Doctrine of the
Church of England or Ireland, let him speak plainly: but nothing is more vile
and disingenuous, than for a man to speak thus indistinctly and confusedly, and
talk all in the general with design to make People think us guilty of those
errors we detest and abhor. If he has any controversy with us, let him deal
honestly, and instance in any one point of Doetrine we believe or teach, that
is contrary to Reason or Scripture; and make it out as plainly, as I have done
his Principles to be such. If not, let him own he had no other design but to
expose the Christian Religion, and it is Teachers; and gratify the Rancour of a
sort of People, who because of their lewd and debauched lives, must naturally
hate that Institution, which they shall one day be condemned by; and which
promises them nothing but Damnation in another World.

This Book which goes under his name, is exactly calculated for them; there is
a little superficial show of Learning to make it plausible, but not one
instance in all the Book of close Reason or Argument. Let him show me where one
link of my Reasoning fails, and I will make it up again so firm, that he shall
never be able to undo it. Whereas all his whole Discourse is a mere Rope of
Sand; many bold and false Assertions, sly Insinuations, and several things,
nothing at all to the question, huddled up together on purpose to patch up a
Book; and amuse such persons who have just Logic enough to be imposed upon by
a Fallacy, but not to see through it.

Now after this long digression of Sect. 3.
two Sections, in his third and last Section he comes at length to the matter
in dispute, but with what success we shall see.

Here he begins to state the question P. 6^.
again, and says a Doctrine above Reason, or a Mystery denotes one of these two
things. Either

1* A thing intelligible in it self, but P. 66.
covered with such a Vail, that Reason cannot penetrate to see what is under
it, till it be removed.

Which definition agrees perfectly to the Mysteries of the Gospel; for they are
all things intelligible in them selves, but in this life so obscured from us by
this vail of flesh and blood, that with our strongest Imagination and closest
Reasonings, we cant penetrate into the true nature of them, till this Vail be
removed; and then we shall see them clearly. Now this is not the definition
that he quarrels with, and if he will admit of this little enlargement of it,
we are both agreed. But the definition he finds fault with, is this.

2. A Mystery is a thing of it is own P. 66.
nature unconceiveable, and not to be judged of by our ordinary Faculties and
Idea's, tho it be never so clearly revealed.

I never met with any one Sentence, so fraught with absurdity as this is. For

1. It signifies a thing in it is own nature unconceivable, this is a downright
falsity. For every Mystery is in it is own nature conceivable; the more truth
any thing has in it the more conceivable it is in it self; the Mysteries of
Christianity are the Eternal Truths of God, and therefore are in themselves
conceivable. But it is in respect of us that they are not so, because of the
frail and limited condition of our understandings in this life.

2. Not to be judged of by our ordinary Faculties and Idea's, tho it be clearly
revealed. Now for a thing to be clearly reveald to a Man, and yet that same man
know nothing of it (which is his sense of the words, and which he would fasten
upon us) is a perfect contradiction. For it is no other than saying, that the
same man way, and may not know the same thing, at the same time. He can never
come off by saying that a thing may be clearly revealed, and yet the Person may
have no ability to apprehend any thing of it; for all Revelation supposes a
capacity in the Person to whom it is made, to apprehend something of it; and
therefore it is nonsense to say, that any thing can be clearly revealed to a
Horse, or a Stock, or a Stone.

3. Besides it is absolutely false, that the Mysteries of our Religion are not
to be judged of, by our ordinary Faculties and Idea's. It has already
appeared, that as to the thing signified and intended in the Revelation, we
have no Idea, nor faculty to judge of it as it is in it self. But as to all
those means, whereby God has discovered the reality and existence of those
things to us, we may judge of them all by our ordinary Faculties and Idea's. And
to make this plain, let us instance in the same Mystery of the Resurrection.

Our Bodies sown in Corruption, shall be raised in Incorruption.

This is one of the revealed Mysteries of the Gospel, and yet we are to judge of
it by our ordinary Faculties and Idea's. For we have Idea's in our heads of
what a body is; what it is to be sown or laid in the ground; what it is to be
raised; and what it is for a body to be improved when it is so. Besides our
Faculties of Understanding are employed, in considering those many arguments
which prove the truth of this Mystery; and therefore it is plain that by our
Faculties and Idea's, we can judge of that part of it which is knowable by us.
But he will say, we cannot judge of that part of it which is totally obscured
from us, and therefore so far it is no part of our Faith, and we are wholly
unconcerned in it. But on the contrary, we are bound by express words of
Scripture, to believe that this Improvement will be very great, as in 1 John,
3. 2. We know not yet what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear
we shall be like him. Here we are bound to believe that we shall be like
Christ, tho we know not what this likeness is, or wherein it will consist.

4. On this supposition, that a thing is in it is own nature unconceivable, how
is it possible for it to be revealed? This is another flat Contradiction ex
Part Rei, as the first was ex Part Hominis. A thing is in it is own nature
unconceivable, and yet it may be revealed ( i. e.) the same thing may, and may
not be revealed.

5. He makes a thing's being in it is own nature unconceivable, and not to be
perceived by our ordinary Faculties and Idea's, to signify the same thing;
whereas they are just as different as Light and Darkness. Tho our capacities
are now dark and shallow, yet they will hereafter be improved and enlarged; and
then we shall have extraordinary Idea's to represent to us what we have no
notion of now: And then the thing will be no way unconceivable either in
itself, or in respect of us.

These are not all the absurdities in this sentence; and yet it is the very
Monster this Knight Errant sets up for himself to engage with. It is the
spurious off spring of his own brain, and yet he fathers it upon us, by
introducing it with this expression, It is made to signify, etc. But it was
never made to signify this by any besides himself. I should read the Gospel a
million of times over before this definition of a Mystery would have come into
my head. Here he has made his own words good; That Contradiction and Mystery
are two emphatical ways of saying nothing; He lays down this absurd definition
of a Mystery, and then sets himself with a great deal of Solemnity to encounter
it, which is in truth no other than for a man to put himself into a ridiculous
antic posture, and then quarrel with his shadow for it.

It is hard to tell how to proceed with this man, he has been running away from
the Question ever since he began; and now that he put us in hopes of coming to
it again, you see how grossly we are disappointed. I would with all my heart
stick by the first definition of a Mystery, which with a little addition I
allow to be very good.

A Christian Mystery is a Divine Truth intelligible of it self, but so covered
and obscured from us now in this life, that Reason cannot penetrate the Vail to
see what is under it, till this Vail be removed in another life by the
glorification of our Bodies. Let him confute this definition if he can, for I
will never fall out with him about the other; he shall have it all to himself,
it is his own Creature, let him be as severe upon it as he pleases. But because
he has so blindly mistook the matter, I must tell him once more what it is he
is to prove, if he has any controversy with us in this point. He is to prove
these two things.

1. That there is nothing revealed to us in the Gospel but what we have clear
and distinct Idea's of, (i. e.) either a full comprehensive knowledge of; or as
clear and distinct notions, as we have of any ordinary Object in nature. And 2.
That we are not obliged by Scripture, to believe that there is any thing
intended in some points revealed, beyond what we are now able thus to
comprehend.
These are the things which lay upon him to prove, if he would have spoke to
the purpose.

It is impossible that any man should argue closely, who mistakes the Question
as he does* however I shall consider what there is in the rest of his Book that
looks like reasoning. He does not proceed to proof yet, but runs upon another
Digression, to tell us the signification of the word Mystery, and particularly
what it signified among the Gentiles. But what is this to us? it signifies
quite another thing among the Christians. But he says not, for in the New
Testament Mystery is always P. 68.
used in the first sense of the word, or that of the Gentiles, viz.

For things naturally very intelligible, but so covered by figurative Words P.
73.
or Rites, that Reason could not discover them without special Revelation. This
is the description which he gives both of the Gentile, and Christian Mysteries
in common.

But taking a Christian Mystery even in his own sense, ( i. e.) As it was
involved in Jewish Types and Ceremonies; yet they differ very much from those
mysteries of the Gentiles. For

1. The Christian Mysteries were not discoverable but by the special revelation
of God, whereas those of the Gentiles were discoverable by the revelation of a
man.

2. Besides it is absolutely false that the things involved in the Jewish Types
were in their own Nature very intelligible. For they were all of such a Nature,
that men could never have arrived to the least degree of knowledge concerning
them by strength of Reason; whereas there was nothing in the Heathen Mysteries
but what was in it self very obvious to Reason.

3. The matters contained in the Jewish Mysteries and the things intened by
them, were such as concerned the Eternal salvation of Men's Souls, whereas the
things contained in those of the Heathen were to a quite contrary purpose, in
order to Idolatry, and many other gross sins. And it is not without very good
reason I take notice of this difference here, for tho it does not hit this
description of his immediately, because he may perhaps say those were thought
to be the concernment of Souls too: yet it is levelled at the main design of his
Book, which by this time no man can be ignorant of.

4. The things contained in the Jewish Mysteries, the Priests themselves were
ignorant of; whereas the Heathen Priests for the most part knew the bottom of
theirs, and concealed them industriously from the People. And this is what he
would insinuate of all Christian Priests, viz. That we fully comprehend the
meaning of all these things our selves, and palm them upon the People for
Mysteries. Which is the occasion of those virulent expressions of his in this
Chapter, That P. 72.
through ignorance or passion we maintain, what was introduced by the craft or
superstition of our fore fathers. And calls it a Gainful Opinion; as if the
only design P. 73.
of Christian Mysteries, were to bring in Money to the Priests. he calls
Christianity as it is now received an Implicit Constitution; and says the P.
73.
Venerable Teachers, play at this small game to amuse the People. But he, P. 74.
like a sharp inquisitive man it seems, has found out our Mysteries, and is
resolved in his next Book to discover them all, and lay us open to the World,
like Heathen Priests as he makes us.

And now I come to his second Chapter of the third Section, where there P. 74.
is the first appearance of any thing like a reason; there is but one argument
in all that Chapter, and indeed in all the Book; and because he delivers it
confusedly, I will reduce it to form, and then we shall see clearly what force
there is in it. And if he thinks I don't do him justice, let him manage it
better for himself if he can. The whole strength of his arguing is this

If we have as clear and distinct Idea's of every thing revealed in the Gospel,
as we have of any thing in Nature, then there are no Mysteries in it.

But we have as clear and distinct Idea's of every thing revealed in the Gospel
as we have of any thing in Nature Therefore There are no Mysteries in the
Gospel.

The Minor he proves thus

If we have as clear and distinct Idea's of God and Eternity, as we have of any
thing in nature, then we have as clear and distinct Idea's of every thing
revealed in the Gospel, as we have of any thing in Nature.

But we have as clear and distinct Idea's P. 86.
of God and Eternity, as we have of any thing in Nature. Ergo

Now do but deny this Minor, and he puts you off to another Book for the proof
of it, and this is the whole substance of his reasoning here. But to pass by
the Impiety and Profaneness of that saying of his, That the Divine Being it
self is not more Mysterious than the most contemptible of his Creatures, I will
give him a reason why it is impossible for him ever to prove what he pretends.
And that is, because even the most glorious of his Creatures are finite and
limited, whereas the nature of God is Infinite; and therefore even when we come
to Heaven, he will be mysterious to us in a more proper sense than any thing
else, because we shall not even then have as full and comprehensive a knowledge
of him, as we shall have of the greatest of his Creatures.

That which he builds upon is this, P. 75.
That nothing can be said to be a Mystery, because we have not an adequate Idea
of it, and a distinct view of all it is properties at once. But who ever said
that the Mysteries of the Gospel were such only for this reason. I grant him if
this were all, then as he says every thing in nature would be a mystery, for we
have not a full and perfect knowledge of any thing. The true reason why our
Christian Mysteries are such in a more peculiar and proper sense is, because
the Idea's we have of them are more imperfect and less adequate, than those we
have of the ordinary phenomenon of Nature. This is the point in difference
between us, Whether we have as perfect and comprehensive a knowledge of every
thing revealed in the Gospel, as we have of any thing in Nature. This is what
he affirms, and we deny; and for proof as I said before, he refers us to
another Book in reversion. Here he only affirms it boldly, and instead of
proving that our notions of these divine things are as exact and full, as the
notions we have even of sensible Objects; he spends this whole Chapter in
proving by several instances, as of the Table he writes upon; of Rain, and a
drop of Water, etc. that we have not an adequate Idea of any thing. But why
does he thus beat the Air? who ever denied it? and yet this poor hungry
thought, is the only appearance of an Argument through his Book; it was for
this only the whole was wrote, and the only skill he has shown in it, is in
beating up so little Sense, into all this Froth.

Now because there is no Proof here, there can be no farther Answer: However
since he has ordered the matter so as to make it look like Reasoning, to amuse
the Minds of unthinking People, I shall show the difference between the things
revealed to us in the Gospel, and the usual Phenomenon of nature with respect
to the measures of our knowledge. And therefore

1. Tho we should grant what is absolutely false, and what he was to have given
some proof for if he had been able, that the things revealed in the Gospel, and
the ordinary objects of our senses, were upon the same level as to our
knowledge, that we are equally ignorant of both, and comprehend them alike; yet
his Inference would not follow from hence, viz That the things revealed in the
Gospel are not mysteries, in a more proper sense than a Spire of Grass, a Stock
or Stone. For tho we are equally ignorant of two things, yet there may be much
more behind to be known in one than in the other; and therefore upon this
score, may much more properly be called a Mystery. For certainly tho we knew as
much of God now as we do of a Stock or a Stone, yet sure he will allow there is
infinitely more yet to be known in that Fountain of all Perfection, that rich
Treasure of Wisdom, which is so far from being comprehended now, that he shall
never be exhausted to all eternity.

We may say the same of all the other Mysteries of Christianity, tho we should
grant our Idea's of them were as perfect, and that we knew as much of them now
as we do of any thing in nature, yet because they are infinitely more excellent
in themselves; and that there is much more behind to be known in them, yet they
would deserve the name of Mysteries in a much more proper sense than any thing
in nature. Especially if we add that they are not only more excellent in
themselves, but they are of much greater concernment to us, as they relate to
the salvation of our Souls, and our well-being for ever in another World: Which
makes them deserve more regard, and consequently a better name if we have it to
give them.

Wherefore we may well wonder what end any man could have in starting such a
notion as this is, unless it were to vilify and debase the Doctrines of the
Gospel; and cunningly to lessen all revealed Religion and it is Teachers in the
opinion of men, as if they already had too great thoughts of God and his
Revelations.

2. But there is a yet greater difference than this, for the things revealed in
the Gospel, as to that part of them which makes them Mysterious, are such as
exceed our present Capacities of Knowledge; whereas all the things of Nature
fall within their Sphere, and are in themselves immediate and proper objects of
our Sense and Reason. Tho many of them are such, that we neither do, nor ever
can actually know any thing of them. And to lay this difference open to all, we
must consider that this of being above Reason is an aequivocal expression, and
signifies two very different things.

1. It signifies a thing which does not exceed our powers of understanding; but
is concealed from us, and lies out of our reach, by some accidental impediment
or obstruction, which it is impossible for us to remove. And in this Sense it
is above our Reason to know certainly, what is at the center of the Earth; or
whether there be any Inhabitants in Saturn, or of what species they are; what
are the true motions of the Heavenly Bodies, and what order they observe among
themselves; and the different configuration of the little parts of matter, etc.
That which makes these things above our Reason, is not any thing essential to
them, but something accidental. And therefore we find our knowledge very much
improved, and promoted by the help of Glasses, which discover things that by
reason of their smalness, and distance were not preceptible by the naked eye,
nor certainly discoverable by Reason. So that we may say, many things were
above our Reason before these helps were found out, which are not so now; and
if these helps could be carried on, and improved to that degree, as to lay open
to our view the smallest parts of matter, and at the greatest distance; or that
a rational account were given us, of all the Phenomenon in Nature, by any
intelligent Being superior to ours, we should apprehend it distinctly and
perfectly, and then nothing in nature would be above our Reason.

2. To be above our Reason signifies, A thing which in it is own nature exceeds
our present Capacities, and is no proper object of those faculties of knowledge
which we are now endu'd withal. And in this Sense the nature of God is more
properly above our Reason than a Stock or a Stone, Eternity than Time; a
Spirit, than a Body; the Joys of Heaven, than Sensual Pleasures; the eternal
Generation of the Son, than the ordinary Procreation of Man; the operations of
the Holy Spirit, than the nourishment of our Bodies, etc. There is as yet no
proportion between these Objects and our Faculties of Knowledge; our
intellectual powers are not yet formed and so adapted for them, as they are for
those things in Nature, which are the proper objects of our Sense and Reason
now. So that it is a more improper way of speaking, to say that these things
should be clearly revealed to us now, as they are in themselves; than to say
that a nice point in Divinity or Philosophy, should be clearly explained to an
Infant. They are indeed plainly revealed to us as to their reality and
existence, but not clearly as to the true nature of the things. Nothing in the
World is more evident than that such things are revealed to us; but what or how
they are in themselves, is impossible for us to comprehend. And this is what
the Apostle means by that saying, That Eye has not seen nor Ear heard, neither
have entered 1. Cor. 2. 9.
into the heart of Man the things which God has laid up for them that love
him. Which Words, tho by the context they are more immediately spoke of things
past, and then revealed in part; yet they have a farther reference to the full
completion of all these things in another World.

I shall make this whole matter plain by an Instance. A Person who was born
blind knows as little of the Sun as he does of the real nature of God; he feels
the heat and warmth of it; he is cherished by it, and lives and thrives by the
secret influences of it; but he neither knows where, nor what it is: and if he
had been ever told that all this was the immediate act of God, he would have
thought so, for he knows nothing of the Sun besides the name. Now upon this
Authors Principles, the nature of the Sun, and the nature of God are both
equally a Mystery to this Blind Man. That he is equally ignorant of the true
nature of both I grant, however they are not equally a Mystery to him. And that
this may appear let us suppose this Man's Eyes were opened; then he would see
clearly that the Sun is a large, round, lucid Body in the Firmament: but he
would be hereby enabled to know nothing more of the true nature of God than he
did before. And why? because this is beyond the reach of all his natural powers
of Knowledge; and if all his Senses were improved to be a thousand times nice^
than they are, tho he would see much deeper into the nature of all things here,
yet the nature of God, and the things relating to another Life would ly as much
out of his reach as ever; he would even then know as little of the Glory of
God, as that Man did of the Sun before his Eyes were opened. for Light it self
is but a Metaphor, adapted to our gross Capacities to signify the Glory of God,
which we are told in the Revelations is to be instead of light in Heaven.

But because this is an Instance only of a sensible Object, let us take another
of Reason. Let us suppose an illiterate person, who never heard of
Christianity, or the Mathematics is equally ignorant of these two Propositions.

The three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two Right ones. And this We shall
be raised in the likeness of Christ.
These two Propositions this Derinder of all revealed truths will say, are
alike mysterious to this Man. Whereas the contrary will evidently appear if we
but take this Man and teach him Mathematics, then he shall perfectly apprehend
all that is to be known of that demonstration, and how it is impossible it
should be otherwise. But teach him the Gospel, and make him as learned as he is
capable in the Christian Religion, he shall know nothing more of that
Proposition (tho he shall be better convinced of the Truth of it) than he did
at first hearing. And why? because the one was a truth in nature, within the
sphere of his intellectual powers; the other is supernatural and he can never
have any notion of the manner of it, till he has new Faculties or those he
already has are greatly enlarged.

But this matter will clear up farther, if we compare some of the Mysteries of
our Religion with those things in Nature which bear the greatest Analogy with
them, and by which they are represented to us in the Scriptures.

If we say a Son is like his Father, we immediately conceive in our Minds the
same Stature, Countenance, Lineaments, and Complexion; or the same Humor,
Disposition, natural parts and Inclinations, etc. so that we very well
apprehend wherein the likeness consists. But when we say we shall rise in the
likeness of Christ, here we stop and our Thoughts can reach no farther.

Again when we say one Man is the Son of another, we apprehend very well the
manner of natural procreation, and how it is he came to be his Father. But when
we say Christ is the Son of God by an Eternal Generation, we know nothing of
the manner of one Spirits producing another; nor can we tell how he came to be
born of a Virgin without the concurrence of a Man.

When we say the Spirit of God has a real influence upon ours in the operation
of Grace, we know much less of the manner of it, than we do of one Bodies
moving another by contact: and we know the Food we eat nourishes us by
undergoing several alterations, and then being converted into the substance of
our Bodies; but we cannot know thus much of the manner how Grace administers
strength and comfort to our Souls.

Again we know of time that it is finite and successive, and we can measure it
in certain proportions by the motions of the heavenly Bodies. But as for
Eternity, for want of a clear Idea we frame a notion of it from time, and thus
by a limited thought we do little less then destroy it is Being. For as for
saying it is a perpetual Now, tho it be the prettiest thought we have of it,
yet if we attend to this we shall find, we say nothing more than that the same
Instant shall remain for ever; and thus attribute that succession to one
Instant of time abstractedly considered, which we used to attribute to things
which exist in it. And therefore it is as gross a description of Eternity, as a
flying Boy is of an Angel.

And yet it is very pleasant to hear how this man talks of it. It is no more
above our Reason because we cannot apprehend it, than a Circle is because we
may. But why? because Reason goes as far as it can in both. The Circle is to be
imagined, but Eternity is not essentially imaginable; if it were, Reason would
have it as well as the Circle, yes that it would: but you would not have Reason
to imagine any*thing that is not to be imagined? And yet but a few lines after
he will make us imagine it in his next Book as perfectly as that 3 and 2 make 5.

But this is a strange Circle in arguing, to prove that Eternity is not above
our Reason, because it is. And you see the cause of this blunder is, because he
confounds Idea with Imagination, one of the best distinctions we are beholding
to the modern Logicians for. It Is plain there are many things we have Idea's
of, which we are not able to imagine, and Eternity is one of them. And because
we cannot frame any imagination of it; it does not follow that we cannot
apprehend it at all, for Reason can frame an Idea of it as it does of the other
things of another life ( i. e.) by Analogy, and for this reason it is more a
Mystery than a Circle which we perfectly imagine.

Once more, tho the Essence of matter lies hid from us, as well as that of a
Spirit, yet we know much more of it is properties, as that it has Gravity,
Extension, Solidity, Impenetrability, Divisibility; and this Table on which I
write tho I cannot actually divide it into infinite parts, yet I can carry it on
in my Mind, and conceive it divisible. Now these are properties of matter which
agree to it in general, and are not mere modifications of it. But we know no
more of a Spirit but that it thinks ( i. e.) just enough to prove it is
Existence, and no more; for as to all the different modifications of Thought,
it is but thinking still; and therefore is answerable but to that one property
of Extension in matter.

Besides we don't attribute this of Thinking immediately and positively to a
Spirit; for we don't say a Spirit thinks because we know so much of the real
nature of it as to discover this: but we say it thinks because we can prove
that matter cannot.

Now when I say the Idea we have of a Spirit is not positive, I mean that it is
not so in respect of our understanding; because we have no way of attributing
it to a Spirit, but by a negation of it to matter. I must confess if we take a
Spirit in the sense that some men do ( i. e.) only for a Thinking Being, then
indeed we come to the notion of it by Reflection; we find something in us that
Thinks, and from thence we immediately attribute it to that Being.

But for any thing that is yet concluded, this Thinking Being may be mere
matter; and when we proceed to infer the existence of an immaterial substance
(which is the true notion of a Spirit, as it is distinguished from matter, and
in which sense God is said to be a Spirit) then the Idea we have of it, is as
far from being positive, as the words by which we express it. Then we have no
other way of conceiving it, but by removing from it Extension, Divisibility,
Solidity, etc. which are the properties of Body: and we conclude that the
substance in us that thinks must be immaterial, because this operation exceeds
the power of mere matter, i. e. while it is such; for if God should alter all
the properties of it, so as to make it something else, and not matter, then no
one can deny but it may think; but how far this implies a contradiction I shall
not now dispute.

So that again I cannot but wonder any one should affirm positively, that we
have as clear and distinct Idea's of the Nature and Properties of Spirit, as we
have of Body.

Mr Lock's Notion of the Soul is only Letter to the Bp. of Worces: P. 69, 70,
71.
that of a thinking substance without any regard either to the materiality, or
immateriality of it; though one would think he inclines to the former, when he
shows this to be the sense of the word Spirit both in Profane and Divine
Authors. However he says afterward that the utmost Proof we can have for the
immateriality of it will amount only to a Probability; and thus much concerning
it he thinks deducible from his Principles, and particularly from his
supposition of a System of matter; and adds that he would gladly see a better
proof of it either from the Bishop of Worcester or any one else. To speak to
this now would be no other then a digression from the business I am upon, but I
do not despair of giving him this Demonstration which he would so gladly see;
and showing him withal (...) ^ (...) how very much he is out in his application
of those Texts of Scripture he makes use of. I know it is easy for a person to
deny any thing to be demonstration which is not mathematically such; but if it
appears that we have as good proof for the immateriality of the Soul, as we can
reasonably expect for any natural or moral truth, this is sufficient for the
conviction of any, except those who by their Principles are obliged to oppose
it.

But to return, it is Evident from what has been said, that we are so far from
forming any Idea of Spirit as clear and distinct as that we have of matter,
that we cannot form a simple Idea of any property in it, which is positive in
respect of our understanding; and therefore since simple Idea's are the
foundation of all our knowledge as they are laid down by that Delicate and
Curious Head, which this man of Forehead only has so grossly mistaken; that
defect in the first principles shall run through all our after Reasonings about
the real nature of it, and render them much more confused and imperfect than
those concerning matter.

I might say the same of a Spiritual or Glorified Body, that we can frame no
Idea of it, but by negation of those imperfections that are incident to us in
this frail condition of mortality, and those few passages related of our
Savior's Body after his resurrecton, are wholly unaccountable by us; at least
much more than the ordinary appearances of Nature; as particularly his
vanishing out of their sight all of a sudden; and appearing in the midst of
them, at a time when the doors were shut, etc. and that these things were not
any miraculous operations, but the real properties of a glorified Body, is more
likely to think; than that he should have rarified the Door, or the Walls of
the House to get entrance; or have secretly conveyed himself along with them,
as some learned men have endeavored to solve these passages. Nor can we
conceive how a body should be divested of it is gravity, so as to mount the
Skies as our Savior's did at his ascension, and as the Bodies of the Saints
shall do at the general resurrection. None of these things are to be solved
upon the common principles of knowledge that are in us now, because we have not
capacities suitable to the nature of them.

So that now we may wonder what ridiculous meaning this man can have, when he
says that all the things which are spoke of in the Gospel, are as consistent
with our common notions as Wood and Stone; and that we are as properly said to
comprehend them; and that our Idea's of natural and divine things are equally
clear and distinct. A strange fallacious inference this, because we fully
comprehend neither, therefore we are equally ignorant of both. And to amuse
people that cannot see this, that he might seem to speak something to the
purpose, he borrows a distinction. viz. That between the Nominal and Real
Essence of a thing. How impertinently he has made use of it in this matter, is
very plain from what has been said; which tho we grant it to be a good one, yet
it is nothing to the purpose. But it is so far from being a good Distinction,
that it seems to me not to be good Sense. For nothing can be more absurd than
to suppose two different Essences in the same thing. Nor can any thing be more
directly levelled at those glorious Attributes of God, his Goodness and Truth
than what it supposes, viz. That we are thus deceived in every thing, and know
nothing at all of the true nature of things by those properties that are
discernable by us. And therefore to use his own words, This rather becomes
Impostors to think, than the tought of God who has no interest to delude his
Creatures, nor wants ability to inform them rightly.

If it had been said in plain language, that there is something in natural
things we do apprehend, and something we do not; which means all in that
distinction: This would have been Philosophy for the Vulgar; and therefore to
make a Mystery of it, it must be called the Nominal and Real Essence of a
thing: tho it carry a flat contradiction in Physics, and a monstrous
consequence in Morality, and lays a foundation for Eternal Scepticisme. But
supposing there is a meaning in it both true and innocent, yet it must be owned
this was the most unhappy way of expressing themselves, that possibly they
could have light upon.

Thus far as to his arguments from Sect* 3. C. 3.
Reason. Now I come to consider those he brings from Scripture: and we are like
to have very close reasoning from them, when in the very entrance he again
confounds these two Propositions. Whether or no Christianity is Misterious, and
whether there are no Mysteries in P. 90.
Christianity. Whereas even the latter of them is dubious; for the word Mystery
is used to signify several things. And therefore to remove all ambiguity, and
show the fallacy of his arguing we will lay aside the Word, and speak to the
thing it self, (i. e.) Whether we have not as clear and distinct Idea's, as
full and perfect a knowledge of all things revealed to us in Scripture, since
the appearing of Christ in the World, as we have of ordinary sensible Objects.

That we had not before he allows, and therefore he grants they were Mysteries
then, but now since the coming of Christ they are not. And the whole substance
of his arguing in this long Chapter is this.

If all those things which were signified by the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies
are clearly revealed to us, then they are no longer hidden from us.

But all those things signified by the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies are clearly
revealed to us. Therefore

They are no longer hidden from us.

Thus he proves the Minor.

If the Vail is taken away in Christ then they are clearly revealed to us.

But the Vail is taken away in Christ. Therefore.

They are clearly revealed to us.

And to make this Minor good, he brings all these Texts of Scripture, and
Quotations out of the Fathers; to prove that the Vail is taken away, and that
they are clearly reveald.

Now if any amongst us had absolutely denied that the Vail was taken away* and
had affirmed that they were not plainly revealed to us, then he might have had
an adversary: But there is not a sentence in this Chapter, that looks like a
controversy with any but the Jews. If this man would have argued instead of
Bantring; he would have distinguished, and shown in what sense we deny it, and
then have proved that the Vail was taken away in that sense that we deny. And
therefore since he has dealt treacherously, I must make him honest, and
distinguish for him.

And in order to make this matter very plain, we know that there are four
things to be revealed concerning any thing that is hid from us. It Is Existence,
it is Essence, it is Properties, and the Relation it has to us; and every one
apprehends at first reading how a thing may be clearly revealed as to it is
Existence, together with the relalation it has to us, and yet remain totally
obscured as to it is Essence and Properties. Now therefore what we say is this.

1. That as to the internal Essence, and real Properties of these divine things
reveald to us from Heaven, we are wholly ignorant of them; and know as little
of them in this respect now they are revealed in the Gospel, as was known
before when they were involved in Types and Figures.

2. That all these things which we call Mysteries, and now revealed to us in
the Gospel, while they were veiled in Types and Figures under the Mosaik
economy, were very much obscured as to their Existence, and as to the
concernment of mankind in them; and therefore the Law is said to have had only
a shadow of good things to come, i e. Men had but a very dark and imperfect
knowledge even of the reality, and being, and signification of those things. As
of the Eternal generation of the Son, his Incarnation, Crucifixion, Ascension,
the Trinity of Persons, Resurrection and Glorification of the Body, the
Operations of the Holy Spirit, etc. They had then no clear and certain knowledge
of the reality and existence of any of these things afterward revealed in the
Gospel, excepting only that of the Being of the true God, which was revealed to
them by Moses under the name I AM, which denoted nothing more than his
existence.

3. We say that these divine things, which were hidden and obscured before the
appearing of Christ, were all of them plainly and clearly revealed as to their
Existence and as to the Relation they have to us, ( i e.) as to the reality and
being of these truths, and our concernment in them. And yet they do not cease
to be Mysteries still, because they are still infinitely more obscured as to
their Manner and Properties, than the common objects of nature. So that now it
is clearly revealed to us that Christ is the Son of God, yet it does not follow
that therefore we know as much of the manner of that Eternal Generation of the
Son, as we do how one Man is said to be the Son of another. Because it is
revealed to us that there are endless Joys in Heaven, it does not follow that
we know as much of them as we do of sensual pleasures. Because it is clearly
revealed to us that we shall be raised at the last day, in the glorious
likeness of Christ; it does not follow that we know as well what this Glory
will be, as we know what it is to be of a Fair and Beautiful Complexion; and
so in all the rest.

And this is the reason of those seemingly opposite expressions of St. Paul,
the one in 2 Cor. 3. 18. where speaking of the Clearness of the Gospel, in
opposition to the Obscurity of the Law he says, We all with open face beholding
as in a Glass the glory of the Lord. And yet in 1. Cor. 13, 12. speaking of
this same present state of the Gospel, in opposition to our future state in
Heaven he says, That now we see through a Glass darkly, but then Face to Face.
By the first he denotes the clearness of the Revelation as to the Existence,
and Design of those things now under the Gospel: by the latter, he denotes the
present obscurity of them, as to their Manner and Properties.

But it may be objected here that thus they are but Types still, and therefore
the things contained in the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, are as little revealed
now, as they were before. But whosoever makes this Objection cannot but know
these two things to be true which I contend for, however we are able to
reconcile them, viz. 1. That those things signified by Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies since the coming of Christ are more clearly revealed to us than they
were before. And 2. That now they are more clearly revealed to us, yet we have
no Idea's of the real Nature or Properties of them, which I have sufficiently
proved. Whosoever allows these two things, must be of my opinion, whether I
were able to answer this objection or no. But it is easy for any one to
apprehend, that when I say the Idea's we have of the things of another World,
are no other than a sort of Types or Figures; I don't take them in the
strictest sense of the Words, as they are applied to Jewish Rites and
Ceremonies; which were all of them actions conversant about external Objects,
and designed to represent some divine transaction which was to have it is
completion in this life; and even then was to have a farther reference to
something intended by it in another World. But my meaning is, that the best
notion we can frame of a Divine Object, represents nothing of the real nature
of the thing to us as it is in it self; if any one finds fault with the word,
let them call them by what other name they please, since it is plain they must
allow the thing.

And now he sees, if he was really blind before, in what Sense this Vail is
removed, and in what sense we affirm it to remain. and if he thinks himself
able to do it, instead of proving operosely what no man denies, that the Vail
is taken away in Christ; let him prove the truth of it in that sense which we
deny, viz. That it is taken away, not only as to the Reality, and Existence,
and Intent, of the things revealed which we allow; but as to the Manner and
Properties of them, so that now we have as perfect a notion and compre hensive
a knowledge of them, as we have of the Manner and Properties of any thing in
nature; or in his own cannot, that we have as clear and distinct Idea's of them
as of any sensible Objects. As for instance Jonas's being in the Whales belly,
was a Type of our Saviors Burial and Resurrection, and therefore now this is
revealed he must make it out, that there is nothing more mysterious in our
Saviors Death and Resurrection, than in a man's being carried into a Vault, and
walking out again upon his legs. The feast of the Passover was a Type of
Christ, and represented the Lords Supper; and this now is but a Type of the
joys of Heaven, as our Savior himself makes it by those words, Hence Math. 26.
27.
forth I shall not drink of this fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new with
you in my Father's Kingdom. But this man must show us the real nature of those
pleasures which are here signified by the Fruit of the Vine.

And now that it appears what he was to have proved; to save me the labor of
transcribing, do but look over every Text he has quoted by way of Proof, and
try to make his inference from it, and then you will be satisfied that Quaker,
or any other Enthusiast never applied Scripture so impertinently. Do but apply
this distinction of a thing's being revealed as to it is Existence and Design,
and the Relation it has to us only; or as to the manner and property of the
thing it self, and then the little fallacy will appear which runs through his
application of them all. I shall only instance in the two or three first.

1. Cor: 2, 7, 8. We speak the Wisdom P. 90.
of God hid in a Mystery, which God ordained before the World for our glory,
which none of the Princes of this World knew, from whence he makes this
inference, viz. That this divine Wisdom was then a Mystery for want of
revealing Information. Who denies it? and to confirm this he adds the following
words. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
Man the things which God has prepared for them that love him; but God has
revealed them to us by his Spirit, which proves no more than what every body
owns, That it was impossible by strength of Reason to have attained to the
knowledge of those means, which God had appointed for our Salvation, and now
they are revealed it is only as to the truth and reality of their existence, as
to their Intent, and the Relation they have to us; and not as to the Manner and
Properties of them.

The things here spoke of which could not have entered into the heart of Man,
were the Incarnation of the Son, and the Descent of the Holy Ghost; which were
the contrivances of infinite Wisdom for the restoration of fallen Man; and this
was what the wisest heads among us could never have thought of. These things
were obscured in Jewish Types and Ceremonies, and at length God revealed it
clearly to us, that those were the means he had appointed for our Salvation.

Now the inference this man must make, if he would speak to the purpose is,
That therefore we now know as perfectly the manner of that conception wrought
by the power of the Holy Ghost in a pure Virgin, as of the ordinary way of
Generation; and because it is revealed to us that the Holy Ghost works in us,
therefore we must know the manner of it as perfectly, as we do that of the
nourishment of our Bodies by meat and drink.

The next is, St. Paul used great ^ Cor. 3. 12. 13.
plainess of Speech, Ergo they had as full and perfect a knowledge of every
thing he spoke as they had of a Stock or a Stone. Nay when he spoke to them of
the depths of the Wisdom of God, and discoursed to them how he was caught up
into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, without doubt they that heard him
had as lively an impression of this whole vision on their imaginations, as he
that saw it; nay as they had of the Man that spoke to them; and we may expect
no less from this profound Revealer of Mysteries, than that he will quote us
all these unspeakable words in his next Book.

And so by the following quotations he thinks he has knocked us down, when any
mention is made of the Mystery being made manifest or known to all Nations.
Ergo the very Manner and Properties of those things are laid open to us. And
therefore this Man (I warrant you) knows as much of the secret Councils of God
now, whose Judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out; as he
does of the dark contrivances of that Caball against all revealed Religion,
where the design of this Book was first laid, and the rest are now a forging.
For it is well known this Mystery of Iniquity does already work; but he who has
hitherto hindered, we trust will hinder, till they be taken out of the way, and
their wickedness be revealed.

And here if I were disposed to be merry, I could make better sport with the
History of this Man's life, than he has done with the Doctor and his
Parishioner; P. 109.
for I have traced him in this too, from the time he first gave out he would be
Head of a Sect before he was thirty years of Age, till he became an Author; and
from thence to his coming into this Kingdom to spread his Heresies, and put his
Designs in Execution. But I am now upon a Subject in Divinity, and not making a
Farce; and perhaps I may have another opportunity of giving the World a clear
and distinct Idea of this man, who thinks himself so formidable; and swells
with the fancy of having run down three Kingdoms only with one cross Question,
which is the foundation of all his Book, viz. How can a Man believe what he
does not know?

I come now to consider how he answers those Objections which are made against
this new Hypothesis of his in Religion.

The first sort of Objections he brings Sect. 3. C. 4. P. 120.
are three or four Texts of Scripture, which make nothing against either what
he, or we say in this matter; but such as Enthusiasts bring against the use of
Reason in Religion. So that they are wholly impertinent, unless he disputes
against the Quakers; and therefore I have no more to do here but to take notice
of the base disingenuity of the man, who by this would make unthinking or
prejudiced people believe, that we are those ignorant perverse Men he speaks
of; and put us upon the same level with the rankest Enthusiasts. Whereas he
cannot but know that we are as vigorous defenders of the use of Reason in
Religion as he can be. It Is by this that the truths of all revealed Religion
are established, and remain unshaken and the same for ever, in spite of all
the opposition of their subtilest enemies. It Is by this we confute his Errors,
it is before the Evidence and Light of Reason that all his Operose and laborious
Sophisms disappear like empty shadows, and vanish into nothing.

When we thus contend for the use of Reason in Religion, then on one side we
are charged as if we denied all Revelation, and when we defend the truth of
Revelation, then on the other side we are charged with laying aside our Reason;
as if we must needs cease to be Men, before we can be Christians. And therefore
I shall state a right notion of this matter as clear as I can in short; and
that by these degrees.

1. We allow that Sense and Reason are the only faculties we have of knowing or
judging of any thing either in Nature or Religion; and we allow that God in all
his Revelations applies himself to us by these faculties; and does not either
create any new ones, or make any essential alteration in these we have; for
then a Stock or a Stone would be as capable of a Divine Revelation, as a
Rational Creature. And therefore

2. We allow that what is not agreeable to these Powers of knowledge we are
already endued with, is not to be received or entertained by us; for otherwise
God who placed these in us, would not be consistent with himself, nor would he
have us so.

3. These Powers of knowledge are better suited to the present objects of this
life than they are to those of another; for otherwise we argue God of want of
Wisdom, and Contrivance, and if they were now as well fitted for the Objects of
another life, there would be no occasion for a change at the last day.

4. We affirm that all the things of another World, even after they are
revealed are totally obscured both from our Senses and our Reason as to the
real Nature and Properties of them as they are in themselves. And this I hope I
have sufficiently made out; so that if People will believe any thing at all of
another life, they must do so without clear and distinct Idea's of them.

5. That since we have not capacities for them, there is no other way of
revealing any thing to us relating to another life, but by Analogy with the
things of this World. Thus the Glory and Intellectual Light of Heaven, is
revealed under the notion of that we have from the Sun; the Generation of the
Son of God, under the notion of one Man's proceeding from the Lions of another,
etc.

Now therefore let me again distinguish these two things in every Revelation or
Mystery. 1. That Analogous object of this life, under the notion of which God
does reveal any thing of another life to us. And 2. The Thing it self that is
signified by it. As to the first of these it falls in all respects under the
severest censure and trial of our Reason, as to the latter it is wholly
exempted from it. As for instance in this Proposition,

The Saints shall reign for ever.

In this Mystery the thing revealed is the happy and glorious state of the
Saints in Heaven. The Analogous object made use of by God for this, is that of
the Splendor and Grandeur of a Kingdom. In respect of this latter our Reason
has full scope and it is not only lawful but commendable, nay our duty to be
very punctual and exact in our Scrutiny. And therefore we must know the meaning
of the words, and understand the matter of the Proposition; we must be
satisfied that it has no impossibility or contradiction in it. Nay more, our
Reason must be convinced, and we must have a clear evidence in our mind, of
it is coming from God by such Pr^ofs to Men's Senses and Reason of it is divinity,
as shall convince us that it could come from none but God; such as Miracles and
Prophecies, or the agreableness of the thing to our common Notions* and I am
not to give my assent to it unless I have this Evidence, which I allow thus far
to be the ground of Persuasion. Thus far we are ready to join issue with any
Adversary of Revelation and Mysteries purely upon the principles of Reason. And
to require it any farther is no other than to demand a rational account from
us, of what we grant we have no notion of.

God never requires our Assent to any Proposition, but upon such testimonies
and proof as shall cause this Evidence. But as to the thing it self which is
signified by this analogy, as the real state and condition of the blessed in
Heaven is in this Mystery, it is wholly exempted from the enquiry of Reason.
And herein is my Faith that I give my assent to a proposition which is
sufficiently proved to come from God, tho I have no notion at all of that
divine truth which is represented to me under the similitude of some worldly
Object.

And thus you see how Faith is nicely and most exactly defined. The Evidence,
or (...) demonstration of things not seen, because Faith is no such precarious
implicit assent, as these Champions for Reason think, but it is the giving our
assent to things which tho we have no notion at all of now, yet the reality and
existence of them are demonstrated to us by such proofs as raise up in our
minds the greatest degree of Evidence for the truth of the Relation. And it is
this that will strike all these Opposers of Faith and Revelation dumb, when
they appear at the Tribunal of God; because they will not then have it to say,
that God required their assent to any proposition, but what they understood as
well as they could understand any thing in this World. And for the Divine
Revelation of which, they had sufficient proofs (if they did but consider them)
to raise up in their minds an Evidence as clear and distinct as they can have
of any thing in this World.

And thus he sees how groundless all those Objections are, and malicious
Insinuations against us and our most holy Faith; as if we in any point of it
declined the strictest examination of Reason. We are so far from distrusting
our cause, or obliging men to walk blindfold, that we give their Reason all the
helps we can; and men are never better disposed for the belief of our Christian
Mysteries than when they follow the guidance and conduct of it. For our whole
Christian Faith is grounded upon the strictest Retiocination.

And therefore having stated the true extent of Reason in the Mysteries of
Religion, I shall now proceed to consider P. 126.
his Friend's objection against his Book, viz. That it destroys the nature of
FAITH. A shrewd objection it is, and that which he never will evade, tho he had
the wisdom of the old Serpent to help him. And that person whosoever he was
would have been more his Friend, if he had in time opened to him all the other
false and impious consequences of his Book; before it came abroad to spread
infection, and blast the credit of the Christian Faith. But now alas! it is too
late, for nothing is so vain as a man of some parts, where there is not a true
sense of Piety to qualify them: And therefore he is now to stand by it with his
Soul, and venture Damnation rather than lessen himself by a public
Recantation, in the opinion of a half learned and debauched sort of people,
whose interest it is to run down that Institution, which if it be true must
rise up in judgment against them at the last day. P. 126.


The force of the objection lies in this. If we can give our assent to nothing
but what we have a clear and distinct Idea of in the Mind, so as to believe
nothing upon the Worth and Veracity of another person, then there can be no
Assent distinct from Knowledge; and thus there can be no Faith either Divine or
Human. For if a man of whose sincerity you are thoroughly convinced, should tell
you That there are a sort of people in the Indie's, who scourge their Idols
severely, when any thing goes cross to their expectations, it is impossible for
you to believe this unless you see it. For tho you know the meaning of the
words, and apprehend clearly what an Idol is, and what it is to scourge it; yet
if the relations of ten thousand People, and ever so many circumstances
concurred to the truth of it, yet you can never give your assent to it upon any
other terms than he did who saw it, for nothing else can give you this evidence
or knowledge of the truth and reality of it, which he makes the only ground of
our persuasion

And then if we cannot give our assent even to the Reality and Existence of any
thing, but when we have clear and distinct Idea's of the real modes and
properties of it as it is in it self, then we can believe nothing either of God
or of any thing relating to another World; For I have made it sufficiently
appear that it is utterly impossible for us now to have such Idea's of them.
Therefore now let us see how he endeavors to get over this. My Reader thinks,
I warrant, that he is going about to reconcile the Christian Faith with his
Principles. But instead of this, he spends sixteen pages in showing you there
is no such thing as Faith; as you will see plainly. I shall take him in order,
and answer every Paragraph because this is the most plausible part of his
Sophistry.

First he tell's us that to be confident P. 127
of any thing without conceiving it, is no Real Faith or Persuasion; but a rash
Presumption, and an obstinate Prejudice.

If he means by not conceiving it, not understanding the meaning of the
Proposition revealed, he is in the right of it; but if he means by conceiving
it the having as full and complete a knowledge of the thing revealed, as we have
of any Phenomena of nature, it is absolutely false; for as I have shown at
large, we may give our assent to the Existence of things when we cannot conceive
any thing at all of their real nature: And that our Christian Faith is however
no rash Presumption or obstinate Prejudice, because it is founded upon
sufficient testimonies of the truth and reality of the propositions believed,
in things whereof we have clear and distinct Idea's.

This is the thing he drives at, viz. that we have a full and complete knowledge
of the things believed; and to make it plausible he says that God has no
interest to delude his Creatures, nor wants ability to inform them. ^rgo he
reveals nothing but what he makes them perfectly comprehend. Therefore he has
not revealed any thing of the eternal Generation, of the Son, the change of our
Bodies, the Joys of Heaven, of the operations of the Spirit, etc. because if
God had revealed them, he would have made you conceive the manner of all these
perfectly; and if he did not, it was certainly want of sincerity or ability in
him. But let this Blasphemer know, that it is neither want of Veracity, nor
Ability in God that is the reason why we don't conceive these things, but the
Weakness and Imperfection of our present state, who have no capacities for them
as yet. And therefore as we now give our assent to the Reality and Existence of
what we cannot conceive, upon that veracity of God which he has thus
endeavored to rob of all it is Authority, and Influence upon our assent; so God
will one day manifest his Power, in bringing all those things to pass, which we
cannot now conceive; and will so enlarge our Souls that we shall clearly
apprehend them, and all the Objects of another World. He proceeds and says that

God would loose his end if what he said P. 12^.
did not agree with our common notions ( i. e.) I^ God should speak Nonsense to
you in his Revelations you would be never the wiser* for if he should reveal to
you that a thing called BLICTRI had a being in nature, and not inform you what
this Blictri was, you could not believe it. Now this very Instance which he
intends by way of Ridicule of all the Objects of our holy Faith, does happily
show the true difference between a rational Assent and a blind Credulity; and
is a sufficient confutation of his whole Book. Let us therefore compare these
two words BLICTRI, and GLORY.

Of the first I know nothing more than that it is made up of seven Letters, and
therefore he that speaks it is a Barbarian to me. And as I know nothing of it,
so I can believe nothing concerning it, but the uncertain found it makes to my
^^t; and that seven Letters makes two Syllables in writing

As to the other word Glory, I grant I know as little of the real nature of the
Glory of God, and of the Saints in Heaven, as I do what that Blictri means; and
yet God does not speak Nonsense, when he reveals to m^ that there is such a
thing in Heaven as Glory. For 1st. Tho I have no notion of the thing as it is
in it self, yet it is represented to me by the brightness of the Sun, and Glory
of a Kingdom, the greatest Images I now am able to frame of it. 2. I am made
acquainted with the Relation this Glory has to me, viz. That it expects me in
the Heavens, that I shall enjoy it, and be made partaker of it; and that it
will render me happy beyond all imagination. But I am no more able to conceive
that Happiness, than that Glory of God which shall be the cause of it. And 3.
It is revealed by God with this design that it should be a prevailing motive of
my Obedience, and an incitement to the practice of Virtue and Holiness. 4. I
have not capacities at present to apprehend the real nature of it as perfectly
as I can apprehend any thing in nature if it were discovered to me. And thus we
see how God in all his Revelations does not speak Nonsense to us, tho we have
not clear and distinct Idea's of the things which are revealed. Nay tho we have
no more Idea of them as they are in themselves, than we have of what Blictri is.

Besides the Text he brings to back P. 129.
this Sophism of his, explains the matter farther and lays open the Fallacy,
Heb. 11, 6. He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. By which we see all that is knowable
of God by us now is his Existence, and the Relation he has to us, viz That he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. For I hope he will own that we
are bound to believe all we know of God, tho he flatly denies that we are bound
to believe any thing more in him than what we know, as well at least as we do
any thing else.

He goes on and asks, without conceiving P. 130.
Faith after this manner, ( i. e.) without making it nothing else but knowledge,
How could Christ be termed the light of the World? and how could we be said to
have the Spirit of Wisdom? ( i. e) unless he gives you as clear and distinct
Idea's of every thing he reveals, as you have of a Stock or a Stone. I answer
by giving us a clear and distinct Revelation of their Existence, of which we
should have been wholly ignorant but for him, for thus he has made us wise
unto Salvation, since he has given us a clear knowledge of our Duty, and backed
his Precepts with the promise of future rewards, which we have no notion of;
and the best thought we can frame of them is. That they exceed all that we can
think or speak.

But says he, That remarkable instance P. 131.
of Abraham's Faith will be objected. Yes it is objected, and the way he answers
it, is by saying as we do, and leaving his own Opinion to shift for it self.
God promised Abraham to give him a numerous Progeny in Isaac; after this,
before Isaac has a Child, God commands him to sacrifice his only Son; He obeys
upon this consideration, that God was able to raise him up again, by the same
power that he at first raised him out of the deadness of Sarah's Womb. Now the
question between him and me, is not Whether this Faith was a firm Persuasion
built upon P. 132.
substantial Reasons, which we allow and contend for, and therefore he says
nothing to the purpose. But the question is, Whether Abraham gave his Assent to
what he was not able to comprehend, which he must own; unless he proves that
Abraham knew as perfectly the whole manner of God's raising a Body from the
dead, or from a Womb past Child bearing, as he did the procreation of it in the
ordinary way of Nature. Had Abraham been able to demonstrate that God would
raise his Son, and to conceive exactly the manner how this was to be brought to
pass, then indeed it were no Faith but Knowledge; but instead of this he had
only the promise of God for it; and knew no more how God would raise him, than
he knew how he made the World.

After this he lays down several Observations P. 133.
to prove there can be no such thing as Faith, ( i. e.) an assent distinct from
Knowledge.

1. If Faith were not a Persuasion resulting from a comprehension of the thing
believed, there could be no degrees in it. I answer this is false like all the
rest, for tho I know nothing more of a thing than it is Existence, and the
Relation it has to me, and therefore am fat from comprehending it; Yet my
assent to the truth of it, shall vary in degrees either according to the Proofs
I have for it, or according as I weigh and consider them.

2. The Subject of Faith must be intelligible P. 134.
to all, since the belief thereof is commanded under no less a penalty than
Damnation. Who doubts it? let him if he can produce one proposition we believe
which is not intelligible. But because we don't fully comprehend the thing
spoke of, are we therefore wholly ignorant of any thing relating to it, and
must we reject it all as Fallacy and Imposture? If it be said He that believes
not shall be damned, Mark 16, 16. then what will become of him that takes all
this pains to show there is no such thing as Faith? especially since the Belief
there meant is something plainly distinct from Knowledge. For sure he does not
think the meaning of that text is this, He that has not as full and
comprehensive a knowledge of God and the things revealed, as he has of any
thing in Nature, shall be Damned, which is all his notion of Faith. Again.

3. If any part of Scripture were unintelligible P. 135.
it could never be rightly translated. A very wise observation, who ever
questioned it? But as I have shown there is a great deal of difference between
understanding the meaning of the words, and, having a comprehensive knowledge of
the thing intended by them* As I understand very well the meaning of these
words. When Christ appears we shall be like him, tho I am wholly ignorant
wherein this likeness will consist; ^o that I can however translate the sense
of that Proposition exactly and perfectly. And therefore it is such Wretches as
He who affirm the contrary, that plentifully furnish the Atheistical and
Profane, with all the matter of their objections against Scripture. But I hope
in time God will put it into the hearts of our Governors to remedy these
disorders.

4. Except Faith signifies an intelligible P. 136.
Persuasion, we cannot give others a reason of our Hope. It Is very true, it is
an Intelligible Persuasion, and grounded upon the strictest Reason. But he with
a hardy confidence openly pretends, that we deny people are to examine and
understand their Faith; and so runs into a comparison between Christ and the
Idol of the Siameses upon our Principles. Now he is past all Reason and
Modesty, and therefore I have no more to do here but deliver him up into the
hands of our Governors. We may confute his Errors, but it is They only can
suppress his Insolence; We only can endeavor to heal those who are already
Infected, it is They alone can hinder the Infection from spreading farther.

5. That either the Apostles could not P. 137.
write more intelligibly of the reputed Mysteries, or they would not. I answer
that all that we are able to understand of these Real Mysteries they have made
so plain, that they could not, neither need they have made them more plain and
intelligible. As for the other part of them, they knew as little of it as we
do; and therefore we don't Rail at them as he does at all the Clergy, as if
they had industriously concealed any thing from us which they knew themselves.

He goes on, ' It Is affirmed that God has a right to require the assent of his
Creatures to what they cannot comprehend. Yes he has, and accordingly does
require it. And again I say it is Blasphemy to affirm that in this he is guilty
of such a Tyranny as only becomes the Devil. He requires our assent to the
Eternal generation of the Son; the Trinity of Persons, and Divinity of Christ;
the Resurrection of our Bodies and change of them into the likeness of Christ
etc. tho we cannot comprehend them. And yet he is so far from acting like a
Tyrant in this, that he acts like a merciful God, and a tender Father. For he
herein condescends to our capacities, and Reveals the methods of our Salvation,
and the future state of Heaven to us, after such a manner as we are able to
understand them; and promises that if they have that influence upon us which
he designs, ( i. e) to excite our Gratitude, and make us Virtuous and Holy; he
will at the resurrection of our bodies, give us capacities to see them clearly
as they are in themselves. So that these Mysteries are to be understood at
last, but not till we come to another World. And therefore God does not reveal
them only to puzzle our heads, but for wise and P. 138.
excellent ends, viz. to bring mankind to salvation by such Methods, as are
consistent with the Freedom of his nature.

From all these Observations he con P. 139.
cludes, That to give our Assent to any thing above Reason in his sense is
contradictory. 1. To the ends of Religion, whereas I have shown at large that
upon this supposition, there can be no Religion at all either natural or
revealed. 2. To the nature of man, ( i. e.) because no man can believe what he
knows nothing of, but this Quibble I have sufficiently removed. And 3. To the
goodness and wisdom of God, who as he intimated before, is as much a Tyrant as
the Devil for requiring us to believe any thing we cannot comprehend.

If God had required us to give our ass^nt to what we knew nothing at all of,
he would have required Impossibilities; if he had required us to give our
ass^nt to what we had no Proof or Evidence for, he would have required what was
Unreasonable; but when he adapts the Revelation of things which we cannot
comprehend to our capacities, under the notions of things which we do apprehend
clearly and fully, it is the greatest argument of his wisdom. And when he
requires no assent from us without sufficient Arguments of Conviction to any
consi^^^ing unprejudiced person. It is a great instance of his Goodness. And
these revelations of things above our Reason to comprehend, as they are most
power^ul incitements to Gratitude here; so they will be the subject of our
Praise and Thanksgiving hereafter, when the Vail is perfectly removed, and that
we are enabled to apprehend them clearly.

Now after all this pains to show that P. 139.
there is no such thing as Faith distinct from Knowledge He says this will be
objected against him. He is in the right of it, this will be ever obj^cted
against him, till he recants his Error publicly.

But how does he endeavor to evade it? Why. That knowledge which is the present
and immediate view o^ a thing is not Faith. He says well. But what is.

Faith is only the understanding what is believed He will stand by it with Soul
and Body that Faith is nothing else. That the understanding what is believed is
necessary in order to Faith no one denies; but any man of common Sense may see,
that this and the other definition are the same; for pray what is understanding
what is believed, but having a present immediate knowledge of it, unless he will
say a man cannot believe a thing till he has forgot he knew it. That which
constitutes the formal act of Faith as it is distinct from Knowledge, is an
Assent upon the Authority of another Person. But according to him Authority is
no ground of Persuasion, and Faith is only the understanding what is believed,
Therefore there can be no such thing as any Assent distinct from Knowledge.

And now have I done this man any Wrong, by charging him with endeavoring to
destroy the Faith of the Gospel, and to overthrow the whole Christian Religion.
In the face of a Christian Government, and in Defiance of all Laws and Power
Ecclesiastical and Civil; He tells them plainly that Faith is nothing more than
understanding what is beliv'd ( i. e.) there is no such thing as Faith distinct
from knowledge; and consequently the Faith of Christians is nothing but
Implicit Assent and blind Credulity.

And therefore here again I would deliver him into the hands of the Magistrate,
not moved by any heat of passion but by such a Zeal as becomes every Christian
to have for his Religion.

But here he pleads a Toleration, but P. 110.
for what? I hope there is no Toleration for Blasphemy and Profaneness; and tho
men are allowed to believe what they please themselves, yet sure they may be
restrained from industriously spreading such Impious Notions as are destructive
of all Religion, and from openly reviling the Christian Faith as Imposture and
Implicit blind Credulity.

Again it is objected against him That P. 140.
his notions of Faith makes Revelation useless. Yes it does, for tho we
understand the Words of the Proposition revealed ever so well, and comprehend
the thing spoke of as fully as we do a Stock or a Stone; yet we can never give
our assent to the truth of the Relation; because that after all is done we must
take this upon the Word of another. But much more does it make all the
Revelations of the Gospel useless, because we have no clear and distinct Idea's
of them, and therefore must utterly reject them all upon this score likewise.

But in opposition to all that can be said, this Positive Man asserts here,
what he has been Asserting from the beginning of his Book, but gives no reason
for; That Revelation is only of use to inform us, whilst the Evidence of it is
subject persuades us. Then reply we, if so you must believe all Relations true
or false indifferently, when you understand the meaning of the Words, and know
the nature of the thing spoken of. Nay if two contrary Propositions equally
intelligible be related he must believe them both.

And therefore now I hope he will not take it ill of the World, if they believe me
when I inform them, that this Book which goes under his name, was the joint
Endeavors of a secret Club, who set themselves with a great deal of Industry
to destroy all Revealed Religion. And that they have made use of this Man as a
Tool only, and have pusht him before them, to try with what safety such
Principles as these may be openly avowed in opposition to all that is
established among us; that they might follow and openly maintain what they have
been forging in secret Cabals.

Now this is a matter of Fact, and whosoever reads this must believe it,
because they understand the meaning of the Words and know the nature of every
thing that is spoke of in them; for Faith is nothing else but understanding
what is believed, and if they understand P. 139.
what is spoke of they must bow before the Light and Majesty of this knowledge.
And therefore I hope he will never contradict me in this or any thing else I
relate of him; for if he says the contrary then either the World must believe
us both when we relate two contrary Propositions or they must be swayed one way
or the other by his Authority or Mine; and whether they believe him or me it
will sufficiently confute him, for it will show that Authority may be a ground
of Persuasion as well as a means of Information. If they believe neither of us,
then it will appear they are not under such a necessity of bowing before the
Light and Majesty of that Evidence he contends ^or in all relations.

The last objection he raises against this Principle of his, is that passage,
1. Pet. 2, 12. Where there is this expression, Which things the Angels desire
to look into. The things spoken o^ here are the methods of our Salvation by the
Incarnation of the Son of God, and Descent of the Holy Ghost. and it is said in
the time present that the Angels Desire to look into them. And I think it a
natural inference from hence, that these things yet are Mysteries even to them
in a great degree; which we need not much wonder at when they don't so much as
know when the day of Judgment will be, and therefore we may the less wonder
they are Mysteries to us.

But we will suppose that this expression is meant of the time past. And then
let me ask him these two Ques^ions concerning it.

1. Whether the Angels did believe those things they are said to enquire into,
or no? if they did believe them, then we find it is very possible to believe
things that we cannot comprehend; for if the Angels understood them fully when
they believed, why should they desire to search into them?

2. Whether, now these things are come to pass, he will assert that we have as
full and comprehensive a knowledge of them all as the Angels have. If we have
not, then we may believe things we do not comprehend. If we have, then there is
no difference between ours and the state of the B^est in Heaven, at least in
respect of knowledge.

The last Objection he brings against C. 5. P. 144.
his own Principles is That which is drawn from the consideration of Miracles.
And this likewise is so strong an objection against him, that the very
supposition of one true Miracle wrought in confirmation of any point of
Doctrine, quite overthrows his whole Book. For

1. The thing it self is in a great degree Mysterious, and therefore if he will
allow these things related of our Savior to be true Miracles, he must allow
there are Mysteries in Chris^^^nity. But he endeavors to evade this by the
same Quibble he did the Doc^r^nes of the Gospel being Mysterious, ^^z* P. 145.
by saying the miraculous action mu^^ be something in it self Intelligible and
Possible. Who denies it? but it is however Mysterious still..: And to lay open
this Fallacy we must distinguish the two things that are to be considered in
every Miracle. And 1. The substance of the thing performed we grant must be
very Intelligible and Possible, for as he says Contradiction is only another
word for Impossible or nothing. 2. The manner of performing it, which is
totally obscured from us, and lies out of the reach of all our Capacities. As
to instance in that Miracle of our Saviors F^^ding five thousand People with
five Loaves* We understand very well what it is, for a great number of men to
eat and be satisfied; and what it is for a small quantity of Bread to be
increased to a mighty bulk: but as to the manner how this was performed, we are
wholly ignorant of it, tho we know well how Corn is increased in the ordinary
way of nature.

But he will object here as he did concerning the Doctrines, viz. That at this
rate All the Phenomena of Nature are miraculous, for we know not the true
manner of any one of them. And this is the main drift of this Chapter, to give
us a wrong notion of a Miracle, viz. That it is nothing more P. 150.
than the dextrous management of second causes, and not any immediate effect of
Almighty God; and therefore in the close he tells us That Miracles are wrought
according to the laws of Nature, tho above it is ordinary operations, which are
therefore supernaturally assisted. * And this is the reason of that bold and
arrogant expression of his, That could he tell how a Miracle was wrought, he
believes he might do as much himself. For there is nothing more in it than in a
Chemical Operation, and if he were Philosopher enough, he would work any
Miracle of them all.

But the true notion of a Miracle is, that it is An operation wrought by the
immediate power of God, not by Assisting only, but Overruling the laws of
Nature; not only by hastening and accelerating it is Operations, but sometimes by
an instantaneous production, of what was never to be effected by the united
force of all natural causes. As to instance in the Raising a Body from the
Dead, all the united force of nature with the most dextrous management, would
not be able to effect this; all the E^tracting, Mollifying, Mixing, Infusing,
Consolidating, etc. And the ministry not only of Thousands but of Millions at
once would not be able to unite a Soul and Body again, when once they are
separated: nothing less than the Almighty immediate act of God is able to
effect this, and that without the concurrence of any natural cause.

Again, there are some Miraculous Operations which are so far from being
according to the laws of nature, that they are contrary to them. As that of the
Sun's going back or standing still, all the laws of nature are disposed for
it is motion, or at least for the motion of our Earth which makes it seem to us
to move.

Again, The making Iron to swim 2. Kings 6. 6.
Were this effect produced by Mollifying, Consolidating etc. or any Operation
which should convert the substance of Iron into that of Wood, then we could not
say that Iron swam, but something else; or if the water were condensed to
support it, then it would be Ice and not water; and if any thing of this nature
were don of a sodain^t would however be miraculous, but not contrary to nature.
But for a solid piece of Iron while it remains such, to swim in Water no way
condensed, this is not only above but contrary to the laws of nature.

And so likewise for Fire not to burn, is contrary to nature. Indeed if there
were nothing more in it than what this man supposes* that it is don by
repelling the heat, and keeping off the flames, then it might be according to
P. 145.
the laws of nature, and there are many things which by an instantaneous
application might extinguish the Fire. But to hinder fire from burning while it
remains such, and combustible matter actually in it, this is contrary to the
laws of nature.

But all those Miracles which are not so directly contrary to nature, cannot
however be said to be according to the laws of nature. And I take these two
expressions to be directly opposite. Which he makes the same, Miracles are
according to the laws of nature. And, they are above the operations of it. For
to instance in the first Miracle our Savior wrought, that of Turning Water
into Wine. The production of Wine according to the laws of nature. must have
been by accelerating the growth of the Vine, and ripening the Grape suddenly,
by application of all those things in nature which could forward it: but to
turn Water immediately into Wine, without any of these methods, was to produce
it afer a manner wholly different from all the laws of nature.

Upon his Principles we have no way, from the nature of the thing, of
distinguishing between the Delusions of the P. 147*
Devil, those celebrated Feats of Goblins, and Witches, and Conjurers which he
speaks of; and those which are wrought by the Finger of God. For without doubt
the Devil is a great Philosopher, and can manag^ second Causes, so as to
produce Effects according to the laws of nature, which shall appear very
strange to us. But we are sure nothing less than that power which is the Author
of Nature, can work any real effect contrary to it, or above it. The Devil
indeed may delude men's senses, so as to make them think that Real which is only
an Appearance; as it is likely he did to mimick that miracle of turning Aarons
Rod into a Serpent; for that of the Magicines was not a real Conversion, but
effected by their Enchantments, or as it is in the original by their Wiles and
Juggling. For we find when they endeavored to imitate Moses, in the
instantaneous production of any real thing with Life, there the Devil failed
them, and they were forced to own it was the Finger of God.

And thus we see plainly, how this Man strikes at the foundation of all
Revealed Religion, by undermining one of the main Pillars on which the Faith
and Credit of it is founded. You see his drift all along in every thing he
says, is to take away all Operations above the Laws of Nature, and all
Doctrines above the reach of Reason; and then all the Religion of Men is
consequently resolved into Infidelity, an Heathenism. So that any one who
wishes Christianity to be true, must hope at least that this Man's Principles
are false, since they are so utterly inconsistent.

2. But 2dly, As miracles being in a great degree Mysterious is an unanswerable
objection against him; so they are altogether useless and impertinent upon his
Principles. He owns P. 146.
that God does not work them at random, but for some end; and this end he owns
is for the confirmation of some Divine P. 150.
Doctrine. But why for the confirmation of a Doctrine? for he has told us over
and over, that it is only the Evidence or immediate knowledge of the Doctrine it
self can persuade us. That Faith is nothing more than the knowing what is
believed etc. And therefore all Miracles for the confirmation of any Doctrine
are needless and superfluous. If they are so evident to our Senses or our
Reason that we know them to be true, what necessity is there of farther
conviction? if a thing be so evident to m^ Senses or Reason that I know it to
be true, nothing can make me surer of it.

So that we see the reason of Miracles is, that they may be a proof of
something that we cannot comprehend.

But it may be objected here that at this rate, if both the Doctrines and
Miracles are mysterious, Then you prove one Mystery by another. I answer that
they are not equally mysterious, for a misterious Doctrine is totally obscured
from us, both as to the manner and substance of the thing signified, as it is
in it self. But in a Miracle the substance of the thing is obvious and
intelligible, and the Manner only of the operation is concealed. And therefore
in so doing, that which is more mysterious is proved by that which is less so.

But this Blunderer will tell you, P* 150.
that the Doctrines themselves are very knowable in all respects, but Miracles
are wholly obscured as to the m^nner of them; And yet in the some breath Own,
that these obscure Miracles, are for confirmation of these plain Doctrines This
is another pi^c^ o^ his Logic, to prove Notum per Ignotius.

He cannot say that tho the Doctrines are plain, yet that they came from God is
not so; and therefore Miracles were to assure us of this. For if the knowing
they come from God makes us give our assent to them, then Authority is a ground
of Persuasion. And besides if they have that Evidence of their truth in
themselves, which he contends for, let them come from whence they will we must
give our assent to them.

And now I am come to his last Sect. 3. C. 4. P. 151.
Chapter, wherein he pretends to give an account When, Why, and by Whom
Mysteries were brought into Christianity. There is not here so much as a
pretense of reasoning, but several vile Insinuations against all the Primitive
Christians, against the Clergy of all Ages, and against Christianity it self,
making it as it is now professed only a sort of Heathenism, and the Ministers of
it in all respects no better than Pagan Priests.

By the title of this Chapter he was to have shown how these Mysteries came
into Christianity, but instead of this (of which he says not a word) he talks
in general how some Ceremonies were introduced, and some Doctrines abused to
superstition. The dispute all along was about Mysteries, and now it is turned
to Ceremonies; of which he speaks too after a confused manner, making no
difference between the Orthodox and Heretical Professors, but charging all the
mistakes and errors of every Sect indifferently, upon the whole body of
Christians in the general. That miscarriages and errors crept in, and that the
Christian Religion was corrupted and abused by many in the Primitive times to
superstition is without all doubt; it is so now, and is like to be so to the
end of the World, for it must needs be that Offenses come. But what is all this
to those who are not guilty of these things? suppose every thing in this
Chapter true, what is all this to us? who in the celebration of Baptism and the
Supper, have rejected all these numerous Rites and superstitious Ceremonies
which he speaks of.

As for those Ceremonies retained by us, it is time enough to defend them when
he says any thing against them; and proves, either that the Worship of God and
Celebration of the Sacraments can be performed without any Ceremonies. Or, That
those which we have retained are unlawful.

All he would insinuate here of them, is that they were in use among the
Heathens; and the force of what he says, if it has any, is this. Heathens used
a White Garment in their Idolatrous Worship, they had certain Times and Places,
and Persons, and Actions, appropriated to the Worship of their Idols; therefore
it is unlawful to have any thing of this nature in the Worship of the true God.

The Heathens used washings, Ergo P. 157.
Baptism is unlawful. The Heathens used Eating and Drinking in honor of their
G^ds, Ergo the Eating and Drinking in remembr^nce of Christ is superstitious.
And thus by a direct and immediate consequence he destroys the Doctrine of the
Sacraments Let him i^ he can, show wh^t else can possibly be inferred from all
this ridiculous incoherent s^uff.

What he would insinuate here concerning the Sacraments is, that by a multitude
of Ceremonies we obscure the nature of them, we make them Misterious, and do
not celebrate them wi^h that simplicity they were at first instituted. But let
him in his next Bo^k show, what it is that we know our selves concerning the
Sacraments, which we conceal from the People. In short let him make out that he
has any other drift in this whole Chapter, than to show that there is no
difference between Christianity and Heathenism.

All this is by way of Amusement to People who do not know when a man speaks to
the purpose; Ceremonies are not Mysteries, nor do they make a thing Mysterious.
Those things which we call Mysteries, are the Nature and Attributes of God; the
Eternal Generation and Incarnation of the Son, and Procession of the Holy
Ghost; The Union of the Divine and Human Natures in Christ; the Resurrection of
our Bodies; the Operations and Influences of the Holy Spirit of God upon ours;
the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead; the Glory and Felicity of the Saints in
Heaven; The Solemnity of the last Judgment etc. These are the Mysterious
Doctrines of our Religion. Let him show us When, Why, and by Whom these reputed
Mysteries, as he calls them, were brought into Christianity. For we affirm that
they were brought into Christianity by Christ himself; who alone was able to
reveal them. That they came in at the first publication of the Gospel; and with
design to make us wise unto Salvation; and therefore we own our selves so fond
of them, that we P. 120.
will hazard any thing, Life and all rather than part with them.

And thus I have gone through his Book, and answered every thing that looked
like Reasoning in it. If he will show me where I have overlooked any thing that
has the appearance of an Argument; or where my Answer fails, I will promise
him not to let it pass. And if any are offended with my manner of treating him,
I doubt not but they will be satisfied* if they but consider what St. Paul said
to Elyma^ the Sorcerer upon a like occasion* O full of all Acts. 13. 01.
Subtilty and all Mischief, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all
Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?

In the next Book he speaks of, he has two things to perform.

1. To show that we are not obliged by Scripture, to believe that there is any
thing, in any point of the Christian Faith, which we do not comprehend as fully
and perfectly, as we do the common objects of this World.

2. To discover to all the World those secrets in Religion, which the Clergy
have industriously concealed from the Laity, under the notion of Mysteries, and
make them so plain that they shall cease to be such; so that every one of them
shall be as wise as e're a Priest of us all. And indeed he is much to blame
that defers it all this while; He that pretends so much Zeal and Concern for
the Vulgar, should not let them remain so long in Ignorance, to be thus
miserably imposed upon, by the craft and cunning of their Priests.

What strange unheard of Design this Man has in that second Book, which is now
a forging, is hard to tell. For by it he is to inform the World of things they
never heard or thought of; He is to reveal to us more than ever Jesus Christ
has done; and what never yet could enter into the heart of Man to think, or
into his imagination to frame any true and proper notion of. I^ The World had
any opinion of his abilities to perform what he pretends with this hardy
confidence, we should all of us expect this wonderful Book with much
impatience. Certainly by all these promises of so much New Light to the World,
which has lived in darkness so many hundred Years, we cannot guess he designs
to be no more than Head of an ordinary Sect, but to be as famous an Impostor as
Mahomet, He has laid a fair foundation for it, for he a^er's positively in one
place, that if he knew the way how a Miracle was wrought he would work it
himself. And again he openly says, That nothing related in the Gospel is
Mysterious, either as to the manner or Substance of the thing, and therefore
it is not unlikely that we shall have this man shortly confirming his Doctrines
with Miracles.

For my part, I cannot imagine how he will go about what he has undertaken;
however thus much I dare venture to promise him, that whenever any thing is
built upon that Rotten Foundation which is here laid, by the Grace of God I
will pull it down.

When this Book of his comes out (which after all will tell us no more
concerning these Mysteries, than what we have heard an hundred times over; but
by what he promises must take place of the Bible it self, which gives us no
such clear and distinct Idea's of the things of another World) Then we shall
give a better guess at the design of the Man. In the mean time, P. 150.
I shall only say a little more concerning the Pretended, and the Real Drift of
this Book. And

1. The Pretended Drift of it is* To free the Christian Religion from that
Darkness and Obscurity, in which it is involved by the Contrivance of it is
Preachers, only to gain a Reputation ^^ their Person^ and Profession; and ^^
make it such a Religion as God designed it, (i. e.) a Religion for all Men. But
how does he go about this? by scraps of Metaphysical Abstractions, which were
tolerable where he found them, but spoilt in the Application. By talking of
Adequate, Inadequate, and Intermediate Idea's; by the Nominal and Real Essence
of things; by Irivolous distinctions between the Means of Information, and
grounds of Persuasion; and by little Niceties concerning the degrees of
Perspic^ity i^ Divine and Human Revelations etc. This is the method this grand
Reformer takes, to restore Christianity to it is Native Simplicity, and make it
a Religion for all People* Whereas it is not One of ten Thousand that knows the
meaning of any of these Words and Phrases, by which he darkens what is in it
self* Plain and Obvious, and renders every thing in Religion a Mystery to them.
And yet this is the very man that talks so much against the new converted
Philosophers, P. 154
for confounding their Philasophy and Di^inity together, and by that means
rendering every thing abstruce by Terms. And who rails at our Clergy for
darkning every thing in Religion, and industriously concealing it from the
People.

2. As to the Real design of thi^ man, it is plain it is no other than what he
formerly declared, and wha^ he openly affects, viz. to be the Head of a Sect.
and set up for a Reformer. For besides many General Expressions, he has
several very particular ones to this purpose, as where he says, That P. 165.
the very Nature and use of the Sacraments are absolutely perverted and
destroyed, and are not yet fully restored by the purest Reformations in
Christen* do^. And that expression in the close of his Book. Because several
turned Lib^rti^es and Atheists, when Priest^raft was laid ^o open at the
Reformation; were Luther, C^lvin, or Zwinglius to be blamed for it? which is
spoke by way of Defense of that great Reformation he intends, whatever the ill
consequences of it are.

Now the Method he has taken to effect this grand design of his, is first to
Amuse the generality of people with a little show of Learning, by hard Words,
and several impertinent Quotations to get a reputation among them.

His next Business was, to insinuate into the minds of people a disesteem of
the Religion they now Profess, and make them believe that Christianity, as it
is now received, is no better than Heathenism; which he does by comparing Sect.
3. C. 6.
them in several instances, and tells us plainly He has said enough to show
how the Divine Institutions of Christianity, through the Craft and P. 163.
Ambition of Priests and Philosophers, did degenerate into mere Paganism. He
calls our Principles narrow bigoted Tenets. And in short says they are a
Mystery of Iniquity. He calls the present Theology, the Gibberish of our
Divinity Schools, and the Language of the Beast. He would have no Ceremonies,
P. 141.
no Times, Places or Particular Actions for the Worship of God, etc. P. 167.


And notwithstanding all these virulent Expressions, and many more through his
whole Book, against the Religion professed and established among us; He says,
That such is the deplorable Preface. P. 2.
condition of our Age, that a man dares not openly and directly own what he
thinks of Divine Matters, if it but v^ry slightly differ from what is received
by any Party; or that is established by Law. And therefore He that has openly
said so much already, what is it he would not say, were it not for the Laws?
Undoubtedly he has a great deal more to say, whenever this new SECT of his
becomes so numerous, that they shall outbrave the Laws, and labor for a
Public Reformation of all the Mysterious Doctrines of the Gospel.

Had this Man made any of the Mysteries of our Religion more clear and
intelligible than they were before, He had don worthily; and might have hoped
for a Reward from God, and Esteem from Men; And the Ministers of the Gospel
would have been so far from resenting it, that they would have thanked him for
it, and not failed to have acquainted their People with it. But by this
Scurrilous Libel upon all these Doctrines which are the ground and foundation
of Christianity; and by Railing at all the Teachers and Professors of it for
sixteen hundred Years, as if they had all been Fools, and Knaves, and Bigots at
the best, till He appeared in the World; He is justly become odious and
detestable by all Men, who have any concern lest for the Christian Religion.

It Is true he has set his Forehead like a Flint, and is prepared with
Obstinacy and Resolution against all that can be said or done against him. For
God knows he no more values this ridiculous P. 172.
Nickname of an Heretic, than Paul did before him. But sure there is a Acts.
24. 14.
great deal of difference between St. Paul's being called a Heretic for
Preaching the Resurrection of the Dead, 1 Cor. 15. 5.
and saying the manner of it is Mysterious. And this Man's Contradicting him,
and saying the Manner of it is not Mysterious; and by his Principels
undermining the foundation of all Revealed and Natural Religion.

Another way of effecting what he designs, is by loading the Clergy in general
with Reproaches, and charging them with most detestible Frauds to serve the
vilest ends. He declares himself in his Preface An open inplacable Enemy to all
Clergymen, who make a mere Trade of Religion, and build an unjust Authority
upon the Consciences of the Laity (i. e.) to all Clergymen who are not of his
opinion, he is a professed Adversary; and He hopes every good and Wise Man will
be the same. Nay the whole Race and Order, he calls an Usurpation on Mankind,
and P. 166.
a Diabolical and Antichristian Tyranny; Preface. P. 22.
and says that by the assistance of Mysteries we first erected our selves into
a distinct Order, and one separate Body; us if there were no such Order
instituted and appointed by our Blessed Savior. And to make us sure that this
is his Opinion, He says plainly, He Preface to the Lady's Religion.
sees no reason why all men indifferently, should not as lawfully teach, as
they are bound to practice their Religion. And again, why Women might not enjoy
the Privilege of instructing others, in the Religious Duties they are bound to
practice themselves, He wants still to be informed. That they may teach their
Children and Servants in private, all the World allows; So that his meaning is,
that they may Preach in public as well as men, tho this be contrary to the
express words of Scripture.

He insinuates every where that our Profession is but a Craft; and calls it a
Trade; and our Religious Mysteries a Preface. P. 19.
Contrivance only to bring us Gain and Credit: as if we had no sense at all of
Religion, and that a little Vain glory and profit were all our aim.

He levels the whole Book mainly at the Clergy, and does all he can to render
us odious in the sight of the People. And to do it more effectually, he all
along makes the Clergy and Laity two opposite Parties, and endeavors to raise
in them jealousies and suspicions of our gulling and abusing them, in order to
prejudice and incense them against us. And that his Sophistry might pass upon
them the better, he paints us out under the notion of Heathen Priests; he draws
their Picture, and then leaves the Laity to mistake it for ours; endeavoring
everywhere, to make all People of his Faith, who thinks that Priests of all
Religions are the same.

What this Man advances here, is but a Branch of that bitter Root of
Socinianism, which has opened a Door for introducing and reviving many of
those Heresies, which have formerly infested the Church, and troubled the Faith
of Christians. These Men differ among themselves, and there is as great variety
of them as there were of the Arrians formerly; yet they all agree in Destroying
Revealed Religion and the established Doctrine of that Church, of which they yet
profess themselves Members. Thus these Vermin engendered in the Body of it, at
the same time they strike at one another, do all equally contribute to devour
the whole, from whence they first derived their life and being.

I hope I need not here enter into a Defense of our Order, or make any long
Apology for the Ministers of the Gospel. This one Book of his, is a sufficient
Proof of the Necessity and Usefulness of the Clergy; for had it not been for
us, such ridiculous Sophisms as these might have passed with the People for
sound Reasoning. If it were not for them, whose business it is to confute the
Arguments of these pretenders to Reason, to lay open their Fallacies, and
detect their Villainous Designs; there would not, in a little time, be so much
as a Face of Religion omong us. And if the Experiment were not too dangerous,
and the consequences of it never to be retrieved, there could not be a greater
demonstration of the Necessity and Usefulness of the Clergy, than the universal
desisting of their endeavors only for a very short space, For then all
Religion would degenerate into Barbarity and Heathenism.

If we are guilty of all these Villainies with which this Man brands us, there
is no punishment either in this World, or the next too bad for us. But if we
are not, and that this Man does not make out what he so positively asserts,
then what will he deserve? We appeal to any Power that is able to take account
of the matter; And if the strength of all Laws Ecclefiastical and Civil should
once be so relax't, that every one may openly vent what they please against the
Christian Religion, and it is Teachers, without restraint (which God forbid)
then we must leave it to him to defend his own Cause.

The World is at this time so disposed for the reception of all Discourses that
seem to set up Reason and Evidence in opposition to the Revealed and
Mysteririous Doctrines of Christianity, that nothing less than the
Interposition of Authority, can stop this current of Infidelity and Profaneness
which threatens to overwhelm these Nations.

How far Men in Power, according to their several stations, are obliged to
intermedle in point of Conscience, I shall not now enquire. But sure I am in
point of Policy, it is become no less than necessary. For the writers of this
Strein have given broad Hints, that they are as little Friends to our
Government, as our Religion. This Man can say, That Magistrates are made for
the People, and every one knows, what Doctrines of Rebellion men are wont to
insinuate by this saying. And again he says. That God alone, and such as are
inspired by him can prescribe Injunctions Pref.
relating to the World to come, whilst Human Powers regulate the Affairs of
this. By which it is plain his meaning is, that they have nothing to do, to
meddle any way in the Affairs of Religion Now what would this man have said, if
he durst have spoke as plainly of Government as he has done of Religion?

Whosoever observes these men's way of writing as to this one point, will be
convinced they deserve to be looked too; Their Numbers grow Formidable, They
begin to speak out their Infidelity and Profaneness, as plain as some of them do
Treason; they are secretly forming themselves into Clubs and Caballs, and have
their Emissaries into all parts, which are supported by Contributions: And I
make little doubt, but that their design is at length to show us, That all
Dominion as well as Religion is founded in Reason.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have designedly left the consideration of those Passages he cites out of the
Fathers, to the last, to be considered by themselves; because many Persons who
will read the rational part, don't care for troubling themselves with the
examination of these. And indeed, because I designed to dwell much longer upon
them, than I find the length of this Letter already will permit.

The very Quoting of the Fathers, is a confutation of himself; for if there be
no other ground of Persuasion but Evidence, what can the Authority of the
Fathers signify to incline Men's Assent either one way or the other? and indeed
of Scripture it self? All Quotations Divine or Human are useless and
impertinent upon his Principles. For what he would persuade by them is evident
in it self or it is not. If it be evident, we shall certainly believe it, let
who will say it; but if the truth of it be not evident from the nature of the
thing it self, all the Pompous Citations in the World signify nothing.

He was sensible of this, and that is the true reason why he gives the Fathers
as foul language, as he does the modern Clergy; not considering that the same
objection holds against the Bible it self. For if the Authority of God be not a
ground of Persuasion, then a Text out of the Bible will be of as little ^orce,
as a Quotation out of any fabulous Heathen Author, to influenceo ur Assent to
any Proposition.

He introduces them after the most scornful manner he could contrive, and says,
that the mentioning of Schutcheons puts him in mind of the Judgment of the
Primitive Church. And in another place he has this expression, by way of
ridicule, The Fathers, The admired Fathers* their Opinions he calls Whymsies.
And their Works insuperable Labyrinths. And calls the just Esteem we have for
them, A Blind Veneration for those who lived before us. He never mentions them
without the greatest contemt, and says, He is not to be put out of countenance
by Venerable names, and Pompous Citations, that have no value, but such as an
ugly Rust and Color give ancient Coins.

But this similitude that he designs by way of derision, does very well express
the worth and usefulness of the Fathers. For as ancient Coins are now of no
greater intrinsic value than the bare weight of the Metal they are made of;
yet they are of excellent use to give us light into the times and customs of
Antiquity, and upon that score are of vasily greater value than any modern
Coins. So it is with the Fathers; they were Men, and wrote like such; and tho
we should grant that some of their works, are not in themselves more excellent
than what has been written in after ages; yet these Writings of theirs are
much more to be valued, because they lived nearer the times of Christ and his
Apostles, and therefore had greater advantages of coming to right apprehensions
of all things relating to Christianity, than it is possible for any after them
to have. Not but that some of them seem to have wrote by a more peculiar
influence of the Spirit.

And therefore this Man's arrogant treatment of the Fathers, puts me in mind of
that passage of the ignorant Childrens reviling the Prophet, and calling him
Baldpate; who saw nothing of him beyond those common infirmities that are
incident to Human Nature, and did not discern any thing of the Divine Spirit
that was in him.

We do not blindly and implicitly acquiesce in any thing they say, but we have
a just Veneration for them, and deserence to their Authority; And if he could
have produced any thing from them which had made against us, we would have
owned he had gaind a great point. But all the Citations he produces, are only
to prove that the things revealed under the Gospel, were called Mysteries under
the Law; and That the Vail is taken away, both which we allow. Let him bring
one Text out of the Bible, or one Quotation out of the Fathers, to prove that
the Vail is taken away in the sense that we deny, ( i. e.) in respect of the
true Nature, and real Properties of those things which we call Mysteries For
that it is taken away as to the Existence of those things, and as to the
Relation they have to us, as to the intent and design of them we allow.

And this is a sufficient answer to all his Quotations, if he brought a
thousand more to the same purpose he has don these. However I shall consider
them in particular. And

1. He says STROM. Lib. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus has the same notion of Mysteries with him. For he says
the Christian Discipline was called (...) or Illumination, because it brought
hidden things to light. Very true. But not because it brought them so to light,
as to discover the real Nature and Properties of every thing revealed; and give
us as clear and distinct notions of all divine things as they are in
themselves, as we have even of sensible Objects, Which this Man ridiculously
contends for. And this he would have seen if he had read but Ten Lines farther,
where he has this Expression,

(...) etc.

By which he affirms the nature of God, to be above all we can conceive or
speak of him. So that it is plain the Father in direct opposition to this
Scribler, is of opinion that God is still Mysterious, notwithstanding all the
Revelations we have of him.

The whole drift of the former part of that 5th. Book, is to show that the true
nature of FAITH, consists in giving our assent to the truth of things which we
cannot know, upon the Authority of God; and to this he applies that Text of the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 2. 5 where he advises us that our Faith should not be founded
on the Wisdom of Men, who as he explains it pretend to make us know every thing
we believe. But on the Veracity of God, who saves us by pure Faith, without
that Evidence of the thing it self, which some Men require. The Father's own
words are these.

(...).

and therefore he elegantly calls Faith the Ears of the Soul, (...)* because by
this we are disposed, to listen to Discourses of those things which we cannot
comprehend. Not that he supposes we are ignorant of the meaning of any
Proposition we believe, and therefore he says

(...)

There is no Knowledge without Faith, no^ Faith without Knowledge.

And he here makes a manifest difference, between that Assent which is the
immediate effect of Knowledge, and that which is properly Faith. And then asks
this Question

(...).

Who is so estranged from God, so much an Infidel, as not to believe him upon
his word; but require the same Evidence, and clear Knowledge of the things
revealed from God, as he requires from men? I answer, This Man of unparalled
Impudence, who has quoted this same 5th Book of his, against himself and us,
to prove the quite contrary to what he thus positively asserts.

The next Father he Q^otes against us, is Justin Martyr. Who says, Moses with
his hands stretched out at the Battle with the Amalakstes, was a Type of Christ
Crucified. And He uses these words Tipe, Simbol, Mystery etc. to signify
things once hid, but now revealed. So do we all to this day use these words, to
express those things which were once hid, and now revealed; and yet there are
Mysteries in the Christian Religion for all that. And if he will look into his
Tract of a True Confession of Faith, He will never again cite this Father
against us, at least in this Controversy; but call him all to naught as he has
done us. When he had been speaking of the Union of the Divine and Human Nature
in the Person of Christ, and proposed many intricate and insuperable
difficulties concerning this Article of our Faith, Perhaps says he these
unconceivable difficulties may perplex your mind, and stagger your Faith. As
for me when I am in, any perplexity about these CHRISTIAN MYSTERIES, I cry out.

(...).

That those things of our Religion are above our faculties of Knowledge, above
REASON, above the capacities of created Nature.

And it follows, That there is no other Solution to be given of these things,
but that of a READY FAITH He argues moreover, the impossibility of coming to
the true knowledge of these Divine Objects, from the disproportion there is
between them, and our present capacities. And ask's this Question.

(...).

With what Confidence can ye go about to give an exact Solution of Divine
things? I leave this man who is concerned, to give him an answer.

The next Quotation is out of Tertullian, who has this expression in his
Apology. Cum vel ex Forma omnibus Mysteriis silentij fiides habeatur etc. He is
in that place defending the Christians, from those crimes of Incest, Adultery,
and murdering of Children, which the Heathen charged them, as being guilty of
in there meetings. That they were groundless Rumors and nothing more, He
argues thus; These things must be first discovered either by our selves, or
others; not by others, because they have no way to know them, but by such as
are privy to them; not by our selves, for none who are guilty of such horrid
Crimes, would discover things which must expose them to the immediate
punishment of the Laws, tho the vengeance of God were deser'd.

And the force of the comparison with the Heathen Mysteries lies in this. If
the Samothracian and Elusinian Mysteries are kept so secret, which are not of
such dangerous consequence to discover; How much more must you think such
Herrid and dangerous Mysteries as you suppose ours to be, will be kept secret.
And his In^erence is very natural viz That these things must needs be mere
Rumor, since if they were true they would not be discovered; or, if they were
discovered, must expect no mercy from the Heathen, who would be sure not to
spare them. And therefore he says.

Dicimur sceleratissimi, dicimur tamen semper; nec vos quod tam diu Dicimur
eruere cu^atis. Ergo aut cruite si creditis, aut nolite credere qui non
eruis^is.

This is the whole scope of the place, and how this man will wrest his
Inference out of it. Ergo, There are no Mysteries in Christianity, I cannot
imagine.

The last He cites is Origin. Who says, That the Doctrines of our Religion do
all agree with our COMMON NOTIONS. (i. e.) as far as we are able to know of
them. But this does not prove, That there is nothing more intended by them,
than what we Know as well, as we do the ordinary Objects of our Senses.

Again He says The Land of Promise was a Type of Heaven. This Man's Inference
is, Ergo, Now this is known, the state and condition of the blessed in Heaven can
be no Mystery to us.

That whole sixth Book of his against Celsus is to show, the direct contrary to
what this man infists upon in his last Chap. viz. To prove against that
Heretic, That the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, were not originally
derived from the Idolatrous and Superstitious Customs of the Heathen. Let him
answer that Book before he sets about answering Mine.

These are all his Pompous Citations from the Fathers, to prove what no one
denies. That the Vail is removed, and that therefore nothing in Christianity,
no not the Nature of God is Mysterious.

Now after all I find this is no new Heresy, but an old one of Eunomius
revived, who affirmed, The Real true Nature of God to be intelligible by us,
Basil: Con: Euno^
which was long ago con^ured in all the branches of it by St. Basil.

It is to no purpose to heap up Quotations here, to prove that the opinion of
the Fathers was, That we know nothing of the true Nature of God, there is not
any thing which occurs more frequently in them, and that they are more express
in. Greg: Nazianzen calls God (...), and in the same Him Hymnus ad Deum.
to God he has this verse.

(...)

How can the mind frame any Notion of thee, who art incomprehensible?

Having thus shown to how little purpose his Citations out of the Fathers are,
and how the Nature of God is truly Mysterious; Because what I have spoke,
concerning our manner of forming Idea's of God and the things of another World,
may look a little odd at first sight; as if I turned all Religion into
Allegory, and by that means destroy the Reality and Substance of it. I shall
show that this is no new Doctrine of mine, but the opinion of the Fathers.

Contr. Marcionem. lib. 2. Cap. 27.
way of intercourse with Men, but by taking on him our Senses and Affections,
by which he accommodates, the insupportable Majesty of his Nature, to our ^rail
and imperfect state.

Deus non potuit humanos congressus inire, nisi humanos and sensus and affectus
suscepisset, per quos vim Majestatis suae intolerabilem, utique humanae
mediocritati humilitate temperaret.

Gregory Nyssen discoursing at large, Lib. 12. contra Eunomium Haeret.
how the sacred Style was accommodated to our Capacity, by expressing the
nature of God and divine things, under the notion of such things as are
familiar to us; adds these words, For how says he could that Immensity be
contained in a little? were it not that those things are brought down to our
shallow Capacities.

(...).

Dionysius speaking of this Symbolical and Figurative way of conceiving, and
expressing the things of another World, call's those things by which they are
represented to us (...). Epist. 9: ad Ti.
signa, figmenta, which is better rendered by the english word Substitutes. And
he adds that the (...) are the Substitutes (...). Those things which have Form
and Figure, are the Representatives of those Divine Things which have none.
Again

Dionysius says it is impossible for us Cap. 1. de Call: Hi.
to contemplate the nature of immaterial Objects, any other way than by help of
those notions, we frame of those things which are material.

(...).

St. Cyrill says that our manner of conceiving Divine things, is by Examples or
Similitudes; after the same gross manner we represent the heavenly Orbs upon a
piece of Paper.

(...).

Gregory Nazianzen discourses fully, Orat. 34.
how nothing is more evident than that there is a God, tho at the same time we
are not able to conceive or express what he is; and has these remarkable
words, concerning our manner of conceiving the things of another world.

(...).

By which he plainly supposes it as impossible for us, whilst we are immersed
in these gross Bodies, to frame any conceptions of Spiritual things, without
the help of worldly Objects; as it is for us to overtake our shadow, or to see
in the dark.

It is ordinary with the Fathers, speaking of God to say, That when we conceive
him as being a Substance, as being Wise and Holy, nay as having Life, etc. they
are all but Figurative Representations of something in God which transcends all
that we can imagine.

Dionysius, or whoever was Author Cap. 13. de Div. No:
of those Books which go under his Name, says,

(...).

And accordingly in his Mystical Theology, speaking of the nature of our
present knowledge of God and spiritual things, says very aptly that this is,

(...)*

And therefore God in the writings of the Fathers is called (...). without
Existence, without Substance, without a Mind, without Life. Not by way of
Privation, as Marius Victorinus in his 4th. Book against Arius observes, but by
way of Excellence. Because the notions affixt to these words, express nothing
of the true nature of the things when referred to God. Very agreeable to what
the Apostle says, Acts 17* 27. Where he expresses the Knowledge we have of God,
by Feeling after him. The Original word (...) is very expressive, for it
signifies the greping for a thing in the dark.

Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of S^rom. Lib. 5.
the method we have of coming to know the nature of God, says, That the utmost
we can arrive to, is to know what he is not, and not what he is.

(...).

And thus we see how little reason this man had to quote those Fathers who, he
tells us, have the good luck to be both the New, and the Old of the World. But
His Heresy is as old as Eunomius, and now revived by this UPSTART as he very
aptly calls himself. And I think we may well call this New Old Sect of his, the
Genesticks of our Age, since they are a profound sort of people, who set up for
Knowing every thing, and Believing nothing.

He hopes in time to plead Prescription, and that His Book too shall in after
ages be valued, as the Fathers are in this. But alas! tho he wants no
qualification of Error, and Impiety for this Ambition of his; yet he has not
Wit and Learning enough, to be a Heretic upon Record. Such Books as these
seldom live any longer, than till their Fallacies are laid open; and then they
perish, and Rott with the Memory of their Authors. Whereas the Fathers (who are
now in Heaven for defending that Truth, which he has labored to corrupt) will
have their just Authority, among all Pious and Learned Men to the end of the
World.

And now that I have done, I must confess the Man was not worth my trouble; but
the Cause is richly so, and it is our misfortune that we think no thing can
gain upon the World but sound Reasoning and Argument. Whereas there have been
many instances, of the most odd and ridiculous Enthusiasts having in a short
time Proselytes enough, to bring Church and Sta^e into confusion. He has as
little of true Reasoning or Argument as any of them, but his Pretense is
plausible; and those are the Books which do mischief in the World. And
therefore I was not to consider the strength only of the Poison, but the
constitution of the Age, which seems strangely disposed for Infidelity, and a
Contemt of all Divine Revelation.

Besides, I have contrived this Letter, so as to be an answer not only to him,
but to all the Opposers of Revelation and Mysteries. And I hope I may say, I
have done something toward the right stateing this whose Controversy, which
has been hitherto so much mistaken on both Sides. For whilst Men on one hand,
expect a rational account, and clear and distinct Idea's of what is wholly
Unaccountable by ^^* and of which we can have no Conceptions at all. And on the
other hand* men go about with endless labor, to explain what is Inexplicable;
there can be no end of these Controversies which multiply upon us every day.
But if we all agree to leave off speaking of what we know nothing of, and
freely own what we must confess whether we will or no; That we can have no
Ideas at all, of the things of another World as they are in themselves; and
that our manner of conceiving them at present, is by Intervention of the common
Objects of this Life, then the whole controversy will be reduced to a very
short ^^^^^. And all the Revelations and Mysteries of Christianity, established
upon those foundations which Christ has laid; Not in the Wisdom of Men, but in
the Power of God.

Trin Coll. Dub. May 1. 1697.
ERRATA
PAge 10. line 13. for Senses r. Senses. And so wherever the word is
distinguished from Reason, p. 24. l. 1. r. ground, p. 25. l. 3. r. evidence, p.
30. l. 3. r. persuasion, p. 63. l. 3. r. of, p. 85. ult. r. deference, p* 134.
l. 20 r. taught, Ibid 27. r. which is all that is meant, p. 143. l. 7. r* cant,
p. 156. l. 8. r. Ratiocination, p. 185. l. 11. r. after, p. 186. l. 7. r.
Magicians, p. 187. l. 1. r. and* p. 199. l. 2. r. abstruse, p. 206. l. 1. r.
Arians, p: 219. l. 18. r. fides, p. 222. l. 23. r. Hymn.


