AN ACCOUNT OF Several Travels Through a great part of GERMANY: In Four
Journeys. I. From Norwich to Colen. II. From Colen to Vienna, with a particular
Description of that Imperial City. III. From Vienna to Hamburg. IV. From Colen
to London.
WHEREIN The Mines, Baths, and other Curiosities of those Parts are Treated of.
Illustrated with Sculptures. By EDWARD BROWN M. D. Fellow of the College of
Physicians of London, and of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Ship in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1677.

Imprimatur,

G. Jane R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom.
Sept. 26. 1676.
TO THE READER.
HAving given the English World an Account of some remote and seldom traveled
Countries of Europe, in the Year, 1673. I remained indifferent, as to the
publishing any thing more, concerning nearer, or better known places; a great
part whereof has been delivered by some good, and observing Writers; upon
which consideration, though written some years since, these Papers have not
come abroad, and had still remained private, had not the desires of Friends
solicited this Publication, and also a Promise in my former Book obliged me to
say something of Vienna; as likewise my Journey unto that Place from England,
by the Belgian Provinces and Germany; and of my Return from Vienna by Austria
Trans-Danubiana, Moravia, Bohemia, Misnia, Saxonia, unto Hamburg; hereof I have
therefore given some Account in this Work, not much engaging into the Policy
and State Government of Places, which have been so largely delivered, as to
make up just Volumes, but have rather set down what is Naturally, Artificially,
Historically, and Topographically remarkable; together with some Customs and
Occurrencies which might be acceptable unto the Inquisitive Reader, or serve as
hints of further Enquiry, to such Persons as may hereafter Travel into those
Parts.

A JOURNEY FROM NORWICH TO COLEN in GERMANY.
IN the year 1668. I left the large and pleasant City of Norwich, and went by
land to Yarmouth a Port Town in Norfolk, at the mouth of the River Hierus or
Yare; large, fairly built and populous, very considerable for the great Herring
fishing in the Autumn, and the commerce it maintains in the Streights;
Baltic, British and German Seas: With Italians, French, Spaniards, Dutch,
Danes, and Swedes. I was here nobly entertained by that worthy and obliging
person, Sr. James Johnson, who also furnished me with letters of Credit, to
Amsterdam, Franckfort, Venice and Vienna; Whereby I was readily and handsomely
accommodated in all Parts where I had afterward occasion to travel.

August the 14. about six a clock at night I went aboard the Angel-Ketch in
Yarmouth Road, a Vessel of about 55 Tuns, and we immediately set sail for
Rotterdam; we left St. Nicholas-Sand on the Larboard, and after that the
Nowles, a new Sand, not taken notice of to be raised above twelve years before.
We kept our course all night, East and by South and East South East. The Sea
burned at the head of the Ship at the beginning of the night, but the Moon
rising there appeared nothing but froth. In the morning we discovered
Gravesandt Steeple. It is the custom upon all this coast to send out
Pylot-boats continually to meet all Ships at Sea, and furnish them with Pylots
to bring them through the sands, and no Ship is to refuse one: Having taken in
our Pylot, we soon discovered Goree Steeple, and then the Briel. We entered the
River Mosa, or Maes, a Large and noble Stream, which arising in the Mountains
of Vauge, or Vogesus, passing by Verdun, Dinant, Namur, Liege, Maestricht,
Ruremond, Venlo, and many considerable Places, does here fall into the Ocean,
we had a very pleasant passage up the River, sailing by many neat Villages, as
Maese-sluys, Schedam, Delfshaven, and handsome rows of Trees upon the shore,
and arrived at Rotterdam about six at night. This is one of the three chief
passages by Sea into Holland, the other being by Flushing and the Texell. The
nearest cut out of England into Holland is from Laistoffe Point to Gravesandt,
which is 28 Leagues, and the deepest part of the Sea is about 28 Fathoms. There
lay two of the greatest Ships in Holland at that time near Rotterdam, the Crane
and the Wassenaer; this latter built in lieu of that in which Admiral Opdam was
blown up, fighting against his Royal Highness the Duke of York. The Heads or
Keys between which we entered the town by water are handsome, and Ships of
great burden are received into the middle of diverse streets without difficulty,
(their Channels being deep and large) the houses are well built, and the town
Populous, they have an Exchange or place for Merchants to meet at, the streets
are so clean that the Women go about in white Slippers, they being paved with
Bricks laid edgwise. The Landthuise has a fair front. In the great Church the
Organs, the Tower and the Monument of De wit, upon the Bridge the Statue of
Erasmus, as also the house where he was born, and the Pleasure boats of the
States are worth the seeing. It being then the time of their Kermis or Fair,
there were plays acted and many rarities shown, as Lions, Leopards, etc, and a
great noise was made about a tall Woman to be shown of seven foot high; but the
Boor of Leckerkir'k, not far from this town, was higher. Parsons and Evans,
porters to King Charles the first, did also exceed her, but I have seldom heard
of any that was taller than Martin Wierwski a Polander, who at the age of forty
two years was presented to the Emperor Maximilian the second, as a rarity of
nature, and was full eight foot high, whose picture, as big as the life, I saw,
near to the Franciscans Convent at Vienna in Austria.

From Rotterdam I passed by Overschee to Delft, by the Powderhouse, which is a
handsome one, built now at some distance from the town to prevent the like
accident which befell when the former took fire and blew up part of the town.
The Piazza or marketplace is a very fair one, having the front of the town
house at one end of it, and the high steeple of the new Church at the other. In
the old Church, Van-Tromps Tomb is very well carved upon the side of the Wall,
himself lying upon a Canon encompassed with Arms and trophies. In the middle
Isle of the new Church there is a noble monument, the Tomb of William of
Nassaw Prince of Orange, together with his Wife and Son, Prince Maurice; his
Statua is in armor with his Dog at his feet, and four Obelisks are supported
by ten Marble pillars. In a house of this Town there were shown me in a Wall
the marks of the bullets shot at Prince William, who was thereby murdered
1584. and in another Church which was broad and spacious I saw a handsome Tomb
for Sr. Charles Morgans Lady, and the Monument of Peter Hein the Admiral, who
took the Spanish Silversleet.

The Hague, Haga Comitis, the ancient place of Residence of the Counts of
Holland, and now of the States general; is about an hours-going distant from
Delft; in which passage, at some distance, we had a sight of two of the Prince
of Orange's houses. This place is well built; the Prince's Court handsome; The
Piazza by it full of green trees; many fair Houses. The Course where the
Coaches meet, the Pall Mall, the Wood, the Park, do much beautify it, and the
way from hence to Scheveling, from whence his Majesty returned into England, is
very remarkable, it being a straight way cut through the Sand-hills, and paved
with Brick for three miles, having on each hand four or five rows of Trees, and
Scheveling Steeple at the end of it.

The Hague and Mad rid in Spain are accounted the greatest Villages, or open
unwalled places, in Europe, and the Hollanders have thought it more honor to
be Masters of the greatest Village, than of a place which, if it were walled,
would come short of many Cities; but this may prove a dangerous resolution, for
formerly upon this advantage, Martin van Rossem, Captain to the Duke of
Gueldres, sacked the Hague; and it was lately in the like danger when the
French Forces lay at Utrecht and Worden, if they had forced a passage into that
part of Holland.

Leyden is three hours or three Dutch miles from the Hague, at present one of
the nearest Towns in Europe; Well built, has diverse large Streets, beautified
with rows of Trees, and the water passing through the middle of them, and also
well fortified after the modern way; I took notice of that Antiquity called
Hengist Castle, or the Berg, said to be built by Hengist the Saxon, and went up
to the top thereof: Upon the top there is now an Arbor, and a Maze or
Labyrinth round it, and a Well, out of which, they told us, they took a Fish
alive when the Town was almost famished during the siege, which was showed to
the Enemy over the wall, endeavoring to make their condition to appear better
than it was, and to dishearten the besiegers. There are now handsome stairs
from the top to the bottom, and a good house built by it, where they have their
public sales and entertainments. But a nobler Antiquity lies under the Sea,
than any above ground; not far from hence near Calwyck is a square fortress
called Arx Britannica, built by Caligula; in the declining of the Roman Empire
ruined in part by the Normans, and afterward neglected, and over whelmed by
the Sea. But in some years, and great retire of the Sea, the ruins have been
discovered, and many noble Antiquities brought from it, some having this
inscription Ex. Ger. Inf. ex Germania inferiori. The Stadthuise has a fair
front toward the street. In the Anatomy Schools are a very great number of
Skeletons. Two legs of an Elephant. The Skeleton of a young Whale, of a Horse,
Deer, Cow, Cat, Fox, and many other Animals; diverse Skeletons of Men and Women,
some bodies preserved with their Muscles, and one entire, the flesh, skin and
all parts defended from corruption. I saw also here what Monsieur de Bills
pretended toward the preservation of Bodies, but more accurately afterward at
Dr. Ruisch his house at Amsterdam The Physick-garden, although but small, is
well filled with Plants, where are also many other both natural, and
artificial Curiosities to be seen, and many sorts of Optic glasses. Near the
garden are the Schools built of Brick with the Officina Elzeviriana on the top.
In the Churches I saw the Monuments of many famous men. There is a Picture in
the Chamber for the Burgermasters, representing the day of Judgment, drawn by
Lucas van Leyden, so much esteemed that, it is said, the Emperor Rudolphus
would have given for it as many Ducats of Gold as would have covered it. The
Table also upon which John of Leyden wrought whilst he was a Tailor, is a
Curiosity, because he proved afterward so considerable a disturber of Germany,
and came to be King of the Anabaptists.

This City endured a hard siege by the Spanish forces, and they were reduced
unto great extremity, but they saved themselves by overflowing the Country, and
so forcing the Enemies to make away with great loss; and afterward coined a
memorial-Medall with this Inscription.

Ut Senacherib a Jerusalem, sic Hispani a Leydae noctu fugerunt. 1574.

From Leyden I came to Haerlem, a neat City, pleasantly seated and having a
Grove near it. The great Church is esteemed the largest in Holland, with a very
high Lanthorn upon it. Within are many Inscriptions and Monuments, most of
which are transcribed and set down in Gotfr. Hegenitii Itinerarium Hollandicum.
In the Prince's house are all the Earls of Holland Painted upon the wall, and
in the Garden in the Summer House, the Picture of Laurentius Costerus, who is
said to have first invented the art of Printing in this Town; but others
attribute it to Johannes Gottenberg, a German. On the other side there is a
Picture of a Ship with Saws, in memory of the manner how Damiata in Egypt was
formerly taken by those of this Town, who, as they report, accompanied
Frederick Barbarossa in an expedition against the Saracens, and when the men of
Pelusium or Damiata had chamed up their Port, by this invention of fastening
strong Saws to the keels of their Ships, they cut the chains in sunder, and so
took the Town. In the rooms are very good Paintings by Hemskerk, and Goltzius,
as his Prometheus and other Pieces; but Cornelius van Haerlem most delighted
me, in his pieces of Herod's killing the Innocent Children; his feast of the
Gods, in which Vulcans foot is esteemed at a great rate; and another Picture of
a Friar and a Nun at a Collation, not inseriour to the rest.

The old Men's house, or an Hospital for sixty aged persons, is large and
handsome; having a good Quadrangle and a Garden in it. The Hospital also for
the sick is very cleanly kept.

Here I first saw the manner of punishing Malefactors by whipping them with
rods, which is more severe than I imagined; they lead them to a Post upon a
scaffold, their hands tied and by a pully drawn up as high as they can be
extended, and then an Iron fastened about their wast to keep them steady; in
which stretchedout posture they receive sometimes fifty or sixty stripes or
more, according to the merit of their offense.

Not far from this place there is a great Water, or noted Lake called Haerlem
Mere about twenty miles in length, which is frozen over in hard Winters, and
men swiftly travel over it by sliding, or in sleds. When Haerlem was besieged
there was a Naval sight upon it; The Dutch having about an hundred and fifty
Vessels, and the Spaniards not many fewer. The Town was afterward taken by
Composition, but such cruelty was used by the Spaniards that they have not yet
forgot it.

From Haerlem I went to Amsterdam, a City at present for Riches, Trade,
Shipping, fair Streets, and pleasant habitations, scarce yielding to any other
of the World. It is seated upon the River Ye, and has its name, as it is
reported, from a Castle appertaining long since to the Lords of Amstel, to whom
this place also belonged: At the beginning, the seat of a few fishermen; but
afterward increasing, it received many privileges from the Counts of Holland,
and was made a Town or City by the favor of their Grants and Charters. In the
year 1470. it was walled about with a Brick-wall, to defend it against the
Citizens of Utrecht, they having been in great danger to have fallen into their
hands, if those of Utrecht had pursued their victories. In few Months after
also, the whole Town was almost reduced to Ashes by fire, but by the increase
of their Traffic they easily overcame these losses, waded through all
difficulties, and rendered good services to their Counts, and received the
honor afterward from Maximilian the Emperor to have the Imperial Crown over
their Arms, which are three Crosses on a Pale

About the year 1525. Gelen, sent from the new King of Munster, passed through
Friesland and came to this City; where having made a party, and communicated
his design, he resolved to surprise the Town by night, at the time of the
sounding of the Bell; to which intent they were already entered the Market
place, had set upon the Town house: and cut in pieces those who resisted them.
When by great providence the rope to the great Bell was taken away; the
Magistrates had notice of it, and caused all the streets and Avenues leading to
the Marketplace to be stopped up with Woolsacks and Hopsacks, whereby they
were hindered in their design of taking the Town by night, and the next morning
their number being discovered to be inconsiderable, they were set upon, driven
into the Stadthuis, and defeated.

Of late years this City is mightily increased and encompassed with a new Wall,
and fortified after the modern way. The new Streets are large and uniform: and
the whole Town being in a low Marshy ground, the water is let in through all
the considerable Streets. The River Amstel passes through the City, being let
in under a handsome well-contrived Bridge of Eleven Arches, which is so built
as to make part of the Wall and Rampart, and is 26 paces broad. The whole Town
is built upon Piles, or high Firr-trees, driven down perpendicularly into the
Earth so thick together, that nothing more can be forced in between them: And
by this means they build Houses in the Sea, and lay Foundations strong enough
to support the greatest Buildings whatsoever, in places where no solid bottom
is to be found. But they must needs be at a great expense and labor before
they can lay the first Stone: And the number of Trees required to each
Foundation is considerable; since for the Foundation of one Tower or Steeple
alone, over against the Church of St. Katherine, Mr. J. de Parivall, who wrote
Les Delices de la Hollande, reckons that there was rammed into the ground a
Forest, as he calls it, of Six thousand three hundred and thirty four great
Trees. About this manner of work, for the fixing their Foundations, I saw them
employed in diverse places, particularly at the East-India-house, and at a place
where a Lutheran Church was then designed to be built, So that it was not
improbably said, That if a man could see all under this City, he could hardly
behold a greater Forest.

The Stadthuis or Townhouse, is the noblest Building in all these Countries. A
Pile of Freestone of an hundred and ten paces in Front, being larger than the
Magnified Front of the Church of St. Peter's at Rome, and eighty one paces
deep, or on the sides. The Chambers in it, the Pictures and Statues, are worthy
to be seen and admired. The first Room on the right hand, or Judgmenthall,
where the Malefactors receive their Sentence, is adorned with large Statues,
hanging down their heads in mournful postures, as if concerned or grieving at
what was then pronounced. The Floors are of Marble; the Roofs are richly gil't
and painted. Upon the top of all stands Atlas or Columlus, holding a Globe upon
his shoulder made of Copper, of about ten foot Diameter, which is as large
perhaps as any Ball or Globe whatsoever employed to this ornamental use. That
upon St. Peter's at Rome, as having been in it, I judge to be less; as likewise
that at Florence. The Turkish Ornament to the Tower of their Mosques, is three
Balls one above another, and an half Moon over them, but they are less by far,
at least such as I have seen: and by relation from Eyewitnesses, the largest
of the three noble gilded Balls at Morocco are inferior to this. But I will
say nothing more of this great building, the Stadthuis, since there is a
peculiar description of it in Folio, with Cuts and Figures of the most
remarkable Curiosities in it. The Exchange is fair and large, and above it are
Shops: it is very well frequented, and he that comes after twelve pays six
stivers.

Diverse of their Churches are fair: In the new Church, the partition with
Ballisters of Brass, and the carved Pulpit, are noble. In the old Church the
Tomb of Van Hulse and Heemskerk are remarkable. Heemskerk did his Country great
Services in their first attempts upon India: for the King of Spain having
consiscated some of the Hollanders Ships, who traded to his Dominions, which
were then the Staple for the India Trade. It was resolved by the permission of
Prince Maurice and the States, to set out a Fleet of eight ships for the
Indies; four of which were to pass by the way of the Atlantic Ocean, and the
Cape of Good-hope: And the other four were to search a passage toward the
Kingdoms of Cathay and China by the North-east, whereby the passage also into
those parts might be expected much shorter than that which was known to the
Spaniards.

To this intent these four last vessels sailed out of the Texel, June 5. 1594.
and returned in September, not being able to proceed by reason of the Ice. But
upon the relation of the Voyage by William Barenson, there were two other
Expeditions afterward to Nova Zembla; in the last of which they wintered
there, and Barenson lost his life. Heemskerk was the chief of the twelve which
returned from that cold habitation, where none but Bears and Foxes could well
endure the Winter, where he had been twice, and afterward made two rich
Voyages into India. Upon whose happy returns the Holland East India Company was
first established, and a prohibition made for any other of that Country to
trade thither for the space of One and twenty years.

But to proceed to other public Buildings in this City. The Tuchthuis or
Raspelhuis, or House of Correction for debauched young men, such as are
incorrigible and disobedient to Parents or Laws, has at the entrance of the
Gate two Lions bridled, a proper Emblem, with this Inscription, Virtutis est
domare quae cuncti pavent. This was formerly a Monastery belonging to the Nuns
of the Order of St. Clare, and converted to this use 1595. They who are put in,
are forced to work and gain their Bread with hard labor. I saw those who
rasped Brazil, having a certain task set them every day, work so hard, that
being naked and in a sweat, and the dust of the Brazil wood flying upon them,
they were all over painted of a beautiful red color. Which odd sight made me
call to mind the Fancy of my Lady Marchioness of Newcastle, of a Nation
wherein the People were of Orange-tawny color, and the King of Purple.

They told us that some that were committed to their charge, and not to be
brought to work by blows, they placed in a large Cistern, and let the water in
upon them; placing only a Pump by them for their relief, whereby they are
forced to labor for their lives, and to free themselves from drowning. One we
saw put into a narrow Dungeon, and kept from meat. Some are put into this House
for a longer time, some for a shorter. It has been a punishment for such as
have drawn their Daggers, or offered to stab any one. And some Citizens, though
able and rich enough, contrive it so, that when their Sons are extravagant and
masterless, the Officers seize upon them, and carry them into this House, where
they are not forced to any hard labor, but kept in till they see sufficient
signs of a mending their life.

This way of Correction may seem severe to many, yet is not comparable to that
which is said to have been formerly used in Germany. Particularly at Colen, in
the white Tower, at the North end of the Town, near the Rhine; where it is
reported, that such Youths who were not otherwise to be reclaimed, were in a
barbarous manner shut up in the white Tower. The height and thickness of the
walls secured them from escaping, or from their complaints being heard. Near
the top was placed out of their reach a loaf of bread, the last remedy against
starving, which while their bold necessity forced them to reach at, they
executed their last sentence upon themselves, and miserably brake their own
necks.

Somewhat like the Raspelhuis is the Spinhuis, or House of Correction, for the
young women who live loosely, are taken in the night, or can give no account of
their living. They are put in for a certain time, according as their fault
meriteth, and are bound to make lace, sew, or employ their time perpetually in
some honest labor.

Those of the better sort are permitted to have Chambers apart. In one large
Room I saw about an hundred of them, and some very well dressed and fine, which
was an unexpected sight to me, and would sure be more strange to behold in
France and England.

The Weeshuis, or Hospital for Children, where there are Six hundred Orphans
carefully looked after, and well educated.

The Dolhuis, or a House for such as are Delirious, Maniacal, or Melancholical
of both Sexes.

The Gasthuis, or Hospital for the Sick, being large, and has a great Revenue.

The Mannenhuis, or Hospital for old Men, and such as are no longer able to
labor toward their own support.

Besides all which, there are great Sums of money collected for the poor, so
that there is not a Beggar to be seen in the Streets, and upon all assignations
or appointments of meeting at the Tavern, or elsewhere, and upon many other
occasions, whosoever fails to come at the exact time, forfeiteth more or less
to the use of the Poor.

The East-India-houses are remarkable, and the great Stores of their
Commodities, Cinnamon, Green-ginger, Camphire, Pepper, Calecuts, Indico, etc.
The ships are of a great burden: their House was then enlarging, although it
was great before; and a perfect Town for all Trades within it self.

The Admiralteyt, or Admiralty where their Stores for War and Shipping are laid
up, is encompassed with water; near to it there lay then 72 Men of War. In the
House we saw their Cables, Grapling irons, Pullies, Oars, Charges for Powder,
Lanthorns for ships, etc. At the entrance of the Gate hangs up a Canoe with a
man in it, dried up, so as to be preserved from corruption, and a Paddle in his
hand: he was enclosed up to the waste in the Canoe, in such sort, as the
Fish-skins, which were the cover to it, being so sewed together that no water
could get in, he might keep the Sea in the greatest Storms without danger. The
top of this House, as of diverse others also in this City, is a Reservatory for
Rainwater, which they have the more need of, because they have little good
water hereabouts.

The fairest Streets in the Town are Harlem-street, the Cingel, Princes Graft,
Kaisers Graft, and the New Buildings in the Island toward Gottenburg. And if
they continue to build with Freestone, they will still surpass these, which,
I Will assure you, are in no small measure beautiful.

I saw a Globe to be sold, made by Vingbomes, between six and seven foot
Diameter, valued at Sixteen thousand Guldens: The Meridian alone, being of
brass, cost a thousand Guldens. The Globe is made of Copper Plates excellently
well painted, with all the new Discoveries in it, as that of Anthony Van Dimons
Land, found out 1642. in 42 degrees of Southern Latitude, and 170 of Longitude,
those toward the Northwest of Japan, and those places both about N. Z. and
also in the Tartarian Sea beyond the Streights of Voygats, New-Holland,
West-Friesland, Cape d'Hyver, etc. but I have since met with a Book, which does
somewhat contradict this; entitled A Voyage into the Northern Countries by
Monsieur Martiniere, who went in one of the three ships belonging to the
Northern Company of Copenhagen, in the year 1653. and by that means had
occasion to converse with the Norwegians, Islanders, Laplanders, Kilops,
Borandians, Siberians, Zemblians, and Samojedes, who are Neighbors to the
Tartars and Tingorses, in his 46 Chapter he expresses himself after this
manner. There having fallen into my hands several Geographical Charts of sundry
eminent and much celebrated Authors, I am much amazed to see how they are
mistaken in the position of Zembla, which they place much nearer the North Pole
than really it is; they divide it likewise by the Sea from Greenland, and place
it far distant from it, when as indeed those two Countries are Contiguous, the
Coasts of Greenland butting upon the Coasts of Zembla, so as did not the great
quantity of Snow, and the violence of the cold render those Borders
uninhabitable, the passage would be very easy by Land from Greenland to
Zembla, and from Zembla passing the Paternoster Mountains to enter into
Samojedia, from thence into Tartary or Muscovy, as one pleased: But of the
truth of this we shall be further informed at the return of Captain Wood.

I was amazed likewise to see they had described the Straight called Voygat,
not above ten French Leagues in length, whereas it contains above five and
thirty Dutch Leagues, which is six times as much. Again, they would persuade us
that through that Straight our ships might pass into the great Tartarian Ocean,
which is a mistake. And although they indeed do affirm that in the time of
Prince Maurice of Nassau, a Dutch Vessel passed that way into that Ocean, yet
it is a manifest error, that Straight being bounded, as I said before, by the
Paternoster Mountains, which are half a League high, and the tops of them
covered with perpetual Snow, which never dissolves. And of this I can give a
positive testimony, having been my self in that Straight under those Mountains
in the Dog Days, which is the hottest time of the year.

From the Steeple of the Old Church of Amsterdam, I had a good prospect of the
Town, and the great number of ships lying upon one side of it, like a Wood; and
all the Towns about it. The Roofs of the Houses being sharp, it is a most
uneven Town to be looked upon downward, as it is a handsome one to be looked on
upward; and is not so divertising or pleasing to the sight, as some Towns in
France and Italy, which have flatter Roofs, or else are covered with a fine
black Slat or Ardoise. Upon this, and all other Towers of the Town, a Trumpet
is sounded at Midnight, and in other parts of the City at six a Clock night and
morning. At eleven a clock, the time of going on to the Exchange, there is good
Music at the Stadthuis, given by the Earl of Leicester. They make good Harmony
also every hour in playing upon their Chimes and Bells in most Steeples. And
there is a Musick-house or Entertaining-house, where any one is admitted for a
Stiver, hears most sorts of Music, sees many good Waterworks, and diverse
motions by Clock-work, Pictures, and other Divertisements.

During my stay at Amsterdam, I had the opportunity of seeing diverse Learned
Men, and Persons of Note. Dr. Ruish showed us many Curiosities in Anatomy, as
the Skeletons of young Children, and Faetus's of all Ages, neatly set together,
and very white; the Lymphatick vessels so preserved, as to see the valves in
them. A Liver excarnated, showing the Minute vessels, all shining and clear.
The Muscles of Children dissected and kept from corruption: entire Bodies
preserved; the face of one was very remarkable, without the least spot or
change of color or alteration of the lineaments, from what might be expected
immediately after death: he had then kept it two years, and hoped it would so
continue. Dr. Swammerdam showed us diverse of his Experiments which he has set
down in his Treatise De Respiratione; and a very fair Collection of Insects
brought from several Countries; a Stagg-fly of a very great bigness; an Indian
Scolopendria, or Forty-foot; a fly called Ephemeron, and many other
Curiosities. Old Glawber the Chemist showed us his Laboratory: And we received
much civility from Blasius the Physic Professor who has wrote a Comment upon
Veslingius.

The Jews live more handsomely and splendidly here, than in any other place:
Their chief Synagogue is large, adorned with Lamps of Brass and Silver. We
happened to be there at the Feast of their New-year; so that their blowing of
Horns, showting and singing was not omitted: Some of them understand diverse
Languages. I saw one Moses di Pas, a Learned young Man, and Orobio a Physician
of Note. And I was sorry to see diverse here to profess themselves publicly
Jews, who had lived at least reputed Christians, for a long time in other
places: One who had been a Franciscan Friar thirty years: and another who had
been Professor some years at Tholouze, and before that Physician to the King
of Spain. Juda Leo a Jew, has taken great pains in making a Model of the
Temple of Solomon, of Solomon's House, the Fort of the Temple, the Tabernacle,
the Israelites encamping, and other Curiosities. I was present at the
Circumcision of a Child; which is performed by thrusting a Probe in between the
Glans and Praeputium, and separating it, or dilating the Praeputium, so as the
inward Skin may be drawn forward as well as the outward; then by applying an
Instrument joynted like a Carpenters Rule, or a Sector, the Skin is held fast
beyond the Glans, and with a broad Incision-knife, or Circumcision-knife, the
Foreskin is cut off close to the Instrument; and what remains of Skin is
immediately put back, the blood stopped with Powders, and a Plaster applied;
the Relations and Acquaintance singing all the while, whereby the cries of the
Infant are less heard.

Leaving Amsterdam, I passed by a peculiar Burialplace of the Jews, who are not
permitted to interr their dead within the Walls, by Overskerk, Bamburg, and in
six or seven hours arrived at Utretcht, in a Boat drawn with Horses through
artificial Cuts of Water, which is the way of Traveling in Holland, Utretcht,
and diverse other Provinces of the Low Countries.

Utretcht is an ancient, large, handsome City, and chief of the Province of the
same name, called formerly Antonina, and afterward Ultrajectum. Long famous
for its Episcopal See founded by Dagobert King of France, who endowed it richly
with Lands and Possessions: Willebald, or Willebrode an Englishman, was their
first Bishop, who converted these Countries unto Christianity; and the
following Bishops grew so powerful, that they were able to bring many thousand
men into the field, and to wage great Wars against the Counts of Holland: Their
Succession also continued for above Nine hundred years. It is now an
University, founded by the States in the Year 1636. I shall not trouble you
with the Names of the Professors; the Learned Mr. Ray, whom I had the honor to
meet in diverse places abroad, having already caused to be printed the Series
Lectionum of this and many other Universities in the Low Countries, Germany,
and Italy, in his Observations Topographical, Moral. Physiological, set forth
1673. The great Church has a very high Tower, or three Steeples one above
another: From the highest of which I had not only a good sight of the Town it
self, which lay under mine Eye like a Platform, but of many others also;
Utretcht being in a plain flat Country, and so well seated, and encompassed
with so populous a Country, that in a days Journey a man may go from hence to
any one of fifty walled Towns and Cities. The English Church here is an ancient
Building; the Pillar in the middle of it, whose Foundation could not be laid
but upon Bulls-hides, is much taken notice of: It was built 1099. and has the
Picture of a Bull upon it with this Inscription;

Accipe Posteritas quod per tua saecula narres,
Taurinis cutibus fundo solidata columna est.
There is an old Library belonging to this Church, which contains diverse old
Books and Manuscripts. A large Bible in six Volumes, painted and gilded after a
very ancient manner: Two Idols taken (in time of war) long since in Germany,
and given to this place by the Emperor Henry the Fourth, are worth the seeing,
not so much for their neatness, as their Antiquity and odd shape: As also a
Horn made out of a Tooth, said to be given at the same time. There are also
three Unicorns Horns, little differing in length; the longest being five foot
and an half: I drank out of one of them, the end being tipp'd with Silver, and
made hollow to serve for a Cup. These were of the Sea-Unicorn, or the Horn or
long wreathed Tooth of some Sea-Animal much like it, taken in the Northern
Seas; of which I have seen many, both in Public Repositories, and in Private
Hands. Two such as these, the one Ten foot long, were presented not many years
since to the King of Denmark, being taken near to Nova Zembla; and I have seen
some full fifteen foot long; some wreathed very thick, some not so much, and
others almost plain: Some largest and thickest at the End near the head; others
are largest at some distance from the Head: Some very sharp at the end or
point, and others blunt. My honored Father Sir T. B. has a very fair piece of
one which was formerly among the Duke of Curlands Rarities, but after that he
was taken Prisoner by Douglas in the wars between Sweden and Poland, it came
into a Merchants hands, of whom my Father had it, he has also a piece of this
sort of Unicorns Horn burnt black, out of the Emperor of Russia's Repositorie,
given him by Dr. Arthur Dee, who was Son to Dr. John Dee, and also Physician to
the Emperor of Russia, when his Chambers were burned, in which he preserved
his Curiosities. I have seen a walking Staff, a Scepter, a Scabbard for a
Sword, Boxes, and other Curiosities made out of this Horn, but was never so
fortunate as from experience to confirm its Medical Efficacy against Poisons,
contagious Diseases, or any other evident effect of it, although I have known
it given several times, and in great quantity. But of these Unicorns Horns no
man sure has so great a Collection as the King of Denmark; and his Father had
so many, that he was able to spare about an hundred of them, to build a
Magnificent Throne out of Unicorns Horns.

I had the honor to see diverse Persons of Note in this City; as D. Cyprianus
ab Oostergo, Dr. Regius, Voetius, the only Member then left alive of the Synod
of Dort, and others; but missed the sight of the Learned Anna Maria Skurman,
who was then gone out of Town, and was forced to content my self with beholding
her Picture, well drawn by her own hand, with this Inscription of hers under it:

Ceruitis hic pict a nostros in Imagine vultus,
Si negat ars formam gratia vestra dabit.
The Painters Hall is considerable, wherein are many good pieces to be seen of
several Masters: Amongst which there are good Heads by Van Colen and Tuart;
Landskips by Soft-lever; and good Drapery, especially in some Turkish Habits,
by Van der Mere.

This Town is also beautified with a fair Piazza or Marketplace, diverse long
Streets, and a Pall Mall with five rows of Trees on each side. In the Church of
St. Katherino is the Tomb of my Lord Gorge. Though I had seen France and Italy,
and the Noble Cities thereof, which are worthily admired by all, yet I was much
surprised upon the first sight of the United Provinces, especially of Holland,
and the adjoining places. He that has observed the easy accommodation for
Travel therein, both by Land and Water, their excellent order and regular
course in all things; the number of Learned men; the abundance of Varieties in
all kinds; the industry, frugality, and wealth of the people; their numerous
good Towns; their extraordinary neatness in their Buildings and Houses; their
proper Laws and administration of Justice; and their incredible Number of
Shipping and Boats, will think it an omission to rest in the sight of other
Countries without a view of this. A Country of little extent, and soon
traveled over, but so replenished with People, with good Cities, fair Towns
and Villages, as not to be met with upon so little a compass of ground, except
perhaps in China.

From Utrecht, in two hours, I came to Friswick, and passed over the River Leck
to Viaenen, where there is little remarkable besides the House and Gardens of
Count Brederode, one of the Ancient Nobility of Holland, or, according to
common esteem, of the most Noble Family of all; the Family of the Egmonds being
formerly esteemed the Richest; the Wassenaer's the most ancient, and the
Brederodes the Noblest. The Mount in this Garden serves for the Rampart to the
Town, and on a round Bullwark are diverse small brass Guns planted. The Statua's
of the twelve Caesar's, of Aristotle, the Pyramids and Partitions, with the
Paintings upon the wall, are the rest of its Ornaments.

From hence I passed still by Boat through the Land of Arkel, some say, derived
from Hercules; belonging formerly to the Lords of Gorchom and Arkeland, till by
Mary, daughter to the last Lord of Arkeland, it sell to John Lord of Egmond,
and afterward was sold to William the sixth Earl of Holland I arrived this
night at Gorchom, a Town well seated, near three Rivers, the Ling, the Wael,
and the Maes. The Marketplace is fair; the Stadthuis is sunk somewhat on one
side. The Governor has a good House, and the Church a very high thick
Steeple: the Works are of Earth; the Watergate is handsome, and over it in
Great Letters is this Inscription;

Civitas in qua maxim Cives legibus parent, and in pace beata, and bello
invicta. 1642. The more remarkable because it made good its Inscription in the
year 1672. when Louis the Fourteenth, King of France, came down with so
powerful an Army into the Low Countries, that in that Summers Expedition he
took thirty walled Towns and Cities, this Watergate being the Limit to his
Conquests this way, beyond which his Forces were not able to attempt any thing.

Leaving Gorcum, I passed by Worcum, on the other side of the River, and then
by the Castle of Lovesteyn, strongly seated and well fortified; and therefore
has been often made use of to secure Persons of Note. Sir George Ascue of late
years suffered his Imprisonment herein, and formerly Barnevelt; upon which
occasion this Castle has been much spoken of, and has given the name to that
whole party who sided with him, well known at present by the name of the
Lovestein Faction. Passing on further up the Maes, I left Proye on the left
hand, and Huesden on the right, and the next day morning arrived at the Bosch.

Hertogen Bosch, Sylva Ducis, Boscum Ducis, Boisleduc, Bolduc, takes its name
from a Wood belonging to the Dukes of Brabant: It is a strong pleasant City,
seated upon the River Disa or Deese, which enters the Maes, about two Leagues
below it; one of the greatest Cities in Brabant; and for its strength, for
which it is beholden both to Nature and to Art, the States of the United
Provinces possess not any one more considerable, and is a very good Frontier
against all Enemies on this side: It is encompassed on all sides with Fenns and
Marshy Grounds. The Avenues to it are by narrow Causies, made turning and
winding, to be commanded in all places by one or other of the six Sconces or
Forts built at some distance without the Town for its greater Security. Besides
which, the Hollanders having some reason to be jealous of the Inhabitants,
whose affections might incline them toward the neighboring Princes, of whose
Religion most of them are, they have built a Citadel within the Town, a Briel
or pair of Spectacles to look more accurately into their Affairs. It is a
handsome regular Fort of five Bastions, each Curtain is 84 ordinary paces long;
the Faces of each Bastion 63; and the Flank or Neck 24. There is a handsome
House of Stone for the Centry at the point of each Bastion, and the middle of
each Curtain, every one of which cost Seven hundred Guldens. Here is also a
Field Canon of an extraordinary length, said to be able to fling a Bullet
almost as far as Bommel. The Piazza in this Town is Triangular.

This City was made an Episcopal See, 1559. The Cathedral is Dedicated to St.
John. In the Quire are painted the Arms of many of the Knights of the Golden
Fleece. And over the upper Stalls or Seats, an Inscription in French, which
contains the History of the first Institution, and Model of this Order, by the
most High and mighty Prince Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, Lorain, and
Brabant: Besides diverse Statua's and Pillars. There are also several Monuments
of the Bishops of Bosche and others.

This Town was taken from the King of Spain by the Forces of the Confederate
Estates, in the year 1628. after a long and chargeable Siege; in which the
little Sconce, one of the Forts toward the South, did excellent Service.

Diverse of the Nuns were still alive in this Town, but at Utretcht they were
all dead.

From the Bosche we traveled through a plain Country, somewhat Sandy, to Breda
upon the River Merck: A place very considerable, pleasantly seated, and
wellfortified. It has formerly had more Outworks than at present: For they
have taken away the Crown-works, and left only the Half-moons and Horn-works,
and Conserves or Contregards about the Half-moons. There is a large Ditch of
Water round the Counterscarp, and a small Ravelin between each Bastion, joined
to the Rampart within side of the Ditch. There is also a double Hay or
Quickset-hedge almost quite round the Town, besides Palisados. The Parapet is
very thick, and strengthened with a row of Elms, and seconded with another row
at three or four yards distance, round the Town; the bodies of the Bastions are
sunk down or h^llowed away, and filled with a thicket of Elms. The Half Moons
are the like without the Town, and after all, a brest-work between the Town and
the Bastions; and Cavaliers upon several places of the Rampart.

This Town belongs unto the Prince of Orange, unto whom it has descended by
the right of the house of Nassaw, by the Marriage of Engelbert the seventh
Earl of that house, with Mary daughter and Heir of Philip the last Lord
thereof, about the year 1400. It was taken by the Spaniards in the beginning of
the Low Country Wars, and was afterward Surprised by the Dutch, by a stratagem
performed by eighty men hid in a Boat covered over with Turf, and so let into
the Castle. In the year 1625. the Spaniards took it again, as by Inscriptions
and Chronograms are to be seen in diverse places, as that over the door of the
Church.

a MbrosI spIno Lae VIg ILantIa bre Da e XpUgnata. As also this,

PhILIppUs hIspanlae reX gUbernante Isabe LLa CLara EUgenIa Infanta, obsIDente
spInoLa qUaternIs regIbus frUstra ConIUrantIbus breDa VIGtor potItur.
Afterward it was besieged and taken by Frederick Hendrick Prince of Orange, as
an Inscription at the Westend of the Church sets it down.

Auxilio solius Dei, Auspiciis confederati Belgij, Ferdinando Austriaco
Hispaniae Infanta cum ingenti exercitu frustra succurrente, a Iulij 23
obsessamad 19 Augusti oppugnatam. Fredericus Henricus Princeps araUsIUs bre
DaMe eXpUgnat seXta OCtobris. The Church is fair and has many good Monuments,
as Renesse's Tomb; a Monument for Sir Thomas Alesbury set up by the Lord
Chancellor Hide; an old Tomb erected 1349. for John Lord of Lech and Breda;
the Tomb of Grave Engleberg Van Nassaw and his family on the side of the Wall;
the Here Van Horn and his three Wives; but the Principal Monument is that of
Grave Hendrick Van Nassaw, whose Armor is supported by four Warriers upon
their Knees; he built the Castle of Breda, which is at present both strong and
beautiful: I observed the place where the Turfe-Boat came in, and where the
Prince came over into the Town. The Gallery, the Garden, the Walks, and Dials
are worth the seeing, the Town in handsomely built, populous, and generally
has a great Garrison in it.

Leaving Breda we soon came by Land to St. Gertruydenberg the last Town on the
North of Brabant, where it joyneth to the Province of Holland, a small place,
but a good Town for fishing, lying upon a Hill near the great broad Water
called de Waert, made by the falling of the Maes and many other Rivers into it.
This Town is fortified and Garrisoned. The Church and Steeple have been Large
and fair, and the ruins of the latter are observable, in regard that this
Steeple was shot down by a Stratagem of the Prince of Orange, while the
Governor and chief of the Town were upon it, to observe a false alarm in the
Prince's Camp, and so lost themselves and the Town. We Passed from hence over a
large Water which has overflowed a great part of the Country upon one side of
it, no less than seventy two Parishes being drowned at once, the Village of
Ramsdun only escaping, and so by an old Tower called the house of Murney, to
the Maiden Town of Dort, or Dordrecht.

Dordracum, so called by some from Duri or Dureti forum, at present Dort, being
seated in the Waves of those great Lakes made by the Maes and Waal, is not
unaptly from its situation compared to a Swans nest, it is reckoned the first
and chief Town of South Holland, in respect of its antiquity, as having served
to secure Odocer in his retreat almost eight hundred years since, and also in
respect of its Privileges, in having the Mint here, and being the Staple for
Rhenish wine and English Cloth.

In this Town are many fair houses and pleasant Gardens. The great Church is
large, the Steeple 312 steps high; the top thereof being made of four large
Dyalls. There is also an Exchange or Place for Merchants to meet. The English
have two Churches, and the French one. The Key or Head to the water side is
handsome, and the Country about very pleasant; we saw the Chamber wherein the
Synod of Dort was assembled 1611. a large fair room; and took a collation in
the same house, in a high turret overlooking the Town and Country: Our seats
Moving round about the Table continually; so as the diversity of the prospect
made it more delightful. The great Vessels round-bellied, which trade between
Coln and this City seemed strange; as also the long Luyck or Liege-boats; and
the number of People that continually live in them. At my going away from hence
I embarked in a Vessel bound for the Island of Walcheren, sailing by most of
the Islands of Zealand and in sight of diverse good Towns. as Willemstadt,
Zirickze, Tergoes; observing in some places where the Sea had overflowed the
Land; and in others where the Industry of the Inhabitants still keep it out, by
keeping up their banks, and thatching the Shoars of the Sea. We Landed at
Ter-Vere, where there is a good Haven and Harbor for Ships, the Walls were
built in the year 1357, toward the Sea are round towers. The Piazza is long.
The Scotch have had a Factory here for above two hundred years, and the
Marquess of this Place did formerly make one of the three States, by which
Zealand was Governed. The Abbot of St Nicholas in Middleburg representing the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the Towns of Middleburg, Zirickzee, Ter-Veer,
Flussing, Tolen, Martins-dike, Romerswal and Tergoes, supplying the Third: over
against this place where a Town had formerly sunk into the Sea, the Steeple
only remains to be seen. From hence to Middleburg the way is Paved with
Brick; as it is also from Town to Town in most places of Holland.

Middleburg is the chief Town in the Island Walachria, seated almost in the
middle of it, being well built, large, rich, and Populous, it is the fourth
Port for the East India trade: has a large, broad Water within the Town, and a
straight cut through the Land to carry Vessels out to Sea, the whole is very
well Fortified, the Officers here are chosen by Strangers or Foreigners, the
Churches are many and remarkable, the new Church is of an eightsquare figure
with a Cupola, the Tower of the old great Church very high, the Stadthuise with
the old statuas, about it, the round Piazza, and many private buildings are
Considerable, and the whole Country about it is fruitful; either divided into
Gardens and Orchards, or Planted with Madder, Pompions, or Grain and Fruits.
The Zealanders are generally addicted to the interest of the Prince of Orange,
and great Lovers of his Person. I found them not a little delighted that the
Prince had been with them some days before, and was made Premier Noble, or
chief of the States of Zealand; which was chiefly brought about, as I was
informed, by Pensioner Hubert, Le Sage, Duvelaer and Vriebergen, formerly no
great friends to the Prince, especially Vriebergen, who was the most earnest of
any to bring him in, in despite to the Hollanders, for General Worts his sake,
who being set over the Zealand forces by those of Amsterdam, lately affronted
Vriebergens Son who was a Colonel, at the head of his Regiment. I was
entertained at Middleburg very courteously by Mr. Hill the Minister, who also
sent his Kinsman with me to Flussing. Flissinga or Vlussing, has Stone-Wals
toward the Sea, and Mudworks toward the Land; a very good Port, and a strong
Town; the waves of the Sea washing its walls; it was one of the first Towns
which the Low Country men took from the Spaniards, in the year 1572, and was
made Cautionary to Queen Elizabeth together with Rammakins and the Briel. 1585.
The renowned Sr. Philip Sidney being the first Governor of it, and surrendered
by King James to the United states. 1616. The Sea shore here abouts is not only
faced with rushes, flaggs and reeds staked down as high as the Tide usually
arises, but it is also strongly bound over with Osiers and hurdles and great
Posts driven in to break the force of the Water, and secure the Piles which
make the Harbor or Havens mouth. The Townhouse is handsomely built, standing
in the Piazza, having three rows of Pillars in the Front one above another;
the Lower Dorick, the second Ionick, and the highest Corinthian; and on the top
there is a Gallery or Balcony to Discover ships at Sea. This is the third Port
for the East- India trade; Amsterdam and Rotterdam being the first and second:
here lay many great ships in the middle of the Town, and considerable men of
War, as the St. Patrick, and the Admiral of Zealand: we saw them also building
of diverse ships, and when the Prince was here, they Lanched one to divertise
him, to which he gave the name of William Frederick, they also presented him
with a Golden Bottle; that being the Arms of the Town: the Prince Landed at
Armuyden and went from thence to Tergoes, and thence to Breda; they reported
his entertainment in Walcheren amounted to fifty thousand Guldens. The Women in
this Island wear most of them red Cloth and straw-Hats, if a Man dies a great
bundle of Straw is laid at the Door, if a Boy, a little one, if a Woman, the
straw lies on the left side of the Door: when any Woman is brought to bed; they
fasten a piece of Lawne to the ring and rapper of the Door; and make it up into
a little baby or puppet finely pleated, and in such manner, as to distinguish
of what sex the young Child is.

Returning to Middleburg by Land I observed there was a row of Trees round the
Town between the moat and rampart, where ordinarily there is only a breastworke
or a hedge, and embarked at Middleburg again, and passed down the River by the
fort Rammakins, and so for the Schelde, Sailing up that noble River till we had
passed the Fort Frederick Henrick and came to Lillo; where we stayed till the
Vessel was searched. Over against Lillo, lies another Fortification, called
Lifgens hock; the Fort de la croix is the last that belongs to the
Hollanders, and lies on the North side of the River; the Banks are cut nigh to
it, and the Country drowned for its greater security. The Spanish Forts
hereabouts to defend the Frontiers, are the Philip, the Pearl, and the Maria.

The River Scaldis or Scheld mentioned by Caesar is a gallant River, affording
plenty of fish, and convenience for Navigation and passage unto several noted
places: It arises in the Country of Vermandois, passing to Cambray,
Valencienne, so to Tournay or Dornick, Oudenard, Gaunt, Rupelmond and Antwerp,
and pursuing its course is afterward divided into two streams, whereof the
Southern is called the Hont; the other runs by Bergen ap Zome, and so into the
Sea between the Isles of Zealand.

The next day morning we went on our Voyage still up the Scaldis or Schelde,
and arrived at Antwerp. Where I had the good fortune to see Mr. Hartop; one
very well known in all those parts and of high esteem for his personal strength
and valor. A Gentleman also so courteous that he makes it his business to
oblige strangers; he showed me many curiosities in this City, carrying me with
him in his Coach.

The Walls of Antwerp are very large, faced with Brick and freestone, having
divrs rows of Trees upon them, broad walks, and conveniences for the Coaches,
to make their tour upon. The Bastions are not so large as generally they build
now a days, yet after the modern way. The Ditch is very broad and deep, the
Country about it, all Gardens. The Citadel is a regular fortification of five
Bastions, wherein lies always a Garrison of Spanish Soldiers: upon every
curtain there are two mounts or Cavaliers; and between them below, a row of
building or lodgings for the Soldiers; the ears of the Bastions are cut down,
and Casamates made, and Palisados set round upon the Esplanade; the Walls are
lined with excellent Brick and stone, nor is there any where a more regular
beautiful Fortification of five Bastions that is finished: it commands the
City, the River and the Country: besides this Citadel there is another Fort
within the Town near the Scheld, to command the River, having eight Guns in it,
called St. Laurence Fort.

The Exchange is handsome, supported by 36 Pillars every one of a different
carving, four streets lead unto it, so that standing in the middle we see
through every one of them. The Mere or Largest street is considerable for the
water running under it, and for the meeting of Coaches upon it every evening to
make their tour through the streets of the City, which are clean and beautiful;
at one end of it stands a large Brass Crucifix upon a Pedestall of Marble. The
Jesuits Church goes far beyond any of that bigness that I have seen out of
Italy. The Front is noble, with the Statua of Ignatius Loyola on the top, A
great part of the inside of the Roof was painted by Rubens, and some of it by
Van Dyke: there be many Excellent pieces of flowers done by Segers a Jesuit;
the Carving and gilding of all the works is exquisite: The Library of the
College is great, and the Books disposed handsomely into four Chambers; the
Founder hereof was Godfridus Houtappel, whose Monument, together with his Wife
and Children are worth the seeing, in a Chapel on the South side of this
Church. In the Church of the Carmelites is a large Silver Statua of our Lady,
and models of Cities in stone. Onsar Lieven Vrowen Kerck, or the Church of our
blessed Lady is the greatest in the City; and the Steeple one of the fairest in
the World, five hundred foot high: one of their feet is eleven of our inches;
so as it is 459 of our feet. In this Church there is much Carving, and a great
number of Pictures highly esteemed, among which one piece is much taken notice
of, drawn by Quintin, at first a Smith, who made the neat Iron work of the Well
before the West door; and afterward to obtain his Mistress, he proved a famous
Painter; his head is set up in Stone at the entrance of the Church, with an
inscription and this verse.

Connubialis amor de Mulcibre fecit Apellem. I was at the famous Abbey of St.
Michael, pleasantly seated upon the Scheld; where among other curiosities, I
saw a glass, which represented the Pictures of our Savior and the Virgin Mary,
collected from the Putting together of diverse other heads: One was represented
from a Picture wherein were thirteen faces, and another from one of twelve;
over the blessed Virgin was this Inscription.

Diva nitet variis expressa Maria Figuris. The Countess of Brabants Tomb, who
was drowned, and her Statua, as also the Monument of Ortelius, are here shown.
Macarius Simoneus was then Abbot, the Monks 63. Near unto the Wharf-gate is the
Church of St. Walburgis an English Saint, who contributed much toward the
conversion of these Countries.

The Townhouse is fair, the House built for the Eastcountry Merchants is very
stately and large, but runs now to ruin, in this I saw among other
curiosities, diverse strange Musical instruments, which at present are not
understood, or at least not made use of: The Hessen house has been also
formerly considerable. The water which they make use of in Brewing, is brought
by an Aqueduct from Herentall about thirty miles distant from hence; and is
conveyed into the Town by a large Channel, peculiarly walled in by it self
where it passes the Ditch; in this City are many good Collections of Pictures
both Ancient and Modern, and excellent Miniature or Limning by Gonsol, one fine
piece, which I saw was peculiarly remarkable, it being the work of 35 several
Masters.

From Antwerp, I passed to Brussels by water, changing Boats five times, and
going through diverse locks, by reason that the Country is so much higher about
Brussels, and the water above two hundred foot lower at Antwerp. At Fontaine a
league and half from Brussels, three Rivers cross one another: one of them
being carried over a bridge. The Piazza of Brussels is fair. and oblong in
figure upon one of the longest sides stands the Townhouse, and over against it
the Kings-house, where upon a Scaffold hanged with Velvet, Count, Fgmond and
Horn were beheaded, the whole Piazza being hanged with Black Cloth. Upon the
top of the Townhouse, stand: St. Michael the Patron of the City in Brass,
Count Marsins house formerly belonging to the Prince of Orange; has a fair
Court, and overlooks a good part of the City, but a quarter of it is ruined by
Lightning. The Thunder bolt or Stone which they affirm to have effected it, is
bigger than two Men's heads, and hangs up upon the door at the entrance. The
Jesuits Church is handsome, and in it the fair white Tower is beautifully
gilded at the top. The Carmelites Church has a noble Altar, and near unto the
Church is the Statua of a pissing boy, which is a continual Conduit. The Armory
was well furnished, as we were informed, before the Governors of the low
Countries sold the Arms; and Cassel Roderigo the Governor left it very bare.
There remains the Armor of Charles the fifth, of Duke Albert, of the Prince of
Parma, Ernestus, and of the Duke d'Alva and of the Duke Alberts horse who being
shot saved his Master, and died the same day twelve month; Spears for the
hunting the wild Boar, one with two Pistols; The Armor of Cardinal Infant,
and of an Indian King; A Polish musket which carries six hundred paces;
Charles the Fifth's Sword for the making the Knights of the Golden Fleece, and
Henry the Fourth's Sword sent to declare war; Good Bucklers for Defense, and
some well wrought; especially one with the Battle of Pyrrhus and his Elephants;
and Banners taken with Francis King of France, at the Battle of Pavia.

Somewhat like Godfrey of Bouillons shooting the three Pigeons near the Tower
of David, is the shot which Infanta Isabella made, when with an Arrow she
killed a Bird, in memory whereof, a Bird pierced with an Arrow is set upon the
top of a Tower in the Count, which is large; and if the New Buildings and
Design were continued, it would be very handsome. Before the Court stand five
brass Statues. The Park is pleasant, with Trees set in order, and adorned with
Grotto's, Fountains, and Waterworks, which come very near the Italian; one
piece somewhat imitating Frascati, in which all Musical Instruments are
imitated, and a perpetual motion attempted: and on the Front of the Buildings
stand the Caesar's head. But the Echo is most remarkable; which may perfectly
be distinguished to ten or twelve Replies. The greatest Church is that of St.
Gudula; in which is her Statua, the Devil striving to blow out the Light of her
Lanthorn. Two Chapels therein are remarkable; the one built by Leopoldus, very
fair on the outside: the other toward the North, has been visited by five
Kings, in which is the Host which bled being stabbed by the Jews. In the
Dominican Church is the Monument of the Duke of Cleve and his Duchess, in
Gorinthian brass. But for a New Church that of the Begennes, or Pious Maids, is
very considerable; there being Eight hundred of them in this City, who have a
particular place allotted to them, where they have built this milk white
Church. The Plague was much in this place at that time, three hundred Houses
being shut up, and a Garland placed on the doors, in the middle of which was
written IHS. I saw the English Nunnery, and other considerable Buildings. And
after I had refreshed my self at the Fish-Tavern, which is worth the seeing,
especially for two Rooms in it, furnished from top to bottom with very good
Pictures, I returned to Antwerp.

October. 4. I traveled through an open Country, and lodged at Molin brusle. The
Spanish Soldiers met us upon the Road this day, some of them well mounted and
armed, and begged of us, and were well satisfied with a small Benevolence. The
next day we entered the Country of Liege, and passed great Heaths, and on the
Sixth, in the morning, arrived at Maestreicht.

Trajectum ad Mosam, or Maestreicht, is a strong Town, seated upon the Maes,
four Leagues below Liege. The Outworks are very considerable; the Wall is old.
Toward the South-east lies a Hill, which arises gently, and overlooks part
of the Town. Under this Hill is one of the noblest Quarries of Stone in the
World. To secure the Town from the disadvantage it might receive from this
Hill, there was formerly a Fort built upon it, but it has been long since
slighted; and they have made out an Horn-work within Musket Shot of it, and the
Bastion answering to it is made very high, to cover the Town. On the other side
of the River stands Wicke, very well fortified also, and rather stronger than
Maestreicht, into which they might retire if the Town should be taken by Storm,
it being united to Maestreicht by a handsome Bridge over the Maes, consisting
of Nine Arches. All about Wicke the Country is flat: there are many Inhabitants
in it, and a handsome Glass house.

The private Houses of Maestreicht are generally covered with a black Slat, or
Ardoise, otherwise not very beautiful. The Town house is fair, seated in one of
the Piazza's, built of white Stone; it has Nine large Windows in a row on
each side, and within is very well painted by Theodorus van der Schuer, who was
Painter to the Queen of Sweden. In another Piazza is a Fountain, rows of Trees,
and the great Church. This Town was besieged and taken from the King of Spain
by the Confederate States, in the year 1632.

October the Seventh I dined at Gallop, a small place, and came that night to
Aken, Aix la Chapelle, or Aquisgrane, an ancient noble City, the Inhabitants
Courteous, and much frequented by reason of its hot Baths, of which I shall
speak more particularly in my Journey from Colen to London. Leaving Aken I
traveled toward Juliers or Gulick, but it being late before we arrived, the
Gates were shut up, so as we went only under the Walls, leaving it on our right
hand. Near unto Gulick runs a shallow swift River, called the Roer. At the
Mouth of it, where it falls into the Maes, is seated a considerable Town,
called Roermonde, through which I passed in the year 1673. when Sir Lionel
Jenkins and Sir Joseph Williamson were sent Plenipotentiaries to Cologne, in
our Journey from Antwerp to that City. We then passed the Country of Brabant,
by the way of Thornhaut, Weert, Roermonde, and the next Night passing by
Erkelens, lodged at Castro, or Caster, in Gulickland, where there are still the
remains of an old Castle, formerly built for the Defense of that part of the
Country. Roermonde is seated upon a rising Hill, near the River Roer, has a
College of Jesuits in it, a handsome Piazza, and an old Abbey with diverse
Monuments very ancient, founded by Gerard Earl of Guelderland. From this Town
their Excellencies were saluted with the Guns from their Walls, charged with
Bullets. The Spaniards in most places striving to express the highest of their
respects.

From Gulick I traveled to Cologne, where I arrived October the 10th, 1668.

A JOURNEY FROM COLEN TO VIENNA.
COlen, Coln, or Colonia Agrippina, was anciently the Capital City of the Ubii,
a people who were at first possessed of the Countries now called Berg and
March, but being over run by the Germans next to them, Agrippa, Lieutenant of
Gallia, received them into protection, and placed them upon this side of the
Roman shore of the Rhine, where they built this place, and called it Oppidum
Ubiorum, and the Romans seating themselves here for the defense of the Country,
in Honor of Agrippina, daughter to Germanicus, and wife to Claudius, whose
Birthplace it was, gave it afterward the Name of Colonia Agrippina. It is at
present one of the largest, if not the greatest, of any City in Germany,
secured toward the Land by a high Wall, and two deep Trenches, and toward the
Water by a Wall of Stone. The Rhine renders it delightful upon one side, and
diverse rows of Trees enclose the Town toward the Land. They have some
Outworks, as Half-moons and Ravelins, but their best security is in the great
number of men which they are able to raise within themselves. Many of the
Streets are broad, and paved with broad stones.

It received the Christian Faith very early, and Maternus was their Bishop
above 1350 years since, who subscribed, amongst others, to the Council of
Arles. They have a great number of Churches, and well endowed, which take up a
great part of the Town; The Prebends and Canons Houses having in many places
Vineyards, and large Gardens adjoining. Toward the North end of the Town, the
Church of St. Kunibald is considerable. The Convent of the Dominicans is fair,
and newly built, with a Garden in the Court, and all the Chambers uniform. The
Jesuits Church is well built and stored with rich Copes, Altar-pieces, and
other Ornaments. In the Church of St. Gereon, a Saint of great name here,
martyred about Colen in the time of Maximianus, are about a thousand Saints
heads, and on each side of the Altar a large Statua, whereof one is of a Moor;
and under the Quire another Church. The Convent of the Carmelites is also
considerable, wherein the Treaty of Peace was held with good accommodation in
it, though with no success, in the year 1673. In the Church of St. Ursula is
her Tomb, and the Tombs of diverse of the Eleven thousand Virgins, martyred by
the Huns. Upon the Monument of St. Ursula is this Inscription; Sepulcrum
Sanctae Ursulae indicio Columbae detectum. Upon many of the Tombs which are old
are Crosses and Lamps. Many Bones and Heads of the Martyrs are also kept in
this Church. The Cathedral is dedicated to St. Peter, and is very large, but
not finished. The Body of the Church has four rows of Pillars within it. The
Quire is handsome and very high: behind it are believed to be the Tombs of the
three Wise men which came from the East to worship our Savior, or the Kings of
Arabia, of whom it was prophesied that they should bring Gifts, commonly called
the three Kings of Colen: Melchior, who offered Gold, Gaspar Frankincense, and
Balthazar Myrrh. Their Bodies, as the account goes, were first removed to
Constantinople by Helena the Mother of Constantine the Great; then to Milan by
Eustorfius Bishop thereof; and they have now rested at Colen for above five
hundred years, being translated from Milan hither by Rainoldus Bishop of Colen,
in the year 1164. There are also diverse other Monuments of Bishops, and Noble
Persons in Brass and Stone, and one in the shape of a Castle with six Towers.
The Canons of this Church are all Noblemen; among whom the Duke of Newburg, who
ordinarily resides at Dusseldorff, about twenty English miles below this City,
upon the Rhine, has two Sons. In a Church dedicated to all the Apostles, they
show a Tomb, which being opened by Thieves, intending to plunder it, the woman
buried in it arose up and went home, and lived with her Husband diverse years
after. In one of the Streets is a Tower, or rather one Tower upon another,
which seems to be ancient, now made a Prison. Upon another Ruin also in the
Streets lies a Tombemade out of one Stone; of which sort of Tombs there are
many in this City and other places; but the greatest number of them I ever saw
was at Arles in Provence.

The Senate House is Noble, having a fair Tower upon it, from whence there is a
good prospect over the City. Upon the Front of the Senate House is a Man in
Basso relievo, fighting with a Lion, who, as it was related to me, was formerly
one of the Consuls, who having had a contest with some Clergymen about the
Government of the City, on a sudden they caused a Lion to be let in upon him:
upon which occasion he behaved himself so well, as he delivered himself, and
slew the Lion.

The Elector or Archbishop of Colen has two Palaces in the City, but by
agreement between him and the Town, he is not to stay here above three days
together. Only this present Archbishop, upon the coming down of the Imperial
Forces, and his loss of Bonna, took Sanctuary here in the Convent of St.
Pantaleon, where he continued a great while.

The City is Imperial and Free, and yet it does Homage to the Elector, much
after this Form: We free Citizens of Colen promise to the Archbishop, to be
faithful and favorable unto him as long as he preserves us in Right and
Honor, and in our ancient Privileges, Us, our Wives, our Children, and our
City of Colen. Most of the City are of the Roman Church, and the whole Town so
full of Convents, Churches, Churchmen and Relics, that it is not
undeservedly styled the Rome of Germany. The Lutherans have also a Church
within the Walls, and the Calvinists at Mulheim, half a League down the Stream
on the other side of the Rhine.

Over against Colen lies Dutz, a small Village, inhabited chiefly by Jews. The
Vessels which come out of the Low Countries hither are long, round bellied, and
of great burden. Near to the Wall of the Town, upon the Quay or Key, is a kind
of Harbor made for them, into which they may be drawn, and escape the Injuries
they would otherwise suffer by the Ice in Winter.

Besides the rich Clergy, there are many wealthy Citizens and Merchants here,
and they maintain a Traffic and Correspondence with diverse Countries,
especially by the convenience of the Rhine. They speak not the best High Dutch;
but Latin and French are understood by many: Diverse Hosts in Inns speak Latin,
and the Servants French; which proves a good help unto Travelers. It was made
an University about the year 1388. Besides the General Hospitals for young and
old persons, there are two for the Sick, and well accommodated. They have a
Pharmacopaea Coloniensis, or a Dispensatory proper to the place, whereby
Apothecaries compound their Medicines. I was acquainted with one of the best,
Mr. Elburg, a knowing and obliging person, who was his Majesty's Apothecary
while he resided at Colen, and whom my honored Friend Sir Alexander Fraser,
his Majesty's chief Physician, made use of, who lived in great reputation in
this City.

Two hundred years since Aeneas Sylvius left an high expression concerning this
place, Colonia quae de conjuge Claudii matre Neronis, Agrippina dicta est, and
trium Magorum ossibus illustrata, nihil magnificentius, nihil ornatius, tota
Europa reperias: which though, if strictly construed, will hardly be admitted
by any who has beheld Paris, Naples, Venice, etc. yet does it declare the
nobleness of this City, even in former times.

We left Colen about four a Clock in the Afternoon, being drawn up the Stream
with Horses, they being made fast by a very long Rope to the Mast; we lodged in
a small Village, having had a good prospect of Colen all this Evening from off
the water. Near to this Place Julius Caesar made his Bridge over the Rhine. The
next day we came to Bon, the Seat of the present Archbishop and Elector of
Colen, Maximilianus Henricus, Duke of Bavaria, Bishop of Hildisheim and Liege,
and Arch-Chancellor of the Empire throughout Italy. This place was formerly
called Bonna, or Castra Bonnensia, the wintering place, in the time of Tacitus
of the sixth Legion. It was not long since very well fortified by the order of
the present Archbishop, and the direction of Colonel Biser, a blind man, having
Cataracts in both his eyes. The Archbishops Palace is very Noble, and there is
a Chamber seated a good way into the Rhine, to which they pass through a
Gallery. This Night we lodged at the foot of the highest of the seven Hills by
the Rhine, which are seen at a great distance; and upon diverse of them stand
old ruined Castles. On the 15th we passed by a pleasant Island with a Convent
in it: at Remagen is also a Convent upon a Rock, fortified with round Towers.
In the Evening we lodged near to a Castle, ruined four years before by the
Electors of Triers and Colen, it belonging at that time to the Duke of Lorrain.
On the 16th early in the Morning we came to Andernach, where the plague was
very much at that time, and they kept a great many of their sick in Boats upon
the Rhine.

Andernach, of old Antenacum, was one of the Roman Fortresses. Upon this River,
some think that Caligula was born, and that Valentinian was buried hereabouts.
Near unto this place are also Mineral Springs, well frequented, and much made
use of. The Town is encompassed with an old Wall; and the Gates were shut up by
reason of the Plague: Notwithstanding, there being diverse Friars in our
company, several of the Townsmen sent out dishes of Meat to them, which we eat
in the Field upon Trees which were laid along near the Town. This day the
passage by water seeming tedious to us, Mr. Mulstroth, a worthy German
Gentleman, with whom I traveled as far as Spire, was willing we should hire a
Coach together, which we did, and invited the Friars with whom we had
breakfasted, to go along with us in it to Coblentz. We passed through a very
pleasant Country, between rows of Walnut-trees, in sight of two of the Elector
of Triers Houses, and near to a House belonging to the Count de Were.

We passed the Mosella over a hand some Stone Bridge of thirteen Arches, built
by Archbishop Baldus, or Balduinus, in the year 1344. and coming into the Town,
we went to the Dominican Convent, which is pleasantly seated near the Banks of
the River Mosella; but the Prior of the Convent, whom we had brought with us,
was so obliging, that he would not part with us that night; and we were very
civilly entertained by him in his Lodgings: He invited also some of the Convent
to bear us company; and after a handsome Supper, with plenty of excellent
Moselle wine, we went to bed between two Feather-beds.

Coblentz, or Confluentia, is a Town of a Triangular Figure, seated at the
meeting of two great Rivers, the Rhine and the Mosella, which make two sides
thereof, and the third is made by a Line drawn from one River to the other;
which is now well fortified after the most regular Modern way. The Wall within
these Works had many old high Towers; and formerly there was another still
nearer to the uniting of the Rivers, and consequently containing a less space
of ground. This Town is under the Elector and Archbishop of Triers, Carolus
Caspar, of the Noble Family of the Leyen, Arch-Chancellour for the Empire in
Gallia Belgica, and the Kingdom of Arles. It was given to the Church of Triers
when Medoaldus was Archbishop above a thousand years since, in the time of King
Dagobert. The Situation is pleasant and convenient, and lies over against the
Castle of Hermanstein, or Ehrenbreitstein, that is, The Stone of far extended
Honor; at the foot of which Castle, upon the shore of the Rhine, under a great
Rock, stands a very Noble Palace of the Electors, two large Wings and the Front
with five Pavilions standing toward the River, and from it a long Bridge of
Boats over the Rhine to Coblentz: when any great Vessel passes by, they let
slip three Boats, whereby the passage lies open, and make them fast again
afterward. In the German wars the Spaniards thrust in a Garrison into this
Town; which was afterward beaten out by the Rhinegrave for the King of Sweden;
and the strong Castle of Ethrenbrietstein being put into the hands of the
French, the Emperors Forces seized upon the Archbishop of Triers, who then was
Philippus Christophorus, and carried him away to Vienna.

In places where the Rhine runs through a low Country and a fat Soil, it
washes away the Banks: to secure which, in diverse places they have made great
Works of Wood, and also to secure Vessels from the danger of the Ice. And I
remember, riding near the Banks of the River Loire in France, I observed them
in some places to be handsomely defended for a long way together with Freestone.

Near unto Coblentz, upon a Hill, is a Convent of Carthusians. October the 17th
we went up the Rhine to Boppart, a walled Town, upon the western bank, where
Van Trump was at that time: It is a very old Town, one of the Roman Fortresses
against the Germans, called anciently Bodobriga; some would have it called
Bopport from Beauport, Fair-haven, or Bonport, a good convenient place for
Vessels to retire into, or to ride in.

On the 18th we dined at St. Guer, a pleasant Town belonging to the Landtgrave
of Hesse, who has a Castle here. Coming on shore we met with an odd custom:
for upon the Wall side there is fastened a Collar of Brass at present, but was
formerly of Lead, and given by Charles the Fifth; into this most Strangers that
come put their Necks, at which time they ask them, Whether they will be
sprinkled with water, or drink wine? and if they choose the latter, they give
an entertainment of wine to the Company. The Queen of Sweden passing by this
place, gave a great Silver Cup, out of which they now drink at this Ceremony.
We lodged this night at Wesel, a Town situated between a high Hill and the
River, belonging to the Archbishop of Triers. Here in the Marketplace they
show us the print of St. Huberts Horses foot in a Freestone.

On the 19th we came to Baccharach, or ad Bacchi aras, belonging to the Elector
Palatine; a place famous for Excellent Wines. We passed by an old Castle seated
upon a Rock in the middle of the Rhine, being of an irregular figure, called
Pfalts, where formerly the Prince Palatines of the Rhine were born, the
Princesses being sent hither to be brought to Bed. We came this night to
Dreickshausen; the next day we went by a dangerous Passage, there being many
Rocks under water, which cause the River to run very rapid and unequally. A
little above this we came to a round Tower, on a Rock in the Rhine, called the
Mouse-tower, built by Hatto Archbishop of Mentz, in the year 900. who, as the
Story goes, in a time of great Scarcity, pretending to relieve the poor who
wanted bread, invited them together into a Barn, where he burnt them all,
saying, They were like the Rats and Mice which would devour the Corn. After
which he was so persecuted with Rats and Mice, that to avoid them he caused
this Tower to be built in the middle of the Rhine, which did not avail him, for
they followed him thither also, and at last devoured him. A little above this
lies Bing upon the Western shore; a considerable Town, belonging to the
Elector of Mentz: here our Boat stayed to pay Custom, as it had done also at
Bonna, Liutz, Hammerstein, Andernach, Coblentz, Lodesheim, Bopport, St. Gower,
Cub, and Baccharach. For the trade of the Rhine being great, Princes and Lords,
who have Towns upon it, make use of that advantage, which, though it abateth
the gains of the Merchant, brings considerable profit to themselves.

Bing, or Bingium, was an old Roman Fortress upon the Rhine, where the River
Navus or Naw enters into it; over which latter there is a handsome
Stone Bridge: In this Town were many of the Duke of Lorrain's Army sick and
wounded, who three weeks before had maintained a fight against the Forces of
the Elector Palatine, near this place. From Bing we continued our Journey to
Mentz: at Rudesheim in Rhinegaw, a place noted for good Wine, they showed us a
Boy, whose hair was thick and woolly, like to the African-Moors, but of a fine
white color, which being somewhat an odd sight, I took away some of his hair
with me.

Mentz, Moguntia, Moguntiacum, and by the French Mayence, is seated over
against the Confluence of the River Main, with the Rhine, or rather a little
below it; in a fertile Country, abounding in all Provisions and good Wine; it
lies at length, and is most extended toward the River; and that part
excels the other toward the Land, which is not so populous or well built:
It is a strong place, and well guarded; it has many Churches and Monasteries,
and some fair Buildings, especially those of public concern, as the Palace of
the Elector, and others: But the narrowness of the Streets, and many old
Houses, take away much from the beauty of the City. It is an University, begun
about the year 1486. or as others will have it 1461. This place also
challenges the Invention of Printing, or at least the first promotion or
perfection thereof: And the Territory about it is famous for the destruction of
the Roman Legions under Varus, by the Germans. Gustaphus Adolphus, King of
Sweden, was wonderfully pleased upon the taking of this City, 1631. entering
into it in State upon the 14th of December, it being his Birthday, which began
the 38th year of his life, and kept his Court and Christmas here; where at one
time there were with him six chief Princes of the Empire, twelve Ambassadors
of Kings, States, Electors, and Princes; besides Dukes and Lords, and the
Martial men of his own Army. At the taking of the Town, they found great store
of Ordnance and Powder; and the City redeemed it self from Pillage by giving
the King a Ransom of Eighty thousand Dollars; and the Clergy and Jews gave Two
and twenty thousand more, of which the Jews paid Eighteen thousand; Archbishop
Wambold saving himself upon the Rhine, and retiring to Colen. The King caused
also two great Bridges to be made, one over the Main, founded upon fifteen
great flat bottomed Boats, the rest being built upon great Piles of Wood:
Another over the Rhine supported by sixty one great flat Boats, each lying the
distance of an Arch from one another; and many Families of people living
sometimes in the Boats under the Bridge. The Bridge over the Main is taken
away; but that over the Rhine is still continued: Upon which I saw the present
Elector passing in his Coach; a Person of great Gravity, of a middle Stature,
having long gray Hair, and was very Princely attended; his Name Joannes
Philippus of the Noble Family of Schoenburg, Elector and Archbishop of Mentz
Bishop of Wurtzburg, and Bishop of Worms, Arch-Chancellour of the Empire for
all Germany; the first of the Electoral College; in all public Conventions he
sits at the right hand of the Emperor, and is a Successor of the famous
Boniface, an English man, Bishop of Mentz, who so much promoted the Christian
Religion in these parts. But though his Dignity and Place excels the two
other Ecclesiastical Electors of Colen and Triers, yet his Territories come
short; and they lie not together, but scatteringly with those of the
Palatinate, Spier, Franckfort, and diverse places in Franconia. But of late he
has much increased his Power, by seizing the great City of Erfurdt in
Turingia, which he has since much beautified and strengthened by a Citadel
built upon St. Peter's hill.

From Mentz I passed by water up the River Main, to Franckfort, a free City of
the Empire, called Trajectum Franconum, a Passage or Ford of the Franks, as
serving them for a Retreat, when they entered or returned from Gaul; at present
Franckford upon the Main, to difference it from Franckford upon the River Oder,
which is an University: It is a large Town, divided into two parts by the
River; the lesser called Saxonhausen, or Saxonhouses, united to the other by a
Stone Bridge over the Main, of twelve or thirteen Arches. It is a place of good
Trade, and well seated for it, as having the advantage of the River Main, which
passes by Bamberg, Schweinfurt, Wurtzburg, Guemund, or Gaudia mundi; and also
the Tauber, and other Rivers running into it, affords convenience for
Commerce with the remoter parts of Franconia; and the Main running into the
Rhine, makes a large communication both up and down that Stream.

But this place is most remarkable for the Election of the Emperor, which, by
the Laws of the Golden Bull, should be in this City, as also for two great
Marts or Fairs kept in March and September; at which times there is an
extraordinary concourse of people from remote parts, in order to buying and
selling of several Commodities, especially for Books, as well printed here as
in other parts, whereof they afford two Catalogues every year, and have no
small dealings that way, by the Factors of the Germans, Hollanders, Italians,
French, and English: although at other times their trading in Books seems not
great; for when I was there out of the time of the Mart, the Stationers Shops
being shut up, made but a dull show. Here are also a great number of good
Horses bought and sold: and on the North-side of the City there is a spacious
place for a Horse-Fair. The City is strong and well fortified; and most part of
the Town are Lutherans. In the German wars, the King of Sweden having taken
Hanaw, sent a Messenger to Franckfort to know whether the City would peaceably
and speedily set open their Gates unto him, and accept fairly of a Garrison, or
stand to the hazard of a Siege: And although they were unwilling to yield, yet
for fear of the worst, they consented, That the King should have free passage
for his Army through the City; and that for the better assurance of it, six
hundred of his men should be received for a Garrison into Saxonhausen; and also
that the Magistrates and People should take an Oath unto his Majesty. So that
upon the 17th of November, 1631. the King's Army passed through Saxonhausen
over the Bridge, quite through the Town. Colonel Vitzthumb was left Governor
in Saxonhausen; and the King himself rode bare-headed through the Streets: and
by his obliging behavior did generally win the affections of the beholders;
and three days after returned thither again with the Landtgrave of
Hessen-Cassell, and the Landtgrave of Hessen-Darmstadt, where they met the
Seventeen Earls of the Wetteraw, or Veteravia, and were feasted in the same
room where the Emperors at their Coronation use to be entertained.

In Saxonhausen there is a House anciently belonging unto the Knights of the
Teutonick Order, which has the privilege of a Sanctuary for Man-slayers and
Bankrupts; but it is a security but for fourteen days. Upon this side there is
the largest portion of Land belonging to Franckfort; on the other side very
little.

This being a trading place, it is no wonder that there are so many Jews in it;
for a distinction they wear great Ruffs, their Sons Bonnets, and their Wives a
peculiar dress of their Head.

The Collegiate Church of St. Bartholomew, where many of the Emperors have
been crowned, is large, has a high Steeple, and is built of a red stone. There
are diverse handsome Fountains in the Town, and good Houses; in one of the best
of which lives Monsieur Pierre Neufville, a great Merchant, and a civil worthy
person, well known in most places of Commerce; who obliged me with Letters to
Venice, and other places.

From Franckfort I continued my Journey through the Bergstraes, passing by
Darmstadt, which belongs to one of the Brothers of the House of Hessen,
commonly known by the name of the Landtgrave of Hessen Darmstadt; and
afterward through a fruitful plain Country, in the sight of Hills, and
sometimes near them: the whole Country planted with Wallnut-trees, Vines, Corn,
and in some places with Tobacco; till I arrived at Heidelberg.

In coming into this Town we passed over the River Neccar, Nicer, or Necarus,
upon a Bridge covered over from one end to another, with a large Roof of Wood:
in the same manner is the long Bridge covered at the entrance of the City of
Alessandria della paglia in Italy.

The River Neccar arises near the Sylva Martiana, now Swartzwald, or Black
Forest, and passing through the Territories of the Duke of Wittenberg, runs
into the Rhine at Manheim: This, though none of the greatest, yet is a
considerable River of Germany; and has diverse good Towns upon it and near it,
as Sultz, Tubingen, Wirtingen, Essingen, Stutgard, Canstat, Lauffen, Hallbrun,
Heidelberg.

There being wars at that time when I was in this Country, between the Elector
Palatine and the Duke of Lorain: The Elector resided for the most part at
Frankendale, to be near his Forces.

Heidelberg is seated on the South Side of the River Neccar, between it and a
ridge of high Hills, so as it cannot well admit of a modern Fortification, or
hope to be extraordinary strong, as being over-looked by the adjacent
Mountains: It lies most at length from East to West: It has been an
University since the year 1346. at which time it was begun by Rupertus, Count
Palatine, and at present is much frequented. In the great Church was kept the
famous Library, which, after that the Spaniards had taken this Town 1620. was
carried to Rome, and added to the Vatican, where I saw it in the year 1664.
being placed upon one side of a very long Gallery belonging to the Vatican
Library; and the Duke of Urbin's Library placed on the otherside, over against
it: both which made a notable addition to the Papal Library. In this Church and
the Church also of St. Peter, are diverse Monuments of Princes of the Palatine
Family, and of Learned and Famous Men. The French have a Church here, and the
present Elector is of the Order of the Holy Ghost; and his Son a Marshall of
France: and good French and High Dutch are both generally spoken here. The
Lutherans have also a Church in this Town, by the favor of the present
Elector; although he himself be a Calvinist: and to express his generous
kindness the higher in this point, the first Stone was laid by himself and his
Son; and it is called the Church of Providence, according to the Elector's
Motto, Dominus Providebit.

Upon the Townhouse is a Clock with diverse Motions, and when the Clock
strikes, the figure of an Old man pulls off his hat, a Cock crows, and shakes
his wings, Soldiers fight with one another, and the like. The Prince's Stables
for above a hundred Horses are seated upon the River very conveniently, but
were fairer formerly, above half thereof having been ruined by the
Imperialists; as also diverse of the Statues on the outside of the Castle, which
is seated high above the Town.

The present Elector is Carolus Ludovicus, Son to the King of Bohemia,
Frederick the Fifth; he was born in the year 1617. and passed his Youth an
Exile from his Fathers Kingdom and Electorate: and at the pacification at
Prague 1635. he was excluded from any restitution to be made to him. But at
length, in the Treaty of Munster 1648. he was restored to the lower Palatinate,
and 1652. returned to the possession of his Fortunes: a highly accomplished
Prince, much honored and beloved by his Subjects. In the year 1650. he married
Charlotta, Daughter to William the Fifth, Landgrave, and to the famous Amelia
Elizabeth, Landgravess of Hassia; by whom he had the Chur Prince, or Electoral
Prince Charles, and a Daughter, the Princess Charlotta Elizabetha; but upon
some discontent the Princess Electress since returned to her own Friends and
Country. This Elector is also Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
Great Treasurer of the Empire, and together with the Elector of Saxony, Vicar
of the Empire.

In his Palace or Castle at Heidelberg, are diverse things remarkable; a very
great Tower to be equalled by very few; within which is a Theater for Comedies.
This was formerly called Trutzkaisar, or the Tower that bad Defiance, or
threatened the Emperor; but since the Restoration of the Elector, there are
some Works drawn about it in the figure of a Star, and the old disobliging Name
is by Proclamation forbidden to be continued, and it is at present called the
Sternschanz, or the Star-fort. By it is a handsome Garden; in the Ditch whereof
there was then kept a great Bear, and a very large Wolf. The Grotto's and
Waterworks are very handsome: they were also making diverse others, having the
advantage of the side of the Hill to bring down the water, and to make Grots
and Caves in the Rock. Amongst other Fountains, that of the Lions head with a
Frog in his Ear, is taken notice of. The Cellars are very large and cool,
filled with Vessels of no ordinary size; yet inconsiderable, if compared to the
great Tun kept in a great Building joining to the Cellars; it was built by this
present Elector's Order, 1664. and goes far beyond any made before: It
contains 204 Faiders and odd measure, or about two hundred Tuns: instead of
Hoops it is built with large knee Timber, like the ribs of a Ship, which are
painted and carved, and have diverse Inscriptions upon them, and supported by
carved Pedistals. Upon one side of it is a handsome Staircase to ascend to the
top of the Vessel; upon the top of which is a Gallery set round with
Ballisters, three and forty steps high from the ground.

About an English mile from Heidelberg, between the Hills, is a solitary place,
where three large Streams or Springs gush out of the Mountain, and presently
fill five Ponds, have three handsome Cascates or Falls, and after run into the
Plain, and are strong enough in a small space to turn four Mills; this is
called Wolfsbrun, or the Wolfs Fountain, from a Princess who formerly retired
into a Cave in this desert place, and was here devoured by a Wolf.

While I was at Heidelberg, two English men came kindly to me, Mr. Villers, and
Timothy Middleton, belonging to Lobensfeldt Cloister, a Convent formerly of the
Jesuits, but since let out to about an hundred English, who left their Country
1661. came up the Rhine, and by the permission of the Elector, settled
themselves a few miles from hence, living altogether, men, women, and children,
in one House; and having a community of many things: They are of a peculiar
Religion, calling themselves Christian Jews; and one Mr. Poole, formerly living
at Norwich, is their Head. They cut not their Beards, and observe many other
Ceremonies and Duties, which they either think themselves obliged to from some
Expressions in the Old Testament, or from some New Exposition of their Leaders.

From Heidelberg I made an excursion, and had a sight of Spire, seated in a
Plain, on the West Side of the Rhine; a place of Antiquity, conceived to be
Urbs Nemetum of old; a large place and populous. The King of Sweden in the
German wars demolished the Works about it, not willing to spare so great a
number of his Soldiers as was required to Garrison it, and make it good. It is
an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Mentz: there are many fair Houses in
it, diverse Churches, and a fair Cathedral, with four large Towers. The
Romanists, the Lutherans, and Calvinists preach in it at several hours. It is
the more populous, and filled with people of good quality, by reason of the
concourse of persons from other parts of Germany, for the decision of Law
Suits: For here the Imperial Chamber is held, and many differences which arise
in the Empire are determined, and the Electors and other Princes, in some
trials at Law, may be called hither. It is a settled Court, which Maximilian
the First, for the better ease of all persons, placed first at Worms, and not
long after it was fixed at Spire, from whence it cannot be now removed, but by
the consent of all the Estates. Things Cognoscible in this Court are determined
by an Imperial Judge, and sealed with the Emperors Arms, so that there lies
no appeal unto the Emperor.

Another day I went to Manheim, formerly a Village, seated at the Confluence of
the Rhine and Neccar; but walled about by the Elector Frederick the Fourth, and
since is much increased; all the Streets being large and uniform, and a Noble
Citadel built; within which, overagainst the Gate, the Elector designs a
Palace, the Model of which I saw: and at present, on the right hand, there are
three Pavilions of Lodgings: in one of which lodges the Elector Palatine; in
another the Prince his Son; and in the third the Princess his Daughter: behind
these there is a handsome Garden and Lodgings for Degen Felderen, the
Churfursts Mistress. Here are some good Pictures, as a Head of Hans Holben, and
a Landscape with the Story of the Union of the Swissers. The Bridge over the
Moat of the Citadel into the Town, is also remarkable, as having six
Draw-bridges upon it, three great ones, and three small ones on the side. There
are Palisado's all along the bottom, in the middle of the Ditch, and without
upon the Esplanade.

From Heidelberg I traveled to Nurnberg in the Company of Captain Wagenseyl,
who had been in the Polish and Hungarian wars, and was employed a little before
in blowing up the Castle of Launsteyn, belonging to the Elector Palatine, to
prevent its surprisal by the Duke of Lorrain. He was then employed to raise a
Company at Nurnberg, for the Service of the Elector Palatine. I had a good
advantage in my Journey by his Company; for he traveled with Authority, and
was a generous, knowing, and courteous person.

The first day we traveled near to the Neccar, in stony and rocky way; and it
being dark before we came to Mospach, the Peasants conducted us from Village to
Village with bundles of lighted Straw.

The next day we came to Poxberg, where there is an old Castle, and in the
afternoon reached Morkenthal, or Mergetheim, the Seat of the Grand Master of
the Herrhn Deutchern, or the Teutonick Order. The Town is wellbuilt, has a
fair Piazza, with a large Fountain in it, and a Statue of one of the Grand
Masters, with a long Corridore from his Palace. This Order has been of great
Fame, and has had large Possessions, as may be seen in the exact Account of
the Teutonick Knights of Prussia, made out from the best Authors, by my worthy
honored Friend Mr. Ashmole, in his Noble Description of the Order of the
Garter; and as Lewis du May, Counselor unto the Duke of Wirtenberg, has set
it down. For the Knights Templars and of St. John, having fought prosperously
against the Infidels, raised an Emulation in some German Gentlemen, who waited
upon the Emperor Frederick the First, in his Expedition to the Holy Land, to
take the Croisado. And because they were installed in the Church and Hospital
of St. Mary at Jerusalem, they were called Marianites. Their Order differed
nothing from those abovementioned, but in the form and color of their Cross,
and was approved by Pope Celestin the Third. Afterward when Jerusalem was
taken by Saladin, those Knights betook themselves to Ptolemais, from whence the
Emperor Frederick the Second, sent them back into Germany, and employed them
against the Prussians and Livonians, who at that time were still Pagans. But by
the Valor and Piety of those Knights, their Souls were brought into subjection
to Christ, and their Bodies to the Order which began that war in the year 1220.
a little while after these Knights found themselves Masters of a Country of
very large Extent, which obeyed the Order, till the year 1525. at which time
Sigismond, King of Poland, gave the investiture of Prussia unto Albert Marquess
of Brandenburg. In the year 1563. the Great Master became Secular again, and
took a part of the Lands subject to the Order, with the name of Duke of
Curland. And Livonia having been the Subject and Theater of many wars between
the Polanders, Muscovites, and Swedes; these last did at length become Masters
of it, and have it in possession still. So that there is no more remaining of
the Teutonick Order, but some Commanderies scattered here and there in Germany.
And the Great Master has his Seat and Residence at Mergenthal.

They wear on a white Mantle a plain black Cross. The Dignity of Grand Master
is generally held by some Great and Honorable Person; and in the Great Assembly
he takes place of all Bishops. The present is the Baron of Amring; and the
Grand Master before him was Leopold William, only Brother to the Emperor
Ferdinand the Third.

From hence we traveled to Lauterbach, near which we passed through a Wood,
and found a Noble Church upon the top of a high Hill, which being much
frequented by Pilgrims, they have made handsome stone Stairs from the bottom to
the top: then to Rotenburg, and lodged at Burgperner, and the next day by
Schantzbach we came to Nurenberg. Rotenburg is an Imperial City, which some
have likened unto Jerusalem for its Situation upon hilly places, and many
Turrets in it. It is Situated near the head of the River Tauber, which may be
accounted the second River of Franconia, passing by Rottingen, Landen, and
Werthaim, where it runs into the Main.

Nurenberg is the fairest City that I saw in Germany; the Houses most of them
of Freestone, very high; and diverse of them painted on the outside, and
adorned with gilded Balls on the top; many are of six or seven Stories high.
Der Herr Peller has one of the fairest. The City is very populous and full of
Trade, although it stands in a barren Country, and wants a Navigable River. The
three best Churches are the Hospital Church, lately built very fair; St.
Laurence, which is very large, with two high Steeples in the Front; and St.
Sebald the best of the three. The Body of St. Sebald being laid upon a Cart
drawn with Oxen, in that place where the Oxen stood still, they buried the
Body, and erected this Church in his memory. In this Church is a Crucifix of
Wood, very well carved, and esteemed at a high rate. The Crucifix without the
Church is very great, and of a black color: and some fancy that the Raht
Herrn, or Magistrates of the Town, have reposited a Treasure within it. The
Pulpit is well carved and gilded, and the whole Church so stately, that it may
pass in the first rank of Lutheran Churches; that Religion being here practiced
in its splendor. The Priest every morning reads the Scripture to the people
for half an hour, or preaches a Sermon. The Townhouse is well worth the
seeing: In it the Hall is spacious, as also the Chambers, and furnished with
good Pictures, and Stones well gilded and painted with white and gold, green
and gold, dark colored and gold, and the like. There is one Picture of most of
the Great Persons in Germany entertained in the Great Hall; another of the
three Brothers of Saxony; one of an Elephant as big as the life; a piece of St.
John and St. Mark, and another of St. Peter and St. Paul, both by Albert Durer:
but the most rare piece is that of Adam and Eve, by the same Master, with this
Inscription: Albertus Durer Almang faciebat post Virginis partum, 1507. Another
excellent one is that of St. Luke drawing the Picture of our Savior and the
blessed Virgin. Over the Gate at the entrance of the Shambles is a large Ox
carved in Wood, and painted over, with this Inscription:

Omnia habent ortus suaque incrementa, sed ecce
Quem cernis, nunquam Bos fuit hic, Vitulus.
The Castle stands upon a high Hill, from whence the Town makes a handsome
show: In it are observable a very deep well, the Emperors Chapel, his Picture,
and the Pictures of the Electors; good Night pieces; and one of a man behind a
white Curtain transparent, very well expressed. The Armor of Hebbele van
Gailinghen the great Sorcerer is here shown; and in the Wall of the Castle the
marks of his Horses feet, when he leaped from thence over the Town ditch.

The new Fountain was not then finished; but the Statua's in Brass made for it
were excellent; the Sea-Horses large, the Sea-Nymphs much bigger than the life;
and Neptune, who was to stand on the top, is above three yards and a half high.
When I came first into this place, I was not a little surprised to behold the
fairness of the Houses, handsome Sreets, different Habits, industrious People,
and neatness in all things, more than I had observed in German Cities before;
and no place has greater number of curious Artificers in Steel, Brass, Ivory,
Wood, wherein they work at an extraordinary cheap rate; and there are Officers
to inspect and enquire into the works of Artificers, that they be true,
perfect, and without fraud: they make strong and handsome Clockwork. The King
of Poland presented the Grand Signior with a very noble Clock, who took so much
delight in it, that when it required some mending (the Turks being ignorant in
Clock-work) he sent it from Adrianople as far as Nurenburg, to be set in order
again.

Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, was more magnificently received and
entertained in this City, than in any other of Germany; which so incensed
Wallensteyn, that he afterward encamped before their Town, and did great spoil
upon their Territories: But the King of Sweden marched thither toward their
Relief, and from thence toward Lutzen, where in a bloody Battle he lost his
life.

The River Pegnitz runs through Nurnberg, and has diverse Stone Bridges over
it; and below the Town, joining with the River Rednitz, runs into the River
Main at Bamberg; and the Main runs at last into the Rhine. The Reduitz arises
at Weissenberg, and is not far from the River Altmul, which runs into the
Danube, toward Regensburg. Upon this convenience, Charles the Great designed
to make a Communication of passage between the Danube and the Rhine; and made a
Canale thirty paces broad between the Rednitz and the Altmul, to join those
Streams for the commodity of Passage by Boat; but after he had proceeded two
German miles in this work, Boggs, Rains, and his warlike Diversions made him
give over that noble Design, whereby there might have been a Commerce by water,
from the Low Countries to Vienna, and even unto the Euxine Sea.

The Roman Lieutenant in Nero's time, had a desire to unite the River Soane and
the Mosella; and to make a passage between the Mediterranean and the German
Ocean; having been at the mouth of the Mosella by Coblentz, and passed from
Chaalon upon the soft and noble River Araris or Soane unto Lion, I cannot but
think these very goodly Streams, and fit for such a purpose. The present King
of France has a design to unite the River Aude with the Garonne, and so to
have a passage by Boat from the Mediterranean Sea by Toulouse and Bourdeaux,
into the Ocean. When I traveled in those parts, viewing the Country well, I
thought it would be a difficult work, and so it proves: but the King has
proceeded already very far therein.

About four Leagues from Nurnberg lies Altdorff, belonging unto it, made an
University in the year 1623. containing, when I was there, about 150 Scholars.
The Physic Garden is handsome, and well stocked with Plants, to the number of
two thousand. Dr. Hoffman the Botanick and Anatomick Professor, showed me many
of the most rare of them; and presented me with diverse. The Anatomy School is
not large; yet the only one in those parts of Germany: And they have diverse
Curiosities preserved in it, as the Skeleton of a Heart, of a Horse, of a Man,
of a Bear bigger than a Horse: And some Pictures, as one of a Ninivite, and
another of Moses, which they take to be Ancient. Dr. Wagenseyl, Professor of
Law and History, brother to Captain Wagenseyl, who traveled with me from
Heidelberg, invited us to lodge at his House, and showed me his Library, and
all his Rarities and Coyns, whereof he has a good Collection, having lived in
most places of Europe, and speaks many Languages well; he gave me a piece of
the first money that was coined in Germany. In the University Library I saw a
fair Hortus Eystetensis, and Youngerman's Collection of Plants by his own hand.

At Nurnberg I met with the Son and the Secretary to the Holland Ambassador in
Turkey, who had traveled hither over-land from Constantinople, in their return
into the Low Countries, traveling in Greek Habits.

From hence I went to Newmarkt, a good Town in the upper Palatinate belonging
to the Duke of Bavaria, and the next day through Heinmaw, subject to the Duke
of Newburg, to Regensburg.

Ratisbona, Regensburg, Augusta Tiberii, Colonia Quartanorum, the chief place
of the Roman Forces in this limit of the Empire, where the fourth Italick
Legion had a constant station; was made a Colony by Tiberius in the year, as
some conceive, of the Passion of our Savior. It was much augmented and adorned
by the Emperor Arnulphus, who had a great affection for this place, so
pleasantly seated, and in a good Country. Here the River Regen runs into the
Danube; from whence it was called Regensburg. There are two Bridges, one of
wood below the Town, and another Bridge of stone of about fifteen Arches; which
is the fairest stone Bridge over the Danube. It is an Imperial City, but not
without some acknowledgment to the Duke of Bavaria: And although it be strongly
fortified, yet it was taken by the Swedes in the German wars. There are many
fair buildings in it, both private and public; and though I am not able to
confirm what some report, that there as many Churches and Chapels in this
City, as there are days in the year; yet are there many fair Churches and
Convents: As the Cathedral of St. Peter, in the South Side of which is the
Picture of St. Peter in a ship; and on the North aother of the Apostles first
Mission. In the Piazza stands a neat little Church, the Convent of St. Paul,
founded by St. Wolfgangus Bishop of this place, the Convent of St. Emerammus
Bishop of Ratisbone, a Saint of great Veneration here, though but of little
mention or name in other parts. The name of Albertus Magnus, Bishop of this
place, has also added unto the Fame of Regensburg.

But that which chiefly promoteth its luster, is the General Diet or
Parliament, which is often held in this City, and is not to be called in any
part out of Germany; and the place is not unfit for the accommodation of such a
noble Convention, as are the Estates of Germany. The Vice-Marshal takes care
to provide Lodgings respectively to their persons, and sees that all things be
brought hither, and at a just price; that the Hall or Place of Assembly be
furnished and adorned sutably to the dignity of the Persons convened, and has
an especial eye and regard toward the Public safety. By this Convention the
great Concerns of Germany are much secured, and their peace and quiet
Established. Wherein Germany seems to have a better advantage than Italy; For
Italy being likewise divided into many Dominions and Principalities, has no
Common Diet or Great Council, whereby to proceed for their Public safety:
Which makes them often so divided in their common Concerns in times of Danger,
and when they most need a joint Combination.

I entered the notable River Danubius at this place, which has already run a
good course, and passed by many fair Towns or Cities; as the large City of Ulme
in Swabenland, where it begins to be Navigable; as also Donawert, Neuburg,
and Ingolstadt, and has already received the considerable River of Licus or
Leck, whereby the Commodities of that great Trading City of Augsburg are
brought into it. When I first embarked at Regensburg, I thought I might have
taken leave of the Danube not far below Vienna, but an opportunity made me see
this great Stream beyond Belgrade, as I have declared in another Account of my
Travels.

The first day we passed by Thonawsteyn, where there is a Castle seated upon a
high Rock, and came to Pfeter or Vetera Castra of old, now but an ordinary
place. The Boats upon the Danube are generally painted black and white, are
flat bottomed, and broad at the Head and Stern; there is a Chamber built in the
middle; and the Rudder is very large, to be able to command the Boat where the
River is rapid, and of a swift Course.

The next day we came to Straubing, a handsome walled Town, belonging to the
Duke of Bavaria; the Streets are straight; and there is a Tower in the
Marketplace, painted all over with green and gold-colour: There is also a
Bridge of wood over the Danube. We passed by Swartz in the Afternoon, where the
Church is seated upon a Hill, and is frequented by Pilgrims, and lodged at
Deckendorff, where there is another Bridge. Near this Town comes into the
Danube that considerable River Iser, or Isara, having passed by diverse
considerable Towns; as Landshut, Frising, and Munchen, the Seat of Ferdinandus
Maria, Elector of Bavaria, Great Steward of the Empire, and at present the
first of the Secular Electors, and he is to take place immediately after the
King of Bohemia, it being so concluded on at the Treaty of Munster, where
Maximilian Duke of Bavaria was allowed to hold the Electorship, which was
confirmed upon him by the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, when he excluded
Frederick the Fifth, Count Palatine, and in lieu hereof there was an eighth
Electorship erected for the Palatinate Family, who also, if the Bavarian branch
does fail, are to re-enter into their ancient Electorship, and the other newly
erected is to be abolished.

Thursday, November the fifteenth, we came by Wilshoven to Passaw, Patavia, or
Boiodurum, a long and noble City in the lower Bavaria, or Bayern, made up of
three Towns, Iltstadt, Passaw, and Innstadt, at the concurrence of the River
Inn, the Danube, and the Iltz. As Towns are commonly of great Antiquity which
are built at the Confluence of great Rivers, for the Strength of the Situation
and convenience of Commerce; so is this accounted ancient, as being a Roman
Colony, and the place of the Castra Batava in old times.

The Church of St. Stephen is stately, besides other fair Churches. The Bishop,
who is Lord of the City, has a strong Palace upon a Hill; his Revenues are
large, and besides what he possesses hereabouts, he has the tenth part of the
notable great Lead-Mine at Bleyberg in Carinthia. This place had lately
suffered much by fire; but a good part was rebuilt, and very fairly after the
Italian manner: So that this may well be reckoned as one of the ten
considerable Cities, which are upon the Danube, accounting from Ulme unto
Belgrade, as Ulme, Ingolstadt, Ratisbone, Passaw, Lintz, Vienna, Presburg,
Strigonium, Buda, Belgrade; all which from Ratisbone I had the opportunity to
see before the end of my Journey. Near to a Wall over against the great Church
at Passaw, which was then repairing, I saw a vast Head cut in stone, the Mouth
whereof was two spans wide, and the rest proportionable. The River Iltz, which
runs in here from the North, is considerable for the Pearls which are found
in it; and the noble River Inn or Oenus, from the South, is the greatest River
which has yet entered the Danube; having passed by Insbrug, and taken in the
River Saltz, upon which stands Saltzburg; and arising in the Alps in such a
high Country as Tirolis, it runs in here with a great force, and adds much
unto the swiftness of the Danube.

Upon the Sixteenth we came to Lintz, the chief City in the higher Austria, not
very great, but as neat and handsome a City as most in Germany. There is in it
a very great Marketplace, with never a bad House in it, the whole Town built
of a very white Freestone; and the Castle upon the Hill is of Modern Building,
and very large. There is also a Bridge over the Danube. The Imperial Forces
rendezvoused here when Solomon came to Vienna. This was also besieged by the
Peasants of Austria in the time of Ferdinand the Second; they having got a Body
together of Forty thousand men, and many pieces of Ordnance, but were stoutly
repulsed after many Assaults, and at last overcome by Papenheim. Not far below
Lintz the River Draun enters the Danube; this comes from the Gemundner Sea, or
Lacus Felicis, passing by Lampack, Weltz, and other Towns, and has a noted
Cataract or Fall of Waters.

The next day we passed by Ens, Anisia, upon the River Anisius, or Onasus,
which taking its original in the Borders of Saltzburgland, runs into the
Danube, and divides the higher from the lower Austria, having received into it
self the River Saltza, upon which stands Cell, or Maria Cell, a place of the
greatest Pilgrimage in Austria. Near this Town are many Roman Coyns and
Antiquities found, and Lauriacum stood of old, a Roman Garrison, and afterward
a Bishop's See: we came to a Village on the North shore of the Danube, called
Greim, where the Graff von Leichtensteyn has a House. A little below this are
two dangerous passages in the River; the one called the Strudel, where the
River running amongst vast depiction of two flat boats or barges near a
whirlpool in a river; on the left bank is a castle ruin; on the right bank is a
church; in the background is a cross on top of a mountain The Whirle-poole in
the Danvbe.
I. Olivor Fe
Rocks, some under water, and some above, the waves are broken with great
force, and the Current is rapid, foaming, and troublesome; and some skill is
required to pass between the Ledges of Rocks which are under water, and when
the water is low the passage is very difficult. The other is the Wurbel, or a
kind of a Whirlpool, where the water turns about with great force, being
hindered in its direct Course by a great Rock. Upon the top of a high craggy
Rock stands a large Cross, and at the foot a little Church, dedicated to St.
Nicholas, who is Patron of this dangerous place, and is believed to take
peculiar care of such as pass this way, and therefore a little Boat comes to
you as soon as you are out of danger, and receives what Acknowledgment you
please, or what perhaps you may have promised to give, when you were in some
fear. This night we lodged at Ips, Ipsium, or Ibissa, a Town on the South Side
of the Danube: over against it lies Besenbeug, or Usbium Ptolomaei. Two German
miles below Ips stands Pechlarn, conceived to be Arlape in former times; and
here the River Erlaph enters the Danube: A mile and a half below this lies
Melcke, Nomale, or Mea dilecta, in former days the Seat of the Marquesses of
Austria, until St. Leopold removed to Kalenburg, and his Successors to Vienna.
The Town lies at length upon the South Side of the River; but the noble
Cloister of Benedictines, which takes place of any other in Austria, stands
upon a Hill which over-looks the Town, the River, and the Country about; is
richly endowed, and remarkable for the Monuments of many great Persons, and the
Tomb of St. Colman, much honored in these parts. We dined at Steyn, where
there is a Bridge over the Danube. Near to this lies Crembs, another walled
Town; and over the water Mautern; and not far from it the rich Convent of
Ketwein; After this the River Traisn, or Tragisama, comes in from the South.
Having passed by the noted Town St. Pold, or St. Hippolitus, we lodged this
Night at St. Eldorff, and the next day passed by Thuln, Stockeran, and Cloister
Neuburg, to Vienna.

THE DESCRIPTION OF VIENNA.
VIENNA, or Wien, which the Turks call Berch, is the chief City of Austria, in
the Latitude of forty eight Degrees, twenty Minutes, not much differing from
the Latitude of Paris. The old Seat of the Dukes of Austria, and for a long
time of the Emperors of Germany. According to ancient account it stands in
Pannonia superior, the Bounds of Pannonia extending unto Kalemburg, or Mons
Cetius, five or six miles Westward of Vienna; beyond which still Westward all
that lies between that Hill and the great River Oenus, or Inn, which runs
into the Danube at Passaw, or Castra Batava, was anciently called Noricum.

It was an ancient place of Habitation in the time of the Romans, and called
Vindobona, as the Learned Petrus Lambecius has at large declared, where the
Classis Istrica sometimes lay, and the tenth German Legion had its station; all
this shore or side of the Danube being famous for the actions of Roman
Emperors against the Marcomanni and Quadi, who possessed the Country on the
other side of the River, and especially for the wars of Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus Philosophus, who notably defeated those Nations, and who, as Aurelius
Victor (who was Governor of Sirmium in Pannonia inferior, in the time of
Constantius) affirms, fell sick at Carnuntum, now Petronel, and died at
Vindobona, now Vienna. And to confirm the Antiquity hereof, besides what
Wolfgangus Lazius has delivered, not many years since some Antiquities were
found. For in the year 1662. when a wall was dug up near the old Palace, the
workmen digging still on below the Foundation, found a Stone Trough or Coffin,
containing hard Earth and Bones, with a small Gold Coin, a Glass Urn enclosed
in a Brass one, an Iron Knife like a Sicespita, or Knife used about Sacrifices,
a little Roll or Scroll of pure Gold, shut up with a Golden cover at both ends,
wherein was an Inscription in strange Characters: Not far from the Sepulchral
Monument were found a Head in Brass, a Brazen Patera, Lamps, Lachrymatories,
and other Vessels, and a Copper Coin of Antoninus Caracalla. The writing in the
Golden Scroll, which no man could read, was conceived by the Learned Lambecius
to be the old Pannonian Character, and that this might be the Monument of some
Pannonian Priest in the days of Caracalla, who, as good Authors deliver, spent
some time about these parts.

It is seated on the South Side of the Danube, on the ripa Romana, that side
nearest to Rome, and many Roman Colonies, according to the usual position of
Roman Stations, both upon this River and the Rhine, as may be exemplified in
Colen, Bonna, Andarnach, Coblentz, Ments, Worms, Spier, and Strasburg. And in
like manner in the old Roman Stations, on the South or Roman side of the
Danube, which were in no small number in or near the Austrian shore, as
Carnuntum, or Petronel, Vischmund, or Aquinoctium, Ebersdorff, or Ala Nova,
Melck, or Nomale, Arlape, or Pechlarne, Lentia, or Lintz; for hereby they
better secured their Conquests, and hindered the incursions of the Barbarians
before them.

It is not seated upon the main stream of the Danube, but by a branch thereof;
for the River running through a low Country; it is divided into several
Streams, and makes many Islands. A small River named Wien, runs by the East
part of this City, and enters the Danube below it, which upon floods does
often much hurt, yet sometimes low and very shallow, so as I have stepped over
it; some will have it to give the Name unto this City: it divides part of the
Suburbs from it, and has diverse Bridges over it. For that we may have a
distinct apprehension of Vienna, we must consider the City and Suburbs thereof;
the Suburbs are very great, and not without fair Houses, Gardens, Walks, and
all Accommodations at large.

The City it self is that walled and fortified part, designed not only for
convenience of Habitation, but also to sustain a Siege, or any Attack from the
Turk, and is now separated from the Suburbs by a fair Esplanade, or open
Ground, above a Musket shot over. The Houses near the wall were pulled down
since the last Fortification in the Turkish war, when they were in some fear
that the Turkish Forces about Gran and New-heusel, would move toward them. It
is fortified a la moderna, with ten Bastions toward the Land, and a very deep
Ditch, into which they can let the Danube: and with two other Bastions toward
the water, on that part of the River which lies on the North-side of the Town.
The Bastions are large; upon one of them I saw Count Souches muster a good part
of the Militia of the City. The Ditch is large and very deep, into which
although they can let in the River, yet it is commonly kept dry, lest they
might incommode their deep Cellars. There are two walls, the one old and
inward, little considerable at present, built at first with the ransom of our
King Richard the First, who in his return from the Holy War, was detained
Prisoner by the Duke of Austria upon the 20th of December, 1192. The Austrians
pretending they had received some affront from the King at Joppa, and that he
had taken down the Ensign and Banner of Duke Leopold in a contemptuous way. The
other outward of a great breadth, made of Earth, and faced with Brick, edged
with Freestone, so well built, as to render this City one of the most
considerable fortified places in Europe. The Esplanade gently descends from
the Town for three hundred Paces; there are very few Outworks.

It is very uncertain who was the first Builder of Vienna, and after it had
been long built, it ran to decay again for Four hundred years together, till
Henry the First, Duke of Austria, in the year 1158. did much repair it; and the
ransom afterward of King Richard beautified it.

The whole compass, taking in the Suburbs, makes a very large Circuit, but the
City it self, which is walled in, may be about three miles in Circumference,
and is exceeding populous, as full of People, for the bigness of the place, as
most of the great Cities. And I could not but take delight to behold so many
Nations in it, as Turks, Tartars, Graecians, Transylvanians, Sclavonians,
Hungarians, Croatians, Spaniards, Italians, French, Germans, Polanders, etc.
all in their proper Habits.

The chief Gates are six: 1. Stubnthor, or the Stuben Gate toward the East. 2.
Karnterthor, or the Gate of Carinthia toward the South. 3. Burgthor, the Town
Gate, or Castle Gate. 4. Schottenthor, or the Scotch Gate. 5. Newthor, or the
Newgate; these two last toward the West: And 6. the Gate of the red Tower
toward the North, which leads unto the Bridge over the Danube: and toward
the water side, there is also a Port by the Emperors palace, and a Cloister or
Nunnery in the Town has the Name of a Port called Himmel port, or the Gate of
Heaven. The five first of these Gates are vaulted and arched with long passages
through the Townwall, and have good Bridges of Wood, with Drawbridges to pass
over the Town ditch: The sixth is under a Tower, and leads to the Bridges of
the Danube: For that River running here in a flat low Country, divides its
streams, so that to pass it quite over, there are at present seven long Bridges
made up of many thousand Tree laid one by another, after their way of making
Bridges. There is also a Bridge within the City of Vienna, called the Hochbrug,
or High-bridge, which is made by the crossing of two Streets at equal Angles;
the ground of one street being as high as the tops of the Houses of the other,
so that to continue it, they were forced to build a Bridge or Arch in the
Lower-street, to let the upper pass over it.

The City is fairly built of stone, and well paved; many Houses are of six
stories high; they are somewhat flat roofed after the Italian way; the Streets
are not narrow, but the compass of ground will not admit them to be very broad;
and their Buildings are remarkable both above and below ground; their Cellars
are very deep. To satisfy my curiosity, I went into some of them, and found
four Cellars one under another; they were arched, and had two pair of Stairs to
descend into them. Some have an open space in the middle of each roof, to let
the Air out of one Cellar into another, and from the lowest an adit or tube
unto the top, to let the Air in and out from the street, somewhat after the
manner of the Mines.

Aenaeas Sylvius, about two hundred years since, commending the City of
Nurnburg, among other expressions lets fall this: Cuperent Scotorum Reges tam
egregie quam mediocres Cives Norinbergenses habitare. The Kings of Scots would
be content to dwell so well as the middle sort of Citizens of Nurnburg. I must
confess, when I first entered Nurnburg, I was much surprised to see such a
noble, large, spruce, rich, and well built City: But Vienna does also deserve
the commendation which he affords it: Ubi Palatia digna Regibus and Templa
quae mirari Italia possit. Where there are Palaces fit for Kings and Churches,
which Italy may admire. And this being spoken so long ago, is now better
verified of it.

The Imperial Palace is very Noble, Substantial, and Princely furnished,
consisting chiefly of two Courts; the one very large, the other lesser, wherein
the Emperor lodges. At the Entrance over the Gate, are set in Capital Letters
the five Vowels, A, E, I, O, U; whereof the Phancies of men make various
Interpretations. That which was told me was this, Austriae est imperare Orbi
Universo; or, Alles Erdreich Is It Osterreich Unterthan, i. e. All the World is
subject to Austria. Although I could hardly believe this was the first intended
meaning. Besides these two Courts is another small one, where some of the Pages
lodge. I took notice of a large rough Jaspis stone lying upon the ground,
little regarded or observed: it is about nine foot Diameter; it was presented
unto the Emperor by the Archbishop of Saltzburg, whose Country affords
notable Quarries, and stones of many sorts; depiction of the Mariensaule or
Column of Our Lady in Am Hof, Vienna, featuring Mary and four angels A noble
copper Column Standing before the Jesuits College in Vienna
John Oliver Fecit
a little piece of it polished, affords fine yellow, red, black, and white
Veins. The Palace of the Count de Draun, and that which Count Rothal has
lately built and nobly furnished, are very considerable; with many others.

There are also many fair Churches, rich Convents, and Conventual Churches; as
that of the Carmelites, of the Franciscans, of the Benedictines, of St.
Nicholas; In this Church I could not but take notice of the late Sepulchral
Monuments of Count Strozzi and Cardinal Harach. The Dominican Convent is very
fair. The Augustines have a large Church, in the middle whereof they have built
a Chapel after the manner of the Holy House at Loretto; upon the top of which
hang the Colors taken from the Turks and Tartars, many of which Ensigns are
not square like ours, but made Escucheon-wise, some filled with Circles,
wherein are expressed half Moons. The Jesuits Colleges are large, who seldom
fail of noble Convents, especially in places where they have so good footing as
in this. The Front of one of their Colleges opens into a fair Piazza, in the
middle whereof stands a large and high composite Column of Copper upon a
Pedestal of white stone, with four Angels with Escucheons, and on the top the
blessed Virgin; Inscriptions also, in which the Emperor dedicates Austria unto
her Patronage and Tuition. In another Marketplace, where the Townhouse is,
there is a handsome Statua of Justice in Copper.

I could not but observe the Scotch Church and Cloister, which gave also the
name unto the Scotch Gate of the City, because I somewhat wondered how the
Scots in old time should be so considerable in this place, but I found by
Information, and the Account of Lazius and Matthaeus Merian in High Dutch, that
this Convent was in former times a great Receptacle for the Scots in their long
Pilgrimage unto Jerusalem, founded and endowed by Duke Henry the First, in
memory of St. Gregory: and it may seem less strange that the Scots should have
a Convent here, and be numerous in these parts in former Ages, if we consider
that St. Colman, one of the Saints of the greatest Veneration in this Country
was a Scotchman, and said to be of the Royal Blood of Scotland, who, in his
passage to Jerusalem was murdered by the Baurs or Country people at Stockerau,
four German miles from Vienna, and hanged on a Tree, where, as the Story goes,
his Body remained uncorrupted for a year and a half, and diverse Miracles being
affirmed of it, it was taken down, and honorably interred near Stockerau; but
by Meginhard Bishop of Aichstadt it was translated unto Melk, and afterward
sent into Hungary, and his Head kept a long time at Stullweissenburg, or Alba
Regalis, according to the Account which is here given of this Saint.

The Church of St. Peter is also considerable, not for its Splendor but
Antiquity, as being accounted the oldest in the City, standing in a place where
in old time there stood an Altar in honor of Domitian, called Ara Flaviana. In
this Church lies the Body of that famous and learned Person Wolfgangus Lazius,
with this Epitaph or Inscription:

Magnifico Nobili Clarissimo atque summa eruditione ornatissimo viro Domino
Wolfgango Latzio Vien. Philosophiae atque Medicinae Doctori and Professori
Primario, Celeberrimi Archigymnasii Viennensis Rectori and Superintendenti
Caesareo, and ejusdem Sacrae Caesareae Majest. Ferdinandi Sanctissimae memoriae
Consiliario and Historico Peritissimo, defuncto Anno Domini MDLXXXVI.

In the Church of the Capucines Convent, are interred the Emperor Matthias and
his Empress, and the Empress Maria, wife to Ferdinand the Third, who out of
their Devotion and Humility, chose to be buried in a Church of this poor Order.
And the Capucines not admitting of Magnificent Monuments in their Churches, as
in the Churches of other Orders, no Tombs are erected worthy so great an
Emperor, and such Empresses.

But the Cathedral Church of St. Stephen, contains diverse Monuments of many
Princes and Great Persons, and is a large stately Building, but somewhat dark
by reason of the thick painted Glass: not covered with Lead, but with Tiles of
wood, which is the only blemish thereof, yet makes a good show. The Steeple and
Spire are very remarkable, as being high, large, strong, and handsome. On the
top or Weathercock-place of the Spire stands a Cross under a Star and half
Moon, according to the Figure I have elsewhere set down, which the People think
to be of Gold, or at least very well gilded: and in the time of Thunder and
Lightning it looked pale and whitish.

They have this Account how these came first to be set up in this place: That
when Solomon the Magnificent besieged Vienna, perceiving the Forces in the City
to be obstinate, he had an intent to batter down the Steeple about their ears:
But some of the Bassa's and great Commanders, advertising him how unprofitable
a business it would prove, and withal when he took the City, what an honor it
would be unto him to have such a Noble Pyramid in his Dominions: He sent word
into the Town, That he was willing to spare the Steeple, upon condition that
they would set up the half Moon and Star (the Turkish Arms) upon the top
thereof. They returned Answer that they would, if he would send the same unto
them, which he did, and they placed it where it stands.

This Spire has the largest Crockets I have observed in any, they being above
a yard long, and adorned with foliage work. The Spire of Landshute in Bavaria,
is accounted the highest in Germany; that of Strasburg the neatest and fairest;
and this of Vienna the largest and strongest. And therefore it is no wonder
that when the Ambassadors of Bosna formerly came unto Vienna, they so often
viewed and admired this Fabric, and plainly said that all the money in their
Country was not sufficient to have built it.

This Steeple is accounted about four hundred sixty and five foot high, being
about half way up three hundred and thirty eight steps. Besides other Hills, I
could see Haimburger Hill within two miles of Presburg, and a great part of
Austria, which the long Course of the Danube rendered very pleasant and
delightful unto the eye. In the Chamber or Room from whence I had this
prospect, there is a Clock, whose Case being of wood, was in part burnt down by
Lightning, and therefore there is water always kept in this place to extinguish
the fire, and a man continually watches in the place where the Bells hand.
There is also an Instrument of wood, or wooden Bells or Hammers, which they
make use of from Goodfriday till Easter-sunday, all the time that our Savior
was in the Grave, during which time they permit no Bells to ring.

At one of the doors of the Church there is a stone placed in the wall, which
is generally conceived to be one of the stones wherewith St. Stephen was
stoned. It seemed to me some kind of pebble, and is worn and polished by the
hands of the people, who when they enter at that door, do touch it with their
fingers. I was also showed depiction of St Stephen's Cathedral, Vienna The
Cathedral Church of S.t Stephen in Vienna
one of the stones which killed St. Steven at St. Sernine, or St. Saturnine's
Church in Toulouse in France, which is a Church abounding with
Relique-Rarities, and where they also think they have the Bodies of seven of
the Apostles, of St. George, of our King St. Edmund, and of forty Saints.

In this Church of St. Stephen, besides many Monuments of great Princes and
famous Persons, diverse learned men have Sepulchral Inscriptions; as Johannes
Faber Bishop of Vienna; Johannes Cuspinianus, and Sebastianus Tengnagelius,
formerly Library Keeper, Historiographer, and Counselor to the Emperor, an
extraordinary learned man, and skilful in fifteen Languages, as the Inscription
delivers; as Hebrew, Syriack, Chaldee, Persian, Arabic, Turkish, Aethiopick,
Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, German, Belgic, and English.

The University of Vienna is also remarkable, if we conssider the Antiquity
thereof, the number of Scholars, their course of Studies, their accommodations,
privileges and advancements. This is said to have been begun by Albertus the
Third, above three hundred years past; and their Rules, Orders, and Statutes to
have been borrowed from the University of Paris, and the Students were
distinguished into four Divisions or Nations; who, besides the General, have
their particular Rules and Officers, and were comprehended under the Classis of
Austrians, Nations of the Rhine, Hungarians, and Saxons.

In the Austrian Division were contained the Friulians, all of the Diocese of
Trent, all Italy, with the other Provinces beyond the Mountains. (...) vian the
Classis of the Rhine were comprehended Sue^^^^^, Alsatians, Franconians,
Hassians, d all the Provinces to the South-west, as France, Spain, Navarre,
Holland, Brabant.

In the third Classis, or Natio Hungariae, were contained Hungarians,
Bohemians, Polonians, Moravians, Sclavonians, all that speak the Sclavonian
Tongue, and also Germans.

To the Classis, or Natio Saxonum, were reduced Saxons, Westphalians,
Frislanders, Turingians, Misnians, Brandenburgers, Prussians. Livonians,
Lusatians, Pomeranians, with the Ultramarine Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
Ireland, Sweden, Norway, and Denmark.

These Divisions take up all the Nations of Europe; and indeed there are
Students here of many Nations: and upon Contentions and Differences the several
Classes will hold unto their own, and take parts, and bandy against each other,
but will all unite and hold together in differences with Townsmen or Jews,
which happen sometimes unto an high degree.

They follow here the old beaten way of Knowledge: and I met with few who had
any good insight in new Philosophy; but there are many good Philologers, and
are well versed in Languages, History and Antiquity: and there are many Learned
Men either educated here, or come from other parts. Some who had taken notice
of the Royal Society in London, were very inquisitive after it; and when I had
satisfied them in all particulars, were very much pleased therewith. If they
should fall into the way of Experimental Philosophy, being very industrious,
it is very probable they may do much therein, and they were sure to have the
countenance of the Emperor. I found them also much affected with the English
Society in other parts of Germany. At the University of Altorff I was much
enquired of concerning it: and a Magistrate of Nurnburg, who had got a
Telescope from London, invited me to his House, to practice the way of using
it. Der Herr von Adlershelme of Leipsick, a Person of great Curiosity, was very
inquisitive after the same Society. And of late years the Curiosi of Germany
have held Learned Conventions and Correspondence, and printed their
Observations at Leipsick. And since my Return into England, I have been
solicited from Cassovia in Upper Hungary, to send the Transactions into those
Parts.

During my stay at Vienna, I went unto a public Anato my of a Woman that was
beheaded: the Lecture lasted so long, that the Body was Nineteen days unburied.
It was performed by a Learned Physician, Dr. Wolfstregel, who read in Latin to
the satisfaction of all persons. What I most particularly observed therein was
this, The Pyramidal Muscles very plain and large; the Uterus larger than is
usually observed; the Cartilago Ensiformis double; the Lungs very black; the
Eye was very well shown; he produced an artificial Eye of Ivory, and another
large one of Pastboard and Paper, contrived and made by himself; the Muscles of
the Pharynx, Larynx, Os Hyoides, and the Tongue, after their dissection, he
reduced very handsomely into their proper places again, to show their natural
situation and position. The Anatomy-Theatre was of capacity to receive above an
hundred persons; and according to the custom of other places, to avoid
impertinent Spectators, a piece of Money was given for admission. Of
Anatomy-Theatres, until of late, there have been few in Germany, or none. And
when I was in the Anatomy-School at Altorff, near Nurenburg, that learned and
civil Professor, Dr. Mauritius Hoffmannus, told me that the same was the First
in Germany.

Paulus de Sorbait, Prime Professor, Physician unto Eleonora the Empress
Dowager, and Knight of Hungary, was the Rector Magnificus. Zwelfer, who writ
Animadversions upon the Dispensatory of Ausburg, was in great repute in Vienna,
and had built for himself a noble House in the City, but he died some time
before my coming thither.

In fine, the University is noble, their Advancements considerable, their
Privileges great, and they have the power of life and death, from ancient and
latter Concessions of their Dukes and Emperors.

But the greatest luster unto Vienna is the Residence of the present Emperor
Leopoldus; he was born in the year 1638. he was Son unto the Emperor Ferdinand
the Third; he was baptized by the Names of Leopoldus, Ignatius, Franciscus,
Balthazar, Josephus, Felicianus. His eldest Brother Ferdinand, King of the
Romans, died of the Small Pox in his Fathers time. His Brother Carolus
Josephus, Master of the Teutonick Order, dyed 1662. He married Margareta
Infanta of Spain, daughter unto King Philip the Fourth, whose Children died
Infants; a virtuous, affable, grave, and worthy Prince, and seemed to me to
live very happily here, in the love and honor of his People, Soldiers, and
Clergy.

His Person is grave and graceful; he has the Austrian Lip remarkably, his
Chin long, which is taken for a good Physiognomical mark, and a sign of a
constant, placid, and little troubled mind. He is conceived to carry in his
Face the lineaments of four of his Predecessors, that is, of Rudolphus the
First, of Maximilian the First, of Charles the Fifth, and Ferdinand the First.
He was very affectionate unto his Empress, who, though but young, was a modest,
grave Princess, had a good aspect, was zealous in her Religion, and an Enemy
unto the Jews. He showed also great respect and observance unto the Empress
Dowager Eleonora, who was a sober and prudent Princess, well skilled in all
kind of curious Works, and delighted sometimes to shoot at Deer from a Stand,
or at other Game, out of her Coach. He was also very loving unto his Sisters,
beautiful and good Ladies; whereof one, the eldest, was since married unto that
Noble Prince Michael Wisnowitzski, King of Poland.

He speaks four Languages, German, Italian, Spanish, and Latin. He is a great
countenancer of Learned Men, and delights to read, and when occasion
permits, will pass some hours at it. The worthy Petrus Lambecius his Library
Keeper, and who is in great esteem with him, will usually find out some Books
for him which he conceives may be acceptable. While I was there he recommended
a Translation of Religio Medici unto him, wherewith the Emperor was
exceedingly pleased, and spoke very much of it unto Lambecius, insomuch that
Lambecius asked me whether I knew the Author, he being of my own name, and
whether he were living: And when he understood my near Relation to him, he
became more kind and courteous than ever, and desired me to send him that Book
in the Original English, which he would put into the Emperors Library: and
presented me with a neat little Latin Book, called Princeps in Compendio,
written by the Emperors Father, Ferdinandus the Third.

He is also skilful in Music, composeth well, and delighted much in it, both
at his Palace and the Church, which makes so many Musicians in Vienna; for no
place abounds more with them; and in the Evening we seldom failed of Music in
the Streets, and at our Windows: And the Emperors delight herein makes the
Churchmen take the greater care to set off their Church-musick, for he goes
often to Church, and not to one, but diverse, especially the best Conventual
Churches: and in his own Chapel some of his own Compositions are often played.
He has also excellent Music in his Palace, both Vocal and Instrumental; and
his private Chapel is well served, where besides the excellent Music, there
are always eight or ten Counts, Pages to the Emperor, who serve at the Altar
with white wax Torches in their hands; and after the manner of the Italian
Princes, diverse Eunuchs to sing.

For his Recreations abroad, he delights much in Hunting, especially of the
wild Boar in due seasons; I have known him bring home six Boars in a morning.
Some stout persons, particularly Count Nicholas Serini, would encounter a wild
Boar alone, but at last he unfortunately perished by one, which has made
others more wary since; and therefore when the Boar is at a Bay, the Huntsmen
so stand about him, that the Emperor, or other great persons, may more safely
make use of their Boarspears upon him.

Surely there are great numbers of them about the Country, for they are no
unusual or extraordinary Dish in the City, though of a delicious and pleasing
taste. They feed upon Acorns, Beech-mast, and Chestnuts, upon the spring or
sprout of Broom, Juniper, and Shrubs, and upon the roots of Fern, and will
range into Cornfieldsd, and come out of Forests into Vineyards. The Huntsmen
are notably versed and skilful in that Game; for though they see it not, they
will distinguish a wild from a common Swine, and ghess whether that which they
hunt be Male or Female, old or young, large or small, fat or lean; and this
they chiefly conjecture from their tread or foot, and the casting their
hindfeet out of the track of their forefeet.

The Emperor being so good a Huntsman, it is the less wonder that he is
esteemed a good Horsman. Certain it is, that he has a very noble Stable of
Horses, procured from all parts, Turkish, Tartarian, Polonian, Transylvanian,
Saxon, Bohemian, Hungarian, Naples, etc. and they are well managed; and they
ride them to the satisfaction of the Beholders.

Having seen the Arsenal at Venice, the Stores at Chatham, and the Naval
Provisions at Amsterdam, I am not like to admire any other, especially so far
from the Sea, and looked for nothing of that nature in this place.
Notwithstanding I found an Arsenal, and place for Naval Vessels to be set out
upon occasion, and some thereof were employed in the last Turkish war, when
they attempted to destroy the Bridge of Boats which the Turks had made over the
Danube, a little above Gran and Barehan. They are built somewhat like Galleys,
carry great Guns, and a good number of Soldiers, and will make a sight upon
the broad deep stream of the Danube, and may be handsomely brought into the
Town behind one of the Bastions, when the River is high; and hereof there are
some at Rab and Komora, as I have declared elsewhere.

The Emperor has many Counselors, great Soldiers and Courtiers about him;
among which these seemed of greatest Note.

Eusebius Wenceslaus Duke de Sagan, Prince Lobkowitz, Pirme Counselor,
Hoff-meister, of the Order of the Golden Fleece, a person of a grave and sober
Aspect, somewhat blunt in conversation, but of a generous temper, and free from
all covetousness, who spent his Revenues nobly, and unto his great reputation:
He was chief Favorite unto the Emperor; and though some had no great opinion
of his Abilities, yet he was the first that discovered the last Hungarian
defection and revolt, whereby those Noble Persons, Count Peter Serini and
Nadasti (whom I saw at Vienna) were brought unto their ends.

Henricus Gulielmus, Count of Stahrenberg, Ober-hoff-Mareschal, or Lord Marshal
of the Court.

Johannes Maximilianus, Count of Lamburg, Oberst-Kammer-Herr, or Chief of the
Chamber, a Person of great esteem. The Gentlemen of the Bedchamber are
numerous, and many are in extraordinary; there may be an hundred of them, all
Barons and Counts. Every one of them wears a Golden Key before his Breast: and
the Grooms of the Bedchamber wear one of Steel: Two of each attend every Night.

Gundakerus, Count Dietrichstein, Oberst-Stall-Meister, or Chief Master of the
Horse.

These are the Chief. These following are also considerable.

Count Sinzendorff, Oberste-Jag-Meister, Grand Veneur, or Hunts-Master, a
Person in good favor with the Emperor, who very much delights in Hunting,
as have most of his Predecessors.

The Count of Aversberg Oberst Falken-Meister, Chief Falconer, who has twelve
Falconers under him.

The Count of Paar, Chief Master of the Emperors Post.

Leopoldus Wilhelmus, Marquess of Baden, Captain of an hundred Hartshires, who
are the Horse-guard, and ride with Pistols and Carabines out of the City; but
within Vienna they carry Lances and Javelins with broad points.

Franciscus Augustinus, Count of Wallensteyn, Captain of an hundred of the
Foot-guard, of a good Personage, and well esteemed of by the Emperor.

Sixty, or more, Pages, for the number is uncertain, and not limited; most of
them Counts and Barons.

Raymundus, Count de Montecuculi, was his General, President of the Council of
War, Governor of Rab and the Confines about it, and of the Order of the Golden
Fleece; a tall Person, somewhat lean, but has a spirit in his look: he is one
of the oldest Commanders in Europe, and performed good Service in Poland,
Hungary, Germany in many places, and is esteemed a prudent, valiant, and
successful Commander.

The Count de Souches was also a Commander of great Fame, and in high esteem
with the Emperor. He was a Native of Rochelle: he first served the Swedes in
the German wars, and was a Colonel, but upon some disgust he forsook the
Swedes, and served the Imperialists, and was made Governor of Brin, the second
Town in Moravia. After the taking of Crembs in Austria, General Torstenson
besieged Brin, and sent word unto the Governor de Souches, That if he refused
to deliver up the Town he would give him no quarter. Who answered him, That he
would not ask any, and also give none: and defended the place with such
resolution, that after many Assaults, Underminings, and Attempts by Granado's,
Torstenson was forced to rise, after a Siege of four months, which was so
advantageous unto Austria and the Imperial affairs, that the Emperor took
especial notice of him, made him a Baron, and of his Privy Council. He
commanded also all the Forces in Vienna, and did notable Service in the last
Turkish wars. He took the City of Nitra, or Nitria, not far from Strigonium or
Gran; and took and slew six thousand Turks which were sent by the Vizier of
Buda against him: a worthy Person, and of a good Aspect. Count Souches the
younger his Son, an Heroic Commander, is Governor of the strong fortified
place Leopoldstadt by Freistadt, a Person of great Civility, unto whom I was
much obliged.

Count Lesly, Nephew unto Count Lesly who was sent Ambassador to
Constantinople to the Sultan from the Emperor, is a Commander worthy of that
esteem he has with the Emperor; a Person of great Courage, Civility and
Humanity, which I must ever acknowledge.

The Courts of the Empress, and of the Empress Dowager, are filled with Persons
of Note; and there are a great number of Soldiers in this place of great Fame,
as the Marquess Pio, Spork, Cops, and many more. Many of the Clergy and Men of
Learning, are in good esteem with the Emperor; but the Jesuits Milner and
Boccabella are his near Favorites. Many Strangers, both Soldiers and Scholars,
have built their Fortunes here. And surely Strangers of parts and industry, so
they be of the Roman Church, are not like to raise their Fortunes any where
better than in these parts.

Though the Emperor goes not to war in Person, yet has he been successful in
his wars, especially in the last Battle with the Turks at St. Godart, where the
business was handsomely and actively managed, to set upon the body of the Turks,
which had passed the River Rab, before the whole Forces of the Vizier could
come over, to the great slaughter of the Janisaries and Turks, who fought
stoutly, and were first put to a Retreat by the French Cavalry. For at first
the Turks seemed to prevail, and had slain a great part of two Regiments of the
Auxiliaries which came out of Franconia, and after their custom, had cut off
their Heads.

Among the many notable things in Vienna, the Imperial Library is very
remarkable. He who has seen the Bodleian Library at Oxford, and the Vatican at
Rome, would be much surprised to find such a notable one here, as may compare
with them; especially upon the extreme Borders of the Learned part of Europe.

The number and nobleness of the Books does much exceed the receptacle or place
which contains them, as making no fair show at the entrance, and somewhat
wanting light. But as for the number and value of the Books, they are of
opinion here that it yields unto none, but rather excels any other Library
in Europe. There was a place designed for the building of a fit receptacle for
them; but, I know not how, a Theater for Comedies is now built in that place.

It is divided into eight Chambers or Rooms, which are so well filled, that
many Books are fain to lie upon the Floor; and the Shelves stand so close, that
there is but just room to pass between them. The Manuscripts stand distinct
from the printed Books, according to their Languages, being divided into six
Classes, Theological, Juridical, Medical, Philosophical, Historical,
Philological. There can scarce be a more admirable Collection than the
Manuscripts in part of the first Chamber, of Hebrew, Syriack, Arabic, Turkish,
Armenian, Aethiopick, and Chinese Books.

It was begun, at least the Books began to be placed in this receptacle, by
Maximilian the First, but has been much increased by succeeding Emperors,
most of them, since Rodolphus the First, being much addicted unto Learning,
there having been large accessions from many noble Libraries, and most upon the
cost of the Emperors. The choicest Books in the famous Library of Buda, of
King Matthias Corvinus, Son unto Huniades, are now in it. The notable Library
of Wolfgangus Lazius, who was Library Keeper, was brought hither, and Three
thousand Books of Johannes Sambucus are now in this Repository.

Augerius Busbequius, sometime Library Keeper hereof, added much unto it; and
in his two Turkish Embassies procured great number of noble Greek Manuscripts
at Constantinople, which are inscribed with his own hand, Aug. de Busbeck. emit
Constantinopoli. A great many were added from the Library of the Learned
Johannes Cuspinianus, Library Keeper, and Counselor unto the Emperor. The
notable Libraries and Mathematical Instruments of Tycho Brahe, Kepler, and
Gassendus, were purchased for it. But the largest accession was made by the
noble Library of Count Fugger, which consisting of sixteen thousand Volumes,
was purchased by Ferdinand the Third. Many were brought, some few years past,
from the Ambrasian Library by Inspruck, by the Learned Petrus Lambecius,
Library Keeper, Historiographer, and Counselor unto the present Emperor; who
has also an excellent Library which is like to be added unto the Imperial. He
then reckoned the Volumes in this great Library to amount at least to Fourscore
thousand; and by this time that number may be increased, for he adds some
yearly. And the number might almost be endless, if they would make use of their
privilege, for the Emperor has a right to have two Books of all that are
printed in Germany.

They have also a great advantage at Vienna, to acquire good Manuscripts from
the Turkish Dominions, for the Emperor is obliged to have a Resident with the
Grand Signor wheresoever he moves or orders him to be; even at the last
sight of St. Godart, the Emperor's Resident was in the Turkish Camp. And when
I was at Larissa in Thessaly, the Resident Signor di Casa Nova, was inquisitive
after Books to be found among the Greeks in Monasteries and other places. And
this Emperor, like his Father, will spare no cost toward such Acquiries.

By the especial favor of my noble Friend Lambecius, I went many times into
this Library, and he was so courteous as to let me have what Books I desired
unto my private Lodging: He would show me diverse Books upon what Subject I
required, and offered me a sight of what Books he thought rare and estimable;
and amongst others I could not but take notice of these following.

A Letter of the present Emperor of China, in the Chinese and Tartarian
Languages, unto the present Emperor of Germany, weaved in a very fine Roll.

Another old Roll written in unknown Letters, yet a little resembling the Greek.

A Book in the Runick Language.

A very fair Manuscript of Ptolomy, with the Mapps drawn in Colors.

The oldest Manuscript and true Exemplar of Livie, in large Letters, without
distinction of Words or Sentences, very uneasy to be read, a thousand years
old, and brought, not many years since, from the Library near Inspruck.

An old fair Greek Manuscript of Dioscorides, written eleven hundred years
since, in very large Letters, without distance of Words, or Accents, wherein
all the Plants are lively painted; also the Pictures of Dioscorides, Galen,
Pamphilus, Cratevas, and other ancient Physicians, bought of a Jew at
Constantinople for an hundred Ducats by Busbequius.

A Book of Geometrical Propositions demonstrated in the China Language.

Another fair one in the China Tongue with Pictures.

A noble old Greek Manuscript in great uncial Letters, without stops, points,
or distance of words.

An ancient Greek Manuscript of the Book of Genesis, in large Letters, without
distance or accents, thirteen hundred years ago; wherein are Forty eight
Pictures or Draughts in Miniature or Water colors, much conducing to the
knowledge of ancient Habits, the manner of Feasting, postures at Meals, waiting
of Servants and Musical Instruments: Wherein I could not but take notice of the
Golden Spot upon Joseph's breast; and the manner of the Execution of Pharaoh's
Baker, his Head being put through a forked piece of wood, and his Hands tied
behind him.

A fair Book of Albert Durer, wherein are many fine Paintings in Miniature or
Limning; as also a Sphere, and within it a Globe carved and painted by him.

A fair Book of Michael Angelo, wherein, besides many rare things in
Architecture, are all the paintings and designs of the Belvedere in little.

A fair Alcoran in Arabic, interlined with the Turkish to explain it.

The Bible in the Coptick and Persian Languages.

Luther's own Bible, marked with his own Hand, and interlined by him with Notes
in many places.

A fair Greek Manuscript of the New Testament, fifteen hundred years ago
written in Letters of Gold upon Purple.

There was also a Magical Glass, obtained by the Emperor Rodolphus, whereby to
see Apparitions, and converse with Spirits; which some conceive to be the same,
or of the like nature with that used by Kelly.

Of ancient Greek, Roman, and Gothic Medals and Coyns, in Gold, Silver, and
Copper, to the number of sixteen thousand. Among the Copper Coyns they pretend
to have two of the Emperor Marcus Otho.

I let fall some Drops into this Ocean, adding some Coyns, Intaglia's, and
Inscriptions not to be found in that large work of Gruterus; which having found
in the Emperors furthest Dominions and Turkish parts, long out of his
possession, where there had been no great enquiry after them; were showed unto
his Imperial Majesty by Petrus Lambecius, and so well accepted by him, that he
said I might have the use of what Books I desired: and at my return into
England he gave me a formal Pass in Latin for my safe Travel, and that my
Trunks or Goods might not be searched, which takes off a great deal of trouble
in passing so many Principalities and free Cities, Commanding all in his own
Dominions, and Requesting all Princes in Germany to favor me, and permit me to
pass freely without molestation: It was thus Subscribed,

Leopoldus

Leopoldus Gulielmus Comes in Kinigseggs.

Ad mandatum Sacr. Caes. Majestatis proprium Beuer.

The Rarities of the great Duke of Tuscany, The Treasure of Loretto, St. Mark,
St. Denis in France, of the Duke of Saxony at Dresden, and others, were very
satisfactory to me. Yet having a fair opportunity, I would not leave Vienna
without a sight of the most noble Treasury or Repository of his Imperial
Majesty; especially having heard so much thereof, and knowing it to be the
Collection of many succeeding Emperors. I therefore took a fit opportunity to
remain diverse hours in it, and was extremely delighted with the rich and
magnificent Curiosities thereof. To set down all I saw, were a work too large
for this Volume; and the Catalogue of them, which is kept in this place, takes
up a large Volume in Folio. I shall therefore only mention these following,
whereby some conjecture may be made of the rest.

In the first Cupboard or Case were many noble Vessels, turned and shaped out
of Ivory, a Cup turned by the Emperors own Hand; another turned by Ferdinandus
the Third. Gallant Cups of Amber; Spoons and Vessels of Mother of Pearl; many
noble works in Coral; a fine Galley in Ivory, and Cups made out of Rhinocerot's
horn.

In the second, An Elephant of Ivory with a Castle upon his back, and over the
Castle a Ship, with much other fine work in the same piece. Two fair Pillars of
Ivory; good Basso Relievo in Ivory; a fair Cranium or Deaths-head, and much
other variety of Ivory work. A Picture in Oil of Ganimede, by Corregio.

In the third, A fine Picture of an old Man's head in Oil by Albert Durer:
great Variety of Watches and Clock-work in Silver: a fine Centaur in Silver,
which is a curious Watch.

In the fourth, More Watches and Clock-work; a gallant Ship of Silver, a
Triumphal Chariot, a Turk riding and attended, a Globe and a Sphere in Silver,
a curious Landscape in Oil by Corregio, a Cupid by the same hand, with a fine
Copy of it.

In the fifth, A curious Filigrane Handkerchief, and two fair Filegrane Plates
brought out of Spain by the Empress Margarita; an Indian Basket of an Indian
sort of Filegrane mixed with Birds; a Basin of Agate finely wrought with silver
Craw-fishes in it.

In the sixth, Is contained a strange Collection of Intaglie and old Roman
Stones, admirable for their work and largeness. A large Agate whereon is
wrought the History of that Victory which Augustus Caesar obtained over the
Dalmatians and Pannonians in the ninth year of our Lord; about five inches
long, and four broad, highly valued.

An Onyx with the Head of Alexander and Olympia.

A Shell with a Battle carved in it.

A Chain with the Heads of all the Austrian Family.

A Dog in a very large Sardonyx.

In the seventh, A noble Head in Oil by Hans van Ach. The Head of Maximilianus
the First in Plaster, with a lock of his own Hair. Mother of Pearl in many
shapes. Fine Baskets, and the twelve Caesar's Heads.

In the eighth, most of Crystal, A noble Vessel about a yard and half high,
made out of one piece of Crystal. An Urne. The Head of the Empress. A fair
Dragon. The Head of the Queen Mother of France. A Crystal in which the Picture
of our Savior may be seen thrice one way, and once another way.

The ninth of Crystal also, A noble Ewer. A fair Vessel of very clear
Crystal, lately bought. A large Head. Fair Crosses, and other Varieties.

The tenth of Gold and precious Stones. Five Crowns. The Imperial Crown; rich
in Jewels, and has a very large blew Saphir on the top. A Model of that Crown
with which the Emperor is crowned, much richer than the Original. A Paragon
Diamond of seventeen Carats and a half. Very large Rubies. A Scepter of
Unicorns horn, set with rich Stones. A Locket of the greatest Diamonds. A
magnificent Scepter, Globe, Cross, and Crown, which cost seven hundred thousand
Crowns. An Opal bigger than my hand, as it was taken out of the Mine; and many
other fair Opals. A very large Emerald. A Ship in an Emerald. A fair Ring-Dial.

The eleventh of Gold. A noble Basin used at the Baptism of the Austrian
Family. Scepters, Scimeters, Knives, and other rich Presents from the Turk.
Three rich Dog-Collars, sent with three Dogs out of England, with this Mark on
them C C. A large lump of pure Gold, as it was taken out of the Mine, as broad
as my hand. A fair piece of Gold Ore, wherein the pure Gold shoots upon a
white Stone. Diverse great Basins of Gold and Coral.

In the twelfth. Vessels of Jaspis, Agate, Lapis Lazuli, Oriental Granates.
Cups of Onyx, Sardonyx. Large ones of Lapis Nephriticus: and a great one of an
Amethyst.

In the thirteenth. A large high Vessel of Bohemian Topaz. Flowers well made
out of precious Stones. A Cup of an Hungarian Diamond. A piece of Ambergreece
as big as a man's head, sent from the Grand Signor. A noble Jaspis-stone. A
large Stone of Agate on the outside, and a bed of large Amethysts naturally in
it in the middle, which is an extraordinary and pleasant Rarity.

In the rest, Noble Chrysolites, Jacynths, Oriental Granates, Berylt or
Aquamarines. The notable rich Smaragdus, or Emerald, or a Cup out of that
Stone. Three great ones having been already taken out, valued at three hundred
thousand Crowns. A Picture in Oil of the little King Uladislaus Lokeli, King of
Hungary. Ten rich Turkish Saddles with Furniture for Horses, set with fair
Turcois Stones. A great number of Gold Vessels and fine Figures in Coral,
Turkish Knives, Gauntlets, and Table men of Gold. Delicate Pictures in Wax.
Very large Bezoar-stones, Indian-gold Cards and Counters. A vast Medal of the
Emperors Arms, weighing two thousand two hundred Ducats, or a thousand pounds
English. A Cup out of Solomon's Temple. Fair Amber, Rare Inlaying in Wood.
Bacchus and other Statua's out of a very high Rhinocerot's horn. A fine Picture
of the Mountain Vesuvius. Jewels with black Feathers given by the Turkish
Ambassadors. A notable Picture of a lean Skeleton Priest, who lived so four
years. A noble Cabinet-clock with large motions. A fair Basin and Ewer of
carved Ivory. King Philip the Second of Spain in Diamond Armor, set in Gold. A
neat Picture of an old Man courting a young Woman, with this Motto:

Arctum Annulum ne gestato. A Knife swallowed by a Peasant near Prague, which
was nine months in his Stomach, and safely cut out 1602. The like happened also
to a person in Prussia, of which Daniel Becker has written a peculiar Tract
under this Title, De Cultrivoro Prussiaco. A fair Crucifix of Pearl. Indian
Pictures made of Feathers. The King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus's Buff-coat in
which he was killed at the Battle of Lutzen. Tilly's Sword. An Angel in Ivory
with Hair and Clothes of Filegrane of Gold. A neat Crucifix of Wood by Albertus
Durer, Two very large Lookingglasses with the Frames of Silver. All the Gospels
written and painted. Many brave Statua's and Pictures every where. The Head of
Charles the First King of England, in white Marble. A Pedistal of Amber, over
which a Cross. The Head of St. Valerius Bishop of Triers. The Picture of St.
Katherine of Sienna, drawn by Sigismund King of Poland. A Picture of the
Emperor as he gives Audience, to be looked upon through a little round hole.
A neat Table of Inlay'd Stone made by the present Empress Dowager Eleonora. A
Nail of our Savior's Cross almost a foot long; our Savior's Blood; and two
Thorns of his Crown, the one whiter than the other. Priests Garments covered
all over with large Pearl. The great and high esteemed Agate Dish, between
three and four spans Diameter, with XRISOS naturally in it. Unto which one
applied that of St. Luke, Dico vobis quia si hi tacuerint, lapides clamabunt.

Unto which magnificent Rarities there is one more added, the noble Chain of
Pearl of eight yards long, taken from the Graff Tokoly in the late Hungarian
war, as I understand since my Return.

I went unto diverse noted Places about Vienna: I walked unto the Hill of
Vienna, two English miles distant from the Town, going up all the way by an
easy Ascent; from whence I had a prospect of the City, and the Campagnia about
it, together with the high Mountains in Steirmark covered with Snow: and in my
return saw the Palace of the Empress Dowager without the Town, called la
Favorita, and passed by the Convent of the Paulini.

About two English miles Eastward from Vienna, there is a very noble
Garden-place belonging to the Emperor, built by Rodolphus the Second, which
has been formerly well furnished, and provided with Plants, but now seems to
be neglected, and somewhat ruinous. It consists of an inward and an outward
square Garden: The inward is two hundred ordinary paces square, about the same
bigness with the Place Royal at Paris: It has a Portico or Cloister, supported
by Forty Pillars of white Stone on each side, and is covered with Copper; as
are also the Pavilions which the common people think to be Gold. Besides this,
there is an handsome row of Buildings well seated, called New-gabau, in which
at present are many wild Beasts kept. Lions and Tigres breed here, and have
young ones. Some say this was the place of Solomon the Magnificents Tent when
he besieged Vienna.

There is also, about two or three miles from Vienna, a noted place of
Devotion, called Arnols, much frequented, especially in Lent, diverse carrying
Crosses very heavy all the way upon their shoulders. There is here a little
House built exactly after that of the Sepulcher at Jerusalem; and also a
handsome Copy of the Picture of our Savior and the Virgin Mary, with their
exact heights. That of our Savior is about two yards high; that of the blessed
Virgin three or four singers breadth lower: These are taken from the Original
in St. John de Lateran at Rome. Hither the Empress desired to go one morning
from her own Palace on foot, out of Devotion, which she performed, though with
a great deal of difficulty, she being not used to walk, and the way was dusty.
The Emperor accompanied her, and all the Court followed on foot, which made a
handsome show.

Nearer unto Vienna there is also a remarkable place for Devotion, called
Itzing: and in the way from Vienna unto it, the twelve Stations of the Cross
are marked out in imitation of what is observed near Jerusalem, in the Via
Crucis, or Dolorosa, in our Saviors proceeding from the City unto Mount
Calvary; the Figures thereof are printed, and the several paces between every
Station set down. The Emperor has a handsome Park near Vienna, called the
Brater, wherein I beheld the effects of the great Lightning and Thunder which
happened three days before, upon many great Trees which were torn, split, or
twisted. There is a House of Pleasure in it, where among other things, I could
not but take notice of a Musical Instrument which I had not seen before, a Seat
or Chest-drum; it has a Cord like that of a Sea-trumpet, but sounds like a
Kettle-drum.

I went also unto Laxambourg, whither the Emperor often retireth; he has a
House in this place, but it is old, and not large. There is also a House of
Pleasure in the Mote, into which there is no other passage but through a high
Gorridore. The Castle is commodiously seated for the Emperors recreation; and
there is an eight-square House in the Marsh, from which the Nobility and the
Empress Dowager sometimes used to shoot, she being very expert therein. Over
the Gate of the Emperors House hangs a great Rib and Jaw Bone, whereof I could
get no better account, then they were the Rib and Jaw Bone of a heathen-maid.
They seemed to me to be Bones of an Elephant But many things that are old or
obscure, they call, in this Country, Heathen: as Roman Coyns, they call Heathen
money. And the Peasants brought me, in a place which had been formerly an old
Roman Station, part of the bit of a Bridle dug up, which they concluded to
be a Heathen Key.

From hence I went unto Mannersdorff, seated not far from the River Leyta,
where there is a natural hot Bath, called the Wildebath; it arises under a
Church, the Church being built over the Springhead. The water of it is but
Lukewarm, and therefore when they desire it hotter, they boil it, and so bathe
in Tubs in a large room. From that Substance which sticks to the sides of the
Coppers in the boiling of it, they judge it to be impregnated with Sulphur,
Saltpeter, and Chalk. The water colors the stones, and makes them look, when
wet, like fine Turquoises. And the vapor of the Bath hanging upon the Moss on
the sides, gives it an Amber or Gold color. The Physicians of Vienna have
given a good account concerning the use of these Baths in High Dutch. Not far
from hence is a noted Quarry of Stone, out of which a great part of Vienna is
built. The Stones being large they cut and square them at the Quarry.

From hence I proceeded to the Newsidler-sea or Lake, so called from Newsidle,
which is a Town seated upon the Northern part of it, consisting of one street
and some back-houses, and a small, square, old Castle upon a Hill, from whence
I had a good prospect over the Lake. It is about three German miles broad, and
seven miles long. The fairest Lake in these parts, affording plenty of Fish;
encompassed and thickly set about with small Towns and Villages; and has no
River, at least not considerable, running into or out of it. A little way from
the Gate of Newsidle they dig out a black earth, out of which they make Salt
peter. In this Journey, not far from Himburg, we passed by a place called
Rauckward, which, though it seems not high, looks over a great part of Austria,
and as far as Brin, the second City of Moravia, a part also of the Kingdom of
Bohemia, and a part of the Kingdom of Hungaria. I went afterward four English
miles up the Stream of the Danube, to see a noted Quarry of Stone in a Hill
called Altenburg. The beds, rows, or cases of the Stones lie not horizontally,
but rather elevated Northward, about the height of the Angle forty, yet are not
always so regularly placed, but rather follow the shape of the Hill, and
according to that are differently situated. Here I also observed a Substance
between a Clay and a Stone called Leberstein, or Liverstone; and upon many of
these Stones I found the figures of Trees and Leaves, though not so deep or
neat as upon the Stones by Florence; yet very prettily marked, and often with
broader Leaves than I had elsewhere observed. I passed forward to
Closter-Neuburg, a Town most of it belonging to that notable rich Monastery
seated here, founded by St. Leopoldus Marquess of Austria, and since much
enriched by succeeding Donations.

Matthaeus Merian has a goodcut of the Prospect of the Danube here abouts, and
in what manner it passes downwards between the two great Hills of Kalenburg
and Bisnburg. Upon one Peak of Kalenburg live diverse Camaldulenses, of an Order
the most severe of any, living most upon Roots and Herbs, in the manner of
Hermites. Near their Cells they had paved the ground with those Stones I
mentioned, which were naturally marked with the shapes of Trees and Plants.

After an open Autumn there followed a sharp Winter at Vienna, in the months of
December and January. The branches of the Danube were soon frozen over. The
main Stream, by reason of its swift Current, held out longer, but was
afterward also frozen. Some have thought that this River is more apt to freez
than others. And we read of Battles which have been fought upon this River
frozen; but I could not make any regular Observation thereof. This hard weather
the ground being covered with Snow, afforded handsome Recreations unto men, and
some unto the Ladies, in running Courses in handsome Sleds and Devices upon the
Snow. Their Sleds were well contrived in the shape of Gryphins, Tigers, Swans,
Scallop Shells, Dolphins, Peacocks, and the like Curiosities, carved, painted,
and gilded. The Lady sits in one of these, richly habited in Velvet, lined with
rich Furrs, set off with Lace and Jewels, in a Velvet Cap lined with Sables.
The Sled is drawn by a Horse, dressed up with Feathers of all colors, and
Bells hanging about him, a pair of Stags horns behind his head, Ribbons and
other Ornaments: one or more Pages ride by on Horseback with Torches in their
hands. And after this manner they perform their Course upon the frozen Snow
about the streets of Vienna in the night, with good speed one after another. A
Gentleman sits behind the Lady and guides the Horse. But the Frost breaking up
put an end to these Recreations. The Frost began and ended here the same day
that it began and ended in England.

The Festivity of Christmas was observed much after the same Manner,
Ceremonies, and Solemnities as in Italy. On Christmas Day the Emperor dined
publicly, attended with many Nobles and great Persons, and three remarkable
low Dwarfs. Upon St. Stephens-day he went to the Cathedral of St. Stephen, and
went up to the Altar, kneeled, and kissed the Plate whereon the Hostia had
lain. At the Epiphany or Twelfth-tide, the old custom of choosing King and
Queen was observed at Court. Count Lesley happened to be King, the Emperor
laid the Cloth, and the Empress filled out Wine, together with other old
Customs.

Before Christmas there was extraordinary mirth and jollity at the Court upon
occasion of a Marriage: For Count Serau, Governor of Gratz in Styria, married
a natural Daughter of Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, which was observed with
many noble Solemnities and Bravery. And the Nobility and Ladies were so
substantially splendid, that I was much surprised thereat.

This was followed by a Funeral Solemnity for the Count of Draun, who was
Colonel of the Forces in Vienna, and who had one of the noblest Houses in the
City; his Corpse was brought out of Italy, and interred in the Dominican Church,
where he formerly built a very fair Altar, there was raised for him a Castrum
Doloris, handsomely contrived and set round with white Wax Torches and Candles.

While I was in Vienna, the Empress Margarita was delivered of a Daughter,
which was Christened by the Name of Maria, Antonina, Josepha, Benedicta,
Rosalia, Petronella, but she lived not many months. When the Empress came
abroad, she brought the Child to the Augustines Church, where Cardinal Carlo
Caraffa, the Pope's Nuncio, received it, blessed it, and laid it upon the Altar.

During my stay here, the Election was in readiness for a King of Poland, after
the voluntary resignation of that Crown by King Casimir; and Couriers often
passed between that Country and this. There were Competitors the Czar of
Muscovy's Son, the Duke of Newburg, and the Prince of Lorrain. The French moved
actively for the Duke of Newburg, the Emperor for the Prince of Lorrain, who
was then at Vienna, in great favor with the Emperor, who greatly promoted his
interest; a Person of great esteem, and who, if General Lubomirski had been
living, who was his intimate Friend, in all probability might have obtained the
Crown; and thereupon it was conceived that he should have married the
Emperor's Sister. But the Poles made choice of one of their own Country, who
was no Competitor, Michael Wisnowitski, lately deceased, who also married the
Sister of the Emperor.

When I was here, there were many Ambassadors of Note, Don Balthazar de la
Cueva, Marquess of Malagon, and brother to the Viceroy of Naples, was
Ambassador for Spain. Cardinal Carlo Caraffa was the Pope's Nuncio. The
Venetian Ambassador Extraordinary, solicited for assistance for Candia, and he
obtained the Regiment of Porcia under Marquess Pio. Count Souches the younger,
who was Governor of Leopoldstadt, and many noble and valiant Soldiers were
preparing for that Expedition. The Turks gave assurance of the Grand Signor's
intention to maintain the Peace inviolably; and requested the Emperor not to
assist the Venetians or Transilvanians, nor to promote, but rather hinder, the
Election of the Emperor of Muscovy's Son to the Crown of Poland. The Bishop of
Beziers, sent by the King of France to the Election of the King of Poland, came
not hither, but passed through Nurenburg, where I lodged at the same Inn: They
were generally here against the French Interest, and so were a great part of
the Polish Nobility. An Ambassador came also from the Cham of Tartary, to
confirm a Peace, and afford mutual Assistance upon occasion. Cha Gagi Aga was
the Ambassador, who brought a Present of the best Tartarian Horses, which are
of high esteem for swiftness, hardiness, boldness in passing frozen Rivers, and
taking and swimming over great Streams. He was dismissed with noble Presents of
Plate. The Emperor presented the Cham of Tartary with a fair Silver Basin and
Ewer, and a curious Watch; and sent Presents unto the Chammine his Wife,; and
also to his Sister and four Brothers. His Followers were stout men, of good
stature, course Complexions, wearing long furred Vests and Calpack's, or furred
Caps. Some of them had silver Rings with the same Signatures of the Turkish
Seals. They took much Tobacco in very long Pipes. Their Tobacco is not in
Rolls, but in Leaves, and dry. They went about wandering and gazing at most
things, as Churches, Houses, Shops: And took much delight to be in the Fair,
where they would take much notice of small trifles. Yet these are the men that
make such sad Incursions into the Eastern parts of Europe, and carrying away so
many thousands, sell them to the Turks, and so repair the defect of People in
Turkey. And now after the Consumption of men in Constantinople, and the Country
about by the Plague, are like to be active in that Trade, hoping to find better
Markets for their Plagiaries and Depredations.

There are diverse Greeks who trade to Vienna, and many live in the Town, among
which I met with three considerable persons. One a grave Abbot, who was forced
from his Convent by the Turk, upon suspicion that he corresponded with those of
Candia. Another who went by the name of Constantinus Catacuzenos, and was of
the Blood Royal of the Catacuzeni. The third was Jeremias a Greek Priest, who
had traveled through Italy and France into England, and from thence through
the Low Countries and Germany to Vienna, and intended for Constantinople. He
came into England to enquire after a young man who was in a Ship which was
first taken by an Algerine, and afterward by an English man of war in the
Levant. He was very kindly used in England, and particularly at Cambridge. He
did a great deal of honor at Vienna unto the English Nation, declaring that
they were the most civil, generous, and learned people he had met with in all
his Travels, and that he no where found so many who could speak or understand
Greek, or who gave him so good satisfaction in all parts of Knowledge: And as a
testimony of his respect and gratitude, requested me to enclose a Greek Letter
unto Dr. Pierson, now Lord Bishop of Chester, and Dr. Barrow, now Master of
Trinity College in Cambridge.

Most men live here plentifully, there being abundance of all provision. They
have great quantity of Corn, which upon Scarcity, by the help of the Danube,
might be brought unto them from remoter parts. The Country affords such
plenty of wine, that they send a considerable quantity up the River. They have
also rich wines out of Hungary and Italy, and such variety, that there are more
than thirty several sorts of Wine to be sold in Vienna. They are not also
without good Beer. Halstadt in Austria affords them Salt, where they make it
by letting in water into the hollow parts of a Mountain, where it drinks in
the Salt of the Earth, and is afterward let out and boiled up. This affords
great profit to the Emperor, and therefore the Hungarian Salt is not permitted
to be brought higher than Presburg. They have also plenty of Sheep and Oxen;
but for Oxen at present they are also supplied from Hungary, nor only from the
Countries in the Emperors Dominions, but from the Turkish parts, by permission
of the Grand Signor; and they are brought hither by the Eastern Company of
Vienna. They eat much wild Boar, whereof the Fat is delicious, like that of
Venison with us. They want not Hares, Rabbets, Partridges, Pheasants. A Fowl
called Hasenhendal, or Gallina Corylorum, is much esteemed by them, which made
me the more wonder to meet with some odd dishes at their Tables; as
Guiny-pigs, diverse sorts of Snails, and Tortoises.

The Danube, and many Rivers which run into it, afford them plenty of Fish,
extraordinary Carps, Trouts, Tenches, Pikes, Eels, several sorts of Lampries,
and many Fishes finely colored; the white Fish, Crevises very large; the best
come out of the River Swechet, not far from Vienna. They have also that
substantial large fish, called a Scheiden, or Silurus Gesneri, larger than
Pike, Salmon, or any of our River Fishes; but the great Fishes called Hausons,
or Husones, in Johnstonus, for largeness exceed all others; some being twenty
foot long. Some think this to be the same Fish which Aelian names Antacetus,
and speaks largely of the fishing for them in Ister. I was at the fishing
places for Hausons in Schut Island, between Presburg and Komara, for they come
not usually higher, especially in shoals; and it is much that they come so
high, for they are conceived to come out of the Euxine-sea, and so up the
stream. They eat them both fresh and salted; they taste most like Sturgeon. It
is a Cartilagineous Fish, consisting of gristles, and they have a hollow
nervous chord all down the back, which being dried serves for a whip. When
they fish for them they blow a Horn or Trumpet, and know where they go by the
moving of the water. From Venice they are supplied with Oysters, with salt
Sturgeon, and sometimes with red Herrings, and great variety of other Fishes
pickled up: as also with Oranges, Limons, and other Fruits. Observing much
freedom, music, and jollity in the City. I wondered how they could content
themselves without Plays, for there were few while I was there, till the
Players came hither out of Saxony, and acted here for a time. The Jesuits
would sometimes entertain the Emperor and Empress with a Comedy at their
College; and I had once the favor to be at one when they were present.

But they have Dancing and Fencing often, and every Holy Day after dinner, the
people flock to some Inns where there is Dancing in the inward Rooms, and
Fencing and Playing of Prizes upon a Stage in the Yard; and at the Windows, or
from the Galleries, behold the Fencers depictions of four fish Rutten out of
the Danube

Koppen

Grondel

Biscurn

I. Oliver Fe.
playing at several Weapons; and commonly pass the rest of the day in delights
and merry Company.

In Treason and high Crimes they cut off the right Hand of the Malefactor, and
his Head immediately after. I saw a Woman beheaded sitting in a Chair, the
Executioner striking off her Head with a Fore-blow, she behaved her self well,
and was accompanied unto the Market place by the Confraternity of the Dead, who
have a charitable care of such Persons, and are not of any Religious Order, but
Lay men, among whom also in this place there are many Fraternities and Orders;
as of the Holy Virgin, of the Holy Cross and others. Another person also
executed after the same manner; as soon as his Head fell to the ground, while
the Body was in the Chair, a man ran speedily with a Pot in his hand, and
filling it with the Blood yet spouting out of his Neck, he presently drank it
off, and ran away; and this he did as a Remedy against the Falling Sickness. I
have read of some who have approved the same Medicine; and heard of others who
have done the like in Germany. And Gelsus takes notice, that in his time some
Epileptical persons did drink the Blood of the Gladiatours. But many Physicians
have, in all times, abominated that Medicine. Nor did I stay afterward so long
as to know the effect thereof, as to the intended cure. But most men looked
upon it as of great uncertainty: and of all men the Jews, who suffer no Blood
to come into their Lips, must most dislike it.

At Presburg they have a strange way of Execution, still used at Metz, and some
other places, by a Maid, or Engine like a Maid finely dressed up with her hands
before her. The Malefactor salutes her first, and then retireth. But at his
second salute she opens her hands and cuts his Heart in sunder.

Though the Winter was sharp, yet the advantage of Stoves, and lying between
two Feather-beds, made it tolerable: For they use Stoves here as in other parts
of Germany, where they lodge and eat in Stoves; and great Persons have Stoves
in the Church, or such as look into the Church. There are Stoves also in the
public Schools where Lectures are read. And this way of lying between two
Feather-beds, with a neat laced sheet spread over, is more convenient in a cold
Country, than most others they make use of. For in the common Inns in Germany
they generally sleep upon Straw, and also in Hungary almost every where; and
more Easterly upon the ground, spreading a Carpet or Saddle-cloath under them:
and more Northerly they content themselves with the Skins of Beasts, Bears,
Elks, or the like; upon which they sleep in the night. Those that sleep lowest
are coolest in a Stove; those that lie upon Tables, Benches, or higher, are
more exposed to the heat. The Citizens of Vienna are well attired, and use Furs
very much. The Women wear a high Velvet Bonnet, lined or faced therewith. The
Place seemed to be healthful; but they speak much of the Colica Austriaca, as
an Endemial and Local Disease, very hardly yielding unto good Medicines. They
speak good German at the Court and in the City; but the Common and Country
people seemed to speak grumblingly, and besides their accent, have diverse words
different from other parts.

They have a Custom upon St. Nicholas-day to put some small Gift into the
Childrens shoes; among other things they put in Medals and Dollars made of
paper and flower gilded and silvered over, yet scarce worth a penny. They sell
Trochies or Tablets in the Markets, made of the pulpe of the Fruit of
Hip-briar, made sharp with Spirit of Sulphur, very refreshing. Some carry about
them a Thunderstone, as a defense against Thunder: and they rub their Childrens
Gums with a Wolfs tooth instead of Coral.

When I was at Venice in the time of the Carnival, I observed many Recreations
and Shows, as Rope-dancing, flying down the Rope, cutting off Bulls-necks with
Swords, and many other. But at Vienna a notable trick which I saw there pleased
me much: A man of a middle Stature laid down upon his back, and a heavy Anvil
was placed upon his Breast, as much as two men could well lift, then two other
men with great Hammers laid on, until they had given almost an hundred blows,
and cut in sunder a great Horshoe of iron, about half an inch thick.

Here is no Christian Religion publicly permitted but the Roman, and therefore
those of the Protestant and Reformed Religion are fain to resort unto Presburg,
Forty miles off, for which they have some convenience by the Danube, and a
Coach which goes every day. In the time of Maximilian the Second, they were
permitted the Exercise of their Religion in the Church of the Holy Cross, in
the City of Vienna. But afterward were prohibited by Rodolphus the Second. The
Emperor Matthias gave them permission to meet at Hernals, a little more than
an English mile from Vienna; and gave leave to their Ministers to come into the
City, and there to christen, marry, baptize, and visit the sick. From which
time they increased very much, till Ferdinand the Second, returning from the
Battle of Prague, banished their Minister from Vienna and Arnols; sent the
Freyherr Jorger, to whom the Castle of Arnolds belonged, Prisoner unto Lintz;
and never gave over till he had taken away their Privileges and Freedom of
meeting publicly in any part of lower Austria.

But here are no small number of Jews, who have a distinct Habitation assigned
them over the Water. They have also a Street allowed them in the City for the
day time, but they must all depart at night beyond the River into the Suburbs.

They are much distasted by the Citizens and Tradesmen, and the Scholars agree
but ill with them. While I was at Vienna there was a quarrel between them to an
high degree. For the Scholars assaulted the Jews Town, beat, wounded, and threw
diverse of them into the River. Diverse Scholars were wounded, some killed, and
also some Soldiers who were commanded out to compose the Fray: and the Jews
Town was guarded many days by the Soldiers of the City. This begot such ill
Blood and Complaints; that a good number of the Jews were to be banished at a
certain day. The Jews, to ingratiate with the Empress, then with Child,
presented her with a noble Silver Cradle, but she would not receive it. And
there was great danger of the general banishment of them when I left that City,
which was afterward effected, they being severely prohibited from living, not
only at Vienna, but in any part of Austria, where there were formerly whole
Villages of them, so as they were forced to betake themselves into the
Dominions of the Turk, unto Venice, into Poland and Bohemia. They being not
permitted to dwell in the Neighbor Countries of Hungary subject to the
Emperor, Styria, or Carinthia.

I must confess they seemed useful unto the place for ready accommodation of
any thing, either by sale or exchange, but the people looked with an evil eye
upon them, as taking away much of their Trade and Employment. They also looked
upon them as useless in war for defense of the place; and were not without some
jealousy that they held correspondence with the Turks, and gave Intelligence
of their Affairs unto them. Yet the Soldiery dealt much with them, and
Captains for the sudden habiting, furnishing, and accommodating of their
Companies. And dining one day with a Commander at a Jews House, amongst other
Discourse I asked the Jew concerning the ten Tribes, and where they were? He
said they were far off in Asia, beyond a great Lake which was continually
stormy, and scarce passable, but upon their Sabbath Day, upon which days the
Jews do not willingly travel.

I have seen their Circumcision at Rome, Padua, and other parts. Their
Physicians ordinarily profess great skill in Urines; and the common people
resort unto them rather than unto Christians, and are so credulous, and have
such an opinion of them, that they might be made to believe they have some old
Receipts of King Solomon.

There are many Jews in Italy, yet they seem to me to be in greater numbers in
Germany. In Amsterdam they are also grown very numerous. At Franckfurt they
told me there were seven thousand of them, which seemed scarce credible. At
Colen they are in great numbers: at Hamburg not a few. But the greatest number
surely is in Prague.

Though they be permitted in many Countries, yet diverse Christian Princes and
States have assigned them some mark in their Habits, to distinguish them. In
Avignon their Hats are yellow. In Italy their Hats are covered over with
Taffate. In Germany they wear Ruffs and Gowns with great Capes. In Holland I
observed no distinction. But the Jews there, most of them having come out of
Portugal, there may be some suspicion of them from their Complexion.

Lastly, when I consider the old strength of Vienna, consisting in an old wall
and a deep ditch, I cannot much wonder that Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary,
took this City. And I must ascribe it, under God, unto the singular valor and
resolution of the Defendants, that Solomon the Magnificent, with two hundred
thousand men, was not able to take it, and though he made large breaches, could
never enter it, but lost some thousands at an Assault, and departed at last
with the loss of a great part of his Army. But this place is now in a far
better condition, strongly fortified, and able to resist the greatest Forces of
Turkey. The houses are cleared from the wall; and yet for better security, when
I was there, Count Souches advised the Emperor to pull down part of the
Suburbs upon the other side of the nearest branch of the Danube, lest the Turks
might take advantage to play upon the two Bastions on that side.

It would be a sad loss for Christendom if this place were in the hands of the
Turk; and no man knows where he would rest. If he should begin with this place,
and take it, the strong holds of Rab, Komara, and Leopoldstadt would want their
support, and soon fall into his possession; and if he were Lord of Austria, a
great part of Germany would lie bare unto him: and probably it would not be
long before he visited Italy, into which Country he would then find other ways
than by Palma nova.

A JOURNEY FROM VIENNA IN AUSTRIA TO HAMBURG.
TAking a farewell of the Imperial City of Vienna, I ordered my Journey for
Prague in Bohemia, which is usually six days Journey by Coach in the Summer,
and eight in the Winter. I went over the great Bridge of Vienna, upon the large
Stream of the Danube, passing by the Chapel of St. Bridget, of an eight-square
Figure. This Bridge is a very great and massy work, supported by many high
Trees, and Timber, and has between two and three thousand Trees laid upon it
cross, or side by side, from one side of the Bridge to the other, for the
passage over it, after the German manner of making Bridges. At Ratisbone there
is a handsome Stone Bridge over the Danube, and between that place and Vienna,
diverse of Wood; but from Vienna to Belgrade I observed none but what were made
with Boats.

Having passed the River, I entered into the Trans-Danubian Austria, or that
part of Austria which lies between the Danube and the River Theya, and came
unto Corneuburg, a pretty Town, about which place the Emperor often hunteth;
it is near the Hill Bisneberg, which is opposite unto Kalenberg. The Swedes
advanced far when they took this place in the last wars, and held it so well,
that they were not easily forced out of it. From thence I came to Stockerau,
near the mouth of the River Mida, where it runs into the Danube. A place
much noted for the death of St. Colman a Scotch Saint, highly honored in these
parts. From thence to Guntersdorff, so to Colnedorff or Koldorff, which
although it be on the South of the River Theya, is accounted the first Village
of Moravia, and then came unto Znaim.

In all this part of Austria, which extends a great length on the North-side
of the Danube, conceived to have been anciently inhabited by the Marcomanni and
Quadi, there are few or no Towns of antiquity, largeness, or note; for the
Romans made their Stations and Colonies upon the South Side of the Danube; but
the Country is full of Villages, and populous. One of the chiefest Towns is
Crembs, which some call Cremona Austriae, which I saw as I came down the
Danube. A great part of this Country was notably harrassed and plundered by the
Swedes. The Soil is light, and easy to be ploughed.

Znaim is a handsome place, with many painted Houses in it, and accounted the
fourth chief Town in Mahren, or Moravia; Olmutz, Brun, and Iglaw being the
other three, famous for the death of the Emperor Sigismund. It is seated by
the River Theya, which divides Moravia from Austria, and running at last into
the River Mark, affords accommodation of passage into the Danube.

From thence we passed by Ulverskirken, Paulitz, and Moravian Budweisse to
Zimmaw, and by Byrnitz came to Igla, or Iglau, upon the River Igla, which at
last runs into the great River Marck, a very pleasant place, seated upon a
Hill, on the Frontiers of Bohemia. It is well fortified a la moderna, upon one
side, and has one of the largest Piazza's that I have seen.

Moravia, is a pleasant and fruitful Country affording plenty of necessaries
for life; the people are plain-dealing, stout, and make good Soldiers. It is
commodiously furnished with Rivers, the greatest whereof is the Mora or Marck,
which arising in the Northern part thereof, runs quite through the Country,
and enters the Donaw not far from Presburg. The other considerable Streams are
the Theya or Thaisa, the Swarta, the Schwitta, which run into the Marck. In the
last Turkish wars the Tartars having passed the Wag in Hungaria, made
incursions into Moravia, and carried away some thousands of the Inhabitants.

Leaving Igla, we soon came into Bohemia, first coming into Stecken, then to
Teutchin Broda by the River Saczua, formerly a strong place, taken by Zisca the
famous Bohemian General, who then forced the Emperor Sigismund to fly out of
Bohemia by the way of Igla. From thence we came to Heberne, and so to Janikaw:
At this place, upon the 24th of February, 1643. was fought that memorable
Battle between the Swedes, commanded by Leonard Torstenson, and the
Imperialists under Count Hatzfield, Goetz, and other Commanders. The
Imperialists had the better at first; but falling upon the Enemies Baggage, and
being too greedy of Booty, they were defeated, three thousand slain, four
thousand taken prisonners, with their General Hatzfield, and six or seven
Colonels. The success hereof gave the Swedes advantage to proceed further, and
into Silesia and Austria. In this Town meeting with a Gentleman who came from
Schaclitz, which is not far from the Risgeburg, or Mountain of Giants, about
the Head of the River Elbe, I enquired of him concerning the spirit Ribensal,
which is said to infest that Country, but he could say nothing therein of his
own knowledge; and though he was confident that there was such a Spirit, yet he
confessed that for twelve years it had done no hurt. In Hills, Mountains, and
places of Mines such reports are ordinary. It is reported that a Spirit haunts
the Silver Mines of Brunswick: And another to be in the Tinn Mine of
Slackenwalde in this Country of Bohemia, and to walk in the shape of a Monk,
who strikes the Miners, sings and plays on the Bag-pipes, and does many such
Tricks. And Agricola in the latter end of his Sixth Book Dear Metallica, gives
this for one reason why Mines, or passages in Mines, are given over.

From Janikaw I traveled to Czaslaw, a good Town, and the chiefest in the
Czaslawer Circle: In this place they say that Zisca was buried, that famous
Bohemian General; he lost one Eye by an Arrow, and was at length blind of both,
yet gave not over the war, and proved successful in it. He wished his Friends
to make a Drum of his Skin, which should serve to fright away their Enemies.
And though he cared not for any Sepulchral Monument, yet he had one in this
place.

From Czaslaw we came to Guttenberg, or Cottenberg, about eight Bohemian miles
from Prague, every mile being five or six English miles. A large Town, and much
frequented, not far from the River Albis or Elbe, of especal note for the
Silver Mines about it: The Hills near it are not high, and consequently the
Mines are not so deep as those of Hungary, and some others in Germany; yet some
are above seventy or eighty Fathoms. They have wrought at these Mines seven
hundred years, and there are about thirty of them. I went down into that which
was first dug, but afterward left for a long time, but they work there now
again, it is called the Cotna, or Auf der Cotton, upon the Cotton, or
Coat-hill; and as the Story goes, a Monk walking over this Hill found a kind
of a Silver Tree sticking to his Garment, which was the occasion that they
afterward dug and built these Mines, and the place retains the name of
Cottenberg.

The Mine into which I descended near the Town, is but nineteen Fathoms deep;
the chief Vein of the Ore runs South, and is about a foot in breadth: the
Ore holds or contains in it Silver and Copper, so that out of an hundred
pound weight of Ore, they ordinarily get an Ounce of Silver, and eight, nine,
or ten ounces or more of Copper, even to pounds, but it is not well known, for
the Copper-works are the Emperors. The Undertakers get out what Silver they
can, and afterward sell the Ore unto the Emperors Officers; but some Ore is
sorich as to contain eight or nine ounces of Silver. A blew Earth which they
meet with in digging, affords the best hopes of Ore. Two men lately perished in
this Mine, having made a fire in it, being either choked with the smoke, or,
as they thought, by the poisonous exhalations forced out of the Minerals by the
fire. I have read that Libussa the Princess, and reputed Sorceress of Bohemia,
foretold many things concerning these Mines; but certain it is, that for the
advantage and profit these bring, the Town has suffered much in many wars. The
Emperor Sigismund made haste out of it upon the approach of Zisca, and seeing
he could not hold it, burnt the Town; but it was soon rebuilt and possessed by
Zisca, whose party called it the Purse of Antichrist.

Leaving Cottenburg, I came to Colline and to Bohemian Broda, so named to
distinguish it from Dutch or Teutonick Broda before mentioned, a considerable
good Town, and from thence came to Prag, or Prague, the Capital and Royal City
of the Kingdom of Bohemia. The Walls of this City seem to enclose the greatest
Citcuit of ground of any I have seen in Germany, but the Hills and void spaces
within it take up a large Tract, and therein it is like the City of Lion in
France; it is seated upon the River Muldau, by the Bohemians named Ultaue, a
large rapid River, arising in the South part of Bohemia, and before at arriveth
at Prague, receives the River Sarsua and the Watta into it; and Northward of
Prague the River Egra, and joyneth with the Elbe.

This great place consists of three Towns, named the Old, the New, and the
Kleine Seitten, or lesser Town. The old Town lies upon the East of the River
Muldau, is very populous, full of Buildings, private and public. Very
considerable in this part is also the University, wherein are great numbers of
Students and Scholars, there being but one University in Bohemia; many persons
also resorting thither from other Countries. It is scarce credible what is
reported of the number of Scholars in Prague in former Ages, as has been
delivered by diverse Authors. And Lewis du May, Counselor unto the Duke of
Wittenburg, affirms, That there are at present scarce so many Students in all
Germany, as there were at Prague in the year 1409. when they reckoned above
Forty thousand under the Rectorship of John Hus. Charles the Fourth, Emperor,
and King of Bohemia, founded the University of Prague, giving equal privileges
to the Bohemians, Polanders, and Germans: and when he would retrench his
favors toward Strangers, there went out of the Town in a weeks time twenty
four thousand Scholars, and a little after, sixteen thousand, whereby we may
judge there were more Scholars in Prague than other persons in some great
Cities. There are also in this old Town diverse Colleges and Cloisters. The
Jesuits have a fair, handsome College, near unto the Bridge, but the
Buildings of the old Town are inferior to those of the lesser Town.

The new Town is large, and together with the River, encompasseth the old, and
is divided from it by a large Trench or Ditch, in o which they can let in the
River. The Irish have a Cloister of Franciscans near unto an old Tower in the
Wall of the old Town. The Jesuits have also begun a large Cloister, which, if
finished according to its beginning and design, will be very spacious and
noble. They are now making Bastions about the Town at one end thereof; there is
also a Citadel, but not finished, at Wisseraht, or Wissegrade, formerly the
Seat of the Princes of Bohemia, and also of the famous Princess Libussa, the
Daughter of Crocus, and Wife unto Primislaus.

The Kleine Seitten, or lesser Prague, far exceeds the other for pleasantness
and beauty of Buildings and fair Palaces. This part lies Westward of the River
Muldaw, which between this and the old Town, is passable by a strong
Stone Bridge, consisting of sixteen great Arches, being about Seventeen hundred
foot long, and Thirty five foot broad, and two open Gates under two high Towers
of Stone at each end. A great part of this Town lies high, and upon the Hill
stands Hratschin, or Upper Prague, and a Summer House of the Emperors,
besides a Magnificent Palace of the Emperors, as King of Bohemia; and by it a
fair Cathedral Church dedicated to St. Veit, first built by St. Wenceslaus,
Duke of Bohemia, 923. from whence the Town and River is best viewed. In this
Church are diverse old Monuments for great Persons; as for Pogiebrachius a
Bohemian King, Wenceslaus, Rodolphus the Second, Charles the Fourth, Ladislaus,
Maximilian the Second, and other Archdukes and Emperors. There are also many
Houses of the Nobility in this part of the City. The Palace and Garden of
Colaredo is exceeding neat, though small. But I was most pleased with the
Palace of Count Wallensteyn, Duke of Friedland, General unto the Emperor
Ferdinand the Second, who being suspected to Usurp that Kingdom, was afterward
killed at Egra. This Palace was built upon the Ruins of an hundred Houses,
purposely plucked down to make room for it; wherein the Hall is large, the
Garden handsome; upon one side whereof there is a place to manage Horses, and
near unto it a Fish Pond: in another part there is a noble Aviary with a Garden
and Trees in it, after the manner of the Aviary of Prince Doria at Genoa, which
is eighty paces long, and eighteen broad. The Stable is large, and worth the
seeing, wherein there is a Marble Pillar between each Horse, and for every
Horse there is placed in a nich of the Wall a Rack of Steel, and Manger of
Marble, and over his Head hangs a Picture of the Horse, as big as the Life,
with his Name under it. Among the rest, I observed that a Bay-horse had for his
Name Monte d'Oro, a Mare, Bella donna, another Espagnoletta, and his most
beloved Horse was named Mas Querido.

Some have thought that the best high German is spoken in this part of Prague;
and there living so many of the Nobility and great Persons, it is not to be
wondered at, that their Language is better than ordinary. But the common
Language of Bohemia is a Dialect of the Sclavonian, though very many speak also
High dutch, as we found in all our passage through that Country. Koningsmark
being with his Forces on the Frontiers of Bohemia, a discontented Colonel of
the Imperialists came unto him, making it probable that he might surprise
Hratschin, and the lesser side of Prague, which he suddenly attempted, and so
successfully, that he surprised many Officers, and old Colaredo in his Bed,
getting so great a Booty, that he could scarce carry it away.

A part of Prague is inhabited by Jews, and called the Jews Town; there are no
small number of them, and many rich, as trading in all Commodities, and have
good skill in Jewels, and several sorts of Stones dug out of the Mines in
Bohemia: I bought some Bohemian Topazes of them, neatly cut and well-figured,
and some which were very large and clear, were at the rate of seven or eight
Dollars. During my stay here, I had a great desire to have saluted Johannes
Marcus-Marci, a famous Physician and Philosopher of Prague, and also to have
induced him to a Correspondence with the Royal Society, but I understood that
he had left this World, to the great grief of Learned Men in these and other
parts.

Many here do speak still of John Hus and Jerome of Prague, and I have seen
Silver Medals of them. They were surely very notable men; and I shall only set
down what Aeneas Sylvius, or Pope Pius the Second said of them. Johannes aetate
major and authoritate, doctrina and facundia superior Hieronymus, pertulerunt
ambo constanti animo necem, and quasi ad Epulum invitati ad incendium
properarunt, nullam emittentes vocem quae miseri animi posset far indicium:
ubi ardere ceperunt, hymnum cecinere quem vix flamma and fragor ignis
intercipere potuit, nemo Philosophorum tam forti animo mortem pertulisse
traditur quam isti incendium. In Hist. Bohemica. John was or greater years and
authority, Jerome of more Eloquence and Learning: both of them endured their
Death with great constancy, and went unto the fire as though invited to a
Banquet: when they began to burn, they sung an Hymn, which the flame and fire
could scarce intercept. None of the old Philosophers endured their death with
such a courageous mind as these the fire.

The same Author compares Prague unto the City of Florence in Tuscany,
wherefore having seen both places, I cannot omit to say something. I had a view
of the City of Florence from the top of the Domo, or Cathedral, and of Prague
from the Church of St. Veit, upon the Hill in the lesser Town: Prague seemed to
my eye to contain a far greater Circuit than Florence; it seemed also more
populous, and to exceed it very much in the number of People, the Streets
larger, and the Windows of Palaces and fair Houses being of Glass, looked not
so tatterdly as the ragged Paper Windows of Florence. The River Arno, which
runs through Florence, is not to be compared with the Muldau at Prague, having
run about an hundred miles from its Head. The large, massy, long Stone Bridge
exceeds any of, if not all, the four Bridges of Florence. The Emperors
Palace also upon the Hill is very stately: But as for the well-paved Streets of
Florence, the Domo or Cathedral with black and white Marble, with a Cupola,
second only to that of St. Peter's of Rome, for the incomparable Chapel of St.
Laurence, and the Dukes Gallery and Rarities, I must confess I saw not any
thing in Prague which answered them. At Weissenberg, or the white Hill near
Prague, that deciding Battle was fought November. 8. 1620. between Frederick
Prince Palatine of the Rhine, elected King of Bohemia, and the Forces of the
Emperor Ferdinand the Second, which gave such a deep blow unto the Protestant
Party, wherein so many of Frederick's Forces were slain and drowned in the
River in their slight, wherein also that famous Commander Papenheim was found
lying among the dead, who notwithstanding died not of his wounds, but was
reserved to end his days with the King of Sweden in the memorable Battle of
Lutzen.

From Prague I designed to pass by water down the Muldaw, which uniteth with
the Elbe about Melnick, and so down the Elbe unto Hamburg. But the Winter
advancing, and the Weather proving cold, the Boats did not go as in Summer, and
therefore I took my Journey by Land, and leaving Prague and the Muldau on the
right hand, I passed the first day to Zagethal, the next to Weluerne, and so to
Budin and Labasitz upon the Elbe. Having passed over the Egra, a considerable
River, arising not far from the City of Egra, and at last running into the
Elbe; the next day by the Castle of Kriegstein, or Warrestone, seated upon a
high steep Rock, I came to Ausig, a small City not far from the Elbe, having
little remarkable in it, like many other small Cities of Bohemia, and so
forward to Nolndorff, where we lodged upon Mount Kninsberg, the day after we
entered into Misnia, passing by Peterswald, and Hellendorff the first Village in
Misnia, and Kisibel, where are Iron Mines about eighteen Fathoms deep, and Iron
works.

We now understood that Bohemia was a larger Country than we expected; it lies
round, and some say it is three days postage over; others that the Diameter
extends two hundred miles. From Igla upon the Confines unto Hellendorff, it
took me nine days Journey in November by Coach, not reckoning the time I staid
at Prague. In many places there are very ill Passages, and so rudely mended
with great Trees, laid side by side, that they are often very troublesome to
pass.

We traveled afterward toward Dresden, in a fruitful Country, wherein were
many Deer in most parts of the way, in sight of the Castle of Pilnitz, a strong
place, and seated high. I could not but cast an eye on the Rocks behind us in
the Forest of Bohemia, which looked like the Ruins of a Wall which formerly
enclosed Bohemia, which Country is described with a Forest or Woods round about
it. But I confess I did not really perceive that there was such a Wood round
about it as is commonly set forth in Mapps; only both within, and also in many
parts of the Borders, there are great Woods which are conceived to have been
part of the Hercinian Forest.

The Bohemians are a strong, stout, and hardy People, make good Soldiers, and
have made great wars both at home and abroad; and Histories are full of their
warlike Exploits. The chief Magazine of the King is at Egra, a strong City,
accounted the Second of Bohemia. The Country affords also lusty and strong
Horses. The common sort of People are boisterous, rough, and quarrelsome,
especially in drink, whereto they are too much addicted. The Nobility and
Gentry are civil and kind unto Strangers. There are many great Families of the
Nobility, among which that of Rosenberg and Popel is ancient, and of high
esteem. Since the unhappy accepting of the Crown by Frederick Count Palatine,
and the ill success upon it, there has been a great alteration in this
Country, both as to People and their Manners; for thereupon many thousands left
the Kingdom, and many who remained, turned their Religion. And the Emperors
have used the like severity upon others in their Hereditary Dominions.

The next considerable place we came unto was Dresden in Misnia, as well worth
the seeing, as almost any Town in Germany. Dresden is the Seat and Residence of
the Elector of Saxony, seated upon the River Elbe, over which there is a very
noble Stone Bridge of Seventeen Arches. The City is very well fortified after
the Modern way, the Bastions Revestues, and in each Bastion a Cavallier: It
has also a large Trench or Ditch about it, in some places double; and the
River Elbe adds unto its strength. The Walls are very strong: and they say,
that when the first Stone was laid to build them, there was placed in the Earth
a Silver Cup gilded, a Book of the Laws, and another of Coyns, and three
Glasses filled with Wine. It has also three Gates. The places most worth the
seeing are these: The Italian Garden in the Suburbs; the Hunters House in the
old Town beyond the River; the Electors Palace; his House for wild Beasts; his
Stablehouse and Arsenal, of which I shall set down some things observable in
their kind. In the Electors Palace, the Hall is very large, and handsomely
painted with Cities, Giants, and the Habits of several Nations, and set out
with seven large branched Candlesticks: But that which affords the greatest
delight is his Kunstkammer, Art-Chamber, or Collection of Rarities, both of Art
and Nature. In the first Partition are to be seen all manner of well-made
Instruments belonging to most Trades, as Joyners, Turners, Barbers, Smiths,
Surgeons, and other Artificers: Instruments to force open Doors, Chests,
etc. In the other Chambers these and the like are observable.

A Tube-glass four Else long. A large blew Turkish-glass. Variety of Coral and
artificial Works of it. Fowls made out of Mother of Pearl. Drinking Cups in the
shape of Dragons, Elephants, etc. Castles of Gold and Mother of Pearl. Many
Fowls and Cups made out of Nautili, and other Shells, and out of Oestrich-eggs.
A fine Oestrich made out of its Egg, with the Feathers of Gold. A Cup made out
of the Ball taken our of an Oxes Stomach, richly set, about a foot long. A
Stone as big as my fist, like a Bezoar-stone, taken out of a Horse. A Purse
made out of the Linum Incombustibile. Silver Ore from the Mines of Freiberg,
almost pure, in strings and shoots. A Natural Cross of Silver Ore. One hundred
and twenty one Heads carved on the outside of a Cherry-stone. A Religious Man
or Friar of Japan carved in Box. A Crystal Cabinet, sold by Oliver Cromwell,
wherein is kept a Ring which has Stones in it in the shape of a Castle. His
Majesty King Charles the Second on Horsback, carved out of Iron. A Head of King
Charles the First. A Glass Organ, Topazes unpolished, ten Inches in Diameter. A
Cup out of a Topaze. Emeralds an inch in Diameter, as they grow in the Rock,
resembling the Vitriolum Nativum, as I saw it in Paradise-hill by Schemnitz in
Hungary. Stones named Thunder stones, smelling of Fire. Rocks made out of all
sorts of Ore, and the names of the places written upon them from whence they
were dug.

The Figures of Fishes in Stones out of Mansfield; the Stones are
dark-colored, but the Fishes of a Gold or Copper color. All sorts of Stones
which are to be found about Saxony and Misnia polished. Two large pieces of
pure Virgin Gold out of the Mine. A Cabinet of all sorts of Apothecaries
Instruments and chief Druggs. A Heart with a Cabinet made in his side,
containing all Medicines taken from a Heart. A white Heart as big as the Life,
made out of the shavings and filings of Hearts horn, and looking like Plaster.
Figures printed in Trees. A Spur in part of a Tree. Horns in Trees.

A Chamber of all manner of Mathematical Instruments and Charts. A good Library
of Mathematical Books An Unicorns-horn, which they will have to be of a Land
Unicorn, being neither wreathed nor hollow. A Dart of Unicorns-horn. Among the
Pictures in the same Chambers these seemed remarkable: A Picture by Colier, of
the Siege of Jerusalem, with great number of Figures, and highly esteemed. Four
Heads of the Elements made out of the Creatures which belong to them in
Caricatura. A painting of Merchants Letters stuck behind green Tape. A Storm by
Rubens. Two Nuns by Lucas van Leyden. A Picture of Dr. Luther in the Cloister,
in his Gown, and after his Death. There is also great variety of excellent
Clockwork, and an attempt for a perpetual motion by a rolling bullet. A Cuckoo
sings by Clockwork, a Horsman rides, a Ship saileth, an old Woman walks, a
Centaur runs and shoots, a Crab creeps upon a Table so well as to amaze
and delight; but among all, the Crab seems to be most naturally imitated.

In the Stable house, besides the extraordinary noble Stable of Horses, wherein
every Horse eats out of a Rack of Iron, and Manger of Copper; and on a Pillar
by him his Comb, Bridle and Saddle, and other Necessaries, hang; besides a
handsome Window with a Curtain before him. There are observable a very fair
Fountain and pond set about with handsome Ballisters, where the Horses are
watered. A long walk arched and painted with Horses; over which is a Gallery
with the Pictures of all the Dukes and Electors of Saxony, both in their
Military and Electoral Habits. Two Beds of Marble. Drinking Cups which seem not
great, yet so contrived as to hold diverse quarts. A Spring which causes a
Horseman in Silver to come riding in, bringing a Cup of Wine in his hand. A
pair of noble Pistols with all the Stories of the New and Old Testament upon
them. A Glass Gun. A Gun which shoots off Forty times without charging again. A
Piece which shows the manner of the first invention of striking Fire in Guns.
A Lock without a cock.

A Chamber of rich Sleds for Horses, made use of in Jollity and pompous Courses
upon the Snow. A white Bears skin stuffed. Tigers and Lions Skins. A Cassowares
Skin. Good Armor for Men and Horses. Many sorts of Indian Money, Duntans, and
other sorts. A Picture of Laplanders and their Customs. A Lapland Drum with
Figures to conjure by. A Chamber of all Hunting Arms and Necessaries.

The Armamentarium-Armory or Arsenal, is a long, square Building, wherein are
about Four hundred brass Pieces of Ordinance, great number of Muskets and
Armor in the Upper Room. Silver Coats of Male. Pieces of Ordinance to be
charged behind. Retorts and Alembicks in the shape of Granados. The Steeple of
the chief Church was lately burnt by Lightning, and the Canon melted which were
upon it.

In the Hunting-house, in the old Town, are fifteen Bears very well provided
for and looked unto. They have Fountains and Ponds to wash themselves in,
wherein they much delight: And near to the Pond are high ragged Posts or Trees
set up for the Bears to climb up, and Scaffolds made at the top to sun and dry
themselves; where they will also sleep, and come and go as the Keeper calls
them. The Horn Gallery is also remarkable in this place, out of which there are
three Chambers; one painted with several sorts of Hunting; another with all
sorts of Fowl; and a third with great variety of Beasts.

depiction of the bear garden at Dresden, Meissen, Germany, featuring five
bears, three on poles or platforms, one on the ground, and one swimming in a
pool or pond The Elector of Saxony his Bear Garden at Dresden in Misnia.

Oliver. Fe


In the House for wild Beasts I took notice of a Marian, which is a four-footed
Beast, that hangs upon Trees by the Tail. Also a wild or Mountain-Cat of a
large size. Five young Bears. Five old black Bears. A white Bear very large;
the feet, the head, and the neck are longer than those of the black, but not so
thick. Two Lions. Ten Luekses; very fine Beasts, in bigness, color, and shape
between a Tiger and a wild Cat; the tips of their Ears and Tails are black,
their Eyes lively, their Skin Lion colored, and spotted, especially about
their Eyes.

The Italian Garden and Summer House in the Suburbs is very noble, wherein are
two Obelisks, two gallant Fountains, a Theater and good Landskips. This Garden
and Summer house were built by two of the Prince Electour's Eunuchs, and
afterward sold unto the Prince for Six and twenty thousand Dollars.

Dresden is but a late City, and was formerly a Village. The Churfurst, or
Elector, was not in the Town; but the Chur-prince his Son was there: A Person
rather of low than middle Stature, his Hair long and yellow, his Face ruddy,
his Body well set and active, and he is very well beloved. The present Elector
of Saxony is John George the Second, Grand Marshal of the Empire, a great and
powerful Prince, who keeps a Royal Court and Attendance, having his Guards and
Officers after the manner of Kings. His Dominions lie in Misnia, Thuringia
Voytland, and part of Lusatia. His Revenues are large, from Impositions upon
Commodities. His Profits great, from the Tax upon Beer, which arises to no
small sum, especially in Wittenberg, Torga, and Leipsick. And his Silver Mines
are considerable. And the Funeral of the last Electour Joannes Georgius the
First, was very magnificent 1657. at which there were twenty four Horses of
State covered with black, and the Electoral Escutcheon embroydered thereon, and
every one led by two Gentlemen, and three thousand five hundred persons in
mourning.

Dr. Luthers Holiday was kept when I was there. The chief Church is very fair:
They preach every morning at seven a Clock. The Lutheran women mourn in white,
as others do in Black: and the woman of the House does ordinarily say Grace
instead of the man. The best Highdutch is spoken in this place, and other parts
of Misnia, which is a very pleasant fruitful Country, and full of good Towns
and Villages.

Leaving this noble place, I took not the nearest Road, but turned out of the
way unto Freiberg, a place noted for Silver Mines; whereof I had read something
in Agricola, and heard very much in these parts. About an English mile or two
from Freiberg, there are many remarkable Mines. I took notice of three of them:
One called Auff den hohen berg, or upon the high Hill, which is the deepest in
these parts, as being seventy seven of their Fathoms deep; each of their
Fathoms contains twelve of their Else, and three of their Else makes one of our
Fathoms. So that the depth of this Mine exceeds any of those wherein I was in
Hungary. There is another Mine called Himmelfurst, or the Prince of Heaven,
wherein not long since there was Ore found so rich, as in an hundred pounds
weight to contain an hundred and thirty Marks of Silver, or sixty five pounds
in the hundred, but there was not much of it: And where the Veyns are richest,
they are observed to be thinest, about two singers broad; but the ordinary Ore
is but poor, holding an ounce, or an ounce and a half, in an hundred pounds
weight; and if it holds but half an ounce they work it. Nor is this much to
be wondered at, for in the vast rich Mines of Peru and Chili, they will work
the Silver Ore which contains four or five ounces in a hundred pound weight,
and ten or twelve ounces is the ordinary rate of the common Ore of that rich
Mountain of Potosi, out of which Hill alone, if we believe Albero Alonso Barba,
Curate of the Parish of St. Bernard in that City, there has been more Silver
taken than would cover all Misnia over and over: For thus he says, Potosi has
already yielded between four and five hundred Millions of pieces of Eight. A
quantity sufficient to make such another Hill of Silver: It is hard to form a
conception equal unto so exorbitant a heap of Riches; but the better to help
our imagination herein, know, that if the Ground were covered with so many
pieces of Eight, laid as close to one another as is possible, they would take
up the space of sixty Leagues square.

Here at Freiberg they have many ways to open the Ore whereby it may be melted;
as by Lead and a sort of Silver Ore which holds Lead in it. They have also
Sulphur Ore found here, which after it is burned, does help much toward the
fusion of Metals: And besides these, Slich, or pounded and washed Ore; and
Slacken, which is the Dross or Cake, or Skum taken out of the Vortiegel, or Pan
which receives the melted Minerals let out at the bottom of the melting
Furnace. Their Treibshearth, or driving Furnace, where the Litharge is driven
off, agrees better with the Figure of it in Agricola, than those of Hungary;
some of the Litharge is green: Their Buckwork and their Engines which pound the
Ore, the Coal, and Clay, are also very neat. Much of their Ore is washed,
especially the poorest, and that which is mixed with stones, quarts, or sparrs.

This is peculiar in their working, that they burn the pounded and washed Ore
in the Roasthearth, before they melt it in the Smeltzoven, or melting Furnace.

At these Mines of Hungary where I was, they used not the Virgula divina, or
forked Hazel, to find out Silver Ore, or hidden Treasure in the Earth; and I
should little depend thereon: but here they have an esteem of it. And I
observed the use thereof, and the manner how they did it. But I shall omit the
Description of it, because it is set down in diverse Books, and it cannot be so
well described as shown to the Eye.

I saw also another Mine, called Auff der Halsbrucker, about eighty of our
Fathoms deep, and much worked: They have diverse sorts of Ore; but they contain
either Silver and Copper, Silver and Lead, or all three; but they work them
only for Silver. They have diverse damps in these Mines, where it is deep. The
Mines are cold where the outward Air comes in; but where not, warm. The
greatest trouble they have is by dust, which spoileth their Lungs and Stomachs,
and frets their Skins. But they are not so much troubled with water; and have
very good Engines to draw the water out.

The Sulphur, or Brimstone Ore which is found here, is also rich; it is hard
and stony, as other Ores are: that which has red spots is accounted the best.
They use a peculiar Furnace to melt the Brimstone from the Ore; some whereof
yields three pounds of Sulphur out of an hundred weight of Ore, which as it
melts runs out of the Furnace into water, or the Exhalations from the Ore
near or in the Fire, are condensed into Brimstone by the Surface of the Water
placed to receive it; this is once again melted and purified. Some of the
Brimstone Ore contains Silver, some Copper, and some both in a small
proportion.

After the Sulphur is melted from the Ore, the remainder serves for two uses;
that is, either for the melting of Silver, or for the making of Vitriol: To the
former only depiction of two German miners and their tools Two Miners in their
habits
Virgula Divina

The figure of an Iron retort such as are used at the quicksilver work at
Idria.

thus; A proportion is cast into the melting Furnace of the Silver, to this
end, to use the Miners expression, to make the Silver which is hard, fluid.

The other use, and which is more considerable, is for the making of Vitriol,
or Copperose in this manner: They take the Ore out of which the Brimstone has
been already melted, and burn it once again, or let it still burn in the open
Air; then putting it into a large Fatt, they pour water upon it, so as to
imbibe and drink in the Vitriol; this Water is afterward boiled to a
sufficient height, and let out into the Coolers, where sticks are set in it, as
in the making of Sugar Candy: The purest Chrystallized Vitriol sticks unto the
wood, the rest to the sides and bottom. Thus the Sulphur Ore, after the Sulphur
is taken out of it, still works upon the Silver Ore, and opens the Body of
it in the Fire; but when this Ore is also deprived of its Vitriol, it works
no more upon Metals.

Friberg is a round well-walled City; has handsome Streets, a Piazza, the
Elector's Castle, and five Gates. the Church of St. Peter is fair, where many
of the Dukes and Ducal Family have been buried, and have fair Monuments;
especially Duke Mauritius, Elector of Saxony, whose Monument in black Marble is
raised three piles high, adorned with many fair Statua's in Alabaster and white
Marble, and esteemed one of the noblest, if not the best, in Germany. And when
this Town was surrendered unto Holck and Gallas, October. 5. 1632. the Duke of
Saxony paid 80000 Dollars to save the Monuments of his Predecessors from being
ransacked and defaced, it being the fashion of diverse German Princes to be
buried in their Robes, with their Ensigns of Honor, Rings, Jewels, and the
like, which would have been booty, and probably have run the same fortune as
the Cloister of Haibron, within twelve English miles of Nurenberg, where some
of the Marquisses of Onspach, who are of the Electoral House of Brandenburg,
lie entombed, where Tillie's Soldiers brake open the Vault, and robbed the
dead Corpses of the Marquisses, George Frederick, and Joachim Ernest, of the
Jewels, Rings, and other rich Ornaments with which they were entombed.

There are some Vaults and Subterraneous Cavities in the City, by which there
are passages into the Mines. This place was formerly straightly besieged by the
Emperor Adolphus, for the space of a year and a month, and at last betrayed by
a Fugitive, who let in a party of the Emperors into the Town by a
Subterraneous Passage near St. Donats Gate, and upon the continual Batteries
made at the Town, and concussion of the Earth about it, the Earth sunk down in
many places, and swallowed great numbers of the Emperors Army.

These Mines afford great benefit unto the City, and also unto the Elector;
They are said to have been found out in the year 1180. But there have been
other Silver Mines discovered since; as at Schneeberg, at Anneberg, and at
Joachims Dale, 1526.

Having passed some time at Friberg, I ordered my Journey for Leipsick, and
traveling by Waltheim and Coldick, came unto it.

Leipsick is seated upon the River Elster, which arising in Vortland, or Terra
Advocatorum, passes by it, and afterward runs into the River Sala. It is a
rich and great trading City; has three Marts in the year, and great resort
unto it from many parts: It is well built, and diverse Houses are seven stories
high. The Castle is strictly guarded, and has in it a strong white Town: But
the Works about the Town are not very considerable, although they might be made
strong.

The Church of St. Nicholas is well adorned, and has the name to be the
fairest within side of any Lutheran Church in Germany; they have also a
remarkable Burialplace or Godtsaker, walled about, and cloystered near the
Wall, wherein the better sort are buried, as the rest in the middle and open
part. Which put me in mind of that noble Burial-place which I saw at Pisa in
Tuscany, called Il campo Santo, because the Earth which the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa brought from the Holy Land, for the Ballast of his Ships, was laid
upon that Ground.

Leipsick is famous for two great Battles fought near unto it in the last
Swedish wars; one between Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, and Count Tilly,
General of the Imperialists, 1631. wherein the Swedes obtained a great Victory.
Tilly was wounded, fled, and lived not long after. Another some years after in
the same place, wherein Leonard Torstenson the Swede, overcame Archduke
Leopoldus Gulielmus, and Octavio Piccolomini, Generals of the Imperial Army.
And about a mile and a half from hence, at Lutzen, another great Battle was
fought, 1632. between the King of Sweden and the Imperial Army, commanded by
Albert Wallensteyn Duke of Friedland, wherein the Swedes obtained the Victory,
but the King of Sweden was slain; and on the Imperial side that famous
Commander, Godfrey Count of Pappenheim.

There is also an University at Leipsick, first occasioned by the German
Scholars of Prague, who in the troubles of the Hussites came hither, to the
number of Two thousand in one day; and is still one of the Three Universities
in the Elector's Dominions; the other being Jena by the River Sala, and
Wittenberg upon the Elbe. In this University they are much addicted to the
study of the Law, but there are also Learned men in other Faculties.

The Magistrates of Leipsick are also considerable. Der herr von Adlershelme
was the Burgomaster, a courteous Learned Person, and great Virtuoso, who had
collected and observed many things: He has had five fair Daughters brought up
in all commendable ways of working, Drawing, Painting, Inlaying with Flowers,
with Mother of Pearl, Stones, and other pretty Works. And they speak diverse
Languages, which they learned at a School in Holland: So that his House has a
great deal of excellent Furniture of his Childrens work, and is one of the most
considerable Curiosities to be seen in Leipsick. His Summer House is handsome,
painted both within and without: And in the Water about, are Muscovy Ducks,
Indian Geese, and diverse rare Fowls. In his Chamber of Rarities there are many
things considerable: But I have seen diverse of them in other places, and lately
set down some Varieties of the Elector of Saxony, I shall mention but a few.

An Elephants Head with the dentes molares in it. An Animal like an Armadillo,
but the Scales are much larger, and the Tail broader. Very large flying Fishes.
A Seahorse. Bread of Mount Libanus. A Cedar-branch with the Fruit upon it.
Large Granates as they grow in the Mine. A Sirens hand. A Chameleon made out of
a Fish. A piece of Iron, which seems to be the head of a Spear, found in the
Tooth of an Elephant, the Tooth being grown about it. The Isle of Jerscy drawn
by our King. A piece of Wood with the Blood of King Charles the First upon it.
A Greenland Lance with a large Bell at the end of it. Much Japan painting,
wherein their manner of hunting and working may be observed. A Picture of our
Savior, the Hatches of which are writing, or written, and contain the story of
his Passion. Bevers taken in the River Elbe. A Picture of the murder of the
Innocents, done by Albert Durer. Pictures of diverse strange Fowls. A Greenland
Boat. The Skins of white Bears, Tigres, Hilves, and other Beasts. And I must
not omit the Garter of an English Bride, with the story of it; of the Fashion
in England for the Bridemen to take it off, and wear it in their Hat, which
seemed so strange to the Germans, that I was obliged to confirm it to them, by
assuring them that I had diverse times wore such a Garter my self.

Leaving this busy and trading City of Leipsick, I directed my Journey unto
Magdeburg, and traveled through a plain Country, between the River Sala and
the Elbe, by Landsberg, nigh to Petersdorff, where there is a small Hill which
overlooks all the Country, so to Kihten, the Residence of the Prince of Anhalt,
then to Caln, and over the River Sala, before it runs into the Elbe, which
arising at Mount Fichtelberg, now hastneth toward it. Fichtelberg is a
considerable Mountain, near which are diverse Mines, Bathes, and Mineral-waters,
of which Gaspar Bruschius has written a Description. And from it arise four
Rivers, running to the four quarters of the World. The Maine or Moenus, toward
the West; the Nab or Nabus, toward the South; the Aeger toward the East; and
the forementioned Sala toward the North. These four afterward fall into the
three greatest Rivers of Germany, the Danube, the Rhine, and the Elbe. Then to
Sals or Saltz, a placed noted for Salt-springs, and that night to Magdeburg.

Parthenopolis, or Magdeburg, is seated by the River Elbe, formerly the
Metropolitan City of Germany, now under the Marquess of Brandenburg, of very
great Circuit, but little more than half built again, since it was sacked and
burnt by Tilly, and Thirty six thousand persons put to the Sword and destroyed.
I could not but observe the ruinous and destructive effects of the late wars in
many parts of Germany, but not in any so great and flourishing a place as this:
And a man might think, that after this great destruction of Houses and People,
this place should not be able to stand a Siege; yet a few years after it was
besieged by General Hatzfield, unto whom ( Bannier the Swede not being able to
relieve it) it was yielded. The Cathedral Church is very fair, and built like
an English one, by the Emperor Otho the First, and his Empress Editha, an
English woman, Daughter unto King Edmund, whose Effigies in Stone I saw in the
Church, with nineteen Tuns of Gold by her which she gave thereto. And to say
the truth, English money has done great things in Germany, for hereby, or with
a good part thereof, this Church was built or endowed. Leopoldus, Duke of
Austria, built the old Walls of Vienna with the ransom of King Richard the
First, whom he detained in his return through Austria from the Holy Land. King
Edward the First sent a great Sum of Money unto the Emperor Adolphus, for the
raising of Soldiers in Germany, which the Emperor employed in purchasing a
great part of Misnia for himself.

The Lutheran Churches are handsome, and their Pulpits are extraordinary noble,
and richly set off, as I observed, through all Saxony, Norimberg. And where
they are Masters of the Places, and have not their Churches only by permission;
here they showed me in the Cathedral Church of St. Maurice, the Statua's of the
five wise Virgins smiling, and of the five foolish Virgins lamenting, which are
very well expressed: They showed me also two odd Relics, which they still
kept as Rarities; that is, the Basin wherein Pilate washed his hands, when he
declared himself free from the blood of our Savior; and the Ladder whereon the
Cock stood when he crowed after St. Peter's denying of Christ.

In the Ruins of the Cloister of the Augustines, there is still to be seen
Luther's Chamber, his Bedstead, and Table, and upon the Door are these German
Verses.

Dis war Lutheri Kammerlin,
Waner in's Closter kam herin,
Gedachnis halb wird noch it zund
Herin gesehen sein Bettespund.
i. e.

Luther did lodge within this little Room,
When first he did into the Cloister come;
In memory whereof we still do keep
The Bedstead upon which he used to sleep.
I lodged at Magdeburg, in an old man's House, who would tell me many stories
of the burning of the Town, the cruelties and bloody usage of the people, who
were destroyed without exception: The Nuns, many of them being drowned in the
River Elbe. After which some observed that Count Tilly never prospered in his
wars. He told me also that Dureus lodged with him, who was employed by King
Charles the First, to endeavor a reconciliation between the Lutherans and
Calvinists in Germany, and to unite them if possible. We were now in the
Territory of the Elector of Brandenburg, Fridericus Wilhelmus, Great
Chamberlain of the Empire, who is in effect possessed of Magdeburg, and next
unto the Austrian Family, is the most potent Prince in Germany, being able to
raise great Armies, and his Dominions so large, that they are reckoned to
extend two hundred German miles in length, from the further part of Prussia
unto Cleve, but they lay not together, but interspersed with many other Princes
Countries: Howsoever, a Horseman may so order his Journey, as to lie every
night in one of the Electour's Towns, in traveling from one end of his
Territories to another.

I had now left the pure German Language behind me, for at Magdeburg comes in
another kind of German, called Plat-Deutch, Broad-Dutch, Nidersachsische, or
the Language of lower Saxony; a great Language, spoken in the North part of
Germany: They speak it at Hamburg, Lubeck, and many great Cities: But they can
converse with the other High Dutch, and with some difficulty also with the
Netherlanders; the one speaking in his Language, and the other replying in his.

At this City of Magdeburg was performed the first Turnament that was in
Germany, which was opened in the year 635. by the Emperor Henry, Surnamed the
Fowler, who coming from the war of Hungary, exceedingly satisfied with the
Nobility, would oblige them to exercise themselves in handling their Arms, and
managing their Horses, and therefore instituted these Sports, whereby the
Nobility was powerfully attracted to Valor and Gallantry, and induced to
perfect and accomplish themselves in all kind of Chevalry. No new Nobility, no
Bastard, no Usurper, none guilty of High Treason, no Oppressor of Widows and
Orphans, none born of Parents whereof one was of base Extraction and Ignoble,
no Heretic, Murderer, Traitor, no Coward that had run away from the Battle,
nor indiscreet Person that had given offense to Ladies by word or deed, were
admitted to this Honor, nor above One of the same Family at a time. Princes
came into the Lists with four Squires a piece, Counts and Barons with three, a
Knight with two, and a Gentleman with one.

The hour and place for the Turnament being appointed, he that had a desire to
break a Lance there, came to the Presidents Lodgings to have his Name written
down, which was done in the presence of three Heralds, to whom the Champion
delivered his Helmet and Sword, and after he had been at Confession, presented
himself in the Lists with one or more Squires, according to his quality. The
Horses of the Combatants were to be without fault or exception; the Caparisons
and Furniture such as gave no offense; their Saddles without any extraordinary
rising before and behind, and all things equal. After which they performed all
kind of Exercises on Horseback: and after the Jousts were ended, every man
repaired to the President of his Nation, to wait for the Sentence of the
Judges; and he that best deserved the Prize, received it either from the hand
of some Lady, or from the Prince that gave it.

These Pastimes were afterward disused, upon the Emulation it caused between
the Princes and Nobility, who strove to outvie one another; or upon wars, in
which there was no leisure for such Exercises; or perhaps upon consideration
that diverse brave men lost their lives in these Encounters: And no less a
Prince than Henry the Second, King of France, neglecting to wear his Beaver
down, was slain in a Turnament. And at Darmstadt also, in the year 1403. at the
Three and twentieth Turnament which was held in Germany, the Gentlemen of
Franconia and those of Hesse, drew so much blood upon one another, that there
remained dead upon the place seventeen of the former, and nine of the latter.

The Winter growing on called me to make haste to Hamburg, from whence I
intended to pass by Sea into England, and therefore I took the advantage of the
Stage-Coaches at Magdeburg, and in four days came to Hamburg; I traveled
through a Country for the most part barren, of little accommodation, or scarce
any thing very remarkable, through part of the Electour of Brandenburg, and
then through the Duke of Lunenburg's Country, passing by the City of Lunenburg,
a handsome walled City, beautified with diverse fair Churches, with high Spires.
The Church of St. Lambert, the Townhouse, and the Duke's Palace, are fair.
Here are Salt-springs in the Town, very beneficial to the place, and supplying
the neighbor Countries. The Town is commanded by a Hill near to it, called
Kalkberg, which lies on the North-side.

In this Road through lower Saxony, I could not but take notice of many Barrows
or Mounts of Earth, the burial Monuments of great and famous Men, to be often
observed also in open Countries in England, and sometimes rows of great Stones,
like those in Wormius his Danish Antiquities: And in one place I took more
particular notice of them, where three massy Stones in the middle, were
encompassed in a large square by other large Stones set up an end.

Hamburg is a fair City, and one of the great ones in Germany; it is seated in
a Plain, being populous, rich, and remarkably strong: It is fortified a la
Modern, much after the way of Holland, with works of earth, but in no place
yet Revestues, or faced with brick or stone: The Territory belonging to it is
but small; it is divided into the new and the old Town. There are five Gates:
The Stone gate, leading toward Lubeck; the Dome-gate; the Alten-gate, or which
leads unto Altenaw, a place near the Town, belonging to the King of Denmark,
where the Romanists and Calvinists have their Churches; the Bridge-gate; and
the Dike-gate. The Buildings of this City are handsome, and commonly have a
fair entrance into them. The Senate House is noble, adorned with carved
Statua's of the Nine Worthies. The Exchange or place of meeting for Merchants,
was then enlarging, it being too small to receive those Numbers which
frequented it. Many of their Churches are very fair, with high Steeples,
covered with Copper. The Front of St. Katherines is beautiful. The Steeple of
St. Nicholas is supported with great gilded Globes. The other great Churches,
are the Dome-Church, St. Peter's, St. Jacob. The greater and less, St. Michael,
the New-Church in the New town. The lesser Churches, are St. Gertrude, St. Mary
Magdalen, and the Holy Ghost. They have a Sermon every day, as in other
Lutheran Cities.

The River Alster runs through it into the Elbe, and turns many Mills: and
the Tide comes up into diverse Streets through Channels, although it be distant
eighteen German miles from the Sea, or Mouth of the Elbe. This place abounds
with shipping, and many of good Burden, and is well seated for Trade, as having
an open passage into the Ocean, and being but a days Journey from the Lubeck on
the Baltic Sea, and being seated upon the long River Elbe, the third great
River of Germany, whereby it may have Commerce with a great part of that
Country, and as far as Bohemia.

Hamburg is full of Strangers and Merchants of several Countries. The English
Company have good Privileges and a rich Trade, and Ships come laden thither
with Cloth to the value of an hundred thousand pounds sterling; and they live
here in good Reputation, and to the honor of their Country: they are Persons
of worth, courtesy, and civility; and I heartily wish them all success in
their Affairs. I must not omit the acknowledgment of my particular Obligation
to that learned and worthy Person, Mr. Griffin, Preacher unto the Company, Mr.
Free the Treasurer, Mr. Banks, who has been in many places of Natolia, and the
Holy Land, Mr. Jenkinson, and my very obliging Friends Mr. Catelin and Mr.
Townly.

This place has the happiness to be quiet when the great Princes of Europe are
at war; for it desires to hold a strict Amity with Princes, and declines all
Dissension with them.

I found a Ship at Hamburg bound for London, and while it was fitting for Sail,
I made a short excursion into part of the King of Denmarks Country; and
returning to Hamburg again, I ordered my affairs for England upon the first
wind, and hoped the next Tide to get over the Altenaw sand, and to pass the
Blanckness, but a cross wind prevented, so that I left not Hamburg till the
tenth of December, and then I had the good Company of Mr. Hoyle, who came from
Narva, and set Sail in a new Ship; but the days being at the shortest, and the
nights dark in the New Moon, the Tide falling also in the day time, we were
able to get no further the first day than Stadt, or Stoade, upon the River
Zwingh, a strong Town, belonging to the King of Sweden, where the Ships that
come up the River pay Custom, and where the English Merchants had formerly
their Residence, when they left Hamburg upon a Discontent.

December the 11th. we came by Gluckstadt, belonging to the King of Denmark,
where the Castle, the King's Palace, and the Church are handsome, and Anchored
that night before the Mouth of the River Oast, which arises in Bremerland, and
falls into the Elbe a mile from Brunsbuttel, on the other Holsatian shore.

December the 12th. we lost sight of the Northern shore, and passed Cook's
Haven, in full hopes to put out to Sea that night; but about Three in the
Afternoon we were becalmed a League and a half below it, where we were forced
to come to an Anchor again, lest the strong Ebb should set us on ground among
the Sands: So we lay that night between Thicksand on the North, and Newark on
the South, right over against a Light-house.

December the 13th. the wind turning Westernly, and blowing hard, we returned
to Cook's Haven, and came to Anchor. Here I came a shore, and went up the Land
to the Fort in this place belonging to the City of Hamburg: It is a high square
Work, with a double Ditch, and some Vessels come up to the Fort; but the Ditch
or Chanel which comes thither out of the Elbe, is dry at low water. The Town is
called Reutsbuttel, not far from the Lands end. Two or three days after, with a
cold North-East-wind, we set Sail for England. Coming out of the Elbe, we were
all the Afternoon in sight of an Island, called Heilige-landt, or Holy Land,
belonging to the Duke of Holstein, which being very high Land, is to be seen at
a good distance, and is of excellent use to direct and guide Ships into the
Mouth of the Elbe, without which they would be at a great loss, the Country
about that Rivers Mouth being all very low Land.

Heiligeland is a small Island, having about two thousand Inhabitants, and six
or seven small Vessels belonging to it, which are employed a great part of the
year in bringing Lobsters and other Fish to London or Quinborough, the
Inhabitants living most upon Fish. We bore out to Sea all night, and the next
day made toward the Land again, and sailed in sight of Schiemoniekeoghe,
Amelandt, and Schelling: in the Evening we saw the Lights at the Vly and Texel;
when we were near the Land, we were much troubled with the Frost and cold
Weather, and less when we were off at Sea. The next day we had a fair wind, and
made such way, that in the Evening we took down our Sails, and let the Vessel
drive, not being willing to deal with the shore in the night. The next morning
we soon discovered the Northforeland covered with Snow, and came to an Anchor
in Margarite-Road, where the wind growing very high, we rode it out for two
days and two nights, and came safe on shore (praised be God) upon Christmas Day
morning.

Now having made so long a walk in Germany, I must confess I returned with a
better opinion of the Country, than I had before of it; and cannot but think it
very considerable in many things. The Rivers thereof are noble, and seem to
exceed those of France and Italy. Of the Rivers of Italy, the Padus or Po, is
the most considerable, which notwithstanding, has no very long course, before
it runs into the Adriatic Sea. And Italy being divided by the
Appennine-hills, running from West to East, the Rivers which arise from either
side, cannot be long, neither on the South Side, before they run into the
Mediterranean, as the Arno, Garigliano, and others: Nor on the North side,
before they run into the Adriatic, or the Po.

The chief Rivers of France, as the Loyre, the Seine, the Rhosne, and the
Garonne, I cannot but highly commend, having passed upon them for diverse days.
There are also four great Rivers in Germany; the Danube, the Rhine, the Elbe,
and the Oder, but none of France seem comparable unto the Rhine and Danube.
France having the Sea upon the North, the West, and the two large Provinces of
Languedoc, and Province upon the Mediterranean Sea, has the opportunity of
Noble Cities and Seaports: But some doubt may be made, Whether any thereof do
exceed Hamburg, Lubeck, and Dantzick.

The great number of populous, large, and handsome Cities, does afford great
content unto a Traveller in Germany; for besides about Sixty six free Imperial
Cities, are many more of good note belonging to particular Princes, and diverse
highly privileged. And surely a true Estimation of the Cities and Towns of
these days, cannot be duly made from the Accounts and Descriptions thereof left
an hundred years since or more, for since those times, Buildings have been
better modelled and ordered; Fortifications and Outworks more regularly
contrived; Convents and Public Houses more neatly and commodiously built; and
the fair Colleges and Churches of the Jesuits, which are now to be seen in
most, do much set off the Beauty of great Places. Every where we meet with
great and populous Towns, Villages, Castles, Seats of the Nobility, Plains,
Forests, and pleasant Woods. And besides the satisfaction we may have from
Objects above ground, we may find no small content in the wonders thereof under
it, in Mines, Minerals almost of all sorts, of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron,
Tinn, Lead, Quicksilver, Antimony, Coal, Salt, Sulphur, Cadmia, and others,
where there are also singular Artificers and Workmen, in the several Artifices
thereof. Conversation with the People is easy, they behaving themselves
without much Formality, and are plain-dealing and trusty, so that a Traveller
needs not to be so solicitous and heedful of what he has, as in some other
Countries, which are esteemed of greater Civility. The Women are generally
well-complexioned, sober, and grave, and they have not yet learned the custom
of their Neighbors of France and Holland, to admit of being saluted by Men:
faithful to their Husbands, and careful in the affairs of their Houses.

They make good provision against the cold of their Country, by sleeping
between two Feather-beds and Stoves.

The common Stoves in Inns, wherein there are for the most part several
Companies eating, drinking, and in the night sleeping, are convenient,
considering the great cold, or at least tolerable; but they being rooms close
shut up, the smell of the meat, and especially of Cabbage, an usual Dish
amongst them, makes them unpleasant, so that sometimes I preferred the course
of hot Countries, while I called to mind, that in Province and Italy we drank
frozen Julebs, which we dissolved with the heat of our hands; slept upon a
sheet, on the outside of the Bed, with all the Windows of the Chamber open; and
as we sat at dinner, there was a Fann in the middle of the Room, hanging over
our Heads, about two yards broad, which with a string was pulled backward and
forward to cool us, and diverse had Pans filled with Snow, to cool the sheets
when they went into their Beds.

Germany is a great Hive of men, and the mighty destruction of men made by the
last German wars, and by the Plague is so repaired, that it is scarce
discernible. They are fruitful, and full of Children: They are not exhausted by
Sea, Colonies sent forth, or by peopling American Countries; but they have some
consumption by wars abroad, when they be at peace at home: few wars being made
in other parts of Europe, wherein there are not some Regiments of Germans; the
People being naturally Martial, and persons well descended, very averse from a
Trading course of Life.

While I read in Tacitus of the old barbarous and rude State of Germany, how
poorly they lived, that they had their Houses at a distance from one another;
how ignorant they were in Arts; and it was doubted whether their Country
afforded Mines; that they lived by exchange of things, making little or no use
of money, and the like, I may justly wonder to behold the present advance and
improvement in all commendable Arts, Learning, Civility, splendid and handsome
Cities and Habitations, and the general face of things incredibly altered since
those ancient times; and cannot but approve the expression of a Learned Man,
though long since, That if A^^^v^stus, Civilis, and those old famous men of
Germany, should revive in their Country again, and look up to Heaven beholding
the Constellations of the Bears and other Stars, they might probably
acknowledge that these were the same Stars which they were wont to behold; but
if they should look downward, and well view the face of all things, they would
imagine themselves to be in a new world, and never acknowledge this to have
been their Country.

A JOURNEY FROM COLEN IN GERMANY TO LONDON.
DUring the Treaty of Peace at Colen in the year 1673. between the United
States of the Netherlands, the King of Great Britain, and the French King; many
English Gentlemen having accompanied their Excellencies the Lords Ambassadors
and Plenipotentiaries in their Journey, had a desire also to view some of the
Neighboring Territories, and to divertise themselves during the heat of the
Summer, at the Spaa, the Baths of Aken, and other places. Having therefore, in
order to our Journey, obtained a Pasport for our Safety from Count Blondel, one
of the Spanish Plenipotentiaries, and from their Excellencies Sir Joseph
Williamson, and Sir Leoline Jenkins; we left Coln on Monday the Fourth of July,
and upon the Road overtook my Lord of Peterborough, who had been at Dusseldorp,
at the Duke of Newburg's Court, and went afterward into Italy to Modena, and
brought over her Highness the present Duchess of York. We dined at a small
walled Town, called Berckem, which some think to be a name corrupted from
Tiberiacum, where we stayed a great part of the Afternoon, to accommodate an
unlucky Accident which happened: A Servant of one of the English Gentlemen
having casually shot a Horse, which belonged to a Commander under the Duke of
Newburg, lying at that time with a party of Horse at this Town, so that we
traveled in the Evening through the Woods, and came late to a place called
Steinstrasse, and the next day morning we went to Juliers.

Gulick, or Juliers, is a small Town by the River Roer, but very ancient, and
called by the Romans, Juliacum, conceived to have been founded by Julius
Caesar; the Seat sometimes of the Dukes of Gulick, before the uniting hereof
with Cleve; and since the dissolution of that Estate, possessed by the United
Provinces; and then again by the Spaniards; but at present in the hands of the
Duke of Newburg. It being agreed at the conclusion of Peace between the
Spaniards and the Hollanders, That the Marquess of Brandenburg should have
Marck and Cleve, and the Duke of Newburg, Gulick and Berg. This is a handsome
well fortified Town, the Streets straight, and the Houses of Brick. The Citadel
consists of four Bastions, of a regular Fortification; within which is the
Princes Palace. The Piazza in the Town is handsome; and the whole considerable
for its beauty and strength.

July the 5th. we came to Aken, or Aquisgranum, sive Leagues distant from
Gulick; the French call it Aix la Chapelle, from a Chapel in the great Church,
much visited by Pilgrims from many parts; and famous for the great number of
Relics preserved therein. When the Romans made war upon the Germans, they
possessed themselves of diverse places between the Rhine and Maes. And Granus, a
noble Roman, being sent into these parts of Gallia Belgica, about the year of
our Lord Fifty three, discovered among the Woods and Hills these hot Springs,
which to this day are so much celebrated in many parts of Europe; who
afterward made use of them, and adorned them after the manner of the Roman
Baths, and built a noble Habitation near them; part of which the Inhabitants
would have still to be standing, retaining the name of Turris Grani, an old
Tower at the East End of the Townhouse; a noble Antiquity: But the manner of
its building gives suspicion it cannot be so old. Hence these Thermae from
their Discoverer have been named Aquae Graniae, and came to be frequented; and
the Town of Aquisgrane built and flourished, till Attila, the King of the Huns,
or Hungarians, destroyed it.

About four hundred years after, Charles the Great riding out a hunting in
these parts, as he passed through the Woods, his Horses Foot struck into one of
these Hotsprings; near which he also took notice of the Ruins of ancient
Palaces and Buildings long before forsaken; and being still more and more
delighted with the pleasant Situation of the place, and convenience of these
hot Rivolets, he renewed and adorned the Baths, built his Royal Palace near
them: and appointed that the King of the Romans should be crowned with an Iron
Crown here as with a Silver one at Milan, and a Gold one at Rome. He also built
a noble Collegiate Church, dedicated to the blessed Virgin, in the presence of
many Princes and Bishops, in the year 804, and endowed it with Revenues for the
maintenance of Canons, who lived together in a College at first, but at
present separately in the manner of Prebends. He built also the old or inward
Wall of the City, so that it flourished till the year 882. at which time it was
again ruined by the Fury of the Normans, and the Emperors Palace burnt to the
ground. This City, besides these Devastations from the Irruptions of the Huns
and Normans, has been diverse times since destroyed by Fire; as in the year
1146. which loss it overcame in such manner, that Twenty six years after, it
recovered not only its former greatness, but was so much increased, that the
large outward Wall was built by the command of the Emperor Frederick the First.

In the year 1224. happened another great Fire, in which, not only the
Buildings, but many of the Inhabitants perished. And the Roof of the Church was
burnt in another Fire 1236. And now of late, for it is not long since it has
recovered its losses by the Fire in the year 1656. when twenty Churches and
Chapels, and about five thousand private Houses were destroyed.

The Townhouse, or Senate House, was built 1353. being all of Freestone,
handsomely adorned with the Statues of the Emperors. The first and second
Story of this Building is divided into Chambers; but the highest is all one
entire Room or Hall, 162 Foot long, and 60 Foot broad. It is well painted in
diverse parts by Amisaga: Two Pieces of whose drawing are much esteemed here;
one of the Resurrection, and another of Charles the Great, giving the Charter
to the City of Aken. Here the Emperors, at the time of their Coronation, used
to keep their Feasts, together with the Electours and other Princes. The Roof
is supported by four Pillars; through the middle of which, the smoke of all the
Chimneys of this Building, is by a handsome contrivance conveyed away.

Over against this House, in the middle of the Piazza, is a Fountain,
considerable both for largeness and neat structure, contrived by a great
Artist, Gerard Coris: where four Springs perpetually empty themselves from
above into a large Basin of Copper, of thirty Foot Diameter; from whence again
it descends by six Pipes into a Cistern of Stone, handsomely engraved, and
passes to many other Fountains in the Town. On the top of this Fountain stands
a large Statue of Charles the Great, Patron of this City, made of brass, and
gilded over. He is in Armor, and looks toward Germany. About the edges of
the great brass Basin is this Inscription:

Hic aquis per Granum Principem quendam Romanum, Neronis and Agrippae fratrem
inventis, calidorum fontium Thermae a Principio constructae. Postea vero per D.
Carolum Magnum Imp. constituto ut locus hic fit caput and regni seeds trans
Alps, renovatae sunt: quibus Thermis hic gelidus fons influxit olim quem nunc
demum hoc aeneo vase illustravit S. P. Q. Aquisgranensis, Anno Domini 1620.

The Church of our Lady, built by Charles the Great, is of an odd Figure. At
the West End is a Steeple adorned with diverse Pyramids; and on the top a large
Globe and Cross. From hence, higher much than the Church, passes a Gallery,
supported by a large Arch to a Cupola near the middle of the Church. At the
East End is also a small Turret or Lanthorn. The inside of the whole is adorned
with Marble Pillars of diverse sorts, with Pillars of brass, gilded Statues,
brass Doors and Partitions, and much Mosaic work.

In the middle of the Church, where Charles the Great was buried, hangs a
very large Crown, given to this Church by the Emperor Frederick the First.
This Crown is made of silver and brass gilt, adorned with sixteen little
Towers, and eight and forty Statues of silver, of about a Foot high, and thirty
two which are lesser. Between these stand eight and forty Candlesticks to
receive the Lights burnt here upon Festivals.

Of these large Crowns I have seen at Colen, and other parts; and it has been
an ancient Ornament in Churches. The Greeks have a Crown, or large Circle much
like this, in the middle of most of their best Churches; on which they hang
many Ostrich Eggs, and the Pictures of the Apostles and Saints. The Turks do
likewise imitate it in their Mosques, but instead of Pictures place Lamps.

Frederick the First took up the Body of Charles the Great out of its Sepulcher
in the middle of the Church, and afterward buried it again; partly in a silver
Coffin under the Altar of the Quire, and partly near the Wall of the old
Building, covering it with the same Tombstone, as before; which is here
reported to have been first taken from the Tomb of Julius Caesar. It is of
white Marble, and has the Figure of Proserpina upon it. Out of this Tomb of
Charles the Great, were taken up a great number of Relics and considerable
Rarities, which he had got together in his life time; some of them given him by
Aaron King of Persia, by the Patriarch of Constantinople, and others; diverse of
which are still preserved here: and these following we had the opportunity to
see. Some of the blessed Virgins hair. One ring or link of the Chain with which
St. Peter was chained in Prison. The Head of Charles the Great. The bones of
his Arm. His Sword which the Emperors wear at the time of their Coronation.
The Picture of the Virgin Mary, with our Savior in her Arms, embossed upon a
Jaspis, done by St. Luke, hanged about the Neck of Charles the Great, and so
found in his Tomb. A Noble Manuscript of the Gospels found in the same Tomb.
Charles the Great's Horn which he used when he went a hunting. His Crucifix
made out of the wood of the Cross. Our Savior's Girdle of Leather, with the
Seal of Constantine the Great at each end. A piece of the true Manna. Some of
the Bones and Blood of St. Stephen, richly enchased, upon which the Emperors
are sworn at their Inauguration. A piece of one of the Nails of the Cross. An
Agnus Dei sent from the Pope to Charles the Great; and many other Relics.
Here is also the Tomb of the Emperor Otho the Third, in black Marble, who in
the year 1000, first constituted the Electors of Germany.

Near to this City are many sorts of Minerals found; as Lead ore, the Sulphur,
and Vitriol-stone, Iron, Coal, and Cadmia, or Lapis Calaminaris: With this
latter we saw them make Brass, or multiply Copper, in this manner. They take
calcined Cadmia, or Calmey, as they call it, Copper from Sweden, and the melted
dross of both; to twenty eight pounds of Copper they put an hundred pound of
Calmey: They put first into very large Crucibles, some old pieces of brass and
slacken, or the dross, and afterward the Calmey and Copper, and let them stand
in the Furnace twelve hours; after which, they put eight Crucibles full into
one, and let what will run over, the best sinking always to the bottom; and
then cast it into a Frame made of stone, bordered with bars of Iron; and so run
it into brass Plates, which are afterward cut in pieces with large Cissars.

The hot Bathes are very much frequented at present. Within the inward Walls
are three convenient ones: The Emperors Bath, the Little Bath, and the Bath of
S. Quirinus. The Emperors Bath is in the same place, and fed with the same
Springs with that in which formerly Charles the Great took so much delight,
that he frequently used to swim therein; in which Exercise few were more expert
than himself; and spent the latter end of his days here, and would often invite
to the Bath, not only his Sons, but his Nobles, his Friend and Guards; so as it
was customary to Bathe a hundred together in those days. But now they are
divided into lesser Partitions. The Emperors Bath having five Bathing Rooms;
and the Little Bath which comes out of it three. These are reckoned to be
Nitro-Sulphureus; and arise so hot, that they let them cool twelve hours before
they use them. From under a great round Stone which covered a Well, in which
there were some of these Hot Springs, I saw Brimstone, hard, above an inch
thick, and Saltpeter, and a petrified Substance finely variegated, taken out.

Besides these, near unto the inward Wall of the City, there are Baths which
are not so hot as the former, esteemed to be Sulphureo-nitrous: The smell of
them is somewhat offensive, and the water in the Cisterns not transparent. The
first is the Bath of St. Cornelius, which has two Receptacles. The second, the
Rose Bath, so called from Mr. Rose, a Citizen of Aken, who built it. The third,
Compus Badt, or the Poor man's Bath. Of this sort of warm Water there is also a
Fountain, much resorted to, and drank of every morning in the Summer for many
Chronical Diseases. About a Furlong out of the South-gate of Aken, is a Village
called Porcetum, or Borset, from the great number of wild Hoggs, which formerly
frequented that place; in which are many Hot Springs upon both sides of a
little Rivolet, and let into Houses, where they are distributed into several
Baths of Stone. There are fourteen of these Houses, and twenty eight Baths; the
Baths holding ordinarily about fifty Tuns of Water, each of them: the Water is
clear and pleasant, without any offensive smell; excessive hot when it comes
first out of the Ground, hotter than the hottest of Aken, and is left to cool
about eighteen hours before they use it. They use also an Instrument of Wood,
pierced with many holes, to help to cool them sooner, or to stir the Water when
any one goes in, whereby he is not so sensible of the heat. There are many
cold Springs rise near these hot ones, whereby they might be tempered; and
surely the quantity of the hot Water being so great, no place might be made
more delightful, nor no Baths more noble. The Turks in our times, do most of
any Nation beautify their Baths, and render them serviceable to their health
and pleasure.

In Austria at Baden, the Sawer Bath is built after the Turkish manner, with a
Cupola over it: and if any one hereafter shall build or beautify these, they
will yield to very few in Europe. At present most of them are of a square
Figure, of about five or six yards over; and the Houses in which they are, very
near one another. The first House has the name of the Ladies Bath; the second
is the Snake; the third and fourth the Sword; the fifth the Golden Mill; the
sixth the Fool; the seventh the Cock; the eighth the Great Bath; the ninth the
Fountain; the tenth the Crab; the eleventh the World Inverted; the twelfth the
Glass; the thirteenth the Angel; and the fourteenth the Rose. There is also
another in the open Air, called the Poor man's Bath. In the Street is a Well or
Fountain of these Hot-springs, of as great a heat as any I have seen;
perpetually boiling or bubling. But of all these Baths Dr. Blondel and Dr.
Didier have written so particularly, as I need not to add any thing more, and
particularly of their Uses.

Within two Leagues of Aken, in the Country of Limbourg, is a Mine of Lapis
Calaminaris, which we went to see, having a Corporal and eight Musketeers for
our Security to pass the Wood. This Mine heth over against the Castle of
Einenberg. As soon as I had delivered a Letter to Mr. John Franck, Comptroller
of the Mine for his Catholic Majesty, he went along with us, to show us the
manner how the Cadmia grows in the Earth, and other Curiosities. This Mine
having been wrought Three hundred years, and being one of the most remarkable
of that kind, it may not be impertinent to set down some particulars concerning
it. It is about eighteen or nineteen Fathoms deep, lying all open like a Chalk
Mine, of an Oval Figure; they digg at present in several places, and the best
Calmey lies between the Rocks, in the deepest part of the Mine: They have now
found an excellent Veyn so placed, of eleven or twelve Foot thick, which they
digg out with Pickaxes, with some difficulty, by reason that the Lapis
Calaminaris is so very hard. The color of this Stone is of a dark yellow and
red, and has Veyns of natural Brimstone mixed thinly in it. The Veyns of the
Lapis Calaminaris being so large, they follow them not only in one place, but
digg over one another heads, and frame their work into the shape of large
Stayrs, and one throws up what another diggs, and so upward till they lade the
Carts with it. Some of the Cadmia is blackish and dark brown; and there are
Fluores between the Cavities of the Stone handsomely figured, but most of a
blackish color. The works about the Mine the most remarkable, are these: 1. An
Overshot-wheel in the Earth, which moves the Pumps to pump out the water; and
this not placed in the Mine, but on one side of it, and a passage cut out of
the Mine to the bottom of it, by which the Mine is drained; and another passage
or cuniculus, out of the place where the wheel is turned, which lets out the
water which turns the wheel, and also the water which comes out of the Mine
into the Neighboring Valley. 2. The washing of the Ore or Stone, which they
perform, as at other works, by letting the water over it, and stirring it; and
this they do wheresoever they begin to work near the Superficies of the Earth,
for there the Calmey is less, and more mixed with Clay and Earth: but the most
remarkable work is the calcining of the Ore (for all our Lapis Calaminaris of
the Shops is the calcined Calmey) and it is worth the seeing; for they place
Faggots in a handsome order first, and cover a large round Area with them, of
about Forty or Fifty yards Diameter, upon which they place Charcoal in as good
an order, till all be covered and filled up a yard from the ground; then they
place ranks of the largest Stones of Calmey, and after them smaller, till they
have laid all on; and then by setting fire to the bottom, the fire comes to
each stone, and all is handsomely calcined. From hence we went to Limburg,
meeting with diverse Soldiers upon the Road, who desired money of us, but did
not attempt any thing against us, we being many of us together in Company.

Limburg is seated upon a high Rock, which overlooks all the Country, and a
little River runs almost round it at the bottom. The Avenue to the Town on
the Northside is difficult all along upon the edge of the Rock; and the Gate of
the Town, over which is the Governor's House, spreads it self from one side of
the Rock to the other, and locketh up the passage. Here we show our Pasports
from the Spanish Plenipotentiaries; and in the Afternoon had a pleasant Journey
to the Spaa. In the way we saw where the French Army had passed the Country
toward Metz, having lain about a Fortnight at Vichet, after the taking of
Maestreicht.

Spa is a neat Villedge in the Forest of Ardenna, seated in a bottom,
encompassed on all sides with Hills, and on the North with steep Mountains. So
that it happening to rain while we were there, the place was, in some hours
time, filled with water, the Hay washed out of the Meadows, the falls in the
River made even, and Pohunt, one of the Mineral Fountains, was drowned. There
was not much Company when we were there, although it were in the hottest time
of the year, which is most seasonable for drinking the waters; by reason of the
wars, and the danger of coming through the Country to them. But in Spa it self
all people are free from danger, all the Neighboring Princes protecting it,
and would count it very dishonorable to disturb a place, which by the virtue
of its Mineral Springs, is so beneficial to Mankind. These Waters are not only
drunk upon the place, but are also sealed up in Bottles, and sent into many
parts of Europe. And Mr. Coquelet, at whose House we lodged, told me that he
sent it as far as Saragossa in Spain: and that he had at that time Thirty
thousand Bottles empty, and waited for a good season to fill them, which is the
hottest, dryest time of the Summer, and the hardest Frost in Winter; at which
times the water is strongest, sparkling, and brisk, The chiefest of these
Mineral Fountains are these, Geronster, Saviniere, Tonnelet, and Pohunt.

Geronster is in the middle of a thick Wood, about an English mile and a half
Southward of the Spa; it is the strongest of any, and the best adorned, being
built up with stone, and a Pavilion over it, supported with four handsome stone
Pillars. There is a green place cleared in the Wood near to it, and a little
House for the Patients to warm themselves in early, in the morning, or in cold
weather. The Arms of Sr Conrad Bourgsdorff, who adorned this Fountain, are
placed over, on two sides; and on the other two this Inscription in French and
High Dutch, in a handsome Oval.

Le Reverendissime and Excellentissime Sr Sr Conrade Bourgsdorff, Grand
Chamberlan, and premier Conseiller d'Estat, Colonel and Gouverneur General de
tous les Forts and Forteresses du Serenissime Electeur de Brandebourg dans son
Estat Electoral, Grand Prevost des Eglises Cathedrales d'Halberstadt and
Brandebourg, Chevalier de l'Ordre de St. Jean, and Commandeur du Baillage de
Lagow, de gros Machenau, Golbeck, Bouckow, Oberstorff, etc. etc. etc.

This Fountain smells very strong of Brimstone, and causes vomiting in a
great many, yet passes chiefly by Urine, as they do all; and strikes a purple
with Nutgalls more inclining to red, than the waters of Tunbridge. The Sediment
is of a light blew in the Fountain, but of a dark dirty red every where else.
Not far from this is another large Spring in the Wood much like it, but not as
yet built and beautified.

Saviniere is another Fountain, almost as far from the Spa Eastward, and built
after the manner of a Tower: the Acidulae are not so strong as the former.
There is another Fountain hard by this, almost the same, held to be
particularly good for the Stone and Gravel.

The third is Tonnelet, arising in the Meadow, and built up with stone: But
being there are no Trees nor Shades about it, it is not so delightful as the
others. And Henricus ab Heers in his Spadacrene, says that this is more
nitrous than the rest, and causes such a coldness in the mouth and stomach,
that few can drink of it.

The fourth is Pohunt, in the middle of the Town, from whence most of the water
is drawn which is sent abroad, if no particular one be sent for. This was
beautified with handsome Stone-work, by the Bishop of Liege, to whom this place
belongs, and this Inscription set over it, Sanitati Sacrum. It is also called
the Fountain of St. Remaclus, to whom it was dedicated; and these Verses are
likewise engraven upon it:

Obstructum reserat, durum terit, humida siccat
Debile fortificat, si tamen art bibis.
i. e.

This opens all Obstructions,
And wears away hard Tumors;
This strengthens much the weaker parts,
And dries up cold moist Humors.
Being at the Spa, we visited Franchimont one Afternoon, passing through a
thick Wood, there is an old Castle, and good Brimstone and Vitriol-works, the
same Stone affording both; and I presume may also make the Spa-water under
ground, or at least be a principal Ingredient in it. We saw the manner here how
they melted, and cast their Brimstone first into great Pails, the florid and
clear parts remaining at the top and middle, the thick and more obscure
subsiding and adhering to the bottom and sides, and is that which is sold for
Sulphur Vivum. We saw also the manner of casting the Brimstone into Rolls, or
Magdaleons: And near unto this place a smoking, burning, little Hill, which is
thus caused: They throw out the burnt Pyrites, out of which Brimstone has been
distilled, and the Vitriol drawn out by infusion, upon this Hill, which
consists all of the same matter, which ferments in time, grows hot, smoaks, and
burns perpetually, and withal, drinks in a new Vitriol into its self.

From the Spa we crossed over to Frapont, a Village seated upon the pleasant
River Uta, or Ourte, where we took Boat and went down a rapid Stream, yet one
of the pleasantest I ever saw, winding and turning between so many green Hills,
in part of the Forest of Arduenna. We descended afterward thirty or forty
small Falls in a long Boat made on purpose. The Oar or Paddle being only a
square piece of Board fixed to the end of a Pole, the Pole standing
perpendicularly in the middle of it. The delightful River Vesa, or the Wesdret,
soon met us, and joining together, we fell down with them into the Maes near
Liege. Upon the Banks of these Rivers all the Arms, Guns, and other Instruments
are made, for which the Country of Liege is remarkable.

Liege, Luick, Leodium, or Augusta Eburonum; Learned Men think this City to be
seated near that Valley, wherein two Legions of Julius Caesar, under Sabinus
and Cotta, were destroyed by Ambiorix, chief Commander of the Eburones. It is
seated upon the River Mosa, which entering with two Streams, makes some pretty
Islands. Three other small Rivers arising in the Forest of Ardenna, are also
here received into the Maes, whereby they have plenty of Fish and other
Conveniences. The City is very populous, and so it has been in former Ages,
when as Charles Duke of Purgunay, sacked it, and destroyed an hundred thousand
of the people.

It abounds with fair Churches, stately Convents, and Religious Foundations,
richly endowed, so that it has been called the Paradise of Priests, and is in
that kind the most notable in all these parts. The Palace of the Bishop is a
noble Fabric, built by Cardinal Erardus, Bishop of Liege. The Cathedral
bears the Name of St. Lambert, who being Bishop of Maestreicht was murdered
by Dodo and others, about the year 622. The Sea was afterward translated unto
Liege by Hubertus, as it had been formerly from Tongres to Maestreicht, and the
Body of St. Lambert removed unto this Church, which is at present very noble,
being built of a reddish Stone, very much carved without, and handsomely
adorned within. Between the Quire and Sacristy, is this Inscription in very
large Letters:

D. O. M.

Intemeratae Virgini Mariae, Sancto Lamberto, Ecclesiae and Patriae Divis
Tutelaribus, Maximilianus Henricus utriusque Bavariae Dux, Archiepiscopus and
Elector Coloniensis, Episcopus and Princeps Leodiensis, Ernesti and Ferdinandi
Bavariae Ducum, Episcoporum and Principum Leodiensium Nepos and Successor in
sui and Praedecessorum memoriam Ponebat. MDCLVIII.

The Canons hereof are of great riches and power, and have the Election of the
Bishop and Prince, who has also had the Titles of Duke of Bouillon, Marquess
of Franchimont, and Count of Lootz and Hasbania. In the Coin of Maximilian, the
present Elector of Colen and Bishop of Liege, I find this Inscription:

Maximilianus Henricus Dei gratia Archiepiscopus Coloniensis, Episcopus and
Princeps Leodiensis, Supremus Bullonensis Dux.

Speutus the Bishop of Liege, bought the Principality of Liege of Godfrey of
Bouillon, when he went to the Holy Land: And in the Treaty of Cambray, 1559.
the possession of Bouillon, and precedence of Title, was granted to the Bishop
of Liege, although at this time also the Houses of La Tour and Mark do bear the
same.

Of the Parish Churches that of St. John, and of St. Servasius are fair. Of the
Abbeys that of St. Jacob within the Town, and of St. Lawrence, built by Bishop
Raginardus upon an Hill out of the Town, are noble. There is also a College of
English Jesuits, well-seated upon a Hill, where the Garden is handsome, and
the Dyals made by Franciscus Linus, are worth the seeing: And an English
Nunnery handsomely built. In the Church of the Gulielmites, out of the Town,
lies the Body of our famous Countryman Sir John Mandeville, who, after he had
traveled through so many parts, took an affection unto this place, and here
passed the remainder of his life, and whose Epitaph, and some Rarities of his,
are still to be seen.

Bishop Notger, who was consecrated by St. Gereon, Archbishop of Colen, and
died in the year 1007. built the walls of this City, and being Tutor to Otho
the third, he found means very much to beautify it, to repair and build diverse
Churches, and endow them with rich Revenues, and let the River Maes into the
Town, which before ran upon one side of it.

As their Churches are fair and numerous, so are their Bells and Chimes
remarkable. In the Cathedral of St. Lambert there are eight large Bells, and
twelve lesser; and there is one so great, as it is said to require Twenty four
men to ring it. In the Church of St. Paul the Bells and Chimes are
considerable; as also at St. Lawrence and the crossed Friars. It is also an
University, and was so famous in former Ages, that they still take notice that
at one time there have been Nine Sons of Kings, Twenty four Dukes Sons, Twenty
nine of Counts, besides many of great Barons Students therein.

Their Speech here, as also at Spaw, is called Roman, and is a kind of old
French, or Dialect of that Language, a great part of which is made up of Latin,
or Roman words: and they call the Neighboring Language of the Dutch, Tuiscon.
But many speak very good French. They have some Vineyards affording a small
Wine. The Hills about furnish them with Quarries of good Stone, and of several
kinds. They have also diverse Mines and Minerals, and great quantity of Pit-coal
for Fire, in some places fetched deep out of the Earth, in others nearer the
Surface: and in one place I saw them beginning to dig where they immediately
found Coal. Their Pumps and Engines to draw out the water, are very
considerable at these Mines; in some places moved by Wheels, at above a
Furlongs distance, to which they are continued by strong Wood-work, which moves
backwards and forwards continually.

The Citadel stands upon a Hill, and is of great Strength; It was built to
keep the City of Liege under Subjection. For 1649. there being some
disturbances in the City, Ferdinand, the Elector of Colen, offering to come
into the Town to appease it, was opposed by the Consul, Jacobus Hennet, who was
soon after surprised and beheaded, together with Bartholomaeus Rolandus; the
Consul having sworn the Elector should never come in whilst he were alive. And
the Citadel soon after was ordered to be built. The Bridges are handsome: that
over the great Stream of the Maes is very broad and fair, and has large
Arches. From hence we could read the Elector's name upon the Citadel,
Maximilianus, although it were at a very great distance, the Letters were so
large.

From Liege we had a pleasant passage down the Water to Maestreicht, passing by
Argentau, a Castle seated upon a high Rock on the right side of the River,
belonging then to the King of Spain, afterward by Vichet in the half way, and
then by Navagne, a strong Fort in the Maes, which commands the River, and at
that time did the Spaniard service; then by pleasant Rocks on our left hand,
wherein many Cuts and Passages have been dug, till we came in sight of
Maestreicht.

This Town having been a little before taken from the United States by a sharp
Siege, was full of French, and had a Garrison in it of about Ten thousand men;
and in the Marketplace stood about Two hundred large Fieldpieces. We saw the
places where they had their Batteries and their Mines, and the Half Moon which
the Duke of Monmouth took: the Outworks were very numerous, and many of them
undermined. Colonel Storff showed us a handsome Draught of all the Works,
Approaches and Manner of taking of the Town.

About a quarter of a Mile out of the Town we went into the great Quarry of
Stone, which is one of the noblest sure in the World. Between Padoa and Vicenza
I had formerly seen the famous Cave of Custoza, or Cubola, said to be above
Five hundred Fathoms in breadth, and Seven hundred in length, but this does far
surpass it: the Roof is very high and stately in most places, the Pillars not
to be numbered, all very large; we passed two miles under ground amongst them:
No Labyrinth can be contrived more intricate, and yet all parts are uniform.
The Floor all in a level, and the Roof in most places of the same height, and
so much has that uniform rule, which I suppose was set to those who first
dug, and so has successively been observed, added to the beauty of this
place, that there is scarce any thing more noble. It put me in mind of the
hundred Chambers of Nero, which he caused to be made under Ground in the Rocks
at Baiae. And the Water which we met with in one place, made me think of Nero's
admirable Fish Pond, built in the like manner within the Earth. We came out
again near to a Convent upon the Banks of the River, and returned by water to
Maestreicht.

The next day we parted Company. Mr. Newton, Mr. Ettrick, Mr. Grove, Mr.
Carlton, and Mr. Newcomb went for Aken and Colen; Mr. Bates and Mr. Daston went
up the River again to Liege, at which place, staying a day or two to find a
convenience to pass to Brussels, we were nobly entertained at a Dinner with
Venison, Wild-boar, and other Dishes, by that worthy Person and Learned
Mathematician Franciscus Slusius, one of the great Canons of Liege, who also
continued his high Civilities to us to the last Minute we stayed in Town.

Leaving Liege we soon came in sight of Tongres, or Tungrorum oppidum, the most
ancient place in all these Countries. Ortelius would have it to be called of
old Atuatuca: It was a strong hold before the coming of Julius Caesar into
Gaul, and was afterward made a Roman Station, and in process of time became so
great, that Attila the Hun destroyed an hundred Churches in it, it being at
that time a Bishops See, which in the year 498 St. Servatius removed unto
Maestreicht. Many old Coins and Antiquities are still found here; and part of
an old Chapel, said to be built by St. Maternus, Disciple to St. Peter, is
still remaining. When the King of France made his great inroad into the Low
Countries, 1672. he borrowed this Town of the Elector of Cologne, and then
passed on to Maseick, where crossing the Country to the Rhine, by the sides of
these great Rivers, Rhine and Maes, he made that notable Incursion, and quitted
not Tongres till he had taken Maestreicht the year following. We dined this day
at Borchloe, and lodged at St. Trurn, or St. Truden, a handsome little Town, so
called from a Church and Abbey herein dedicated to that Saint.

The next day we dined at Tienen, or Tilmont, on the little River Geet, once
one of the chief Towns in Brabant, but long since decayed. In these Plain
Countries, in many places we saw small Hills, or Sepulchral Eminences of the
Ground: And near unto the Walls of Yienen, are three very remarkable ones, said
to be the Tombs of great Commanders. In the Evening we came to Lovain.

Lovain is the chief City of that quarter of Brabant, which comprehends
Arschot, Halen, and Judoigne; an ancient and large City, pleasantly seated upon
the River Dele; it is of great Circuit, and the compass of the wall accounted
above four miles about: but there are many void Spaces, Hills, Fields, and
Gardens within it, which makes it very pleasant and delightful. There are
herein diverse good Buildings, Convents, and Churches: the chief whereof is the
stately Church of St. Peter, the Convent of the Carthusians, the Hospital. The
public Palace or Senate House are also Noble.

It is the great University of these parts, said to have had its beginning
about 926. but endowed by John the Fourth, Duke of Brabant, and confirmed by
Pope Martin the Fifth, 1425. There are Forty three Colleges in it; whereof the
four chief are Lilium, Falco, Castrum, Porcus. Goropius Becanus, a Learned Man,
and Native of Brussels, affirms, That no University in Italy, France,
Germany, or Spain, is to be compared unto it for its elegant and pleasant
Situation. The University is under the Government of Rector, who is in great
esteem and honor among them. This University has produced many Learned Men:
But neither the Buildings of the Colleges, nor their Endowments do equal those
of our Universities, and the Situation thereof seems not to exceed that of
Oxford.

We traveled from hence to Brussels, being most part of the way in the sight
of the very high Tower of the Church of St. Rombald at Machlin.

Count Monterei was then Governor of the Low Countries, and resided at
Brussels, the ordinary Seat of the Governors of the Spanish Netherlands; which
City he had taken care to fortify, and to make it more tenable, if it should
be attempted by the French.

From Brussels we passed to Antwerp, where we were handsomely treated by Mr.
Wauters and Mr. Hartop, and having visited some of our Friends, the next day we
passed the River Schelde, and took Coach in the morning, traveling through a
fruitful, plain, flat Country, set with rows of Trees in most places, and
arrived in the evening at Ghent.

Gaunt, Gandavum, or Ghent, is esteemed to be the greatest City, not only of
Flanders, but of all the Law-Countries, and challenges a pace amongst the
greatest in Europe; but at present it decreaseth and decays rather than
increases. And if Charles the Fifth were now alive, he could not put Paris
into his Gant, a greater Glove would not fit that City, which is so much
increased since his time. In Ghent are many noble Convents, among which the
Jesuits is one of the fairest: There is a Cloister also of English Nuns. The
Cathedral is stately, and the Tower belonging to it being very high, gives a
prospect of a pleasant and fruitful Country round about it. There are diverse
Piazza's, large and fair; in one of which stands a large gilded Statua of
Charles the Fifth, Emperor and King of Spain, who was born in this City. The
whole Town is generally well built, and the Streets are fair and clean. The
Inhabitants hereof have been taken notice of to be extremely given to Sedition,
and for their sakes a great many other Cities in Europe are punished, and have
in a manner totally lost their Liberties: For the Spaniards, to curb the
Seditious humor of the People of Ghent, were put upon the Invention of
building Citadels in Cities, whereby a few Soldiers are able to suppress any
Commotion, or beat down the Town, so that here I saw the first Citadel that was
built in Europe by Charles the Fifth: It is not large, and the Bastions little,
and though of a Regular Figure, yet not so convenient as those of latter days,
since that Art has been improved.

From Ghent we passed by water about Twenty English miles to Bruges, a very
elegant large City, and formerly a place of very great Trade, being within
three Leagues of the Sea; so that from the tops of their highest Buildings, the
Ships under Sail are visible, and at the same time a Fleet of Ships, and a
large Territory of a fruitful, pleasant Country, comes under your eye. It is
fortified with Works of Earth and deep Ditches. The Convents are numerous: The
artificial Cuts of Water from this Town to all places, makes it of easy
access; and though it has no Port, the Passage from hence to Ostend by water
is short: And they are at present upon a Design of bringing Ships up to this
City.

Ostend is about Ten English miles from Bruges, seated upon the waves of the
German Ocean, which wash it continually on one side: And they have now
contrived it so, as to let the Sea in almost round the Town for a great space,
whereby it is become much more strong and defensible than before. For when I
looked upon it, and considered what it was when it was besieged by Archduke
Albertus, and taken by Marquess Ambrosius Spinola, 1604. with an honorable
Surrender after three years Siege, I cannot but ascribe very much unto their
Supplies from England, and the obstinate Valor of the Defendants, especially
the English under Sir Francis Vere. Sluys being in the hands of the States of
the United Provinces, and Dunkirk under the French. The Spaniards possess no
other Port in Flanders but this and Newport; and this being the most
considerable, they are now making the Haven large, and are upon a considerable
Work in order to the carrying of their Ships over into that Cut which goes
from Ostend to Bruges, out of their Harbor, by the means of a very great Lock
or Receptacle of Water, which is to communicate with both; which, when it is
finished, may be very advantageous to the Traffic. of the Spanish Netherlands.
This Town stands very low, but the Streets are straight, large, and uniform

From hence I went all along upon the Sea-shoar to Newport, a handsome Town,
with large fair Streets, but low built. There were then a great number of small
Ships in the Harbor. This place is famous for the Battle of Newport, fought
here by Albertus, and Count Maurice, wherein the Spanish Forces lost the day,
and much of the honor of the Field was due unto the English under Sir Francis
Vere; since which time, although there has been much blood shed in these
Quarters, yet there has not been so considerable a Battle ever since, although
the English had also the fortune to do great Service hereabout at a fight
called the Battle of the Sandhils, when a part of the Army of French and
English, which besieged Dunkirk, fought with the Spanish Forces by Newport, and
overthrew them.

From Newport we put to Sea, sailing out of the Harbor, and intending for
England; but the wind being very high and contrary, after having been at Sea
all the night, and had leisure to take notice of the great number of Sands upon
that Coast, in the morning we put into Mardike, where at present there is only
a Fort of Wood just above the High Water mark, with some few Guns mounted. The
other Fort, more into the Land, being demolished.

Dunkirk is much increased of late, and the King of France has not spared money
to render it considerably strong. He has very near finished a noble Citadel,
begun by the English while this Town was in their possession, which has the
Sea on one side of it, the Haven on another, and the Sandhills toward the
Land, which when the wind is at South-west, does somewhat annoy it: To prevent
which, the French have made diverse Cuts and Channels through the Sands, into
which the Sea entering, does moisten and fix the Sand, so as they are not so apt
to fly. And every Bastion is sprucely kept and covered within with green Turf.
Beyond the old Wall of the Town, there are now great Works drawn, which
encompass so large a space of Ground, that the Town is made bigger by half: And
in this part stands the English Nunnery, and many handsome Buildings. The new
Fortifications are very large; and the Bastion toward the North the most
stately, upon which the King of France entertained the Duke of Monmouth. The
Port is large, and capable of receiving a great number of Ships, but at low
water it is almost dry; and there are so many Sands before it, that at that
time the Sea comes not in any depth within a mile of it.

From Dunkirk we traveled by Land to Graveling, where the Works are of Earth,
large and high, the Church stately, the Streets broad, but the Houses low, and
at present not populous.

From Graveling I came to Calais, from whence setting Sail in the morning, we
came to Dover, and the same day to London.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Benj-Tooke at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THe Works of the Most Reverend Father in God, John Bramhall, late L.
Arch-Bish. of Ardmagh. Fol. Several Chirurgical Treatises, by Richard Wiseman
Sergeant Surgeon to his Majesty. Fol. Skinneri Etymologicon Linguae
Anglicanae. Fol. Bishop Sanderson' s Sermons. Fol. Bentivolio and Urania, by N.
Ingelo, D. D. Fol. Mr. Faringdon' s Sermons complete, Three Vol. Fol. Dr.
Heylin on the Creed. Fol. Lord Bacon' s Advancement of Learning. Fol.
Lightfoot. Horae Hebraicae in Johannem. Quarto. Dr. Brown' s Travels in
Hungaria, Servia, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Thessaly, Austria, Styria, Carinthia,
Carniola, and Friuli, with Sculptures. Quarto. A Representation of the State of
Christianity in England, and of its decay and danger from Sectaries as well as
Papists. Langhornii Elenchus Antiquitatum Albionensium. Oct. Batei Elenchus
Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia. Johannis Stearne de Obstinatione Opus Posthumum.
Praefixa sunt Prolegomena Apologetica. Octavo. Two Letters of Advice; 1. For
susception of H. Orders. 2. For Studies Theological, especially such as are
Rational. Oct. Some Considerations of present Concernment, how far the
Romanists may be trusted by Princes of another Persuasion. 8. Two short
Discourses against the Romanists. 1. An Account of the Fundamental Principle of
Popery, and of the Insufficiency of the Proofs they have for it. 2. An Answer
to Six Queries, 12. These four by Henry Dodwell M. A. sometimes Fellow of
Trinity College near Dublin.

