How the love of God is the true ground of hatred of sin.
NO man can hate sin in the ground thereof (as it is offense to Gods Spirit)
but in the love of God; yet there may be and is hatred of sin (that is
Justifiable,) before the love of God is known, and felt, and dwelt in, and that
manner of hatred of sin came up under the Law, and stands under the same (to
wit, the Law-without;) where men may read such and such things were sin and
offense to the Spirit of God, and so believe what others have said thereof, and
never come to the Spirit of God in their own hearts and particulars, that the
offense and sin is against, and the love of that may be ignorant of: for that
which is sin and offense to the Spirit of God, is also an offense and burden
to, and on the creature and creation of God (in which this Spirit dwells, and is
to be manifested in the Image, and Authority, and Dominion of God placed in his
creature:)

And as No man can serve two masters, but he will hate the one and love the
other, or cleave to the one and despise the other: So is it in this particular
of servitude; that though sin would be a master, yet the truth being received
in the love thereof, and God obeyed in the heart and mind of the soul; he that
is Lord in the Members, and therein has a Law (warring against the mind and
its Law,) is hated in that mind, and warred against by the man (that possesses
the whole frame,) though it may be a thorn in the flesh, and may have power to
buffet, to show the creature his weakness, and that he may not be exalted
above measure: But where sin is loved in the heart, though the truth may be
received (in that man,) yet it is held but in the unrighteous part, and the
prayer is not heard, because of a regard to iniquity therein, but the
subjection to God (in that state) is but for wraths sake, and so a child of
wrath and fury, and against such is wrath revealed from Heaven; though that
which leads into an extreme in the passionate part (against that in others
which is Lord at home, and which they seek to rule by as they are ruled) is as
ready to lead out into the affectionate part (in any extreme self may therein
be pleased, and rule as Lord:)

And this is a state under the Law, in which the woman would rule, and that
which defiles usurp Authority, the feet abiding not at home, nor the house
kept in good order, but a tatling abroad, and the busy body becomes the
complainer, and all is in a hurry, and a continual brawling, that the man gets
to the top of the house, and nothing of the husbands advice is took, neither is
he learned of; though the creature may be learned to cry out against that which
others has declared to be sin and evil, and may have a creaturely wisdom to
discourse the offense to the Spirit of God (as so laid down by men,) but the
more the creature is seen in this work, the less is God honored, and self the
more set up and exalted:

Therefore that this woman may know her place and state, it would be good for
her to know she is under the Law of her husband (as long as he lives,) and let
her show him love by obedience (that is better than sacrifice,) that she
pretends relation to, least he be yet found alive, that gave the bill of
divorce (because of the hardness of thy heart;) and thou not free to be
married to this other, even Christ; free from the Law of her first husband; for
The froward shall not dwell in the house for ever, neither shall the complainer
inherit good, but a bond-slave shall be their Lord, and they both shall
possess trouble: And she to hate that which he controles, is the fulfilling of
the Law, and a subjection that answers the state of a Prophet in God, the
spirit of the Prophets being the informer, until the creatures own be subjected
in such a state.

For which cause this Lesson (of the love of God) is worthy to be heeded and
learned by all professors and professions, and submission, and subjection to
the will of God, (under all trials,) that has patience for its rule, and fo:
bearance for the shoulders, on which the work thereof is laid and built, that
honor and respect the work and creature therein (in the Lord;) in that though
it is become an easy thing to get words of truth, yet no man knows the mind
thereof, but by its spirit, and who is in the life of its love: but whoever is
in the enmity and hatred of the creatures life, are in the enmity and hatred of
God, and against his Spirit, because Gods life is in his creature (in whom they
live, move, and have their being,) and therein he determined to rejoice and
delight; and where this love and delight dwells, it is manifested to the world
(by their loving their brother they see, without which God could not be seen or
known;) for it is the love of God in the heart that flows forth into the world
(in charity and every good work,) but where is envying, and strife, and malice,
and every evil work, the wrath of God abides and rests (on and in that soul)
and how then can the love of God be known that is thereby crucified and
over-powred, and the delight overborn, by the worldly sorrow and discontent of
spirit that works death?)

In these particulars is weight to the serious hearted, that have known and
endured the wrath, anger, and hatred of God (in the resurrection of the
witness and testimony of his spirit, that first made against them) in the
angry, wrathful nature of enmity and hatred against his Spirit, and its leading
and guidance, in which all things come forth in fury and full of rage, and not
in the winning overcoming power of God, though service for, and to God (in
reference to the subjection of what is in his way) may be, and is, in such a
state, until liberty and freedom to Gods Spirit, be come up and known in the
earth; for it subjects the one, for the enlargement of the other:

Now when the House of God was defiled, the wrath and anger of God was kindled
and inflamed against the Inhabitants (the Inhabitants of the Earth,) and the
bush burnt and was not consumed (the vision of which appeared in, and to Moses,
that could dwell in the judgment of God, and endure his wrath and anger against
what it was then kindled (for the Seeds enlargement;) but Pharaoh by whom it
was kept in bondage, and whose life stood in the cause and ground thereof,
could not endure it, but was consumed and overthrown thereby; yet the
perfection of the work of God (at that day) stood afar off the understanding of
man: the substance of what did then in bondage or was inbondaged, being in the
two Seeds; it being for the sake of his creature (in which his own Seed and
Spirit of truth had place) that he suffered the oppressures, and hard burdens,
and yoaks that rests on his Seed, in which Pharaoh magnified himself, until
God saw how to get himself a name in his destruction, that fitted the vessel,
for that very end the Lord raised him up (even for the making known his power
in, and on,) for the vessels were in his hand, as is the clay in the hand of
the Potter, which he might make for what use he pleased, and according to the
pleasure or displeasure of his Spirit (that acted the man that had his own mind
and spirit that possessed the vessel,) was the use of the vessel honorable or
dishonorable, and raised up to the same end his power was made known by, and
in, he taking pleasure where his Spirit rested (that as the Sun shined on the
bad, as well as good, and as the wind blowed where it listed, and no man knows
whence it comes, or whither it shall return,) that returned from Pharaoh
finding no rest, whereby the vessel was so fitted (that of necessity) must
honor and magnify the power of the Creator,) that created all things to, and
for his own praise and glory, though it had been employed in that which was, and
is, to the dishonor of his Spirit, that so created it (in reference to its
freedom and liberty).

And this Gods displeasure, anger and wrath, has rested and does rest on
several conditions of the creature, which they submitting to, and laying down
under, comes to witness a change by, and in such conditions: but if they
continue in that the anger, wrath, and fury is to, they grow, and come forth
creatures filled with fury, wrath and anger, which clouds the glory of the
second, and more clear administration of God, even that of love and salvation
(that exceeds the first in glory;) and this is a great mystery in the world, to
continue and dwell in the love of God, and know its wound (to wound and dest^oy
that which has wounded and slew the soul; and so to come forth in the healing
and saving Spirit of God, that is the cause and ground of destruction (at the
root) to the Devils Kingdom of sin; for nothing can reach the root of sin, and
offense to the Spirit of God, but a Judgment well informed by, and in the
Spirit of God (faith therein works by the love of) that thereby comes forth in
the victory of the creatures faith; Therefore let all that read me, come into
the love of the Spirit of God, and truth of its discovery in their own hearts,
that that may grow (in every particular) which discovers what the sin and
offense is to at home, and no longer depend on Judgment without, and set up any
man's Judgment and Opinion (in a case of controversy) that one man may Lord it
over the Conscience of another, but come out of the controversy, and let he
that is Lord only, of, and over the Conscience, take place, and see that true
Judgment be set up at home, (within in the heart;) that can only distinguish
for God (there) and all the rest will soon cease, and the strife about things
under a Law without will be ended, and the Covenant felt that puts an end to
that without (of works,) and brings in the grace and favor of God, which
reaches to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, the everlasting Covenant of
righteousness in the heart, and that of the garments and outside coverings,
shall not be the ground of distinction (in Judgment,) that can be but
according to the appearance, but the naked and unvailed heart shall be Gods
witness, and no self separation will be able to darken this glory, but Power
endless is on their head, and Majesty is the garment of their clothing, that
are hid in the storm of the day, and covered from the fury and rage of
unreasonable men; praises endless to God for this great work.

R. B.


