THE HEAD of NILE: OR THE Turnings and Windings OF THE FACTIOUS Since SIXTY, IN
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Whigg and Barnaby.

Nil haheo quod agam, and non sum piger.

Horat. Satyra Sermon. 9. Lib. 1.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. 1681.

THE HEAD of NILE: OR The Turnings and Windings OF THE Factious since LX, In a
DIALOGUE between WHIGG and BARNABY.
Whigg. HOW do all our Friends at -- that good Family, whose Master wants
nothing but a Commission, answerable to his heat, to make him match his
Father-in-laws Courage and Conduct, and that other too the Jack-call to that
Lion, who has espoused too our Cause, and Right by both sides, but there is no
surer or better holding than by the Tail; he is a notable Young man, and a
great help (though he don't show much) he can do as he is bid, and hold his
tongue too, but I hope by this time you know one another better, I am sorry we
were there so severe upon you, I profess I have seen some in a Pillory bear
rotten Eggs with greater Stoicism.


Barnaby. And with greater reason, than your stinking breath, that has had your
rotten Cause so often in your mouths,


Whigg. But how do they all do, and the People of the Lord in and near about?

[Shaking him hard by the hands.
Barnaby. They all do as much mischief as they can, though not the tithe of
what they would do, the times (praised be God for it) are altered since you had
me at the stake, baiting me there, I expected by the discourses the Trumpet
every moment for Battle, I was thinking which way to get a Commission, I did
not care for taking one from my Playfellows, and giving them another.


Whigg. I find you are still the same man, only not quite so fierce.


Barnaby. The Times don't require it, there is not half the danger, I love the
Seaman (though not his swearing) that is most sollicitous, and lays about him
most, when the black Clouds hang like a Kittesol, or Umbrella, over his head;
and in the midst of a Storm blusters alike with it, when that is weathered out,
who but would imitate and enjoy the Calm?


W. You are of Principles different from mankind; they love to be most quiet
then, to swim with the current, they think it madness or folly to try to stemm
it; and some that are Pilots too, sworn Pilots to a Port, let me tell you; but
I am persuaded, had I o^ the Times kept where we once were, we had converted
you; I profess we had so much business, I had then scarce time (for riding to
this place, posting to that) to open my mouth, even to eat, much less to talk,
and spend those precious minutes in the conversion of a single Sinner; but now
we have leisure, and how willing would I be to bring over a Saul to make a Paul
of him.


B. If the flanting tail'd Comet at Christ-tide did not foretell this change,
yet sure the Isle of Purbeck business was no raised story by, but a perfect
Vision of one of, your party, that exactly represented these Times, an Army
raised from the very Clots of Earth, and all of a sudden returned to their
Mould, or popp'd under ground! it is a good hearing you are at leisure, (though
I find it is to do mischief if you can) the State-Physician may find as by a
Pulse the condition of the Nation, when the Cane big with Tuck (of use and omen
both) walks the streets as if its Master was one of the Penny Posts, when the
Hat is pinched over the Eyes, when the Saints are tenderly sought for in every
corner, and the Sisters are refreshed only with the hasty and holy kiss, and a
Paper of Recipes are left not to cure, but promote the twang of the Nose, then
is the Critical Minute -- but now you are playing the Moles.


W. If you could afford patience or leisure, I could show you which way we are,
and have been playing the Moles, undermining Church and State, but not so
blindly as some may imagine, but while we make others to think we cannot see, we
soon alter the scene and find they cannot, or at least their blind-sides.


B. Your extraordinary freedom puts me upon my guard, I am afraid you have
entertained a design of converting me.


W. Faith you know comes by hearing, God may afford you his Grace to fathom our
depths, if you will promise to lay aside all prejudice while we discourse I Will
be free with you, and then you will see that it stands to reason to side with
us, when you find there can be no danger can reach you if you be with us, if
against us, with what do your very dreams affright you, with Plunderings,
Sequestrations, Decimations, Deprivations, Axes and Halters.


B. And can you fancy if I lay aside all prejudice, i. e. hearken to the
dictates of naked reason, unmixt with fears and interest, your Cause will get
the day?


W. We care not for such a Philosophical lump, no more than for a man of
Clouts; give us one in a Political guise, we should have nothing but old Plato
against Plato Redivivus; what a pother would you make in rooting your passions
out, before you could clear the eyes of your reason, you would take a great
deal of pains to make your self as useless to any body of Men, as your Eunuchs
are to Women, if you design to be serviceable to a party, you must bring your
Tools with you, you will else be accounted a mere Cipher; you must use all the
means you can, to make your self as considerable as may be, you are gone else
into whatever party you list your self, they make baits of better morsels than
you would make your self; come, it is better siding with us, than be set by, and
abused to gratify your enemies, only in hopes to bring them over, or but to
stop their full career; your Principles will be forced to strike sail to their
interest, and you will at last find your self a sacrifice to their malice. When
you understand us better, you will blame your self for holding out so long,
your knowledge of us is like Philosophy, a little enclines a man to Atheism,
but a thorough knowledge in us is a perfect cure. I Will be free, and because I
have time, I Will be the Palavicino in our Cause, give you such an History of our
selves, that you must needs be begged for a Fool, or cloystred for a Madman, if
you stand out any longer.


B. Curiosity (though it was the Mother of the first sin in Mankind) yet I hope
it will not be so fatal to me, I will force nature for once, to see what you so
much boast of.


W. If you then consider first, either our number, our methods to gain, or the
secrecy in our Intreagues, you may find them next to miracles, and as good
arguments for us, as for our Religion in general, and though we list above
three parts of the Nation on our side, as first, some that have been Stagers
from the beginning, then all the brood of those that were Demy-gods in the late
times, and lastly, those that we have wone over by sundry means, yet among all
these, none have ever given vent to the least material project or plot we have
or had in hand.


B. Your Oeconomick Polity is as easy to be seen and believed as 'twas hard to
be prevented.


W. As the case once stood I thought you might as easily have unhinged the
Poles as have done it, but as it is now let me tell you.


B. One question if you please how it is possible for you to list three parts
of the Nation on your side?


W. You must note, that in our Catalogue are listed not only those that
actually separate themselves from the Church, but those likewise that come but
now and then, to cover the matter, but never except upon extraordinary
occasions, i. e. to serve some religious purpose of ours, (then if
indispensably necessary, or highly useful) they receive the Sacrament. All
these excepting Papists we list in our Muster-Roll, though there be many
divisions and sub-divisions.


B. Yes all the Nation observe these to enter as one man the Lord's Battle.


W. What nothing but passion in one dress or other, you much mistake us for all
that, we can talk and act if we list like other men; but you have got the
humor of a Dialogue Writer, that cannot make two discoursing, but must think of
the Playhouse, turn at once Painter, Tailor, Humourist and Actor, but we can
and do (though not abroad) talk and act as the rest of the world.


B. I believe you, I wonder none of the two Houses upon the late failure of
their best Actors, have not courted some of you to be sharers there.


W. None of us would any more (though our parts lay well for it, and were it
not for one thing our Consciences could digest it) take such a place than we
would a Benefice of six score, or eight score pounds per annum.


B. What because the whole Isle is your Theater, and one day of yours is as
good as a Poets.


W. Very true.


B. But how can you tell you list not as downright Papists in your Catalogue
as were in your Armies of old, your Father Cummins as well as your Lambert?
except you think the Saints know the faces of one another, as your Master
Bricklayers do by a private mark, but you had rather perhaps talk though with
blasphemy in the Schoolmens language intuitively.


W. That observation of Dr. Oates's the only thing he has injured us in, was
such an omission of some people that has done us abundance of mischief, but we
easily answered it, by telling that they may herd themselves as well in your
Church as amongst us, witness Goodman of Gloucester, and the Will of a late
Bishop tending thereto, and ^pish adding thereto makes it an unanswerable
Argument. But you have almost withdrawn me from my purposed discourse, from
unravelling some secrets to you worthy to be known.


B. That I would be very loath to do, pray communicate them.


W. Know then our greatest Secrets, they are like Sinon's Pin in the Trojan
Horse, from whence come all our men, armed, if we please.


B. These are certainly rare secrets of more value than the Philosopher's
Stone, and the inventers are sure in greater honor than Columbus.


W. Know then, I say, the fixing our Flying party at the Restoration, our
gathering like a Snow-ball since, our erecting thence an Image as dreadful as
Daniel's, whose hands as well as feet are Iron, are things as glorious as this
age can produce, and more mavelous than that turn in 60, which was caused by
our own fears and jealousies; but this doubtless is the Lord's doing and ought
to be mavelous in the sight of all men.


B. You can I see take the Lions Skin, and lay the Foxes by, when you please.


W. I can be passionate in the Lord's case in God's glory, I can sing that he
had and has almost turned away the captivity of his people, that he has given a
blessing to our head and hands.


B. Come, come, none of these things, we are in private, but how came it to
pass that you so fixed your party at the Restoration, and since so mightily
increased?


W. The Army you know getting the upper hand, and the Independents the Command
there, destroyed the Bird we had in the Cage, we had diverse attempts to wrest
the power from them again, we writ and affixed Manifesto's, we sided with the
Loyalists, we steered it under the name of a Free Parliament, but never could
effect any thing. At last, after we had nothing to trust to, nothing to confide
in, and knowing not where to cast our Anchor, we turned our eyes upon this our
present King, hoping that the disuse of his Coin might have made him forget his
Title, Regnante, and we might have steered in Regente Carolo.


B. What did you expect he should have left his old Friend the Church (as it
was established in his Fathers days) and Loyalists, and have sided with you and
your fancy, did you not rather dread an account of the old Scores?


W. We had some reasons to make us so impudent as not to dread but hope better
things; the Declarations from beyond the Seas, the natural mildness of the
Prince's temper, and the unthought of kindness of our own, that could betray
our elder Brothers in iniquity, when we could not be certain we should save our
selves from the Gallows.


B. Were these reasons weighty enough with you to build so largely upon?


W. These, and the party we presumed for so great a kindness might have the
management of affairs made them weighty with our necessities; at the worst we
had what most of us fought for, (could we make it stay with us) good store of
Cash.


B. But could your imaginations run so high as to fancy such things as you now
wrangle for?


W. I must needs confess our impudence has been growing upon us; we were more
modest then, but since the Religion was once again made Statute, we thought our
Friend might have given a stamp to ours as well as the old one, and though then
we neither did nor dare stand in competition (being glad of a security for what
we had done) with the old Mumpsimus, yet since the Houses of Lords and Commons
had leave to vote them in, we only in all humility request the same privilege
if they will to vote them out again, and then we don't doubt a lucky turn.


B. How did you receive the News?


W. 'Twas the greatest blow that ever was given our Party, and most thought the
Neck of it had been quite broken.


B. Why could you not struggle with death as well under them now, as you grew
up under them heretofore?


W. The case was not the same, we had no open Favorites, no Grandees to
shelter our cause, no privilege to plead against the Clergy as it was then so
lately established, and we had more wit than to think that Act would be like
our late Claret Act, no sooner made but broken by the Legislators themselves,
and which was worst of all, we were made jealous one of another; for to
ingratiate, reconcile, and scar over the old wounds, some among our selves that
were leading men, that were Nurses, as it were, to the Good Old Cause, that
cherished it, and as we hoped would have left it their Heir, were chosen out to
wear the rags of the Whore of Babylon, and we were afraid they would have fell
down and adored the Image, but God left but few to follow these Delusions.


B. What powerful charms did you use to prevent such temptations?


W. We caught them as they caught others heretofore, we tickled them into too
great an opinion of themselves, we set the whole Party to Coakes those few that
were picked out of the Brotherhood.


B. But you did not stop all.


W. No, nor did not desire it, but we made a plea from their departure the more
powerful to stay the rest: For when by their arguing how instrumental they
might be, in shadowing the tender branches that might spring, by watering the
Plants that might thirst; by doing sundry good Offices to the Brotherhood, we
returned that such and such at our instigation had already undertook it upon
that design, that to desire more would render it suspicious, and therefore
useless; we laid before them the whole scene of their lives, their zeal in the
Cause, tho utter ruin of it if they left it, and even they that at first upon
principles of Advantage took to this way, by their following of it so long,
were wedded to so fond an opinion of it, that they stuck to it to the loss of
honor and lucre.


B. You made them trusty Diogenes's, give them their Tubbs and their Sunshine,
and a figg for our Princes Bounty and Grace.


W. I they even turned their Tubbs to the Sun, and had God's blessing too with
it, they kept their Livings and Purses full too, we counter-plotted their
policy which was good in it self, but 'twas too narrow, had we All been
preferred the work had been done.


B. As the case then went, on my word, if you had not bestirred your stumps
well, the best mouthed pack, and acu^st nose-breed in England, had been in
greater danger to be lost, then the race of Jennets in Charles the fifth's
Reign was on the Coast of Africa: Well, thus I see you fixed your Party, how
canie you so vastly to multiply?


W. That is God's blessing upon our poor endeavors, it is he that gives the
increase.


B. I wish he had given a greater out of the Act of Indemnity.


W. You are Violent again, but I Will tell you, it is evident it is a sign of God's
taking delight in us, that he so multiplies us; at the Creation he spoke to
man, to the beasts and fishes, and gave them that blessing; and after his
scourging the World by a Deluge, and satisfying his wrath, he returns this
blessing in his love, Genesis the 9th and the 1st and the 7th, and accordingly
they did. Now we find when this Land was scourged, and God returned in his
love, we have since mightily, nay, marvellously increased.


B. Have a care, you are now running to China, Japan and the West Indies, to
the Papist Argument, The Most Universal.


W. No, no, pray mistake me not; I do not mean as that Babylonish Crew do, they
brand their Whore in the forehead with it, that the world may know her by it,
we only take it as a pledge of God's Love to the Godly.


B. For once I will not (though I justly might) be severe upon your meaning; but
do you use no means, don't you set your shoulders to the Cart-wheel?


W. In Good troth, we have not been wanting to our selves to work us out a
Party, and that by sundry means.


B. As how?


W. The first step was accidental, and even beyond our hopes much more our
expectations; for you must know in our days we had so anew modeled the face of
All things, that had an old Elizabeth Reformer arose from the dead, he would
have star'd as much about him as Father Adam would at our Buildings, Clothes
and manner of Living, we had coined words before, and at, our coining of money,
that were known to none but the Saints, and they had quite in sacred matters
through disuse unlearnt all others, besides and moreover, they were to be
spoken in the true Accent, else, as unintelligible too as the Notes of Birds
and Beasts, to these we superadded some artificial faces, and the inarticulate
language of sighs, the female (...), with some tenets of Divinity of the same
date, so that we seemed if not as we told them a New-Ierusalem, yet I Am sure at
the least a New England; having seasoned them thus for many years, when those
came back from beyond the Seas, with the King, or that lay fishing here in
Coverts, with the old English Dialect, began to appear upon the sacred Stage,
all that they said or could say seemed to be as strange as themselves, they and
their Congregations seemed to be Barbarians to each other, and the latter, not
being able to wean themselves from the prejudice of Education, Ebbed to us;
thus we found our hands in a short time full enough, we took then sweet counsel
together, how to evade the Act for Renouncing the Covenant, that seemed to be
as fevere as the Ordinance of God, that was made against the Children of
Israel's going into the Land of Canaan, for it was to continue three Lives in
Law, we therefore Resolved not to continue Jews, wander without a Government,
but effected one according to the old Form, got Imperium in Imperio, we
borrowed a little piece of Policy (God wot) of those that since have copied out
a great deal from us: We followed the example of the outed Bishops in the late
times, who fearing the whole Set might be worn out, they designed to Blow more
over the Nation, well knowing their neighbors the Romish Church would never
let them have a Breed again. But it had been well for the Church and State if
it had so Luckily happened.


B. But you were not in probability driven to those straits, thanks be to your
neighbors, you might have had them, have swarmed round about our Coasts, like
shoals of Herrings, from almost all the four Quarters, from New England,
Holland, France, Savoy, Germany, Poland, Switzerland, Denmark, Swethland, at
least from your Sister Scot-land, and some fine dainty, breeders from your old
Damm Geneva.


W. Do you think should the Spaniard be so impolitickly kind, as, upon a
general rot of Sheep here in England (which God forbid, for then I fear we
should want our clothing) to return our imprudent kindness with a breed from
Spain, they would till some considerable time relish our turf; No, no, it is
best securing some of our own if we can, and that we thought the truest policy.


B. But what art do you use to get a new brood?


W. Even the same that was used to gain us; We tread the same steps our
Forefathers trod in, and like the famous Horse Courser before Plato, make the
race be run in the same steps, We play the old Dog over again.


B. I don't suspect your art of ducoying, but pray your methods you use?


W. In short I Will tell you, though you know we have men of great Fortunes and
Estates, that are pleased to espouse our Cause in all ages, yet if you will
observe, you will find we have never a Gentleman in our whole Class of
Teachers, as godly as some Lady-mothers pretend to be; the Popish Ducoys have
got one Baronet, and some very few Cadets, but the most part are just like ours
the Sons of the Proletarious Mechanics, the highest we can arrive to is the
Son of a Shopkeeper, whose Interest grew by his Religion, and thinks he shall
secure the former the better, if he makes his Son a Prop and Leader of the
Party.


B. But what Education do you give them?


W. We take them piping hot from their Mother's Milk in their untainted
innocence, send them to a Conscientious Sober Schoolmaster, to one that knows
their Mothers, where they sha'n't learn to be Idle, to Steal for others, grow
up to Drink, and even whilst Children as 'twere to lose the precious Jewel of
Modesty by Wenching, as they do in most Free-Schools.


B. You have copied out Julian's project in disguise, but this is too mean to
bring on your Cause; What farther Education do you give them, do you not send
them to the University?


W. No, no; We tell them they will suck in there nothing but Tobacco, Ale,
Arminianisme and Popery; and they so soon run off their bias there as no one
can imagine, they prove Reprobates as soon as they can make a Syllogism, which
make their Mothers almost out of opinion with the Prayers of the Congregation
which were put up at their expense for them; the first time they come home, we
can never see them with their short Cloak and little Bible under their arm,
they tell their Parents they have taken an Oath to the contrary, non interesse
Conventiculis: Oh profane, wicked, antichristian, abominable Sanction, and if
we come to discourse them we may as soon convert a Syllogism as them.


B. How do you do to instruct them in the Arts and Sciences?


W. We are even with their Statute De non intrandis Conventiculis, and make
bold to profess Logic and other University trifles at Stamford, or any where
else, even to the designed prejudice of those two Nurseries of Debauchery; in a
word we have erected Academies, where people don't serve such a slavish
Apprentiship to the Arts as they do in the Universities, and where those that
design the painfull-preaching-Ministry are brought up as the Dutch Physicians
do their Novices by the hand, carry them about with them, teach them how to
handle the pulse of their Patients the Auditory, and for the first Fee instead
of preferment, help them to a zealous Sister, well-flesh't in the Purse, and
the Promise of a Reversion of Dr. such a one's Church, or Dr. such a one's.


B. You do it seems with your Congregations as some Captains do with their
Companies, raise them and then merchandise 'em off, but do you think if the
Universities should or could unbend the bow, not tie up the youth at sixteen to
take the Oaths, but then when they take a complete degree, do you think the
Universities would not fill more and the Dissenters be fewer, 'twould break
your Academies, and your Beyond Sea trade too, Doway and St. Omers would find a
great decay in Trade. But these are but projects.


W. But then I Will tell you what are and are not projects; i. e. some Canons of
yours designed to be binding, but are made mere empty air by the disuse, which
makes sufficient provision for the two Universities, that like the Rivers
though they come from the Ocean, yet send as great a stock back thither again,
that Canon that commands every Parsonage endowed to the value of -- to make
such a proportion to poor Scholars for so long, would stock the Universities so
much, if put in practice, that Pluralities might find Curates at the rate
current of their Forefathers; i. e. Welsh price current amongst us 20 Mark and
a License (not to marry, but) to sell Ale, but our old enemy Laud, though a
grand enforcer of Church tricks and knacks in other cases, foresaw what a stock
we got by such Cattle, and designed a retrenchment scarce to be thought on, to
have rooted them in a manner quite out, for under the rose, 'twas from thence
we first had our store, and it is through our means, so many little sprinklings
of Charity, as so many little (...), store among your greati Channel, which
running but a little while makes the^^ (...) to us.


B. You have sufficiently, I thank you, given me a character of the birth and
parts of your Pastors, the meanest I find of both in the Nation, but I wonder
at your art of Ducoying Proselytes.


W. You may well wonder with the whole world, and that is part of the secrets
I Have been so long disclosing, how it is possible we should so spawn (I mean for
the vastness of the increase pray no other wise so few years, when the other
party thought we might be well enough content, if we did as the Moors would
have the Tangerines, keep what we had encroach't and not endeavor to enlarge
our bounds.


B. But you were too skillful Engineers to samely acquiesce.


W. The Act of Renunciation I talked of before was quick silver to us and
though we make no bragg^ of it, we now and then chop upona piece of policy,
that taught us Non: Progredi est Regredi and weighing well our circumstances,
we knew to our cost 'twould be so in our case: We kept therefore that mystery
of trading still on foot, and would by no means let them dishand, (and you must
know in trade it is not an easy thing to knock off a settlement on the sudden)
but we the more viggorously hurried on their effects that way land so mightily
thrived, that in a short time, as we have seen by these blessed effects in our
days we have poisoned (as they say) the Corporations of England; we never
bought of any people but our Party, but sold to any of what Tribe soever, for
there were our gains, and I think we have so strengthened our Party with wealth
and multitude, that they not only awe, but are able to conques the whole
Country, any if the Pilgrims should come from Spain, and the black Bills
appear, we should easily though our Walls are down, more than make our party
good with them, and if by chance or otherwise the King should dye before the P.
Duke, we should command the Grown upon the head or heads of whom we pleased.


B. But what if one or two wealth Corporations should be burn to the ground in
the scuffle for the Crown for example sake, and proclaimed security and
immunity to those that would depart do you think it would not make more take
Aprons than did at Worcester Fight, 'twould bring you, with an Horse-pex to
you, out of your City Armies.


W. Have a care of giving the enemies such unlucky hints, they are too much
bent to mischief of themselyes


B. Well let that pass, what other ways of increase had you?


W. Many more (...) but at thus when ^e had first fixed the orading part, to
give them and our selves credit we turned Heralds, and summoned in the Country
Esquires, that we knew heretofore bore no ill will to our Party.


B. That was an overt act of your treasonable designs you intended, and thought
so lately to perfect, but were you not afraid of coming within the Statute of
Treason, and making for feit of your late Act of Indemnity, how if they had
discovered you?


W. No danger of any such thing, and if they would have done so it had
signified nothing, we began by degrees, by sly insinuation, severe remark,
witty little Lampoon, and so on to larger Libel, thence over a merry glass of
Wine gravely discoursed of Offices at Court, remarks of this miscarriage or
that, then the haughty contempt and pride of such who were lately in a less
eminency than your Worship, not a word against the King, no more than we do Now
in Public, we aimed only at evil Counselors, at last we drew some remarks
concerning the express commands of the supreme power, as have as dreadful
Conclusions as your Comets have Tails, and I am no Astrologer if they portend
not as much as they do: thus we wound up our Instruments again that were
thought safely enough hung upon the Willows; besides these, we had those that
were old Cavaliers that could not relish that Politic Maxim of -- 's in 60
Oblige your Enemies, your Friends will be so still, a great many of these who
were not Sir Hudibrass's Dial, through distaste and want of preferment turned
Cat in Pan, some to be Active, and a great many to profess a Neutrality, that
if their Prince wanted a Sword to be drawn he might find Champions, they had
done enough for their rewards, these were men that promised themselves, what
our Hispaniola Voyage men promised themselves, when they came so off by the
Lee, mountains of Gold, Hoghen Moghen preferments, but our Party by their money
chop't in between them and home; next seeing preferment came by thwarting the
Kings Party and designs, the whole Nation, I mean their Representatives, made
it their constant trade, a great many got it that way, and for the present were
reconciled and highly offensive to us; but afterward being laid by for others
that had the same game to play, they became disgusted and more inveterate than
ever, and these preferments running through so many hands have infected as many
as have parted with them, and we shall have daily more and more come over to
us; the Court is but a Slide, where the followers run at the heels of those
that go before to trip them up, and then they come limping or whining over to
us; besides all these we have those that are true to us as Steel, those that
have been loosers notwithstanding the mild terms of the Restoration, those
that have disgorg'd Kings and Bishops Lands, and this hatred we know remains to
the second or third generation, and so will on.


B. Though some upon these grounds may have disrelish'd the Court, yet how come
you to be befriended by them?


W. I Will tell you, you must know we talk much of Liberty and Property, and the
Laws of the Land; when in truth no one sins against Acts of Parliament more
openly than we do, and God knows few of us have visible Estates, and though at
Elections we make a great cry, and a great many Voices by our busy Activeness
a W. -- for the Lord's sake, yet scarce any one of us has Land enough to give a
Vote, then the Gentlemen would fain be Courtiers, but because that w'ont fadge,
we tell them as cases go within these few years, they or their Posterity will
have so stripped the Prerogative, that they will come to a Venetian State, if not
a downright, upon hits and turns, Commonwealth; then every member of the House
of Commons shall become a King in his District, and the voice of the People
shall be then as the voice of God, they shall set up and pull down, they shall
cleave to and flee from, and who shall say them Nay; they shall compare with
the Roman Senate of old, and shall Outvie the Polish Diet, the Nobility of that
Nation shall but equal a Peasant, and our August Assembly but Gentlemen, if
that, till our Character comes upon them, shall outvie that of Ratisbonne; with
such sugar-plumbs as these, We cajol the Commonalty, and though they think
hereafter to serve their turns on us, we in the interim certainly serve ours on
them, they as willingly as an over-ridden Papist give not only free quarter
but staple allowance to a piece of flesh we send to them dressed up in black,
and they dare not deny us.


B. How so?


W. They know that in a working Party, those only or at least at first are
looked upon in a change of times, that have been active or encouraging in head
or purse; into their hands as into trusty Patriots the new gotten Liberty is
entrusted, and to bear a good will and not to lend an helping hand, is as good
as to sit down and be content with their old Game.


B. Are these the Motives that make you so expensive in your Religion? that
make you muzzle the Ox that treads out your Corn, that your Ass may feed;
that make you break the Laws of the Land and of God too, and be guilty of
little actions Peasantry blushes at, stopping your small offerings, refusing
your Mint and your Cummin, but offer to your Moloch, your selves, your Sons,
and your Daughters, to go through the fire, hardly to be saved.


W. Soft, soft, do you think though we say Acts of Parliament tie up the hands
of the Prince, that ^hey are, binding to the Almighty your Religion as to the
form or ^dus of worshipping is Statute, other wise the same with ours.


B. Our Parliament is not so Omnipotent yet, there lies an obligation upon such
lumps of earth as you are, and you ought to submit to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lords sake, and in disobeying them you disobey God, and so run the
hazard of your damnation.


W. Soft too there, we do not disobey the Laws, but if Laws are made that are
burdensome to the interest or Conscience of those that are obliged by them
these Laws are to be endeavored to be removed; now the Canons, Liturgy, and
Hierarchy established by Laws, are against both our Interest and Conscience, we
therefore have all along endeavored to remove them, by Apologies in Q.
Elizabeth's Reign, by courting the Grandees in favor or out of favor, we are
and have been in stant in season and out of season, finding no Redress there,
we have even put our selves upon our Country, that should constitute the grand
Assembly of the Nation, we have All, I mean the greatest part of them at our
beck, their hands ready to repeal them, and this is all that we did, we broke
not the Laws but have endeavored all this while to have them repealed.


B. This is beyond most Arguments I have heard: but what further method have
you used?


W: When our Quartermaster General had planted over the Nation those Indigents
that wanted bread into some Gentlemen's Houses, those of the Country that were
well affected came in with presents and complements to his Worship, extolling
his charity and goodness, intimating to him how glad they should be to give him
a visit when the time of the spiritual repast should be.


B. And did they come for all the Acts of Parliament?


W. Come, I, and into the Houses of those that were Justices of the Peace too.


B. That is as cunning a trick as the Jesuits and Priests, putting themselves
into the Gaols for Debt to avoid being sent there for Treason, but does no body
find them out?


W. It Is impossible, who dare come there to search? next the doors being kept
shut, the Females, for you must know most are so, come to pay a visit to the
Lady, and the Clowns their Sons or Husbands are their walking sticks.


B. But it is impossible that sham can last for such shoals as must be their
Guests.


W. That is a manifold mistake of yours, you don't aright conceive the thing,
there come not very many at a time, and their Worships Chaplain entertains them
at a cheaper rate than your Archbishops and Bishops Chaplains do their Lords
Guests after Dinner: next, should you come one. Teaching day you would not find
the same faces the next, except a few Neghbours, for (...) do as your Beggars,
the blind and the lame exchange, in the morning at such a stand you shall find
a Blind man, in the afternoon at the same a Lame, this Sunday we are at this
House, next Teaching day at that.


B. Can no one trace your steps?


W. I know no one dare, we are more dreadful than your Banditi, if we find any
to dog our doings, we certainly turn back and ruin him, and let me give you
good advice, never concern your self with us, for we shall haunt you worse than
a Spirit, or an ill Conscience, your very shadow shall not be so constant an
Attendant on you; as the Spies we shall set to observe your motions, and from
the least glympse of things, raise reports upon you, and we shall not spare
dirt but throw enough, that some may be sure to stick; and though we have no
recourse to Wakeman's Poison, or Pickering's long Gun, yet we can Godfree a man
a 100 miles distance, and bring that which is worse than death to him, Want,
Scandal and Misery; ruin him in his Fortune, blast his good Name, and make him
an object of pity, as we made him of hatred, and he shall find as great a
defect in one, as he has had excess of the other.


B. What a miserable condition then are those in that have the Cure of Souls
where you are planted, who ought to be the discoverers to your old and new
devices?


W. That is according as he behaves himself, if he does not thwart any known
Doctrine of ours, preaches not up Allegiance to supreme power in all and every
case, either actively or passively, nor magnifies in a set Speech the Church,
as it is now established, for the best in the World; if he reflects not upon
the late Times, but has got a good knack of laying and resolving all Rogueries
upon Priests and Jesuits, why then he may have a good word or two from us, but
not so much as shall do him any good; but if upon a thirtieth of January, he
shall father the late Rebellion upon the Consult of Jesuits held at Paris, and
our Jewish usage of the Papists as a consequet Judgment from God; if he shall
wipe off Land's blood from the Brethren, by a just Judgment of God for not
revealing his intelligence (when we had seized his Papers) he had from Andreas
ab Habernsfield, and shall own that we Presbyterians brought in the King, out
of our mere good will, and not that we lent an helping hand against our will,
and upon a forced put, then he shall be Cater Cosen with us all the year after;
the Universities may give Degrees and make Judgments upon laudable Sermons, but
it is we that fix the Characters in the Country. We can plant in Wildernesses,
make barren places fruitful, can make again fruitful places desolate; we can
lay waste more than Goth, Hunn or Turk.


B. You talk certainly at random; do as Alexander did in the East, leave marks
of bigger Men, Horses and Armor (to write his own History in Capital Letters)
than were in Reality. How can you that sneak with your Tail between your Legs,
hide your Head if you meet with any honest Face, play such Spiritual Bullies,
as to frighten whole Parishes, scour Churches, when ye are as afraid of coming
into one as the Devils themselves are.


W. Good words, Sir, we have those that are Dissenters in Mafquerade, Spiritual
Mummers, that dance to our Fiddle, while they are in your Church, that are the
Spies and Informers to our Party, that shall cog, fawn and cringe, as if they
were just adoring you to make you their Pope, but shall no sooner turn their
backs, but shall mouth you, and could spit on you, and I will tell you under
the Rose, there is never a Parish in England, where any outed Minister has
planted himself, but he has above three parts of the Parish (where he lives) in
a string, and large Contributions from his neighboring Villages, so that not
only the Incumbent, but his neighboring Brethren about him, rise or fall, as
they chance to consent to, or oppose our Doctrines: by these ways we have
wrested in effect a Toleration from the Ministers, though we cannot from the
King; and if the Bills for Comprehension or Toleration should never pass the
upper House, or not be Signed, yet, thanks be to God, and our selves, we are in
a hopeful way of living and thriving, and we lately so much awed those
Ecclesiastical Hectors, the Tantivy Prerogative Blades, that they talked no big
words of censuring, throwing our moneys as the Primitive Christians did
themselves at the feet and pleasure of their Sovereigns, though they should be
Heathens or Papists, Thompson's case pretty well cowed them; we had the
Cudgels, in a manner, once in our own hands, they could then change their
notes, and think peace and unity a precious thing had we got the better, and
when we do, we shall remember the Furca Caudina, they had better at first have
made us Brethren, or have choked us in the Cradle, their middle way of taking
away our Spiritual Armor, silencing, and shaming us, we shall sufficiently
revenge upon their heads.


B. How came it to pass they let you younger Brothers so much overgrow them,
why did they not keep you under when they had you?


W. By a sort of childish art we wheadled them, we made a hideous noise and
squeaking, whenever they came, though but to touch us, and talked much of
persecutions, roared out as if we had been stabbed, when they came but to
cleanse our heads of the vermin that had got, and eat into them; thus we
shifted our selves out of their Clutches, and when we had once gathered
strength, we kept them off at distance, with partees and discourses, till we
got further strength; at last we brought them to think it safer to let us
alone, and not to venture to struggle with us: thus we came to be upon even
terms, but 'twould amaze you to guess the bold methods we used to take place of
them, never daring and life-despising Hero charged so boldly and homely as we
have done, we not only got fo(...)ing, but a more glorious though underhand
peace than the Tangerines had, a cessation from all Acts of Hostility on the
Moors side, and a leave to fortify and cast up what Bulwarks we please; to
tell you nothing but the plain truth, we have got such advantages scarce to be
paralleled; you know since the Restoration we being losers, were so much
humored as to have leave to speak, that is, I mean the Law was not taken of
us, if we did vent our gaul, did beblacken the Lawn Sleeves and Rochets, did
limit the raging Prerogative, did bespatter the Church of England as an
unlick'd Cub of Rome, but we have more wit, we are not so impolitickly kind, we
brand their discourses with the term of Railing if any but tells us never so
little of our own, and if they preach nothing but downright History; we
threaten them with the Act of Indemnity, and we make their own Patrons desert
their cause, and their honest endeavors are more likely to meet with a check
than a reward; so that now a days we are as safe in all points as in
Predestination, Free Will, etc. prohibited by Proclamation, a silly Tool that
did our work, stopped the mouths of our Enemies from injuring us, but not ours
from injuring of them, but we don't only employ our time in obstructing
others, playing the Duke of Anjou's Cow, beshit the fingers of those that go to
pull us back by the Tail, but we are all active, we have of all sorts and sizes
to draw over to our party; as we have ways to set the Diocesans against the
minor Clergy, little stories to fill their credulous ears with, so we have an
art to alienate their affections from them.


B. Their obedience (though not blind) is too well fixed.


W. Never trust me if we had not gono near to have done it, I have seen a
piece, but the water leaving us so fast we shall not launch it now, that would
have done much toward it, we want nothing but to blow up their Affections, and
then we shall have abundance of pains saved us.


B. That you would never have accomplished; which way would you have attempted
it?


W. We had ripp'd up their own Canons, made by the Ruling Clergy to them, shown
how, and what burdens they laid upon the shoulders of the weak Brethren, and
that they touch them not themselves with their little finger, bawled them all
into practice, and made it a great deal worse than the last-discontented
Clergyman did; you must have been perfect Spaniels had we shown you all, and
yet have sawn'd.


B. I don't find any of you leave either your followers or your ways for seeing
the Whipping Stocks, Bridewell, the Pillory, or the Gallows.


W. If we could have got none of them over, yet howsoever we can, though with
greater pains, gain or keep the vulgar in their fidelity to us.


B. It Is half a miracle to me, they are so deaf to sense and reason in matters
of Religion, and so quick at all other things, that they can so readily cheat
themselves in Religion, and others in all manner of Trade, but the wisdom of
this world overrules that of the other.


W. Mankind has much brute in the inside, and vanity and pride are so essential
to Nature, that a man may play the Solomon and make his judgment thence, as
well as he did from the love of Parents; besides, what may be a great cement,
we write much often, common, obvious, plain stuff, give them the most winning
vulgar names we can think of, in the Title page, enstrange 'em with new thought
of words, the Dialect of the Party, by that means, if any attempt to write upon
the same subject, though ten times better, they will dislike it, because it wants
our words; they can no more understand Divinity without our terms, than a
Tarpaulin can Navigation without his own: but we as tenderly as Papists keep
them from reading any other Books, decry 'em, and they like Children will be
afraid to touch 'em.


B. These are toils set only for proud ignorance, how do you catch your
greater game?


W. If none of our former Stales bring them in, if they will not be brought in
with the kind bonds of interest and love, we bring them over with the cords of
fear, with the Chain-shot of Popishly affected, and the Stink-pots of downright
Papists we do their work, but this we learnt from our Fathers, but we have a
sure invention now that is more sure and less troublesome.


B. What is that?


W. We have got an art of undermining and blowing up men of principles that we
dislike, and interest we cannot shake or dissolve; we make our whole party side
and complement, even those men in the highest nature, caress them with all
endearments possible, make our selves perfect Spaniels to them, permit none of
our Party to oppose them in Elections, and highly treat them at our own expense.


B. And what do you get or expect from these kind methods?


W. What? overlay them with kindness, hug 'em to death in our arms, our breath
poisons 'em up.


B. You have more Poison in you than the Wench that, it is said, sed on
Aconites, sent to poison the great Conqueror in the East, but how do you
compass that design?


W. Easily, our very siding with any man (though the known friend of Church and
State) renders him suspected by his former party, and then sending some sly
reports widens the breach strangely, and he must be very wary and circumspect,
and older than our selves, if we don't run him into some little absurdities,
that shall give such distaste to his former Party that they shall quite disown
him, so that seeing on whom his interest depends, he must tamely swallow and
disgorge in house our dictates, or else we make three Parties of two, and
infallibly carry the day.


B. Pray explain your three Parties of two.


W. The former Party disdaining to be cast off, Miss makes application to
another, some too strongly obliged by Interest, or Friendship, generously stick
firm to the first, but we not finding him real and able, to and for us, and
having Politickly thus set the same interest at Logger-heads with one another,
make choice, as one man, of one that will go in a string with us.


B. Pray God in Heaven it may be so in his good time, but if man might be judge
the sooner the better, and the more the merriei.


W. Nay, if nothing will bridle your headstrong passion, it is time to break up
our discourse, I Will stay no longer, fare you well.


B. Hanged never flinch now you have just entered me, and would you break sport
now I have scarce whet my Whistle?


W. If civil I Will take the other Dish;


B. How happened it the State did not take some preventive course with you, but
let you run to such a head?


W. They were more understanding than so, the stirring of a little wind would
once have soon fanned us into a flame, we waited nothing else, and all that we
could do could not provoke it, but we thought Fitz-harris's delivery set forth
in a Speech by Sir Formal, would have set the Commons to have delivered their
own, and backed the privilege of the Subjects, what a rare Topic for Oratory
was lost, and as great an opportunity, we cannot expect such another this age.


B. But how do you do to keep the Rabble on your side after such notable
Miscarriages and Rebuffs they have lately met with? I thought they had been
like the African Mahometans, that measure all things by success, and for the
loss of one Battle fly to their Conqueror, and cry God and their Prophet has
forsaken their former Leader; I am sure that was the Doctrine of the Party of
old, and I have heard some use made of it since; what have you got the art of
dismounting and spiking these dead-doing Engines of yours when they can be no
longer serviceable to you, or do you think the resolution of Authority will be
easily shaken? what spirits keep up your hearts?


W. You talk too fast and too much, (the subject for all this will scarce bear
it) I know no Rebuffs but the Dissolution of Parliaments; and to tell you
plain, had it not been for the following Declarations, God, had he pleased,
might have made and turned even these for and to our advantage, for we had some
Irons in the fire that had -- had not the Norwich Address been an unlucky
Leading Card, and the other Cities followed so hotly and closely that one City,
pox of 'em all for dancing after L'Estrange's Country and Fiddle.


B. Well, since your Party by all means will have him a Fiddler, he shall be so
for once, but he must be the Orpheus of our Nation, that makes the Stocks and
the Stones, the City and the Country to dance after him; but can you tell how
this notable turn of Times came?


W. I can give a shrewd guess how we came to fail in our undertakings if you
mean that.


B. Yes, yes, that.


W. There is an ancient piece of Policy that gives this counsel, fight not too
often with a Neighboring Enemy lest you teach him your art; if you have been
so imprudent, make a long Truce and he will forget your manner of Fight, and if
you have any sleights he will be to learn them afresh, and you may make him pay
for so doing. This we contradicted, and though we had the same Head and Hands,
and used the same methods we did in Forty, yet the reason why we had not the
same success, was, because we had the same alive to remember and know our
Tricks under our Vizards, had we left no footsteps with the Royal party (but
that we have enough) we could not have missed of success; it is but exactly
copying out these methods (and buying up all footsteps from the others) and in
less than a Century success will attend their actions, never doubt the Recipe
--


B. Don't you begin to dream of the Laws of the Land being put in execution?
what if they should, and be farmed out too?


W. The first indeed we are too apprehensive of, but the last makes us merry,
we would all come to Church then and break the Farmers; and if the Laws should
be ordered to be put in execution, I know more than one Justice of the Peace
that say, that they are the men that are to put the Laws in execution, and they
have, they say, as much power to suspend them as his Majesty himself, and if
complaint should chance to be made against them, if they have but a majority on
the Bench on their side, they will fear no Fine themselves; but it is a thousand
pities the Justices are not for life, it is worth the Parliaments taking notice
of, and addressing for it, then I knew what brave things might be done, could
we but get but that, the Judges to be for life; or the Election for
High-Sheriffs in the power of the Country, we should then have perpetual
Tribunes.


B. Any or all would do less harm than Authentic Copies published of the
Privileges of Parliament would do good; dare you exchange one for the other?


W. As I have no Commission, so I dare not trust my own Judgment in the case,
but I am sure the last is of vast use, and would be of such secret service, as
I cannot fathom; but I hope they will not be so severe as you seem to talk,
whilst there is a Plot, such zeal would be mistim'd, we must still be against
the common Enemy.


B. You have too long cullied the Nation with such moderate Principles; sit pax
in diebus nostris, has ruined the Church and state as much in these days as in
King James's; why should not we imitate the Principles (though seemingly)
dangerous of A. B. Bancroft in 88. when he so swing'd the Brethren, or A. B.
Laud's, when the head of this Plot (according to our late Evidence) came first
to light, is there any necessity Extremes in Church and State should be like
two Buckets in a Well, no sooner one down but the other up? If any thing undoes
us, 'twill be our mildness, follow but the blow and there will be no danger;
let the Dutch pull their Dams up, and see if the raging Sea will not break in
upon them, and ruin every Mothers Child; our Laws are our Ramparts, our
Justice is our Dykes, our People moved with the Northwind of Phanaticism, are
more mad than the Sea, and more bellowing than the Waves, pull but those up,
see if they will not overrun King, Priest, and all things.


W. I suspect your courage, you are so brisk upon a little success, stay and
see what may happen.


B. We have staid long enough; your only desire was to put your selves (though
not upon God yet) upon your Country, and formally to stand the shock of a
Trial, which Country have found you guilty, what can you say why Judgment
should not pass upon you, why the Laws of the Land should not be put in
execution against you, and every one of you?


W. I, when a Jury of the Country is lawfully called, (not when they thrust
themselves upon such an Office) that is, when the Parliament is called then we
will Safely stand to a Trial; you will not, I hope, call a few the
Representatives of the Nation, a few Grand Jurymen, picked and culled by the
Sheriff, who you know is chose by the Court, then a parcel of Inland Stuff
Merchants, that throw their words as lavishly as their hands and legs, and
think to make us the Shuttle-cock, but we will remember their Stuff, we will
tooth and nail, if we have ever any more Parliaments in England again, the next
Session put in a Bill for wearing Cloth half the year; we will build up our
little Sisters Taunton-Dean, Worcester, and the Stroud Watermen, they shall be
able to o're-top your Stuff-Merchants, and then we shall make them as humble as
their Address, but notwithstanding these Hogen-Mogen doings of Grand Juries,
Corporations, etc. a small parcel of men, that have too much cowardice and
covetousness, to make good either Article of their new Faith, and we have still
the main Body of the Nation, thousands and ten thousands that never have, nor
will, submit themselves, and bend their knee to Authority, managed by Popish
Counsels.


B. This is very mysterious, now and then, when you please, a Westminster Grand
Jury shall be the voice of the Nation, but no heed given to any other; and the
majority of a Corporation shall then speak the sense of the whole Town, but at
other times shall scarce have leave given them to speak even for themselves.


W. 'Ill give you the Test how you shall know, whether they speak for
themselves alone, or for their places their purses, not their heads, give them
the preeminence in?


B. How?


W. If the same number of God's and the King's people walk in the ways, and
frequent the places of worship, which the profane call the Conventicles, as did
heretofore, then it is an evident sign that these, nor none of these, are
included in the Addresses, or come over, but the same number, etc. walk in the
same ways, you know what follows.


B. And what follows if the same number do, the Nation is or may be as safe;
as long as they keep the power of the sword in their own hands, it is not only
the Papists houses may be searched for Arms, but any others, and all taken
away, except what necessary for the trained Bands, your stock of Arms bought in
at Fairs at the beginning of the Plot for pretended fear of the Papists, should
the State look to it, would not be such scare-crows, or if taken away no such
oppression, when the time was once known that a Malignant could not carry a
Knife in his Pocket, to cut his meat (if he had any) for fear he should be up
in Arms with it.


W. How, sease our Arms (our last and only hopes) whilst the enemy is in the
three Nations, whilst there is a Plot, this is to unbutton our Collars, hold
our hands, and let the Papist or the Spaniard do execution to our throats, I
dread the death of a Spanish Grandee, methinks hanging, drawing and quartering
in a good Cause is dying on a Feather-bed to that.


B. Since you seem to like that sort of death better than living in quiet, why
did you not choose it twenty and odd years ago? you were ripe enough for it
then, why did you desire to leave your Leaders so basely in the lurch, and at
once the Hangman too? but I find by your wincing where you are galled, and
where your hopes were when you gave out so many challenges to the Government,
let that begin to suppress Conventicles if it dares, by the Lord, they knew who
would make an end, but we find you are now matched, and his Majesty has a
greater Lifeguard than only broken Citizens, men that will stand by him with
their Fortunes too.


W. I, when I see that once, when the 40 or 100 thousand pounds come, then I
shall think them in earnest, and not look upon them as managed by your great
Noblemen and little Clergymen, but now they are filthily managed, and have
words put into their mouths, contrary to their own interest, and then any one
may safely swear contrary to their sense, as if the City of Oxon could speak
any more their minds in their paper Address than they could in the
Presence Chamber, when they went to give the King thanks for the Dissolution of
the last Parliament, such shameless Hypocrites, Credat Judaeus Apella, Non Ego,
they were made to do it in a politic sense of having him there again; Come
come, things are not so much off the hooks as some may imagine, and though now
we don't talk much because 'twould prejudice our Cause, there was and is a time
for that and all things, we act the more.


B. Dare you further diselose your Secrets, you must before you Proselyte me:
What are your methods?


W. Several, according as occasions and circumstances vary, and because the
greatest Argument the Papists used was their certainty of a Revolution of
times, and the incertainty of acceptance should they refuse the Scepter held
out, I Will be as kind to you, and show you such a Scene as shall satisfy you
which way the wind is like to blow; I can bring you incognito to our Smects of
Policy, where you shall see a Scene far better than our Discourse, toward the
building you up in the Faith and Fear of the Godly.


B. If you have got any Curtains to cover or hide me in, or a peeping hole, no
danger, but if I must pass under the sanctified name of an Obedias, Tobias, or
so forth, my face will want choke, and I shall look too plump, a month with a
Sister will sanctify my looks into the Brotherhood.


W. Come take no thought for that, we have your whispering places as well as
those of old, Gloucester is not the only hole in England, follow me but be sure
to stand close.


B. I beg your pardon, I shall hear some Treason, and be kept by you so long
from disclosing till I am made guilty of misprision; I begin to suspect your
extraordinary kindness, thrown on one that can no way, not desires any to merit
it, pray how have I deserved so ill at your hands, as to be thought so well of
by you as to be trusted?


W. I Will tell you the truth for once, which is rare with us: you are in those
unhappy circumstances that have caught many, you have made some observations on
us, enough to undo you, there remains nothing more now but to proceed and know
our utmost, and side with us if not downright in a perfect activeness, yet in
a sly underhand covert acting, or at least in a professed neutrality.


B. Are you altogether such bug-bears as you make your selves; cannot innocence
be a rampart?


W. A mere bauble, there are no ramparts able to withstand our undermining, we
have got the new art, the Dutchmen don't exceed us, we run on and turn your
own Cannons against you, and make your own Engineers be your Executioners, but
for once come and see our methods.


B. Since you are both ways so dreadful, I Will try for once your kindness.


W. Come -- stand close.


Enter Smectymnus Junior, J. O. R. B. T. C. R. G. P. H. -- -- with a train of
many other Superintendents, Messengers, Spies, Coyners, and Improvers of
Stories true and false. J. O. Brother, this day I as willingly resign up my
Chair to the good Conduct of that Spirit that dwells in you, as with regret
once I resigned up a place that gave me opportunity of showing forth that
Talent of Utterance God had so signally endued me with, though but in the
language of the Beast, but now I shall endeavor to quench that gift of the
Spirit, (though in good faith) it even boy leth within my breast, and longs
even with the longing of a Woman to breath forth upon the Sons of Men, but now
it behooves us to act, and not to let the light of the day go down upon our
words, with the Kiss therefore of Charity I enstate you in the name of the
whole people of the Lord, this day to be our Governor, and to take the
Proposals that may tend for theirs and our good and God's glaury; and consider
from whence this honor accrews unto you, not so much from your own worth as
from the mere grace of God's people, remember therefore, to whom you must give
an account when the day is spent and the night comes.


R. B. That this honor in this venerable Assembly so soon returns to me again,
I must acknowledge God's hand in directing your hearts, in pitching upon me, as
a man that have not shown my self (I thank God) obstinate to any thing but
Monarchy and Episcopacy, I have bore so great an indifferency, that, at one
time or other, the whole people of God, of whatever opinion, have been sensible
of my Charity to them; and this now like true Charity, thrown on the face of
the waters, returns into my own bosom again, for I find the choice of me
(nemine contradicente) as an expedient to restrain our divided Interest, from
swerving from God to the Church Prelatical; I thank my God I still see the
purity of Discipline kept up amongst us, as well as his pure word, that we have
our Meetings like the Apostles, and first fruits of the Gospel, the first
converted, notwithstanding the rigor of the Governor, and his Laws, and those
that would make both worse, and that we still enjoy an underhand Government,
and that we still keep what our Forefathers got in the sweat of their brows,
Imperium in Imperio. But how long our Kingdom though not of darkness, yet in
darkness, will remain, (He that set it up can best tell, for my part I know
not) if we suffer the very foundations to be shaken, and no countermines on our
side; I verily fear and foresee its ruin, and shall timely get me out from
among such desolation as will befall us, if laying aside our private
Animosities, you do not speedily provide for the safety of our Ark, for the
Philistines have even snatched at it, and the people of the Lord begin to turn
their backs, let us the Priests that bear it stand stiffly to it, and let not
God and his Glaury be ravished from us, and we be made e're long no better than
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto it. It Is to be confessed I was too
short-sighted in Politics, and too ungovernable in refusing the advice of him,
that can see through a glass objects in State too far removed from our eyes
naked and unexperienced, and that I did perfectly draw this War (that has so
shaken our Foundations) upon our heads, but it was not without your advice, aid
and helping hands; in repelling it therefore I shall desire the same, and let
this be our first business.


R. G. Besides that my fears have been too true, I have often told you 'twas
dangerous to let the vogue of the world so highly run upon one man.


T. C. Why would you not be pleased timely to prevent such mishaps, and let the
Gentlemen of invention play a Bull-dog at him, now it is too late, how many
early buds have they nipp'd! they are the very Frosts in May, and like your
last May Frost, will make an Oak hang his ears, if they take him whilst his
tender buds come forth, they are of the race of those that sent the golden
mouth Doctor S. Chrysostom to dye and be starved abroad, for a crime of their
own inventing and making, Adultery; however, to stop him in his career, let us
(to give the Devil his due) own his ingenuity; how well verst he is in
Controversies, but insinuate withal, he mispends his time, the Controversy
between the Church and us has been as well handled before, that he might employ
his time better in declaiming like his Brother T -- upon Virtue and Vice, that
he preaches but ordinarily to his Parishioners, never minds but an
extraordinary Congregation, the King's Chapel, S. Margaret's, or before the
Lord Mayor; these things will alienate the Affections of his Parish, and we
shall have them in time complain of him for idleness, perhaps insufficiency.


J. O. This may be done but not as from us, but cannot we Halloo him at the old
Game the Papists, let us counterfeit a piece, do you think he will swallow the
Gudgeon.


R. G. I, if any one has cunning to write it, but he will certainly smell it
out; If we should start a subject that should raise his blood (that possibly we
might pitch upon) yet we should never aright imitate their smooth periods,
interwove with pretty sophisms, and their vivacity mixed with a seeming
passionate seriousness and extraordinary concern; our stiff easy imitable
style is so far wide that no one so much used to it, as all us are forced to
be, can ever bend his head easily to act their part.


R. B. On my faith, we want our enemies, I begin now to understand the cunning
of our friends at Helm, that would not be persuaded by us to put a period to
the Plot, and cut the Papist off root and branch and so set us up: 'twas not
the cunning of a Prince at first to set a foot two Factions to counter plot one
another, but his interest to damn both, but it is the cunning of one party not
quite to vanquish (only over top the other) lest they should presently be
rooted out themselves, like two Hares, one continually pops before the Hounds
when the other was almost spent, so they preserved one another, otherwise they
had both successively gone to pot, the Plot at this rate will do us as much
mischief as we expected good from it, I hope our swift runners will bethink
themselves in time, and not pursue the Game so hotly, we shall be undone else.


T. C. Had it not been for this Plot he had spent his life in the Wheel, in
running round in the Controversies betwixt the Papist and Reformers, but he has
served us as Captain Drake served the Spaniard, run from West to East and come
home by us when we were gaping after him elsewhere, one would not have thought
he could have so easily shot that little straight that parts us.


J. O. He has perfectly played the Tumbler with us, run round us, played with us
at first, at length he has given us the deadly bite, who could have suspected
Irenicon could have proved Threnicon to us, or Ben Ammi, Ben Oni, and all this
from a City Preacher? the glories of those that are gone before us in the
Faith, are well known to the Saints upon the earth, how they heretofore made
the City Preachers bend the knee, and make boast of the word preached, and to
make them by their often preaching, lay the greatest reverence upon it, and in
a word to act this way (unwittingly) all the while for us, and shall we so far
degenerate from our Forefathers, that awed the City Preachers more than their
Bishop, as to be baffled by one of them? I am ashamed to think it, more (were
we not among our selves) to speak it.


T. C. It Is a strange thing to be thus baffled and from a hand we so little
expected, it makes me begin to believe, what we were often forced because it
made for us, to tell the people, upon Afflictions impending; That there is one
that brings all Counsels to naught when he pleases. How glibly all things ran
even to our hearts content, and now what a rubb our Bowls have met with when we
thought we could not possibly be short, it has put us out of all way too, what
shall we do?


R. G. Do, Copy out a little more Jesuitism, divide the Book, and write an
answer as speedily as may be.


R. B. Haste will do us a great kindness in order thereto, if this venerable
Assembly shall think fit, I have some old and hasty remarks of mine, made a
long while ago against the Church of England, in Vindication of our selves,
whom they style Schismatics, if you shall think fit we will Christian them
with the title of an Answer to St. --, and we all know they will pass with
those we desire they should, our very writing again is argument enough, it is no
matter what we write, buz it abroad Richard has answered it, show them the
Book, and the work is done, the heads of our Party are not Logical enough to
weigh truth, reason, or matter of fact.


J. O. You had best to communicate your Notes, Brother, let us have the
superinspection, send for them.


R. B. I came armed with them, praemonitus praemunitus.


J. O. Why do you think this will do, this is hunting on the File, here is
nothing but what has been in print over and over again, the Letters of our
Press will set themselves if they are not as much worn as the Subject, but our
cause will break even a back of steel.


R. B. Well never fear, if my former Observations hold not I know not the art
of deluding, and besides we shall have this happiness to boot, that there will
be little or nothing said to it, so that our side must look upon it as
unanswerable, and what will win upon them it is pretty well swelled, for ye all
know they look upon the bulk not the weight of reason.


H. I have an humble request to this venerable Assembly, that a Book of mine,
wrote for the good of the Cause, but not vending at all, and there being danger
of breaking (two at once) the Author and Bookseller, may have leave given it
to have the Title Page reprinted and styled, An Answer to S -- --


R. B. This way they will both sell, mine had it not been for that had never
lain by me so long.


T. C. Let them both pass, if we don't give the last blow (though it is so
faintly and weakly, that it hurts not the Adversary) the hearts of our people
will not be kept up.


R. B. Since you have accorded in this great and weighty affair like Brethren:
let us even remember one another and hang together, and fear not the enemy from
without, I leave you my peace and dismiss this Assembly,

Exeunt Omnes.
W. How do you like our proceedings, they were short to day, and they had some
intelligence their meeting was smoked.


B. I wondered at their Conciseness in this affair, considering their usual
notorious Prolixity; but is this All?


W. There was a sign made by the last that came in, who by quality is half Spy
half Coyner, and has double pay, of some notice taken, but perhaps the Rogue
gave us a cast of his last Office; and did it only to get credit, like some
Secretaries of State, that make more Intelligence-mony be paid by thousands
than it cost them, he has lost you the best part of the Scene by much, you
would have seen one come in his Chair, without as much as Livery-man to attend
him.


B. Have you any such person that comes in a Chair to you?


W. I, One that is very infirm, that cannot stir without hugging his man as much
as the Cause, one that has shown himself true to us this forty and odd years,
though now and then for ours and his own interest he pretended to be otherwise,
but of these late years he has been strangely much our Friend, we do nothing
without his advice, he receives all our Proposals, Intelligences, and manages
all things, returns back his Commands and they are executed, there is no one
comes into the Assembly without his Approbation, and he is strangely suspicious
whom he trusts much, did you see him but walk you would swear he durst scarce
trust himself, he does not let one leg leave the other an inch, for fear the
other should be left in the Lunch; after this you would have seen a pleasant
Scene, a sort of men set, the discourse of your Coyners and Improvers, as if
they were to Act in the Duke's Theater, they read to them on their own
Subjects, and limit them how far they may proceed without incurring the danger
of the Law, it is their business to noise abroad several little boldnesses, as
that I wear my Hat by the same title and as good as the King wears his Crown,
by the Laws of the Land, by the first we gain a disesteem to the King's Crown
and Dignity, and reverence to our own Coxcombs, this way we teach men to
depreciate Majesty, and to exalt their own horns.


B. And what is the worst of all they think what they say, they as little know
time beyond their Year-books and Magna Charta, as a rude Indian does Geography
beyond his Feet and Eyes; it is true the Kings wear their Crown by the Laws, the
Laws backing them in it, yet it is as true, Kings of England wore their Crowns
before, and when there were no Laws, and they were made by the Authority of the
Crown, and more for the good and security of our natural Crowns than through
any want in the politic one, and they are to them if any thing like that other
metal in Archimedes's golden Crown.


W. Hold, no further, we shall stop you else, as we do others; we have a way,
that if any but in the theoretick discourse runs the Crown of England up to its
pitch, and tells how fine feathered 'twas before 'twas stripped, we presently
ball they would have it so again; and if they talk of any little Prerogatives,
we run them to the extremities in every thing; what you would fain have him a
King of France, or the Great Turk, send for what moneys he hears you have; nay
more from misinformation, and though they disown any such thing, yet presently
runs into their head that Democratical Hectors saying, I Would stab and kill any
Officer the King should send to command the least hair of my head, and though
we dare not but own, the King can have no High Court of Justice against him,
and should he commit violence he must be turned over to the last Tribunal, yet
they think to escape themselves for downright murder: These are the men that
give ground to your Politicians in Coffee-houses, how far they may traduce
Government, and not commit Treason, and one not used to their discourse would
be ready to make Affidavit, that they spoke broad-fac'd Treason.


B. Were my necessities never so great, and my heart never so villainous, I
should not love this trade of dancing upon the High-ropes, I should be afraid
of a slip, and then I am gone, I love to have my heart go with my words, but
not to have the Hangman my Interpreter, but does no one Staly himself, does the
Pitcher never break?


W. No, no, now and then it gets a filthy crack or two, when your Whitehall
Bullyish Captains come to a City Coffee-house, they get a kicking down stairs,
and a broken Rib or two, but they would make them pay sauce enough were it not
for their scurvy Protections, and they Pocket it the quieter in hopes to make
some nimble-heel'd Esquire pay one day for all and make them amends.


B. I perceive then, these Hectors in the Cause are mere Bully-Sandy^, that
will take a kicking if they can but nimm a little money, and your Setters are
men of no practice, that would force some this way, sure these are the Causes
Forlorn-hope and the very Pictures of Liberty and Property; but does not His
Majesty's Honour-Guard, his Attorney General, never meet with these Privateers
and clear the Coast?


W. They are swift Sailers, and His Majesty is not furnished with Advice-boats,
a little Intelligence-money on this side the Narrow Seas, not all beyond them
might do the Jobb, were it not for the extraordinary mercy of a moderate minded
Jury, which we seldom fail to find or make; so that a man were he constrained
to one, had better run the risk of Scandalous words against His Majesty than
against any of his Protesting Lords, and His Majesty would he condescend to
take the Privilege of a Peer (as the House of Lords did to sit in the House of
Commons, when their own House was voted useless) he should (as they did) find
greater respect shown him.


B. A pretty device to Commonwealth a Nation; the point so long desired, and so
long tugged for, (ever since forty) the King to be one of the Three Estates,
would come very easily, how safely then might old* Noll's own Major (remember
Pryn's own Principles and forget his Prince's immunities and rewards to him,
and) send a saucy Message to a Minister that he was out in his Prayer, because
he prayed for the King as distinct (as he is) from the Three Estates, but have
you no more?


W. No more that appear upon the Stage, but we have the Proposals of many
Well-willers, taken in, there read and considered by a select Committee, and
the next Session, in brief ripped up to the whole Assembly, how far useful they
may be to the Grand Cause, in a fine set curt Speech, then in this issue of the
Brain we contradict our other practice, and will not let the Father be the
Godfather too, but the whole Divine Camp Christian it.


B. As the Popes change their names, you give them a clear quite contrary name
to what the subject matter of the Proposals are, as if a Book was writ to pull
down the King, ruffle the Lawn Sleeves, you would call it the building up of
Sion, would you not?


W. The people else would not know what it was designed for, they would be
afraid 'twas Treason else.


B. It Is pity these underhand Retailers of Treason should not be as well looked
to as your Wholesale Plotters.


W. Projectors have ever had the liberty to lay down their Hypotheses, they
enforce none to follow them, people are left to their liberty.


B. And they should taste the fate of Projectors, to be ruined for pitching upon
such Subjects.


W. But we have a way now to ensure our Projectors, we never let a Book
signally calculated for the clipping the Wings of the raging Prerogative, and
excrescencies of Christ's pure Church, but it comes recommended to the great
Assembly of the Nation, the two Houses of Parliament, so that we way get a
general Protection for them, we seldom or never let any Piece (by our good
will) go abroad but about that time, and then they pretty well swarm; we have
some that let fly against this part of the Prerogative, others against that,
and so on; the same method we use against the Church, so that he that compiles
them all together in a Body, will find Monarchy and Episcopacy quite run down
in all their branches.


B. Quite run down in all their branches. -- A modest expression to palliate
broad-fac'd Treason against King and Church, the Government as it is now
established, their writings to me are overt acts of their intentions, (and
though they cannot persuade those they recommend their treasonable projects to,
nor the King himself to Un-crown himself) and H. N. or whoever was the author
of the New Modeled Government, Plato Redivivus, ought to be brought to the
King's Bench Bar with his Papers, as much as Coleman and suffer upon the same
reason, if not upon the same Law, as they are guilty of the same Crime, of
Treasonably designing the Subversion of Monarchy, and the introduction of
another form of Worship: shall Treason fare the better for being barefaced,
and highly recommended to the three Estates? Or is your Treason like to
Wenching grown,
The great and barefaced Sinner let alone;
The Underlings and Modest pay for all,
And these alone are caught because they are small.
They should fare no better nor worse than their Brother Plotters, was I in
authority enough, and your whole Party (dare you own such Treason) should be
made like to the Ten Tribes, were it not that ten hundred to one are as
signally Fools as the other Knaves, that know no more than what is just put
into their mouths.


W. Hold Counselor of Rehoboam, you are too high a flyer, you will have less
thanks than you expect for your pains, did you but know the necessary use that
is made of us, you would not be so hot for destroying poor Carthage; how many
have got preferment in the days of our selves and our Fathers by writing
against us? how many have thought to do it in these days? how many have
thought and think to get Heaven only by pure cursing of us? and how many have
washed, as they think, the Leopard's Skin by turning head against us? how many
fine hot headed discourses would be little worth, were it not for the Leachery
some have to hear us handsomely Billingsgated? do you think the Licenser of the
Press (when time was) by keeping it this way open, does not make it as
beneficial to him as his formerly keeping it shut, only when opened with his
own Key? he is ready to offer money, had he any, to any of us, to write against
him; nay, he is fain to write now on both sides, and what would he do if we
were gone? would we a little while lay our selves fallow we should ruin him,
and the Bishops would be found as an useless order of men; now they get the
good will of some, purely because we bear them such ill will; did we serve them
as Hannibal served Fabius, and as they think to serve us, use no acts of
hostility against us, thereby thinking with their weak policy to get us out of
favor with our own, we should certainly do their work; the very distinction of
Protestant Bishops, (...), made those beloved by the Episcopal Party but from
the Teeth outward.


B. These are such uses as Esquire Dunn made of your Forefathers by Accident, had
it not been for them, it is odds if he had touched grill'd meat or boiled that
day, had strutted the Streets in the Colonels Plush-Jacket, had --


W. Hold, good words, you don't know whose turn may be next; the Multitude
gives force, force gives power, power enacts Laws, and the Laws set forth
Treason.


B. True blue still, you will not flinch an ace from your Priciples, not all the
growth and manufacture of Hemp in England or Norway, will make you recede, but
methinks you might have enlarged your self much upon your Panegyric of the
Good Old Cause.


W. So I had, had you not interrupted me, but now I could find in my heart to
let it alone, had I not left the best behind, and you would imagine I could say
no more for it, but I Will tell you something, from whence you may guess the bulk
we are like to grow to, we have copied out the old Roman policy which bred them
up even from nothing, we make a proclaimed Asylum, where not only men come but
plenty of Women, (we need not play their after-game) they are both game and
stale too for others, and we have some that come to us, let me tell you of none
of the meanest quality, how it does ones heart good to see the discontented
Statesman come reeking in revenge over to our Party, caress the Good Old Cause
(an old cast off Whore) for a fresh Miss, this presents her with all the
jilting tricks and trapans set for her, the other makes Legs and bows to her
followers, if they be but Apprentices out at heels, a third carouses her, and
so each in his way.


B. But this, as they say, will not maintain her.


W. Oh for that, besides all our own poor endeavors, we have some in your
Party that drudge night and day only at last to serve us, that after all their
arts arrive at the art of discontent, who though they don't run downright to
our Conventicles, nor associate with the Brethren, yet their fermented
melancholy has broached such Tenants as are highly useful to us, and one
Renegado you know is of more worth than a Regiment of our own, and were you not
of the same opinion, you would never prefer such ignorant Mumpsimus's as come
from Rome to you, and let your own of ten times the worth be ready to starve at
home, except you do it in policy (lest we should cover our Cause with them,
and) to credit your selves, and could we get but one point, we should not
despair of as good Pillars to our Cause, as stout as Janissaries, as learned
(and after we have quick-silver'd 'em) as able as Jesuits,


B. What doubty point is that you so much long for?


W. There are, you know, now and then in the two Universities, some feuds about
Privileges, decided commonly by the Visitors, who are most or all Bishops,
could we so contrive it, to make them ride the Colleges hard, hold their Noses
in a Cap-stone, we should have them wince and kick, and be for throwing their
Riders.


B. Should the Proceedings be disrelish'd by 'em, and they feel too much of the
Old Man, they would not upon a Pique run over hedge and ditch to you and ruin
themselves, put themselves past all hopes of preferment they have waited so
long for, had they no fixed principles of honesty in them.


W. Preferment indeed, a six score or eight score pound per annum Parsonage is
the Grave of most of them, there they bury themselves alive, their own clots of
Clay pelt them continually, they can never lay them till they overwhelm them
with their own Mould, would they espouse our Cause they need not fear two or
three hundred pounds per annum, besides respect and other things, we had been
with 'em else, and played Mr. Scruple, I faith; you like Fools divest your
selves of that honor due to you, to cloth the Bishops with it, we strip them
and cloth our selves, come, come, the Outliers fare better than the Herd, and
though after a year more, the Pale in part will be broken down, the Act against
the Covenant will be out of doors, yet how few will that bring in; we may, at
first, like those that arose just after our Savior, walk about and appear to
many Congregations, and that way, as it were, preach up what we were sent for,
but few of us will be fixed, we shall like them find our habitations taken up,
and no room for us, that will be as good an excuse for us, as an Act against
us; we were shut out when the Park had Food enough, now it is devoured, and over
stocked, we may graze and starve in it, but we may oblige some Parishes and
Patrons that desire us, and considering our great interest I know no better way
(were I to counsel a Friend) than to Apprentice himself for this remnant of
time to our Party, for to be sure we shall have more to dispose of than we
shall know well to turn our hands to, but our grand Assembly that shall then
meet, will dispose of all things I doubt not to our interest, however we must
swarm then more or less, and I believe we shall imitate things in nature, send
out our young ones with a Leader or so, but the Old Stock ought to remain
behind, perhaps we may take some little City Lecture or other, and put an end
to the contest between the two Universities, send a little Man of God to
out-preach an Army of them, then shall our Cause come in repute again, and be
more glorious than ever; the abused, and therefore discontented Clergy man
finding our interest, shall consult his own, and satisf^ his revenge too, and
shall sue to us as much as they do now to Bishops to be preferred; long
neglected worth shall flee to us as to a Sanctuary, and generously disdain
naked hopes for his Camelion diet, worth though no where seated but in the
fancy, or taking thought but for some small atchievment, if not rewarded for
that, is restless till it takes some course to vent its Gall like the poor
Mariner in Columbus's Ship that first spied Land, because he received no reward
for so blessed a discovery, wreak'd the revenge though 'twas upon himself, and
turned Mohammedan, and there is a way (Divinity tells us) of shooting another
man through ones self; and no one then shall think himself longer bound to
continue a Son, when he has once found the Church has ceased to be a Mother; as
these were the generous Principles that first (in Aerius) raised us up, so they
have continued us, and will yet billow us up higher.


B. You are good Tradesmen in Divinity, and deservedly cry up Faith, as true
Sons of Abraham as the circumcised that now (as their Forefather) entertain
Faith even against, Hope, against all manner of reason; but should the Dice
miraculously favor you, and run once more high on your side, you would I fear
Massacre the Land, and execute what ('it is said) the tenderness of but one
Officer prevented before, the Church of England stands in an Aequilibrio of
danger, and steers it self between the two Gulphs; it is equally dangerous to
incline to this or that, only a Sword is more welcome than a Saw; the Character
of a Committee is as dreadful, nay more, than that of a Popish Successor, the
last wants no language to set it out in the possibility of its raging extent,
and the actual raging extent of the first can be reached by none, the Orators
must do there as your Geographers in Terra incognita, leave a space, and draw
naught but Savage Beasts, unknown to the Woods of Africa, and congealed sighs
and groans like Du Bartas his words under the Pole.


W. These are Bugbears that fright none but Children, but as long as the
Gog-Magog in the North remains the true object of the Nations fears we shall
not easily be made Tools of.


B. But what if those Clouds of Dissatisfaction should be dissipated, and the
object of all your fears should be the subject of an universal joy; and he
should declare himself openly to the World a Protestant according to the Church
of England, by as good Testimonies as the Law requires, what do you think then?


W. I think then none of us either would, or by interest was bound to believe
him; do you think we would have such a cheat put upon us, in a moment to be
outed in all our measures, we would have those that should look through such
fig leaves; we would boldly tell the World he has a Dispensation for it, that
it was no more than what we suspected and feared, we would show them his
cunning in not taking it sooner, only out of hopes to persuade the credulous
World of the reality and sincerity of the conversion, baw^ out there is more
danger now than before, and if ever the fatal blow comes 'twill be when he is
in a better capacity to fool the Nation, and act his own part the securer, pity
the sinking condition of the Nation, when it is only our selves that are so,
and I Would undertake knew I a man of our Party who contrary to his desert, had
the luck to be drowned, could I know it before, I Would easily persuade him
(though contrary to the express promise of God) the whole World was drowning
with him, so far wide of the Mark should we make their Arrows fall.


B. I see you can preach down God's Grace in a trice.


W. That Is our Trade against our Enemies; we should, notwithstanding (such a
turn should it happen) take our own thoughts for truth, and go on in our
Expedients for putting by I. D. of Y. from inheriting the Crown Imperial, did
you never see any? I am sure we spared no pains or cost to spread them over the
Nation.


B. Yes several.


W. How do you like 'em?


B. Like 'em?


W. Why, they are pretty Engines let me tell you, to widen breaehes, to keep
open the Bleeding Vein, they are more useful to us than the Invention of
Gunpowder proved to the Papist, were it not for them and our Champion in the
House of Commons, Expedients would have been hearkened to, and then there would
have been such a calm, that there would be no recreation for us Porpoises.


B. For what is transacted in the House I meddle not with, but as for the
Proposals in general to the Nation, I look upon them as Seeds of Rebellion, and
the groundwork of as many Bloody Noses for Posterity, as ever our Predecessors
had.


W. Which do you fault? there are many.


B. They are all of the same Leaven, nothing but a Medly of Rebellious
Principles to build the Superstructure on, as founding Dominion in Grace, to
the scandal of the Reformed Church, and closing with their seeming Enemy the
Papist, grounding the Origin of Sovereignty in the People, hunting in
after-Principles for Principles of Nature, as Salus Populi Suprema Lex;
interpreting Texts of Scripture by their own Passion, worse than Quakes by his
new Light, assuming the same power God himself used in the Economy of the
Jews, of setting up and pulling down Kings, and in profane Histories, writing
the Originals of the greatest Usurpations to be copied out in our time,
palliating Texts of Scripture that expressly forbid their Madness with
Figleaves, such as Do not evil that good may come of it, they cover it with a
distinction from the Schools unknown to Christianity, of a minus malum against
a positive good: in a word, you will ransack Heaven and Hell to accomplish your
Designs, and after all you are afraid which way to turn him by, lest you should
open a Gap to ruin your selves.


W. We fear not that.


B. Don't you so? let us see by what Authority would you have him turned by, by
the King's alone, or jointly with the consent of the two Houses.


W. By the last, by an Act of Parliament, that is a sure way.


B. But what if you have not his Consent? (or if you have he should repent, and
think himself bubbled out of Three Kingdoms, but we shall injure him in such a
supposition) and the neighboring Nations of the same persuasion you would by
all means have him to be of, (and that may be a cause to induce him to be so)
should disrelish your unequal proceedings, and should rise up against you.


W. Are those the Bugbears? do you think the Protestants are not able to cope
with the Papists? never fear, we would make a Battle Royal for Religion, and
make Europe to be but one Cockpit.


B. But we know there are some that are no Papists, that can disrelish injuries
done to Monarchs, our Trade felt that in Moscovy after our King's barbarous
murder, so that this side wants no real Fears, no more than your other
Jealousies; but supposing the Three Estates of Scotland should not join with
the King to turn him out there?


W. Why then there let him be King, that has been objected, and so answered
already in a Piece of ours, entitled, Some serious Considerations touching the
Succession, by an Impartial hand.


B. I know it, and there you divide the Union, once thought happy by the
Nation, the foresight of wise Henry the VII. and the joy of Q. Elizabeth.


W. Well, since you have met with that Piece, you may remember too, (were you
so pleased) that after his death the Kingdom must revert to the Crown of
England.


B. I commend him, he had spoiled all if he had not laid it so down in his
Scene, but what if it will not, and they should make an Act to the contrary?


W. Pish but it must, our Crown would be the next lawful Successor.


B. Do you think the Scotch men that have had the reputation to have fewer
Fools among them than are Wise among the Irish, cannot easily learn a Lesson
that is set them? and is not an Act of theirs by as lawful Authority, of as
much force against you as one of yours against them?


W. We don't intend to make any Laws against our Sister Kingdom of Scotland,
only against I. D. of Y. exclude him being King of England and Ireland.


B. And perhaps they intend not to make any Laws against their haughty Sister
of England, only against -- -- only exclude them out and their Heirs, from
ever inheriting the ancient Kingdom of Scotland; so that you would give them
their Chair again.


W. Why then we will make an Ireland of it; we have some that have conquered it
once already.


B. But what if by a Law, and Act of Parliament, when they can hold it no
longer, they should by a Clause throw it into the Lap of France? the Scotch and
they were never such mortal Enemies; would you bring the English Navy up the
Tweed to bear upon them as they marched into England? that and the Commons
according to the late Act of Parliament refusing Free Quarter, would make the
Nation sensible who are the Abettors of the Interest of France, and what evil
their Politics would prevent; come, let us not by Forestalling Providence,
bring a curse and ruin upon our selves; let us do what is right and just and
God will protect us.


W. Though the Angel of my God, whom I serve, should appear to me, and certify
me not a hair should fall from the head of any in this Nation, by the Clouds
that seem to threaten us, yet we ought altogether as much to go on in our
Proposals, as St Paul in much the same case would not let (although he was so
ensur'd) the Seamen leave the Ship, means must not be omitted, the Cart Wheel
may else stick.


B. Some Divinity of the old strain; means may, nay must be used, but not
contrary to the known will of that God you serve, to the suspicion of that
Providence, he so signally (in your supposition) promises you, and without a
further intimation of that Spirit, not contrary to, but consonant with common
reason, such were St. Paul's means; but here all along you see Arguments more
prone to breed mischief than prevent any, and to bring a War upon our selves
and Posterity, and that Providence, whom we dare not trust, may with a great
deal of Justice avenge it self upon us in this World, as well as in the next.


W. Well then since you say means may be used with reason, and the
Parliamentary power we find may do us more harm than good, what if the King
alone should set him by?


B. You will fix up your staff there, will you?


W. If we may, and I am sure we can bring a great many stories, if that will do
any good, from ancient Nations and Kings, that did so, the people of Rome
(before Rome was Rome as it is now, that is before the Pope had a great House
there, and became Dominus fuc totum, Dominus Deus noster Papa) had now and then
for a breakfast a Kingdom given them by the Will of a deceased King, and so
ours may give all the three Kingdoms away at a clap, and save all the bloody
Noses you might see in the Scotch clouds, and we will make an Address that
shall be as dreadful as our Ordinances of old, to stand by whomsoever he shall
pitch on with our Lives and Fortunes.


B. Well then you find you have nothing else to do, but to get him in the mind.


W. And we had nothing else before, I wish we could do it but once, but they
that should have not gone about it the right way, they never yet offered any
thing more for that, and passing whatever Bills they should think needful,
which perhaps might have been an hard bargain, but the relieving Tangier, and
standing by him in all the Alliances and Foreign Leagues he should make, had
they offered him his Ship-mony, his Courts of Wards and Liveries, to have a
perpetual hanc upon his two Houses again, with his free Quarter, that they got
by slurring on him, and a* round sum in hand, somewhat might have been done; in
order thereto our Coyners had grafted a story upon the Duke's last departure,
that with tears in his eyes he should bid his Brother remember if he did part
with him to sell him as dear as he could, we thought to have set the last
Parliaments a bidding for him as for a Stock at Gleeke.


B. But they found his Majesty never designed any such thing, none of his
Friends in the House ever gave the least glimpse to it, but he promised it is
said an Earl to do it if he could but satisfy his Conscience as well as he
told him they could satisfy the Laws.


W. Conscience in Kings, they should, as Ambassadors are sent abroad to lie
for the good of the Nation, be damned or stand fair for it, for the good of
their people, but we can sear that up, and I wonder he told not his Majesty so,
we could have made a Fast for that, besides their Politic Capacity excuses 'em.


B. These are Hairs of the old Dog: but suppose you were put to prove your
Concessions, That the sole power of the King can dispose of the Crown at his
pleasure, how would you do it?


W. Easily.


B. How?


W. As thus; The Crown may be disposed of by some Authority, but the King with
the necessary concurrence of the three Estates must not, because that might do
us perhaps more injury, therefore the King alone may.


B. This is an Argument only to convince those that long to be convinced with
never so small a one, this is made for your selves, how would you convince the
next Heir put by as to the right of it?


W. We would convince him by dint of Sword.


B. But how would you convince the other part of the world, that might look
upon this as a piece of injustice, and perhaps right him in his Cause, we are
making again a Cockpit of Europe.


W. If it come but once to that, we have those that shall draw Declarations as
well nay much better than their Swords.


B. But would not the Elder Brothers of the Nation, ('it is they that constitute
the two Houses of Parliament) have taken it ill to have had the next Heir have
put their Noses out of joint, by the importunities of their Fathers pretended
Friends, because they fancied the Eldest would have proved the hardest Masters?


W. How sillily you talk now, that could not be done, the Laws of the Land were
their security, they lay not at the pure will of their Predecessors, their
Estates are most of them entailed upon them, and you know in an entailed Estate
a superior power is requisite toward the cutting them off, either the Courts
of Judicature, a special Act of Parliament, or the King's consent together with
the Parents as in descent of Honors.


B. I profess I highly admire the Law, as being the effects of great Reasoning,
nay so great a friend it is to it that it disowns it self, if it comes
otherwise, or any ways contradicts what we hold reasonable to be believed, our
Religion in the whole or in its parts; Now that Law thinks that in an entailed
Estate (which I presume modestly the Crown may be thought to be, the best
holding in England sure) the next Heir cannot be put by, without an Authority
supreme to the Paternal (or that derived from it) Now in private Estates, there
is a supreme to the immediate Paternal power, such as Courts of Judicature, and
special Acts of Parliament, by virtue of which they hold those, and keep them
from other people, but in the case of the Crown there is no power supreme to
the Possessour but the power of the Donor, which is God himself, so that we
must have in reason we see a Revelation first before a Disinherison, and if any
thing is done contrary to Reason, the Law says (...) is (...) in it (...), and
the parity of Reason, no one (endued with it) can deny between an entall'd
Estate of private persons and the Crown, and the denying a descent in an
entailed Estate not cut off by a superior power to the next Heir, would for
the present Gavelkind the best Estates in England, and make better for the
younger Brothers than Burrough-English or a War.


W. Here are two or three things in which I fear you have over-shot your self
in, as first what is all this to the purpose if in private Estates the Laws
require a supreme power, we can make a Law that shall wipe off all that, and
enact quite contrary.


B. If you can make Acts of Parliament against the Common Law of the Land,
which was in being before the Parliament, I hope you cannot make them against
Reason too, this Law was thought ever reasonable; and the contrary may look
suspicious.


W. We can make a Law that that Law it self that invalidates all other Laws if
not reasonable shall be kicked out of doors: but another thing you say there is
no supreme power to the Possessour's but the Donor's which is God, etc. how
then can yone King By his powerful inherit, as I have heard a great many that
would be thought most Loyal and most Orthodox maintain; but I believe they were
men that feared the consequences of a Popish Successor as bad as they hated
the growth of Parliamentary power.


B. Great fears, great preferments and great sins may so enslave a Soul as to
make him sordidly flatter the Prince to the detriment of his Crown and Dignity.


W. But I highly dislike one thing more, that Monarchy should come from God,
these Church-buildings of yours will one day ruin the Nation, but what if it
should come from the People, what say you then? I think I spoil your Mag-pies
nest for you.


B. Though, that is gratis dictum, yet this will bring us to Scotland again and
hunt over the old Game, I thought you had quitted that hold before, come it is
much the best and truest way to throw all upon the Almighty, no single Monarch
then like King John, can make overtures of his Kingdom to an African
Mahomentan, shall we be less afraid of parting with the three Kingdoms at the
Princes pleasure, than with the single Town of Tangier? if we give the Level to
the People the Crown and they will draw one one way and the other another, so
that our Whimsies would but fever our Body Politic, and cause a restless
motion in it, thus we find that axiom as true in that Body as in the Natural,
all things are in a restless motion till they come to their proper Center.


W. If you puzzle the Cause thus with Objections (...) body yet ha^ taught us
to make answer to, and Consequences of Conclusions our Politicians have not or
will not see, I must; though I know your manner of Education and living, get
you viewed, see if you cannot be found to have some lines or lineaments in your
face or body that will verily persuade some to fancy they have seen you saying
Mass; a strong fancy brings a strong belief, and belief's above knowledge, so
that any one may safely swear you Priest, Regular or Secular, of what Order
soever, Dominican or Jesuit, if he can but strongly fancy you so.


B. This is Plot-saving Doctrine, as good as Scissars and Sieve, or Key and
Bible, to make the Patron go halfs, to detect his ^^n; Some by Peter, and some
by Paul will find out whether the suspected be a Roman Catholic, then if of
any Order, if so, of which, that once found, it is but opening the Catalogue of
their names, and there is the (...), as quick a way and almost as sure, as the
High Court of Justice, where the breath of the Lord became the breath of the
People, and men's Heads were poll'd off, your Women can sit at home and play the
Destinies spin the thread of Men's Lives, but who can lay any thing to the
Saints charge?


W. I begin to suspect you think lightly of the Plot and the King's Evidence,
you are a Heretic I fear if not a downright Atheist in our modern policy,
what, I warrant you, you would make little of the Plot.


B. I shall not make so much of it as some others I fear have and will I shall
never build upon it either Wealth or Revenge; list unrais'd Armies, the Rabble,
instill fears into 'em, and so far proceed, till there remains naught to secure
the Authors and followers, but to put Weapons into their hands, and then
commit the horridest outrages against Church and State, that your paper
Ammunition, your Declarations and Pardons might not make them disband: I can
tell you the end as you have told me the beginning, and so fare you well.


FINIS.

