KEDARMINSTER-Stuff. A new PIECE of Print: OR, A REMNANT OF Mr. BAXTER'S PIAE
FRAVDES UNRAVELLED.

BEING AN APPENDIX TO Nonconformists Plea for Peace IMPLEADED.

By J. B. Worcestershire.

If I should zealously press my Judgment on others, and seek to make a Party
for it, and disturb the Peace of the Church, and separate from my Brethren, I
should fear lest I should prove a Firebrand in Hell for being such a
Firebrand in the Church. I charge you therefore, if God should give me up to
any factious Church-rending course, that you forsake me, and follow me not a
step. See Baxter 's Saints Rest, Epist. Dedic. to the People of Kedarminster,
p. 8, 9. LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1681.

A REMNANT OF Mr. BAXTER'S PIAE FRAVDES UNRAVELLED.
SECT. I. Mr. Baxter's Title Page.
There Is a Book of late extant called [Nonconformists Plea for Peace:] It Is
called a [Plea] though it be indeed mere Magisterial dictating above what any
Metropolitan would arrogate or pretend to; and is apparently more like a Plot
than a Plea, merely to disturb the Churches Peace, and embroil the Nation.

It Is called a Plea for [Peace], though it be indeed for Schism; and no more a
Plea for Peace, than the Author's fighting against the King was a making Peace
with him. See who will, how well it is fitted to alienate the minds of Ministers
and People, to seduce the Weak, and to confirm the Factious, to exasperate
Governors, and possess the minds of men with hateful and rebellious thoughts
against their Government, to disturb the Peace of Church and State, and to lay
the Grounds of a lasting Separation; and he shall find that it is more likely to
set three Kingdoms in a Flame, than to settle Peace in one; it being certain
that such Paper-lights as these Pleas for Peace, did help to inflame the
Kingdom with the late Civil War: It Is well known they were such Outcries
against Bishops and Ceremonies, that first brought in plea the Kings
Prerogative; 'twas pretense to Reformation and the purity of Religion, to
tenderness of Conscience and the power of Godliness, that brought men first to
unjust. Sequestering and wresting away Estates, then to plundering and cutting
of Throats, and at last to the banishment and murder of Princes: In a word, to
that which in times of the late Usurpation robbed us of our Laws, Government,
and Peace, tore and worried our Church and State, making it a prey to Tyranny
and Sacrilege, which stained the Protestant Religion with Royal Bloodshed, and
covered Fields with the Carcasses of many thousand Christians. I say, that
which did this, was pretense to Reformation and purity of Religion, the
Bloodthirsty Zeal of those Puritans who (as Bishop Bancroft foretold) would
never give over their Cry for Reformation, till they had ruined us Church and
State; and whatever specious titles and pretenses this Plea for Peace may have,
it is certain its duct and tendency is no better: what is most material in it,
has had its disquisition by the judicious Impleader. I have now to do but with
some of the Rubbish and Impertinencies of it, which that worthy Author has past
by as less worthy of his notice.

SECT. II. Of their Separate Congregations.
THE Pleader begins with Churches. His first undertaking is to show what
Churches are of Divine Institution, and what not; where he endeavors, by dark
Definition and nice Division, to make the Church like the Multitude, many
Heads, the forking it into Dichotomies merely to amuse the people, representing
to them the Notion of a Church as some unintelligible thing, to make their
Schism the harder to be discerned. He tells us, p. 8. He doubts not but that a
Society of Neighbor-christians associated with a Pastor for personal Communion
in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, (such as their Meetings are) is of Divine
Institution. His 16th and 17th Sections are to the same purpose: which I have
found his Followers to take for proof, that their Congregations are true
Churches, and of Divine Institution. But I doubt not there are thousands of
good Christians in England, that will as soon believe these Assemblers Heads to
be truly Steeples, as those Assemblies to be true Churches, especially as now
managed.

1. To the great contempt of those more public Assemblies that have the stamp
of Authority both from God and man, and which are of that which is the only
Church National that ever was reformed from Popery by a Law, and not out of
Huddles and Tumults, as Geneva and most of the Reformed Churches beyond Sea
were; which Reformed Church or Churches in England, as the first Reformers
planted with their Sweat, so their Successors watered with their Blood, and
particularly those Martyrs Cranmer, Ridley, and others, that were the first
Compilers of the Common Prayer.

2. Their Antichurches are kept up to the begetting of those Schisms and
Divisions, which the best of Christians in Primitive times have accounted as
bad as Heresy; as Chrysostom. Epist. ad Ephesians. Edit. secund. p. 823. (...), To
divide the Church (says he) is no less evil [or sinful] than to fall into
Heresy. And Aug. Ep. contra Parmen. l. 2. 2. Vix crimen aliquod, etc. There is
scarce any thing so bad as Schism; not Idolatry, said Dyonis. ap. Eusebius. l. 6.
Not Sacrilege, said Optatus, l. 1. It Is (...), the original of Evils, said
Ignatius, Ep. ad Smyr. Mr. Baxter says ( Plea, p. 3.) Indeed could they find
out the Schismatic, he hopes he would be condemned of all. But what Quaker,
Papist, or Schismatic whoever could not say as much? And if they knew indeed
what Schism is (says he, p. 3.) they would avoid it. As though all those most
learned and best of men in their Ages, Ignatius, Cyprian, Augustine, and others
that wrote so much against Schism, knew not what Schism is, but wrote against
they knew not what; or as though so great a Polygraphus as Mr. Baxter, after so
many years dabling in their Writings, could not find out the definition of
Schism. But,

3. God never instituted Churches to be kept up in disobedience to those
Christian Magistrates which he commands us to obey upon pain of damnation, i.
e. eternal damnation, as Mr. Baxter expounds it, H. Commonwealth, p. 352.
telling us further, These. 319. That disobedience to our Rulers, is in Ministers
(says he) double treason and wickedness.

4. In his same H. Commonwealth, These. 240. he teaches, That it is necessary to
the Churches peace, that no private Congregations may be gathered, or
Antichurches erected, without approbation and toleration from the Magistrate.
[Where he means plain enough, all Congregations separate or distinct from the
Parish-Churches, as theirs now are.] Adding in the same page, That if private
Assemblies be permitted unlimitedly, then 1. it will be impossible to restrain
Heresy, Infidelity, or Impiety; yea, 2. they may meet (says Mr. Baxter) to
plot against the Magistrate: And no Assemblies whatever, says he, [meaning
beside those of the Parish-Church] are to be allowed by the Magistrate. Again,
These. 263, (says he) If Magistrates forbid Ministers to preach or exercise the
rest of their Office in their Dominions, they are to be obeyed. For which he
instances in David, Solomon, and other Kings taking down and setting up
Priests, and ordering the Officers of the House of God. And what he says in his
Plea, p. 218. [That where there is no necessity of their preaching,
Nonconformists should forbear it,] condemns the practice of most Nonconformists
in England.

5. It Is a little regardable, that many of these Antichurches are kept up by
those very persons who blew the Trumpets of Rebellion in XLIII, and were the
most active Pulpiteers in setting forward the late Civil War, and after that
the Regicide; which will be made evident in the ninth Section following: And
that these Meetings are all kept up by those who look upon themselves as bound
by Oath (the Solemn League and Covenant) to endeavor all the days of their
lives the extirpation of Church Government by Bishops, Deans, etc. i.e. to
endeavor the Overthrow of that Government in the Church which is by Law
established; and so to act over again the Tragedies of Civil War, when
opportunity and power shall give them leave.

SECT. III. Of Bishops.
THe Pleader comes next to Bishops, and tells us, p. 6. 13, 14, 15. That in
Scripture times a Bishop had but one fixed Society, one Church or worshipping
Assembly, under him; and that the greatest defenders of Prelacy have affirmed,
that Churches Provincial, Patriarchal, National, etc. are but of Humane
Institution. Answ. So have the greatest defenders of Nonconformity affirmed
Churches Congregational, Classical, and all others, as well as Diocesan,
Provincial, etc. to be of Humane Institution only. The ordering of such
distinction of Churches, are left (says Mr. Tombs, Theodul. p. 21.) to divine
Providence and humane Prudence. Among those great defenders of Prelacy he
mentions none but Dr. Hammond, Dr. Ham. Annot. on Acts 11.6. which Mr. B.
mistakes for Acts 11.30.
and that most falsely and injuriously, thus: [ That though this Title (...)
has been extended to a second Order in the Church, and is now only in use for
them under the name of Presbyters, yet in Scripture-time it belonged
principally, if not only, to Bishops; there being no Evidence that any of that
second Order were then instituted, though soon after there were such instituted
in all Churches.] From which words the Pleader infers two things: 1. That the
Office of a Presbyter that was no Bishop, was not in being in Scripture-times.
2. That no Bishop had more than one worshipping Assembly at once. To the first,
Answ. The Doctor in the next page renders this reason for it, That while there
was no multitude of Christians, there were found none among them that were fit
to be constituted Presbyters (in our use of the word;) and therefore contented
themselves with a Bishop only, and a Deacon or Deacons to assist him; there
being (says he) then so small store out of which to take more, and so small
need of ordaining more: Intimating that when the number of Christians
increased, and there was need of ordaining more, that Order should be set up in
the Church, as it was soon after. So that his first conclusion from the
Doctor's words, is very falsely inferred.

The other thing that he infers from them is, That a Bishop had but one Church,
or one Worshipping Assembly at once. Answ. Of which there is not one syllable
in the Doctor's words; and how far it is from his meaning and opinion, will
appear to any that will but turn over his Annotations to the page preliminary
to Titus; where, from Eusebius, he affirms Titus to have been Bishop of the
Churches of Crete; and from St. Chrysostom, that Titus had committed to him
(...), an entire Island. So his Annotations on Tim. 1.3.15. and other places,
show how grossly he miscites the Doctor, and how falsely he asserts from him,
That Episcopal Churches in Scripture-times were but single Congregations. And
it is strange that Mr. Baxter should say that he knows no proof ever produced of
Gods instituting Churches Provincial, Patriarchal, etc. since he himself has
produced such full and solid proof of it, and that but lately, as in his
Christian Directions, part 7. p. 127. And N. 4. having proved the particular
Orders of Presbyters and Deacons, he tells us, That besides those in the
universal Church in the Apostles days, there were many general Officers under
Christ, that had the care of governing and overseeing Churches up and down, and
were fixed by stated Relation to none. Which shows, that beside the fixed
Pastors and Deacons of every Church Congregational or Parochial, there was in
the Apostles times a larger Episcopacy in Gods Church, and more general
Officers and Overseers to preside and visit the Churches, like Colonels and
chief Commanders in an Army, Officers different from the Captains and stated
Officers of every single Company. Thus Mr. Baxter; and yet now he never saw
proof produced of Churches Provincial, Patriarchal, etc. divine institution. It
has been proved ex abundanti by Bishop Hall and others, particularly Dr.
Stillingfleet's [Vnreasonableness of Separation,] that Episcopacy is founded on
no other than Scripture, Reason, Apostolic practice, and Antiquity: To which I
add but this, That the Apostles and Disciples were distinct Orders of
Church Officers, as is evident from that of Judas's forfeiting his Bishopric,
and Matthias (according to the prediction of the Psalm) taking it up; who being
by lot declared to be his Successor, was accordingly advanced from the lower
Order of Discipleship to that higher one of being an Apostle. According to
which the Ancients used to compare the Episcopal Office to that of the
Apostles, and the Presbyters Office to that of the Seventy, as Officers
employed by and under Bishops.

And this name [Apostle] being at last thought too sacred, as being fit only
for such as had seen the Lord, and were (according to the import of the word)
immediately sent by him; therefore in the early times of Primitive Christianity
this name Apostle was laid aside, and that of Bishop used in its stead;
implying the same duty and dignity, though not of person, yet of place, as that
of Apostle: So that what the Apostles were in Christ's own time, that are
Bishops ever since; and what Rank the Seventy had in the Church in Christ's
time, the same and no other our Ministers have now.

As for that trite one, of the names of Bishop and Presbyter being applied to
the same persons, it does no more argue every Presbyter to be a Bishop, than
the King's being a Gentleman argues every Gentleman to be a King: For admit the
names were used in common to both, yet where do we find that the powers are
exercised in common also? That the Presbyter as well as Bishop, has (...), the
power of ordaining, inflicting Church Censures? Conc. Nic. c. 5. Conc. Ant. c.
6.
etc. The Councils of Nice and Antioch expressing a manifest distinction
between Bishops and Presbyters, do declare the Disciplinary proceedings of
Church Censures to be under the Bishops ordering, and not the Presbyters. But
in this I am prevented by that late excellent Treatise [The Unreasonableness of
Separation;] only let me observe Mr. Baxter's Argument against Episcopacy,
Plea, p. 17. Having worded it thus, That Bishops cannot morally beget the
Species of Presbyters; he argues, If Ecclesiastical Generation imitate Natural,
then Bishops would beget but their like; men beget men, Physicians make
Physicians, and so (says he) Bishops may beget Bishops. Answ. As though Bishops
should be consecrated in their Mothers womb, and Presbyters be ordained such
before they were born; and as though they could not be Bishops or Presbyters
jure divino, unless they were born such. This is (I think) the true import and
force of his Argument; not much unlike to that of his Scotch-brother, who
reading in Genesis the History of the Creation, concludes thus: Here Is not a
word of Bishops of all that God made, therefore Bishops are not Jure divino.

The unchurching of Tim. and Tit. p. 1, 2, 3.
Ejusdem Farinae is that of Brother Prynn, who concludes Timothy to be no
Bishop, 1. Because St. Paul and St. Luke, who were acquainted with him, never
called him Bishop: 2. Because he was St. Paul's Associate and Fellow-traveller:
3. Because St. Paul calls him a Minister of God: 4. Because he was a young man.
And I doubt not but Mr. Baxter's late Book against Episcopacy will appear
altogether as futile and doubty, when it has had its due disquisition.

SECT. IV. Mr. Baxter's Character of Bishops.
FRom Arguments, the Pleader proceeds to downright reviling and railing
Accusations, stiling the Bishops [ Plea, 2 part, p. 153. 160.] Proud
Diotrepheses, and that it is the lordly, proud, and impatient spirits of the
Pastors of the Church, that are the great disturbers and dividers of it;
maliciously hinting, 2 Plea, p. 174, 175. That there are some of our Bishops
that scarce believe that there is a God, or a Life to come. And in his Book of
Concord, p. 122. he calls them, The Military Instruments of the Devil.

Concerning the latter of these, I shall only say to the Pleader as Michael
said to the Devil, The Lord rebuke thee, Jude 9. though the Apostle in the
foregoing verse calls them, Filthy dreamers that despise Dominion, and speak
evil of Dignities: he calls them, Raging waves of the sea foaming out their own
shame, v. 13. murmurers and complainers, whose mouths speak swelling words, v.
16. even they who separate themselves, v. 19. As to the former part of his
Railery, it is strange that he should call Bishops proud Diotrepheses, since
according to that charge of St. John against Diotrephes, which he alludes to,
Joh. 9. none can be called such but they who refuse the Authority of Bishops,
prating against them maliciouslly; which was that St. John blamed Diotrephes
for, in his loving to have the pre-eminence. But who are more likely the proud
Diotrephes's, they who teach and practice Obedience to their Rulers, according
to Gods Word, or they who magisterially set up their own Domination, Judgment,
and Will, as the Rule of Order, Unity, and Peace? [though in sinful opposition
to their Rulers,] Princely prescribing to all Christian Churches the true and
only terms of Concord [as the Pleader in his Plea's and other Books has
done.] Who but a Pope or Scotch- Archegus could have dictated concerning the
killing and deposing of Kings, as Mr. Baxter has done in his H. Commonw. These.
358. compared with 368. If the King (says he) raise War against the Parliament
upon their declaration of the dangers of the Commonwealth, in that case the
people may not only resist him [i. e. fight against and kill him if they can]
but also (says he) he ceases to be King. Nay, let him strain the very Papal
Tyranny to what pitch of Insolence and Imposition he pleases, there are
Presbyterian Claims and Presidents will equal it. Witness that of their
Brethren in Scotland, in and since King James's time, [whose Discipline they
would have had in England;] they vindicated to themselves and their Consistory
a sovereign, universal, and independent power in all things spiritual: They had
not only the Directive, but Legislative Power also; and all temporal things in
ordine ad Spiritualia came within the verge of their Scepter; all Sovereign
power had only the Executive power of doing as they commanded, and was bound
to preserve by its Power and Arms, their sacred Privileges and Sovereignty:
Whatever Laws enacted by King and Parliament they conceived to be against the
Laws of Christ, [ i. e. Presbytery in chief] the Presbyterian Ministers had
power to repeal, and to discharge the Subjects from obeying. They might decree
Laws of their own, not only contrary to, but destructive of the Laws of the
Land. The King was bound to keep their Laws, and put them in execution; and if
neither he nor his Council would do it, the Nobles and Commons, nay every
individual person, was bound to do it at their direction: as may be seen in
Presbytery displayed, A. Bishop Bromhall and others. This is that Presbytery
which was in Scotland, and which Nonconformists would have had in England.
What Is there in Episcopal Jurisdiction, to this Presbyterian Insolence? their
power of citing before their Judicatory the King and his Family, of
excommunicating him in case of nonappearance, their subjecting his earthly
Scepter to theirs, which they called the Scepter of Christ; in a word, his
being forced to do whatever these Presbyterian Ministers enjoined, was that
which King James had the smart experience of; and therefore in the Conference
at Hampton Court, p. 79. (says the King) A Scottish Presbytery as well agrees
with Monarchy, as God and the Devil; then Jack and Tom, and Will and Dick shall
meet, and at their pleasure censure me and my Council and all my Proceedings;
then Tom shall stand up and say, It shall be thus; Dick shall reply and say, It
shall be thus: And therefore (says the King to Dr. Reignolds) till you find I
grow pussie and lazy, I pray you, good Doctor, let Presbytery alone; for if
that be once up in England, I am sure it will keep me in breath. The
Patriarchal Presbyters among them were honored and attended more like Kings or
Princes, than Presbyters or Prelates. In a word, such was the Domination and
Lordly pride of the Nonconforming Brethren of Scotland, that it is certain no
Bishop or Archbishop in England, Scotland, or Ireland, has used more
Authority, or Lorded it more arrogantly, than these Presbyterian pretenders to
parity.

Consult who will Mr. Baxter's Writings, and he shall find that England had
never such an Aristarchus; the whole world had never such a Metropolitan,
except the Pope, for Magisterial prescribing, insolent despising, and censuring
even all the Christian Churches in the world, whose practices agree not with
his capricious humor; is not he then a fit person to call the Bishops and
Church Governors lordly, impatient, and proud Diotrepheses? But it is no great
marvel, upon this consideration, That were people brought to a due liking of
Bishops, their beloved Separation could not be kept up: As Contzen the Jesuit
observed in these words: His Directions for restoring of Popery, l 2. c. 18.
How easy is it (said he) to bring the Puritans of England into Order and
Unity with other Protestants, were they but brought to a liking of Bishops? And
this railing against Bishops is that Seignior Bellarini advised, as one way for
the best managing of the Popish Interest in England: His Letter to Father Young.
Let the Bishops (said he) be soundly aspersed, as factious on the one hand, as
worldly and careless on the other; and that it were well if they were removed.

SECT. V. Mr. Baxter's Character of the Conforming Clergy.
THE Pleader having had this wrathful and malicious fling at the Bishops, see
how like Ministers of the Gospel he accosts the inferior Clergy, calling them
craftily, Raw Youths; their preaching, a saying over a pedantick lifeless
Speech; and out of the Pulpit, little differing in speech or life from Carnal
Worldlings, or formal Hypocrites, 1 Plea, p. 87. raw, cold, dry, scandalous
Ministers, injudicious Novices, worldly Formalists and Hypocrites: p. 231. He
supposes some guilty of Heresy, Usurpation, Malignity, and Wickedness: p. 105.
And the greater part of the Ministers of England to procure the liberty of
their Ministry by sin, yea gross deliberate sin: p. 116. Ignorant Readers,
unfit to be trusted with the care of Souls, for their unskilfulness,
unsoundness, notorious sloth and negligence, and great aversness to a holy
life, etc. Just as the old Nonconformists the Donatists reputed St. Austin,
calling him a seducer, a deceiver of Souls, Possid. de vita Aug. cap. 9.
exclaiming against him publicly and privately, that he was a Wolf that should
be slain for the preservation of the Flock; and all this because that holy man
kept and defended the Communion of the Church, which those Schismatics
rejected. The like usage had Basil at Neocesarea, and Greg. Nazianzen at
Constantinople. And thus do the Papists at this day call all Heretics beside
themselves.

But what railing Quaker, what black-mouthed Atheist or Schismatic whatever
could say more? Yet this is Nonconformists Plea for Peace. The Pleader teaches
[ Plea, p. 33.] That Princes ought to preserve peace and charity among the
Churches, and hinder Preachers from uncharitable reviling each other: Is this
such reviling or no? In his Scripture Proof for Infant Church Membership, he
teaches, p. 148. That sharp reproaching of Ministers is the common Character of
all Schismatical Subverters of the Church: Is this sharp reproaching of
Ministers or no? Who then are the Schismatical Subverters of the Church? He
adds in the next words, They smite the Shepherds, that they might the easier
scatter, [separate, and divide the Sheep] who teach people to scatter,
separate, and divide: And to what else does this smiting, slandering, and
reviling tend? Who sees not it is the Atheist's great endeavors to make the
profession of the Ministry it self, the ground of its contempt; and the
distinctive names of Ministers, the very Appellatives of scorn? So that to call
a man a Priest, is (with some) to degrade him below his Servant. Is it not sad
then that such an old carping Minister as Mr. Baxter, should so abet that
rampant sin of the times, which the Leviathan-sinners so sport in? Not to say
what the Pleader's design in it is, had any man a mind to make Schisms in the
Church, what better method could he use, than to vilify the Teachers of it?
None could make men Schismatics by persuading to Schism, so as people should
perceive it; it must be done eruptly, by vilifying their Teachers, and
representing them as such that the people may or ought to separate from.
Suppose the Devil were incarnate and dwelt among us, I appeal to the Pleader,
whether this would not be his main work and business, (viz.) to make the
Ministry and preaching of the Gospel succesless to the good of Souls, And I
appeal to any but the Pleader, whether any thing can be devised conducing more
thereto, than vilifying the Ministers and Preachers of it, as the Pleader does;
and making them odious to the people all he can. What people, having any sense
of Religion or the fear of God, would not separate from Ministers of such black
Characters as the Pleader fixes on the Conforming Clergy? I shall end this with
those words of Mr. Baxter in 241 These. of H. Commonw. It is necessary (said he)
to the Churches peace, that no Pastors or Christians be suffered in Print or
Speech to rail at one another, and use contentious or opprobrious words: -- And
that tolerated Churches be not suffered to cast scorn upon the approved
Churches, nor be over-busie or public in drawing away others to their mind. He
adds, If men for foul words are bound to their behavior, and women for
scolding be put in the Gumble-stool; there is no reason men should be suffered
to rail on pretense of their opinions in Religion. Thus Mr. Baxter: Yet he
allows himself such railing in his opinions of Religion, that no Mother
Celiers, Hobbes, White, or Whitebread, would exceed. But this is just that
which Contzen the Jesuit advised in order to the promoting of Popery in
England, to vilify the Ministers: For (says he, Cont. l. 2. c. 18.) he that
shall read the Writings of Lutherans against Calvinists, and Calvinists against
Lutherans [much more of Nonconformists against Conformists] will think he reads
not the Invectives of men against men, but the Furies and Roarings of Devils
against Devils: And hence in time (says he) the very Rulers themselves will
take occasion to change their Religion.

It was on this same account that Vrsin gave Flacius Illyricus this Character,
[Pref. in Apol. Cat.] That he was one who for diverse years, by his discrediting
Worthy and Orthodox men, and by stirring up unnecessary contentions, was a
troubler of diverse Consciences and Churches all over Germany. [As I wish Mr.
Baxter be not all over England.]

SECT. VI. Mr. Baxter's Character of Nonconformists.
BUT are there none of this black Character among Nonconformists? are no raw,
cold, injudicious Novices, etc. among them? No, they are hinted to be clear,
serious, holy, diligent Preachers, Plea, 1. p. 87. Judicious, convincing,
affectionate Ministers, p. 231. And in his second Plea it is totidem verbis,
Under all the Heavens of God, there is no one party of Ministers or People more
able, holy, wise, and faithful, than those that are now silenced, and
reproached as Puritans in his Majesty's Dominions; and that they are the glory
of the Churches, and of the King and Kingdom, and such as no Prince in the
world is equally blessed with.

Thus, like the people of China, they fancy themselves to have two eyes, and
almost all the world beside to be blind. But,

1. This uncharitable boast does ill become such holy, judicious, etc.

2. This is no more than what the Pharisees of old, the Anabaptists and Quakers
of late have opinioned of themselves: The Order of Jesuits in the Church of
Rome, have styled themselves the Saintly Brotherhood; and it is certain that
many Quakers excel them in their affected Gravity, many Anabaptists in Piety,
the Prelates in Learning and preaching, and some Jesuits in all four. But,

3. Who will regard this Thrasonism, this boasting humor, since it is that
which the Holy Ghost has so plainly foretold and condemned, That in the latter
days perilous times should come, when men should be lovers of themselves,
boasters, proud, false accusers, fierce, despisers of them that are good,
traitors, heady, high-minded. -- From such turn away, 2 Timothy 3.2.

4. As for their Character of Holiness he gives them, observe who will their
Carriage and Conversation, and he shall find but few things in them excelling
Conformists, except their looking disdainfully, walking and talking demurely,
as those of their predecessors in the 23 Mat. 14.9 Mat. 11.26 Act. 5. boasting
and conceiting of themselves above others; avoiding the company of such as they
think worse than themselves; of being of the strictest Sect or profession in
Religion; their straining at a Gnat, as the Pleader does about Christmas Day,
when such camels as Perjury, Sacrilege, and Disobedience to Magistrates, will
down well enough; their starcht Conversation, supercilious and contemptuous
Carriage toward all that are not of their Opinion in Religion, insomuch that
one that never saw their faces before, may discern them, for the most part,
from any sort of people in England, except Quakers only.

5. As for the commendation he gives of their Ability [or Learning] however
they now arrogate the reputation of it, it is not long since Learning was
judged by some of them to unqualifie men for approbation to the Ministry; Parts
and Abilities were reputed Qualities no way Ministerial: While Friends and
Faction, well-meaning and little understanding, have been Accomplishments
beyond Study and University; when humane Learning (as one observes) has been
scoft at as vain Philosophy, and the enticing words of man: and under the
notion of the foolishness of preaching, the simplicity of the Gospel, etc.
Ignorance has got the stamp of Jus Divinum, and natural Weakness has past for
supernatural Grace. But,

6. There Is none questions the Pleaders abilities; he is able to divide the
Church into Species semper divisibiles, into nothing, and (as a Nonconformist
said of him) to distinguish himself into a Fart. How many Nonconformists in
England beside himself, could in the twenty years study he speaks of, find out
so many feeble Exceptions as he has done, whereby to amuse and ensnare the
Rabble in the opinion of the sinfulness of Conformity? And there are among them
(no doubt) men of great Learning and Abilities, as he says; but allowing for
the disproportion of number between them and Conformists, and it is certain
there will be found among them more Grossum-caputs by far, than the Church of
England will own. I know one of them that (because he was generally reputed one
of the ablest) I shall here make this mention of: In a considerable Company
disputing with his Parish-Minister fiercely against Ceremonies, and
particularly kneeling, being sufficiently baffled, rose from his seat, and with
eyes and hands lift up, gave God thanks that he was none of the Disputers of
this world; which was judged by his Party a sufficient Confutation of the
Adversary, and Denomination of an able man: And taking their Abilities by such
measures as these, they are all acknowledged (as the Pleader calls them) able
men. But admit they were indeed men of better learning, preaching, and living,
(as they are not;) it is certain, no Heresy or Schism in the Church, no
Sedition or Rebellion in the State, could be carried on but by such men, who by
a demure conversation and tolerable parts, are able to inflame the people with
unreasonable Zeal, to sanctify politic Villainy, and put a varnish of Religion
on the blackest designs. Schismatics had always this to say for themselves;
The Donatists and Novatians were purer than others, and therefore separated
from the ordinary Christian-Assemblies; Arrius, who denied the Divinity of
Christ, was looked upon as a man of good learning and life: but were these men
ever the less Schismatics for their great Learning and plausible
Conversations? no, but much worse.

As for their Preaching he so commends, there are no doubt many among them of
great Dexterity and Skill, otherwise how could they keep up their Separation?
But 1. Are there not such among Conformists? 2. Are there not many of the
Nonconformists much followed, who have nothing whereon to fix that Character
but twang and tautology, noise, hum and haw, schreeching and bawling like
Baal's Priests, as though God were no nearer them than the visible Heavens? And
here let not the Pleader think that I speak of all of them, or that I
undervalue, much less deride serious and affectionate preaching; for I have as
great a veneration for it as himself: and were there a real distinction between
affectionate preaching, which Nonconformists so affect, and rational convincing
preaching, which Conformists so excel in, I had rather hear one Sermon of the
former kind, than two of the latter.

As for his stiling Nonconformists the glory of the Churches, of the King and
Kingdom, and such Ministers as no Prince in the world is equally blessed with; I
say but this: Then they are much mended, since it was used to be disputed,
whether the Jesuits or Puritans were like to prove more pernicious and
dangerous to the Commonwealth, where both or either of them lived. Vid.
Watson's Quodlibet, 2 Art. 1. And since the Lord Keeper Puckering proposed the
same thing to the Parliament, delivering to them Queen Elizabeth's Command,
That they hearken not to the solicitations of those called Puritans, who (said
she) do nothing but disturb the Peace and good Repose of Church and
Commonwealth. And concerning the same persons, Dr. John Burgess in his
Rejoinder, p. 629. observes, That as under the Name of Christ, and pretense of
advancing his Kingdom, Antichrist was set up: so under the name of Antichrist,
and pretense of only opposing him, the Kingdom of Christ may be pulled down,
and in part already is (says he) and men scarcely feel or fear it. And it is
observed out of Bishop Bancroft, The Apol. for Bishops voting in Parliament, p.
73.
that he long since foretold, That the Puritans would never give over their
clamor for Reformation, till they had utterly ruined the whole Kingdom and
Church, if they were not timely suppressed: Adding that of Livy, Vrgentibus
Rempubl. fatis, Dei and hominum salutares admonitiones spernuntur. And though
the Nonconformists are (as I really believe) irreconcilable haters of Popery,
yet if Bishop Whitgift or Dr. Oats be to be believed, it is certain they
contribute their endeavors to the bringing in of Popery, though they are not
aware of it. The Bishop affirms [in his Letter to the Lord Treasurer, in
Fuller,] That to his certain knowledge, the Dissenters were animated to
Nonconformity by the Jesuits. And Dr. Oats in his Narrative, Item 1. That the
Rebellion in Scotland of the Presbyterians against the Episcopal Government,
was contrived by the Jesuits; Wright, Morgan, Ireland, and others, being
instructed to preach under the notion of Presbyterians, and to inform the Scots
of the sad estate they were in by reason of Episcopal Tyranny exercised over
them. Item 11. That the Jesuits in Scotland had stirred up the Presbyterians
there to a Rebellion. Item 43. tells us, That Messengers were sent into
Scotland with instructions to carry themselves like Nonconformists, and to
preach to the disaffected Scots the necessity of taking up the Sword for the
defense of Liberty of Conscience. So that what the Jesuits did in Scotland in
carrying on the Plot, was under the disguise of Nonconformists. And Item 73.
That there were eight thousand Catholics ready to rise and join with the
disaffected Scots, when required by the Scotch Jesuits so to do. So Item 25.
51. and passim, Showing, that though the Nonconformists mean no such thing, but
are really irreconcilable Enemies to Popery, yet they as really are
instrumental to Jesuits in bringing of it in; and it is evident that they are
the avowed Enemies of the Protestant Religion as now established by Law, which
the Popish Plotters do so oppose and hate. Key of Catholics.
And Mr. Baxter himself says, That the Papists account that if the Puritans
prevail, they shall make great advantage of it, their being unsettled and all in
pieces, giving them footing for continual attempts; and that having their Party
secretly among Puritans, is the way to be sure to maintain their interest. Thus
Mr. Baxter: Yet these Puritans are styled, The glory of the Churches, of the
King and Kingdom, and such as no Prince in the world is equally blessed with. But
I wish they deserved indeed the Character here given them; for I am sure, that
the more holy, wise, and able judicious they are, the more quiet and peaceable
they will live, and the more obedient to their Governors; especially at such a
time as this, when Disobedience and Division [that are always dangerous] do
threaten most perniciously the Church and State: and therefore the turbulent
and wrathful revilers of Ministers and Government, the peevish, censorious, and
false accusers, are certainly none of these.

SECT. VII. Nonconformists charging the Parliament with the burning of London.
AMong all the dirt thrown in the face of Authority, he has no such malicious
fling as that at the Parliament, charging them with their making the
Oxford-Act, as that horrid and crying sin for which God inflicted that dreadful
Judgment the Burning of London, p. 238. And that the Bishops may be sure to be
taken notice of, he words it thus; The Parliament and Bishops: as though the
Bishops were no part of the Parliament. And all this in the greatest capital
letters, to signify the notoriety of it.

But were Mr. Baxter an unprejudiced and impartial, and not a passionate and
spiteful interpreter of Providence, he might have thought of many other more
crying sins, as more probable procatarcticks to ascribe that Judgment to. We
want not sins National [of so deep a tincture of Hell, and so complicated a
sinfulness as to contain in them the violation of all Laws Divine and Humane,
the boldest transgression of the plainest Rules of Duty, the downright
renouncing Christianity it self] to ascribe such Judgments to: As, 1. The
Murder of the late King, a stain that like Cain's brand, will stick by us as
long as we are a Nation. What can we think of that Crime that does at once (as
one speaks) hamstring the State, and cut the pipes of Justice; wrap up all in a
wild Confusion, and ruin whole Societies of men; murder the Father of the
Country, Gods Vicegerent, and that in a formal way of Justice, thereby running
Justice through as with her own Sword? and all this in open Rebellion, which is
as the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. i. e. diabolical, and scarce ever
repented of; not only contrary to the Rules of Scripture and the Laws of
Nature, but also contrary to many sacred Oaths and Promises, the most solemn
Obligations that can be fastened on the Consciences of men. Such a heinous
crying sin as this, is like enough to call for Vengeance, to bring a Curse upon
the Nation, and make the Land like an Akeldama, yea a Maranatha, scarce to be
expiated without a total Excision and final Extirpation. Nor is the distance of
time between the Sin and the Judgment, any thing to the contrary: for such
Crimson-daring sins are usually punished at a distance. It was forty years after
the murder of the holy Jesus, ere the Vengeance threatened for it came upon the
Jewish Nation. 2. Or it might have been more religiously ascribed to what Mr.
Baxter speaks, Of the Devils stigmatizing the Nation with the brand of PER, and
of the Lands mourning for Oaths broken: Which is probable enough. But who are
the Oath-breakers? they who renounce the Solemn League and Covenant, a thing
which if 'twere binding, would make Rebellion and Perjury it self matters of
duty; or those Ministers in Forty three who sent away their Congregations with
full discharge from the bonds of the the Oath of Allegiance to war against
their King, by the Solemn League and Covenant, and after that the Engagement; a
thing as contrary to the Covenant, as the Covenant was to their Oaths of
Allegiance and Canonical Obedience; and after that their homaging to Cromwell in
a way and manner almost as contrary to their Engagement, as that was to any of
their former Oaths: so that they were shod round with Perjury, who now so stick
at one Remove. Such was the compass of their religious swallow, all Oaths could
down with them, but none could hold them. No marvel then (as Mr. Baxter says)
if for Oaths broken the Land mourns. And to ascribe that direful Conflagration,
the burning of London, to such crying sins, were a far more religious
interpretation of Gods Providence and Judgments, than to ascribe it to an Act
of Parliament that designed nothing but the good of the Kingdom, the peace and
security of Church and State. To which I might add, 3. The Blood of those many
Christians shed in the Civil War; all which the very Laws of the Land make
Murder: For to kill any man in War, without Authority derived from him or them
that have legal power to make War, is Murder. And that they who made the War
had no Authority so to do, is evident from that 25 Edw. 3. c. 2. which makes it
Treason to levy War against the King in his Realm, or to be adherent to the
Kings Enemies in his Realm, giving them aid or comfort in the Realm or
elsewhere. Many other National and crying sins may be named, whereto we may
aptly and piously ascribe this dreadful Judgment, and not thus spitefully to an
Act of Parliament designing nothing but the good of the Kingdom.

SECT. VIII. Nonconformist Persecution.
HIS Book does abound with loud Outcries of Persecution, the loss of their
Maintenance, the ruin of their Estates and Health, p. 234. He scatters up and
down his Plea frequent complaints of Goals, Starving, Ruin, Death, bloody
Persecution, etc. as though he were in any Turkish Slavery or Popish
Inquisition. And what does all this tend to, but to enrage the People, and to
bring an Odium on the Conforming Clergy? For Mr. Baxter tells us in his Preface
to Cath. Theolog. That godly people will follow their suffering Teachers, and
that their sufferings will stir up in the people a passionate Zeal, which will
make the people pray for the downfall of that Clergy [Prognost. p. 14.] as the
Enemies of God and Godliness; and that it will make some of the Nonconformists
think [p. 20.] these passions of the people needful to check the fierceness of
the Afflicters, and therefore will let them alone. And some of the more
injudicious and hot-brained of the Nonconformists (as he styles them) will put
the people on, and make them believe that all Communion with Conforming
Ministers or Parish-Churches, is unlawful, and their forms of Worship sinful
and Antichristian; and that they are Temporizers, and betrayers of Purity, that
communicate or assemble with them. These and the like effects, Mr. Baxter
says, the sufferings of the Nonconforming Ministers will have.

Who then will wonder at their noise of Persecution, or question their ugly
meaning of crying out of it at such a time as this, when they have the Liberty
and Indulgence which not long since was all that they pretended to desire; when
the Penal Laws are like to be taken off, and a door of not only Toleration,
but Comprehension open; which (it is believed) will produce no other discovery
than this, How fond they are of their [truly so called] beloved Separation,
notwithstanding all their clamours of Persecution.

But how are they persecuted? Why, 1. They vilify and reproach their
Governors at their pleasure, who yet let them alone, and pass it by impune. 2.
They have bound themselves by a rebellious Covenant, to endeavor the
extirpation of our Church Government; which they adhere to, and refuse to
renounce, notwithstanding its complicated sinfulness; and so declare themselves
to be such Enemies to their Governors and Government, as want but opportunity
and power to act (according to their League and Covenant) the Overthrow of it
and them: for which reason their Governors knowing their Enmity to their
Government, think them not fit to be trusted with places of Ministerial
Authority and Preferment, upon their own seditious and pernicious terms. And
this is that the Pleader calls Persecution, the loss of their Maintenance, the
ruin of their Estates, etc.

In the Primitive Church, when the Christians dwelt among Heathens, there came
a Maid from her Fathers house to one of the Heathen Tribunals, and without any
Call to it, declared her self a Christian, spit in the Judges face, and so
provoked him to cause her to be executed. Will any say this was to suffer
Persecution? So these third Cato's of the Nonconformity load their Governors
with Reproaches, calling them to their faces, Lordly, proud, and tyrannical
Thorns and Thistles, the military Ministers of the Devil, etc. For all this
provocation, they are suffered to preach openly, and to be well paid privately,
to act freely, and to enjoy plenteously all that they desired [not long since]
to enjoy. Few of them but have plentiful Maintenance; some, that beside their
Contribution of thirty or forty pounds per Annum, have lodged themselves
eruptly as Chaplains to Persons of Quality; where they are attended and
honored like any Scotch (...), set at the Table by my Lady, when the poor
Parish-Curate is set below the Candlestick. I know in my Country here in
Worcestershire about ten of them, and I believe the County has not many more,
most of which I am well assured has more for his Maintenance than ever my self
had from the Church, who have lived a Minister of it almost these eight years:
Yet these are those querulous and discontented Creatures, those poor gentle
Lambs, that are still bleating out Persecution and Tyranny.

Had the Loyalists been but half so favorably used by Nonconformists, during
the time of their Usurpation and Tyranny, as Nonconformists are now by them,
they would never have been so ungratefully querulous: It Is well known how they
turned almost all out of their Livings, that adhered to their lawful Sovereign;
sent them with their Wives and Families a begging, who durst not prostitute
their Consciences with downright Perjury, and having sworn Canonical Obedience,
durst not by a contrary Oath transgress at once the Laws of God, Nature, and
Nations. They obtained that Order from a bloody Usurper, that every Episcopal
Divine should not only be incapable of a Benefice, but also to exercise any
act of Ministerial Function; nor yet be suffered to get some little subsistence
by teaching School; no, nor at last to live in any Gentleman's house, who out of
pity might take him in to keep him from starving. Whether this, or the present
case of the Nonconformists, be more like Persecution, let any but a
Nonconformist judge. Read who will, the Principles and Practices of the
Nonconformist Brethren in Scotland, and he shall find (as one observes) that
where they have the Power, their little finger is heavier than the hand and
loins of a Bishop, or Episcopal Governor: The authority of their Courts
Ecclesiastical was more tyrannically exercised over not only the Bodies and
Estates, but also the Souls and Consciences of men, than ever was that of the
Popish Inquisition: e. g. If after a little time granted for information, any
refuse to conform and subscribe to their Confession of Faith, Presbytery
displayed, p. 39.
their Rule of Government, their manner of Worship, he is forthwith
excommunicate, yea though his dissent from them be but in a Theological Tenet,
[which they frequently called Heresy;] after which Excommunication, upon the
remonstrance of a Commissioner from the Presbytery to the Civil Judge, there is
a Warrant from Supreme Authority given out to command him to conform, or within
few days to be put to the Horn, i. e. to be outlawed: The tender Conscience not
conforming, the outlawed's Estate and Movables [i. e. his Chattels] becomes
forfeited to the King: If within a year and a day he gives not Obedience and
Conformity, his whole Revenues and Rents of immovable Goods are forfeited to
the King during his life. Here the man is stripped of all his Estate movable or
immovable; yet this is not all, but still upon Remonstrance of the Presbytery's
Commissioner, another Letter goes out, which they call a Letter of Caption
[like that of our Writ de Excommunicato capiendo] which is to secure his
Person, and commit him to close Prison as a Rebel. If he skulk or hide himself,
out goes a Writ called Letters of Intercommuning, which forbids all the Kings
Subjects to commune or confer with him personally or by Letter, upon pain of
being accounted a Rebel of the same guilt. And if the Church requires all this
of the Civil Magistrate [for so they call the Soveraignty] he is bound to obey
them.

Now say who will if this be not in many respects as bad as the Popish
Inquisition, when a man shall be brought to all this for Nonconformity, though
but in a Theological Tenet. What are our Penal Laws on peevish Dissenters,
compared with such Presbyterian Tyranny? We desire them but to renounce a
perjurious Combination, called [Solemn League and Covenant,] an Oath taken
contradictory to a former; which if it bind the Conscience, a man may be bound
in Conscience to steal, rebel, murder, or any thing; he has no more to do but
swear, and he is bound in Conscience to do it: an Oath which some
Nonconformists have called a very Nest of Villainy, and such (said one of them)
that no person or people fearing God ever took. We desire them but to subscribe
and conform to such Church Discipline and Order as many of themselves have
acquitted from all intrinsic sinfulness, and (I think I may add) such as
only can comport with the present Government of State. In case of
Nonconformity hereto, the penalty is, to some advantageous, to all easy and
tolerable. And what is this to Scotch Church-tyranny over Soul, Body, and
Estate, for dissenting but in a Theological Tenet, which the Presbyterian
Ministers would have had brought into England; or to that Cruelty which they
exercised on the Loyalists when in their usurpt power?

But to end this, let me bespeak the Nonconformists in the words of the
Independents to the Presbyterians, in a thing printed 1648, called [The
Pulpit-Incendiary] directed against Mr. Calamy, Case, Cranford, and others, p.
45. the words are these: You complain of your misery and bondage, sorrows and
oppressions, and troubles of the Church; [i. e. the Presbyterian Church] What
ails you? what troubles you? who oppresses you? where is the least show of
oppression, or cause of complaint minister'd to you, except it be because you
are not suffered to oppress your Brethren? Can you feed upon nothing but Blood,
yea, the blood of your Brethren, that though you have every thing else, you so
complain of sorrow and oppression? Is this your sorrow and oppression, that you
cannot oppress? Thus the Independent to the Presbyterian, i. e. Nonconformists
to one another in 48. And it is even so with Nonconformists still. This is their
Persecution, that they cannot persecute; this is their Suffering, that they are
not suffered to domineer: So certain it is, that nothing but governing will
satisfy them, let them pretend what they will.

SECT. IX. Nonconformist Loyalty.
HIS seventh Sect. from p. 120. to p. 140. gives in a List of some few harmless
Transactions relating to the late Civil War, whereby he would betray his Reader
into an opinion of Nonconformists innocence, And that they were no promoters of
the Civil War, nor had any hand in the Kings death, insinuating that they wrote
and preached against it; (p. 130, 132.) that they were of those that restored
the King. Nor do they stick to tell the world, That no people in the world have
better principles of Loyalty and Obedience than they. Thus will they tell the
Sun it is midnight, and yet be believed by their credulous Followers. But this
has had its full confutation by the Impleader, who has made their guilt
evidently to appear as much notorious to be denied, as it is impious to be
defended: and therefore I should pass it by. But seeing, 1. that
notwithstanding all that can be said, the belief of their innocence in this
matter gets ground daily; and 2. that their Pleas for Peace, Way of Concord,
Melius Inquirendums, etc. are of the same tendency as those Paper-scuffles that
began the Civil War: Seeing these things, I think he does a good office who at
any time endeavors the undeceiving of Posterity in such a matter as this is,
and gives the world what warning he can of those Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing,
that so worried Church and State into their wild and ruinating confusions;
though he do no more but make more public what is published already of those
seditious Invectives against the King, and Incitements to Rebellion, which the
Nonconformists Pulpits flamed with, venting not only from Pulpit but Press,
their rebellious Doctrines as religious Maxims, like Razors set with oil (said
one) to cut the throat of Majesty with their smooth keenness.

I begin with Mr. Baxter, H. Commonw. These. 358. compared with 368. If the King
(says he) raise war against the Parliament, upon their declaration of the
dangers of the Commonwealth -- in that case the King may not only be resisted
[i. e. fought against, kill'd] but he cease to be King. Yet speaking of the
Governors then in being, who by Rebellion and Perjury had usurpt Supremacy,
Pref. to H. Commonw. he says, They were the best Governors in the world, and
such as Subjects are forbid to depose, on pain of damnation. In his Preface to
H. Commonw. p. 23. he speaks it like a Challenge to the whole world, That if
any man can prove that the King was the highest Power in the time of those
Divisions, and that he had power to make that War which he made, Though St.
Peter says, the King is Supreme.
he will offer his head [he means, his neck] to Justice as a Rebel. [So that
every one taking the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy Mr. Baxter condemns for
Perjury.] He tells us in H. Commonw. p. 486. That he having often searched his
own heart whether he did lawfully engage in the War or not, and encourage so
many thousands to it, that the issue of all his search was this -- That he
cannot see that he was mistaken in the main, nor dares he repent of it, nor
forbear doing the same, if it were to do again in the same state of things. He
says indeed in the same place, That if he could be convinced that he had sinned
in that matter, he would as gladly make public recantation, as he would eat or
drink; which he never did yet: And therefore is still of the same mind, and
would on the same occasion do the same things, i. e. fight and encourage so
many thousands to fight against the King.

Mr. Calamy, in a Sermon before the House of Lords, on Christmas Day, 1644. p.
29. That it is commendable to fight for Peace and Reformation against the Kings
commands: p. 9. And that all that fought under the Kings Banner against the
Parliament, fought themselves into slavery, and did endeavor by all bloody
means to subvert Religion and Liberty: p. 12. And that the King that should
have been a Head of Gold, was an Iron Head to crush his own body in pieces: p.
18. That those that made their peace with the King at Oxford, were the Judas's
of England; and it were just with God to give them their portions with Judas:
p. 13. That those that engaged in this Cause [i. e. the War against the King]
and the Covenant, were unjustly charged with Rebellion: p. 38. That it was Gods
Cause, and it should at last prevail. And in his Speech at Guild Hall, Oct. 6.
1643. That this Cause was every way so just and good, that if he had as many
lives as he has hairs of his head, he would be willing to sacrifice them all
in that Cause, i. e. the War against the King.

So Mr. Case, in his Sermon before the House of Commons, on Ezekiel. 20.25. Epist.
Dedic. Ye [i. e. the Parliament] have overcome the Lion and the Bear, why may
ye not overcome this uncircumcised Philistine, who has not ceased to blaspheme
the Armies of the living God? Behold HE lies grovelling at your feet! what does
there remain but CVTTING OFF HIS HEAD? And in his Sermon on Ezra 10.2. How has
the preaching of Christ scorched those Cathedral Priests, the unhallowed
Generation of Scribes and Pharisees, and perfected their Rebellion into that
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost? Mr. Case on Dan. 11.32. before the
House of Commons, Cursed be he that holds his Sword from Blood, that spares
when the Lord says strike, p. 24. that suffers those to escape whom God has
appointed to destruction. In a Sermon on Isai. 43.4. What a sad thing is it (my
Brethren) to see our King in the head of an Army of Babylonians, refusing to be
called the King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and choosing rather to be
called the King of Babylon! Again, p. 18. Prelacy and Prelatick Clergy,
Priests and Jesuits, Ceremonies and Service Book, were mighty Impediments in
the way of Reformation, and God has mightily pulled them down. Preaching to a
Court Martial on 2 Chronicles. 19.6. You know (says he) how the Midianites [ i. e.
the King and his Party] with whom you have to do, have vexed you with their
Wiles, and labored to obstruct and cut us all off in our passage to the Land
of Promise; that blessed Reformation which the Parliament consult for,
Assemblies dispute for, Armies fight for, and all good Christians pray for;
therefore do you honor God in avenging your Brethren on those Midianites, in
doing execution on those Enemies of Christ and the Kingdom. And in his Book of
the Covenant, delivered in three Sermons, He that has been a Malignant or
Neutral, let him be so no more; for I protest against every man that after his
striking this solemn Covenant with God, shall dare to persist in any of these
mentioned Abominations; [i. e. adhering to the King, Ceremonies, etc.] he is an
Enemy to Christ, a Traitor to the Kingdom, a State murderer, a destroyer of
himself and his Posterity, etc.

Mr. Herle in his Sermon before the House of Commons, on 1 King. 22.22. p. 28.
If the Devil can but get a Prophet to leave Gods service for the Kings, he has
taken a Blue already, and is ready for as deep a Black as Hell can give him.

There may be produced many thousand instances of the like, showing how active
they were in, and how far contributing to, the late Civil War, and consequently
the Murder of the King. And thus they whose first Institution made them
Messengers of glad tidings between God and his People, have made themselves
Heralds to denounce war between Gods Vicegerent and his Subjects; and that not
only by casting a slur upon the King, and representing him as unworthy to be
King, but by clamouring against Bishops and Ceremonies, Mr. Blair, Mr. Jenkins.
as the blind brood of Antichrist, Popish trash and trumpery, etc. Which same
method is just now reviving; I pray God prevent the same sad consequents and
effects. But notwithstanding all this, they still outface the Sun, and say,
[as the Pleader doth] That they preached and wrote against the War and
Regicidie, and that they were of those who restored the King: But alas, when?

-- Galeatos sero duelli, poenituit. When the Independents had rode them like
fools, they were glad to part Stakes. It Is certain these Presbyterians never
attempted the Kings restoring, till they were visibly in the very jaws of the
Phanaticks, that would suffer them to domineer no longer; but were then seizing
on their Tithes and Churches, the last morsel of their Spiritual Revenues: So
that (as one said) if the Tithe-pig had not cried louder in their ears than
either their Conscience or the Word of God, they had not been awakened to
attempt it,

Mr. Baxter objects, That it was not the Presbyterian, but a rude conquering
Army that put the King to death. Answ. A rude conquering Army were the
immediate Agents, but who empowered them to do it? those Under-parties and
inferior Sects. How broke they in upon us, but at the Schism and breach that
Presbyterians first made? This point of Nonconformists guilt, as to the
promoting of the War and the Kings death, may be cleared from other Topics, as
the Covenant, etc. But hanc movere nolo Camerinam.

In asserting Nonconformist Loyalty, Mr. Baxter proceeds to tell us, p. 30.
That Princes and Rulers may forbid -- all that preach Rebellion or Sedition,
that propagate such wicked Doctrine, and that they may punish them that do it:
p. 247. And that they shall never be against making the strictest Laws to
punish Nonconformists that shall be proved guilty of Sedition or disloyalty,
etc. Answ. Not to call Nonconformists disloyal or seditious, I leave to the
Readers judgment these things following; which Mr. Baxter in his first Plea
speaks not as his own only, but as the sentiment of his whole Party. He
teaches, p. 226. That Pastors preached against the will of Princes for three
hundred years, and after that against the will of Christian Princes. And p. 26.
That God has wrought Miracles to justify those that would not cease
preaching, when Princes, yea Christian Princes have forbid them: Particularly
the Bishops of Africa, who for preaching when the King forbad them, had their
tongues cut out by the Kings command, and yet spoke freely after their tongues
were cut out. Where though he call them Christian Princes, yet all that he
alleges for it, proves no such thing, but that those Princes were all Arrians,
or usurping Conquerours. Is this disloyal and seditious or not, to argue the
duty of Nonconformists preaching in disobedience to Christian Princes, and in
spite of their Laws, from Ministers disobeying such Usurpers and Arrians as he
instances in Valens, Constantius, etc. that because Athanasius, Basil, and
Miletius preached notwithstanding the prohibition of Arrian Princes, that
therefore Nonconformists of England must, notwithstanding the Interdict of the
King? What does this argue, unless the King and Clergy of England were Usurpers
that had not the power of forbidding them to preach, or Arrians that would not
suffer any Ministers to preach Christ? Again he tells us, p. 225. That Papal
Usurpations, and imposing of things unnecessary as necessary to Union and
Communion, has been the great cause of Schisms throughout the Christian world
for this thousand years. And p. 226. that they who still obey such dividing
Imposers, do continue Schisms in the Church by encouraging the causes of them.
Where by [dividing Imposers] we must understand the King, Parliament, and
Clergy of England; for who else can he pretend to say imposes upon them? And if
no body imposes on them, why does he clamor and complain of dividing
Imposers? What mean those black Characters he gives the conforming Clergy of
England, of deliberately perjured persons, and a hundred the like? What People
fearing God would not abhor such a Ministry, and in spite of all lawful
Authority, fight and die, do and suffer any thing, rather than hazard their
Souls in trusting them to the care and conduct of such Ministers? Interpret who
will, his meaning, in suggesting it as the opinion of some Casuists, That
Humane Laws bind not, when they are not for the common good, [of which good the
people must be judge;] Adding, That he had rather say, When they are
notoriously against the Laws of Christ, and the common good; intimating the
Laws of England to be such: for what Laws else are they concerned with? Had Mr.
Baxter a mind to preach Sedition, what would he say more? None that design
Sedition, will teach it openly and in terminis; that will not take: It must be
done insinuatingly and disguisedly, as -- etc. Yet Mr. Baxter, in the name of
the rest of the Nonconformists, would have Princes forbid and punish all that
propagate seditious and disloyal Doctrine; and would have the strictest Laws
made to punish any Nonconformists that shall be proved guilty of Sedition or
Disloyalty.

SECT. X. Kneeling.
ANother Scruple of the Pleaders which the Impleader has past by, is kneeling
at the Sacrament: And of all the ugly Pimples that flush in the face of
Nonconformist Churches, there is none looks worse than this, upon the account of
that great breach that of it self it makes in Church Communion; the Word and
Sacrament being the two principal materials of Church Communion. And for this
he urges nothing but the old Cant, in four particulars.

First, Sitting being the Table Gesture, Sitting as men do at Meat (says he,
p. 150.) is certainly lawful.

Answ. As though the Lords Supper were a common Feast, and the administration
of it to be guided by the Rules of common Table-fellowship; and if so, why do
not Dissenters receive it with their Hats on? for that is as correspondent to
the ordinary Table Gesture as sitting is.

Secondly, He urges the Example of Christ. Whereas,

1. It Is not certain what gesture Christ used: All that we read of it is, Luke
22.14, 15, 20. John 21.20.
that he did eat the Passover with his Disciples in a tricliniary gesture,
which we now express by sitting: Whereas,

1. It was the ordinary custom of the Jews to change their gesture, Buxt. Syn.
Judaic. cap. 13.
even during the Passover it self; whereas the Sacrament was (...), says the
Text, Luke 22.20. Beside, it is nowhere said, that Christ and his Disciples
continued in the Table gesture at the blessing of the Holy Supper.

2. There Is the same reason for our imitation of Christ in one circumstance as
well as another; and so if we must imitate Christ at the Sacrament in Gesture,
why not in Time and Place also? and so as Christ did in an upper-room after
Supper, etc. But,

3. If we must imitate Christ's practice herein, we must receive it kneeling,
i. e. in conformity to the custom of the Church where we live; so did Christ
and his Apostles, they received the Passover in that Gesture which was then in
use in the Jewish Church.

Thirdly, A third thing he urges against kneeling [which I believe is as much
against his own knowledge] is the custom of the Church Catholic, and the
Canons of general Councils, particularly Nice, 1 Can. 20. that prohibiteth
Adoration on any Lord's Day in the year.

Answ. Though Mr. Baxter allege this to amuse his Followers, yet he knows,

1. That that same Council which forbad Genuflexion, did require standing, and
not sitting. And,

2. That that injunction of the Church was only to signify their belief and
joy concerning their own and Christ's Resurrection, and not to continue in the
Church after the Resurrection was sufficiently believed; for if it were still
binding, we must receive the Sacrament standing, and not sitting or kneeling.
But,

3. Admit that the Primitive Christians did receive the Sacrament kneeling
[which they did not] yet that would not prove kneeling unlawful upon this
account, because the Church is not bound to observe always the same indifferent
Rites and Gestures: for though Christ and his Apostles sat when they taught
the people, Act. 16.13. yet all Ministers are not bound thereby to the same
Gesture.

Fourthly, A fourth scruple he has against kneeling, is its symbolizing
scandalously with idolatrous Papists, who signify thereby Bread-worship or
Idolatry.

Answ. This same Argument is as good against sitting; for that is as much a
symbolizing with Papists, Arrians, and Heathens.

Durand. rat. l. 4.
1. Papists. The Pope himself, at some Solemnities, Alt. Dam. c. 10.
receives the Eucharist sitting. And the Benedictine Monks the Thursday before
Easter, receive it sitting.

2. Sitting is a symbolizing with Arrians. The Arrians in Poland denying the
Divinity of Christ, Syn. Craco.
were the first Authors, known to those Churches, of this sitting gesture.

3. It Is a symbolizing with Pagans. Sitting was the ordinary gesture of Worship
in the Romish Pagan Idolatry. Plutarch affirms, That the ancient Laws of their
Pagan-worship required ut adoraturi sedeant, that they worship sitting. Now if
symbolizing with Papists be a sufficient Argument against kneeling, why is not
symbolizing with Papists, Arrians, and Heathens, a good Argument against
sitting; and so Christ's institution of the Sacrament made void by admitting no
gesture to be lawful? Yet by this superstitious fear of sin in kneeling, do
they break Communion with us, and scare many wholly from the Sacrament in
public and private both; like that good Physician, that out of tenderness to
his Patient, lest he should hurt himself by drinking, stole his silver Cup.
It Is enough to show, that this scruple [like the rest] does not arise from any
tenderness of Conscience, but peevishness and obstinacy; that the Church of
England has so openly and plainly declared against all adoration of the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, Rubric after the Communion.
or any corporal presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood therein. And is
it not shameful obstinacy when men shall be so tempted to contemn that sacred
Ordinance which the Primitive Christians so begged upon their knees! that it
shoul'd so superstitiously be made the cause of Strife and Division, which was
intended to unite us in love to one another! That men should choose to go to
Goal rather than to the Lords Table, for fear of kneeling, and all upon such
feeble pretenses as the best that the learned Pleader could produce! This
scruple has been so often, so fully, and so convincingly confuted, that Mr.
Baxter (in his Book against Bagshaw) tells us, That the Nonconformists of
London, upon consult in this matter, did generally determine to receive the
Sacrament of the Parish-Minister [and kneeling.] Which shows that they are
convinced of the lawfulness of it, and do act in this matter contrary to a
known duty, merely to keep up the Separation. And in his fifth Disput. p. 411.
That himself would kneel rather than disturb the Churches peace; intimating
that himself does not believe it to be sinful, though he would have his
Followers to believe so. I know one or more Nonconformists of the greatest note
in Worcestershire, who having acknowledged the lawfulness of kneeling,
ingenuously declared, that they refused Communion with their Parish-Minister,
and gave the Sacrament in houses, merely in compliance with the people, and for
fear of losing them; (as much as to say) For fear lest their Faction should
return to Union and Church Communion, and (as Mr. Zach. Crofton said) serve God
and do their duty, leaving their Leaders to their dissembling tricks.

The rest of his Exceptions are for the most part such as do vanish in the very
naming of them: As,

1. That every Parishioner should receive the Sacrament twice a year. As though
every Child or Idiot were thereby obliged to it, or as though the Church meant
any but persons duly qualified; though the Mr. Cartwright.
greatest Nonconformists in Queen Elizabeth's time, and the Alt. Dam.
greatest in King James's time, seemed to think three times a year too little,
and therefore would have all who were in the Churches Communion, forced to
receive Statis temporibus omnes adigendi, said the latter; forced by civil
punishment, said the former.

2. That all Priests and Deacons are to say daily the Morning and
Evening-prayer privately or openly, not being let by sickness or some other
urgent cause. Where is the Exception? or what is the evil of praying when they
can awhile? for the injunction intends no more.

3. He excepts against the use of Godfathers and Godmothers; though himself [in
Scripture proof of Infants Baptism, page preliminary to his Epist. Dedicatory]
has proved sufficiently, that the use of Godfathers and Godmothers is, if not
Apostolical, yet of greatest antiquity in the Church, it being used in
Hyginus's time, who lived (as he proves from Helvicus, Paraeus, Prideaux, and
others] within forty years of St. John, and conversed with the Disciples and
Familiars of the Apostles; and so (as he urges) cannot be ignorant of the
practice of the Apostles in baptizing Infants. So that (according to Mr. Baxter
himself) it is probable enough that the use of Godfathers and Godmothers is
Apostolical. However, that it is of greatest antiquity in the Church, himself
has proved, beyond the reach of scruple; nor are any other of his scruples
much less futile. Is it not a shame then for those Dissenters to make such
pitiful Pleas for Peace and Nonconformity, to disturb the Churches Peace, and
endanger the Safety of the Kingdom, on such frivolous pretenses and scruples,
no more rational or religious than that of their Brethren in Scotland, who once
scrupled the lawfulness of sending sealed Letters into Spain, lest the Wax
should be employed in making Tapers to the Virgin Mary or other Saints, and so
they should be accessory to Idolatry; or than that of a
Worcestershire-Nonconformist, who killed his Fathers Greyhound [contrary to his
Interdict and Intreaty] because it was (said he) a profane creature.

SECT. XI. Now upon a due disquisition of these things, judge who will of these
Queries following.
Q. 1. WHether that which Mr. Baxter says of Conformity, be not much more true
of Nonconformity (viz.) That there is more in Mr. Tombs for Anabaptistry, in
the late Hungarian for Polygamy, in others for Drunkenness, stealing and lying
in cases of necessity, than ever has been published yet for the lawfulness of
Nonconformity?

Q. 2. Whether the present sad Separation be not kept up chiefly by this Cheat
(viz.) the Peoples supposing Nonconformists to know Communion with our Church
to be unlawful and sinful? whereas they do believe and know the contrary; and
accordingly [some of the learnedest of them] have declared publicly the
innocence and lawfulness of our Church Communion, Liturgy, and Ceremonies, etc.
who yet could never be brought to say one word to the people of this their
belief.

Q. 3. Whether Mr. Baxter's taking up with such frivolous Exceptions, and being
guilty of so many gross and palpable self-contradictions in defending
Nonconformity, be not some proof that he writes what he does not believe, and
designs nothing in his Writings but to amuse the people and support the
Separation? and whether he could with all his Learning have devised any thing
more, whereby to perpetuate a rigid Separation?

Q. 4. Whether their being so studious of new Scruples, and so busy at
reviling Governors and Government, at such a time as this, when Indulgences to
them abound, when their Interest gets ground, when they enjoy all that liberty
that once they did pretend to desire, when there are attempts of opening the
doors of Toleration and Comprehension to them, and when the attempters have
been so scurrilously reproacht, and so abusively requited for it, as that
excellent person Dr. Stillingfleet and others have been: Whether this be not
some sign that they affect Nonconformity, and are fond of their Separation,
and to be satisfied with nothing but governing; and that it is not Conscience,
[as King James said at Hampton-Court] but Contumacy that keeps them from
conforming?

Q. 5. Whether their refusing to renounce the Covenant, which Mr. Alsop calls
the great Mountain in their way to Conformity; whether this does not import
their belief of the obligation of that diabolical Sacrament, and so that they
look upon themselves as bound thereby to endeavor the alteration of the
Government, as soon as they can strengthen their Party, and get power and
opportunity so to do? And whether the Government had not need to have a very
watchful eye over such as so look upon themselves as obliged to endeavor all
they can its overthrow, who have sworn, and stand to their Oath, expressly thus
never to give themselves to Neutrality or Indifferency in extirpating the
Government, [as it is now by Law establish'd] but will zealously and constantly
continue their endeavors all the days of their lives, to extirpate the
Church Government by Bishops, etc. That they will do this against all
opposition, against all lets and impediments whatever, as the words of the Oath
are.

Q. 6. Whether the Nonconformists would endure in the Kingdom a Party so
combined against them, as they are against the present Government, had they the
power that once they had?

Q. 7. Whether the like outcries against Bishops and Ceremonies, the like
Paper-scuffles as these Pleas for Peace, were not the immediate forerunner,
and much of the cause of the late Civil War?

Q. 8. Whether all those convulsive State-troubles we are in, all those Fears
and Jealousies of Popery that the Nation groans under, be not truly and rightly
ascribed to those Abettors of Nonconformist-principles, who banished the D. of
Y. thither where he was seduced to the Church of Rome?

Q. 9. Whether that tenderness of Conscience and purity of Religion which
Nonconformists so pretend to, can consist with that schismatical disturbance of
the Churches Peace, that despising Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities,
that vilifying of Ministers, and disobeying of Magistrates, which
Nonconformists are so notoriously guilty of, and which are as contrary to the
Word of God, as Mr. Tombs's Anabaptistry, the Hungarian's Polygamy, lying,
stealing, drunkenness, etc.

Q. 10. Whether these Nonconformity-scruples can in the judgment of right
Reason or Religion, countervail one of those many evils of those divisions of
Church and State, which they occasion? Such are,

1. That want of Christian love and tenderness of affection which Christ so
much enforces upon his Church and People, much unchristian censoriousness, and
rash judging one another, that (...), that bitter envying and strife, which St.
James so condemns as carnal, sensual, devilish, Jam. 3.14, 15. By all which God
is certainly offended, Christian Charity much violated, the Churches Peace
disturbed, its Enemies most gratified, Christianity it self reproached,
Irreligion and Ungodliness encouraged. Constantine observed, That the
separation of the Donatists made those that least zeal'd Religion, to deride
and scoff at it. Optatus notes, Eusebius Eccl. Hist. l. 10.
That whilst the Donatists made a breach in the Church about matters of
Discipline, and contended that their Separation was lawful, and the Orthodox
Church decry'd it as unlawful, the common people were at a stand about the
practice of Religion, inter vestrum licet, and nostrum non licet, nutant and
remigrant animae populorum: And one way in particular, whereby it is very apt
to promote Profaneness and Irreligion, is by rendering Church Censures, and
particularly Excommunication, ineffectual on Offenders. What care they for
being excluded the Society of Christians, as long as so many reputed religious,
do upon the very account of Religion voluntarily exclude themselves?

2. The endangering the Safety and Interest of the Kingdom: Church-divisions
have brought most dreadful Ruins on Kingdoms and Countries. He that reads the
History of the Turks and Eastern Empire, shall find that the Christians
State-divisions which were founded on their Church-divisions, laid the
foundation whereon the Turks erected their Dominions in those places; which was
the rooting out of their public Christian Profession. And Josephus relates,
That the Divisions of Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation, Prol. de Bell. Jud.
exposed them to the desolation brought upon them by the Romans. Such is the
evil of Church-divisions, that Dion. Alex. said, That to suffer Martyrdom,
(...), Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6.
rather than to divide the Church by Schisms, is not less glorious than to be a
Martyr for refusing to offer Sacrifice to Idols.

3. A third evil of the present Church-divisions is, the declining of the
regular and public exercise of their Ministerial Functions, which the ancient
Christians showed such dislike of, that if any Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon,
being ordained, did not undertake his Ministration, Con. Ant. c. 17.
he was to be separated from all Christian Society, and to be condemned with
the same severity as he who undertook the place and minded it not: which
regular and public Ministration no Nonconformist can in Reason or Religion
pretend to, so long as it is in such manifest contempt of lawful Authority as
the Holy Scriptures condemn for heinous sin; much less can they pretend to it,
that have wholly laid aside their Ministration or Exercise of their Ministry,
as is the case of many Nonconformists that I could name.

Were the Pleader employed in this matter (I doubt not) he would produce an
Induction of a hundred such particulars, showing the great evil and sinfulness,
the pernicious duct and tendency of the present Separation. Yet this beloved
Separation must be kept up, though on no other grounds than that on which the
late Civil War was raised, (viz.) pretense to Reformation and purity of
Religion; like the Papists Oath of Secrecy for carrying on the present Plot,
which though every word of it almost be Blasphemy or Treason, Bolron's
Narrative.
yet is called a good and pious Design. Whereas if they had the liberty of
reforming, what were the Reformation but mere Tinkery, mending one hole and
making two? as it was with them in Queen Elizabeth's time; there were four
Classes that had set up themselves in this Kingdom, who addressed themselves to
the Lord Burleigh for alteration of the Liturgy; Dr. Ham. view of the Direct.
p. 2.
they had granted them the liberty of reforming, and making a new one, somewhat
according to the Geneva form; but this the second Classis disliked, and altered
in 600 particulars. That again had the fate to be quarreled at by the third
Classis, and almost as many faults found with it as the first; and the third
was in like manner quarreled at by the fourth. So that at last the dissenting
of those Brethren, like the division of Tongues at Babel, kept the Tower from
advancing any higher.

I would now conclude with my humble request to Mr. Baxter, That he would
forbear any further vilifying of Ministers, railing at Bishops, and scribbling
against Ceremonies, etc. as that which has contributed very far to the great
danger we are in of ruin both to Church and Kingdom: But I know it is as good
forbid his Beard to grow. I shall end therefore as I began, with reminding him
of his own words in Saints Rest, Epist. Dedic. to the People of Kedarminster,
p. 8, 9. If I should zealously press my Judgment on others, and seek to make a
Party for it, [as he has done] and disturb the Peace of the Church, and
separate from my Brethren, [as he doth] I should fear lest I should prove a
Firebrand in Hell, [which God forbid] for being such a Firebrand in the
Church [as he is.] I charge you therefore if God should give me up to any
factious Church rending course, [as he hath] that you follow me not a step, [as
you do.] Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Some seasonable Advice to all Protestant People of England, heartily
recommended by a Lover of his Country. Printed for Randal Tailor. 1681.


