Theatrum Redivivum, OR THE THEATER Vindicated BY Sir RICHARD BAKER IN ANSWER
to Mr. PRYN'S HISTRIO-MASTIX: Wherein his groundless Assertions against
Stage Plays are discovered, his miss-taken Allegations of the Fathers
manifested, as also what he calls his Reasons, to be nothing but his Passions.

Comici finis est humanos mores nosse, atque describere, Hierom. ad Furiam.
LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Francis Eglesfield at the Marigold in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 166^.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
AT length thou art presented with a small Piece, which for many years has
been bu^ied with its Renowned Author. It appeared not till now, knowing very
well, that this late World has been fitter for Bedlam, then for sober, and
Rational Discourses. The Author wants not evidence for what he speaks, (though
speak what he would; if he named a Stage Play, he was sure to meet with a Momus
in every corner) but some things have the ill luck to be condemned, before they
are heard. Well (Reader) seeing we are (by the providence of Heaven) so happy,
as to be allowed the use of our own Eyes, and Reason again; Be as thou ought
to be, a Reader, before a Judge. For to condemn the innocent, is equally to be
condemned, with acquitting the guilty. The noble Author of this Book seems
fairly to design nothing more, then Truth, and especially in clearing the Sense
of those two great Luminaries of the Church, Saint Cyprian, and Tertullian, his
Master, in his Book De Spectaculis, wherein his principal drift only is, to
cry out against, and sever^^y to condemn the mixtures of Idolatry with their
public Shows: some intentions there were of annexing the Treaties of
Tertullian, and Saint Cyprian, both to this Discourse; that every man might
see, what the Author of this Book saw in them: But, for some reasons, that
labor is respited. It is very well known what Satirical Inv^ctives are
thundered out against the ^heatre, but their just Reasons are not yet produced;
it may be, they are reserved for the second Volume of Hi^trio Mastix: Ind^ed
some may be s^en against the abuses of it, from which to reason against the
thing it self would engender a consequence of such large extent, that we must
eat our words, or be weary of our ^ives. For if we sit down by such a
Conclusion, that things are unlawful in their use, because unlawfully abused,
we must neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor wear Clothes, becau^^ in all
these, and many more, the bad^ness of mankind is such, that it prompt them to
unexcusable exorbitancies, an^ deba^cheries. Good men have found^ed much of
their Rhetoric, and th^^^ loudest Declamations against Stage^ Plays, upon what
others had formerl^ said against them, rather out of a sequa^tious credulity
corresponding with wha^ others have Magisterially determined^ then a due
attendency either to the Pr^n^ciples of right Reason^ or Scrip^u^^ Authority,
which ought to cast t^^ scales, and put greater obligements upon the
Consciences of reasonable Cr^atures, then the Conj^ctures o^ Opinions of the
gravest Mortals. But ^ must not forget my self, and enter up^on Apologies for
this learned Au^^hours undertaking (who has sober^y, and judiciously acquitted
himself) I ^ave taken upon me, only to speak the ^rologue, and to tell you
upon what ^cene he lays his Discourse: he needs ^o Epilogue to plead excuse for
the ^cting of his Part: And I make ^o doubt, Reader, if thou will but vouchsafe
him a patient perusal, but he shall also have thy

Plaudite.
THE THEATER VINDICATED, OR AN ANSWER To Mr. PRINS HISTRIO-MASTIX.
WHo has not heard of Sr. Francis Walsingham, an Eminent Counselor in Queen
ELIZABETH'S Time, famous for his Wisdom in matters of State; and more for his
Piety in advancing the Gospel? yet this was the Man, that procured the Queen to
entertain Players for her Servants; and t^ give them Wages, as in a just
Vocati^on. And would he ever have done this, being so religious a Man, if he
ha^ thought Plays to be profane; being s^ great a Statesman, if inconvenient
to the State? And now, me thinks, I have said enough in defense of Plays.

But because not only the Wisest Me^ are sometimes mistaken, and the Truth may
be found amongst the meanest (Saepe etiam est Olitor valde opportuna loquutus)
It will be fit to lay aside all consideration of the Persons, that speak; and
only to take into consideration, and weigh the Reasons, that are delivered.

It is true, Mr. Prin is Plaintiff; and it is a great advantage, that an
Accuser has over a Defender: not only in that, he speaks first, which gets a
possession, as it were, of the hearer's Hearts; but because he has commonly
the pretense of some notorious Crime for his Foundation, upon which every man
naturally is apt to cast a Stone: where the Defender must himself alone not
only pull down the Building, and raze the Foundation; but vindicate also both
the Natural, and the acquired Inclination, and prejudice of the Hearers. And
especially, the Accuser has this advantage, when he meets with a Common Place
of some Vice to run upon: for then he goes away amain with it; and bears down
all before him, with O Tempora! O Mores! But most especially, if the pretended
Vice may seem to trench upon Religion: for then the Defender is scarce heard
speak for the multitude of voices, that are crying out even in Heathenish
Devotions; Great is Diana of the Ephesians: that whatsoever can be alleged, in
defense, out of Reason, is presently beaten back without reason.

But, leaving these disadvantages to take their fortunes, and having a clear
conscience, that I no way encroach upon the Bounds of true Religion, I am the
bolder to enter the Lists: yet not so much taking upon me to be a Champion of
the Cause; as only undertaking to be a Wrestler with the Writer. And this I
willingly profess, that I wrestle not with him, as he is in his own Person, for
I know him not; and he may be better, then he seems to me: but I wrestle with
him, only as he appears in his Book; which cannot be fuller of words, and
emptier of reason, then it is. And I think it fit to tell, how far his Book
has wrough^ upon me; that where, before the reading it, I took Plays only de
been esse, as being in use; after the reading it, I found Plays Been esse, and
fit to be in use. For his Arguments being taken all up upon trust; and not so
much as weighed, when he took them; now that he comes to put them off again,
are found not only not to be weight, but not to be Silver; and so, where he
intended, by his Book, to bring into detestation the seeing of Plays: he has
rather brought into estimation the acting of them. For when a man takes upon
him to prove a Matter; and then either cannot, or does not prove it
sufficiently it leaves not only a vehement suspicion; but a strong conceit in
the Hearers minds, that his Cause is not good. And as the only Itch of
Vainglory made many in Old Time go out of the Church, and become Heretics in
Divinity: so the like Itch of Vainglory makes other men go out of Humane
Society, and become Heretics in Morality. Like Erostratus, who burnt the
Temple of Diana at Ephesus, for no other cause, but to be talked-of in the
World.

His very beginning is very suspicious. For he begins not a Jove (as yet Poets,
whom he taxes so much, use to do) but a Diabolo. He takes his First Reason
from the Devil: ( Fol. 9.) He therefore thinks Plays unlawful; because they
were invented by the Devil: wherein he shows himself to be better acquainted
with the Devil, then we are^ for we know nothing of it, whether they were of
his inventing, or no: and we may marvel how he comes to know it, unless the
Devil himself have told him so; and then it is the more unlikely to be so,
seeing The Devil is a Liar, and the Father of Lies. He will say, perhaps, he
had it from Tertullian; who tells also, tha^ the Angels were cast out of Heaven
for inventing Astrology: as true in the one as in the other. It seems,
Tertullian had no true Inventory of the Devil's Inventions: yet this man would
make us as very Fools, as himself, to take all for current, that he hears him
say. But what, if we should say, that many things have been discovered, and
made known to Men, even by the Devil; which yet are profitable to be known, and
lawful to be used? Does not Lodovicus Vives affirm, that the Devil invented
Logic? Yet will any man, that has Reason, affirm Logic to be unlawful? The
Devil confessed Christ to be the Son of God; when the Jews knew it not, or
would not know it: and is this man so very a Jew, to think it therefore
unlawful to confess Christ? And why is it any better Argum^nt to say, The Devil
invented it; therefore it is Impious: then to say, God invented it; therefore
it is Pious? And yet who knows not of things invented by God, which, for their
abuse, have been rejected? Which he cannot be so forgetful, as to deny, if he
do but remember the Brazen Serpent. If then a thing Invented, and Instituted by
God, might, being abused, be rejected; why may not a thing Invented, and
Instituted by the Devil, the Evil being removed, be retained? For it is not the
Inventour, that makes a thing to be good, or evil; but it is the Conformity, or
Opposition to the Rule, and Will of God. Indeed by the Paw of this first
Argument we may see what a kind of Lion we are like to find in the sequel of
his Discourse. For where Tertullian, and other Fathers, prove the Plays of the
Heathen to be all naught, and execrable; because Idolatrous, and full of
Superstition: and thereupon infers, that they were Inventa Diabolorum,
Invention of Devils, as from whom all Evil originally does flow: this man, like
a Crab, goes backward with their Reason, and says, Plays were invented by the
Devil; therefore are execrable, and unlawful: so making that the Medius
Terminus, or Proof of his Argument, which the spoke only by way of
Exaggeration and making that his Foundation, which they laid on as only a
Superstructur^ And even for the guiltiness of this, yo^ shall see in his next
Argument, with wha^ a trick he seeks to put it off again; an^ yet is willing to
hold it still.

For [ Fol. 16.] Though he cannot per^haps punctually say, that Plays were
imm^^diately invented by the Devil; yet he man truly say, they were invented by
Idolatrou^ Heathen People, as the Devil^s Instrument^ which comes much to One.
But see the Judgment of this man; that sees no^ what a Fall he has taken by
raising the Argument; to fall from the Devil to Hea^then People: but well, Quod
dat accipimu^ we take what he lays down. Plays were not invented by the Devil,
but by Hea^then People: so his First Argument is cas^ out of Doors by himself;
and will hi^ second be served with any better Sawce^ For can nothing be
lawfully used, tha^ has been invented by Heathen People^ Let him look in
Polydore Virgil, and see ^ow many things of our daily use have ^een invented by
them; even the Let^ers he writes his Book withal. Then ^e were best go
quickly, and blot out all his Book; lest being written with Letters, invented
by the Heathen, the Devil should come, and challenge it to be of his inventing.
Here he thinks to mend the matter with saying; that [ Fol. 18.] good things,
invented by the Heathen, may lawfully be used, but not bad things, as Plays
are: but must he not first prove Plays to be bad, before this Reason will do
him any good? And if he can prove them to be bad; they shall then be unlawful
as bad, but not as invented by the Heathen: and so this Reason would do him no
good, though he could make it good.

But though he can fetch no Argument against Plays from the Devil^s Invention;
yet he has an Invention to fetch an Argument from him; and this it is: [ Fol.
28.] Plays were at first ordained, and destinated to the immediate Worship, and
gratification of Devil-Gods: therefore unlawful; but he has no sooner made
this Argument, but he finds fault with it himself; for [ Fol. 37.] so were many
of our Churches, which now are converted to Christian uses. Upon this he
replies, and then again rejoyns, and plays at fast and loose, goes in and out
so often in it, that it were but to run a Wilde-Goose Chase, to offer to follow
him. Yet I cannot let pass one subtle part, he plays at parting; where he
says, [ Fol. 40] that He for his part thinks it impossible, that ever Plays
should be r^formed; for who should do it? Good men will not; they rather wish
their ruin, then their useless welfare: Bad men will not, because they delight
in their pleasing Corruptions. And so he concludes them to be desperate, and
past all hope of Reformation. But may we not better apply his Argument to
himself; and say, We, for our parts, think it impossible, that this man's
Malice should ever be Reformed; for who should do it? God's Holy Spirit will
not, so long as he is resolved to ^ontinue in his Malice; the Devil will not,
who would have him be more malicious then ^e is, if possibly it might be
effected by ^im: and so conclude his Case to be ^esperate, and that he must be
fain to ^o on in the rage of his Malice still, ^or want of One to mend him.

But his Fourth Reason comes in most ^tately: where he makes [ Fol. 42.] Plays
the Pomps of the Devil, and Vanities of this wicked World; which every
Chri^tian man has renounced in his Baptism. But this Reason comes not more
vaunt^ngly in, then we shall see it go sneakingly out; as having no Credit for
want of being known. For who ever took the Pomps of the Devil to be meant of
Plays, and not rather of Pride, Vainglory, Luxury, Idolatry especially, and
such like? For, if one Man go to a Play, and another, in the mean time, be
luxurious, arrogant, and proud; in which of these Two shall the Devil be said
to be in his Pomps? Certainly, not in him, that is at a Play; for he may be
there, and (the rather perhaps for being there) have Thoughts, and Meditations
full of Humility; whilst in t^^ other, wheresoever he be found, we a^^sure,
there cannot be found an humb^^ or a sober Thought: and where Humili^^ and
Sobriety are wanting, there is t^^ Devil properly in his Pomps, and Iolli^^
This Argument indeed is used by Te^^tullian, and some of the Fathers; wh^^
speaking of the Plays of the Heathen, (...) them the Pomps of the Devil, by
reason of their Idolatries, and Superstition^ which justly get the name of
Pom^^ of the Devil from all other Vices; as b^ which the Devil is most of all
magnified and exalted. And, it seems, this Man coming to spy it in their Books,
takes the Argument as he finds it; and, without ever examining the Matter,
claps it (...) here, as fitly as the Painter in the Poet who put a Horse's Neek
to a Man Head;

Humano capiti cervicem Pictor equinam. For what is this to our Plays? Not
unlike what Cicero spoke of Piso; (who, ou^ of opinion of his Ancestour's
Virtues, was by the People of Rome made Edile:) ^^so was made Edile; not this
Piso: ^uid enim simile habet, praeter Nomen? For that likeness, but in the
Name? So ^e may say; (though in a contrary ^ay) Plays are the Pomps of the
Devil; ^ot our Plays: Quid ^nim simile habent, ^^aeter Nomen? And one would
think, ^ertullian had taught him plainly e^ough, that the Pomps of the Devil
are therefore only affirmed of Plays, because of their Idolatries; where he
says: Si igitur ex Idololatria universam Specta^ulorum paraturam constare
constiterit; ind^bitate praejudicatum erit, etiam ad Spe^tacula pertinere
Renuntiationis nostrae testimenium in Lavacro quae Diabolo, and Pompae, and
Angelis ejus sunt mancipata, scilicet per Idololatriam: ^i quid aut^m ex his
non ad Idolum pertinuerit; id neque ad Idololatriam, neque ad nostram
Ejerationem pertinebit. Thus in English. If therefore it shall be made
manifest, that all the Materials, and Furniture of Plays be merely Idolatrous:
it will be an undoubted Prejudice, that the renouncing we make in Baptism
belongs, and reaches unto Plays; which are dedicated to the Devil, his Pomp^
and Angels, by reason of their Idolatries but, if there be any thing in a Play,
tha^ belongs not to an Idol; neither shall (...) belong to Idolatry, nor yet
reach to the Renouncing we make in Baptism. Wha^ could have been spoken more
plainly^ to have made him understand, if hi^ Zeal had not blinded his
Understanding? or to have made him go right, if he had not been wilfully bent
to go astray? If he would now at last but take this Distinction along with him,
in surveying his Book once again; and apply it where there is occasion: it
might do him no small ease in disburthening the Body of his Book of many
peccant, and gross Humors, which make it swell into this huge Bulk.

It seems he can do no good against Plays with his Arguments from the Devil;
and therefore now he means to give the Devil over: and it is Time; for we may
marvel, what pleasure he could take, to keep him company so long. Yet he cannot
leave the Devil so quite, but he must have a Trick from him still, and be
tearing men's clothes from off ^ir Backs; as the Devil did, Luke viii. ^7. For
his dislike of Plays now (though ^ith interposition of some extravagant
^onceits, which he calls Reasons; and will ^^tter take their places afterward)
is because of their Clothes ( Fol. 179.) He thinks it not lawful for Men to
wear Women's clothes, or for Women to wear Men's; and, because this is often done
in Plays, and Masks, he utterly condemns them. Yet this is well; there is
some moderation in this: for this Reason puts not Plays to death; but only
confines them. For, notwithstanding this Reason, they may be lawful enough
amongst the Indians, who go naked; and, not to go so far, they may be lawful
enough too amongst the Irish, where one kind of Garment serves Men, and Women.
But, though we can be content to cross the Water to the Bank's- Side; yet we
should be loath to cross the Irish-Seas to see a Play: and can we not see one
here, because of their Clothes? Indeed, he cites a Text of Scripture for (...)
Deuteronomy. xxii. 5. The Woman shall not we^^ that, which pertains to the Man;
neithe^ shall a Man put on Women's raiment. ^ pregnant place indeed: but where
find he this Precept? even in the same place where he finds also, that we
must no^ wear clothes of Linsey-Woolsey: and see^ing we lawfully now wear
Clothes of L^^^s^y-Woolsey; why may it not be as lawfu^^ for Men to put on
Women's Garments^ But, if he will have this Precept to stan^ in force, though it
be no part of the Moral Law, yet because it may have (...) Moral construction;
how will he then de^^fend his own eating of Black-Puddin^ against the Precept
for eating of Blood^ For this Precept against eating of bloo^ has a stronger
Tie, then that for wearin^ of Garments. For that, as given onel^ by Moses, may,
with just probability, b^ thought to end with Moses: but this against eating of
blood is continued afte^ Moses Time by the Apostles themselves^ And why then
should it trouble Mr. Prin's conscience to see a Boy wear Women's Garments,
against the Precept of Moses; ^hen it troubles not his conscience to ^^t
Black-puddings against the Precept (...) the Apostles? But, howsoever it
^^ouble his conscience, it need not trou^^e any bodies else; seeing his Reason
^^oves it no more unlawful to see a Play, ^^en to eat a Pudding, and so, upon
the ^atter, is not worth a Pudding. But, if (...) be so great a sin for Men to
put on Wo^ens Garments; what is it for Men to put ^n Women's Conditions? which
is perhaps ^^deed the very Moral of this Precept: as Clemens Alexandrinus, and
St. Cyril, of old, and of late, amongst others, Macchabaeus Alpinas (a Writer,
whom Melancthon exceedingly commends) ex^ound it. And if it be so, then is this
Man the true breaker of the Precept; and ^ot Players: at least, if we may call
it Women's conditions, to do nothing else, but scould, and rail: for what is all
his Book, but a bundle of scoulding Invectives, and railing, instead of
reasoning? But, to give a full Answer to this Argument, do but hear what
eminent Divines conceive of this Precept. And, th^^ I may not do, as this man
uses to do (...) show a Be, bring in the whole Swarm^ will name you one of
many, yet (...) unum e multis, Martin Luther: who^^ words upon this place are
these; (...) non prohibetur, quin ad vitandum peri^^^ lum, aut ludendum joco,
vel ad sallend^^ hosts, Mu^ier possit gerere arma Viri, (...) Vir uti vest
muliebri: sed ut serio, and usit^^ habitu talia non fiant; ut decora utriq^^
sexui servetur dignitas. It is not (says he^ forbidden by this Precept; but
that (...) avoid danger, or to play, and sport, (...) to deceive an Enemy, a
Woman may (...) a Man's apparel, and a Man a Woman^^ but that it be not done in
earnest, and as th^^^ usual Habit; that so a decent comelin^^^ in both Sexes
may be observed. And wh^ knows not, that Luther, when time wa^^ did greater
matters in the World, the^^ making good the Exposition of a sing^^^^ Text. But,
lest you should think it (...) Lutheran Opinion, or that Luther herei^ were
singular by himself, I will joy^ one with him, that had as lieve die, as b^^
^^yned with him, if he could otherwise ^^oose, the learned Jesuit, Lorinuse;
who, ^eciting great variety of Interpretations upon this Text, makes choice of
this, as ^he soundest; that Dissimulatio vestis potest ^^terdum sine peccato
fieri, vel ad represen^andam Comice Tragiceve personam; vel ad ^ffugiendum
periculum; vel in casu simili: ^or representing a Person in Comedy, or
Tragedy; or for avoiding of danger, or ^n such like Cases, a woman may
lawfully ^ut on a man's apparel; and a man a woman's. Thus these men allow that
in Plays, for which this man allows not Plays. And is it not strange, that Mr.
Prin, with all his great Reading, should never meet with any of these? For [
folio 199.] he professes, he never met with any, that was of this Opinion:
that either his knowledge must be very little, if not knowing it; or his
Profession very naught, if, knowing it, he dissemble it.

But, that this Precept is not intended literally, as any part of the Moral
Law, is not only the Opinion of most Writers; but appears also by the
thirteenth Canon of the Council at Gang^^ (which this man cites to the
contrary^ for, upon that Canon, the old Interpret^^ Balsamon delivers it, not
only as toler^^ble, but, in some Cases, as very com^mendable, for Women to go
in Men's ap^parel; as St. Melane, and St. Eugenia and other Holy Women, are
there said to have done. There is here offered us a^^ answer; that, though it
may be tolerate^ being done to honest intents: yet it cann^^ be tolerated,
being done to lewd purposes as Players do it. But this Answer, lik^
Mephibosheth, is lame of both the Feet^ for neither do Players use it to le^^
purposes; neither, if it were a branch o^ the Moral Law, ought it to be done
for any purpose.

But ( Fol. 156) Hypocrisy is a notoriou^ s^n; and Players are in this
notorious Hypocrites; and therefore the Greeks have but one word for an
Hypocrite, and a Player; as if they took them both for one. A very goodly
Argument! as though, because the Latins have but one word for an Host, and a
Guest: ( Non Hospes ab Hospite tutus) therefore an Host, and a ^uest should be
all one: which if he should go about to prove, I doubt he ^ould be found to
reckon without his Host. Howsoever, by this reason, we may claim as much
difference between an Hypocrite, and a Player; as is between an Host, and a
Guest: and tha^'s difference enough. But what is it, wherein Players are such
Hypocrites? Forsooth! because men wear women's Apparel, and counterfeit the
gestures, and behaviors of women; and so appear to be women, when they are
men: and to appear other then they are, is plain Hypocrisy. It is plain
Hypocrisy, no doubt; but it is not plain, that it is unlawful Hypocrisy. Is
it not said, that some Zeal is not good, if it be without Knowledge? and may we
not as truly say; that some Hypocrisy is no evil, if it be without Deceit? For
the evil of Hypocrisy is not in the Act, but in the End: and though Players
may be guilty of the Act; yet certainly of the End they are not. For, seeing
that, which they do, is not done to Circumvent, but to Represent; not to
Deceive others, bu^ to make others Conceive: though it may without question be
called Hypocrisy, ye^ it is not Hypocrisy, that can be called in question. It
is not Hypocrisy in malam partem. Was it Hypocrisy in the Thre^ Angels, that
appeared to Abraham? ye^ they appeared other, then they were^ they seemed Men;
they were Angels^ they put on Bodies; they were but Spirits. And is there not
as much Hypocrisy in putting on other's Bodies, as in putting on others
Garments? Did no^ the Angel Raphael, when he conducte^ young Tobias in his
Journey, both take upon him the Name, and Person, and counterfeit the speech,
and behavior of Azarias? And will he say, that this also was no Hypocrisy? If
then Angels might be such Hypocrites, and yet not sin; why may not Players be
such Hypocrites, yet come to be as Angels?

I had thought I should have gotten them leave to Play, if they would but go
handsomely, and wear good clothes: but this makes worse for them then before.
For ( Fol. 216.) he dislikes Plays now, because Players wear such costly
clothes: and represent Kings, and Queens in such sumptuous ^obes. He thinks,
perhaps, that Kings, and Queens should wear no clothes, but made of Leather;
because it was of that stuff, that God made clothes for Adam, and Eve; who
being the greatest Princes, that ever were in the world, it were Presumption
for any to wear better clothes, then they did. But I think it best to let alone
the Answering of this Argument until we meet a^ Amsterdam: only I may have
leave to say this; that he should do Players as great wrong, to hinder them
from wearing of rich clothes, as he should do a Goldsmith, to restrain him from
selling of rich Plate: for what do Players, but sell their Clothes, as often as
they show them?

All, that hitherto has been said, has been but accidental, and I may say his
outside Arguments: he never came to the substance till now; but now he comes,
and therefore now we may look for very substantial matter; and thu^ he begins.
( Fol. 63.) The subject, ma^^ter, and style of Plays is lascivious,
sc^^^rilous, and filthy: Therefore Plays are u^^lawfull. But not so unlawful
as this Argument: for mark the faults of it. If he mean it thus; The subject,
matter, an^ style of some Plays is scurrilous, and filthy; Therefore all Plays
are unlawfull^ who sees not the unlawfulness of thi^ kind of reasoning, from a
particular to conclude a general? But, if he mean i^ thus; The subject, matter,
and style of all Plays is scurrilous, and filthy: this is more unlawful, then
the other; seeing it is directly false: for who knows not, that Tragedies are
not capable of scurrility? Although therefore Tragedies cannot get his leave;
yet, it seems, they have his Argument's leave, to hold up their heads, and
live. But how then will the Title of his Book hold up his Head, to be called
Histrio-Mastix? have a general Name, if it be not general? Will he say, that
Tragedi be not Histriones; Actours of Tragedies no Players? He should, if he
were ^ell served, be made eith^r to abridge ^is Title, or to enlarge his
Argument. But perhaps, because Tragedies are the Gentry, I may say, of Plays,
he is so ge^erous as to spare them for their Gen^ry's sake; but then Comedies,
which are ^ut the Commonalty of Plays, ar^ like to pay for it. But I doubt, he
has not so much Generosity in him, but rather, that for Tragedies he has
other Tragical Arguments in store, other Rods in Piss for them; and that this
Argument is wholly employed upon the defeat of Comedies: and therefore only
upon them it beats. But is th^re no means to save them from beating? Are there
not wards to keep of his Blow even from these also? May we not, first, flatly
deny it, and say, that in Plays no such scurrility can be found? Or, may we
not, next, divert it, and say; that, if any such scurrility be, it is the
Poet's fault, and not the Players? Or, may we not, thirdly, excuse it, and say;
If any such be, it is an abuse, at least done in such mannerly manner, that it
is not offensive to modest Ears? Or, may we not, lastly, justify it, and say;
that some scurrility man be, and sometimes must be in Plays, yet serving always
to pious Uses? I^ any of these Sayings he has his Answer^ and may take home
his Argument with him again, to teach it better manners^ then to slander Plays.
But let us examine these wards, to see if we can make them good, that we take
no^ more upon us, then we are able to perform. For this Argument, though he
make it but one, yet is, in truth, his Floodgate, which lets in the most, or
the most substantial of all his Arguments: that, if this be once well stopped,
he will not have ^ drop of Water, either of the Spring-Wate^ of Reasons, or of
the Pond-Water of Authorities, to turn his Mill. But in doing this there is no
necessity of using Method; for why should I be tied to keep order in answering,
when he tak^^ a Liberty to keep none in objecting? He is none of the
Methodicals himself, and therefore cannot look, that others should be. To speak
then, prou^ (...) buccam venerit, as matters come to hand: Is there in Plays
such Scurrility, and Obscenity, as he pretends? Let him then blame the Poets,
whose fault it is; for Players do but act that, which Poets in^ent? And what is
he the nearer now for condemning of Plays? Is it not a proper Argument to say;
Choerilus makes naughty Verses: Therefore there must no more Verses be made?
Poets make scurrilous plays; Therefore Tolli tota Theatra jube, Throw down all
Theaters. If all things must be cast away, that may be, and oftentimes are
abused, why does not this man pull out his Eyes with Democritus? or geld
himself with Origin? or wish with Nero, Vtinam nescirem Literas! Would I had
been an Ignoramus! But this Sophistry, ab Abusu ad usum, is so well known now,
even Lippis, and Tonsoribus, to the meanest sort; that one would wonder, how he
could stumble upon it, but much more, how he could stumble at it. But we are,
perhaps, more provident, then we need: we blame Poets, when, perhaps, there is
no cause. For can he charge Plays directly wi^^ any such obscenity? He urges
indeed cer^tain general Invectives, and Dolus versat^^ in generalibus, Deceit
lies in generals, but h^ instanceth in none: and we doubt not^ but, if he
could, he would; but, since h^ does not, we believe he cannot. The Stoics, a
Sect of Philosophers, the nearest of any to Christianity, were yet o^ this
Opinion; that nothing is unhonest, o^ obscene to be spoken, which is honest, o^
lawful to be done; and therefore they called all parts of the Body, and all
actions of Life (which Modesty in us suppresseth) in their common talk, by the
proper Names, in the broadest Terms; that we may truly say of Stoics, Non^
were more severe in the Rules of Virtuous Life, yet none more obscene in the
usage of filthy Talk. If then Obscenity of speech was no Disparagement in a
Stoic to the reputation of his Virtue; why should it be accounted so great a
Disparagement to the reputation of a Player? And yet I will allow him this: if
any such Stoical Obscenity can be found in Plays; ^^t him speak as bitterly
against them, as ^e can, I will never call it Railing; but ^ill take his part
my self: and such, it ^^ems, was the Obscenity of Plays in old ^^me, as appears
by Salvianus, Tanta ^^cum, ac verborum obscoenitates, ut vel re^^tionem sui
interdicant; that is, So obscene ^ere their Words, and Speeches, as not to ^e
named. And this is the Obscenity, which the Ancient Fathers so much cry ^ut
against in Plays, as pudicis auribus ^on ferenda, not to be heard by modest
ears, which I would have this man to note, that he may be brought to lay the
Saddle ^n the right Horse: for in the Plays of our ^imes he shall never be able
to show any ^uch Obscenity. There are sometimes perhaps, when Necessity
compells it, for representing of some scurrilous person, some secret strains,
in ambiguous terms, like the voices of Oracles, as it were an Obscenity under
Covert: (the Obscenity, to make appear the condition of the person; the Covert,
to express the modesty of the Player) and this is so far from offending the
Ears, that it is not sensible, till it have passed the sense, as not under
stood, till examined by the Understan^^ing: and being once there, it com^ to be
but Obscenity in Abstracto, which was in the world before ever Plays were and
would be still, though Plays should be no more. And in this they do b^^ imitate
Nature her self, quae parts e^ quae aspectum essent deformem habiturae, co^
texit, and abdidit: who covers the part^ which would have no pleasing aspect;
no^ took them clean away, (as this m^^ would have it) but placed them so, th^^
as they offend not, being seen, the Eyes; no more do these speeches, being
heard, the Ears: and would he ha^^ more modesty in Players, then there ^^ in
Nature? To expect therefore, tha^ Plays should be altogether without obscene
Passages, were it not to expect that Nature should make Bodies altogether
without Privy parts? And the hearing of those ought no more to offend the Ears
of any, then the seeing of these offended the Eyes of Adam, and Eve: of which,
though naked, they were not a whit ashamed. Obscene sights did never ^rouble
them, till they had made them selves Obscene Hearts. For as long as all is
clean, that should be clean, the foulness of that, which should be foul, will
never offend. Have not the neatest Cities their Sinks, and Channels? yet who
takes offense to look upon them? They are necessary for our use, but not
necessary for us to use. They are therefore made foul, that we may walk clean.
Indeed, it is not so much the Player, that makes the Obscenity, as the
Spectatour himself: as it is not so much the Juice of the Herb, that makes the
Honey, or Poison, as the Be, or Spider, that sucks the Juice. Let this man
therefore bring a modest heart to a Play, and he shall never take hurt by
immodest Speeches: but, if he come as a Spider to it, what marvel, if he suck
Poison, though the Herbs be never so sovereign. How many Questions of
Aristotle's Problemes? how many Chapters in Books of Physic may be found more
guilty of such Obscenity, then any Plays? And if such passages in the Books be
still suffered, and not to^ out; why may not the like passages b^ suffered in
Plays, and yet be born ou^ For as there is good use of such Treat^^ses in the
Schole of Nature, so there (...) good use of such speeches in the Schol^ of
Manners: and as in those it is the Reader's fault, and not the Writer's; (...)
in these it is the Spectatour's fault, an^ not the Player's, if any evil, or
corrupt^^on be contracted by them. And he that should forbear to go see a Play;
be^cause, perchance, he might hear some scurrilous speeches, may he not perhap^
tarry away, and hear worse at home^ For indeed this whole world is a^ a common
Stage, where men an^ beasts do play their parts, and where men many times play
the parts of beasts And I would know of this man, wha^ day he ever lived, that
he did not both hear, and see as great Enormities really committed upon this
great Stage, as are heard, or seen, but feignedly represented, on these lesser
Stages? And (...) there not as great danger in seeing ^^ces really acted, as in
seeing them only ^^ignedly represented? in seeing them done (...) ^arnest, as
in seeing them but done in ^^^^st? When vices are really acted, they (...) and
as Copi^s, and Examples, which men ^^e apt to follow; but when they are on^^
feigned on a Stage, they stand as Rocks, ^ewed only to be shunned. When sins
^re actually committed, they are as Pitch which touches us, and must needs
de^le us; but when they are only repre^ented, they are but as Pitch seen in a
^lass, which cannot defile us, because ^ot touch us. Where vices are really
^cted, there men may be said to stand in ^he way of Sinners; but where they are
only feignedly showed, there, men may be rather said, to sit, and hear their
Arraignment, and Condemnation.

But ( Fol. 48. and 948.) he would make us believe; That all the attractive
power in Plays, to draw Beholders, is merely from scurrility: as if it were no
Play; at least no pleasing Pla^, without it. Wherein, besides his prejudice, he
may be made to confess his ignorance: for l^^ him try it when he will, and com
him^self upon the Stage, with all the scurrili^^ of the Wife of Bath, with all
the ribald^^ of Poggius, or Boccace, yet I dare affirm^ he shall never give
that contentment t^ Beholders, as honest Tarlton did, thoug^ he said never a
word. And what scurrility was ever heard to come from the mouths of the best
Actours of our Time^ Allen, and Bourbidge? yet, what Plays were ever so
pleasing, as where their Parts had the greatest part? For, it is not the
scurrility, and ribaldry, that gives the contentmunt, as he foolishly imagines,
and falsely suggests; but it is the Ingeniousness of the Speech, when it is
fitted to the Person; and the Gracefulness of the Action, when it is fitted to
the Speech; and therefore, a ^lay read, has not half the pleasure of a Play
Acted: for though it have the pleasure of ingenious Speeches; yet it wants the
pleasure of Graceful action^ and we may well acknowledg^ that Gracefulness of
action, is the greatest pleasure of a Play, s^eing it ^s the greatest pleasure
of (the Art of pleasure) Rhetoric: in which we may ^e bold to say; there never
had been so good Orators, if there had not first been Players: seeing the best
Orators that ever were, account it no shame, to have learned the gracefulness
of their Action, even from Players: Demosthenes from Satyrus; and Cicero from
Roscius. Let him therefore keep his scurrility to himself, and send his
Proselytes to sit with his Hostess at Oxford; whose Apophthegm was, No mirth
without Bawdrie: as for us, we are contented, to see Plays in their best
Garments, and not in their foul clothes, in their graces, and not in their
faults.

But who are they in Plays, that use such scurrilous, and obscene speeches?
Has not a Poet said well; Tristia maestum
Vultum verba decent, Iratu^ plena minarum,
Ludentem, lasciva; feverum, seria dictu.


Indeed, if they were put into the mouths of Princes, or Persons of gravity,
there were just cause of dislike^ but to be put into the mouths of scurrilous,
and base persons, What hurt ca^ they do? None to the Actours; for the decorum
takes away their fault, and makes that faultless, which is decen^, and less to
the Spectatours: for how can (...) infect them, to imitate the scurrility,
whe^^ they see it, comely for none, but scurrilous persons? It rather teaches
the^ to avoid and loath such speeches, seeing they cannot but loath to be such
persons. For does this man think, tha^ goers to Plays are such simple Ideots^
that when they see a beastly, or profane part acted before them, they take it
to be done for imitation? The^ were the Lacedaemonians very fools; who to make
their children abhor Drunkenness, would make their Slaves drunk of purpose; and
act the vice before them; that seeing in others a deformity so hateful, they
might learn, in themselves to hate the deformity.

Sic teneros animos aliena opprobria saepe
Absterrent vitiis:
The man had an Itch to be writing a Book; and because he had not matter to
make it good, he was desirous at least to make it great; he would have a great
Club, though never so hollow. Greatness, he knew makes a show, and shows carry
all in the Eye of the world; Substance is but seldom understood, and therefore
not often much stood upon. And it may be some pleasure, to observe, with what
winds he blows up the bladder of his Book; and what pretty tricks he uses, to
furnish his Table of Vainglory with variety of Dishes. He has one trick,
which he uses in his Text; and seems to have learned it from Egge-Saturday in
Oxford, to make diversity of meats, with diversity of dressing: As for example;
Take the word Effeminate, this one word shall furnish him with four, or five
several Dishes of Arguments against Plays: as first, ( Fol. 546.) Plays
effeminate men's minds and bodies, therefore Plays are unlawful. This is one of
his Dishes. ( Fol. 167.) The very action of plays is effeminate; therefore
plays are unlawful. This you must take for another Dish^ ( Fol. 220.) Plays
are ever attended with effeminate, and amorous Dancing; therefore Plays are
unlawful. This is another; and I should cloy your stomachs too much, if I
should serve in all his Dishes of this kind. He has another Trick, which he
uses in his citing of Authors; and seems to have learned it from ^^atho in
Terrence, where he counsels,

Vbi nominabit Phaedriam, tu continuo Pamphilam; for where his Argument calls
for Ludos in Theatro; he thereupon brings in, Ludos in circo; L^dos in foro,
Ludos in septis, where the matter requires Testimonies, against Tragedies, and
Comedies, he presently brings in places of Fathers, and others, against
spectacles of Fencing, against Bear-baiting, against Horse-Races, and such
other Games; as like to Plays, as Chalk is to Cheese; and by these, and such
like means, he has made a great bellied Book, as if there were some goodly
child within it; when being ripped up, and looked into, there is nothing to be
^ound, but a very Timpany of wind, and ^ater. For, after all his bustling, and
^tir; after all the Crambees of his ( Fol. ^65.) four and forty Tautological
Ar^uments, it comes all but to this; that ^n Plays are often used Speeches, and
other Circumstances, effeminate, idle, scur^ilous, obscene, profane, and
Heathenish; and therefore ( Fol. 447.) corrupt men's manners, infect their
affections, debauch their dispositions; and ( Fol. 321.) generally indispose
them to all goodness; which is all nothing, but either his miss-taking through
ignorance, or his enforcing through malice; for though such Speeches are
sometimes, perhaps used; yet the decorum in the Speaker, the intent of the
Speech, the nature of the Example, make them all warrantable; and are so far
from working the effects he speaks of, that they rather rectify the Judgment,
qualify the Affections, moderate the Passions, and generally dispose them to
all Virtue: that where we meant but only to defend Plays, he has brought us
now, that we are forced to praise them; and where we thought but one^ly to keep
them from taking wrongfu^ disgrace; we cannot keep our selve^ now, from giving
them deserved com^mendations. For, what can be mo^^ worthy our embracing, then
that, which both intends our good, and works ^^ us, the good it intends? and
what d^ Players intend, by bringing in a Tyran^ with words of death, and hands
imbrue in blood, but to show the deformity o^ Tyranny, to make us detest it?
And d^ they intend this good to us; and d^ they not as well work it in us?
Certain^ly, even this as forcibly, as that, apparently; for seeing there are
two principal Motives to Virtue, Praise, and R^^ward; and two things likewise
that deterr from Vice, Shame, and Punishment^ what can be more forcible, either
to draw us to Goodness, or to withdraw us from Vitiousness, then where the
examples of all these are most lively showed, and represented to us? Certainly,
unless men be stark fools; rather wilfully to run into Pudles, and Quagmires,
then (...) take a fair way when it is showed ^^em; they cannot choose by such
ex^mples, but be drawn to walk in the ^^aths of Virtue. And let him not say, as
^ome have said; that scurrilous^ and pro^hane speeches are very dangerous for
^^fecting the hearers; because Assuescen^o audire, discunt facere, By en^ring
themselves, they learn to practice; for this were ^ikely to be true, if they
only heard ^uch speeches, and ended there, which ^s the fashion indeed of the
common ^ctions in our life; but here, where we no sooner hear the words spoken,
but presently withal, we see the shame, and punishment that attends them;
certainly, it would be very strange, that by often hearing such speeches, we
should get a custom of following them; and not rather, by often seeing their
disgraces, get a custom of avoiding them. And to this purpose, there is in
Seneca, a pretty tale of the Poet Euripides, who, in one of his Plays, having
made a Speech of a high strain, in magnifying of Riches, the people grew so
tumultuously angry at it, (fearing least suc^ speeches, should make men in
love wit^ riches, and prone to covetousness) that that they were ready to run
upon the stage, and tear the Actour in pieces^ that had spoken it; till
Euripides was feign himself, to come out amongst them, and entreat them, to
have patience, and see the end: for they should presently see, the riches he so
exacted, to have such a downfall in the miseries of his rich man Bel^erophon;
that it should leave but little list in any man, ever after to desire their
company. For the speech (says he) was but to show the Spectatours their own
Error; but the event in Fact, was to show them, the Truth it self.

When an Actour presents himself upon the Stage, until he speak, he is but a
picture, and when he speaks, he is but a Story; (and therefore perhaps a
Player is called Histrio, quasi Historio) for as one said well, that a Judge is
lex loquens, a speaking law: so we may say as truly, that a Player, is a
speaking Picture: or ^ History in person; and seeing we ^ow no hurt, by a
Picture; and cannot (...) commend History: why should Plays (...) condemned,
which are but a compo^^on made of these two? A History is ^t condemned, if
recording the life of ^^lian; it set down, his cruelty against ^^ristians, and
his Blasphemies against ^^rist. And if an Historian may law^^lly write it, may
not we as lawfully ^^d it? and if we may lawfully read it; ^ay not a Player as
lawfully pronounce (...) and what does a Player else, but ^^ely say that
without book, which we ^ay read within Book? A Player Acts ^^e part of Solomon;
but is never the ^iser for acting his part: why should he ^e thought the
wickeder for acting the ^art of Nero, or the more blasphemous ^or acting the
part of Porphyrie? Can ^here be a greater Blasphemy, then to ^urse God? yet
Iobe's Wife persuaded ^im to do so; and this is written, where ^t may be read:
shall we therefore think ^t unlawful, to read the Story of Job? Can there be a
more blasphemous speech, then that which the Jews spa^^ of Christ; that he had
a Devil, (...) wrought his miracles, by Beelzebub Pri^^^ of the Devils? yet the
holy Evangel^^^ have recorded this speech: shall (...) therefore think it
unlawful, to re^^^ their Gospells? Can there be a mo^^ profane Speech, then
that of the Po^^ Ede, lude, Bibe: Post mortem nulla V^^^^ptas? Yet Solomon in
his Ecclesias^^^ has some such speeches; shall (...) therefore think it
unlawful, to read (...) Book of the Preacher? And w^^^ then (if we may Parvis
Componere mag^^^ shall Players be thought, either Bla^^phemous, or profane: if
sometime^ they utter such speeches under the pe^^son of another? and indeed to
spea^ it plainly, they cannot avoid the using and uttering such speeches, if
they wi^^ be Players^ For as he, who would live^^ pourtray a Devil, or a
deformed Monster must needs draw some ghastly lines, and us^ some sordid
colors; so he, who will deliniate to the life, the notorious lewdness of
people in the world, is necessarily enforce^ (...) such immodest phrases, as
may present it ^^^ts native uglyness; else he should but con^^^le, or masque
their horrid wickedness, that ^^^e may behold it: not rip it open, that all ^^y
abhor it: and this is the only reason, of ^^^se more uncivil, or seemingly
immodest ^^ssages, that are here, and there, scattered (...) this Discourse.
But in what Discourse ^^ink ye? even in this very Discourse (...)
Histrio-Mastix. For these last eight (...) nine lines, are his own very words,
(...) his Preface to the Reader; to justify ^^e Obscenity, of his own very
speech^^, which he uses in his book. But (...) this possible? Has he then, a
Mono^olie of Obscene phrases; and immo^est speeches, that none may lawfully ^se
any, but only himself? may not ^layers claim the privilege of subjects, ^o the
English Tongue, and use them upon occasion, as well as he? No, he ^seth them
only upon necessity, to ex^ress the Obscenity of Players, and do ^ot Players
use them only upon neces^ity, to express the Obscenity of people? But what
necessity have Players to meddle with the Obscenity of people? T^^ same
necessity which he has, to med^^^ with the Obscenity of Players. But (...)
could not otherwise diswade men, from seeing such Obscene Plays; and Pla^^ers
cannot otherwise dissuade me^ from being such Obs^ene persons. (...) may thus
go on, as far as he will, (...) when all is said; it will ever be foun^ either
a voluntary Obscenity in hi^ self, or a necessary in Players: the every
schole-boy, that has but learne^ his Cato, will be upon his jacket wi^^ this.

Turpe est Doctori quum Culpa redarg^^ ipsu^^
But ( Fol. 100.) he seems here, t^ please himself with a Reason; that i^
Plays were good Schools of Virtue, ho^ should it happen, that ( Fol. 102.)
Players^ and the ( Fol. 143.) Frequenters of Plays^ are commonly the worst, and
most vicious men? As though there were not many as honest, and wise as himself,
that go to see Plays? I may justly say as honest, seeing no dishonestie is
greater, the^ ^o condemn men, whom he does not ^now; and I may as justly say
as wise, ^eeing no Folly, is greater, then to be ^o busy, where he has
nothing to do; and to be so Censorious, where he has ^o Authority. But is he
so foolish as ^e makes himself, to think that good ^choles must always produce
good ^cholers? Were there ever better ^chole-masters in Humane Schools, ^hen
those which the Emperor Nero, and Commodus had? Yet they both pro^ed Monsters
of men, the one in Lasci^iousness and Cruelty: The other in Cruel^y, and
Lasciviousness. Were there ^ver better Schole-masters in Divine ^choles, then
those which Gebezi, and ^udas had? Yet they both proved no^orious Examples to
all Posterity; the one of incredulous Bribery, the other of Bribing
Incredulity. But though we keep no Register, of such men, as have profited in
virtue by this Schole of Plays: yet we are not altogether destitute of
Examples. For has not Lucian Recorded one Lesbonax, an honest man of Mytilene,
who being a gre^^ Frequenter of Plays, was wont to say (...) himself; that he
never saw a Play, but (...) returned home, a better man then he (...) out? And
what has Cicero recorded (...) Roscius; who was a famous Play^ himself; and
yet no less a famous h^^nest man; Vt cum dignissimus esset Sc^^ propter
Artificium; ^tiam dignissimus e^^^^ curia propter abstinentiam. That his ^^^ry
Adversary durst not speak of him^ the Bar, without this Addition, Qu^ honoris
causa Nomino. And lest (...) should say, that the Schole of Play^ Degenerated,
and grown worse, sin^^ that time; have we not seen in our o^^ time, a famous
Scholar come out of the Schole: Edward Allen a Player himself Famous as well
for his Honesty, as for (...) Acting: and who has left behind hi^ a worthy
Testimony of his Christian Ch^^rity, to all posterity? And who doubt^ but
amongst the Spectatours of Play^ we may find many, like to Lesbonax^ and
amongst Players themselves, some like to Ros^ius? and even to go no fur^^^er
then his own Authors, whom he ^rings in for witnesses against going to ^ays;
(and we doubt not but he takes ^^em for honest men; as Cicero, Seneca, ^linie,
and a number of such besides) ^et were they all Frequenters of Plays, (...)
their own confession in their wri^ings: and how then, is he not ashamed ^o say,
that none but Infamous, Unchaste, ^rophane, and Graceless persons are
fre^uenters of Plays: when all his worthy ^rite^s, who he cites for his
witnesses, ^ere themselves frequenters of them? ^f their honesties were
sufficient, to make them sufficient witnesses, against ^he lawfullness of going
to Plays; why are not their Honesties as sufficient, to make their Examples
sufficient Warrants for going to Plays? and so, I may say in their Defense, as
Cicero said in Defense of Roscius; Nisi ^osdem, and Adversarios, and Testes
habeant, nolo vincant: that there never was poor Book made ^he Instrument of so
impudenta^ly; so n^torious a scandal, as this Histrio-^astix.

But ( Fol. 142.) will you know, how it happens, that Players, in this Man's
(...) count, ^re most excessively vicious, un^ha^^ profane, and dissolute men?
marry, ^^^cause most of them (as he is credibly infor^^ed) are professed
Papists. A very necessa^^ Consequence: as though to be a profess^^ Papi^t, were
to be a professed Atheist for what but Atheism could bring for^^ all such
excessively vicious men as (...) would make them? Yet this makes we^ for Plays,
though it makes ill for Player^ for Players, though the most excessive^ly
vicious men, yet are not so, because Players, but because Papists. Let hi^ take
heed, he pull not an old house upon his head; for though Papists diffe^ from
Protestants, in some points of Moral, and Theological Doctrine, yet they differ
not from them in the necessity of Moral, and Theological Virtues. Although
therefore we do not question his credible Information, yet we justly question
his incredible Consequence: as being indeed a very inconsequent incredibility.
If he had only said, Some Papists are excessively vicious men; though ^^is had
been a busy impertinent Asser^^^^ yet I presume, no Papists them^^^v^s ^^uld
much have gainsaid it: for (...) Religion was ever known, that had (...) some
Professors of it excessively vi^ous? But, when he says, Players must ^eeds be
excessively vicious, because ^^ey are Papists, this lays a taint upon (...)
generality; and makes a Papist, and (...) honest man, to be Disparata, and
In^^^^^^ible; as never possible to meet to^^^her in one Person. In which
opini^n (what Puritans may do, I know not, ^ut) I verily think, scarce one
Protestant ^ill ^e found to take his part. But we may leave Papists to defend
their ho^^sties, as they can themselves: and ^his man, as he can, to oppugn it;
we meddle no further with them, on either side; but, Ipsi viderint, Ips^
viderit.

Sufficient has been spoken in behalf of Players obscene speeches; but these
are scarce one half of their obscenity: for besides these, ( Fol. 374.) There
are in Plays wanton gestures, amorous kisses, and (...); and these are the
obscene sights, and the great provocations to lust, for whi^^ he specially
condemns Plays. Grave crime^ Caie Caesar: Kisses, and amorous kisse^ very
obscene sights, and great provoc^^tions to lust: but why more being do^^ upon
the Stage, then done in his ow^ house? Why more done in fiction, the^ in
reality? Why more used in Jests, the^ used in earnest? Why more seen seldom^
then seen continually? For who sees no^ every stranger that comes to his house
to kiss both his own, and other me^^ wives before their faces? yet all done
with Vestal modesty; and no man eve^ heard to complain, but only this man^ as
born, it should seem, under some very lustful, and jealous Constellation. And
will not even Nature her self, by this Reason, be found guilty of immodesty?
for making Pigeons to bill openly, and Cocks to tread their Hens before men's
faces? a sight, it seems, a Brother cannot see, but it presently sets his teeth
a water, to be doing the like. But must we not think his inclination then a
very dry Tinder, and very apt to take fire; ^^at can be enflamed to lust with
so cold ^^rovocations? However it be, this equi^^ cannot justly be denied to
Players; ^^at, either this man may not be allowed (...) kiss, and use amorous
Complements, ^hen he goes a Wooing; or they may ^e allowed to do as much, when
they ^epresent him a wooing.

But there is yet in Plays a worse mat^er then all these; for, ( Fol. 390) they
^re the very places of meetings, where lasci^ious matches are oftentimes made,
and ^^metimes acted. But should not lascivi^us persons have very ill harbors,
if ^hey had not better Ports to arrive ^t, then to meet at a Playhouse? And
why Plays more then Fairs, and Markets? why Plays, more then confluence at
Marriages, and other Festivals? why Plays more, then frequenting of one
another's Houses? and what says a Poet; Why Pla^s more, then even goings to
Church it self?

Q^i^ locus est Templis augustior? hoec quoque vitet,
In culpam si qua est ingeniosa suam.
And, it seems indeed, where Play Houses were so bad, that Temples were no
better; as Minutius Felix says: V^^magis a Sacerdotibus, quam inter Aras,
(...) Del^bra, condicuntur stupra? tractantur (...) nocinia? Adulteria
meditantur? Frequ^^^tius denique in Aedituorum Cellulis, quam i^ ipsis
Lupanaribus, flagrans libido defung^^tur. And what marvel, if the Heath^^ used
in Plays such Obscenities, who accounted such Obscenities to be but Plays^ as
little caring in such things to see^ honest, as to be; but this is not the Case
of Christians, who, though never so irregular, will yet observe this Rule; Si
(...) cast, tamen caute, If not chastely, yet charily. And what caution were in
this, to offer lascivious speeches, where all men's Ears; or lascivious acts,
where all men's Eyes are continually upon them? as if a Thief should steal in
the open street, where all men see him? ( Fol. 387.) He tells of Heliogabalus,
that he commanded Stage Players, to commit Adulteries, really, and openly upon
the Stage: he tells of Tiberius, that he caused others to defile themselves
before his face. And (...) tells ^e these filthy tales, but only (...) the
pleasure he takes in telling them? or else, how far are they from the Mat^er,
in speaking of our Plays? when he ^ees any such acts committed upon our ^tages,
let him not spare to tell us of it: ^ill then, he may leave his gabling of
Heli^gabalus, and keep his filthy Stories ^n store for the private delight of
his own meditation.

He has hitherto maintai^ed himself with the Obscenity of Plays; but now, that
the Patrimony of that Argument is spent, and gone, you shall presently see how
bare, and beggarly he will grow, and for very necessity fall a pilfering. For,
his very next Argument is directly stolen, where he makes ( Fol. 72.) Plays
unlawful, because they are bloody, and ty^^n^ical, breathing nothing but
Malice, Anger, and Revenge; for this belongs properly to the Spectacles of
Gladiato^s, and Fencers, and not to Plays; unless perhaps, to Heathen Plays,
where men, and sometimes Christian men, were cast in amongst wild Beasts to be
devoured; but, what is this to our Play^ where never any wild Beast was see^
upon the Stage, unless perhaps suc^ wild Beasts as David speaks of, wh^^ are
like to Horse, and Mule, that have no Understanding.

He has another very Thrifty Reason; by which he would make us think him a
good husband for us; ( Fol. 30^. and 310.) where he condemns Plays, because
they make their Spectatours spend s^ much money, and time in seeing them. But
what will Frenchmen say in defense of their Recreation? Who spend more money,
and time in one day at Tennis; then these Spectatours do in many weeks at
Plays? and how comes it, that seeing he aims only at cheap recreations, he
forgets the Emperor Domitian's Recreations; who made it his sport, to spend an
hour in the Afternoon, in catching of Flies? For as for those, which he allows
of, Fishing, and Fowling; Hunting, and Hawking: the very Fable of Actaeon would
make him see his Error, if he had the will (...) understand the Moral. But how
^an we think him a good husband for ^s: who is so bad a husband for himself?
for what a deal of money, and ^ime has he spent in Transcribing of Authors,
and Printing his Book: which, if ^ man should say, had been better spent ^t
Plays, though he perhaps would be ^ngry: yet as wise men as himself, I verily
think, would be of that opinion.

He has another Argument, which he seems to have borrowed from the Heathens
Bacchanalia: where ( Fol. 508.) he makes Plays unlawful; because they are an
immediate oc^asion of Drunkenness, and Excess. It was indeed usual at those
Feasts, to Surfeit, and be Drunk; or rather Surfeting, and Drunkenness were the
Feast it self: but who ever saw a man Surfeit, or be Drunk at a Play? and how
can that be an occasion of Drunkenness, which neither ministers Example, nor
Means of Drinking? No Example; unless perhaps in Fiction: and then not so much,
to represent men Drunk with Wine, as this man with Error.

He has an other Argument, which he seems to have been looking in a Glas^ when
he made it: It reflects so directly upon himself: ( Fol. 501:) where h^ makes
Plays Unlawful: because they ar^ the constant cause of much Sloth, and
Idl^ness. For what greater Idleness, then to sit all day, transcribing of
Authors; which is but Actum Agere? But should he not by this Argument have
concluded rather the Gowt to be unlawful? of which when one was asked, what
Idleness was the wor^t, he answered: Podagrici Pedes, the Gout in the Feet?
Indeed to see a Play as he (it seems, reads Books, to look only in their
Tables) it might not be much better; but to see a Play, with that due
observation, which the true use of Plays requires, he will find it, as far
from Idleness to be at a Play, as to be at Schole: and Scholars would take it
in great dudgeon, if he should say, they were Idle, when they are at their
Books. But what says Attilius in Pliny: Praestat otiosum esse quam Nihil
agere: as much as to say, It were ^^tt^r to be (...) a Play, and be Idle: then
to sit ^cribling out of Authors, and do nothing.

He has another Argument, with which, it seems, he seeks to cheat us; ^here (
Fol. 515.) he makes Plays unlaw^ull; because Play Houses are the Schools, and
Plays the Lectures, to teach men, how to ^heat, and Steal. For, Who knows not,
that Thieves, and Cheatours, can have their Scholing for nothing; and need not
to pay for it, by going to Plays! Indeed, ^ far cunninger Schole-master they
have to teach them the Craft, then Players; one that is in Earnest; and would
take it ill at their hands, that they should take any ill in hand, which they
had not from him. But does not this Reason, through the sides of Plays, give
greater wounds, to Assizes, and Sessions? For there indeed, the plots, and
practizes of Theevery, the tricks, and conveyances of Cheatours, are openly
laid open, and publikly made known: that if he call it a Schole, certainly they
are Free-Scholes: or rather Academies in comparison of Plays, But who knows
not, that both Plays, and Sessions, disco^ver Thefts, and Cheatings indeed, bu^
not as this man would cheat us; and make us think, to the end, they may be
used, but as Logic teaches fallacies, to the end to avoid them. We may justly
therefore for this reason, bind him over to the Sessions, both for the
implicit aspersion he lays upon them, and for the explicit cheating, he seeks
to put upon us.

He has another Argument, which we may call his Rainbow, seeing there are as
many Vices in it, as there are Colors in the Rainbow; ( Fol. 551.) where he
makes Plays unlawful; because they occasion an apparent breach of all the ten
Commandments, of which we may say, December mundi facti sunt; sed ubi sunt illi
novem? for some sins are incompatible; that where one is familiar, the other
will always be a stranger, unless he mean it as St. James speaks; that he which
is guilty of one sin, is guilty of all: and in that sense, we may say as much
of him, when he does but only tell a Lie. This man, with a little help, would
bring it about, that the very sin of our first Parent Eve ^as nothing else, but
her being a Player, where she and the Serpent were the Actours, and Adam the
Spectatour; and not only that all Players are damned, ^ut that none else are
damned but they. For, if Players break all God's Commandments, then he, who is
no Player, breaks none of the Commandments: as when Aesop's fellow, being asked
what he co^ld do, answered, He could do all things; then faith Aesop, If he can
do all things, there is nothing left for me to do. You will say, This is not to
answer, but to trifle; and has not Solomon advised us, Answer not a fool in
his folly, lest thou be like unto him? yet, seeing we have^ answered his
Arguments before, where he charged Plays with the Vices in particular, it may
well enough serve for an answer to this Argument, where he charge them in
general: and so we observe also the other Precept of Solomon, (fellow to the
former) Answer a fool in his folly, lest he be wise in his own con^^i^

You have heard many grave Argument^^ you shall hear one now, to make you
laugh, ( Fol. 291.) where he makes Plays unlawful, because they provoke
oftentimes profuse laughter, as though he knew not, that to be risible is only
proper to men^ and no excess in this can tain^ them with aspersion of any
beastlike quality, or make them, as all vices do, and this should, if it were a
vice, to be like a Beast. And especially he is not well advised in this, in his
own behalf; for if it were not for this Risible, we should hardly, perhaps,
find any thing in himself, to know him to be a man. But why should he blame
Plays for provoking of Laughter, when he makes an Argument here himself, that
provokes more laughter then ever any Play did? that we may truly say, Omnes qui
audiunt risi^ emori. For what was ever heard more ridiculous, then to make it
an Argument against Plays, ( f. 714.) because Noah, Melchisedech, Abraham, and
the Patriarchs are never read in Scripture, to have approved Plays? Or, as his
Elegancy ^^p^esseth it, t^ have been experimentally ^equai^ted with them? As
absurdly, as if ^ne would prove, that Guns are no good weapons in the Wars,
because Joshua, Gi^eon, David, and the ancient Warriors are never read in
Scripture, to have used Guns, or to have been experimentally acquainted with
them; much like the ^oolishness, which Livie notes in a Roman Tribune, who
threatened the people, he would hinder their levying of Soldiers, when there
was no War toward; and, Is there not in this, as just cause to set M^rous
Crassus a laughing, as when he saw an Asseat Thistles?

He has another Reason, as vain, and ridiculous as this; ( Fol. 127.) where he
makes it a Reason to condemn Plays, because they are at the best, but vain, and
ridiculous. As though any thing of this world, even the best things that are,
when they are at the best, were any other, then vain, and ridiculous; and let
him not distinguish of things, and say, that some are s^rious; for the more
serious, the more ri^i^^lous: for what is this, but the very Argument, at which
Democritus could no^ forbear laughing, all his life time.

But these are but the small Fry of h^^ great Pool; he has three Reason^
which, like the great Pikes, may be sai^ to contain in their Bellies all his
other Gudgin-Reasons: and in the taking o^ them consists, in effect, the taking
awa^ of all the other. And may we not ad^mit them all to be true, and yet, as
o^^ case is, take no Disparagement, by ad^mitting them? seeing, as he urge^^
them against Plays: so we may urg^^ them as well against no worse a thin^ then
Riches. For his first Reason man be this; ( Fol. 327.) that Plays are a
pr^vocation unto Lust: and is it not said (...) Riches, that they are
Irritamenta mal^^rum? His second: that Plays ( Fol. 521.^ Indispose men to all
Religious Duties: and is it not said of Riches; that we cann^^ serve God, and
Mammon? His third: tha^ ( Fol. 565.) they bring Damnation, upon men's Souls, and
Bodies; and, Is it not said of a Rich man, that he cannot Enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven? and why ^^en should he think to fright us with ^^s Thundering
phrases, from seeing of ^lays, and is not himself frighted with ^^em, from
seeking of Riches? Cer^^inly, seeing all his Reasons are as ^^rong against
Riches, as against Plays, and yet Riches we doubt not, may be ^ad, and held by
good men; why may ^ot Plays also be Acted, and be beheld ^y good men,
notwithstanding his reasons? For, as there may be Bonus usus Divitiarum, which
makes void all the reasons against Riches; so there may be Bonus usus Ludorum,
which may avoid all his Reasons against Plays: that unless he can prove it is
not lawful to be Rich, we shall never admit his proofs, that it is not lawful
to see a Play; let him therefore, either allow men to see a Play, as well ^s to
be Rich: or, if he will persuade men not to see Plays; let him then write
another Book, and persuade all men to be Beggars.

Plutarch writ a ^ook De Vtilitate ab Inimicis Capienda, and if this man had
the good meaning of Plutarch, and had written his Book, de Vtilitate a
Spectac^^lis Capienda; we might then perhap^ have thought him, as Charitable,
as no^ we think him Malicious. But if he be not a Manichee, he is, at least,
very like one; who seems he could find in his Heart, to blame God for Creating
of Vipers, and such other Venomous Beasts; because his gross Head is not able
to conceive, how the sovereign Antidote of Treacle should be extracted from
them.

And now, to make a Recapitulation of his Arguments, to see, how he has
labored all this while, De lana caprina; about a matter of nothing, and how
easily his main blows may be avoided with one ward, he says, Plays are bloody
and Tyrannical. It may be true of Heathen Plays, it is false of ours: He says
they are a provocation to Lust; It may be true of Heathen Plays, it is false of
ours: He says they are Ordained, and Dedicated to the Worship of Devil-Gods;
it is true of Heathen Plays, it is false of ours. He says, they are the Pomps
of the Devil, renounced by Christians in their Baptism: It may be true of
Heathen Plays, it is false of ours. He says, they are fraught with bitter
Scoffings at Religion, and Religious men; it may be true of Heathen Plays, it
is false of ours. He says, they cause a prodigal Expense of Time, and Money; it
may be true of Heathen Plays (which lasted many times, many days together, and
were set forth at Infinite charges) it is false of ours. He says, they are an
immediate occasion of much Actual Adultery; it may be true of Heathen Plays, it
is false of ours. He says, they occasion much Drunkenness, and Excess; it may
be true of Heathen Plays, it is fal^^ of ours. And thus, to his Diversis Nodis,
Vnus Cune^s, many arguments, as he calls them, one answer, as a wedg, may serve
sufficiently, to cleave them all asunder.

Yet he has one passage, that stands barking in a Corner, but dares not come
out in the likeness of an Argument, where he calls ( Fol. 329.) Playhouses, the
Seminaries of Vices; the Temples of Venery; the Schools of Bawdery; the Dens of
Lewdness; and all the Vile names he could get together, by raking Hell, and
Billings-gate. But will it not be a Sop to stop Cerberus his mouth: if we do
but examine the Commonwealths, in which Plays have been most usual; whether,
after Plays admitted, they have grown in their manners, either not worse, or
perhaps better; for so it may appear, that Plays have been no such corruptions,
no such corrupters of the times, as he would make them. Examine the Roman
State; and, not to wander about, take the times under the Emperor Augustus, in
which, Plays where in their height: he Reigned six and Fifty years; a
reasonable time to make a trial: and were not his times, more quiet, more
civil, and more virtuous, then ever they had been before? So quiet, that all
the world was quiet, and the Temple of Ianus shut up twice in his time? So
civil, and virtuous, that as himself was call Augustus; so his times were
called Augustum Saeculum. Come to our own Co^ntry, which is better known to us;
take the Time from the beginning of our late famous Queen Elizabeth, to the
present, almost fourscore years, a large time likewise for probation; and were
ever any Times known in this State more Civil, or more Virtuous? so civil, that
no civil Arms; so virtuous, that Justice, never more duly administered; Se^mons
never more Preached, more frequented; Virtues in Princes never more
transcendent, Loyalty, and Love in Subjects never more eminent; that if Virgil
might say it of Augustus Times; certainly, we much more justly may say it of
these of ours; Iam redit, and virgo; redeunt Saturnia Regna,
As if the Golden-Age, of which the Poets talk such wonders, were come into the
world again. And how then are Plays such Seminaries of Vices, as he talks of?
He must find better Seminaries then Plays, or he is like to have but a slender
crop. That we may know these Phrases of his, to be nothing but the Fictions of
the Devil's Poetry, or the Flowers of his Rhetoric. He will say, they are the
very words of Tertullian, and other of the Fathers; but will he never learn
this one lesson so often taught him; They may be true of Heathen Plays, they
are false of ours. He will lastly say, that we have spoken indeed of general,
and public Virtues, but they are the Vices of private men, that he complains
of; as though the public were any thing, but the uniting of the private; or
the general any thing, but the meeting of particulars: and who doubts, but
there will be a Cham in the Ark; though Noah the Preacher of Righteousness be
continually in presence? there will be a Judas amongst the Apostles, though
Christ himself be doing his Miracles continually before them? But should not
this man consider rather, from whence these men took their infection (which
from Plays, we are sure they did not) then to stand baiting at Plays, which is
at most, but Cum capiti medendum est, Reduviam curare; for, to think to mend
^ens Vices by taking away Plays, is as ^dle, as that one should think to mend
(...) Faces, by taking away Glasses.

He has yet one Argument behind; which is, I may say, his Palmarium; and
which he has kept for a final Argu^ent, because it must serve to give a final
^low to beat down Plays: namely, ^ Fol. 552.) The fearful judgments of God,
which have been showed upon them. A final Argument indeed, able to beat down,
not only Plays, but all men's Hearts from seeing of Plays. But where is his
Commission, to make the Application? It is, no doubt, good counsel, when any
extraordinary fearful accident happens, to call our selves to account, and to
enter into a due consideration of all our miss-doings; acknowledging, that such
things are oftentimes sent of God, as gracious warnings to draw us to
Repentance; but yet, when such things happen, to censure them presently, as
Judgments of God upon any particular Sin^ and to determine upon what particular
Sin, or Sinner they are sent; this is more then this man has warrant for,
either from Scripture, or Fathers, or from Discretion^ When God reveals the
reason of his doing, we may safely then take notice of it, and rest our selves
upon it; as when the Earth opened, and swallowed up Korah, and Dathan; there
was manifestly known, both the particular Sin, and the particular Sinners:
Likewise when Fire fell down from Heaven upon S^dom, and Gomorrha. But when the
Tower of Shilo fell, and with the fall, slew eighteen men, who could make the
application? seeing Christ saith^ They were not the worst men, upon whom the
Tower of Shilo fell. When a child was born dumb, and blind, this man would
presently, it seems, have censured it, as a Judgment of God, upon the Child,
or Parent; yet Christ told his Disciples, It neither came for any Sin of the
Child, nor of the Parents. For the Judgments of God, are as secret, as
fearful; they are an Abyss, till he give them a bottom; and where God keeps
silence, ther^ men ^an have no science. For, what man is he, that can know the
counsel of God; or, who can think what his Will is? He ^ells us of Play Houses,
both public, and private; some suddenly fallen down, some burnt up with fire,
without any apparent cause preceding? And what great wonder is this; if in so
many hundred years, in so many thousand places, some few such accidents have
sometimes happened? Have not the like happened even to Churches, and Chapels;
and private places of Religious meetings? Will he therefore say, they were
Judgments of God against the use of Churches, and Chapels? he tells us of some
Players, and some Spectatours of Plays, that have died at the very Play, both
suddenly, and strangely; and what great wonder is this, if in so many hundred
years, in so many thousand places, amongst so many millions of people, some few
such chances have sometimes fallen out? Have not the like happened to some
Preachers in the Pulpit; and to some devout persons, even at their prayers?
Will he therefore say, they were Judgments of God, against the use of
Preaching, and Praying? How much better, is that censure in Minutius Foelix:
Fulmina passim cadunt; sine delectu tangunt loca sacra, and prophana: homines
noxios feriunt, saepe and Religiosos: Thunderbolts fall down indifferently;
they light upon places profane, and sacred, without any choice; they strike
good men, and bad, both alike. His Inference therefore of these Judgments,
shows he has no Judgment, being as idle as busy, and proceeding rather, from
a malice to the cause, then from any understanding of these effects, and as
little from any Charity at all to the Reader.

Thus this final Argument, which should h^ve made a final End of Plays, has
made a final End of all his Reasons, and of all his Reason: and yet he has one
Argument more, though not one Reason more, but a kind of prognostication
rather, for he tells, before hand, ( Fol. 565.) what entertainment, both
Players, and Spectatours of Plays, are like to find in another world, even
without Repentance, Eternal Damnation. And this (...) calls an Argument, with a
witness: and (...) is so indeed, for it is a witness to us (...) his rashness,
and irreligion. For, he ^efies being a Papist, and he denies ^eing a Puritan;
and now this Argu^ent, is a witness against him, that he (...) no Protestant.
For by aggravating ^e sin (as he accounts it) of seeing a ^lay, being not
Repented, with Eternal ^amnation: he shows himself to think, ^^at every Sin not
Repented, deserves ^ot so much: for if he thought Eternal ^amnation, the common
punishment, ^f every sin, why should he lay it, as an ^ggravating punishment
upon this ^n? and if he think, Some sin not Re^ented, not to be Mortal, we
think him, ^or so thinking, not to be a Protestant. ^f then, neither
Protestant, nor Puritan, ^or Papist: what Religion should he be of, that we may
not justly leave the Damna^ion of this Argument, upon himself? And thus it
befalls men, transported with malice, that whilst they make, their own
threatening, the measure of others suffering; they fall them selves to ^^^fer
that, which they threatened to oth^^^

Thus you have seen his Fore-pa^^ which are his Reasons; you may now (...)
pleased to see his Back-parts, which (...) his Testimonies, and Authorities;
and y^^ shall find him no better to follow th^^ he was to meet; yet it makes a
bett^^ show; for he began his Reasons from the Devil, but he begins his
Authorit^^^ from God: for ( Fol. 545) he begi^ with the Scriptures, the word of
God: (...) doubt, a most powerful evidence, not (...) be spoken of without
honor; not (...) be thought of, without reverence: an^ indeed, if he could
alledg but only the name of Plays, or Players, as spoken o^ in the Scriptures,
we should have a wonderful respect, and be wouderfull ci^cumspect how we
meddled with them but seeing he cannot do this, we man justy suspect him to be
no better a man in his Authorities, then he was in his Reasons, great
pretenses, but no proofs, fair colors, but no substance; all he can say, is
but only to say, he has nothing bu^ ^ords, and words are but wind, and ^ay
well enough be blown over. For, (...) for his Inferences, and Collections, and
^eductions, we may demur upon them at ^asure, and take time to consider. But
^^st any man should think we waved his ^estimonies of Scripture, as being
con^^ncing, and such as cannot be answer^d; let us, for the reverence we bear
^^em, hear him at large, and see what he ^ath to say out of these sacred
Records. and he seems to bewray the weakness ^f his Cause at the very first:
for, ( Fol. ^45.) he grants that Scripture speaks nothing against Plays in
precise terms; and ^hy then will he condemn them in pre^ise terms, if the
Scripture do not? Is ^ot this to incur the reprehension of S^^omon, Noli esse
nimium justus? be not ^oo precise; for to condemn a thing ^n precise terms,
which the Scriptures do not, what is this, but to be nimium justus; more
precise then needs? But if the Scriptures condemn them not in precise terms, in
what terms then? Indeed only in Hilary T^rm; for it would make a man merry;
or rather it would make a H^rse break his halter to see the strange Antic
faces of applications h^ makes, to wring out a condemnation of Plays from
places of Scripture; an^ when he has all done, we might mak^ as good an
Argument and say; This man speaks scarce a wise word in all his book; Therefore
Plays are unlawful: For wheresoever he finds any place against Idolatry, and
Altars, against Adultery, or Murder, aganst wantonness, or prophanene^^, he
presently applies them as spoken against Plays, and never considers how idle,
and simple he is, to stand picking, and culling out some certain Texts of
Scripture; when if these applications, would serve, he might have said it in a
word, that all the whole Scripture is nothing else, but a very arraignment, and
condemnation of Plays. But thus he fetches it about; he confesses that no
Scripture condemns Plays, in precise terms; but that ( Fol. 546.) they
positively prohibit, and censure them, under the names of Idolatry, of things
consecrated to Idols, of the C^p, and Table of Devils; of the Customs, Rites,
and delights of Idolaters; of the way and fashi^n of the Heathen; of the will
of the Gen^iles, and such like; under which, Plays are ^s really, and
absolutely comprised, as any ^art is under the whole, or any Species under its
proper Genus. A very fine device, ^o make Quidlibet, ex Quolibet. He seems one
of that man's Scholars, who deduceth, and finds comprised, all Natural, and
Moral Philosophy in the first Chapter of Genesis; but will any man be^ieve
him? The Fathers said this of Hea^hen Plays, and he, good man, thinks he may
say it of ours; will not therefore his device suit better with himself, and
give us leave to say; No Scripture indeed condemns this man in precise terms;
but they condemn, and censure him under the names of a false Prophet, of a
perverter of Scriptures; of one, Zealous without knowledge; of a Syco^hant, a
Busie-body, a Slanderer, and such like; under which names, this man is as
really and absolutely comprised, as any part is under the whole, or any
individuum under its proper species. And when we say this, can any man say, but
tha^ our application of these to him, is fa^ more just, then his to Plays?
Certainly the Heathen, have more color of reason, to worship the Sun, out of
the Te^^^ Et Domino Soli servies; then this man has to condemn Plays, out of
any Text, against the Idolatry of the H^^then. For they at least, have the
ambiguity of the word Soli, to stand upon; but this man has nothing Intus or
(...) Cute, neither Ambiguitie nor perspicuity of word, neither letter nor
tittle of letter, to Countenance his Exposition. There are indeed some Rules,
by which, one vice may be comprised under the name of another; as when lesser
vices are forbidden, it shows the greater are forbidden also: so incest, and
Sodomitry under the name of Adultery, so Atheism, under the name of Heathenism:
or when a General vice is prohibited, it shows the particular kinds are
prohibited also so poisoning under the name of Murther^ so Bribery, and Fraud,
under the name (...) Stealing; but can he show, that Plays (...) by any such
Rules comprised under ^^e names of the vices he alleges? No^^ing less: if he
had done, or could do ^^is, he had spoken to some purpose, ^^d with some
reason; but since he ^ath not, nor cannot do this, what can ^e say of him, but
that he has showed ^ore Malice then Wit, more Zeal then Knowledge, more
Boldness, or Imprudence, ^hen either Judgment, or Understanding. ^e had read
perhaps in some Authors ^ome strange applications of places of ^cripture; and
he, like a true Pythagore^n, takes all upon the Credit of Ipse ^ixit: and
thereupon grows confi^ent at last to be a Coyner of Applica^ions himself: he
thinks he has as much Zeal as they; and knows, he ^ath less Knowledge: and
these two joined together, much Zeal, and little Know^edg, are the true Parents
of all these false ^himerical Applications. Would any man ^hink, that these
words of David; Blessed is the man, that has not walked in the council of the
ungodly: and has not stood in the way of sinners: and has not sat in the
chair of Sc^n^ers, were spoken by him, as against goin^ to Plays? Yet
Tertullian fetches it about and takes advantages of some Circumst^^^ces, to
make it seem probable. But man not Tertullian be as well mistaken in ap^plying
places of Scripture against Plays as he was in applying them to maintain the
Error of the Millenaries: or the Corporeit^ of the Soul? Although for this
place perhaps we may excuse him; seeing he seem^ to apply it, by way of
Allusion, and Exageration only, and not by way of Argumentation: in which
sense, while this man mistakes it; it is one of the Seeds he takes to set in
the Wilderness of his Brains: and from this, and such other mistaken Seeds is
grown at last this huge Forest of Confusion, which he presents you with in this
his Voluminous Rhapsodie: Voluminous indeed, if you look on the bulk; but a
very Pamphlet, if on the substance.

But is it not strange to see, how confidently he goes to Moses to fetch Texts,
as it were Warrants against Plays; as i^ ^e were sure, that Plays were then in
use, ^n Mos^s his time? For if they were not, ^e would make Moses a very hasty
Judge, to condemn them before they were born. And indeed unless where ^e
learned, that the Devil invented them, ^e can learn also, at what time he
Invent^d them; I will never believe, but ^e is much mistaken in the time of
their Nativity. Especially seeing his Rabbi Tertullian fetches the greatest
Antiquity of Plays but from the coming of Tyr^henus, and the Lydians, into
Italy: (for when they were called Ludi ^ Lydis) and Tyrrhenus came into Italy
some distance of time, after the Trojane War; and the Trojane War was four
hundred years, and more, after Moses Death. Now, seeing the places, which this
man cites out of Moses, were Exhortations to the people, to avoid the
Idolatries, and Customs of the Heathen, that were at that time; how can they
be taken as intended against Plays, which had no being in the world till many
hundred years after? But this may pass among, his Venial faults: he thinks,
perhaps, that God will never charge him with Errors in Chr^nologie; so they
exceed not a Thousand years: because a Thousand years with him are but as one
day. Yet it were not enough neither to say, that Plays were then in use; but he
must prove also, they were then in use, in such manner as now they are; for, if
since that time they have mended their manners, it were no reason, that, having
lived so long, they should now be put to death in their Age for faults
committed so long since in their Infancy. But if they be of so great
Antiquity, it is very probable they are of as great Innocence; for having had
many Accusations, they have passed many Trials: and though often Arraigned, yet
never Convicted: and they should have very hard fortune, if, having stood the
blows of so many axes, they should now be felled with the cut of a penknife.

But, seeing he will needs be going to Moses for Proofs, let him go, and let us
see what he can make of them; and that every Reader may be a Judge, I will cite
you some of his places, which he takes to be positively spoken of Plays; and I
will cite them, as he Quotes them, lest you should think I take advantage; the
rest I will Quote only, that you may read them at leisure; and laugh, if you
can, for anger, or be angry, if you can, for laughing. ( Fol 545.) Levit.
xviii.30. Therefore ye shall keep mine Ordinances (namely, against Incests, and
Sodomitries) that ye do not any of the abominable customs, which have been done
before you, and that ye defile not your selves therein. This is the first of
his places, which he alleges as positively condemning Plays. Would any man
think he were in earnest? But hear another, Deuteronomy. vii.2. And the LORD thy God
shall give the Nations before thee, then thou shall smite them; thou shall make
no Covenant with them, nor take compassion on them. This is another of his
places, that positively condemns Plays. And about some ten ( Deuteronomy. xii.3. and
xx.16. Josh. vii.12. and xi.12. Judge. ii.2. Numbers xxxii.52. Psalm. xvi.4.
Ierem. x.2.) more he has of like scantling; and come no n^arer to touch Plays,
o^ Players, then these do. But these are out of the Old Testament: no doubt, he
has better out of the New^ hear therefore some of them too. Acts xvi.20. But
that we write unto them, that they abstain from filthiness of Idols, and
Fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood. And i^ not this still
worse, and worse? Yet hear another, Romans xii.2. And fashion not your selves
like unto the world; but be ye changed by the renewing of your minds, that ye
may prove what is the good will of God: and about some twenty places more of
like pregnancie against Plays. Would any man think he were well in his Wits, to
allege these places as spoken against Plays? But what should he do? he must
either take these, or none; that we may justly say, The Devil certainly owed
him a Shame, that put into his head, to take upon him the handling of this
Argument; and it is indeed, as a most learned man, and most reverend Divine of
our Time writes, that this man, and such ^s ^e, make the Scripture speak what
^hey please; deriving strange Positions, and P^radoxes thence; when they, and
their Bibles are alone in corners. But it is ^lain enough to see his crafty
dealing; ^or he Quotes indeed these places, but ^e cites not one of them: for
he well knew, if he had brought them to the Bar as witnsses against Plays, they
must have stood mute; for not one of them could have spoken a word in
disparagement of Plays.

But you may hear him crying out, that he alleges these places, but as others
have alleged them before; and have we not heard Cicero long since crying out,
that no Opinion is so absurd, which has ^n some Philosopher for a Patron? But
he has consent, as though there were not as well Fratres in Errore, as Fratres
in Mal^. But he has consent of Times, as though the stream of Invectives set
once a running, upon just cause, may not continue running a long time after the
Cause removed? And that which reaches to them all, as though places o^
Scripture may not by way of Allusion, and Exaggeration, be applied to many
purposes; to which yet, by way of direct Argumentation, they cannot be applied?
Well, he has now done with Scripture, but he had done better, if he had never
begun: for is it not a shame, he should make them a stale, and bring them in
for witnesses, when they have nothing to say; or rather indeed should suborn
them to become false witnesses; and make them say that they never intended?

But though you take his Bible from him, yet he has other very strong Records,
that are able of themselves to carry it. ( Fol. 570.) he has fifty four
Councels, whereof every one has diverse Canons, all to be discharged in the
very faces of Plays, and cannot choose, but shiver them all in pieces. No
doubt, the Engines are strong; but does he not miss-take the Mark? for, if we
mark it, we shall find them not levelled at our kind of Plays, but at Pagan
Idolatrous Plays, (wherein, as Balsamon says, ^here were Maledicta, and
Blasphemiae, be^ides many Superstitions) and addressed chiefly to restraint of:
them upon Sundays, for the time; (so the sixty fourth Canon of the Council of
Carthage) In Churches, for the place; (so Concilium Trecense) to Churchmen,
for the Persons; (so the five and twentieth Canon of the Apostles) But here he
would take upon him to be an Interpreter by himself; and ( Fol. 647.) make us
believe; that, though the Canon speak only of Churchmen; yet the equity of
the Canon reaches to all other men. But what says the old Interpreter
Balsamon? By forbiding them to Churchmen, it shows, they allowed them to
Laymen. By forbidding them in Churches, it shows, they allowed them in
Convenient places. By forbidding them on Sundaies, it shows, they allowed them
on Working-daies: and so he has made a fair hand with himself: Charged Canons,
to be all Discharged, and shot in his own face But is this a wise, or a wise
man's Argument? Plays were forbidden by Councils heretofore; ther^^fore they
ought to be forbidden by the Church now? For how many things have been decreed
by Councils, which now are clean left off, and abrogated? Did not the Council
of Antisiodore decree it unlawful to give New Years Gifts at Christmas? Yet
who sees it not now an A^nual custom; and without offense? Did not the same
Council decree it unlawful to deck houses with Laurel, or green Boughs? Yet
who sees it not now an usual fashion, and counted a Decency? Did not the Synod
in Trullo decree it unlawful for Gossips at a Christening to marry together
ever after? Yet what Marriages now more lawful, more frequent? Did not the
same Council in Trullo decree all eating of Blood to be unlawful, and subject
to Excommunication? Yet who eats it not now familiarly, and without scandal?
Infinite the like. For indeed the Constitutions of the Church have ever had
regard to the time: and the time to the circumstances of occasion; which not
being ^nown, no man can Judge of the great ^^tness of Decrees, as they might be
^^en; and yet of the great unfitness of ^he same Decrees, if they should be
^ow. And therefore, though this man ^eem to produce Councels, yet, in truth, ^e
produces them not, he delivers the ^ords as a Parrat, that pronounces the
^yllables, but not as a man, that under^tands the meaning; and not to deliver
them in their full sense, is in true sense, ^ot to deliver them at all; as
Cicero says, The^ shall a man be said to say the same thing, when he says it
in the same sens^, and with the same intent. But how can this man do this, when
he knows not the intent, nor the circumstances of it? or, if he do, yet he
dissembles it, and will not know it, which is a worse ignorance, then the
other. And if we should allow him the levelling of his Canons, as he pretends,
though we are not willing to lay any taint upon such reverend Assemblies, yet
this we may be bold to say, that oftentimes Major pars meliorem vicit; and that
sometimes one Paph^ntius has been more worth, then all the Council besides.

And ( Fol. 668.) as for his Squadro^ of seventy one Fathers, and his one
hundred and fifty other Writers, whom he brags to have gotten on his side,
though it make a great show, yet it is no great matter, if we consider he has
been fifteen hundred years in getting them; and especially, if we consider,
that all those, whom he cannot get on his side, we may justly challenge to be
on our side, and will make a greater troop, then his can make an army. But,
lest it should be thought that all these Trumpets, which he pretends to be for
him, be so for him, that they be against us, let us a little hearken to their
sounding, whether it has been always upon a true Alarm, or no; for if it have
not, we may justly except against them, and bar their voices from our Scrutiny.

Some therefore of his Trumpets, and those of the best, and ancientest, are
such as sound only at Pagan Plays, whereas our Plays are no more like them,
then Helene the Mother of Con^^antine was like Helene the Wife of ^enelaus; and
are as different from them, as we our selves are differing from ^agans: and of
this, both Tertullian, and ^t. Cyprian, (the two most earnest of all ^he
Fathers against Plays) may be wit^esses; and indeed witnesses instar omni^m:
and whereupon do they ground their condemnation of Plays? Do they not both
only upon Idolatry? Hear Tertullian first, If there be no Idol in the Play,
that Idolatry be not committed in it, ^hen I charge it not with any
renouncing, which we have made in Baptism. Next ^ear St. Cyprian, Quod
spectaculum sine Ido^o? Quis ludus sine sacrificio? If therefor this man can
find in our Plays, either Idols, or Sacrifice, he may justly require our
voices in crying down of Plays; but, if they be as clean from ^eprosies, as
Naaman was from his, having washed in Jordan, then has this man need to be
down on his knees, and to ask these Fathers, and us forgiveness, them for
miss-reporting, and miss-enforcing them; us, for miss-enforming and
miss-perswading su. Because Miri^^ was excluded from the Camp, when she was
leprous; shall we therefore not admit her into the Camp, when she i^ cleansed?
Indeed, when this man before brought poor, and simple reason^ to prove his
Cause, we could not much blame him, (for you can have no more of a man then his
Talent) but now, that he wrests Scriptures, traduceth Councils, falsifieth
Fathers, miss-interprets all; this most needs have some thing voluntary in it,
and has therefore no Mean in the evil, because a meaning to be evil. The only
excuse is to say; that he seems only s^pere ex Indice, to have all his
learning from the Tables of Books: for they be these indeed, that make so many
Mountebanks of Scholars, as swarm in the world. For, when a Theme is
propounded, they run presenty to the Tables, and pick Authors pockets of what
serves their turns, but never once offer to look the Authors in the face^ and
so, not knowing the Antecedents, and Su^seq^^^ts, they neither understand what
they read, nor this man, what he writes.

And that you may know him to be such an one, you shall find it by this one
cast of his Scholar-ship, ( Fol. 546.) where he says, That Cyprian was
seconded by Tertullian, in his Opinion against Plays: as though Tertullian had
lived after Cyprian: for that a man, who goes before, and begins an Opinion,
may be seconded by him that follows, there is reason; but to say, that a man,
which follows, and continues an Opinion, is seconded by him that went before,
and began it, was never heard of, till he has brought it into Being. And may
we not here say, that this one Answer alone, is it self a full discharge to his
whole Book, without any more ado; seeing all the Arguments he brings in his
Book, either drawn from Reason, or from Authorities, either of Councels, or
Fathers, or other Writers; they are true enough against the Plays of the
Heathen; but, as Plays are now in use amongst Christians, not a true word in
any of them; and therefore where he has entitled his Book, A Tragedy of
Actours; he should, if he had done right, have entitled it, A Comedy of
Errors. It is true indeed, Tertullian condemns Plays by places of Scripture,
not only against Idolatry, and Superstition, but against Sensuality also, and
Concupiscence; but does he not by the same places condemn also second
Marriages; when either a man marries a second wife, or a woman a second
husband? yet he is condemned for applying the places against these; and why not
then as well, for applying them against Plays? for who doubts, but there is
more Concupiscence, and Sensuality in marrying a second wife, or husband, then
in seeing a Play?

There is yet another Sense, in which these holy Fathers do sometimes speak of
Plays, though neither Idolatrous, nor Superstitious, as things unworthy of a
Christian man: but is it not in the sense, that Christ spoke of the providence
for earthly things, of caring for food, and ^^yment; after all which, says he,
the ^^ntil^s s^ek? And does not Saint Paul (...) the same sense, though in
another ^egree, vi^ifie also the best works, that ^e can do, even the good
works ^f the Law; accounting them to be ^o better then very Dung: then which ^e
could not have used a more con^emptible, and disgraceful Term. But who knows
not, that these things are ^poken by way of comparison? If therefor that,
which is comparatively spoken, ^ man shall take as spoken positively, shall ^e
not show himself a superlative false Expositour? For, setting aside Idolatry,
and open Obscenity, which our Plays de^est as much as this man, neither
Ter^ullian, nor any of the Fathers, did ever any otherwise condemn Plays, but
as they condemned all artificial delights of the world, aspiring only to that
perfection, of which St. John speaks; Love not the world, neither the things of
the world: ^f any man love the world, the love of God is not in him. I speak
this the rather for pr^vention; lest the man, vouchsafing perhaps to read this
Discourse, should think he had found here a just ground for a Reply, and vex us
again with transscribing of Authors, and heaping up Mountains of Authorities,
like Pelion upon Ossa, to this purpose: which now, he may hereby know, will
serve him to no purpose; for we seek to justify Plays, as fit recreations for
an honest Natural, or Moral man, but no ways to be matched with the high
mysterious Contemplations of a Christian in Divinity. And, I doubt not, but all
the Sentences of the Fathers, spoken against Plays in this kind, will take
this for an Answer; and this may be sufficient to show, that these men's
sounding is insufficient, and nihil ad Rhombum.

Others there are, of whom we may be bold to say, seeing the Proverb says it,
that The greatest Clerks are not always the wisest men. Bring them to a Matter,
that is not merely Logical, and you shall find them oftentimes to be merely
Irrational. Plays therefore being Practical, and their chief use consisting in
Action; these men's soundings will prove no other, then as the barking of Dogs
at Mo^nshine in the Water.

Others there are, that sound out of zeal, but their zeal being without
knowledge, though we may commend their zeal, yet we cannot commend their
ignorance; and we may truly apply another Proverb to these, that With too much
haste they outrun the Constable: for though they had the Alarm in their ears,
yet they have lost it by the way; and have so fast fixed their eyes upon the
abuse of Plays, that they never cast a look upon the right use, but are like
one Gobryas, whom Plutarch speaks of, who fallen down, and struggling with
Magus, bid Darius thrust his sword though through them both. But these are no
fit men to make Judges of, who ought rather to spare the guilty, then to
condemn the innocent; and rather to venture a doubtful danger, then to destroy
a manifest benefit: for the hurt of Plays, though seen, may be avoided; the
benefit of Plays, if not seen, cannot be obtained. And thus, by that time these
men's soundings are all suppressed, there will be as few left to sound their
Trumpets against Plays, as were left to cast stones at the Adulteress in the
Gospel.

And lastly, when the Fathers, and other devout Writers, inveigh so bitterly
against Plays, and apply to them such heavy styles, may they not be understood
to do it (...), by way of Exaggeration, in majorem cautelam: that there be not
so much as the appearance of evil amongst Christians, as St. Paul
acknowledges? And when Players use Speeches sometimes, and Actions, a little
swerving from the strict Rules of Purity, may they not be understood to do it
(...), by way of Illustration, in majorem suadelam; as a Player in Terence
professes his intent to be, Vt, cum cognurint, perpetuo oderint? Although
therefore there may seem to be between them a Diametrical opposition; yet,
seeing they agree in the Principal intent, that is, in Moral erudition, why may
they not be brought to some indifferent reconcilement, and not continue in the
deadly fewd, which this man professes: if a Spirit of Charity, which covers
faults, and not a Spirit of Malice, which makes faults where none is, were the
Vmpire between them, and had the hearing, and handling of the matter?

After his Canons of fifty four Councils, and his seventy one pieces of
Ordinance of the Fathers, and his hundred and fifty Musket Shot of other
Writers, he comes at last ( Fol. 702.) with his Squibs of forty Heathen
Writers, and Philosophers; but has he not utterly disgraced his whole Army, by
having such Scare-crows to march in the Rear? Has he not extremely overshot
himself, to bring his Cause before Heathenish Moral Writers? Whilst he kept
himself in Foro Divino, and Foro Ecclesiastico, though he had not much to say
against Plays, yet Plays had not much to say for themselves; (for we must not
look, that the Scriptures will persuade us to go to Plays, no more then they
persuade us to seek to be rich) if he had kept himself within his compass, and
gone no further then his Name professes, to be only Histri^m^stix, which is,
in his own interpretation, a Beadle of Beggars, he might with some indifferency
have been tolerated; but, having once gotten the Whip into his hand, he lays
about him like a Bedlam-man, and strikes at every man he meets, not only his
professed Duellists, the Players, that act the Plays, but the Poets, that make
them, the Spectatours, that see them, the Magistrates, that allow them, the
Music, that abets them, the Dancing, that graces them; nay, he spares not
Sovereign Majesty, even Kings, and Princes: that we must needs now take his
Whip from him, and if he show not himself more reasonable with his Tongue, then
he has done with his Pen, even send him to B^dlam for a mad man. But for
Music, and Dancing, we will talk with him hereafter: now we will only
question him about the other, and begin with Poets, because they are the
Beginners of Plays^ And what can he say, why he should offer to whip them? Were
they not highly esteemed, when they lived? Are they not highly valued^ now they
are dead? Is there any Library, where their Books are wanting? Is there any
Learned man, that cites not their Sentences? Nay^ so much did Plato esteem of
Sophron's Books, who was, as Quintilian says, but Mimorum s^riptor, as it were
a writer of Ballads, that he was found to have them under his Pillow when he
died. If then he cannot for very shame condemn Poets, how can he with any face
condemn Players? As if he should allow a Song to be set in Music, and not
allow it to be sung? or an Oration to be penned, and not to be pronounced? But
which are the Players he would whip? If only the bad Actours, we are
contented; let him not spare them: for to be a bad Actour is no more the part
of a Player, then his Book is the Work of a Scholar. But will ^e therefore whip
Roscius too? He were best take heed what he does: for, if Roscius bring him
once upon the Stage, he will make him more ridiculous by playing the Beadle,
then once he made Chaerea, (whom Cicero speaks of) by playing the Bawd. Brutus,
that glorious Tyrannicide, was not only a great favourer, and furtherer of
Plays, but he writ to Cicero, that he should not intermit to see them, even
presently after Caesar's death; and will he whip Cicero too, if he take him at
a Play? He were best take heed what he does; for Cicero can write Orationes
Prinnianas, as well as Philippicas, that will live to his disgrace, as long as
Letters shall live in grace^ Pompey the Great built a Theater on purpose for
seeing of Plays; and will he whip Brutus, and Pompey too, for dissolute
Magistrates in allowing of Plays? He were best take heed what he does; for
Brutus has a penknife died in blood, and Pompey can lead him as a Slave in his
Triumphs: and it is not for a simple Gown-man to meddle with them, who were the
Princes of the Gens Togata. Augustus Caesar thought so modestly of Plays, that
he allowed Vestal Virgins to go unto them, assigning them a place in the
Theater, where they should sit, and see them; and will he whip Vestal Virgins
too, if he catch them at a Play? He were best take heed what he does; for they
sit there by the Emperor's allowance; and Non est tutam in eum scribere, qui
potest proscribere, It is not safe writing against him, who has power to
banish you. If Plays then have Roscius for an Actour, Cicero for a Spectatour,
Brutus for an Abettour, Pompey for a Benefactour, and Augustus for a Patron,
where is he, that scandals Plays, as if they durst not show their faces in any
good Company? Let him bring me five such men in Foro Morali, in disgrace of
Plays, as I have brought him five here in their commendation, and I will
confess the Game lost; if he cannot, let him then leave his facing, and his
bragging, which do but set him aloft, to make him a Spectacle; and though with
the Credulous they get him Credit, yet with the Judicious they show he has no
Judgment.

But where are ( Fol. 702.) his forty Heathenish Moral Writers, and
Philosophers all this while? Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca,
Tacitus, Pliny, Maerobius, Marcus Aurelius, and the rest? Indeed he has made
them his Executours, but they refuse to administer; and we may say of them, as
Augustus said of his Ajax, (a Tragedy he had written) In spongiam incubuit,
they are shrunk in the wetting. And he makes me think of a Mad man of Athens,
who, in all other points a sensible man, only in this one point distracted,
that, standing by the Seaside, what Ships soever he saw pass by, he presently
thought them to be his own, and would exceedingly rejoice, as if they were his
Ships, newly come home with rich prizes: so this man, in other matters, for any
thing I know, well enough in his wits, seems yet to have one corner of his
Brains possessed with this madness; that standing in his Library amongst his
Books, what good Authors soever he sees there, he presently thinks them to be
of his Opinion, against Plays, when, Good man^ there is no more to ^e found of
his Opinion in any of their ^ooks, then was found of this mad Athe^ian's, goods
in any of the Ships. It were ^edious to examine them all; if I show ^ou his
faults in some, you may believe ^e in the rest: but what need I require ^ou to
believe me, when you may turn ^o the places, and take him tripping ^our selves.
For in the places he cites ^ither ye shall find nothing at all of that ^e
spe^ks, or nothing at all to the purpose he speaks of. Try him in Seneca,
because he is likeliest to be next at hand. He cites his one hundred and twenty
second, and one hundred and twenty third Epistles: but in these two long
Epistles there is not a word to be found concerning Plays. He cites his seventh
Epistle, and there indeed he speaks of Spectacula; but what? not Plays, but
Earnest; of which he says, Mane, Leonibus, and Vrsis homines; meridie,
spectatoribus suis objiciuntur. He cites his Proeme to his Controversies: there
he has a Line, or two, of the Effeminateness of young men in his Time; but
concerning Plays Ne verbum quidem. He cites his twelfth Chapter De brevitate
Vitae, a place ra^ther against himself; for Seneca, having there spoken of the
Luxury of his Tim^, concludes thu^; I nunc, and Mimes mult^ mentiri ad
exprobrandam luxuriam put^: plura mehercule praetereunt, quam fingunt. He cites
the one and thirtieth, and two and thirtieth Chapters of the seventh Book of
his Natural Questions, wherein is not a word, that makes against Plays, only
he complains, that Plays were then in more request, then the study of
Philosophy. He cites the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth Chapters De vita
beata, but in all them, of Plays, Altum silentium. And is not this man now the
very mad man of Athens? I might say here, Et crimine ab uno disce omnes. But
try another; take Macrobius. He cites his first, and seventh Chapters of his
Saturnalia: but in the first not a word of Plays; in the other he shows how
wonderfully Augustus Caesar graced certain Players of his Time, Laberius, and
Publius, Pylades, and Hylas, as if he should Quote us a place on purpose, to
give himself the ^ie. He cites Valerius Maximus, who tells ^ndeed of Sempronius
Sophus, that he put ^way his Wife for going to Plays without his privitie: but
this was not for ^oing to Plays, but for going without ^is privitie, and is
thus far rather for the ^eputation of Plays, that it was not un^ommendable for
women to go to Plays, so they went with their husbands, or in other good
company, with their ^rivitie. And is not this man still the mad man of Athens?
He cites the two and twentieth Epistle of the fourth Book of Pliny, but there
a Judgment only ^s passed against an Agon Gymnicus, an Exercise of naked
Wrestlers, and what is this to Plays? He cites Socrates, and thinks he has
wisdom on his side, because he was judged the wisest man by the Delphian
Oracle: but was Socrates a fit man to condemn Plays for Obscenity; who (as
Salvianus relates) would have no Man to have any Wife of his own, but all Women
to be in common: and what were this, but to betray the City, whilst he defends
the Suburbs? For, where this Opinion is held lawfull^ what obscenity can be
held unlawfull^ He must therefore either renounce Salvianus his Testimony; and
so he shall lose the blessing of one of his Fathers, or else renounce Socrates
his Judgment, and so he shall lose the Ringleader of one of his Squadrons. He
cites Plato, but he is taken from him by one, that will hold him in spite of
his great words, the thrice^ Worthy Sidney, who proves plainly, that Plato
banished not Players out of his Commonwealth for any of the reasons by this
man alleged; but because the Poet^ of his Time filled the world with a wrong
Opinion of the Gods, and he would not have the Youth depraved with such
Opinions, whereof now, without further Law, Christianity has taken away all
the hurtful belief. And so he can have no help from any of these, but he must
be the mad man of Athens still. And as for Cicero, and the learned Emperor,
Marcus Aurelius, you shall hea^ them presently speak so much to hi^ face; that,
if none else would prove him to be the mad man of Athens, yet they themselves
will be the men shall do it.

But these are but single, and private men, ( Fol. 713.) He can show whole
Cities, and Nations, that banished Players. And did they not Physicians also,
and Philosophers, and Mathematicians? Yet in many Cities they were kindly
entertained; they were Civitate donati, enfranchised, and made Free Citizens:
and some of them grew to that wealth, that is incredible; as it is recorded of
one Aesop, an Actour of Tragedies, that he left his Son so rich, that he fed
upon Pearl, and was served at his Table in Silver Dishes. But mark how this man
can play the ambidexter. At first, it was a good Argument against Plays,
because they were the Customs, and delights of Heathen People: now it must
serve for an Argument against them, because they were rejected, and banished by
Heathen People, that we need not wonder, how his Book comes to be so vast, and
voluminous, seeing with the same breath he can both kindle, and blow out the
fire; the same thing, both affimed, and denied, he can equally make to serve
his turn.

And where he tells us of great Princes, and mighty Emperors, both Heathen,
and Christian, that are on his side; what should we speak of any Heathen
Emperors after him, who had none before him, the great Augustus, as worthy to
shut up the leaves of this contentious Discourse, as he was to shut up the
doors of the Temple of Peace. And him we have already showed, by places of the
man's own directing, to be directly against him: but, to leave no place of
doubt, how firmly Augustus is on our side, hear what Suetonius Tranquillus
says of him, Spectaculorum and assiduit^te, and varietate, and magnificentia
omnes antecessit; In the daily frequenting, and in the variety, and
magnificence of setting forth Plays, he exceeded all men. Indeed the man ( Fol.
459.) labors much to get Augustus from us, and we cannot blame him: yet in
this we blame him, that he seeks to get him from us by a trick; he would make
us believe, that Augustus ^id not favor Plays, or Players, because ^e punished
two excellent Players, Hylas, and Pilades, the one with Whipping, the ^ther
with Banishment. As though any man thought Augustus so far to favor Plays, as
to grant Players an Immunity of committing faults without controllment? For he
punished them not meer^y for Playing, but for playing the Knaves, and for their
Misdemeanors. And now, that I may Coronidem imponere, conclude all with one,
that wore a Christian Crown, and wore it so worthily, that he was called Pater
Patriae; did not Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, command Plays to be used,
and to be used after the old manner, with liberty to tax men's Vices, and not to
spare even scoffing at himself, if he deserved it? And how can we forget a
Queen of our own, (of late famous Memory) whose Virtues we shall remember
longer, then our own Names: who would never have given allowance to Plays, all
the time of her Reign, and been her self oftentimes a Spectatrix of them if
she had either been informed by her Confessors, or had conceived in her own
excellent Judgment, that they could be any either Scandal to Religion, or
Disparagement to Modesty. And it may be a President of no small moment for the
countenancing of Plays, that a great Prelate of our time, Eminent as well for
his Piety, as his Learning, yet seldom passed a Christmas, that he had not
Plays Acted at his house before him.

But what cares this man for either Princes, or Prelates? for what ( Fol. 734.)
says he: Too many great ones (he knows not out of what respects) have
vouchsafed to honor Plays, (or rather dishonor themselves) with their
presence: and ( Fol. 735.) were degenerating Princes: this is, that he stands (
Fol. 719.) upon, and will maintain, that not one, either Heathen, or Christian
writer of any Note, can be alleged in defense of Plays. A bold challenge, but,
if there be no fallacy in his Writers of Note, a challenge, that is presently
like to fall to the ground^ For what thinks he of Marcus Tullius Cicero? was
not he a Writer of Note? Who, though he have not written a Book on purpose, yet
has inserted in his Books many notable Sentences in behalf of Plays; which if
we should collect, would make a just Volum. But what need we, when he has one
sentence, that seems as a Verdict on their side, where he says, Comoedia est
Imitatio vitae; Speculum consu^tudinis, and Imago Veritatis: (a short, but a
full Description of the Nature of Plays:) a Comedy is the resemblance of Life,
the mirror of Custom, the image of Truth: in which not a word, that speaks
not, if not in their Praise, at least in their Commendation. And not to stand
piling up of Authors; what thinks he of one, that may be Instar multorum, the
Emperor, and Philosopher, Marcus Aurelius? Was not he a Writer of Note? Who in
his excellent Book of Morality (for which we are beholding to our engraffed
Countryman, a learned Issue of a most Learned Parent) has so briefly, and yet
so fully expressed the profit of Plays, that you must not think it tedious, if
I set down his own words. Tragedies (says he) were at first brought in, and
Instituted, to put men in mind of worldly Chances, and Casualties, that these
things in the ordinary course of Nature did so happen, that men, that were much
pleased, and delighted by such accidents upon this Stage, would not by the same
things, in a greater Stage, be grieved, and afflicted. After the Tragedy, the
Comoedia Vetus, or ancient Comedy was brought in; which had the liberty to
inveigh against Personal Vices; being therefore, through this their Freedom,
and liberty of speech, of very good use, and effect, to restrain men from
pride, and arrogancy. After these, what were either the Media, or Nova
Comaedia admitted for, but merely, or for the most part, for the delight, and
pleasure of curious, and excellent Imitation? Thus writes Marcus Aurelius: and
what could he have spoken in so few words to a greater praise of Plays? And
this he writes in his Book, I may say, of Mortified Morality; that one may be
sure, he speaks as he thinks: and cannot be suspected to flatter Sensuality.
And what will the man say now to Heathen Writers? What? but that, which we may
say for him; that sure their Books had no Tables, and so he could not come to
see what they said of Plays. Or perhaps for all his saying, he cares not much
whether Heathen Writers be of his side, or no: but for Christian Writers, he is
sure enough of them, to make his challenge good. But is not this Impudence past
all patience, when ( Fol. 763.) he has named himself two Writers of Note,
Molanus, and Lindanus; the one a Divinity Professour^ the other a reverend
Bishop, who have both of them written in ^ustification of Plays? But you must
allow him to except these, he meant so when he made his challenge. Well, be it
so: what thinks he then of the Glory of our Nation, the Incomparable Sir Philip
Sidney? Was not he a Christian, and a Writer of Note? Who in his general
Defense of Poetry has inserted also a particular defense of Plays, and you may
well hear his words without altering, because they are not capaable of
bettering. Comedy (says he) is an Imitation of the common Errors of our
life, which the Comedian represents in the most ridiculous, and scornful
sort, that may be, so as it is impossible, that any Beholder can be content to
be such an one. Now, as, in Geometry, the Oblique must be known as well as the
Right; and, in Arithmetic, the Odd as well as the Even: so, in the Actions of
our Life, who sees not the filthyness of Evil wants a great foil to perceive
the beauty of Virtue. This does the Comedy handle so, in our private, and
domestical matters, that with hearing it we get as it were an Experience: what
is to be looked for of a niggardly Demea, of a crafty Davus, of a flattering
Gnatho, of a Vainglorious Thraso, and not only to know what effects are to be
expected, but to know, who be such, by the signifying badg given them by the
Comedian. And little reason has any man to say, that men learn the Evil, by
seeing it so set out; since (as I said before) there is no man living, but by
the force truth has in Nature no sooner sees these men play their parts, but
he wishes them in Pistrinum. Although perchance, the sack of his own faults
lie so behind his back, that he sees not himself to dance the same measure:
whereto nothing ^an more open his Eyes, then to see his own Actions
contemptibly set forth. So that, the right use of Comedy will, I think, by no
body be blamed: and much less of the high, and excellent Tragedy, that opens
the greatest Wounds, and shows forth the Ulcers, that are covered with
Tissue; that makes Kings fear to be Tyrants, and Tyrants to manifest their
Tyrannical humors; that, with stirring the Effects of Admiration, and
Commiseration, teaches the uncertainty of this world, and upon how weak
Foundations Gilden roofs are builded. It were therefore too absurd to cast out
so excellent a representation of whatsoever is worthy to be learned. Thus the
excellent Sidney: and what more could he have said, if he would have sought to
flatter Plays? Yet there is an Exception against him to, because ( Fol. 913.)
he has written an Arcadia, one of the Books in this man's Index Expurgatorius.
But perhaps he will admit of no English Testimonies: take one then in France,
and what thinks he of the Ing^nious, and Learned Michael de Montaigne; was not
he a Christian, and a Writer of Note? And hear what he writes in the five and
twentieth Chapter of his First book of Essaies: I have ever (says he) accused
them of Impertinencie, that condemn, and disallow such kind of Recreation, and
blamed those of In-justice, that refuse good, and honest Comedians, or (as we
call them) Players, to enter our good Towns, and grudg the common people such
public sports, Politic, and well-ordered Common Wealths endeavor rather
carefully to unite, and assemble their Citizens together, as in serious Offices
of Devotion; so in honest Exercises of Recreation. Common society, and loving
Friend-ship is thereby cherished, and increased: and besides, they cannot have
more Formal, and Regular Pastimes allowed them, then such, as are Acted, and
Represented in open view of all, and in the presence of the Magistrates
themselves. And, if I might (...) sway, I would think it reasonable, that in
populous Cities there should be Theaters appointed for such Spectacles. Thus
Montaigne: and where is the man's challenge now, as though there were none,
that either did, or durst oppose him? Certainly we may truly say; the Saying is
verified of him, Scientia non habet Inimicum praeter Ignorant^m: Verecundia non
habet Inimicum praeter Impudentem.

But when all is said, that can be: this is his Murus Aheneus, that he says no
more, then what Tertullian, and Saint Cyprian, and many other most Zealous, and
Learned men, have said before. It is true indeed, Tertullian, and Saint
Cyprian, two shining Ligh^s in the Church of God, have both of them written
Treatises De spectaculis, concerning Shows, and Plays; and I could wish they
were in English, that the world might see a strange thing to wonder at: which
is, that this man says almost nothing material of Plays, which he has not
from them, and yet, where they write most learnedly, he says the same thing,
and yet writes most ignorantly: where they write exceeding devoutly, he says
the same thing, and yet writes exceeding maliciously: where they show in their
writing great judgment, and discretion^ he says the same thing, and yet shows
nothing but Vanity, and gross simplicity.

One would wonder how this should happen, but this is the matter: Circumstances
in matters Moral enter common often times with the substance it self, or rather
indeed become very parts of the substance; which these Fathers have most duly
observed: but this man goes away with the substance, as Sampson with the Gates
of Azzah, and leaves the Circumstances all behind him: and so, whilst he
thinks he has the substance of the matter; he has not indeed the matter of
the Substance. A few words will make it plain. Tertullian lived in the time of
Septimius Severus Emperor of Rome: under whom was the Fifth, or Sixth
Persecution against Christians: in the twelfth year of his Empire were
proclaimed Secular Plays (so called, because they were solemnized but semel in
saeculo, once in an hundred years) and were dedicated to the honor of some of
their Heathen Gods. Tertullian (conceiving it might breed great scandal to the
Christian Religion, if Christians should resort unto them: and the Heathen
being apt to insult, as though Christians had no pleasures in their own
Religion, but were fain to come for pleasures to them) writes a Treatise,
exhorting all Christians to forbear these Plays; and uses indeed many
Excellent, and weighty Reasons, that these Plays were full of Idolatry, and
Superstition, and therefore they could not go to see them, but they must become
as Accessaries, and partakers with them in their Idolatry: that they were full
of licentious Beastliness, as wherein men, and women were brought in, naked
upon the Stage, using many Libidinous, and Immodest gestures; that themselves
were now in Persecution, fitter to mourn, then to be merry, fitter to wring
their hands with compunction, then to clap their hands at a Plaudite; that they
might bethink themselves of greater pleasures in their own Religion, their
Reconcilemeut with God, their Redemption by Christ, their Hope of Heaven, and
such like. Now, what man of our Ministers, if he had been in Tertullian's place
would not have written of these Plays, as Tertullian did: yet what man of our
Ministers, as our Plays are now, would once have offered to open his mouth
against them? They were Idolatrous; ours, merely Moral: they, dedicated to
Heathen Gods; ours, dedicated only to honest Recreation: they, full of impious,
and profane Obscenity; ours, full only of civil Mirth: they, full of cruelty,
and blood; ours, friendly, and quiet, lovingly maintaining mutual society:
they, in time of persecution; ours, in time (for which we have cause to praise
God) of Peace, and Iubile: they, Acted by Heathen, and amongst Heathen; ours,
Acted by Christians, and amongst Christians. And now, let the world judge,
whether there be no just cause to commend this Father for wri^ing as he did,
and yet to condemn this man for writing as he does? For he duly observed all
due Circumstances, but this man observes none; but is merely a confused Lump,
as if he were a man made out of the first Chaos, and were never descended from
Adam, made of the Earth, when it was a distinct Element.

Although therefore he could say, that he says nothing, but what others have
said before, yet would this be no Apology for him; s^eing he says it not in
the same Times, nor amongst the same Persons, nor upon the same Occasions, nor
with regard of any due Circumstance. And yet, this is not all; for is not his
Book full of severe Censurings? of uncharitable Invectives? of far-fetched
Applications? of opprobrious Language? of blemishing Imputations? But, suppose
it were not, Is it nothing to gather the errors of former times, and to cast
them upon the Reformation of the present time? Is it nothing to suck the Ulcers
of Diseased persons, and then spit them all in the face of his Country? Is it
nothing to obtrude his own mistakings for truths; and that to the scandal of
the whole nation? Is it nothing to persuade the world, that ( Fol. 1, and 568.)
we profess to be Christians, but are none, as maintaining Heathenish, and
Idolatrous Customs? Is it nothing ( Fol. 149.) to sow seeds of Suspicion, and
Iealousies in the peoples hearts, as if all were out of order, both in Church,
and Commonwealth? Is it nothing for a private man, to take upon him to be
Censor morum, in matters both Civil, and Ecclesiastical? If these things should
be suffered, every Korah, and Dathan would be controlling of Moses, and Aaron;
every Jack Straw would be giving ^aws to his Prince; every Dreamer would be an
Enthusiast, as if another Montanus were come amongst us: but I forbear to
aggravate faults already censured, Quas meruit poenas, jam dedit illud opus.


Only add this as a Corollary to all, that has been said, If Plays be neither
guilty of Idolatry, nor obscenity, then is his Book guilty both of malice, and
slander; but they are neither Idolatrous in any sort, as all men will
acknowledge, nor Obscene in the sort he would make them, as no man can deny;
and therefore what is his Book but a very unmannerly surmise for the manner, and
a very filthy Impostume for the matter. And now, that you have heard this
Negative Argument to absolve Plays; you may be pleased to hear one Affirmative
Argument, to make them absolute, and it shall be cut after his own fashion, if
that will please him.

That exercise is most worthy to be frequented, in which both profit, and
pleasure may be had together: but such are Plays, therefore most worthy to be
frequented. The Major is proved thus, Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit ^tile
dulci.
The Minor thus, Et prodesse volunt, and delectare Poetae.


There remains only a short Paraphrase upon this Argument, and then Dixi.

For should we not wrong Plays, if we did only defend them, and did not
commend them? To leave them non Laudatos, were to leave them Illaudatos: and
they deserve not only an Apology, but an Encomium. As therefore it is said of
Images, that they are the Books of such as cannot read; so we may say of Plays,
that they are the Schools of such as cannot study, and teach that with ease
and delight, which in other courses cannot be attained without much pain, and
labor. And let not the Name abuse you, as if you were at play, when you are at
a Play; for though the Name be but a Jest, yet is there in good earnest much
earnest good to be learned from thence by due observation. Certainly, the very
scope of Plays in Christian times, has ever been addressed to the magnifying
of Virtue; or to make notorious the foulness, and deformity of Vice; wherein
indeed they have an ability, then any other course far more enforcing. For
whereas the common man is drawn to love Virtue, not so much by the love of
Virtue, as by the love of Happiness, which grows out of Virtue; and to hate
Vice, not so much for the hate of Vice, as for the hate of Miseries, that flow
out of Vice: it must necessarily follow, that what does most manifest such
happiness, or such miseries, must needs, to Virtue, or from Vice, be most
enforcing; but this effect is far better wrought by Plays, the Representation
of life, then by the life it self: seeing life, being casual, and tedious, does
neither always answer to desert; nor yet is ea^ie to be observed, where the
Play no sooner shows you the Vice, but it inflicts the punishment; no sooner
the Virtue, but it bestows the reward. Besides, where Laws suppress faults,
by making the faulty, punishable: Plays reclaim the faulty, by making the
faults, if small, ridiculous^ if great, odious.

Indeed, the Passages of the world are excellent Glasses, if they be had within
reasonable distance, which, as it is the purpose of Histories to do by
Relation; so it is the purpose of Plays to do it by Representation, as Cicero
says, Haec consicta arbitror a Poetis esse, ut effictos mores nostros,
expressamque imaginem nostrae quotidianae vitae videamus: Plays, I conceive,
were devised by Poets for this purpose; that in them, as in a Glass, we might
see the manners, and very Image of our daily life. Plays indeed are Glasses of
the Passages, and Actions of the world: and it is unhappy for Glasses, when
they fall into the hands of Ill-favored faces; for they may chance to lay the
Ill favouredness of their faces upon the Glasses: and just so it is with this
man; for he lays all the blame of the world's bad actions upon Plays, where he
ought rather to lay all the blame of Plays bad actions upon the world: for, if
the world were good, Plays would be good; but, if the world be bad, Plays are
but the Glasses, they do but their kind to represent it as it is; and
therefore no fault of theirs, if they be bad too.

But he cannot abide to hear talk of Representations, he finds no difference
between real committing a Sin, and representing it. But have we not even in
Scripture some Examples, (which we may apply with reverence) that things which
cannot without indecency be done, may yet without indecency be represented? Can
there be a more beastly, a more shameful act, then to show one's self stark
naked before all people? yet the Prophet Esaias did so; and did so three years
together: and though in it self it were a shameful act^ yet in him it was not
so; because he did it for representation. Can there be a more foul, or foolish
act, then for a man purposely to marry a Whoor, and to have children of
Fornications? yet the Prophet Hosea did so: and, though in it self it were a
most foolish act; yet in him it was not so, because he did it for
representation. And may we not then draw from hence not only an Apology for
Plays, by reason of their lawfulness, but an Encomium also, by reason of their
forcibleness? And for this cause the great Schole-man, Thomas Aquinas, says,
and says it in this very case. Poeticae Fabulae idcirco inventae sunt, ut
mortales adducerent ad virtutis adeptionem, ac Vitii fugam, ad quoe simplices
homines melius repraesentationibus, quam rationibus inducuntur. Plays were
invented to this purpose, that men might the better be drawn to embrace Virtue,
and to fly Vice; to which they are much better drawn by representations, then
by reasons.

But he would be thought very devout; he stands upon it, that we have other,
far better, more Crystalline Glasses then Plays, even Scriptures, the Word of
God, and Preachers, the Ministers of the Word of God, etc. As though, because
the Sun is a glorious Light of God's making, we might not use a Torch of our
own making, when the Sun is down? The Scriptures indeed are Divine Rules, God's
Word is a Lanth^rn to our feet, and a Light to our paths, and Preachers are
sublime Schole-masters, who sit in Moses Chair to instruct us; and I could wish
with this man, that Prayers, and Sermons were more frequented, and Plays less;
but yet not with this man's mind, as though every one, that goes to a Play,
were damned: but because Plays are but of Humane invention, and may miscarry in
that they intend; Sermons are of Divine institution, and have a promise of
Grace annexed; and of which it is said, That Faith comes by hearing. We see
Plays but to refresh our Spirits; but we hear Sermons to sanctify our Spirits:
we see Plays but as a bodily recreation; but we hear Sermons as a spiritual
edification; which yet I speak not to make comparison, but to show there is no
comparison to be made. They are non eod^m nominanda die. But yet they are no
^lasses; he can never make a Glass of a Pulpit, as we may do of a Stage; that
may teach us to know our selves, but it cannot show us to see our selves: this
is only done by representation, which is the proper Office, and work of Plays.
If therefore we could make true use of Plays, as Plays do their parts to offer
it unto us, we should not only in them see our faults, but by them learn to
amend our faults; and though we attribute not unto them a power of working
spiritual Grace, which is proper to the Pulpit; yet we may attribute to them a
means of working Moral Virtue, which may be common to the Stage. Here he falls
to exclaiming, (for he is excellent at loud exclamations) [ Fol. 733.] Oh, let
it never be heard of in Gath, nor published in Askelon; [ Fol. 101.] for who
can be so ^rossly stupid, to think to learn any Grace, or Virtue from a
Playhouse? Who ever sought for Pearls in Dirt; or for a Crystal Spring in
filthy Mire? with many such, no less impertinent, then Pathetical
Interrogatories; which he would use, if he were but speaking of a Goose's going
barefoot. Indeed he bears himself very h^gh; as if he were the only Atlas to
bear up the Firmament of Virtue; and that we are all children of the Giants,
that fight against God, and all goodness: but we let him know, (if at least he
will learn) that we honor Virtue as much sincerely, as he would seem to do,
and we seek to advance Virtue by more ways, then he directs how to do. We
acknowledge Prayer the most sovereign means; then reading of Scriptures; then
hearing of Sermons; then conferring with learned Ministers; then conversing
with Religious Persons: but yet we exclude not inferior helps; for seeing all
the means we can use is little enough, why should we neglect any means, though
never so mean? And indeed, as Seneca said of Epicurus, Male audit, infamis est,
sed immerito: He has an ill report, and is infamous, yet undeservedly: (for
though he made Pleasure the Summum Bonum, yet he meant a Pleasure flowing out
of Virtue) so we may say of Plays; Male audiunt, infames sunt, sed immerito:
They have an ill Name, and are infamous, but undeservedly: for though they be
in show but Pleasures, yet they bring a profit with them, and conduce to
Virtue. And seeing Heathen men might have, and oftentimes had in great eminency
Moral Virtues, to what may we impute it more, then to their seeing of Plays?
For, though Philosophy gave them the Rules, and Histories told them the Tales,
yet Plays only showed them the Examples, which gave the life to both the
other. For Rules of Philosophy are but dead Lessons, and Tales of Histories
make but light impression; the Viva vox, and Action of the Player, is as a
Les^on in Music, played unto us by the Master; and as a Seal upon both Sense,
and Understanding, the Print whereof is reciprocally carried from one to the
other with infinite repercussions. Rules of Philosophy, though they be good
Directions, yet they want one to lead us by the hand; they bring us only to
Video meliora, proboque, and then leave us to Deteriora sequor: where Plays do
not only show us the Right, but lead us in it; not only tell us the way, but
tread it out before us. Reading of Histories, though it be pleasing to the
Understanding, yet it is wearisome to the Sense; neither is the Understanding
it self so much wrought upon by that we read, as by what we hear, and see; and
this makes Plays to be of far more use, and profit then Histories; because in
them we have absolutely the help of one Sense more, and the help of the other
Sense with far more force, and greater contentment. And as for the
Understanding, it is not only sooner, and better Informed, but is Dilated
also, and made both more capable, and more capacious, by seeing of Plays, then
by reading of Histories: seeing in these the Fantasy, receiving it only from
the dead Book, and doing it all, it self alone, can be but faint in delivering
it to the Understanding: where, in Plays, the Seeing prompts the Hearing, and
the Hearing prompts the Seeing, and they both join together, to present it to
the Fantasy, which, receiving it with vigor, with vigor transmits it to the
Understanding. I might quickly here grow tedious, if I should follow the
Matter, and not observe Form, but seeing too long Walk^, though never so
pleasant, may be wearisome, I will make a stand here; only showing, what an
Hill is behind to be ascended, if, after private profi^s, I should proceed to
speak of public Benefits: proving how necessary it is, that the multitude, who
live by their labors should have Recreations allowed them to sweeten their
pains: and that of all Recreations, hitherto invented, there is not any, for
many Considerations, so worthy the embracing, as this of Plays: it is a general
delight, general to Sex, to Age, to Quality; it is an innocent delight,
innocent in Deed, and in Occasion; it is a cheap delight, it ventures nothing,
and spends but little; it is a sociable delight, many do at once enjoy it, and
all equally; it is a ready delight, without wast of time, or trouble of
waiting; it is a refreshing delight, it becalms the Spirits, where most other
delights make the Pulses beat; it is a delight both to Sense, and Reason: and,
of the Senses, more then one more then one way do at once partake it: and as
for the Reasons, we may truly say of Plays, that they enlarge it by Discourses,
quicken it by Conceits, and direct it by Examples. These are some reasons of
many, to show there is just cause, why Plays should, and may delight us: but to
show, that they do indeed delight us, what can be alleged better then that,
which Cicero says, Quid ego dicam populum, ac vulgus imperitorum ludis
magnoper^ delectari? quanquam id huic causae satis est; sunt enim populi, ac
multitudinis Comitia: What should I speak of the delight, which common people
take in Plays? of which we need seek no further reason then this, that they are
the Marts of the people. And lest you should think it a base delight, as
delighting only the base multitude: hear what he says further, and says it
not only as a Witness, but as a Party, making it a delight even of Statesmen:
Et nosmetipsi, qui ab delectatione omni negotiis impedimur; and in ipsa
occupatione delectationes alias multas habere possumus, ludis tamen oblectamur,
and ducimur: Even we our selves, who by reason of employments are hindered from
taking of any delight, and in the employments themselves may have many other
delights; yet are we also affected, and taken with the delight of Plays. And
what will you say, if this man himself, who has spoken so reproachfully all
this while of Plays, and would make us believe ( Fol. 724.) that none but lewd
people are delighted with them, even he also can be proved to delight in Plays?
You would think it strange: yet hear what Cicero says to this point too, and
that upon his credit: Delectant homines, mihi creed, ludi, non eos solum, qui
fatentur, sed illos etiam, qui dissimulant: Plays, believe me, delight all; not
them only that confess it, but even them that would deny it, and do dissemble
it. And who doubts, but that we shall find this man amongst the Oratour's
Dissemblers?

But to make an End with him, that never makes an end; seeing Scriptures in no
kind, ancient Fathers, and Councils, not in our kind, have ever condemned
Plays; seeing no Reasons of any force can be brought against them, and many may
be alleged for them; seeing they rather deserve Commendation, then need
Defense, I hope to find none either in Judgment so weak, or so strong in
Passion, as to set his hand ^o this man's pen, or to lend his voice ^o this
man's throat, in making Outcrys against Plays; but that he will be con^ent, as
to see the wide world drawn ^n a Map, and a large History in an Abridgment; so
to see, and favor Plays, which are nothing, but Epitomes of the World's
behavior.

FINIS.

