A Brief Account OF SOME TRAVELS In diverse Parts of EUROPE, Viz.

HUNGARIA, SERVIA, BULGARIA, MACEDONIA, THESSALY, AUSTRIA, STYRIA, CARINTHIA,
CARNIOLA, and FRIVLI.
Through a great part of GERMANY, AND The Low Countries. Through Marca
Trevisana, and Lombardy on both sides the Po.

With some Observations on the Gold, Silver, Copper, Quicksilver Mines, and
the Baths and Mineral Waters in those Parts.

AS ALSO, The Description of many Antiquities, Habits, Fortifications and
Remarkable Places.

The Second Edition with many Additions.

By EDWARD BROWN, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, at the Sign of the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXV.

TO THE READER.
A Great part of these Papers were Printed eight years since, and some of them
have seen the light no less than twelve: But since that the Copies have been
disposed of, and the Impressions sold, the Bookseller has thought fit to
Reprint them together. In order to which, whilst he gave me the Opportunity to
read them over, I could not omit the making of diverse Additions, and adjoining
another Journey through the delightful Country of Lombardy: Calling to mind the
Magnificence of some Roman Antiquities, and the Remarkable Actions of great Men
in those Quarters. Whereby I might give a short Account of the strange Fate and
various Revolutions of diverse of their ancient Cities. As to the natural
Curiosities and Observations in the first parts, it would be unnecessary to
make any Introduction, they having now run through so many hands. I can only
say, that what you had in scattered parts before, are here compacted together
in one entire Volume, and hope for the same kind Acceptance. The number of the
Cuts are increased, and the Figures of diverse Habits, Medals and Antiquities,
added: The Particular Description of which, in this Preface would prevent the
satisfaction of considering them in their proper places; to which I shall refer
you, wishing you the same pleasure in viewing them there, that I have had
formerly in beholding them in their due Situations, and in the Contemplation
and Description of them afterward.

Edward Brown.

THE General Description OF HUNGARY.
HOW far HVNGARIA exceeds other Countries of Europe in Mines, Baths and
Mineral-waters; because I have elsewhere given a particular account of such
Subjects, I shall at present omit their repetitions, and at this time add some
other Considerables; and in the first place say, That it abounds not only in
those, but is also the best Rivered Country in Europe: nor does any Region
thereof afford so many noble and useful Streams.

On the East side it is washed with that Noble and Navigable River Tibiscus, or
the Teisse, arising in the Country of Maromorus, at the foot of the high
Carpathian Hills: which, having received the Mariscus or Marisa, and many
Rivers into it, runs into the Danube, between Varadine, St. Peter and
Belgrade. By this River comes down the great quantity of natural Stone-salt,
brought from many Salt-mines in Hungary and Transylvania; whereof a great part
is brought up the Danube to all Places, as far as Presburg; (it being
prohibited to be carried any higher) least it should hinder the sale of the
Austrian Salt, upon which the Emperor has an Impost, and no small quantity
also down the Danube, and afterward up the River Morava into Servia and
neighboring Countries.

On the West side runs the River Arabo or Rab, rising in Styria, and running
into the Danube by Javrinum or Rab. A considerable River receiving the
Lauffnitz, Pinca, Guncz, and other Rivers into it. And now lately more famous
for the defeat of the Turks, under Achmet the Grand Vizier, by the Imperial
Forces, at St. Gothard, nigh this River. The discourse hereof was fresh, when I
was at the City of Rab: and many I found, who saw the Corpse of Men and Horses
floating in that Stream.

Upon the Southern Parts are considerable, the River Dravus or Drau, which
arising in the Territory of Saltzburgland, a part of old Noricum, runs a long
course through Carinthia and Hungary, and falls into the Danube near Erdoed, or
old Teutoburgium; after it has passed from its head about three hundred Miles.
About its entrance into Hungary, it receives into it the long River Mur; and,
far above this, nearer its original I found it a considerable Stream: having
passed the same by a good Bridge as high as Villach or Villaco, and between
Clagenfort and Mount Leubell in Carinthia, I passed the same also by two long
Wooden Bridges, and an Island in the middle between them.

On the same side is also the noble River Savus, or the Sau; which arising in
Carinthia, enters the Danube at Belgrade; continuing a long course of about
three hundred Miles, and swelling by the accession of many good Rivers. Being
at Carnodunum or Crainburg, an handsome Town, not far distant from the Head, it
appeared a considerable Stream; which is afterward so enlarged, as to have
remarkable Islands in it, as that of Metubaris, to the West of old Sirmium, and
that of Segestica or Sisseck, by Zagrabia, containing of old a strong and
famous Town; unto which the old R man's brought their Commodities from Aquileia,
and so by Land to Labach or Nauportus; from thence unto Segestica, and
forwards, for the supply of those Provinces and their Garrisons and Forces in
them. Between these two noble Currents of the Dravus and the Savus, lies a
fair and long Inter-amnian Country, wherein Solomon the Magnificent chose a
safe retreat, until he came to Belgrade: when, with about four hundred thousand
Men, which he brought to take Vienna, he dared not to meet the Forces of
Charles the Fifth, then encamped before that City.

Upon the North part of Hungary, are the Rivers arising from the Carpathian
Mountains, which divide Poland and Hungary; more particularly the River Gran,
which runs into the Danube, over against Strigonium or Gran; and also the River
Waag or Vagus, which comes in above Comara: which Stuckius, an ocular Witness,
conceives to equal the Po in Italy. I am sure, at Freistat, above fifty Miles,
before it discharges into the Danube, it is a very large Stream, and has a
long Bridge over it; part whereof was broken down by the Ice, the same year
when I was there. And far above it, nearer the head, there is also a
considerable Bridge at Trenschin, a fair Town, which gives the name unto that
Country, and much resorted unto for its hot Baths and Mineral Waters; having no
less than thirty two plentiful Springs.

The great Danubius or Thonau continues its Stream quite through Hungary; and
no one Province has a larger share of it; for accounting from the City of Vlme
in Swabenland or Suevia, where it begins to be Navigable, it continues a
long course, passing by Ingolstad, Ratisbone, Straubing, Passau, Lintz and
Vienna unto Presburg; from whence through Hungary it makes a course of above
three hundred Miles, before it passes by Belgrade: To omit the long Stream
thereof in its farther progress, when having washed the Shoars of Servia,
Bulgaria, Wallachia and Moldavia, with many mouths it enters the Euxine or Bla
k-Sea: having in this long passage drank in above sixty considerable Rivers;
and in sober account performed a course of above fifteen hundred Miles. Whereby
it may tolerably admit the double name of Danubius and Ister, properly applied
unto distinct Parts thereof.

So that, although I have seen the Danubius, for about seven hundred Miles; yet
cannot tell, whether I may certainly say, that I have seen any part of Ister.
For Strabo ascribes that name unto it, below its Cataract, or great fall, which
happenes about Axiopolis, in Moesia inferior, or Bulgaria. But Appianus, and
later Account, define it to begin at its concurrence with the Savus at
Belgrade: and if so, yet we had but a short sight of the Ister; which
traveling more up into Servia, we were fain to leave at Hissargich. And of
this Ister or lower part of the River, many things are spoken and related by
the Ancients, which are not so plainly verifiable of Danubius.

An Aqua Duct near Scopia.


Besides these large Rivers above named, there are some others, taken notice of
also by Pliny; and esteemed Huvii non ignobiles. The Sarvizza or Orpanus,
arising near Vesprinium, and passing by Alba Regalis, runs into the Danube,
which I passed over at Jeni, or nova Palanka. The River Walpo or Vulpanus,
arising above the Town of Walpo, which was taken by Solomon, in his march to
Alba Regalis, or Stull-Weissenburg. We passed over it by Walcovar, and the
River Bosneth or Bacun^hus, which runs into the Savus, not far from old Sirmium.

As this Country excels in Rivers, so has it also many considerable and long
Bridges. There is a long Bridge of Boats over the Danube, between Strigonium
and Barchan, which is the first Bridge on this River, which we meet with from
the great Wooden Bridge at Vienna, which takes above two thousand Trees to
plancher it. Upon the shore of St. Andrew's Island by Virouichitz, I took
notice of a ruin of Stones, where the Turks told us, there had been formerly a
Stone Bridge: but the Turks in these Parts, think it best to make Bridges of
Boats; which they so handsomely contrive, as to open a passage for Boats and
Vessels of burden to pass; so that he that beholds those in these Parts, will
not wonder at the Bridges of Boats at Rouen, and Grenoble in France. Between
Buda and Pest, there is a Bridge of Boats over the Danube, where it runs all in
one Stream, of above half a Mile long, the best I have seen of this kind; and
if Sigismund had lived to effect his Design, of making a notable Stone Bridge
in this Place, there had probably been no Bridge in Europe to compare with it.
There is also a Bridge at Calocza, formerly an Archbishop's Sea, and a handsome
and well-contrived Bridge, by Walcovar over the River Walpo. But that of
Esseck, or Mursa of old, is scarce to be paralleled with any other; built
partly over the Dravus, and partly over the Fenns, which are often overflowed.
The Bridge is five Miles at least in length, having Towers built upon it at the
distance of every quarter of a Mile: It is handsomely railed on each side, and
supported by great Trees, erected under it; nine or ten in a rank, unto each
Arch. That part of the Bridge, which was built over the Dravus, was burnt down
by Count Nicholas Serin, in the late Turkish Wars between Leopoldus the First,
Emperor of Germany, and Sultan Mahomet the Fourth: and is now supplied by a
Bridge of Boats, somewhat below the former; which I passed over in September,
1669. The Turks did not rebuild it in the same place, because the Supporters
below the Water, when the fire ceased, were so strongly fastened and hard, that
it would have cost them too great a labor to get them up. By this Bridge the
Turkish Forces pass into Hungary: and at this place the unfortunate King
Ludovicus thought to have stopped the Turkish Army which marched under Solomon.
And lately Count Serini undertook a long March to burn the same, to prevent
Supplies from coming to the Vizier, who was with his Army in other parts of
Hungary.

And as there are still many Bridges over the upper Danube, so have there also
been in Old time upon the lower, or Istrian part thereof. Darius King of Persia
made a Bridge of Boats over that Mouth of the Ister called Ostium Sacrum.
Nicephorus relates, that Constantine built a Stone Bridge over it. But the most
remarkable and admirable Bridge, was that, built by the Emperor Adrian, and
described by Dion the Historian: whereof there are still some Ruins, not far
from Severin, about twenty Hungarian Miles from Belgrade. This Bridge consisted
of twenty Piles of square Stone of an hundred foot high, besides the
Foundation: of sixty foot in breadth, and the distance between each of them one
hundred and seventy foot; and conjoined by Arches, upon the which was this
Inscription,

PROVIDENTIA AUG. VERE PONTIFICIS VIRTUS ROMANA QUID NON DOMAT? SUB JUGUM ECCE
RAPITUR ET DANUBIUS. And, as a Memorial hereof, many Roman Coins were stamped,
and some in Silver, not yet rare among us, with this Inscription, DANUVIUS.

No River affordes so large and peopled Islands. Between Vicegrad and Vacia,
there is a fair and large Island, called St. Andrew's Island. Another a little
below Buda, against the West side of which stands Adom, extending forty Miles;
and exceeds that of the Isle of Man, containing many Villages in it; upon part
whereof the Turkish Forces encamped, when they came to raise the Christian
Siege at Buda, and was the great omission and error of the Christians, that
they fortified not in that Island. Another against Mohatch: another about the
entrance of the Dravus: and a new one hard by Belgrade, made by the settling of
the Silt or Ouse brought down by the Savus and the Danube; where thirty five
years ago there was no face of an Island, but is now full of Trees; how this
may advantage or disadvantage Belgrade, future times may show. But the Turks
are so secure and fearless of any Forces, that may ever hurt them in these
Parts, that they have no consideration of such things. And allowing the River
Leyta to be the boundary of Austria, the Island of Schut, or Insula Ci^uorum,
will prove most considerable of any; containing many good Towns, as Comora,
Sumarien; besides very many Villages. And passing through it, I found it well
peopled and ordered against Incursions; wherein there have been diverse,
formerly made by Turks, Tartars, and rebellious Forces.

No River whatsoever, so far from its discharge into the Sea, affordes more
Naval Vessels of strength and sufficiency for Fight; nor has any afforded the
like signal Engagements and Encounters, at this distance from the Sea. The
Emperor has some Vessels of War handsomely built, like Galleys at Vienna,
Presburg and Comora; and an Arsenal for provision of many upon occasion. The
Turk at Strigonium, Buda, Belgrade, and other places below.

At the Siege of Belgrade, Mahomet the great brought two hundred Ships and
Galleys, well appointed, up the Stream. And the Hungarians sent Turkish History.
so many down the Stream, from Buda, that after a sharp encounter, they took
twenty of the Turkish Vessels, and forced the rest on Shore near the Camp; so
that, to prevent falling into the Enemies hand, Mahomet was fain to cause them
to be set on fire. The Christians had a great Fleet at the Siege of Buda, when
all miscarried under Turkish History.
Count Regensdorff. For the History delivers, that the Christian Fleet
consisted of four and twenty Galliots, about fourscore small Pinnaces, and
little less than an hundred Ships of Burden, and other great Boats. By the
help of such Naval Vessels Wolfgandus Hodder did a good piece of Service, when
Solomon besieged Vienna; for he came out of Presburg with armed Vessels, and
sunk the Vessels sent from Buda with the great Ordnance, to batter the Walls of
Vienna.

And as this Country abounds in Rivers, so is it not without some notable
Lakes, as the Lake Balaton or Platsee, or Volcaea of old, extending a great
length between Vesprinium and the Dravus, with some strong Forts upon it. This
Lake put a stop unto the cruelty of Solyman's Soldiers, who destroyed all from
Buda unto the Lake Balaton. And since it lies on the East of the River Leyta,
we may also reckon in the Newsidler Sea, a pleasant Lake, seven German Miles
long, and three broad: so called from Newsidel, a small Town, of one street and
some backward Houses, with a small square Castle upon an Hill by it, from
whence I had a good prospect over all the Lake. In the Commotions of Botscay,
fourteen Villages about this Lake were burnt by Turks, Tartars and rebellious
Heyducks. The Hungarians call it Terteu and Pliny, Peiso. It is in the middle
way between Vienna and Sabaria, the birthplace of Saint Martin. The long
extended plain of Pampus, in Paraguay in America, exceeds all others, as being
two thousand Miles in length. And I have heard that famous Navigator, Captain
Narborough, say, who not long since, was Commander of the Sweepstakes, and made
a Voyage in her into the South Sea, that there is all low Land from the River
of Plate, unto the middle of the Straights of Magellan. Moscovia and Poland
have long Plains, but many of them Woody, and obscured by Trees; but none more
open and clear Plains than this Country. The greatest Plains. I have observed
in England, are those of Salisbury, Lincoln and New Market. But these are but
long Walks, compared with those of Hungary; and are exceeded by the Plains of
Austria, from Vienna unto Mount Simmeren, unto the Borders of Styria. And
though the Vpper-Hungary be hilly and plentiful in Wood; yet are there large
Plains below. I traveled from Vienna to Belgrade, about four hundred Miles,
upon continued and not interrupted Plains; which often appeared like the Sea,
without any visible Eminencies, only a short and plain Wood, by Bacna, and
Shilberg, beyond Dotis; and if we reckon the full of this Plain, it will prove
much longer, extending from Mount Kalenberg or Cetius, two German Miles
Westward of Vienna, and so beyond Belgrade, still along the North side of the
Danube, unto the Borders of Walachia; which will make a larger extent, than the
famous long Walk from Agra to Lahor in India. This plainness of the Country,
affords an handsome way of Traveling in open Chariots, carrying one or two Men
with a Charioter, drawn by two or three, sometimes four Horses a Breast; and
room enough to lie down. In this manner I traveled from Buda to Belgrade, over
fair large Plains; and many Miles upon Green-Swarthe and unworn Ways;
especially in the County of Sirmium or Schremnia, as they now call it.

No Country has so large a share of Capital Cities upon the Danube; for
whereas from the course thereof, from Vlme unto Belgrade, there are reckoned
Ten very considerable ones, there are no less than four thereof, that is
Presburg, Strigonium, Buda and Belgrade, accounted unto Hungary; and Buda, with
the addition of Pest, on the otherside the Water, seems to be the largest of
them all; and I believe the largest also of any upon that Stream.

And as this Country excels in Rivers, so is it very abundant in Fishes. The
Tibiscus or Teisse, is esteemed the most Fishy River in Europe, if not in the
World; insomuch, that they have a common saying, That it consists of two parts
of Water, and one of Fish. And the River Bodrack which runs into the Tibiscus,
not far from Tokay, is so replenished with Fish, that in the Summer when the
River is low, the People say the Water smells of Fish. And this is no small
River, but as I had the account from a Commander who purposely made it for me
when he passed it, was thirty Fathoms broad, and eight and an half deep, but
being of this Figure it could not be well Fished with Nets. Which exceeding
fertility, if any will ascribe unto Saline Tinctures, both of its own Stream,
and others accessionary into it, which lick the many natural Salt-Mines under
ground, and so may carry with them, or at least promote some Principles of
foecundity, may admit of consideration. The Danube abounds in many good
Fishes; as Trouts, Perches, large and delicious Carpes, exceeding any I have
seen; and besides many others, a Fish called Coppen, a kind of Capito; a
Biscurne, or kind of Lamprey, a Grundel, or spotted kind of Cobites, with six
Beards, two short, and four longer; a large Fish much exceeding a Pike, called
Scheyden, a Silurus Gesneri: and above all, there is at some Seasons great
store of ^lusones, called by them Hausons: whereof some are twenty foot long;
esteemed a very good dish, and somewhat like Sturgeon. There are set
Fishing-places and Storehouses upon the side of the Danube; whereof the
highest is above Como a, upon Schut-Island, but the greatest Fishing is about
Kilia in Walachia; where they salt them, and send them into other Parts: they
come out of the Euxine Sea.

As the Rivers are full of Fish, so are they covered with Fowl, in the Winter;
Swans I observed none in the Danube, but many other Fowls; and some Pelicans,
not far from Belgrade.

As the Waters are also fruitful in Fish, so the Land abounds in other
Provisions; and very eminently in the two supporters of Life, Bread and Wine:
their Bread is hardly exceeded by any in Europe; worked up and kneaded with
long continued labor; and so made light wholesome, and well tasted; and at so
cheap a rate, that for two pence as much is afforded there, as twelve pence
with us in England. And indeed in all the Turkish Dominions, where I traveled,
I met with so good and well tasted Bread, that with Wine, it was a Feast; and
with Water a sufficient Repast. Grapes they have very delicious and large;
those at Virouichitz by Vacia, are of eminent Note; Wines also of a generous
and noble sort; the Wines of Tokay are highly esteemed; the Sirmian Wines are
very rich and pleasant, in the South part of Hungary, in which Province the
Emperor Probus is said to have planted Vines, about Mount Almus or Arpataro. In
many other places the Wines are very noble; and some brought unto Vienna, where
there are above thirty sorts of Wines to be sold, brought from several Parts.

And as the ground is not unfruitful in its own Nature, so they are not without
the practice of Good-Husbandry, both in their Arable and Pasture Grounds:
especially in Vpper-Hungary, and Parts not subjected to the Turks. I being
there, about the end of February, saw every night all the Country about us on
fire, occasioned, by burning the Stubble and Grass and Herbs; which afterward,
arose with plenty again.

Saepe etiam sterileis incendere profuit agros,
Atque levem stipulam crepitantibus urere flammis.
To set their Fields on fire, and Stubble burn
With crackling Flames, does to their profit turn.
They use not Barnes or Stackes of Corn; but have many deep and large Caves
under Ground, wherein they lay it up safe, both from Robbers and sudden
incursion of Enemies. At Clesch near Toopolchan, when the Turks and Tartars
made their Inroads in the last Wars, the People retired, and hid themselves in
such Cavities; but some Turks, speaking Schlavonian, told them that the Coast
was clear, and the Enemy gone; and so tempting them out of their Holes, they
were unfortunately deceived into Captivity, and carried away into remote
Countries never to be heard of again.

There is also great plenty of Deer, Hares, all sorts of Poultrey, Partridges
and Pheasants; great store of Sheep, which in diverse places, have long Spiral
Horns, and very long curled Wool. And Oxen in great numbers, whereof it is
thought they send an hundred thousand yearly into Italy, Germany, and other
Parts; and it is commonly said, they have enough to serve a great part of
Europe. They are of a kind of Mouse-colour; and the Eastern Company at Vienna
has the privilege to bring them, to furnish that City. There are also
Buffelo's, whereof they make no small advantage, in ploughing of their Lands,
especially in some stiff Grounds, where they must else use five Yoaks of Oxen
to a Plough; and one in my company told me that he had been fain to make use of
six Buffelo's to draw a light Calleche, or Chariot through some Grounds. Not
far from Botesech, there are Horses also in very great number, some large, many
but small, yet swift. I saw a thousand of them belonging to the Peasants at
Sone, Seen or Senia, a Village upon the Danube, in the Contribution Country,
nor far from Comara.

As they exceed in many things, so they are peculiar in some others;
particularly in their Language, which is proper to themselves, and different
from any other. I went to a Church at Bitchka, where the Minister Prayed and
Preached; and though there were a very good Linguist with me, who spoke
Schlavonian, German, Turkish, Vulgar Greek and Italian; yet could he make
nothing of it, or find affinity in it, with any other Language he knew. A
Specimen hereof is set down by Megiserus, of the Lords Prayer, in that
Language. Mi Attyanck Ky vagy az meniegbe, m^gh Szentel Tesseck az te newed,
etc. In the like manner we were confounded by the Language of Albania, on the
Northward part of Epirus, and West of Macedonia. We made use of some of that
Country in passing the Mountains, who were able to speak some Schlavonian: But
as for Albanese, or their own Language, wherein they were delighted to sing Day
and Night, as they traveled with us, our best Linguists, both Turks and
Christians, understood nothing of it.

In some parts of Hungary, many speak Schlavonian, at Freistat, which the
Hungarians call Colgotz. I observed, that at the Church, the Sermon was in
Schlavonian; but at the Franciscans Church, in Hungarian. This incommunication
in Speech, makes them to learn other Languages, and especially the Latin, which
very great numbers speak, especially the Gentry and Soldiers, and I scarce met
with any elsewhere, who spoke it more ready, than the Noble Graff Sacchy,
Governor of Dotis, and his Lieutenant Elvedy. I have also met with Coachmen,
Watermen, and mean Persons, who could make themselves understood thereby.

The Latin-Tongue is very serviceable in Hungaria and Transylvania: but below
Belgrade of little help unto a Traveller, where that far extending Language,
the Scklavonian, prevails. And indeed, with the help of two Languages, German
and Schlavonian, a Man may make a shift to Travel from Hamburg to the Boders of
Tartary, and to Constantinople. And I have heard that the Schlavonian alone is
understood from Mockelberg in Germany to the Caspian Sea. And before we come to
Belgrade, the Schlavonian enters again; which is also spoken in Servia,
Bulgaria, Romania, and a great part of Macedonia; and in so many other
Countries, that with this Language a Man may make a shift to be understood from
the Adriatick-Shore of Dalmatia, unto the Tartarian Ocean. For we read in
Purchase, that when the Hollanders returned from Nova Zembla; the Inhabitants
not very far off could say, Dobre, and Nich Dobre; that is, Good, and not Good;
which are expressions of approving or disapproving, in the Schlavonian Language.

The Turkish Power so much prevailing or threatening in these Parts; it is in
vain, to expect any great University beyond Vienna. Nor do I find that there
has been any very considerable ones in this Country; and though they have had
many Bishops and learned Men; yet they have had their Education many of them
out of Hungary. As had also of old St. Jerome St. Martin. And the present
Hungarians, which addict themselves unto Learning, especially those of Quality,
do commonly Study at Vienna, Prague or Breslaw; a small University, or public
Study there is at present at Schemnitz.

But the Hungarians may justly boast of early helps unto learning, and a very
noble Library erected at Buda, by their King Matthias Corvinus, Son of the
famous Hunniades, about two hundred years ago; consisting of some thousands of
Books, especially Greek and Latin Manuscripts not to be met with or Purchased
elsewhere; part whereof was dispersed into the Turkish Dominions, when Solomon
surprised that City; and a choice part thereof procured afterward, for the
Imperial Library at Vienna, when Cuspinianus was Keeper thereof, diverse whereof
are marked with the Arms of Corvinus, a Crow bearing a Gold Ring in his Beak;
which with many succeeding additions, made by Busbequius, Wolfgangus, Lazius,
Fugger, and others; together with the choicest Manuscripts, brought from the
Ambrasian Library near Inspruch, by the Learned Petrus Lambecius, the present
Library Keeper, make up the fourscore thousand Volumes, now contained in the
Emperors Library at Vienna, by the especial Favor of which worthy Person, I
had the honor, not only to see many of the choicest and most specious thereof,
together with many Noble Rarities in that Place; but to have any useful Book
unto my private Lodgings. And at my coming away, he gave me a Catalogue of some
hundreds of Alchymical Manuscripts, which are in that Library, which I
presented to the Royal Society, from him; with leave to have any of them
brought into England, or to be Transcribed at Vienna, if they pleased. And if
the three most admirable Brass Statua's of Hercules, Apollo and Diana, which
were placed at the entrance of Corvinus his Palace in Buda, had not been
carried away by Solomon, and cast into Ordnance at Constantinople; it is not
improbable, they had been by this time at Vienna. About four hundred Books, the
Relics and refuse of the Library at Buda, were lately remaining there; where
it was no easy matter to have a sight of them; yet so carelessly kept by the
Turks, that Worms, Mice and Rats were like to have the Spoil thereof. But the
Fire at Buda 1669, has now consumed them all.

And as their Language is peculiar, so is the Opinion of their Crown; of which
they have the greatest esteem of any other Nation. This they commonly believe
to have been brought by an Angel from Heaven unto St. Stephen, their King: and
have so high an estimation thereof, that they think, the Right and Fate of the
Kingdom goes with the possession thereof. Which makes them very wary in the
Custody of it, and in all Adversities to secure it. And the Turk has been
always industrious to obtain it. It was formerly kept in the Castle of
Vicegrad; but at present in that of Presburg.

Pineda cut of Cromerus.
And this opinion is probably founded upon the Tradition or Story, how they
came unto it; which is thus delivered. King Stephen intending to settle the
Christian Government in his Kingdom, appointed two Archbishops Sees;
Strigonium, which was the place of his Nativity, and Colocza; and sent
Astricus, Bishop of Colocza, to the Pope, to confirm the same, together with
his Kingdom, and to send him a Crown, and other Royal Ornaments. At the same
time it fell out, that Misca, King of Polonia, sent about the same Errant: and
a Crown was providing for him. But Pope Benedict the Eight, in the mean time
was warned by an Angelical Apparition, to send the Crown unto King Stephen;
which accordingly he did, which probably begot that great Veneration and high
Opinion, they have ever since had of it.

The Crown it self is also singular in its Fashion and Figure; for it is a low
Crown, with a Cross upon it, with four Leaves or Turnings up about it; one
whereof is as large as the other three, at least as two thereof. It is no easic
Favor to obtain a view of this Crown at Presburg, but I saw a Model of it in
the Treasure of the present Emperor Leopoldus; which was a Crown of Gold,
adorned with many precious Stones, exactly made after the fashion of the
Hungarian Crown, and perhaps richer than the exemplar.

Though the Hungarians want not Ingenuity, Industry, and sufficient parts for
Learning, and liberal Arts; yet have they been more addicted unto Martial
affairs, than unto deep Learning: Even the Bishops and Clergymen proving stout
Soldiers; and no less than six Bishops were slain, with their King Ludovicus,
in that fatal Battle of Mohatch.

Some report, and others believe, that the famous Poet, Ovid died, and was
buried in Hungary at Sabaria, seated at the confluence of the Rivers Guntz and
Regnitz before they run into the Rab. Where it is reported, that he having been
banished unto Tomos, near the Euxine Sea, was at last recalled, and in his
return toward Italy died at Sabarta. Where it is said his Tomb was found with
this Epitaph, made by himself:

Hic situs est Vates, quem Divi Caesaris Ira
Augusti patria cedere jussit humo.
Saepe miser voluit patriis occumbere terris,
Sed frustra, hunc illi fata dedere locum.
Before I came into Hungary, I observed no shadow or show of the old Pyrrhical
Saltation, or Warlike way of Dancing, which the Heyducks practice in this
Country. They dance with naked Swords in their hands, advancing, brandishing
and clashing the same; turning, winding, elevating, and depressing their bodies
with strong and active motions; singing withal unto their measures, after the
manner of the Greeks.

The mighty Acts of Attila, King of this Country, together with the numerous
Forces he brought out of these and the neighboring parts, are very remarkable;
whereby he overran a considerable part of Germany, and a great part of Italy:
Sacked and Burnt Aquileia; and fought that memorable Battle with Aetius, the
Roman General, in Campis Catalonicis, near Toulouse; wherein it is said were ten
Kings present, and about two hundred thousand slain: and, which is also
observable, the Generals on both sides were of these Parts; for Attila
Jornandes.
was a Hunne, and Aetius a Maesian, or Servian, of the neighbor Country. And
in succeeding Ages, how far and widely the Kings of Hungary enlarged their
Dominions, besides many Historical Accounts, is tellified at their Coronation,
by ten Banners carried by Great Persons; Monsieur de Fumee.
wherein were represented ten Provinces of that Kingdom: that is, Hungaria,
Dalmatia, Croatia, Schlavonia, Galisia, Rascia, Servia, Bulgaria, Bosnia, and
Ludomiria.

This Country has given the longest stop unto the Turkish Conquests, and
farther intrusion into the Western Parts of Europe. For most, which they have
already obtained, has been upon the advantage of the Hungarian Divisions, and
their own subtilty and false practices; and Solomon, by such false and low
dealings, surprised the Capital City of Buda. And although the Turk has now
obtained the best part of the Country; yet almost a third part remains out of
his Power, and in obedience to the Emperor, as King of Hungaria: as almost all
Upper Hungary, from Presburg unto Tokay, and Zatmar. And there are yet out of
their hands the three notablest Bulwarks of Chrislendom; Rab, Komara, and
Leopoldstadt; all which I had the advantage to fee. This last has been erected
since the loss of Newheusell; and made much after the same manner; consisting
of Six regular Bastions revestues. It is seated on the West side of the River
Waag* over against Freistadt, not far from the place where the Tartars passed
over in the last War, and destroyed a great part of the Country, and carried
away many Captives from those Parts, and out of Moravia. This Fortisication was
begun in the year 1665, and was well advanced, but not finished when I was
there, 1669. Count Souches the younger was then Governor thereof; from whom I
received great Civility in that place; and a Guard of Foot Soldiers, to convoy
me through the Contribution Country, toward Schemnitz, Cremnitz, and the other
Mine Towns.

Many Roman Emperors have honored these Quarters with their Presence, Birth,
Death, or great Actions. For (to omit Trajan, Caracalla, Galienus, Constantius,
and many more) the Emperors Aurelianus, Probus, Gratianus, Maximianus, had
their Nativities at Sirmium; and Claudius Gothicus died in it, or near it.
Jovianus, and Valentinianus were Born in Pannonia. Ingenuus, Governor of
Pannonia, was saluted Emperor by the Moesian Legions. Vetranio likewise, in the
same Country. And at Sirmium was held a General Council, when Photinus was
Bishop of that place.

The Roman Armies being much in this Country, no wonder it is, that so many
Coins of Copper, Gold, and Silver are to be found in it: Whereof I obtained no
small number at Petronell, or Old Carnuntum, which was a Part of Pannonia. And
at Seen, or Senia, situated near the Danube, I met with very many. They are
also to be found at Old Buda, or Sicambria; at Old Sirmium in the Country, now
called Schremnia; at Mursa, or Esseck, and many other Parts. An Armenian
Merchant, in whose House I lodged at Belgrade, undertook to provide me with
Roman Coins against my return: which he might well do about those Parts, as at
Sirmium, Samandria, and other places. And not far from thence Lysimachus, King
of Macedon and Thrace, is conceived to have kept his abode, at a Castle or
Palace near Deva; where that unparalled mass of Gold Medals was found, as is
particularly delivered by Monsieur Fumee, in his Account of the Wars of Hungary.

Near the Town of Deva or Devas, was found great store of Treasure, by the
Peasants of the Country, under an Ancient Castle or Palace, all ruined and
decayed. The Rain continuing a long time, and the Water running with a forcible
current, there was discovered an infinite company of Golden Medals: upon one
side of which was Coined the Image of Lysimachus, on the other side a Victory;
every one weighing two or three Crowns. The Storm and rage of water being past,
and the Sun shining on these, made a mavelous glittering; which perceived by
the Peasants, they remained ravished with joy; and taking them up, they also
found a Golden Serpent: which afterward General Castalde sent unto Ferdinand,
with a part of these Ancient Medals. This being an ancient Custom with those
who buried their Treasure, to place Serpents there, in token of a Faithful
keeper. After the Peasants had taken, no man knew what, others took from thence
more than Twenty thousand Ducats. And the report was, that they might have
taken an hundred Thousand. For that had sometimes been the abode of King
Lysimachus. Whereof Ferdinand had a Thousand, and Castalde three Hundred. Which
Coin remained in this place from Lysimachus's time. Among other notable
Antiquities, there were also found two Medals of Gold, the one of Ninus, the
other of Semiramis, which were sent to the Emperor Charles the Fifth. And there
was not any Man in all that Province, of what Authority or reputation soever,
who had not some of these Medals: so infinite was found this Sum to be.

In the Old Roman Towns, through which I passed, the People, upon notice given,
would bring what Coins they had, called by them Heathen-money. In the Countries
of Servia and Bosna, the Armenians and Jews make Collections, and send them to
Ragusi; from whence the greatest part is carried into Italy. I must not omit
one Copper Coin of the Emperor Julius Philippus, which I found common in those
Parts, and very rare in others; it has on the Obverse, the Head of Philippus,
with this Inscription, I M P. C. M. JVL. PHILIPPUS AVG. on the Reverse, a Woman
between a Lion and a Bull, with the Inscription, P. M. S. COL. VIM. AN. VII;
which may be Provinciae Moesiae Superioris Colonia Viminacium Annona Septimo
data.

Viminacium was a Roman Colony in Moesia Superior, now Servia; and conceived
to be Singidunum, or Senderin upon the Danube, at the entrance of the River
Moschius or Morava; by the Lion and the Bull, might be declared the goodness of
the Soil, fit for Agriculture, and the Valor and Courage of the People; and by
those fierce Animals sitting so quietly together, that, by the Prudence of
Philippus, Agriculture went on, and none found opposition from the Lyca, or
force of others.

Annona Septimo data; The Seventh time of the distribution of Corn under
Philippus. The Legio decima sexta frumentaria, which was quartered in that
place, having the Charge of the conducting thereof; as the Learned Tristan has
conjectured.

an Hungarian
R^g 22

W Sherwin^^*



This is the Habit of an Hungarian, which is found to be so fit and convenient
for all sort of Exercise, especially on Horseback, and in War, that it is made
use of also by the Croatians, Schlavonians, and other Nations, and by the Turks
themselves who live near the Frontiers; although otherwise they seldom change
their own Habits. The Hungarians delight most in Colors, wearing Blew, Yellow,
Green, and Purple Cloth; and it is rare to see any one in Black; the Priests
themselves being habited in long Purple Garments. The Hungarians usually carry
in their hands, a Club, or Iron Mace, of which they have two sorts, a Catshan,
and a Delta, or Balta as they pronounce it. The Catshan has a globular Iron
head with furrows in it, and spaces cut away to render it more light, and easy
to be handled; this is expressed in the Figure of the Hungarian Habit* the
Delta has a head somewhat like a Hammer, but broader, and at the end makes the
shape of that Letter.



A JOURNEY FROM Vienna in Austria, TO Larissa in Thessalia.
HAVING passed the Winter in the Imperial City of VIENNA, I took a Journey into
Hungary, to view the Copper, Silver, and Gold Mines in those Parts. And not
long after, although I had already had a fair sight of Italy, I made a Journey
unto VENICE, passing through Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, and Friuli;
and soon after my return to Vienna, I met with an opportunity, which carried me
unto the Ottoman Court, which then, and a long time before, resided at the
famous Old City of LARISSA in Thessaly. You are not to expect the Names of all
Places, which I passed; yet diverse you will find mentioned, which are not to be
found in Mapps; except you have some more exact, than any I have met with.

Between Vienna and Presburg, above the confluence of the River Marck with the
Danube, I could not but take notice of the Town of Petronell, and Haymburg Hill
and Castle. Petronell is conceived to have been Old Carnuntum, a strong Hold of
the Pannonians, in vain attempted by the Romans, an Hundred and seventy years
before the Incarnation; but was afterward subdued, in the time of Augustus,
made a Roman Colony; and the Station of the Legio decima quarta gemina, and the
Classis Istrica; and in process of time so enlarged, that it became the chief
City of Pannonia Superior, and comprehended that tract on the South Bank of the
Danube, wherein now stand Haymburg, Dutch Altenburg, and St. Petronell.

I had been formerly at Petronell, to inform my self in the noble Ruins and
Antiquities thereof; where I met with variety of Medals, Inscriptions,
remainders of a noble Aquaeduct, and the Remains of a goodly Fabric, which I
thought might be the ruin of a Temple of Janus, but it is conceived to have
been a Triumphal Arch, erected in Memory of a great Victory over the
Pannonians, and Dalmatians, by Tiberius, in the Ninth year of our Lord. My
noble Friend, Petrus Lambecius, has set forth the Figure of one side thereof
(in the Second part of his Description of the Imperial Library,) and of the
back part I took a Draught my self. This, and other Carnuntine Antiquities may
be seen in the same Author; and more may be expected, when that Worthy Person
shall please to Publish his Carnuntum redivivum.



In this place, the Emperor Antoninus Philosophus, in order to his Wars with
the Marcomanni, now Moravians, resided the space of Three years, and died at
Vindobona, now Vienna: and here Severus was elected Emperor by the German
Legions. But this Noble and Ancient City was ruined, in aftertimes, by Attila
the Hunne, in his Incursions into these Parts: Yet there are still remaining
many marks of its Ancient Greatness. And though Grass now grows where Old
Carnuntum stood; yet by an observing Eye, the Foundations of their Houses, and
their Streets are still discoverable: and such great quantities of Roman Coins
have been of a long time, and are still found there, that the Boors are
commonly well furnished with them; of whom I purchased a great number: and Mr.
Donellan, an Irish Gentleman, who then traveled with me, and was walking in my
Company, viewing these Old Remains of former Greatness, by chance struck with
his foot a Silver Coin out of the Earth.

Presburg, Posonium, Pisonium, and by some thought to be Flexum, is a pleasant
City seated on the North side of the Danube, ten German miles Eastward from
Vienna, the chief City of Hungaria in the Impeperial Dominions thereof; since
the loss of Buda, the place of Convention for the Estates; and since the loss
of Strigonium, the Metropolitan City. The City is pleasant; the Castle is
stately, beautiful, and well situated on the top of a Hill, and built of White
Stone; herein is kept the so highly esteemed Crown of Hungary, commonly
believed to have been brought by an Angel from Heaven, unto St. Stephen their
King; and is of a different figure from other Crowns. The Garden of the
Archbishop is very fair; the Walks, the Grotto's, the figure of Jeronimo, the
Labirynth, Fish Ponds, and Fountains are Noble. In the Dome, or Cathedral
Church, lies the Body of St. Johannes Eleemosynarius, Bishop of Alexandria.
The Jesuits have a part of the same Church, and a noble Apothecaries Shop, full
of Rarities. The Lutherans have also a fair Church here.

Rab, or Javrinum, a City seated at the confluence of the Rivers Rab, Rabnitz,
and the Danube: and a strong Frontier Bulwark against the Turk. It has two
Bridges, one over a double Ditch, leading toward Austria; and another toward
Alba Regalis, or Stullweissenburg. It has seven large Bastions, and four
Cavalliers, or high Mounts, which overlook them. The first is the Castle
Bastion, upon which stands the Castle or Palace of the Governor. The second is
the Water Bastion, lying toward the Danube. The third is the Bastion of the
holy Hill, under which when the Turks sprang a Mine, a Horseman was blown off
from the top of it into the Danube, without any hurt to himself or his Horse.
The fourth is the middle Bastion, toward the Land Eastward. The fifth is the
new Bastion. The sixth is the Imperial, or Empress Bastion. And the seventh is
the Hungarian Bastion, lying next the River Rab, where the Turkish Governor was
killed when the Town was surprised in the Night by the Christians. The Country
is all plain about, and there is nothing which seems to command it, but a small
Hill at some distance, which is undermined, and may be blown up upon any
occasion; beyond which there is also a Tower or Spy in the open Fields, to
discover the approach of the Enemy. It was Besieged by Sinan Bassa, in the
Reign of Sultan Amurah the Third; where he lost many Men, and at one assault
Twelve thousand; but at last was Surrendered, by the Treachery of Count Hardeck,
the Governor; which cost him his Head at Vienna; where, upon a Seaffold covered
with black Velvet, kneeling by the side of a Table covered with a black Velvet
Carpet, he laid his Hand upon the Table, and the Executioners at the same
instant struck off both his Head and his Hand. In a few years after, it was
recovered, by a notable surprise, acted by Count Swartzenburg, and Count Palfi,
with a great slaughter of the Turks. I saw a part of the Gate, which was then
broken by a Petard, the same being still kept for a Memorial, in a part of the
Cathedral Church. While this place was in the Turks Possession, they made a
Dungeon for Christian Prisoners, wherein there is no light, but what enters by
a Grate upon the ground in the Marketplace. But this is now seldom empty of
Turks, begging the Charity of Passers-by, and selling neat Whips which they
make in this their sad restraint.

He that would take a view of warlike Engines and Instruments, is not like to
have better satisfaction any where, than at Rab and Komara, where he may take
notice of one, called a morning Star, used by the Sentinels, and at an assault,
defense of a breach, or entrance into a Town; of earthen Pots to throw amongst
the Enemies, filled with sticking and burning materials. There he may also see
a Lehn Brad^r, or plank set with hooks, to be placed on the outside of the
works, covered lightly with earth; whereby those, who storm are wounded, and
entangled. A werf Kugel, or instrument filled with wild fire, and combustible
matter, to be thrown by the hand, it sticks fast and burns. A Spannische
Ritter or Cheval de Frise, to be laid in the way, to keep out the Horse; diverse
sorts of Chain-shot, and the like.

General Montecuculi was the Governor of Raab, whose Pass I had the advantage
of in the former year, to travel by these parts unto the Mine*Towns. The
Emperor being wearied with Chiauses, and ordinary Envoys, which so often came
to Vienna from the Visior of Buda, and expected presents at their return; has
taken order, that, without especial License, they shall come no further than
Raab, but there receive their dispatches.

Komora, Gomora, Crumenum or Comaronium, a large and strong Town at the
East End of the Island of Schut, looking over the Danube and Waag, strongly
fortified, and well manned. Colonel Hoffkircher was then Governor: the
strongest place is the Tortoise Fort; so called, from some resemblance it has
to a Tortoise. This Town, after the taking of Raab, was besieged by Sinan
Bassa, with sixty Ships, and a great number of Turks and Tartars; but in vain,
and to the great slaughter of the Tartars. Although the Bassa omitted nothing
toward the gaining it, but employed treachery as well as force, and under
color of a Parley, sent five Turks to the Governor, Baron Brown, who had then
received a great wound upon his right Knee, to try if he could by any means be
wrought upon to deliver up the City. And the Governor gave them the hearing*
till they had declared their whole treachery; but then presently commanded four
of their Heads to be struck off, and to be set upon long Pikes upon one of the
Bulwarks, for the Bassa to look upon; and sent the Fifth back to the Bassa to
tell him that although he found one in Rab to serve his turn he was much
deceived, if in him he thought to find Count Hardeck, and to assure him that he
would never betray a City committed to his charge, but rather wished to dye the
Emperors true and faithful Servant imbrewed in the Blood of the Turks.

In the inward Castle I observed three old Tombs, which had been formerly
brought thither from Seen or Senia, a place of Antiquity, not far off. Some in
the Castle observing me to write out their Inscriptions, were very inquisitive,
and obliged me to leave a copy of them in the Castle; and if, upon
after-consideration, I should find them to be of importance, required a promise
of me, to send them an account thereof: The Inscriptions were these.

On one of them MEMORIAE JVLIAE EMERITAE QVAE And on the Cover D. M.

The Inscription upon another was this, MVALVALERIANI'LEGIIIIFLVIXITAN

And on the top or Cover, this following,

ITALYPIEYPSYEIETATIATPOS.

The third Tomb was of the same Figure, but without any Inscription. I could
not omit to set down these, because they are not to be met with in that great
Volume of Inscriptions of Gruter.

Gomora has been of late more strongly fortified, and a greater compass of
ground is taken in, by a line drawn from the Waag to the Danube, and fortified
with four new Bastions.

Of some other places, near unto these already named, and whereof I took notice
the year before, I shall make but short mention; as particularly of Newhewsell,
by the Hungarians called Vywar, seated by the River Neutra, not far from
Nitria, a strong place, and Bishops See, taken by Count de Souches in the last
wars. Newhausl is a strong Hold, regularly fortified with six large Bastions,
which makes it lie in the form of a Star, it was surrendered after six storms
unto the grand Vizier; who presently besieged it, after that Count Forchatz,
the Governor, had rashly lost a great part of his men at the Battle of
Barchan; where the bones of the Slain lie yet in the Field. The Turkish Bassa
lives in the Palace, which belonged to the Archbishop of Presburg, and has
converted the Church into a Moschea. The Bassa growing too familiar with the
neighbor Governor of Komara, was jealously looked on by the Grand Seignior,
who sent one to take of his head, and put another into this Government. This
place commands contribution from a good part of the Country between the River
Waag and the Neutra, and between the Neutra and the River Gran: and in places,
where we lodged in those parts, the Master of the house told us, he was obliged
to give notice unto the Turks, who, and how many were in his house; whereof we
were not unwilling, resolving to be gone, before the account thereof could come
unto them. If the Vizier had not spent time about the siege of Newhewsell, but
marched into Austria, when the Emperor was yet unprovided, the Auxiliary
forces far off, and Vienna, and all the Country about in great fear, he might
have probably left sad effects in those parts; but attempting some time after,
to break into Austria by Saint Godard, when the Imperial forces were in
readiness, and the great bodies of Auxiliaries of Germans and French came up,
he was repulsed with great loss of his best Soldiers, and readily clapped up a
peace, which kept these parts in quiet for many years.

Seen, Sone or Senia, a Village near the Danube, and remarkable place for
variety of Antiquities, where, by the help of the Byro or Judge of the Town, I
met with diverse Coins, and some of Gold, some Intaglia's, and as they called
it, a Heathen or R^man Key. Whereof I presented some unto Petrus Lambecias, who
showed them unto the Emperor. This place, being in the contribution Country to
the Turks, has been little enquired into; and therefore the Antiquities
thereof were the more welcome. Amongst all the Inscriptions of Gruter, I find
but one or two of Senia. The People say, this place was formerly called
Apollonia, but without any good ground.

Passing from Raab to Dotis, St. Martinsberg offers it self to view; an
handsome Town, and strong Hold, upon the top of a high Hill, overlooking all
the Country. This is still in the Christians hands, though it has formerly
been taken by the Turks, once in Amurath the third's time.

Dotis, Tata, or Theodata, about twelve English miles from Gomora, where there
is a Castle with a Ditch about it, and also some Natural Baths near it. It has
been often taken and retaken: Graff Zacki, a Noble Hungarian, was then
Governor, whose singular Civilities I must always acknowledge; and indeed in
these parts, I was at best content in the company of Soldiers, for they
commanded all, and were generous and free hearted Persons, and could commonly
speak either Latin, High Dutch* or Italian; my company was the more acceptable
to them, because I had seen many parts of Europe before, which they would much
enquire after.

But to return into the road again; we parted from Comora, being towed by a
Saick of twenty four oars. The Hungarians rowing upon one side, and the Germans
on the other, they saluted the Fortress with two small Guns, which they carried
at the head of the Saick, and so we passed by S^ne, Nesmil, Rodwan, and came to
Motch, the exact place of the Frontiers. Here we expected a Turkish Convoy;
which coming betimes in the morning, we made ready for them; their Officers
went first on shore, then our Veyda or Veyuod with the Interpreter, and
chiefest of the company, both parties walking slowly, and at meeting gave hands
to one another, then we delivered our Boat unto the Turks, which they fastened
to their Saick, and sent one i^ to our Boat to steer it: and turning about,
saluted the Christians with one Gun, and then with eighteen Oars rowed down the
Danube, we carrying the Eagle in our Flag, they the Double Sword, Star, and
Half Moon.

The Turkish Saick convoyed us to Strigonium or Gran, and set our Boat on shore
in the Town, and so left us; the Governor also took no notice of us, either in
hopes of a present, or some private interest; but an Aga, who came with four
troops of Horse from Newhewsell, being come into the Castle, asked the Governor
(as we were informed by a Turk, that came unto us) what he meaned to have so
little care of his head, to deal with us after this manner? who were not sent
to him, or to a Bassa, or a Vizier, but to the Sultan, and no doubt had a
Present for him: whereupon we were soon dispatched.

This City of Gran, Strigonium or Ostrogon, is seated on the Southside of the
Danube near the Confluence with the River Gran, divided into the upper and
lower, and both walled; the lower Wall does well command the Danube. St. Thomas
Hill, hard by the Town, is also walled, because it commands the Town: There
are in this place Natural Baths of a moderate heat. This has been the
Metropolitan City of Hungary, where St. Stephen, the first Christian King of
Hungary, was born; and King Stephen the third buried.

Scarce any place has suffered more strong and notable Sieges; besieged in vain
by John, King of Hungary, taken by Solomon, recovered by Count Mansfelt for
Matthias, the Archduke; besieged again in vain, but taken in the time of
Sultan Achmet, by the mutinous baseness of the Christian Defendants, who
shutting up Count Dampier, the Governor, delivered the place unto Aly-Beg the
Turkish General; but after many years it was taken again by the Christians
under the Duke of Lorraine, in the year 1683. Over against Strigonium lies
Barchan; between these two places there is a Bridge of Boats.

From Strigonium we passed to Vicegrade or Vizzegrade: The upper Castle of this
place is seated upon a very high Rock, where the Crown of Hungary has been
formerly kept: the lower Castle has been fair; there is also a handsome
Fabric of square Stones, and Arches, the ruins whereof do still remain: this
place was retaken from the Turks by the Forces of the Archduke Matthias, in
the time of Mahomet the Third, but betrayed, and delivered up by the Treachery
of the Heyducks in the Reign of Sultan Achmet. Charles King of Naples, and
sworn King of Hungary, was wounded on the head by Forchatz; and being carried
into the Castle, under pretense of laying a Plaster on his head, was strangled.
This place yielded to the Duke of Lorraine, 1684.

Over against Vizzegrade lies Maroz, where there is a large Church; and the
place having voluntarily submitted unto the Turks, the Christians paying a
small Tribute, lived under no great oppression. Below this Town, the Danube
divides, and makes a fair large Island, called St. Andrews Island, still rowing
down, by which we passed by Virovichitz, a noted place for pleasant Vineyards
and good Grapes, and an old ruin of Stone, upon the shore of St. Andrews Isle,
where the Turks told us, there was formerly a Stone Bridge, we came to Vacia,
in former times a Bishop See, which has now two Mosches, and one Christian
Church without the Wall. This place was seized upon, sacked and burnt by the
Turks, 1541. but taken by the Emperors Forces, under the Command of the Duke of
Lorraine, in the Year 1684. after he had overthrown the Turks in Battle near
the Town, but was quitted again at the latter end of the Autumn, there being a
ridge of Hills near it which overlook the Town, and render it not easy to be
defended.

Here we changed our Convoy again, and passed unto Buda, the Capital City, and
Royal Seat of the Kings of Hungaria, and the residence of a Turkish Vizier, who
has diverse Bassa's under him. It is a large City, and of a pleasant situation;
divided into the upper and lower Town, wherein are some ruins, and relics of
Magnificent Structures, raised by the Hungarian Kings, especially Matthias
Corvinus, whose Palace the Vizier possessed. But much abating of its ancient
glory. There are also some fair Mosches, Caravansara's, and very Magnificent
Baths. There is also a high Hill called St. Gerard's Mount, which has a Fort
on the top, and over-looks the Town and Country.

The natural Baths of Buda are esteemed the noblest of Europe, not only in
respect of the large and hot Springs, but the Magnificence of their Buildings.
For the Turks bathe very much, and though little curious in most of their
private houses, yet are they very sumptuous in their public Buildings, as
their Chars or Caravansara's, Mosches, Bridges, and Baths declare.

There are eight Baths, whereof I had opportunity to take notice during my stay
at Buda, three toward the East and South-East part of the City, in the way
leading toward Constantinople, and five toward the West end of the Town, in
the way toward old offen, and Strigonium.

The first is a large open Bath at the foot of a high rocky Hill, called
Purgatory, whereof the People have some odd and scrupulous Apprehensions.

The second is covered with a Cupola, and stands nigh the same Hill, but more
into the Town, and near a place where they use Tanning.

The third is called the Bath of the green Pillars, though at present they be
of a red color, it stands over against a Caravansara. The Water is hot but
tolerable without the Addition of cold water, it is impregnated with a
petrefiing Juice, which discovers it self on the sides of the Bath, upon the
Spouts, and other places, and makes a gray Stone: The Exhalation from the Bath
reverberated by the Cupola, by the Irons extended from one Column to another,
and by the Capitals of the Pillars forms long Stones like Isicles, which hang
to all these places.

The Water is let out at night, when the Women have done bathing, who often
stay late. The Bath is round, set about with large Pillars supporting a Cupola,
which has openings to let out the Steam, and yet the whole Room continues to
be a hot Stove.

The Baths of the West end of the Town are first, Tactelli, or the Bath of the
Table, a small Bath covered: the Water white, and of a Sulphurous smell; they
drink of this as well as bathe in it; what they drink they receive from a
Spout, bringing the Water into this place. I delivered a five-Sols piece to a
Turk, who was bathing in it, to gild for me, which he did in half a Minute, by
rubbing it between his fingers, while the hot Water fell from the Spout upon it.

The second is Barat Degrimene, or the Bath of the Powder-Mill, it rises in an
open Pond near the Highway, and mixes with the fresh Springs, which makes the
Pond of a whitish color in one part, and clear in the other; as also cold and
hot in several parts. This conveyed cross the Highway into a Powder Mill,
becomes useful in making of Gunpowder.

The third is cuzzoculege, the little Bath, or the Bath of the Saint, for which
name the Turks give a superstitious reason: It is kept by Turkish Monks. The
Bath where the Springs arise, is so hot as scarce to be endured; but being let
out into another bathing place at some distance, it becomes tolerable and fit
for use. This Water has neither color, smell, nor taste different from common
Water, and deposes no sediment, only the sides of the Bath are green, and have
a fungous substance all over.

The fourth is Caplia, a very noble Bath, but part of the Buildings was
consumed this year, 1669. by a great Fire that happened in Buda, but is since
repaired by the Turks. The Water is very hot, not without a petrefying Juice in
it. The Building about is eight square, with a noble Bath in the middle, with a
Circle of a Trench of Water about it for the better Ornament, to bathe the feet
in; on every side it has a Niche, wherein is a Fountain; in the middle of the
Antichamber, where they leave their Cloths, there is also a fair Stone Basin
and a Fountain.

The fifth is the Bath of Velibey, which has a strong sulphurous smell; and a
petrefying Juice in it, and is so hot, that to make it tolerable it requires
the addition of cold Water; this is the noblest of all. The Antichamber is ve
y large, the Bath-Room capacious, and high-Arched, adorned with five Cupola's;
one a very fair one over the great round Bath in the middle; and one lesser
over each of the four corners, where are either Baths, or Bath-stoves for
private use: in these the Turks take off the hair of their Bodies by a
Psilothrum mixed with Soap: it being not their Custom to have any hair, except
their Beards. Twelve Pillars support the great Cupola, between eight whereof
are Fountains of hot Water, and between the others are places to sit down,
where the Barbers and Bath-men attend; and each of these places has two
Cisterns of Freestone, into which are let in hot Bath-water, and also cold
Water, to be mixed and tempered as every one pleases.

Men bathe in the Morning, and Women in the Afternoon. When any man intends to
bathe, having entered the first Rooms, he finds there diverse Servants attending,
who furnish him with a Cloth and Apron. Then he puts off his Cloths and having
put on the Apron, he enters the second Room, wherein is the great Bath, and
sits on the side of the Bath, or between the Pillars near a Fountain, where the
Barber strongly rubs him with his hand opened, stretching out his Arms, and
lifting them up; after which the Party bathes. Then if he be a Subject of the
grand Seignior's, or it be the Custom of his Country, he has his head shaved,
and if a young man, his beard, except the upper Lip; next the Barber rubs his
Breast, Back, Arms, and Legs, with an hair Cloth, while he either sits, or
lies with his face downward, then washes his head with Soap, and after throws
cold Water upon him, all over his Body, and then he walks in the steam of the
Bath for a time.

The Germans call this City Offen, and some will have it founded by Buda, the
Brother of Attila, the Famous King of the Hunnes. And to speak the truth among
all the numerous Countries, and Places Conquered by that Warlike Nation, they
could not choose out indeed a nobler Seat to build a City in, where, besides
the advantage of their natural Baths and Stoves, this being placed upon the
Banks of the greatest River in Europe, where it runs in one entire Stream, and
the City rising up by degrees to the top of Hills, affording from most Streets
of the Town, a Prospect of twenty Miles or more, on the other side of the
Danube, as far as ones eye can reach, with the view of Pest, and the long
Bridge of Boats, and the beautiful fruitful Country about it, renders it most
exquisitely pleasant and delightful, and was the Royal Seat of the Hungarian
Kings and Queens, till that Solomon the Magnificent, entered it with his Sons
Selimus and Bajazet, on the Thirteenth of ^ugust, in the Year One Thousand Five
Hundred Forty One, and made a Decree that Buda should be from that day kept by
a Garrison of Turks, and the Kingdom converted into a Province of the Turkish
Empire and the Queen and her young Son, be sent into the Country of Lippa,
beyond the River Tibiscus, at a little distance from Buda or Offen: there is
another Place called old Offen, conceived to be Sicambria of old, where the
Sicambrian Soldiers quartered, in the time of the Romans: and some Antiquities
and Inscriptions have been taken notice of in that place.

Over against Buda, upon the Eastern-shoar of Danubius, stands the City Pest,
being Quadrangular and seated upon a Plain: and by ^eason of its Wall, and the
Towers of the Mosches; makes a handsome show from Buda. It gives the name unto
the County or Comitatus Pesthiensis: Hungaria being divided into Counties, like
England; between this place and Buda, the handsome Bridge of Boats, is above
half a Mile long.

The habit of the Turkish Women seemed new and strange to me: Breeches almost
to their feet, a kind of Smock over them, and then a long Gown with their
Head-dress, which setches about, covering their face, except their eyes, and
makes them look like Penitents: but it was not unpleasant unto me, as taking
away the occasion of Pride and Folly: though otherwise it can have no good
grace in a stranger's fancy.

During our Stay at Buda, we went into a Turkish Convent, where the Prior or
Superior called Julpapa, or Father of the Rose, with some of his Brethren
brought us into a large Room like a Chapel, and entertained us with Melons and
Fruit: at parting, we gratified them with some pieces of Silver, which were
kindly accepted. The Julpapa had his Girdle or Ceinture embossed before with a
whitish Stone, bigger than the palm of my hand, which was Galactites or
Milk-stone; whereof they have a great opinion, because in their belief, Mahomet
turned a whole River in Arabia into this kind of Stone.

We lodged at an old Rascians house, where we were well accommodated; having
from it a fair Prospect over the Danube, the long Bridge and Pest, and a good
part of the Country. Diverse Turks and some Chiauses resorted unto us, where
they were treated to their content. The Master of the House was thought to hold
secret correspondence with a Franciscan Friar of Pest, and to give intelligence
of Occurrences unto the Ministers of State at Gomora, Rab, and Vienna; he
prevailed with me to pen a Letter in Latin and Italian; wherein I was not
unwilling to gratisie him, because it contained nothing, besides an account of
some Prisoners, and the encroachment of the Armenian Merchants upon the Trade.

As we were riding in the City, diverse of the common Turks murmured, that we
should ride, where they went on foot. But I was pleased to see many Turks to
salute Seiginor Gabriel, the Emperors Courrier, in our Company, and to take his
hand, and put it to their foreheads, but was much more delighted with the
courteous entertainment of Mortizan Ephendi, a person of note, and who had been
an Envoy extraordinary at Vienna. He received us in an handsome large Room, and
treated us with great kindness; saying, that he desired our company, not to any
Feast, but to a Treat of Affection and Respect; such as might declare, that we
had conversed like friends, and eat and drunk together; he called for a stool,
that I might sit down, it being then uneasy to me to sit cross-legged, and
asked me, whether I would learn the Turkish Language, or whether I would go to
the Port, and how I liked Buda, and among other questions, asked, what was the
King of Poland's name? and when I told him, Michael Wisnowitski; his reply was
s mewhat strange unto me; saying, Michael, that is a good name, that is the name
of the greatest Saint in Heaven, except Mary; and so having entertained us, he
dismissed us with good wishes. At our return to this place, after two days
stay, the Governor sent us with four and twenty Horse Soldiers into
Christendom again, these guarded us with great care, a day and a night, till
they saw us safe at Dotis.

But now leaving Buda, we traveled by Land Eastward; and passing by the ruins
of the King of Hungary's Mint-house, by Ham Zabbi Palanka, and by Erzin, we
came to Adom, in Turkish, Tzan Kurteran, or anima liberata, so named by Solomon
the Magnificent; because, in his hasty retreat from Vienna, he first made a
quiet stop at this place, and there could think himself secure from any pursuit
of the imperial Forces. This place was afterward taken by Graff Palsi, from
thence we came to Pentole or Pentolen Palanka. This or Adom is conceived to be
the old Potentiana, where the Hunnes, invading those parts, fought a bloody
Battle with the Romans, under the conduct of Macrinus and Tetricus, but were
overthrown.

From hence to Fodwar, in sight of Colocza, seated on the other side of the
Danube, in the road to Temeswar, formerly an Archbishops See; whereof Tomoreus
was Bishop, whose rashness conferred much unto the loss of Hungary, at the
Battle of Mohatz. Then by Pax or Paxi unto Tolna, formerly Altinum or Altinium,
where the Hunnes being recruited, fought a second Battle, obtained the Victory,
and expulsed the Romans, though not without the loss of forty thousand of their
own men. This has been a very great place, but burnt by the Christians. The
Hungarians and Rascians, who inhabit here, living in no good agreement.

Thence to Jeni Palanka, where we passed the River Sarvizza, formerly Vrpanus,
a handsome River, arising near Vesprinium, and passing Alba Regalis, or
Stullweissenburg, the ancient place of Sepulture of the Hungarian Kings, which
makes a triangle with Buda and Strigonium, and running into the Danube below.
From thence by Setzwar to Botoseck, where we traveled by night, and had a
Horse-guard of Spahies, till we came to Setz, a large Town; where I observed
the ruins of an old Castle, and a round Palesado upon the Hill.

Here is also a new Chan or Caravansara; then to Mohatz. Before we came to this
place* we passed by a small Bridge over the Brook Curasse; which, upon great
rains, over-flows the Neighbor parts; near which Ludovicus the unfortunate
King of Hungary perished, being stifled in a muddy place, where his Horse
plunged, after the Battle fought with the Forces of Solomon, on the other side
of the Town. We went to see the place, where so noble a Prince lost his life,
and an inconsiderate Battle lost the Crown of Hungary. This Battle was fought
the 29th day of October, in the Year 1526. Cotriscus, who was near the King's
Person when he was drowned, related the manner of it to the Hungarians, and
showed them the place where he fell in, from whence the King's Body was
afterward taken up entire, and carried to Alba Regalis, where with great
Solemnity it was buried among the Sepulchers of the other Kings of Hungary, his
Predecessors.

Hereabouts we met with a Caravan of two or three hundred Persons, some going
to a place of Devotion, and having Janissaries with them, to guard them: others
intending, by permission, to seat themselves in other parts of Hungary. And in
diverse places I met with numerous droves of Oxen, driven toward Vienna, upon
the account of the Eastern Company of that City, who furnish that place and
Country about, and are permitted to pass free by the Grand Seignior. This day
we le^t Quinque Ecclesiae, and Zigeth on the right hand, this last is a strong
place seated by the side of a Fenn, in which there is an Island, and beyond
that a Castle. Count Sereni defended this Place against the Turks, with
unparalleled Bravery, and when he had lost the Town, retired into the Island,
and last of all into the Castle, and when there were but four and twenty of
them left alive, they all Sallied out together, choosing rather to die every
man, than to give Solomon the Magnificent, who besieged them, any pretense to
the Town, by their Surrender; and Solomon himself died likewise in the Camp,
and has a Sword hanging by his Tomb in Constantinople, as a peculiar honor to
him, in regard that he did not only spend a great part of his life, but also
died in War.

From hence by Barinowar Darda or Draza unto Esseck or Osseck, conceived to be
old Mursa, or not far from it. It is seated low, and the Streets are planked
with Trees. Upon one side of the Gate is part of a Roman Inscription. M.
AELIAN, etc. on the other side, a Maids head in a Stone; there is also a Dyal,
which is not ordinary, brought from Serinwar; and the greatest piece of
Ordnance, which I saw in all those parts, not lying upon a Carriage, but upon
Bodies of Trees. But that which is most remarkable here, is the well contrived
Bridge of Wood, made partly over the River Dravus, and partly over the Fenns
adjoining, being five Miles long: being rayled, and having Towers at every
quarter of a Mile: that part over the River Dravus, was burnt down by Count
Nicolas Serini, in the last Wars, and another built since. He that beholds this
Bridge, the Towers of Wood upon it, the strong rayles and floar, and the
numerous supporters of it, cannot but wonder, how they should be supplied with
Wood to build it, or maintain it. But hereof I speak elsewhere, this is the
greatest Passage in Hungary, from Servia, and the Turkish Dominions. Had this
been well defended, when Solomon invaded Hungary, he had not probably obtained
so easy a March unto Buda. And to hinder the Supply of the Grand Visiers Army
from other parts of Turkey, Count S rini burned down that part, which was built
over the Dravus; and in his return burnt Quinque Ecclesiae or the City of five
Churches, which lies Westward from Esseck.

From thence we came to Valcovar, where there is a handsome wooden Bride over
the River Walpo or Valpanus, plentiful of Fish; and upon which, to the
Westward, stands the Town of Walpo, taken by the Turks in the Year 1545. by the
Treachery of the Dependants, after that it held out three M^nths under the
Command of Perennus's Lady and Friends, and the Garrison was notwithstanding
put to the Sword. Then by Sotzin Palanka, and Towarnick or Tabornick, to
Metrouitza a large Town, and a great place for a Fair, strengthened by the
adjacent Lake. So to Simonovitz, leaving at a good distance on the right hand
the famous old Sirmium, now an inconsiderable place, whereof I have also said
somewhat elsewhere. They call this Country Schremnia; and that, more near the
Dravus, Bossega.

In this Country many Families, and the Inhabitants of diverse little Towns,
live all under ground. I had formerly read of Troglodytes and subterraneous
Nations, about Egypt; but I was much surprised to see the like in this place,
and could not but say unto my self:

Now I believe the Troglodytes of old,
Whereof Herodotus and Strabo told;
Since every wh^re, about these parts, in holes,
Cunicular men I find, and humane Moles.
Near these Habitations are Wells, to supply them with Water; which they draw
up, like Dyers and Brewers: and Dogs come out upon Strangers. As we traveled
by them, the poor Christians would betake themselves to their holes, like
Conies. So that to satisfy our curiosities, we were fain to alight, and enter
their houses, which we found better than we expected, divided into partitions,
with Wooden Chimneys, and a Window at the farther end, a little above the
ground: and all things as neatly disposed, as in other poor houses above
ground; although but meanly, after the fashion of those parts. Their Speech is
a Dialect of the Schlavonian. Then traveling on between the Danubius and the
Savus, we came to Zemlin upon the Danul e; from whence we had a fair Prospect
of Belgrade, into the Castle of Zemlin, Stephen, the usurping King, retired,
and died. From hence we passed by Water unto Belgrade. Belgrade, Taurunum, Alba
Graeca, Greek-Weissenburg, or Nandor Alba, as the Hungarians call it, it is a
large, strong, populous, and great Trading City, in Servia, or Moesia Superior,
seated at the Confluence of the River Savus, and Danubius: having the first on
the West, the other on the North. The Danubius is here very broad, runs
^uriously, and seems to cut off the Savus, as the Rhosne does the Soane, by
Lion in France.

The Water of the Danube seems more white and yellow, troubled, and more
confused. Turbidus and volvens flaventeis Ister arenas.
That of the Savus, darker, greenish and clear; at the entrance of the Savus,
there is an Island, on which there is now much Wood, although it be not older
than five and thirty years; about which time, since the silt of both streams so
s^ttled, as to appear first above Water.



Arriving at Belgrade, I passed by the Water Castle* and afterward by the
upper Castle, both large, and having many Towers; The Streets, where the
greatest Trade is driven, are covered over with Wood, as in diverse other
Trading Places; so that they are not offended with the Sun, or Rain. They
consist commonly of Shops which are but small; and no other, than a Tailors
Shop-board, placed low; upon which, after the same manner, the Shopkeeper
sits, and sells his wares to his Chapman without, few or none entering in. I
saw also two large places built of stone, like unto the Exchange with two rows
of Pillars over one another; but they were so full of Merchants Goods, that
they lost much of their beauty. There are also two large Bezestens, or places,
where the richest Commodities are sold. They are built in the form of a
Cathedral Church, and within are like to the old Exchange, above stairs. The
Grand Vizier has built a noble Caravansara in this City, with a Fountain in
the Court, and near unto it a Moschea, with a Fountain before it: which was the
first Moschea, which I had the opportunity to see within-side. He has also
built a Metreseck or College for Students, I saw a Stu^ent habited in green,
and wearing a Turbant with four Corners, different from others, which is a
peculiar distinction. Although near to most Towns there be Sepulchers to be
seen, yet I observed them to be most numerous at Belgrade, as being very
populous, and the Plague having been lately in it.

We lodged at an Armenian Merchant's house, where we were handsomely
accommodated. And we visited diverse others, who had built them fair houses;
one, in which there was a Fountain and handsome Bath, and Stoves, where we
wanted not Coffee, Sherbet, and excellent Wines; such as the Neighbor Country
affords. These Armenians are dispersed into all Trading Places, and have a
Church here at Belgrade, and seem to be more plain dealing, and reasonable men
to buy any thing of than either Jews or Greeks.

The Countries about have a great Trade unto this place: the Raguseans Trade
here, and the Eastern Merchants of Vienna have a Factory in this City. And
surely Belgrade is as well seated for Trade, as any inland place in Europe,
for being situated upon the Confluence of the Danubius, and the Savus, having
the great River Tibiscus running into the Danule near it; the Dravus not very
far from it, and the River Morava not far below it; the Danube also flowing
forward unto the Euxine Sea, it may hold no uneasy Commerce with many remote
parts. And Servia being a fruitful and pleasant Country consisting of Plains,
Woods, and Hills, which might afford good Metals, not without stout Men, good
Horses, Wines and Rivers, if it were in the Christians hands of the temper of
those in the Western part of Europe, it might make a very flourishing Country.

This place has formerly been the Bulwark of Hungary, in vain besieged by
Amurath the second, and again by Mahomet the Great, who was repulsed by the
valor of Hunniades, and the Auxiliaries, raised by Friar Capiftranus: when
Hunniades issuing forth, and encamping out of the City, beat away the Turkish
Forces with great slaughter: where Mahomet himself was wounded in the breast,
lost his Ordnance, and two hundred Ships were overthrown, by a Fleet, which
came from Buda; but, being unprovided, it was since taken by Solomon the
Magnificent, in the second Year of his Reign, in the Year of our Lord 1521. and
in no likelihood to be recovered.

Leaving Belgrade, we proceeded in Servia, and pa ssed by a very high Hill,
called Havilleck, on the South or right hand, where are still the ruins of an
old Monastery, and came unto Hissargick, nigh the Danube; which, in Maps, is
commonly placed too far from it. Here we took leave of that noble River, which
by this time has run a long course; and from Vlme, in Schwabenlandt, where it
begins to be navigable, about nine hundred Miles: but more from its first
source and orignal; and has a long space yet to run, before it enters the
Euxine. Next to Collar, not far from Samandria, an old habitation and Roman
Colony, but now a place of no great remark. It fell into the hands of the Turks
in the time of Amurath the first, and was given to the Christians again by his
Son Sultan Bajazet, for Lazarus Despot of Servia being slain in Battle, left a
mournful Widow. Stephen his Eldest Son, and a fair Daughter, and their Family
being then in great distress, they sent Ambassadors to Sultan Bajazet, with
rich Presents and great Offers which pleased him well, but above all he was
marvellously taken with the incomparable beauty of the fair Despoina, at the
same time presented to him by her Mother the Despotin, who had formerly
promised her to him, upon which he not only granted them peace for the present,
but in return thereof bestowed upon them the pleasant City of Semandria. The
beautiful Despoina after this when Bajazet was overthrown, and shut up in an
Iron Cage, was suddenly taken Prisoner in the City of Prusa in Asia Minor by
Axalla, one of the Generals to Tamerlane, and carried far away, into the
Eastern Parts of the World, but however it came to pass She was afterward
brought back again, and now lies buried by the Tomb of Sultan Bajazet at
Brusia: From hence to Hassan Bassa Palanka, about forty English miles from
Belgrade: perhaps so called from Hassan Bassa a famous Turkish General. Here I
could not but take notice of an handsome Antiquity in Stone, of a Lion worrying
a Wolf.

From thence to Baditzna, where the Women's dress began to change, and was
somewhat odd unto me. They wear a kind of Canopy on their heads; which is set
about, as also their foreheads, with all sorts of money, which they can get of
Strangers. We left some small pieces among them, to add unto that curiosity: in
this kind of Ornament I have seen some Grecian Women very rich, and somewhat
after this fashion, but their head-dress not raised so high, having their
foreheads covered with Ducats of Gold, and Pearl.

A Bulgarian Woman


We passed on to Jagodna, pleasantly seated, and in a fair Country, whence
setting forwards, after a few hours we turned Southward, and soon after, upon
the side of an Hill, upon the right hand, I saw the Tomb of a Turkish Saint,
about four yards long, and a square covered place by it: here our Chiaus
alighted, and performed his devotions in prayer, then we traveled on, through
great Woods, dangerous for Wolves and Thieves, by Chifflick, where there is a
Caravansarah, but not always safe: so as we refreshed our selves in a large
Farm-house, not far from thence, belonging to a rich Wine-Merchant of Belgrade.
From hence we traveled by Night to the noted River Morava or Moschius, the
chief River of this Country; which arising above in the Mountains in two
streams, the one named Morava di Bulgaria, the other Morava di Servia, after
uniting, runs into the Danube, at Zenderin or Singidunum, opposite to the
Rascian shore: we passed this River at a place which was broad, somewhat deep,
and rapid, and therefore not without some fear, and the continued loud prayer
of the Chiaus in Turkish, and of the Couriers Ora pro nobis. This passage put
me in mind of the swist River Varus, in the Confines of Provence and Italy,
which I passed on Horseback, with two men going by me, on the lower side
shoving up my Horse lest the current should bear him down. By this River
Morava, the commodities of Servia, and part of Bulgaria, are brought into the
Danube, and so dispersed; and up the current of the same River are brought Salt
and other commodities, from Hungary, Austria, and the neighbor Countries. Not
far from this River, was that great slaughter of the Turks by Hunniades; who,
with ten thousand Horse, set upon the Turkish Camp by Moonlight, slew thirty
thousand, and took four thousand Prisoners, victoriously returning unto his
Camp. Where he left Vladislaus and George Despot of Servia. We arrived at
length at Halli Jahisar, or Crushovatz in Bulgarian; a considerable place,
where there is an handsome Church, with two fair Towers. Then traveling the
whole day through Hills and Woods, we came to Procupie, which some will have to
be Villa Procopiana, in Turkish called Vrchup. Here we stayed till the next
day, being lodged in a Ragusean Merchants house, where we were well
entertained. The Priest, being of the Roman Church, spoke Latin, which is a
Language not ordinary in these parts; and enquiring of me after Latin Books, I
presented him with one, called Manuductio ad coelum, which he kindly accepted,
and gave me a wrought-coloured Handkerchief, and some little things of those
parts. They had also a Physician, who had some knowledge of Simples and
ordinary Compositions. His manner was to go into the Marketplace every
morning, and invite all persons, who stood in need of his assistance, to resort
unto him.

From hence we came to Lescoa, or Lescovia, where I could observe little,
besides a large Tower, which seemed to be ancient, but without Inscription. We
passed much of our time at a great Fair, which happened to be at that time kept
in a large enclosed place, with great resort of People; where I thought it
seasonable, to present the Chiaus with a Feather; he having lost his the day
before, and we found some want thereof, for hereby we traveled with more
Authority through all places. This Town is seated upon the remarkable River
Lyperitza, which may well be called the Maeander of Maesia; for it runs ^o
winding and crankling between the Hills, that in the space of less than twelve
hours, we passed it ninety times. This called to my mind the River Taro in
Italy, which, parting from the Dominions of Parma, I passed forty times, before
I came to Fornovo.

The next day we traveled over the Mountain Clissura, one of the Spurs or
Excursions of Mount Haemus. We were much surprised at the gallant appearance
thereof, for the Rocks and Stones of this Mountain shine like Silver, and by
the light of Sun and Moon, (for I passed it once by day and another time by
night) afforded a pleasant glittering show, as consisting of Muscovia glass,
whereof I brought some home with me. This Mountain surely cannot be much unlike
that mentioned by Olearius in his Travels into Persia, between Permeras and
Scamachia, where he relates that he saw a Mountain of Lapis Specularis, which
when the Sun shined upon it, looked like a heap of Diamonds. We descended in a
narrow rocky way by the strong Castle of Kolombotz, or Golobotz, and came unto
Urania, seated at the bottom of the Mountain Clissura, this is a strong Pass,
which the Castle commands, and locks up the passage.

The Hills between Servia and Macedonia, are a part of Mount Haemus; which,
under several names, is thought to extend from the Adriatic to the Euxine Sea;
admitting of several passages, which Philip, King of Macedon took a special
care to shut up against the Neighboring Nations. Which when he had done, he
thought himself secure: and that from thence no Enemies could come at him,
except they dropped out of the Clouds. Some have thought, that from the middle
Peaks of Haemus a man might see both the Euxine and Adriatic Seas; and King
Philip made trial of it: but we find not, that he satisfied his curiosity
therein; nor do I think any has done it. Being upon high Mountains, and more
inclining to the Adriatic Sea, I viewed all about; but found, that the high
Albanian Hills did cut off all long Prospect.

From Urania we passed to Comonava, near which there is still a Greek
Monastery, upon the side of the Hills. From thence to Kaplanlih or Tigres Town;
but why so called, I could not learn. Then to Kuprulih or Bridge-Town, where
there is a considerable River named Ps^nia, and a good Bridge built over it.
This Town was casually set on ^ire, while we were in it, and a great part of it
burnt down; the fire increasing much before we got out of it. Here we met with
many persons, who brought the Tribute, and a Present of Hawks out of Wallachia
unto the Grand Seignior, then residing at Larissa.

From hence, by Isbar, we came to Pyrlipe, first passing the high Mountains of
Pyrlipe in Macedonia, which shine like Silver, as those of Clissura; and,
beside Moscovia Glass, may contain good Minerals in their bowels. The Rocks of
this Mountain are the most craggy that I have seen; and massy Stones lie upon
stones, without any Earth about them, and upon a ridge of a Mountain, many
Steeples high, stands the strong Castle of Marco Crollowitz, a man formerly
famous in these Parts.

Then through a Plain Country we came to Monaster or Toli, a great Place, well
peopled, and pleasantly Seated. Here the Sultana, who was great with Child at
Larissa, was designed to be delivered* and lie in. All accommodations being
ordered to that purpose, where I afterward heard she was delivered of a
Daughter, who lived not long after. The Turks, who have a high opinion of
Alexander the Great, would have been glad to have had a Son of the Empire born
in Macedonia.

From hence to Filurina, and Eccisso Verbeni, where there are Acidulae of good
esteem, the Springs large, and plentiful. Before we descended the Hill, which
leads to this Town, we had a sight before us of the famous Mount Olympus, about
Seventy miles off; and on the left hand we saw the Lakes of Petriski, and
Ostrova; they have a Traditi^n, that one of these Lakes was made, by taking
great stones out of the side of the Hills, whereby the Subterraneous water,
finding vent, over-flowed the Neighbor Plains.

We came afterward to Egribugia, where we again left the Plains, and traveled
over high rocky Hills to Sariggio^e. Whence passing through the River Injecora,
we came to Sarvitza, a noted Place, built partly upon an Hill, and partly in
the Plain. The Christians live most in the upper part, the Turks in the lower:
there is also a Castle upon a very high Rock: not far from hence we went
through a passage, cut through the Rocks, like to a great Gate, and a small
River passing also through it, which makes a fast Pass, and commands the
passage of this Country, which put me in mind of la Chiusa, in the Julian
Alps, between Vensone and Ponteva; which passage the Venetians shut up every
night, we took notice also in our Journey of the first Turkish Moschea, which
was built in these parts, upon that place where the Turks first rested, after
they had taken the strong Castle and Passage of Sarvitza. Here we also passed
by a Hill of a fine red Earth, whereof they make Pots and Vessels, like those
of Portugal Earth, which are of esteem all about these Parts. We proceeded over
dangerous Rocks, in narrow hanging ways still on Horseback; although we had
little pleasure to look down the Precipices on one hand, and see the Carcasses
of Horses in some places, which had fallen down and broke their necks.
Afterward we had the Mount Olympus on our left hand, till we came to Alessone
or Alesswn, a considerable place; where there is a Greek Monastery, and Monks
of the Order of St. Basil. The Monastery was of a different kind of building
from any I had then seen. From hence passing over a River, we entered into a
round Plain, of about five Miles over; with diverse Towns pleasantly seated in
it. Then over an Hill again, which is a Spur of Mount Olympus; upon the top
whereof an old Man stood beating of a Drum, to give notice unto Passengers on
both sides, that those parts were free from Thieves. From this Hill as we
descended, we had a good Prospect of the Plains Pharibus.
of Thessaly; and at the foot of it we turned to the left, and passed over a
River, which runs from under a rocky Mountain, not in small Springs, but the
whole body of the River together; and then through Vineyards, and Cotton
Fields, to Tornovo, and from thence to Larissa, where the Ottoman Court
resided: of which places we shall speak more hereafter.

In our return, we left the road, about Kaplanlih, and turned unto Skopia, a
City of great Trade, and the largest in these parts. Scopia or Scupi of
Ptolomy, named Vscopia by the Turks, is seated in the remotest parts of Maesia
Superior, or the Confines of Macedonia, at the foot of Mount Orbelus, upon the
River Vardar, or Axius, in a pleasant and plentiful Country, seated partly on
Hills, and partly on Plains. It was first a Bishops, afterward an Arch Bishops
See; still a pleasant and populous place. There are seven hundred Tanners in
it, and they Tann in great long Troughs of Stone, and make excellent Leather,
wherewith they furnish other parts. There are some handsome Sepulchral
Monuments, and many fair Houses, as that of the Cadih, and that belonging to
the Emir, or one of Mahomets Kindred, whose Father was of great esteem in these
parts. In the Courtyard of the Emir's House, stands a remarkable and
peculiarly contrived Fountain, in manner of a Castle, set round with many
Towers, out of the tops whereof the Water springs forth. Their best Houses are
furnished with rich Carpets to tread upon: and the Roofs divided into
Triangles, Quadrangles, and other Figures fairly gilded, and painted with
several Colors, but without any Imagery or Representation, either of Animal or
Vegetable. Here is also a fair Bezestan, covered with Lead; many Streets
covered over with Wood; and diverse places are fair both within and without the
Town, being set off by Trees and pleasant Hills and Dales.

There are a great number of Moschea's or Turkish Churches. The fairest is on a
Hill, and has a large Portico before it, supported by four Marble Pillars;
near which is a Tower of Wood with a Clock and a Bell in it; from whence I had
a good Prospect of the City. There is also an Arch, which seems to be Ancient,
and a rivolet running under it. A large Stone also which seems to be part of a
Pillar, with this Inscription SHANC. A little way out of the City, there is a
noble Aqueduct of Stone, with about two hundred Arches, made from one Hill to
another, over the lower ground or Valley between, which is a handsome
Antiquity, and adds to the honor of this place. When Mahomet the First
conquered this City, he placed a Colony of Asiaticks in it, which makes it the
more Turkish. Great Actions have been performed hereabouts, in the time of the
Romans, particularly by Regillianus; as is testified by Trebellius Pollio, that
he won so many Battles, and carried on such mighty things at Scupi, that he
deserved a Triumph. Hereabouts also stood Paraecopolis, and Vlpianum.

The Sanziack of this Place is under the Begle^beg of Rumelia or Graecia. A
Trade is driven from hence to Belgrade, and to Thessalonica or Salonichi, and
many other places. I have been more particular concerning this City, because
Geographers pass it over in a few words; and I could never meet with any, who
had been at it.

From hence we traveled to Catshanich, a Fortress that commands the passage b
tween the Hills; and afterward advanced so far, as to enter the famous Plains
of Cossova in Bulgaria; which some take to be Campus Merulae, a Plain not very
much exceeding Lincoln Heath, yet the Stage of great Actions. Here the greatest
Christian Army, that was ever brought into the Field in Europe, consisting of
five hundred thousand men, under Lazarus Despot of Servia, fought with the
Forces of Amurah the first, and lost the day. In which Battle Lazarus was
slain: and Amurah, viewing the dead bodies, was stabbed by Michael Cobilovitz,
a Christian Soldier, left for dead in the Field. Amurah has in these Plains a
Memorial Monument unto this day; and that part is called the Field of the
Sepulcher: in the same Plains was also fought that remarkable Battle between
Hunniades and Mahomet, for three days together; where Hunniades, having very
unequal Forces, was at last over-thrown.

We proceeded forward to Prestina, a good Town, and where we expected good
accommodation; but having entered into a fair Room, we found a man lying down
in it sick of the Plague. So we consulted our safety, and stayed not long; and
having a Gypsy to our Guide, we traveled through a Country thinly inhabited,
but fruitful and pleasant and were much refreshed with fair Cornelions, which
grew plentifully in the ways: we passed also by an hot Bath, a little on the
right hand. The Bath is an arched Room well built, and very refreshing unto
Travelers. It has a red Sediment, and is impregnated with a succus
lapidescens, and makes a gray Stone. It is within two hours going of
Bellacherqua or Cursumne, where I observed a Convent and an old Church with two
handsome Towers: From whence passing over the Hill Jasnebatz, we came to
Eshelleck between the two Morava's, and so by a Castle upon a Hill, near unto
which is a noted Convent, wherein is kept the body of Kenez Lazarus, and the
body of St. Romanus, and so proceeded. But I must not forget to say something
of Larissa.

THE DESCRIPTION OF LARISSA AND THESSALY.
LARISSA is the chief City of Thessaly, seated by the River Peneus, the chief
River of that Country. Upon the North it has the Famous Mountain Olympus, and
on the South a Plain Country. It is now inhabited by Christians, Turks and
Jews; has fair Bezestens, diverse Turkish Moschea's, and Christian Churches in
it. It is pleasantly seated, and upon a rising ground: on the upper part
whereof stands the Palace of the Grand Seignior, which he has made use of
during his residence in this place: it is contrived with jetting large Windows,
on four sides, near which he took his repast, and pass-time, according as the
Wind served, or afforded the best ventilation.

It is also an Archbishop's See, having diverse Suffragan Bishops under it. The
Reverend Father Dionysius was then Archbishop. The Church of St. Achilleus is
the Cathedral, where I heard Divine Service, the Archbishop being present, and
standing in his Throne in his Episcopal habit, and his Crosier in his hand;
when three or four of us Strangers came into the Church, he sent one to fume us
with Incense and ^weet Odours.

The Grand Seignior kept his Court in this place for some years, in order to
his Affairs in Candia, and for the great convenience of Hunting and Hawking,
wherein he exceedingly delights. When I came away, it was said, that he would
go to Negroponte; but he remained at Larissa some months after, until he
removed to Saloni^hi, and afterward to Adrianople.

In the hot and dry Summer 1669. the Grand Seignior passed above two months of
that Season upon the Neighboring Mount Olympus, partly that he might have a
large Prospect over the Plains, and (...) of the Aegaean Sea, and partly to
enjoy fresh Air, and be removed from the choking heat of the Valleys; but this
humor proved destructive to some hundreds of those, which attended him; for it
became so cold upon the Hill, that many, who resorted unto him, being
overheated by ascending the Mountain, and then pierced by the cold Air above;
fell sick, and dyed; and often in such places, where there was scarce Earth
enough to bury them. The Sultan himself sell also into a distemper, but it
lasted but three or four days: of Horses and Camels not a few perished. The
Sultan, who is a desperate rider, killed one of his best Horses; by forcing him
up a noted Peak of the Mountain, called Pythagon or Kissagon, where few or none
could sollow him; he was also so daring, that he would have leaped on Horseback
over a Fissure or Cleft in the Rocks in a bravery; and was scarce withheld
from that bold attempt, by the prayers and importunity of his chi f^st
sollowers: Many also perished by drinking of a Spring of a whitish color upon
the Hill, in their Heats and Thirst, contracted by ascending the Mountain; they
complaining of a coldness and heaviness at their Stomach for three or four days
before they dyed.

The Greeks (who are forward to magnify the Concerns of their Country,) speak
highly of Mount Olympus: and Homer would have it to be the habitation of
Jupiter and the Gods, and to be without Clouds; but unto me some part of the
Alps seem much higher; and I have seen Clouds above it; and in September there
appeared no Snow upon it, which the high Peaks in the Alps, Pyrenaean and
Carpathian Mountains, besides many others in Europe, are never without. And
Olympus also was plentifully supplied with it upon the first Rain that fell in
that Country; it not being unknown to you, I suppose, that when it rains upon
the Valleys, at the same time it snows upon high Mountains; and this Hill I
must confess to be visible at a great distance; for I beheld it from Eccisso
Verbeni in Macedonia, seventy miles from it; and it consists not of one rising
Peak, as it is sometimes described, but is also extended a great way in length,
and makes good the Epithere of Homer, Longum tremere fecit Olympum. If the word
be there taken, nor Ma^^^^*
only for high, but long.

This Hill chiefly extending from East to West makes the Inhabitants, at the
foot of the North and South sides, to have a different temper of Air, as if
they lived in Climes much distant; which makes the expression of Lucan very
Emphatical: Nec metuens imi Borean habitator Olympi,
Lucentem tot is ignorant noctibus Arcton:
Paulus Aemylius, the Roman Consul, winding about this Hill, by the Seaside,
overcame King Perseus, and so conquered Macedonia. When King Antiochus besieged
Larissa, Appius Claudius raised the Siege, by Livy.
great fires, made upon part of Mount Olympus; the King apprehending thereby,
that the whole force of the Romans were coming upon him. But the Exploit of the
Consul Martius upon this Hill was most remarkable, and unparalled by any
since; who being sent against King Philip, the last of that Name, brought his
Soldiers over Olympus, by passages Lib. 5.
unknown, and such difficult ways, that his men were fain to wallow, cap. 7.
and make hard shift down; and his Elephants, by strange contrived Engines,
somewhat like draw-Bridges, one under another, were let down into the Plains;
as Sir Walter Rawleigh has more largely described the same.

And as the Grand Seignior has honored Larissa by a long abode in Pdolybius.
it; so King Philip of Macedon, the last of that Name, did the like: for we
find he passed the Summer at Larissa, the same Year, when Hannibal took
Saguntus in Spain. Whether Xerxes were here, when his great Army passed through
Thessaly toward Thermopylae, Histories do not declare. But King Philip, Father
unto Alexander the Great, after he had quieted the Illyrians, and Pannonians,
bent his mind upon Greece; in order whereto he took the City Larissa upon the
River Peneus, and thereby got so good footing in Thessaly, that he made great
use of the Thessalians, in the following Wars with Greece.

Before the Battle of Pharsabia, as Caesar delivers, Scipio lay with a Legion
in this City; and this was the first place, unto which Pompey retired, after
his Overthrow; according to that of Lucan. Vidit prima tuae testis Larissa
ruinae.
Nobile, nec victum fatis caput.


And not staying there, he went along the River; and taking Boar, went out to
Sea, and was taken in by great Ship, then ready to weigh Anchor.

The River Peneus, which runs by Larissa, is the chiefest in Thessaly, and into
which most of the other Rivers run; arising from Mount Pindus; and running into
the Sinus Thermaicus, or Gulf of Salonichi, passing by the famous Valley of
Tempe, and running between Mount Olympus and Ossa, into the Sea.

In that famous Expedition against the Graecians, Xerxes would have made his
entrance by this way: for Herodotus delivers, that he failed from Thermae, now
Salonichi, unto the mouth of the River Peneus; to observe, if there were any
passage, or any could be made, to enter into Thessaly; and finding, upon
enquiry, that the River had no other passage, and that it could not be turned:
he said, That the Thessalians had done wisely to yield, and make their peace
with him; for, by stopping of the River Peneus, Thessaly might have been
drowned.

(...)
I found the Epithete of Homer very agreeable unto this River, for it has a
clear stream and bottom, and the Fable of Apollo, and Daphne, the Daughter of
Peneus, who was turned into a Bay Tree, had a proper Scene in this place: for
on the Banks of the River, Bay-trees grow plentifully unto this day.

There is an handsome Stone Bridge over this River, consisting of Nine Arches;
and peculiarly contrived with holes and passage in the solid parts between the
Arches, to afford some passage unto the water, when it is high; and hinder the
bearing down of the Bridge, in high waters, and great floods.

The City being full, many Turks had their Tents in the Fields, by the River
side, and lower Grounds, which being of various colors, and not far from a
large Moschea, and the City, afforded a pleasant Prospect. The Sails of their
Tents were so ordered, that they came not within a yard of the ground: so that
the Air might freely enter into them; where they commonly remained passing a
great part of the day in Drinking Sherbet and Coffee.

The nearest considerable Port unto Larissa, is that of Vollo, or old Pagasa,
in the Sinus Pagaficus, or Demetriacus, or Gulf of Armiro: not far from whence
stood old Argos Pelasgicum; from which place the Argonauts first set sail, in
that famous Voyage for Colchos, by which way the Grand Seignior received
intelligence from Candia, and his Asian and African Dominions. And not far from
hence, at the Promontory Septas, there happened the greatest Shipwreck we read
of; when Xerxes lost five hundred Sail by a Tempest from an East Wind.

It was no hard matter to have a sight of the Grand Seignior, at this place;
for he rode out often, for his recreation of hunting and hawking, with great
number of Attendants, and Huntsmen, and Falconers, in their proper habits: and
also went frequently to the great Mosched. I had a full view of him, as he came
out of his Palace, to go unto his devotion. Before he came out, diverse brave
Horses richly caparisoned, were mounted by diverse of his Attendants, nobly
attired, and rode about the Courtyard; so that he looking out of the window,
made choice of which he liked best, and would then make use of.

At his first appearance abroad, great acclamations were made, low bowings from
all, both near and at a distance; the Streets were made clean, and a Jan^ary
was placed at every corner, to provide, that there might be no hinderance in
the way. The Chiauses rode before, the Shatters, or great Courtiers, about
Twenty four followed on foot; and immediately, on each side of his Horse,
walked two chief Janissaries, with white Feathers, set in an hollow Pipe before
their Caps, very large, and spread, and about a fathom high; which shaking as
they walked, were high enough, both to shade and fan his face as he rode. Many
brave Horses were led after him, and diverse persons followed, carrying Cushions
and Pillows to the Mofchea. Before he came our of his Palace, I observed many
gallant Persons in the Porch, which the Chiaus, who walked with me, told me,
were persons of the greatest quality in Turkey.

The Grand Seignior was then under Thirty years of age, well set, somewhat
short necked, inclining to fatness, his complexion fallow naturally, and much
heightened by frequent riding about in those hot Countries. He has a very strong
body, and healthful, and is a hard rider; has a stern look, and yet would
speak kindly unto persons, and encourage the people abroad to approach him,
taking no delight in the cries, and frights, and flying away of the Inhabitains
at the sight of him, or any of his Officers. The Grand Vizier carried diverse
Christian Chyrurgeons with him to Candia, but I heard of no Physician of Note
about the Grand Seignior. The Sultan took great liking to a private Turkish
Priest, whom he met withal by chance in Thessaly, and made him his Chaplain;
but the report was, that a famours Priest was coming to him.

Achmet, the Prime Vizier, being absent, the Chaymacham, of Deputy Vizier,
dispatched all Affairs of State here, and had the best House in the City. The
Emperor's Refident had three Interpreters, who, upon all occasions, were made
use of in Addresses unto him, and by whom we were informed of the most
considerable Occurrencies; they being civil persons, and good Linguists.

The Sultana was also at Larissa much beloved by the Sultan, by birth a
Candiot, little of stature, somewhat marked with the Small Pox; she was then
with child, and was to go to lye-in at Monaster, a great and pleasant Town in
Macedonia; which being a place we were to pass, proved a great convenience unto
us; for, in order to her better Journey, the Highways were plained, Hills made
passable, with Broadways and Bridges over Rivers, to the great labor of the
Inhabitants; who notwithstanding were not unready, to make a Bridge for such
great Ones to pass out of their Country; for at the first approach of the Grand
Seignior, a great number of the Greeks forsook their habitations, for fear of
him and his Attendants, and left them unto the Turks; but were recalled again
by his command.

The Grand Seignior's Son was also with him there, about Six years old.

I went with Osman Chiaus to see the Chaymacham's house, but especially to hear
his Music, which was accounted the best in Turkey. Where I heard the loudest,
yet not unpleasant Music, I ever met with; ten men at once playing in an open
high Room upon large Wind-Instruments, which they miss not to do at certain
hours of the day.

In the Town I also heard some Turkish Songs, but especially concerning Sabata
Sevi, the famous Jewish Impostor, who had made a great noise in the World, and
how Cussum Basha so handled him, that he was glad to turn Turk. This Cussum
Basha, is a person much honored by the Turks, and cried up for his great Skill
and Practice in Physic; an Art not much known amongst them. He is now Vizier
of Erzrum in Asia; is married to one of the Grand Seignior's Sisters, and lives
with her; and was formerly Vizier of Buda, and upon that account well known to
the Germans. Here I met also with a French Book, concerning Michael Cigala,
another Impostor, who had deceived the Emperor, and the King of France, and
other Christian Princes. Which, the Interpreter to the Resident told me, the
Turks very much laughed at; and that he was a Grecian born, and not a
Wallachian. Of Paddre Ottomanno, who was thought to be the Grand Seignior's
Brother, now a Dominican Friar, and whom I had seen at Turino, I could hear
nothing.

There were many Thousand Soldiers, and Horses, in and about the City, and
Five thousand Camels for the Service of the Grand Seignior, which being of
different magnitudes, ages, and the bunches on their backs of different shapes,
and in some variety of colors, and treading soft, and with little noise,
afforded me a pleasant sight, when they were led by my lodging to watering at
the River.

When we read, that Mardonius, the Persian General of the great Army Sir Walter
Rawleigh.
of Xerxes, wintered in Thessaly; It is no small Testimony of the fruitfulness
of that Country; and though the number of men was here very great at this time,
yet was there no want of provision, but all very cheap; in a Victualling house,
I could Dine with roast and boiled, and Sherbet, for the value of Six pence,
and at an easy rate could oblige Turks and Christians with a meal, which they
would take very kindly.

The Place was also extraordinary populous: there being at that time such a
mixed multitude in it. Yet was the City in very good order, and quietness. An
Officer with a Club in his Hand, accompanied with about twenty Persons, walking
about the Streets, and punishing all Persons drunk, quarelling, clamorous, or
acting any thing against good Manners.

When I was there in September 1669. it was very hot Weather, and many were
sick of Fevers and Agues; as they were at that time in most Parts of Europe,
and at my return into England I found many languishing under Quartan Agues, who
had been taken therewith about that time. They were then also in their Vintage,
and we had the opportunity of tasting their Must and New Wine; and the stricter
Turks, who would not be tempted with Wine, would be much delighted, to take a
little in the Must.

During the hot sweating Season, we went often to the Barber, who would
handsomely perform his Work, and much to our refreshment; trimming every Man
according to the Fashion of his Country.

The Greeks have a place, of the breadth of a Dollar, lest bare upon the top of
their Crowns; and then let the Hair grow round it the breadth of two Fingers,
more or less; after which they shave all the rest of their Head, and wear it
bare.

The Croatian, has one side of his Head shorn, and the other side is neither
shorn nor cut, but the Hair is let to grow as long as it will. The Hungarian
shaves his whole Head, except his Fore-top. The Polander, wears his Hair short
cut, so as it comes down to the middle of his Forehead, and the middle of his
Ear. The Turk shaves his whole Head, except a Lock upon his Crown. The Francks
shave not their Heads, but wear their Hair long, as with us, only for the more
amicable converse, and that nothing about them might be offensive to those,
whom they live amongst, they often tuck it up under their Caps. The Greek
Priests, also neither shave nor cut their Hair, but wear it as long as it will
grow; and many of them have thick heads of Hair; but those, that have least,
receive most refreshment here. The Party to be shaved, sits low; and the Barber
has the better advantage, to shave much at one stroke, he lays on very much
Soap, and holds his Rasor as a Knife, and in a few strokes finishes his Work.
There is a Vessel of Water with a Cock hanging over their Heads, which the
Barber opens as he pleases, and lets fall the^ Water on them.

In one of these Barbers shops in the City of Larissa I saw an ancient large
Tomb of stone of a Jaspis green color, a noble Monument, but taken little
notice of there, and the Barber had caused a hole to be dug through the top
stone, and put Water into it, and made it to serve him for a Cistern.

I was in some doubt, how we should be accommodated for the exchange of our
Ducats, Dollars, and other money we brought with us; but we found ready
accommodation therein from Moneychangers, who sit in the Marketplace for such
purposes, to change them into Medines, Aspers, and five sols Pieces, whereof
there was plenty in those Parts.

The great trading Streets were covered, as in other great Turkish Towns; the
Shops are small, but well furnished; wherein hang all Commodities, which may be
had in a larger manner, if desired. The Shopkeeper sits like a Tailor in his
Shop, and so sells his Commodities unto his Chapman, who commonly stands in the
Street. ^ or other Commodities, a man riding through the Streets cries them,
and gives notice where, and at what rate they may be had.

Though I have been much pleased at the sight of the fine Stables of Horses of
many Princes in Christendom, as at that of the Louvre in Paris. The Viceroy's
of Naples. The Duke of Saxony's noble Stable at Dresden, and Count
Wallesteyne's at Prague in the last of which each Horse has a Marble Pillar by
him, eats his Provender out of a Manger of polished Marble upon a Pedestal of
the same, placed in a Nicchio, in which hangs also his rack of hammered Steel,
and over his head on one side his Picture as big as the life. Yet those gallant
Horses, I beheld at Larissa were surprising unto me, chosen from all parts of
the Turkish Empire; which were so richly equipped with Bridles and Saddles set
with precious Stones, and withal so tender mouthed and tractable, that it was a
great delight to behold them. I saw some Tartarian Horses, which are of
singular esteem, for hardiness, lasting, and swiftness, but unsightly, and
promise little, and when Cha Gagi Aga, Ambassador from the Cham of Tartary,
presented some of them to the Emperor of Germany, at first sight I thought them
but a pitiful present.

The Greek Merchants some of them learn the Italian Tongue, in order to their
Commerce: which makes that Language of good use unto a Traveller in these
parts, where French and Latin are in a manner useless. The Jews speak commonly
Spanish, as they do in Macedonia, Servia, and Bulgaria; and High Dutch in
Hungaria.

I was in Thessaly at a very dry season, and some considerable Rivers were low,
and small ones dry, yet one I observed about seven Miles on this side Tornovo,
to flow plentifully from under a rocky Mountain; not in small springs or
streams; but the whole body of the River came from under the Hill. The Country
however in general was very hot and dry, and I could not but think, what a
different face it now had, from that, in the time of Deucalion, King of
Thessaly; when that memorable deluge happened in this Country, which some
affirm, to have lasted a whole Winter; occasioned by some stopping of the River
Peneus, and its current into the Sea; into which River most of the others run,
and so an inundation must follow in such a Country as Thessaly, which is plain,
and encompassed with Hills. And some also conceive, that in the first times all
this Country was under water, till an Earthquake divided the Mountains of Ossa
and Olympus, and made a free passage for Peneus, to pass by Tempe into the Sea.
In Macedonia, between Comonava and Filurina, at a place called Eccisso Verbeni,
where I saw plentiful Springs of Mineral waters, I had also a Prospect of two
great Lakes; one whereof the People have a Tradition, that it first happened by
taking great stones out of the side of a Mountain; whereupon there issued out
such a flood of water, as to drown the Country about, and to cause a Lake.

As I traveled in Macedonia, the Chiaus told me, that within two days he would
show me French men, whereby he meant the Country People of Thessaly, from some
likeness of their Caps with small brims, to the little Hats lately in fashion.

The Thessalians have been a warlike Nation, and are still a stout People. I
heard the Turks complain of them, as a sturdy and desperate People; and Men,
who, if injured, would find opportunity to be revenged: and that diverse of the
Turks had been surprised, and had lost their lives by them.

The Country of Thessaly seemed the more considerable to me, in regard that it
has formerly been the Seat of great Actions, and produced many worthy Persons;
and particularly, because the famous Hippocrates, the Father of Physicians
lived and practiced here, as may be collected from the Oration of his Son
Thessalus, and the Narration of his Life by Soranus, annexed to his Works;
wherein it is delivered That he lived in Thessaly, and was warned by a Dream to
abide in that Country. That the Princes and Rulers of the Barbarous Nations
about Illyria and Paeonia, sent hither to him; as also the King of Macedonia.
That he dyed in, or about Larissa. That he was buried between Larissa and
Gyrton, and it may be observed in the Epidemies or Books of Hippocrates:
wherein he sets down the Particulars of the Diseases of his Patients, together
with their Names and Places of Habitation. That a great number of his Patients
were of the City of Larissa.

Many famous Battles have been fought in the Plains of Thessaly; and a greater
than any there might have been, if the Graecians had accepted of the Challenge
of Mardonius, the Persian General, when he sent unto them, to come out of their
fast Places, and fight with them in Thessaly, where there were Plains and open
Places enough, wherein to show their Valor.

The Thessalians are an handsome race of People, having black Hair, black Eyes,
and their Faces of a fresh and florid sanguine, much like our fresh Complexions
in England: so that Strangers much admired the Women, and spoke often of the
bell sangue de' Greci, or fair blood of the Graecians. The Macedonians, who live
in hilly Countries, are of a coarser Complexion: and the Moreans or
Peloponnesians, who live more Southward, incline unto a swarthiness.

They have always had the name of good Horsemen, and the Country still abounds
in good Horses. They have also great Buffalo's, esteemed the largest in Greece,
except those of Santa Maura in Epyrus. There are also large and well-colored
Tortoises, of a fine yellow and black; and esteemed very good meat. But the
Turks laughed at the Christians, for feeding on such Food, where they might
have Mutton, Pullets and Partridges.

The Country produces very large, fair, and delicious Figs, Watermelons, the
largest and most pleasant I have tasted; which were very refreshing unto us; as
also fair and delicate Pomegranates, Orainges, Limons and Citrons, Vines, which
are low, like those about Montpellier, and not supported; but the Branches and
Clusters great, and the Grapes as big as good Damasens, and of a delicious
taste. The Wine of the Country is rich, but much thereof has a resinous taste
or tang of the Boracho.

They plant Tabaco, and esteem it better, than what is brought from other
Parts, as being more strong and pungent. The Fields are spread with Sesamum and
Cotton Trees; but the Trees grow low, yet make a fair show. The Country abounds
in Almonds and Olives; and the Greeks delight most in the ripe Olive pickled,
as we in the green.

The Gourdes in the Hedges, with their large yellow Flowers, and the many sorts
of green Thorns, and ever-green Oaks, make the ways pleasant.

The Ilex coccifera, and Chermes-berry, or the Excretion, serving for dying,
and making the Confection of Alchermes grows plentifully in these Countries;
and with this Aegeus in old Time tinged the Sails, which he presented to
Theseus upon his Voyage to Crete; ordering him, if he overcame the Minotaure,
and returned fortunately, to make use of these Sails beautifully colored in
token of Victory. Upon the high Hills grow Asclepias and Helleborus; in the
stony Plains Carduas globosus, Cystus, Lavender, Marjoram, Rosemary, and other
sweet smelling Plants. The Platanus or Plain-tree grows most sair, large and
well spread in Macedonia, affording a refreshing shade; so that it is less to
be wondered at, that Hippocrates found Democritus sitting under a Plain-tree at
Abdera in Macedonia. Some of the seeds and tusts I brought with me into England.

They use much Garlic in most of their Dishes, and their Onions are
extraordinary, as large as two or three fair ones with us, and of a far better
taste; being sharp, quick, and pleasantly pungent, and without any offensive
smell. Though I were no lover of Onions before, yet I found these exceeding
pleasant and comfortable to the Stomach. They are used at most Collations, and
eaten with B^ead in good quantity. I asked a Chiaus, then with us, who had
traveled through most of the Turkish Dominions, whether he had any where met
with so good Onions, as these of Thessaly; who answered me, that the Onions of
Egypt were better, which was the first time I sensibly understood the
expression in Scripture, and ceased to wonder, why the Israelites lingered after
the Onions of that Country.

Malainsana.
They have a Fruit which they call Patlejan or Melanzan, between a Melon and a
Cucumber; out of which they make a very pleasant Dish, by taking out the middle
or seeds of it, and filling it up with the meat of Sawsages, and then pare it,
and boil it.

Of the Agents of foreign Countries, there attended on the Grand Seignior, the
Resident of the Emperor of Germany; the Ambassador of Ragusi; and another of
Wallachia, which are Ambassadors of the Confines; the Ambassadors for Trade,
residing about Constantinople, and not obliged to keep close unto the Sultan.
Larissa being full and pestered with People, the Emperor's Resident desired of
the Sultan leave to abide in some Neighbor Town; who bade him to make choice
of any Place, or any House he liked; which concession moved him to cast his Eye
upon Tornovo, a large and pleasant City of Thessaly, about ten Miles Westward
from Larissa, and seated near the Hills; where most of the Inhabitants are
Christians, there being only three Moschea's, but eighteen Churches of the
Greeks; whereof the chiefst, which I observed, were these: the Cathedral Church
of St. John, the Church of St. Demetrius, of Cosmus and Damianus, of the
Nativity of the blessed Virgin; of St. Elias (this is the Habit of their
Monks.) (where there is also an adjoining Monastery, seated on the side of the
Hill) of St. Anastasius, of the twelve Apostles, of St. Nicholas, (with a
Convent also,) and of St. Anthony the Hermit. The Bishop hereof is under the
Archbishop of Larissa.

A Greecian Monk.
page* 42



A Greek monastary at Alessone.

p. 66

The monastary of St Elias by Tornodo



And I could not but take notice how these Eastern Parts of Europe abounded
with Christians of the Greek Church beyond my expectation, and since they are
thus to be found in many large Countries. In Graecia, and the Greek Islands, in
the Turkish Parts of Dalmatia and Croatia, in Rascia, Bosnia, Servia, Thracia,
Sagora, Bulgaria, Sirfia, Bessarabia, Cossackia, Podolia, Moldavia and
Wallachia, and the vast Dominions of the Emperor of Russia, they must needs
make a notable part of Christendom, and put me more sensibly in mind of an
Expression of a learned Writer. If we should collect and put together all the
Brerewood's enquiries.
Christian Regions in Europe, which are of the Greek Communion, and compare
them with the Parts professing the Roman Religion in Europe, we should find the
Greek far to exceed.

In the Western Parts of Europe, in many Churches the Fonts are stately, raised
high from the Ground, and to be ascended unto by diverse Steps; sometimes
covered with large Canopies, or with high Pavilions handsomely carved and
adorned. But in the Greek Churches the Font or Basin is generally made of plain
Stone, and placed low upon the Floor of the Church; and this is more convenient
for them, in their baptizing of Infants. For they put the Child into the Water,
and are not contented with a mere sprinkling upon the Forehead of it. But the
Priest, after he has blessed the Water, and dipped a Crucisix into it three
times, he takes the naked Child by one Arm, and sets it into the Font up to the
Wast, and with his other Hand laves the Water thrice over its Head; and this
has been their Way of baptizing for many hundred Years. Nor could that
otherwise have happened, which is reported of the Emperor, Constantine the
sixth, Constantinus sextus, dictus Copronymus, quod Infans dum baptizaretur
aquam sacram ventris solutione maculasset. The dipping of the naked Body in
Water being apt to move it. I saw some of their Children baptized before the
Navel string was fallen off.

The Fields about this Place are planted with Vines, Cotton and Sesamum. The
Emperors Resident Illustrissimo Signore di Casa nova, was well accommodated
here with a fair House, and had thirty Turks and Christians in his Family, and
two Janissaries attending at the Gate, good humored and fair conditioned Men, as
could be wished. The Resident was a Milanese by birth, a grave and sober
Person, somewhat melancholy, much addicted to his Book and reading, but very
civil and courteous. He dined and supped alone by himself; his Secretary,
Interpreters, and others of his Family, had another Place of repast, and were
always well provided, and served after the Turkish manner.

The Ambassador also of Ragusa made choice of the same Town; and their
followers often met each other, and many courteous salutes passed between them;
but they were only by civil Messages, for they never met, upon a punctilio,
which kept them asunder; the Ragusa Ambassador pretending a right to take the
first place, he being in the quality of an Ambassador, the other but of a
Resident; although he were much despised for it by the Germans, and his Masters
looked upon, but as Gentlemen of the Set Bandiere, or Persons that were and
had been Subjects and Tributaries under seven Masters, or Sovereign Princes.

I must not forget Demetrius, a Greek Merchant of Tornovo, in whom I thought I
beheld the Humor of the old Greeks, we were diverse times entertained at his
House with much generosity, and hearty freedom. He desired us to enjoy his
House freely, and to be merry after the Mode of our own Countries: and, as an
especial favor, brought his two Daughters to bid us welcome: and we took the
liberty, after the Custom of France, Holland and England, to salute them; they
were handsomely attired, after the manner of their Country; their Hair brayded
and hanging down their back; their Shoes or Slippers painted, their Nails
colored of a reddish color with Cna or Alcanna; the Leaves of which Plant,
powdered and steeped in Water and Wine, and laid a Night upon their Nails,
leaves this Tincture, and is much used in Turkey; where some delight also to
color tho Mains and Tails of their Horses. The Graecians of Scio also, who
wear Gloves (it being a rare thing to see any here) do color their Gloves also
upon those Parts which cover their Nails. Cna is a great Commodity in the
Turkish Dominions, brought out of Arabia and Egypt, and to be bought in every
good Town or Fair. I brought a Pound of it Home with me, which lost not its
tincturing Quality.

The Grecian Countries, which I passed, are extremely altered from that State,
^hereo^ we ^end in ancient History: as having suffered spoiling Inc^^sions ^ro^
many Nations, and a fatal Conquest by the Turks; who utterly destroyed many
Towns and famous Places, and changed the Names of most; not leaving the old
Appellations unto Rivers, which most lastingly maintain their ancient Names. I
passed most of the great Rivers in Macedonia, the Axius, Erigonus and Aliacmo^
which have now Names of no affinity unto them. The River Pe^eus, so famous in
the old Poets, has lost its name, together with Apidanus, Enipeus, and others,
that run into it. The Turks call Larissa, Jeni-Sahar; and Thessaly,
Comenolitari.

SOME OCCURRENCIES AND OBSERVATIONS IN THIS JOURNEY.
IT is no unpleasant sight to behold a new Scene of the World, and unknown face
of things, in Habits, Diet, Manners, Customs and Language. A Man seems to take
leave of our World, when he has passed a Days journey from Rab or Comorra:
and, before he comes to Buda, seems to enter upon a new Stage of the World,
quite different from that of these Western Countries: for he then bids adieu to
Hair on the Head, Bands, Cuffs, Hats, Gloves, Beds, Beer: and enters upon
Habits, Manners and course of life; which with no great variety, but under some
conformity, extend unto China, and the utmost Parts of Asia.

Though we were pretty well secured by Authority for safe Travel, yet we were
not without fear of the Hussars, till we came to Esseck Bridge, over the River
Dravus: for they are active Persons; and understanding the Language, will
boldly range about for Booty, as far as that noted Pass; and, knowing all
By-ways, will rob and spoil whom they meet, especially the Turkish Subjects.

Nor were we without fear also of Gypsies, who are stout and bold, and some of
them have been noted Robbers. There are many of them in Hungaria, Servia,
Bulgaria, Macedonia; and some I saw at Larissa, and other Parts of TheBaly.
They are in most Towns, and live by labor, and handy-craft Trades; many of
them color their Hands and Feet of a reddish color, with Cna, and think those
Parts suffer less from the Cold thereby. Some Gypsy Women color the ends of
their Hair also. Though they be remotely dispersed, yet they are thought to
have had their beginning about Wallachia, and the adjoining Parts, many of them
are conceived to be Spies unto the Turk. A little before I came to
Leopoldstadt, by Freistadt, a great drove of them appeared in those Parts;
which the People suspected to be Spies of the Vizier of Buda, to take notice of
the State of those Parts, and how that Fort proceeded.

Traveling from Belgrade into Servia, we were in some danger of being robbed:
for we perceived three Horsemen to ride very fast after us; and, when they had
over-taken us, they rode about us, waving their Lances, and discharged their
Pistols; but the Chiaus perceiving them to be Spahies, showed his Feather, and
said to me, discharge one of your Pistols at random, and let them know, we are
not unarmed; at which they went off, and we saw them no more.

Caravansara's, Chan's, or Places of public Lodging, built by Benefactors, we
liked not so well as private Houses; and therefore, being but few in Company,
seldom lodged in them, for they are wide Rooms, and we must provide for our
selves therein; and sometimes they are dangerously seated, so that it was not
fit to adventure our selves therein, for fear of being robbed; for though
Robberies be severely punished, yet are they frequently committed; and Gypsies
are well versed in that Trade; and therefore, in order to the safety of
Travelers, Drummers are appointed in dangerous Passages; and in Macedonia, in
a narrow Pass, I saw an old Man beating a Drum upon the ridge of a Hill;
whereby we had notice, that the Passage was clear and free from Thieves.

We had the advantage of good Accommodation for Travel, for parting from
Comora, our Boat was towed by a Saick of twenty four Oars; Hungarians rowing
upon one side, and Germans on the other; till we came to Motch, the Frontier
Town, where we had a Turkish Convoy; who fastening our Boat to their Saick with
eighteen Oars, rowed down the Danube, we carrying the Eagle on our Flag, and
the Turks the double Sword and Half Moon, and passed by diverse remarkable
Places to Buda, from whence we had good Accommodation for Travel to Belgrade,
by open Chariots, with two, three or four Horses on breast; which with great
speed conveyed us through that pleasant plain Country, and from thence through
Servia, and other Provinces, we were furnished with very good Horses, which
would travel at a good rate twenty Miles in a Stage, and were very sure of
foot; whereof I had good experience, when in some Parts we traveled over great
Hills, unequal and craggy Places, and over the bare Rocks. They are very free,
and therefore the Owners of the Horses took acceptions at our Spurs, which are
seldom used by them, and the Turks had none, but what we brought, and gave
them. They are very tractable and tender mouthed; and when we mounted or
alighted, would handsomely apply themselves to such Places; and when we walked,
some of them would follow us without leading. They have a lighter and lesser
Shoe than our Horses; and when they have shod one foot, they take up the foot
against it, and setting the other upon a Block of three inches high, they pare
it.

They have very good Horses in most of these Countries, and very fleet, but they
never dock them, but their Tails grow out at length, and sometimes they
handsomely make them up: and in their Journeys they often alight from them, and
strongly pull at their Fore-top or forehead-lock, and think that does much
refresh them, which the Strangers who travel here call Croatian Provender.

The Bassa of Temeswar presented Ragotzi with a Horse, which Ragotzi slighting
cut off the Horse's Ears, Main and Tail, and sent him back again. This perhaps
would have been thought an Ornament to an Horse in England: but the Bassa took
it as such an affront to his, that he never ceased from stirring up the Sultan,
and other Princes against him, and never forgave the Injury, but by the help of
the Turk, Tartar, Emperor, Poles and Ragotzi's own Countrymen also, he wrought
at last his Ruin.

For their feeding, they make no high Mangers or Racks, to pull down their Food;
but, observing the Rule of Nature, lay their Hay low before them, and almost
even with the Ground; which in long necked Animals, may be the most commodious
way, they are lodged hard, and often with little covering. At Larissa, where
the Town was pestered with Horses and Camels: the Yards of the Houses were full
of them, and Places made at the bottom of the Wall for their Food.

In Caravansara's the Horses are tied to a ringle, fastened unto the side of a
long Place, a little elevated, upon which the Travelers take their rest; and
the Hay was laid a little below our feet, whereon the Horses feed.

They plow more with Oxen than Horses, and especially with Buffelo's; and have
great variety of Ploughs and Carts; some whereof I could not but take notice of
in Macedonia, made with Wheels, not consisting of Spoaks, but of solid Wood, in
the whole piece; whether so contrived for strength, in those rocky Countries,
where they must strike and force upon such inequalities, I cannot tell.

We were furnished with small things to oblige the People where we passed: and
in Houses where we entered, many would welcome the Emperor's Courier, and ask
him what he had brought for them. We pleased them with Scissors, Knives; and
they would be content, if we gave a Glove to one, and the fellow to another. To
the Women we gave small pieces of European Coins; and I was much thanked by a
Bulgarian Woman, for a bright cinq sols piece, which she added to the dress of
her Head, over her Forehead, with other Coins she had there before; some of
them wearing Ducats of Gold, and Pearl, and Stones of value upon that Part,
which make no unhandsom show.

Being only careful to keep our selves from Thieves, we expected no such
trouble, as we found from Wolves and Dogs, in our Journey about the Mountains
in Servia; and especially in large Woods, we were continually alarmed by
Wolves, especially in the Night; when they seldom ceased to howl in great
numbers, and not far from us; so that we were forced to be solicitous in our
Guard, and to keep close together. And as the Wolves were troublesome, so also
the great number of Dogs in those Parts were very offensive to us. As soon as
we came near any Town, or left it, they came out, running at us, barking and
biting the Horses legs, and in Houses would be barking and snarling, so that
without a Cudgel it was not safe going into the Yard. And it seems impossible,
that these Towns should be surprised by the most silent Enemy, without having
good notice thereof by Dogs: and sure, they are kept to this intent. For as
soon as the Sun sets they begin to bark and cease not till the Morning. The
Town of St. Malo's in France is also guarded somewhat after this manner, where
they turn the Dogs out of the Town at Night, and are as secure thereby, as if
they had an army of Watchmen to guard them. Some such trouble from Dogs I
remembered, that I had met with at the strong Town of Komara, when I came into
the Town about Midnight, which was so full of Dogs fiercely barking and running
upon us, that to save our selves, we were fain to take shelter in the Corpse de
guard, till a lodging was provided for us.

I could not but pity the poor Christians, seeing under what fear they lived in
those Parts; when I observed them to make a way, as soon as they perceived us
coming toward them. In Macedonia the Men and Women would betake themselves
into the Woods to avoid us; and we took the pains sometimes to ride after them,
to undeceive them of their folly and needless Frights.

But that which moved me most, was the pitiful Spectacle of Captives and
Slaves, which are often met with in those Countries; together with the variety
of their hard Fates and Accounts, how they fell into that Condition; some by
Treachery, some by Chance of War; others by Plagiary and Man-stealing Tartars,
who plentifully furnish the Turkish Dominion; some fixed to one Master, others
having been sold unto many, and at distant Places. But their Condition is most
desperate who are Slaves to the Court, and belong to the Grand Seiignior: for
they are never to be redeemed. Of which kind I met with one at Egribugia in
Macedonia, attending at the post house; who though he had no hard Office, yet
was extremely dejected upon this misfortune of Non-redemption.

In Thessaly also I met with one Sigismund, who had been a Slave to several
Persons, and in several Countries. He was an Hungarian, born at Gran, and taken
at the Battle of Barachan, under Count Forchatz, in the last Wars; first served
a Turk, then sold to a Jew, who proved a hard Master, then to an Armenian;
under whom he so well acquitted himself, that his Master gave him his freedom,
and he made a shift to come to Larissa, where the Emperor's Resident
entertained him. I was very much pleased with his Conversation, being a worthy,
honest and good natured Man; and had maintained his Christianity in his several
Fortunes. He spoke Hungarian, Sclavonian, Turkish, Armenian and Latin: showed
me the Draughts of many Monasteries, Abbeys, Moschea's, and considerable
Buildings in Armenia, Persia and Turkey: and I hope by this time he is in his
own Country.

The Turks, who are well acquainted with the Captives of several Nations, make
observations of them: so they say, a Russian is best for the Oar, a Georgian
makes a good Courtier, and an Albanian, a good Counselor. A Turk in our
company, observing a Georgian Captive much dejected at his Condition,
encouraged him, and bid him be of good cheer; telling him he might come to be a
great Man, and one of the best in Turkey.

The first time I went to have a sight of the Grand Seignior, Osmund Chiaus
made no great haste forward, and when I asked him the reason, he replied, I
take no great pleasure to be too near him: and afterward when he talked of
some Bassa's, who had been strangled, and I added, that in this respect he
lived more happily than any Bassa: he said, such things must be patiently put
up, all our Lives are in the Sultan's hands: in your petty Kingdoms and States,
Men are Tried and Convicted, but our great Empire cannot be so maintained, and
if the Sultan should now send for my Head I must be content to lay it down
patiently, not asking wherefore: and I remember his Words were that in this
Country we must have, patienza fin a perder la testa, e poi pa^ienza, patience
even to the loss of our Heads, and patience after that.

We had frequent Memento's of Mortality, by Graves and Sepulchers, as we
passed; especially near Belgrade. For the Turks are commonly buried by the
Highways: yet their Tombs are not ordinarily splendid, consisting only of a
Stone erected at the Head and at the Feet: yet some set up Stones of two, three
or four yards high. Some have a Turbant carved upon the Stone, at the Head; and
others set up two Pillars of Stone; some proceed farther, and raise the
Sepulchers, as with us, and afterward place two Pillars upon them, one at the
Head, and another at the Feet. At Scopia I saw fair ones, after this manner,
and two Sepulchers in one of them: but the best way I observed in these Parts,
is by building a Pavillion supported by four Pillars. As we traveled to the
South from Jagodna in Servia, I saw upon the side of a Hill, a large Turkish
Tomb, about four yards long, and a square place covered by it, which the Chiaus
told me was the Tomb of one of their Saints, and accordingly performed his
Devotions at it, and at other Places: on Thursday Nights and Friday's, I
observed the Women to visit the Sepulchers, and pay their Devotions at the
Tombs of their dead Friends.

This Gigantick Saint that lay buried here, was certainly a fit Man in his time
to wield the holy Club, with which the Turk does propogate his Religion and
Dominion, and if he were as long as his Tomb, he was as formidable a Person as
any of the Patagonian Giants painted upon the Southern Part of diverse Maps of
America with long Arrows in their Throats. I must confess it seems strange to
me that the Stature of Man should be extended to that height. Mr. Wood, an
ingenious Person, who has made very fair and accurate Maps of the Streights of
Magellan, the Islands therein, and the Coast from the River of Plate to
Baldivia, in the South Sea, told me that he had seen diverse Graves in the
Southern Parts of America near four yards long, which surprised him the more,
because he had never seen any American that was two yards high, and therefore
he opened one of these long Sepulchers from one end to the other, and found in
it a Man and a Woman, so placed, that the Woman's head lay at the Man's feet, and
so might reasonably require a Tomb of near that length.

But to return into the rode for our diversion, we sometimes met with Turkish
Fairs, which are ordinarily kept in some large ground, enclosed and divided
into Streets and Passes, according to the variety of Commodities to be sold,
where a Man may recreate himself with multiplicity of Fripperies, and things
different from those of our Parts, and cannot want variety of Music; which,
though but mean, proved some diversion unto us. The first Fair we met with, was
at Lescoa or Lescovia, upon the River Liperizza in Servia.

It was no small comfort to us, to find the Country so free from the Plague,
which we only met with at Prestina, a large Town, on part of the Plains of
Cossova, when we came into that Place, we were entertained in a very good
House, and brought into a large Room, well accommodated with Carpets and other
Ornaments; where we found a Turk lying sick of the Plague. The Chiaus, after
the Turkish Humor, made nothing of it; but some others were not so contented;
and therefore we removed and traveled in the Night, till we came to a Gypsie's
House amongst the Hills, where we were well accommodated.

The Turks were much pleased to see me write; when I came into any House, I
pulled out my Paper-book to set down what I observed; which when they
perceived, they would come about me, taking notice of the Paper, and binding of
the Book, wondering to see me write so fast, and with such a Pen, which was made
of a Goose Quill, they usually writing with a hard Reed, cut like our Pens.
Many carry about them an handsome brass Ink-horn, which they hang by their
sides; their Ink is good, Paper smooth and polished; whereon they will write
very fairly, as I have to show in the Sultan's Pass, which I brought home with
me.

When I found occasion, I used to look upon some Maps, which I carried with me:
whereat Osman Chiaus smiled, saying, there is no depending upon Maps; they set
down only great Towns, and often falsely. Chiauses are able to make the best
Maps, who pass their Days in traveling Countries; and take notice of all
Places* and know their Turkish Names; and in many particulars I found some
truth in his Words; for the Maps of Hungary are not exact; those of Servia,
Bulgaria, Macedonia and Thessaly very imperfect. In upper Hungary, many Towns
are omitted, many ill-placed; in the lower also not a few. The Danube seems to
fetch about too much to the South-west, before the Tibiscus enters into it. In
Servi^, Hissargick is placed too far from the Danube, which runs by it. I
find no mention of Procupia or Vrchoop, of Lescoa or Lescovia, considerable
Towns; the last upon the winding River Liperizza: nor of Kaplanly or Tigres
Town, in Macedonia; nor of Kupruly or Bridge-Town; nor of Urania, Pyrlipe,
Comonava, Eccisso Verbeni; nor of the Lake Petriski and Ostreva, not far from
it; nor of Egribugia, Sariggiole, Sarvizza; nor of the River Injecora near it;
nor of Alesson, nor Tornova in Thessaly, a handsome considerable City. And he
that travels in Macedonia, will never be able to reconcile the Positions of
Rivers and Towns to their usual Descriptions in Maps, although not long ago
there have been large ones published of Greece.

I took great pleasure to converse with Chiauses, especially if they were of
any years; for they speak diverse Languages, and have seen much of the World;
are commonly good Company, and able to give account of many things. Osman
Chi^us, who traveled with us, was about fifty years of Age, spoke Turkish,
Sclavonian and Italian: a stout and faithful honest Person, very cleanly and
neat: he told me he had traveled the greatest part of Turkey, and growing old
seated himself in Buda, as a Chiaus to the Vizier; which place pleased him
better than any in Turkey: he took a civil farewell of me at Buda, bringing me
out of the Gates, and with many a Dios wished me a happy return into my
Country; and indeed, in all my Journey I met with fair carriage, and civil
usage; when I came into any Room where the Turks were sitting* they would
salute me, and touching my hand, require me to sit down with them, then offer
me Coffee, and sometimes Tabaco, and at Meals invite me to eat heartily; only
in some places, the Boys, and meaner sort of People would call me Sashtlu gaur,
or haired Infidel. And a Jew at Larissa, whom I had employed to buy some little
things for me; and I saying, they were too dear, gave me some ill Language,
which so displeased some that were by, that if the Grand Seignior had not been
in person in the Town, they would have taught him other manners.

The Turks took much Tabaco in the Countries which I passed, and many carried
little bags thereof by their sides, which they take in pipes of an ell long,
made of an hard reed, and an earthen head at the end, laying one end on the
ground, and holding the other in their mouths. I did seldom take any; but to
comply with their kindness, I would not refuse it; and by reason of the length
of the pipe, it was cool, and less disturbing; they take it also often in
snuff. Seignior Gabriel, the Emperor's Courier would tell them many stories;
and while he was speaking, they would come about him, and listen very
attentively: and he would pull out his snuff box, and put snuff-powder into
their noses, which they would take very kindly. They would be always gazing
upon the Emperor's Arms cut in a Stone, which he wore upon his breast;
whereupon he would take occasion to magnify the Emperor, describe the
multitude of Provinces subject unto him; and any thing that might confer unto
his honor, whereof they would take great notice.

I liked well the neatness and cleanliness of the Turks, which we conversed
with, and their washing of their feet, hands, and faces, though they had some
purifying conceit thereof; while we traveled, the Chiaus, at the fight of a
Spring, or clear water, would often alight, and wash himself; and every morning
was very curious in winding up his Turbant, and combing of his beard; and would
ask me, whether it were well done. When they go to the house of office, they
carry a pitcher of water with them; they affect privacy when they make water;
which they perform, resting upon one knee, and stretching out the other leg.
Walking in Larissa with the Chiaus, the Streets being narrow, and full of
people, and remembering the sad fate of Vincent le Blanc, who lost his liberty,
besides other misfortunes, for pissing over a Turkish Saints head, who lay
interred in a place, he little suspected; I asked him, where I might make water
without offense, who answered me grumblingly at first, but afterward directed
me to a place, and stood at a little distance, to secure me from any affront.
And at another time while I traveled in an open Calesche or Chariot by
Moonlight, I made water over one side thereof, to avoid being troublesome to
the rest in engaging them to stay for me till I alighted and went aside or
retard their journey in the night; but one who laid down by my feet took
notice of it to me with a great deal of regret, and and though out of the
respect he professed to bear me, he was resolved not to divulge it. Yet he
wondered I would venture the loss of my credit in such a matter.

Some experience we had in our return of the Turkish Justice, at Egribugia, in
Macedonia; for traveling from Sariggiole over high Rocks, we met with a
Turkish Aga before our arrival; who, having a numerous train, had taken up all
the Horses at Egribugia; so that we could not be readily supplied; and
therefore intended to ride our Horses another Stage, the way laying now in the
Plain, and our Horses strong and able, we set forward on the same*Horses; but
before we were got out of the Town, we were stopped, and carried before the
Cadih, by the Postmaster; who alleged against us, that we were injurious unto
him, in that we passed by, without taking Horses at his House; he being allowed
by the Grand Seignior, whose Servant he is, so much for every Horse he
provides; and that none was to provide Horses in that place, but himself; so
that he was damnified and had no profit coming unto him.

The Cadih therefore considering of the business, and sitting crosslegged upon
his Carpet, and leaning his elbow upon four or five Folio Books, which he had
by him; commanded his Servants to fill every one a dish of Coffee. The Chiaus,
in our defense, urged, that we had business of concern; that we had the
Chaymacham's Letters; and were employed from the Grand Seignior to the Emperor
of Germany; that he himself was a Chiaus to the Vis^er of Buda, whither he was
to conduct us, and that no man could or ought to stop him; whereupon the Cadih
said, the Chiaus must not be hindered in his journey, nor the Postmaster be
unconsidered; and so presently called for the Post-masters Book, and with his
pen, made of a reed, set down a Sultanine to be allowed him in his accounts to
the Tefterdar, and bade us good morrow, and wished us a good journey.

In the European Turkish Dominions, which I passed, I could not but take notice
of the great number of Christians; for, excepting great Cities, or where the
Soldiery reside, they are generally all Christians; whereof the great body is
of the Greek Church, who live patiently under the Turkish toleration. If there
should happen any considerable commotion among the Turkish powers; it is highly
probable, they would sit still, and be little active; and if any Forces of the
Latin Church should attempt the Conquests of these parts, in all probability
they would find very little assistance from them, and I fear they would rather
adhere unto their Turkish Masters.

Though Augustus thought it a point of wisdom, to put some limit unto the Roman
Empire, yet I do not find the Turks are of his judgment, but still endeavor to
enlarge their Dominions, and when I consider that people, their hardy
education, sober course of life, and obedience to their Superiors; that no
Bassa can easily intend a revolt, but some others will discover him, in hope to
obtain his place, or some great preferment; and that they so punctually observe
the duty of their Charges; I am apt to think, or fear, if he, who puts bounds
to the Sea, and says hither thou shall come and no further, does not, out of
his great merry, put a stop to their further incursions, they may probably
obtain and conserve a far larger Empire, and even all Europe, unto the Western
Ocean.

Certain it is that they are unsatisfied with their present bounds and look
beyond Hungaria, and I have heard them say, we must in due time come to Beatch,
for so they call Vienna, and try our fortunes again*

At this day the Star and Half Moon are above the Cross, upon the Steeple of
the Cathedral Church of St. Stephen, in the Emperor of Germany his Imperial
City of Vienna: and it grieved me to see in all the Con^ines a sort of Cross
which our Heralds do not dream of, which is a Cross Lunated after this manner,
whereby the Inhabitants as they testify their Christianity, so they
acknowledge the Turkish power.

A Cross with Half-moons set over the Churches in the Country which pays
contribution to the Turks in Hungary.
The Star and Half Moon upon the Steeple of St. Stephen's Church at Vienna.


Le^pold stadt

pag^^*



A JOURNEY FROM KOMARA OR GOMORA* TO THE MINE-TOVVNS IN HUNGARY* AND FROM
THENCE TO VIENNA.
BEING at Komara, and having satisfied my curiosity as far that way as the
Christian Dominions extended. I pursued my intention of seeilng the Copper,
Silver and Gold Mines in Hungary; and being unwilling to return again to
Presburg so far about to get into the road toward them; I attempted a nearer
passage, although there be few who go that way. And therefore I traveled along
the North shore of the Island of Schut, till I came to the Confluence of the
River Waag and Danube, and then passed over to a Fortification raised since the
last War, called Gutta; it lies in a Marish ground between a branch of the
Danube, the Waag, and the Swartz, within a mile of Newheusel; which we plainly
saw from the Steeple of the Church at Gutta, and could distinguish the
buildings within it; as the Bassa's Pala^e formerly belonging to the Arch
Bishop of Presburg; The Church in the middle of the Town; the Tower to the
Moske, and others. But this nearness to Newheusel proved not only dangerous,
but destructive to it in the beginning of the year 1685. after that the Turks
had sent great Recruits from Buda: ^or the Count of Zabor having burnt the
Suburbs of Newheusel and taken several Prisoners; the Turks to revenge it made
an excursion, and burnt the Town of Gutta, and put all the Inhabitants to the
Sword. Their Boats here are of one piece of wood, in which notwithstanding they
venture themselves, and pass the greatest Rivers with them; in this Fort were
130 men commanded by Captain Matthias Fruhwurdt. From hence by Forchatz we came
to Schella, where there is another Fort built to hinder the Turks from passing
the River Waag, for hereabouts the Tartars broke over, burned and ruined the
whole Country about in the late war, in such manner, that it remains still
desolate; at half a miles distance from this place is a hole in the Earth which
burns like Solfaterra by Naples. From hence we went to Schinta a large Fort and
built long since to command the River and the Country about. There is a Tower
in the middle, four Bastions and many good pieces of Cannon. At the entrance
there hanges a great Rib, a Thigh Bone and a Tooth, which I judged to be of an
Elephant, having seen the Skeleton of one: and also such bones as these hang up
before the Emperor's House at Laxambourg; those bearing the name of the bones
of a great Heathen Virgin; and these of a Giant. We came afterward to
Leopolstadt; a noble regular Fortification with six Bastions, where the Young
Count de Souches commanded, to whom I delivered Letters, and received many
favors from him. Afterward I passed the River and came to Freistat, a large
sair Town but lately burned by the Turk. Count Forchatz has a handsome Castle
here, and a large House in the Town, whereof I took the draught.

The Lutherans had also a School or College here, but ruined with the rest of
the Buildings. They are Tributaries to the Turk, paying yearly eight
Hungarische, almost four pence of our money, for every head, whether of Man,
Woman, Children, Sheep, Oxen, or Horses. The Children are educated to hardship,
and the Women seldom marry twice. They bathe much, and use sweating naked in
Stoves, holding their feet in warm water. They use Cupping-glasses also very
much and scarifications. In the Convent of the Franciscans were only twelve
Friars left; and the Roman Christians in these parts have few other Priests but
Monks.

Two Hungarian miles from Friestat lies Banca, where in a low ground near the
River are fifteen Baths; into three of which the Riverwater is now entered, the
River Waag continually wearing out its banks by reason of its rapid course.
Twenty years since there were also hot Baths on the other side of the River,
but are now covered with the cold stream. These Baths leave a white sediment in
all places, and tinge Copper and Silver immediately as black as Ink: Hard by
these Baths is a Quarry of Stone, and some Veins of Chalk, which were very
pleasing to behold, the Chalk being of all colors except green, and the
colors so finely mixed, as a painting or marble Paper does not equal it.

We being here upon the 18 of March, and the weather very cold, had no thoughts
of bathing in so open a place; though in some of them we saw Women and
Children; and the Hussar who drove our Chariot hither, after we had supped,
went out, and in a very hard frost pulled off his clothes in the open Meadow at
midnight, and bathed himself in one of those Baths.

A* Boat cut out of one tree much used in Hungaria* Croatia* Carniola*
Sclavonia* etc. ordi^arily about 18 foot long* two foot and an half broad ^ne
and half deep.

A Sclar^nian.

German.

P^lonian.

Hungarian.

Croatian.



March the 21. Graff Souches sent us German Musketeers to convoy us through
the Contribution Country, and defend us in our travels; we passed by Ripnich,
and a Castle at Docatzi, belonging to Baron Berrini, and came at night to
Topolchan upon the River Nitra, where the Town with the Church were burnt in
the last war, and had not well recovered it self again. A mile from hence at
Bellitz are also hot Baths. The next day by Clesch, the Inhabitants of which
place were all carried away Captives in the last Wars; and through a great wood
by Hochwise, where the Inhabitants were most Germans. We came to Sernowitz
seated upon the River Gran, where is a Castle upon a Rock, but the Town is
Tributary to the Turks, and they often visit it. March 23. We passed the River
Gran early in the Morning, and came among the Hills to Hodrytz, by which Town
runs a swift stream very serviceable to them, which helps to move their Engines
employed in the pounding, washing and melting of the Silver-ore. We traveled
over a Mountain called Hell, and came to Schemnitz, the greatest of the
Mine-towns in Hungary: and where great quantity of Silver-ore is every day
dug. The Town is well built, has three fair Churches in it, the greatest
part of the Inhabitants are Lutherans. There are also three Castles here; the
old Castle in the Town, where there is Wind-Musick at six every morning, and at
twelve, and at six at night. 2. The New Castle, built by a Lady, who removed
the Gibbet from this Hill, and left a fair building in lieu of it. The third is
on a high peak, where there is a continual watch kept to discover the approach
of the Turks, who immediately give notice of it by the shooting off a Culverin.
The Streets lie up and down Hill, the Country hereabouts being all very uneven.

There are very many Mines here, and many adventurers are induced to try their
fortunes by the good success so many have had: for if they find a Vein of Ore
in any reasonable time, before they have quite spent their Stocks in digging,
they may probably expect great profit.

These Mines amongst others are very remarkable; the Windschacht-Mine, the
Trinity, that of St. Benedict, St. John, Matthias, and one called the three
Kings; but the chiefest and most wrought are those of Windschacht and Trinity.
Trinity-Mine is seventy fathoms deep, built and kept open with under-work at a
great expense, much of this Mine being in an earthy soil. The Ore of it is much
esteemed, and is commonly of a black color covered with a white Earth or Clay;
so that the streams where they work it, become milky and whitish, and is that
substance I suppose which is called Lac Lunae, or the Milk of the Moon or
Silver. Diverse Veins in this Mine lie North, and other rich Veins run to the
North-East. When two Veins cross one another they esteem it fortunate; so that
all Veins of Ore keep not the same point even in the same Mine, which would be
an help to discover them; but they have no certain way to know either which way
they run, or where they are, till by industrious persevering in the labor of
the Mines they are at last found out. They use not the Virgula divina, or
forked Hazel-stick to direct them, having no opinion of it (as I observed they
had at the Silver Mine at Friburg in Misnia, where I also learned the use
thereof) but dig always as the Adventurers desire. They showed me one place,
which they had dug straight on six years, when the Ore was but two fathoms
distant from the place where they first began: and in another place they dug
twelve years outright, and a t last found a Vein which in a short time paid
their charges. I was in many parts of this Mine, and went so far, that at
length I passed quite under a Hill, and came out on the other side.

In Windschacht-Mine wherein I also descended as far as the water would then
permit me, descending thrice almost perpendicularly about three hundred large
steps or stairs of a Ladder. I observed a large Wheel deep in the Earth, of
twelve yards Diameter; turned about by the fall of subterraneous Waters. This
Wheel moves Engines which pump out the water from the bottom of the Mine, up to
the cavity wherein this Wheel is placed. The water which moves this Wheel falls
no lower into the Mine, but passes away through a Cumculus made on purpose,
through which both this and the other water pumped from the deepest parts of
the Mine, do run out together at the foot of an Hill. Besides this Wheel there
is another above ground which lies Horizontally, drawn about continually by
twelve Horses, which serves also to pump out much of the water of this Mine;
about all the Works whereof, I was informed that there were no less than two
thousand men employed.

In some places of the Mine it is very cold, and in others so hot, that to
refresh my self I was constrained to go with my breast naked; although I had
only linen Cloths on. Where they work it is always hot, so that they labor
naked for eight hours if they are able, and then rest eight hours more.

In this Mine they showed me a place where five men and a Person of quality
were destroyed by a Damp, for which reason they have now placed a Tube there,
the like they place over all doors, and over all ways where they dig right on
for a great space, and have no passage through; whereby the air is let in, let
out, or carried round, and the Miners underground ventilated with it.

The blackish Ore is esteemed the best; much of it has a mixture of a shining
yellow substance or Marchasite, which if it be not in too great a quantity is
not unwelcome, by reason that it disposes the Ore to fluidity, or renders it
more easy to be melted; but if it be in too great a proportion, they are of
opinion, that it preys upon the Silver in the Mine; and in the Furnace carries
it away while it melts, by over-volatilizing it; and therefore they term it a
Robber, as a substance which spoils and takes away the richness of the Ore.

There is often found a red substance which grows to the Ore called Cinnabar of
Silver, which being grinded with Oil makes a Vermilion equal to, if not
surpassing the Cinnabar made by sublimation.

There are also found in these Mines, Crystals, Amethysts, and Amethystine
mixtures in the clests of the Rocks, and sometimes nigh or joined to the Ore;
as also Vitriol naturally crystalliz'd in the Earth in diverse of these Mines;
and particularly in a Mine in Paradise Hill; which then belonged to Mr. Jacobus
Schwiboda, an Apothecary, at whose House I lodged, and who presented me with
many curious Minerals.

And as there is great variety in the Silver-Ore, as to its mixtures with
Earth, Stones, Marchasite, Cinnabar, Vitriol, etc. So also in its richness;
some holding a great proportion of Silver in respect of others. An hundred
pound weight of Ore sometimes yields but half an ounce or an of Silver;
sometimes two ounces, three, four, five, and unto twenty ounces; what is richer
is very rare, yet some has ^een found to hold half Silver, and I have seen of
it so rich, as to be cut with a knife.

A Specimen of each sort of Ore which they dig out of the Mines is carried upon
its first being discovered to an Officer called the Probierer, who is to prove
and judge of its richness; which he does in this manner. Of all sorts of Ores
he takes the same quantity, the Ores being first dried, burned, and pounded, he
gives an equal proportion of lead to all, melts and purifies them, and then by
exact Scales takes notice of the proportion between the Ore and Metal contained
in it, and reports it to those employed in the great melting Furnaces; who
accordingly add or diminish the quantities of those substances which are to be
mixed with the Ores to melt them in the melting Furnace; as for example, to an
hundred centen or ten thousand pound weight of Silver-Ore, which holds above
two ounces and an half of Silver in an hundred pounds weight, they add forty
centen of Leich, which is Ore pounded and washed; two hundred centen of
Iron-Stone, which is not Iron-Ore, but a Stone found in those Hills, of which
the liver colored is the best. A q antity of Kis, or a sort of Pyrites,
according as the Ore is mixed with Marchasite, and of Slacken as much as they
please. This last is the scum or cake taken off from the top of the Pan into
which the Metals run, and is a substance made out of the former mentioned, by
fusion.

Whatsoever is melted in the melting Furnace, is let out through an hole at the
bottom thereof into the pan, which is placed in the Earth before it; and thus
exposed, it immediately acquires an hard scum, dross, loaf or cake, which being
continually taken away, the Metal remaining becomes purer; to which is added
lead which carries all the Silver down to the bottom with it, and after some
time the melted Metal is taken out; then being again melted in the driving
^urnace, the lead or what else remains mixed with the Silver is driven off by
the blowing of two great bellows; and runs over from the melted Silver in form
of Litharge. That which first comes over, is the white and that which comes
last, being longer in the fire, is the red, not that it is Litharge of Gold,
both being driven off from the same Metal.

Most of the Schemnitz Silver-Ore holds some Gold which they separate by
melting the Silver, then granulating it, and afterward by dissolving it in
Aqua fortis made out of a peculiar Vitriol prepared at Chremnitz, whereby the
Gold is left at the bottom and is afterward melted; the Aqua fortis is
distilled from the Silver, and serves again for use. But it would be too
tedious to describe all the works of these Mines which do well deserve as
accurate Descriptions as those of Misnia, and other parts, of which Agricola
has written largely, and very well in his Books De re Metallica and de
fossilibus. Lenys also of Mineral works is esteemed, and Lazarus Erker has
handsomely described the principal Ores and Mineral bodies. But certainly there
are few places in the World to be compared with this, where Art and Nature
strive to show their utmost force and riches.

They work in this Country much after the manner they did in the Emperor
Rudolphus his time; who was a great undertaker and encourager of Mine-works;
but, many of their Instruments and Engines are much improved.

Notwithstanding the great quantity of Silver made every week at Schemnitz and
carried away in Carts, I found some difficulty to procure the least piece
there, and scarce any one in the Town could furnish me with any that was pure,
for the Money of the Country is mixed with above half Copper; and being
desirous to see what alteration diverse of those Mineral-waters in that Country,
would make upon Metals, for want of other Silver, I was forced to make use of
silver Crosses, Crucifixes and Medals, which I borrowed.

Near unto Schemnitz, where old Schemnitz stood, is an high Perpendicular Rock,
part of which from the bottom to the top is naturally tinctured with shining
fair blue, some green, and spots of yellow in it. At first sight I was much
surprised with the beauty of it, and could fansy nothing like it, but a whole
Rock of polished Lapis Lazuli: and I have heard from a Spaniard, who lived long
in the West Indies, that there is also a Rock like this nigh to the Silver
Mines in Peru.

At Glass-Hitten, an Hungarian mile, or about seven English miles from
Schemnitz, there was formerly a rich Gold Mine, but it is lost, no man knowing
where the entrance was since the time that Beihlem Gabor Prnice of Transylvania
overran that Country, and the Inhabitants fled away. The Owner notwithstanding
left some marks and directions whereby they might discover it, with the Figures
of his Instruments upon the Barks of Trees; which Instruments they have already
found by digging in the Earth, and thus much is intimated to them, that where
they find a Stone, on which a Face is carved, they are at it, and are only to
remove part of a Rock with which the Owner stopped up the Mine.

This place is much frequented by reason of its natural hot Baths, of which
there are five very convenient, with handsome descents into them, and covered
over with large high Roots. The Springs are very clear, the Sediment is red and
green, the wood and seats of the Baths under water are incrustated with a stony
substance, and Silver is gilded by being left in them: But the most remarkable
of these Baths, is that which is called the sweating Bath, whose hot Springs
drain through an Hill, and fall into a Bath built to receive them; at one end
of which by ascending I went into a Cave which is made a noble Stove by the
heat of these Thermae, and so ordered with Seats, that every one who sits in
it, either by choosing an higher or a lower seat, may regulate his sweating, or
enjoy what degree of heat he desires. This Cave, as also the sides of the Bath
are covered by the continual dropping of those hot Springs, with a red, white,
and green substance, very fair and pleasing to the eye.

Bathing my self in the largest of these Baths when there were a great many Men
and Women in it; an active man to divert the Company, had privately conveyed
himself to the top of the House which covered the Bath, and on a sudden cast
himself down into the water, and by taking hold upon the bottom of the Seats
kept himself under water for some time; afterward a Serpent coming into the
Bath through a channel which conveyed the water into it, many of the women were
afrighted at it. He still to continue his service and good will to the Company,
was the first that would encounter it, and deliver the Damsels; which he did in
a short time, so successfully, that he caught the Serpent in both his hands,
and holding it out of the water, put it into his mouth, and bit the head off.
Being taken with his good humor, I afterward sent for him into the Stove; and
finding that he had been employed in the Mines, I asked him among other things,
whether he had seen any natural Vitriol, and where, in the Mines, crystallized
in lumps, pure and ready for use, which he said he had in many places, but in
the greatest quantity, in a Mine now given over; by reason that in some places
the Earth was fallen in, which was near to Schemnitz: And accordingly two or
three days after he came to see me at Schemnitz, brought me Lamps and Mine-mens
habits for my self, and two Friends more; and we went with him under ground,
till I came where he showed me great quantities of it, much to my satisfaction:
the Vitriol there shooting upon the Stones and Earth, upon the floor and sides
of the passages, as it does by art in the Pans, and about the sticks, not
hanging from the top, as in many other places I have seen it, like to Ice-icles.

Glass-Hitten belonges to the Count of Lippey, of whose Family was the Learned
Polycarpus Procopius Bocanus, who was sent some time past by the Archbishop of
Presburg to give an account of the rarities of these Countries; but his death
hindered the publishing of his observations.

Eisenbach about four English miles from Glass-Hitten, and five or six from
Schemnitz, has also hot Baths; the Sediment of which is red, and turns into
stone; so that I brought away with me pieces of it of five or six inches
diameter: I took also a large piece of this water petrefied as it fell from a
spout in which the waves of it are to be seen; but the spout it self, although
made of Wood, was not at all changed, as lying under it. However, those Trees
with which they built the sides of the Bath were so petrefied, that those which
lay next above the water, were entirely turned into Stone. And it was not
unpleasant to observe how nature did here assist art, and out of the body of a
Firr-Tree frame a Column of Stone. Nor is it much to be wondered at, that the
wood under the water should remain unaltered whilst that above suffered so
great a change. These waters are hot, and part of whatsoever is contained in
them is sufficiently Volatilized to be carried up with the steam of the Bath,
and I remember in the Bath of the Green Pillars at Buda, I took notice, that
the exhalation from the Bath reverberated by the high Cupola built over it, and
by the Irons extended from one Column to another, and by the Capitals of the
Pillars was formed into long Stones like Ice-icles, which hang to all the said
places, such as may be observed in many subterraneous Grotto's, and
particularly in England in Okey-hole in Somersetshire, and Pooles-hole in
Darby-shire. Sulphur also which is in great quantity in many hot Springs flies
away continually, and is not to be found in them, if you boil or evaporate the
Bath water: and therefore to discover it, I thought it more rational to look
out of the water than into it; neither was I more deceived in my conjecture,
than he who looked toward the West, rather than toward the East to see the
rising of the Sun. For upon many places which were over the Baths, and received
the steams of the hot water, I have seen Sulphur to stick; and to satisfy my
curiosity further herein, I caused once a Pipe to be opened at Baden in
Austria, through which the hot water continually ran, and took with my hand
from the upper part of the Pipe, diverse Boxes full of a substance scarce to be
distinguished from Flower of Brimstone. Walking about also one day in the Sower
Bath at Baden, and leaning over the Ballistres to talk with some Friends, who
were then bathing themselves, I perceived that my Buttons and what else I wore
of silver, were all turned yellow of a fair Gold color, although I were at
some distance from the water. Which made me try this experiment also, which was
to hang money over the Bath at a foot distance, or at a greater, to see what
alteration it would make, and how soon; which it colored in a minutes time,
and that which was nearer in half a minute.

But to return to Eisenbach, there are two convenient Baths much frequented,
and a third which is made by the water let out of the former, called the
Snakes-bath, from the number of Snakes coming into, and delighting in it when
it is filled with these warm waters.

March the thirtieth, I traveled from Schemnitz by Glass-Hitten, and
Apfelsdorff, where there is a House of the Archbishop of Presburg; and
afterward passed the River Gran and came in between the Hills; where in one
place they have thrown up the Earth, and made a work from one ridge of the
Hills to the other, to defend the Country; and hinder the Turkish Excursions
toward Chremnitz: Afterward we proceeded by that Golden River and yellow
Stream which washes all the Ore above till we came to the Town.

Chremnitz is a small Town, but has large Suburbs, and lies high* St. John's
Church at some distance from it, is thought to stand upon the highest ground in
Hungary. This is the oldest Mine-Town, and the richest in Gold of all the seven
in these parts, which are these, Schemnitz, Chremnitz, Newsol, Koningsberg,
Bochantz, Libeten and Tiln.

They have worked in the Gold-Mine at Chremnitz nine hundred and fifty years;
the Mine is about nine or ten English miles in length, and there is one
Cuniculus or Horizontal passage which is eight hundred fathoms long, called the
Erbstall. The depth of it is above one hundred and seventy fathoms; they do not
use Ladders to descend into this Mine, but are let down at the end of a Cable,
unto which is fastened a sling, or seat of Leather; the Leather being broad, and
divided ordinarily into two or three parts, so that it is to be shifted or
changed as you find convenience, and affords no uneasy seat, even to such as
are not used to it. And in this manner, whoseever enters the Mine is let down.
Through one of the Schachts or perpendicular Pits, of which there are six. 1.
That of Rodolphus. 2. Queen Anne. 3. Ferdinand. 4. Matthias. 5. Windschacht,
and 6. Leopold. I went down by the Pit of the Emperor Rodolphus, gently
descending by the turning about of a large wheel to which the Cable is fastened,
one hundred and eight fathoms deep into the Earth; and after many hours being
in the Mine, was drawn out again by Leopoldi Schacht, or Leopolds Pit, or
Shaft, straight up above one hundred and fifty fathoms; a heigh surpassing that
of the Pyramids by a third part. At the bottom of which Schacht I was not
discouraged to find my self so deep in the earth, for considering that I was
yet above three thousand miles from the Center, I thought my self but in a
Well. It is built on all sides with Firr-Trees, one laying upon another on four
sides from the bottom to the top, and after the same manner all these Mines are
kept open where they have not a Rock on all sides.

Many Veins of the Ore run to the North, and to the East; They work also
toward one, two, or three of the clock, as they speak; for the Miners direct
themselves underground by a Compass not of thirty two points (such as is used
at Sea) but by one of twenty four, which they divide as we do the hours of the
day into twice twelve. Of the Gold-Ore some is white, some black, some of it
red, and some yellow. That with black spots in white is esteemed the best, as
also the Ore which lies next to the black Veins. This Ore is not rich enough
to suffer any proof in small parcels, like that of other Mines, whereby to know
what proportion of Metal is contained in it* but they pound a very great
quantity thereof, and wash it in a little River which runs near the Town: The
whole River being divided and admitted into diverse cuts, runs over the Ore
continually, and so washes away the earthy parts from the Metallin, and from a
clear River above the Town, by its running through so many works, and over so
much pounded Ore, it becomes below the Town a dark yellow Stream, of the color
of the Earth of those Hills. Unless it be upon six days of the year; two at
Christmas, two at Easter, and two at Whitsuntide, when the River it self as
well as the Mine-men cease from working, and is permitted to flow clear
within its own Banks.

There have been pieces of pure or virgin Gold found in this Mine, some of
which I have seen in the Emperor's Treasury, and in the Elector of Saxony's
Repository, one piece as broad as the palm of my hand, and others less; and
upon a white Stone many pieces of pure Gold; but these are very rare.

The common yellow Earth of the Country near Chremnitz, especially of the Hills
toward the West, although it be not esteemed Ore, affords some Gold. And in
one place I saw a great part of an Hill dug away, which has been cast into
the works, washed and wrought in the same manner, as pounded Ore with
considerable profit.

Matthias Dollinger the chief Officer at Chremnitz for the Mine-work, has also
lately invented a Mill to pound the Ore finer than it was before; and by this
invention has obtained a considerable quantity of Gold out of that Ore which
otherwise would have yielded none; in his House I saw many sorts of Minerals,
and was very kindly entertained by him; and when I was at the bottom of the
Gold-Mine he sent me down a present of excellent Wine to drink the Emperor's
health.

Some passages in this Mine cut through the Rock and long disused, have grown
up again; and I observed the sides of some which had been formerly wide enough
to carry their Ore through, to approach each other; so as we passed with
difficulty; this happens most in moist places, the passages unite not from the
top to the bottom, but from one side to another.

They carry their Ore under ground from one place to another; or to the bottom
of the Pit whence it is drawn out, in a Box or Chest which they call a Hundt or
Dog; this runs upon four whels, it is higher behind than before, and has a
tongue of Iron at the bottom, which being fitted into a channel of wood framed
in the middle of the bottom of each passage, it can no ways deviate, but keeps
always in the middle; and by this means a little Boy will run full speed with
three or four hundred pound weight of Ore or Earth before him, wherever you
command him, without any light, through those dismal dark passages of the Mine:
and it was very new to me to hear the rattling they make in the Mine, and the
alteration of the sound as they are nearer or further from us; and to see them
come with that swiftness out of the Rocks, overturn their little Chariot,
where they are to leave their Ore, then turn again and enter those dark Caves
with such a force and swiftness.

Not much unlike this is another instrument they have to bring the Ore from the
mouth of the Mine, or from the Hills down to the Buchworke, where they pound it
and wash it; but instead of a tongue it has eight wheels or four rowlers and
four wheels, and the way is made with Firr in such manner and at such a
distance that the rowlers roll upon the wood of the Firr-trees. And these
rowlers and wheels are so contrived, that these Chests can never overturn nor
go out of the way, and a child draws them, and sometimes a dog serves the turn.
To one Buchworke alone, they carry every week three or four hundred of these
Chests full, and each Chest holds four hundred pound weight.

There were two very bad strong damps in this Mine when I was there, and diverse
others that had not the like force to suffocate in so small a time. One of
these Damps was in a Schacht Puteus or Pit, and the other in a Stall, or
right-on passage; no Lamps would burn in either of them, yet the Miners would
venture into them for some short space of time: and we let one man down into
that Damp which was in the Pit five or six times; but pulled him up again as
soon as ever we saw his Lamp go out; this place is most poisonous when the
water is high, the vapor then arising more strongly, the other Damp in the
Cuniculus they hope to remedy, by perflation, and making or digging another
passage into it.

I was informed that there had been twenty eight men killed at one time, by
Damps in four Cuniculi, seven in each; and in the sinking of Leopold's Pit,
they were much troubled with Damps, which they remedied in this manner.

They fixed to the side of the Schacht or Pit a Tube from the top to the
bottom; and that not proving sufficient they forced down a broad flat board
which covered or stopped the Pit, or couched very near the sides of it on all
sides, but where the Tube was: and so forced out all the Air in the Pit through
the Tube; which work they were forced often to repeat. And now they having
diverse other passages into it, the Air is good and sufficient, and I was drawn
up through it without the least trouble in breathing.

Altermans Fore-stall, a Cuniculus five hundred fathoms long, was burned in the
year 1642. by the carelessness of a boy wiping the snuff of a Lamp upon the
wood; and fifty men smothered in it; they were all taken out except one, who
was afterward found to be dissolved by the sharp waters of the Mine, nothing
escaping either of flesh or bones, but only some of his cloths.

There is Vitriol in this Mine, white, red, blue and green; and also Vitriolat
waters. There is a substance found, which sticks to the Gold-Ore of small
pointed parts like needles, of a purple color, and shining, the mother of
which is yellow like brimstone, it is called by them Antimony of Gold. There
are Crystals found here, and some tinctured yellow.

There is a Vitriol-Mine in these Hills nigh the Gold-Mine, about eighty
fathoms deep. The Earth or Ore whereof is reddish, and sometimes greenish. This
Earth is infused in water, and after three days the water is poured off, and
boiled seven days in a leaden Vessel, till it comes to a thick granulated
whitish substance, which is afterward reduced to a Calx-in an Oven, and serves
in the making of Aqua fortis, or the separating water used at Schemnitz.

Where they pound the Gold-Ore, they lay a foundation three yards deep of wood,
upon which they place the Ore, over which there are four and twenty Beams armed
at the bottom with Iron, which break and grind the Ore, it being covered all
the while with water. These Beams are moved by four Wheels, one Wheel to six
Beams, the water which comes out from the pounded Ore, is let into little Pits
or Chests commonly seven or eight one after another; and afterward into a
large Pit of almost half an Aker of ground, and then after settling let out.

The Gold-Ore in powder or pounded is called Slich, of which that is the
richest which is nearest to the Beams where it is first pounded. They work thus
day and night continually. The Candles which they make use of are of Firr or
some Resinous wood.

They take the Slich washed so long as perhaps in an hundred pound weight,
there may be half an ounce or an ounce of Gold and Silver, the greatest part
ordinarily Gold, two thirds generally, (for the Chremnitz Gold-Ore is seldom
without some mixture of Silver, and the best of the Schemnitz Silver-Ore yields
an eighth part of Gold in proportion to the Silver;) to this Slich they add
Limestone and Slacken, and melt them together in the melting Furnace.

This first melting produces a substance called Lech; this Lech they burn with
Charcoal to make it lighter, to open its body and render it porous, and then it
is called Roast.

To the Roast they add Sand as they see occasion, and melt it again in the
melting Furnace; then let it out into the Pan, and proceed as in the melting of
Silver.

They have diverse other ways to get the Gold out of the pounded Ore, and I
cannot omit to set down this one, in which they proceed without Lead.

They wash the pounded Ore often, and lay it in powder upon Cloths, and by the
gentle oblique descending of the water over it, and their continual stirring
it, the earthy, clayish, and lighter parts are washed away, while the heavier
and metalline remain in the Cloth: not much unlike to this proceeding is that
with Sheepskins and Wool, which they place either in the water which comes
from the works, or in rivulets which have their Heads hid in Hills and
Mountains rich in Gold; so that while the water and fluid parts pass through or
over them, the more solid, heavy and metalline are ensnared; and by this way
some have obtained the Golden Fleece. But to continue the manner of working
with cloths, they wash the cloths in which the Ore does stick in several Tubs,
and the water after some settling is poured off from its Sediment; which
Sediment is again washed and stirred up in several Vessels and Troughs, till at
length they sprinkle Quick silver upon it, and knead it well together for an
hour or two; and then washing it again in a wooden Vessel, after the separating
of much of it, which the Quicksilver touches not, by striking this Vessel
against their leg, they bring the Gold and Quicksilver together in an
Amalgama, to one corner of it. From this Amalgama they strain as much of the
Quicksilver as they can through course cloths first, and then through fine.
They put the Mass remaining upon a perforated Plate, which they set over a deep
Pan placed in the Earth; in the bottom of which Pan they also put Quicksilver:
This Pan they cover, and lute the cover well, and then make a Charcoal fire,
upon it, and drive down the Quicksilver yet remaining in the Gold to the rest
in the bottom of the Pan; and then taking out the Gold, they cast it into the
fire that it may still become purer.

After some few days having seen the most remarkable curiosities of Chremnitz,
I went to Newsol; passing those Hills which lie on the East Side of Chremnitz,
upon the top of one of which lies a vast Stone or Rock alone by it self, near
the way-side; these Hills afford wood for the Service of the Gold-Mine. Passing
on further we were not far from Lila, a Village, where they find Quicksilver;
and after we had traveled over the Quicksilver Hills, we came again to the
River Gran, upon which Newsol stands; there is a Bridge of wood to pass the
River at this Town, and an handsome building of Piles shoring cross the River to
stop the wood thrown into this River, ten miles higher, where the Country is
very full of wood: and by this Artifice without labor or charge, it is
conveyed to Newsol, to be used in the working of the Copper-Ore, and in the
burning, melting, casting, hammering of the Copper.

Newsol is an handsome Town, and has a large Piazza, at the upper end whereof
stands a fair Tower. The Castle also is worth the seeing, in which is the
Church covered over with Copper; within the Church there are many Figures of
carved Wood, and some Relics: but being in the possession of the Lutherans
they are not much regarded, though carefully preserved. As I also observed in
some Lutheran Churches in Germany, as at Nuremberg, and Magdeburg, where some
Relics had been left; which they have not parted with, but still keep as
rarities.

At this Town, and near unto it, are the greatest Copper-works in Hungary, the
body of the Copper being very strongly united to its Stone, Bed, or Ore, the
separation of it is effected with great labor and difficulty; for the
Copper-Ore taken out of the Mine is burned and melted fourteen times before
that it becomes fit for use; and first it is melted with a Stone which they
call Fluss-stein, and its own dross, and with Kis or a sort of Pyrites. It is
afterward carried to the Rost-hearth, where it is laid upon great stacks or
heaps of Billets, and those set on fire under it; by which means it is burned
into a substance called Roast, and this is repeated seven or eight times;
afterward it is melted again in the melting Furnace, and at two Furnaces more
at Mismills, and twice at the Hammer.

Here they also melt Kis which is brought hither from Jesina, which substance
melted is serviceable in the melting of Silver.

At Mismills not far from hence they get Silver out of Copper, which they
separate thus: They add Lead to the Copper when it is melted, and take out the
Metals melted together in Spoons or Iron Dishes. When it is cold they give it a
strong fire again as it lies upon cross Bars, until the Silver and Lead melts
and falls through. When the Copper has passed its last melting and is fit for
use, they cut it in pieces, with great Hammers which are sharp, to move every
one of which there is a Mill on purpose, which with great force lifts up the
Hammer: and to shape and form it into Vessels or Plates, they have other
Hammers, which are flat or round according as they intend to frame the Copper.

The Governor of these Works at Newsol was highly obliging, and besides the
giving us opportunity of seeing every thing we desired, he sent me a handsome
present of Wine and Fowls, and wrote a Letter to the Prefect of the
Copper-Mine at Herrn-grundt to show me every thing that was curious and
observable in that Mine.

Herrn-Grundt is a little Town seated very high between two Hills, upon a part
of Land of the same name, an Hungarian mile distant from Newsol. The Country
about was then all covered with Snow after we came to such a height, but in
the Valleys, and in our journey from Newsol hither we met with none; so that we
found the Air very piercing as we passed toward the entrance of the Mine in
Miners habits; which habit consists of a Linen Coat and Drawers, a stiff round
Cap, like the crown of a Hat, a leather Apron turned behind, and two pieces of
Leather tied to the Knees, to defend those parts against any sudden striking
against the Rocks, or the fall of Earth upon them. In the Mine we were warm
enough.

I went into this Mine through a Cuniculus called Tachstoln, and continued
diverse hours in the Mine, and visited many of the most remarkable places in it.
The sleep descents in this Mine are made by Ladders or Trees set upright, with
deep notches or stayers cut in them to stay the foot upon: They are not
troubled with water, the Mine lying high in the Hill, so that the water may
drain away; but they are molested with dust, which is choking and fretting,
and also with pernicious damps.

In one place of the Mine they showed me the manner how they had lately cured a
very bad Damp by a great pair of Bellows, which were blown continually for many
days; and in diverse other places the Damps were so strong as to hinder the
Workmen very much in their labor, and these Damps are not only met with in
places where the Earth is full of Clay or the like substances, but also where
it is rocky, and one place they showed me where there had been a pernicious
Damp, and yet the Rock so hard, that it could not be broken by their
Instruments; but the descent was all made by the means of Gunpowder ramm'd
into long holes in the Rock, and so blown up.

Much of this Mine lies in the Rocks where they have no need of Wood-work to
keep it open, and some passages lie between the Rock and the Earth, so that
they are kept open upon one side by Firr-Trees, and on the other side with
Stone, the passages also are not so regular as at Chremnitz, for many here are
neither horizontal, nor near to a perpendicular, but moderately inclining up
and down, and there are many large Cavities within. In one place where we
descended obliquely to go to a remarkable part of the Mine, we found that the
Earth had fallen in and stopped up the passage, but one of our Guides unwilling
to go about, and the Earth being yet loose, he made a Borough into it and
dug his way through, although the Earth continually fell upon him and
covered him; and got at length through and tumbled down amongst the Workmen
below, with a great quantity of Earth after him; with which they so speedily
laded their Barrows and Hundts, of which I spoke before, and the Boys ran away
with them with such swiftness, that in a short time he made the passage clear
again up to the place where he had left us.

The Veins of this Mine are very large, many of them, such as are termed
cumulatoe, and the Ore is very rich, in an hundred pounds of Ore they
ordinarily find twenty pounds of Copper, sometimes thirty, forty, half Copper,
and even to sixty in the hundred. Much of the Ore is joined so fast to the
Rock, that it is separated with great difficulty, and in many places the Ore and
the Rock are one continued Body or Stone, only with this difference that one
part of the Rock will yield Copper, the other none; which is known and
distinguished by the color, and easily at first sight, the Copper-Ore being
for the most part, especially the best of it, either yellow or black: The
yellow is pure Copper-Ore, the black contains also a proportion of Silver.

There are diverse sorts of Vitriol found in this Mine, white, green, blue, and
a red clear transparent. There is also a green Earth or Sediment of a green
Water, called Berg-Grun, used by the Painters; there are likewise Stones found
of a beautiful green and blue color, and one sort upon which Turcoises have
been found, and therefore called the Mother of the Turcois.

There are also two Springs of a Vitriolat Water which turn Iron into Copper,
called the old and the new Ziment; these Springs lie very deep in the Mine, and
the Iron is ordinarily left in the water fourteen days. These Waters are very
profitable, seeing that the worst sort of Iron, and useless old Iron is hereby
turned into the purest sort of Copper, which has this commendation above other
Copper to be more ductile, malleable, and easily melted; and I have melted it
without the addition of any other substance, without difficulty. Whilst the Ore
of Copper must run through many Fires and Furnaces to be brought to any thing.
Of this sort of Copper I took a good quantity out of the old Ziment, and I took
also a piece of Copper of the Figure of a Heart which had been laid in it
eleven or twelve days before; having the same Figure, but as perfectly Iron
then, as it is at this day Copper. Some will not have this to be a
Transmutation of one Metal into another, but that this Water of the Ziment
being saturated with a Vitriolum Veneris, and meeting with such a body so ready
to receive it as Mars, it deposes Venus, who immediately insinuates her self so
far into Mars, that she does dividere and imperare, and at last she substitutes
her own body, and precipitates that of Mars.

In the changing of Iron into Copper in these Springs, many parts are indeed
often separated, and lie at the bottom in powder, but these parts are not Iron
but Copper; and I have taken of this powder out of the Spring, and melted it
into excellent Copper; so that if the Iron be not changed, I know not what
becomes of it. This Operation which nature so curiously performs in the Mine, I
have since seen attempted to be imitated by Art; and in my judgment
successfully.

After that I had seen many of the most remarkable places in the Mine, I
returned to the Verwalter of Herrn-Grundt his House, and put my clothes on
again in the Stove: where we were afterward very kindly entertained. He showed
me a Map of that Mine wherein we had spent most part of that day; and the
delineations of all those places we had been at, with a Scale to measure the
lengths and distances of all Passages and Places in the Mine; and it was very
delightful to see so large a Draught or Picture of so fair a Subterraneous
City: nor can I term it less, in which there is more building than in many. The
extent surpasses most, and the number of the Inhabitants are considerable,
their Order admirable, their Watches exact, their Rest undisturbed, grateful
after Labor and refreshing, they reposing themselves eight hours in the hollow
of a Rock after the same time spent in labor; besides this Map, he showed me
many curious Minerals taken out of that Mine, and by heating the Copper-Ore,
and casting it into water, made the water like some natural Baths which arise
near these Hills. And upon my commending the Ziment water and its strange
Operation upon Iron, he presented me with diverse fair pieces, and a chain of
Copper transmuted in those Springs. They make also very handsome Cups and
Vessels out of this sort of Copper, and we drank out of one of them which was
gilded over, and had a rich piece of Silver-Ore fastened in the middle of it;
and this Inscription graved on the outside: Eisen ware ich, Kupser bin ich
Silber trag ich, Goldt bedeckt mich. i. c.
Copper I am, but Iron was of old,
Silver I carry, covered am with Gold,


The profit which the Emperor makes by his Mines, is reckoned to amount to an
hundred and twenty Thousand pounds sterling yearly. But when they come to deal
with deeper and richer veins of Ore, and that there shall be by degrees more of
these Vitriolate Copper springs discovered, this revenue will then be
increased. And it is more than probable that time will bring more of them to
light; for at Zolnock, and other places near the Carpathian Hills there are
diverse of the same springs already made use of. But if furthermore, considering
the nobleness of these springs, containing in them the true mature Salt of
Venus, some Persons hereafter shall be so fortunate, as moreover to discover
and experimentally improve the use of Springs and Fountains saturated with a
Vitriolum Lunoe, and learn perfectly how to adapt Metalline Bodies to the
adaequate energy, and activity of such waters; The improvement by transmutation
as it is at present more than ten to one, so it will in those days amount to
above a hundred to one, and the use of these Mines and Metalline labors may
hereby effectually prove in times to come one of the Richest Jewels in the
Imperial Crown.

From Herrn-Grundt we came to Stubn, a Town three Hungarian miles distant from
Newsol, and two from Chremnitz; where near unto a Rivolet there are diverse hot
Baths of great esteem, and much frequented; the water whereof is very clear and
sinells of Sulphur, the Sediment green; it colors the wood over it green and
black, but does not change the color of Metals so soon as most others; I left
money in it a whole night, which was yet but faintly colored. The Springs
arise underneath, and pass through the holes in the plancher of the Baths.

The heat of these is answerable to that of the Kings-Bath in England; there
are seven in number: The first is the Noblemans Bath, the second the
Gentleman's, the third the Country-mans, the fourth the Country-womans, the
fifth the Beggars Bath, the sixth for such as are infected with the Lues
Venerea, the seventh the Bath of the Gypsies. These Baths are in a Plain
encompassed on all sides with Hills, the nighest unto them are toward the
East; and it is the same ridge of Hills which on the other side are so rich in
Metals. I bathed in one of these and met good company that I was detained too
long, and received some inconvenience from the heat of the Bath, nor could I
commend their custom of eating, drinking, and sleeping much while they bathed.

From Stub'n Bad we went to Boinitz, crossing the River Nitra and leaving
Privitz a large Town on the left hand. At Boinitz there are also five natural
Baths of a moderate gentle heat delightful to bath in, being much beautified by
Count Palfi Palatine of Hungary, and all of them covered under one large roof.
The first is the Noblemans Bath built of Stone, descended into on all sides by
Stone stairs; the other four are of wood, very handsomely and well built, where
it was a pleasure to us to see the Boys and Girls dive so finely for any thing
that we cast in. About this part of the Country there grows very much Saffron.

From Boinitz we went to Westonitz, two Hungarian miles, and from Westonitz the
next day, we arrived at Trenschin, which they count four Hungarian miles; but
such long ones they are, that we were traveling from before Sunrising till
eight of the Clock at night, before we could come to our journeys end.

Trenschin is a handsome Town seated upon the River Waag, over which there is a
Bridge of wood; the Piazza is fair, the Jesuits Church handsome, the Castle
seated very high, easily discernable at twenty English miles distance, and
belonged to the Graff Jellhasey. There are two warm Baths a mile from the Town,
and a great number of Springs of Mineral waters in the Country about. Here we
met with Count Rothall going from the Emperor to treat with Abaffi Prince of
Transylvania his Commissioners at Eperies, where I engaged some of his
Attendants to make enquiry into the Salt-Mines of that place, or any other,
according to the instructions I left with them, and afterward I received an
Account to this effect.

Half an hours going from the City of Eperies in upper Hungary, there is a
Salt-Mine of great note from the first place of descent unto the bottom, it is
about one hundred and fourscore fathoms deep. Into this the Miners descend
first by Ropes, and at last by Ladders unto the lower parts. The Mine is for
the most part in an Earthy, and not a Rocky ground.

The Veins of Salt are large, and there are pieces to be found of ten thousand
pound weight: they commonly hew out the Salt into long square pieces of two
foot in length, and one in thickness, and for use it is broken and grinded
between two Grind stones.

The Mine is cold and moist, but the Salt being a Stone salt, is not easily
dissolved, or at least in any great quantity by dampness or moisture; yet much
of the water of the Mine is impregnated with salt, in such sort that being
drawn out in large buckets, and afterward boiled up, it affords a blackish
Salt, which they give to their Cattle in that Country.

The color of the ordinary Stone-salt of this Mine is not very white, but
somewhat gray: yet being broken and grinded to powder, it becomes as white as
if it were refined, and this Salt consists of pointed parts or fossets. Another
sort of Salt there is also, which consists of Squares and Tables; and a third
to be found of somewhat stirious or long shoots.

Nor is all the Salt of this Mine of one color, but of diverse; that which is
found grossly mixed with the Earth receives some color from it; and even that
which is most pure and resembles Crystal, does often receive tinctures of
several colors; in the middle of a Crystalsalt with long shoots, I have seen a
delicate blue; and at Count Rothall his House at Vienna, I saw a large piece of
a fair transparent yellow. There are also some pieces so clear and hard, that
they carve them into diverse Figures, as if they were Crystal it self. Of all
these sorts mentioned I also obtained some pieces, and brought them with me
into England.

But it is time to conclude this long discourse of Mines and Minerals, which
may seem of little concern unto many; yet for the satisfaction of the more
curious in so considerable a piece of Naturals, in places little known unto us;
and withal, undescribed by any English Pen that I know; I would not omit this
particular account thereof.

I continued my journey near to the River Waag, and came to Nove Mnesto, and
from thence the next day to Tirnaw, a City seated upon a Plain, and to be seen
at a great distance; it has almost recovered it self out of the Ashes that it
was reduced into six years before: the day following we got to the Danube
again, and lodged that night at Presburg, whereof I have spoken elsewhere; and
then passing the Danube in two Ferry-boats, we traveled by Homburg Tower, by
Haimberg Hill, by the Town of Haimberg, by Regelsbrun, Vischet and Swechet, and
came to Vienna.

A great part of these Countries of upper Hungaria, through which I traveled,
had a different face from that of Austria, and from what they had formerly
been. For some places had been burnt or plundered by the Tartars and Turks in
the late war, and diverse pay contribution to them, so that many live warily and
meanly to become less noted: And in diverse places their Houses are bare and
unfurnished; and it is well if they have any other Bed than one for the man of
the House and his Wife. Even in parts of the Country better provided, and under
the Emperor, a great part of the people being of the Lutheran, or the reformed
Religion, are under such hard measure and fears that they live in little
content, and being of a stout and persevering temper, they may in time become
so desperate, that if the Turk should break powerfully in, it is probable they
would not fight so heartily against him as in times past. There are many
Calvinists, many Lutherans. They were formerly almost all Lutherans in the
Mine-Towns, but now the Officers are of the Roman Church. At Schemnitz a very
fair Church was lately taken from the Lutherans; and they told me that at
Boinitz, and the Country about, Count Palfi caused all his Lutheran Tenants to
change, or at least to declare the change of their Religion, or else to part
with their Houses and Lands: There are also many Anabaptists up and down, more
observed for their neat working in Mother of Pearl than any thing else. The
Unitarii live in the farther parts of upper Hungary toward Transylvania, and
have the commendation to speak generally Latin, even the Hungarian Catholics
are much dissatisfied at the intrusion of the Germans, and their encroaching
upon them, they look jealously upon the Court at Vienna, think themselves not
regarded according to their merits or ability of their Services, nor the
Hungarian Privileges well observed, so that they can scarce dissemble their
Discontents, which may in time prove of very bad consequence.

A JOURNEY FROM VIENNA INTO STYRIA, CARINTHIA, CARNIOLA, FRIULI;
Unto the strange Lake of Zirchnitz, to the Quicksilver Mines at Idria, and to
other remarkable places in the Alps.
WHILE I remained at Vienna, I took the pains to see diverse places not far
distant from it, as Neugebau, Kalenberg, Closter, Newberg, Itzing, Baden,
Laxamburg, Newsidler-See, with others; and afterward made a journey unto
Venice, not by the Stage-Coaches which keep one constant road, but chose rather
to perform it by Horse whereby I might stay in any place, or go out of the road
at pleasure.

The first considerable place we saw was Baden, about four German miles from
Vienna, a pretty walled Town seated near a part of Mount Cetius, which divided
Noricum from Pannonia; a Rivolet named Swechet passes by it, which afterward
enlarges and runs into the Danube about a German mile from Vienna, there are
three Churches, that of the Augustiners, of our Lady, and S. Stephen; but this
place is most remarkable for its Baths which are much frequented from Vienna
and these parts. The Springs being numerous and affording nine convenient
Baths, two within the Town, five without the Wall, and two beyond a Rivolet
called Swechet.

The Dukes-Bath is the largest, about twenty foot square, in the middle of a
House of the same Figure, built over it. The vapor passes through a tunnel of
Wood, at the top: and the Water is conveyed into the bottom of the Bath, at one
corner through wooden pipes and Trees, under the Town-wall, from the Spring
head, which rises at a little distance Westward. The Springs of the rest of the
Baths rise under them, and let in through holes of the Plancher, for all the
Baths are Wainscoted, the Seats, Sides, and Bottom being made of Firr. The
Water for the most part is clear and transparent, yet somewhat bluish, and
makes the Skin appear pale in it, in the same manner as the Smoke of Brimstone,
it colors Metals (except Gold, the color of which it also heightens)
turning them black in a few minutes. The Coin of this Country, which is mixed
of Copper and Silver, (having 7/15 of Silver, and 8/15 of Copper) is in a
minutes time turned from a white into a dark yellow, and soon after becomes
black. It gives a fine green color to the Moss and Plants which it washes, and
leaves often a scum upon them of a purple, mixed with white As it runs from the
Springhead, it somewhat resembles the Sulphur River in the way from Tivoli to
Rome, but is not so strange or stinking nor does it incrustate its banks.

The Spring head is also considerable, in regard that it rises under a rocky
Hill, at some distance from the entrance, and I passed to it about the length
of forty yards, through an Arched passage cut in the Rock, which is also a
natural stove, (as that of Tritola and Baiae*) made by the hot Bath water
running under it, most part of the top of this Cave is incrustated with a white
substance which toward the mouth becomes harder and stony. I caused some of
the Pipes through which the Bath water runs to be opened, and from the upper
part of the Pipe. I took some quantity of the Sulphur in powder, it being very
like flowers of Brimstone, this being as it were sublimed from the water and
not deposed, it being found in the upper part of the Pipe, oleum Sulphuris per
campanum dropped into this water, is received into it quietly, Oleum Tartari
per deliquium causes an ebullition as in the making of Tartarum Vitriolatum.

The Second Bath within the Wall is our Lady's Bath, about twelve foot broad
and twenty four foot long. One end of this is under a Church of the same name.
This is fuller of Sulphur than the rest, and more blew, and leaves a yellow
flower upon the boards, as the others do a white.

The Third is the New Bath, without the Town near the Gate, when I saw it, it
was full of People who were making merry and singing.

The Fourth is the Jews Bath, this has a partition in the middle, to separate
the Men from the Women.

The Fifth is St. John's Bath of a triangular Figure.

The Sixth is the Beggars Bath, always shallow so as they lie down in it.

The Seventh is the Bath of the holy Cross, about two sathoms square, chiefly
for the Clergy.

The Eighth is St. Peter's Bath, this is greener than the rest.

The Ninth is the Sower-Bath, this is set about with stone Balastres, and
covered with a handsome Cupola and a Lanthorn, the Water is very clear, in the
stream of this Bath I have often colored Money black without touching the
Water; yet the Water it self being once cold changes not the color of Metals,
although they be boiled in it.

The hottest of these Baths have not the heat of the Queens Bath at Bathe in
England. They use no Guides as with us, but direct themselves with a short
turned Staff.

Here we met with very good Company, and all kind of accommodation at no dear
rate. A Captain of the Emperor's whom I had accompanied to these Baths as a
token of his love gave me a Gempskugel which is said to be an excrescence upon
the Liver of a wild Goat of Tyrol, and highly cried up in Germany for a signal
remedy against the diseases of the Liver, malignant Fevers and the Plague, and
many are so obstinately credulous as to think that whosoever takes it becomes
invulnerable for twenty four hours after.

Having bathed in the Baths, and taken a draught of the Town, I left Baden, and
the next considerable place was Newstad, one of the chiefest Cities in Austria;
it is of a square Figure with a Piazza in the middle of it, two sides whereof
are arched and supported with Pillars: there are four Gates, three whereof are
to be seen from the Piazza; St. Jacobs is the chiefest Church, which has two
Steeples in the Front. The Emperor has a Palace here of a square Building with
four Towers, which are to be seen a great way off, as is also most part of the
Town, as lying in a Marish Ground, and in a plain Country; it is encompassed
with a Ditch and two Walls, the one very low, the other seems not strong; yet
as they told me, at one time the Turk could not take it, but left it upon
condition that they might take something out of the Town; which being granted,
they took the Pronger or Whipping-Post, and carried it unto Constantinople; and
at another time in the Year 1529. Solomon the Magnificent stormed it seven
times in one day, and was every time repulsed. At this place Count Peter Serini
and Frangipani were beheaded, as being chief Contrivers in the Hungarian Revolt.

From hence through the Plains we came to Mount Simeren passing by Newkirckel,
where there is a Chapel with a little red Pinnacle which they say was built by
an English King; I suppose by King Richard the first, who was kept Prisoner in
Austria in his return from the Holy Land, whose Ransom built the old Walls of
Vienna. Mount Simeren is a part of Mount Cetius upon the top whereof lies an
heap of Stones which make the boundary between Austria and Styria; the ascent
of the Hill is steep and stony; so that sometimes it takes twenty four Horses
or Oxen to draw up a Cart or Coach.

We lodged at Schotwien or Schadtwien, a strange Town seated between Rocks upon
the passage of the Hills, the Houses upon the sides of the Rocks are
inaccessible but from the Top of the Hills, and looking over the Plains, serve
for Watch-Towers; this is a close strong place, and called by some Claustra
Austriae; having the Mountains on each hand, and shut up with a Gate at each
end; a small current coming down from the Hills, is admitted into the Town
under the Wall, which put me in mind of the Picture of the Wall to the Kingdom
of China, wherein is expressed the manner of the Rivers running into China, the
Wall being still continued over them. From hence I came to Mehrzuschlag, the
place where they beat out the Iron into Bars; so to Keimburg passing by a swist
small River named Murtz, then traveled by a Castle belonging to the Family of
Stubnberg, which is esteemed one of the Ancientest in Germany, and came to
Prug, seated upon the River Mur or Muer, a swift large River, but not
navigable, although after it has passed by Gratz and Rakenburg it enlarges.
Prug or Muripons is not ill built considering the Country, and has a fair
Piazza. Another Town of this name I had seen before seated upon the River
Leyta, and for distinction called Prug upon the Leyta, so forward by Luheim
where the Staple of Iron is. I came to Knitelfeldt and Judenburg still nigh to
the River Mur, the next day to Hundtsmark and Newmark, then to Freisach, which
some think to have been Virunum, others Vacorium, in sight of Altenhofn, the
Castle of Itrowitz, and the Castle of Tottenbrun, which belongs to the
Archbishop of Saltzburg.

Then to St. Veit or St. Faith, formerly the chief City of Carinthia, seated
upon the Confluence of the River Glan and Wunich, it is walled about, has six
Churches in it, a Piazza also, and in the same a remarkable Fountain with a
Laver or Basin of white Marble made out of one Stone, which was five of my
fathoms in circumference: this noble Antiquity was brought from Saal or
Zolfeldt, a place not far off, and abounding with Roman Antiquities.

^



In sight of Vitopolis or St. Veit, there are four remarkable Hills, as the
Hill of St. Veit, St. Vlrick, St. Laurence, and St. Helena, with a Chapel upon
each of them, to all these upon one day in the year the Inhabitants go in
devotion on foot, although to perform the same they must travel above thirty
English miles.

We stayed at St. Veit, and had the divertisement of a Latin Comedy at the
Franciscan Convent, it was in May when the higher Hills were covered with snow,
but the lower were all green, full of Firr and Larch-trees, it thundered and
lightened very much, and as soon as it began they rung their Bells. Many here
have great throats, some as big as their heads, many are blind, diverse dumb and
fools withal; without the Town there is an Hospital for such as have lost their
voice, their wits, or are otherwise oppressed by their great throats, many of
them cover their throats, which otherwise are very ill complexioned in cold
weather. Men and Women have them, the better sort of People, which live well,
drink wine and good beer, are less subject to them. I saw bigger throats in
these parts, than any I had observed in the Alpine parts of Savoy.

St. Veit, whose name this place bears, was a zealous Christian who labored
much in the Conversion of these parts, and was persecuted under Dioclesian.
Many Churches and Towns do carry his name in other parts of Europe, and the
People have an opinion of St. Veit in the curing of that dacing disease called
Chorea Sancti Viti.

From hence we traveled to Saal, or Solua, anciently a Roman Colony, and set
down in the Map of Wolfgangus Lazius by the name of Colonia Soluensis; a Field
near unto it, is called Ager Soluensis or Zolfeldt, a place very fruitful in
Antiquities, many whereof have been carried into other parts: in this Field I
saw that much spoken of* Antiquity of the Kings Chair; it is made of Stone set
together in the form of two Elbow-Chairs turned back to back. Upon three of the
Stones there are Inscriptions, but surely more ancient than the Chair. At the
installing of the Duke of Carinthia, whether he be King, Prince, or Emperor;
either he himself or his Substitute sits in one part of the Chair toward the
East, and a Baur or Countryman in the other part of the Chair toward the West;
and among other Ceremonies, the Countryman rises up and presents the Duke with
a fat and lean Ox; the Duke is obliged to take the lean and return the fat one,
and afterward to receive a gentle box on the ear from the Countryman, and so
after this manner is installed.

The Church of Saal is very ancient, and has escaped the fury of the Barbarous
Nations; herein I saw the Tomb of Modestus a Companion of S. Veit, it is a
plain Monument, and they have a Tradition here, that the Tomb has removed it
self about a yard nearer unto the Altar than where it was first placed. On the
Church Walls are many old Roman Antiquities of good Basso relievo, which were
first taken out of Zolfeldt; those which I chieflly observed were these. A
Chariot with two Horses. A Chariot and a man in it. A Wolf licking of fruit
fallen from a Tree. Hector fastened unto the Chariot of Achilles as he was drawn
about Troy. Four fair Heads unto the middle. Two Wolves, each holding a Horn
and a Cup between them, out of which shoots a Vine with Leaves and Grapes, this
is over the Porch. Within the Porch is a Cupid holding of a bunch of Grapes.
Romulus and Remus sucking of a Wolf. Two figures over the Crucisix by S
Christopher, with some others, all which Zolfeldt afforded; where I also saw
many Inscriptions, one upon a stone on the South Side of the Church was this,
HERCVLI. E. also diverse Roman Coins of Copper and Silver found in these parts,
and I brought away a Medal of Trajan's in Gold.

From thence we came to Clagenfurt or Claudia of old, which is at present the
chief Town in Carinthia, a fair four square Town enclosed with an handsome Wall;
the Rampart is very broad; at each corner there is a Bastion, and one in the
middle of each Curtain; the Streets are strait and uniform as well as the
Works; there is also a very fair Piazza in the middle. For the beauty of this
place they are beholden to the Industrious Lutherans while they held this
Country: The Piazza is adorned with a Column of Marble, and a Statue of the
Virgin upon it, also with a Statue of the Emperor, but above all with a noble
Fountain in the middle, over which is a large prodigious Dragon made out of one
Stone, Hercules with a Club standing before it, which the people think to be
the Statue of a Baur which killed this Dragon in these parts. This was also
brought from the above mentioned Field of Saal. There are three noble Massy
Fountains observable in these hilly parts, these two of St. Veit and
Clagenfurt, and another of white Marble at Saltzburg.

Among the odd Customs of Carinthia there is an old one delivered By Aenaeas
Sylvius.
of this place, that if a man were vehemently suspected of theft, they hanged
him, and three days after judged of the Fact; if he were found guilty they let
his body hang till it was corrupted, if otherwise, they took down the body,
buried it upon the public account, and said prayers for his soul. Clagenfurt
was then full of Soldiers, where I had the honor to see Count Lesley the
chief Commander, Baron la Hay, and my Lord Peasly who had a Company in the
Town, whose singular civilities and favors I cannot sufficiently acknowledge,
they obliged me to be at their Table while I stayed, and one day my Lord Lesley
carried me in his Barge through a handsome straight cut into the Werd-Sea or
Lake of Clagenfurt to a house of pleasure called Loretto, finely seated, and
which has a Chapel in it, built after the same manner with that of Loretto in
Italy, which having formerly seen, I was the better able to confirm the exact
imitation of it. Count Lesley is related to Montecuculi, and so was pleased to
give me Letters to Vienna, and to other parts: The honor I had to know the
right honorable the Earl of Norwich, Earl Marshal of England, did much
increase my kind reception among them, whose worthy name I found not only known
in the Dominions of the Empire, but afterward also in Turkey.

Leaving Clagenfurt, I continued my Journey Southward, and after a German mile
and half crossed the River Dravus where I found it already a large swift River,
passing over two long Bridges of Wood, and an Island in the middle; and after
an hour or two I began to enter between the Hills at a place called the Hammer,
where the Iron is beaten out, and proceeded in order to my passage over Mount
Luibel. The Fountain in the Piazza of Glaa^nfurt^ and Chief City of Carinthia.
page* (...)

In a short time entering into as odd a desert of Rocks as may be seen, where
th^re is a great Cascata or fall of waters, and the water has so worn the
Rocks that all seems to be artificial: the way up is made with Walls, turning
backward and forward with great pains, and greater Art than I could have
expected in this Country. And in this manner we went on winding backward and
forward till we reached the highest passage of the great Mountain Luibol, which
is part a of the Carnick Alps, dividing Carinthia and Carniola, and one of the
most remarkable Hills I ever saw; for having passed up as high as the steep
Rocks and Peaks would permit, we turned sidewise by a made way which led us
into a hole or passage cut quite through the Mountain, imitating the samed
Grotto of the Hill Pansilipo by Naples: there is a Roof of Wood-work in the
middle, which is continued unto the Carniolian side; the Roof of this passage
is high, the lenghth of it is 156 yards, and it is four yards broad.

The manner of passing through this Hill was surprising unto me, having never
read nor heard hereof before, I thought it might be some work of the old
Romans, but I was afterward informed that it was much later, and that if
former time there was no passage into Carniola this way, but they went about by
Villach. At first sight of this hole when I was far below it, I conjectured it
might be the ha^itation or Chapel of some Hermit, but could not imagine how he
should come unto it, till at last by the winding and turning of the way up the
Hill, I did not only pass through it my self, but met with diverse Passengers
who came out of Carniola, and it is so well contrived, that the Country
carriages and Carts pass through it every day.

In ascending this Hill we had bad weather, rain and fierce hail, and and the
snow laid still by the way-side; and being so high at the time of a strom, I
had an opportunity to see the Clouds descend, and after it was past to ascend
again so high, as to got over part of the Mountain, and a stream of them passed
through the hole out of Carniola into Carinthia, oppositely unto us who passed
out of Carinthia into Carniola, or out of Karnten into Craen.

This noble passage being already so well contrived, and in the Country of a
laborious and industrious people, is like to be continued, who remove the snow
with great pains in the Winter, and keep the way passable, and as we
continually ascended till we came to this Grotto, so when we were once got
through it we always descended, and came first to S. Anna, two English miles
downward, then to Newstuttel a German mile and half further still descending,
and proceeded forward till we came to Crainburg, which is thought to have been
formerly Carnodunum, a good Town seated upon the River Savus, from whence
through a fair Plain four German miles long, we came to Labach or Lubiana the
chief City of Carniola; the River Labach runs through it, which falls
afterward into the Savus. It is an handsome City with a Castle seated upon an
Hill which over-looks two large Valleys to the North and South, and has a fair
Prospect of many Hills and Castles, but being commanded but another Hill not
far from it, it is neglected, although we find that it has endured a strong
Siege, for while the Emperor Frederick was receiving the Crown at Aken, his
Brother Albertus and Count Vlrick took the advantage to besiege it, but it made
so good resistance that the Emperor had time to raise the Siege and destroy the
Army. At Labach I happily met with Mr. Tosh a Scotch Apothecary in that Town,
who was very civil unto me, informing me of the places about, and showing me
many Curiosities, and the several Minerals of those parts.

This place is conceived to be old Nauportus famous for the landing of the
Argonautes, who setting forth from Argos Pelasgicum in Thessaly sailed unto
Colchos on the East side of the Euxine Sea, but being pursued by the King of
Colchos his Vessels dispatched after them, they declined returning by the
Hellespont, but bearing Northward entered the mouth of Ister or Danubius, and
passed up the River till they came to the concurrence of the Danubius and the
Savus, and taking up the Savus they came to the River Labach, and went up that
River landing about this place anciently called Nauportus, and then traveled
to the Adriatic Sea and returned unto Greece. So that in my travels I had been
near their setting out in Thessaly, and at the place of their landing in
Carniola.

From hence we traveled toward the Zirchnitzer-See, or famous strange Lake of
Zirchnitz having the Marshes on our right, hand, and the Hills on our left till
we came to Brounitza, and then passing over them we came to Zirchnitz, a Town
of about three hundred Houses, which gives the name unto the Lake, here I
applied my self unto Andreas Wifer the Richter or Judge of the Town who
afforded me directions and accommodations for the viewing of the Lake; and went
down to Seedorff, a Village half a mile nearer the Lake, and then to
Niderdorff, where I took Boat and spent some time upon the Lake.

This Lake is about two German miles long, and one broad, encompassed with
Hills at some distance, and upon the South Side lies a Forest part of
Birnbaumer Forest, which extends a great way, wherein are many Dear, wild
Boars, Foxes, Wolves and Bears.

Every year in some part of the Month of June, the water of this Lake descends
under ground through many great holes at the bottoms; and in the Month of
September returns again by the same holes; and with a speedy ascent, springing
and mounting up to the height of a Pike, and soon covering that tract of
ground again. When the water is underground, the Earth makes a speedy
production of of Grass yielding food for Cattle in the Winter, and at the same
time, Hares, Deer and Boars resort to this place out of the Country, and the
forementioned Forest, and are often taken by the people.

The Lake affords plenty of Fish, but they fish but by permission, for the
Prince of Eckenberg is Lord thereof, and a good part of the Country about, but
upon the going away of the water, all have liberty to take Fish, which they do
by standing in the water by the holes, and so intercepting their passage take
great plenty of them, which otherwise would follow the water underground, and
not returns again until September. I could not hear that any unknown Fishes
were brought up by the water, but those which come up are of the same kind with
those which went down, which are a kind of Carp, Tench, Eels, and such as are
common in other Lakes; and they are rather gainers than Loosers hereby, when
they come up, for the Fish having spawned before, the fry that goes down has
had about three months growth under ground when they are brought up again.

The Ground under the Lake is very unequal, and the water not near of the same
depth, but in some places four foot, and then suddenly again twenty yards deep:
and because the Fish frequent the Valleys or deeper places, more than the Hills
or eminent parts, the Fishermen who know the place wet and dry, have given unto
seven of these Valleys peculiar names, which in the Sclavonian, the Language of
that Country, are these,

Vodanas. Reshetu. Sitarza. Ribishkiama* Naknisha. Levishe. Kottel.
I passed over the five first mentioned Valleys, and went to a noted Stone
called the Fishers Stone, by the appearance whereof they can conjecture how
soon the water will descend, and by an Hill, which when the water is high
becomes a pleasant Island, and then returned.

They can give no account that this Lake has failed any year to descend and
arise again, or have any tradition how long this property of the Lake has been
observed. Some Lakes have been made by Earthquakes, but it is more probable
that this has been from all Antiquity, and according to the best conjectures,
this is the Lugea Palus of Strabo, and therefore more strange that the Ancients
are silent in this remarkable account.

The nearest Sea unto this Lake is the Sinus Tergestinus, and Sinus Flanaticus,
the Gulf of Trieste, and the Gulf of Quevero. And not many miles from hence are
the Heads of diverse considerable Rivers, as that of Labach, the Corcoras or
Gurk, the Colapis or Culp, which run into the Savus. The Vipao or amnis frigdus
which runs into Lysonso by Goritia, and diverse more, but whither these Rivers
arise where the Lake falls, I could not learn.

The Ground not far from this Lake is very hollow and full of Caverns, and I
observed many Caverns and deep holes in other parts of Carniola somewhat like
unto Elden hole in Darbyshire, and I was informed by the most considerable
persons at Zirchnitz that the Prince of Eckenberg had the curiosity to go into
one of them, and came out again upon the side of an Hill.

I was upon consideration whether I should go from hence unto Tergestum now
Trieste, a Port-Town of the Emperor's in the Adriatick-Sea, and then by Ship to
Venice, but having been in many Mines before I had a desire also to see the
famous Quick silver Mine at Idria in the County of Goritia; and parting from
Zirchnitz I passed by Lovecq, and traveled over Mountainous parts till I came
to Idria, which is encompassed with Hills on all sides, and a River of the same
name runs by it, which although Leandro Alberti terms superbissimo fiume
d'Idria, yet I found it small and shallow at the time when I was there, upon
plentiful rains howsoever it proves sufficient to convey down the Firrtrees,
and other wood required in the building of the Mines, and also for fuel
necessary in the service of them; and to this end there is an handsome work of
Piles made slopeing a-thwart the River, (after the same manner as I observed at
Newsol in upper Hungary cross the River Gran) to stop the Trees which are cut
down and cast into the River above this place.

What is chiefly considerable in this Town are the Quicksilver Mines, very
well known to the neighboring parts, and exceeding useful to many at greater
distance.

The entrance into these Mines is not high or upon an Hill, but in the Town it
self, whereby they are somewhat the more troubled with water, against which
they are provided with many excellent Engines and Devices, as at other deep
Mines; the deepest part of the Mine from the entrance is between one hundred
and twenty, and one hundred and thirty fathoms.

Of the Quicksilver of this Mine they have two sorts, the one called Jungfraw,
that is virgin Quicksilver, the other plain Quicksilver, virgin Mercury they
call that which discovers it self without the help of fire, and is either
plainly to be seen in the Earth or Ore, or falls down in little drops in the
Mine, and sometimes streams out in good quantity; as about seven years ago it
ran out of the Earth at first in a stream as small as a thread, and afterward
as big as a Pack-thred, but ceased in three or four days.

That also is accounted virgin Quicksilver, which having no need to pass the
fire, is separated by water first in a Sieve, and afterward in a long Trough,
having very small holes at one end, so that there is in a manner two sorts of
Virgin Mercury; the one running out and discovering it self without labor, the
other requiring some way of extraction and separation, though not so high an
one as by fire.

Plain Quicksilver they name that which is not at first perceived by the eye,
or falls from the Ore, but is forced out by fire, and this they obtain out of
the Ore, or out of the natural Cinnabar of Mercury which they dig out of this
Mine. The Ore is of a dark color mixed with red, but the best is a hard Stone
which they commit not presently to the fire, but powder it grossly and work it
by the sieve, that so if any Virgin Quicksilver be found in it, it may be
separated in this manner, and what does not pass the sieve, may be separated by
fire in Iron Furnaces, fifty of them in a fire.

The Quick-silver-Ore of this Mine is the richest of all Ores I have yet seen,
for ordinarily it contains in it half Quicksilver, and in two parts of Ore one
part of Quicksilver, and sometimes in three parts of Ore, two parts of
Quicksilver.

I went into the Mine by the Pit of St. Agatha, and came up again by that of
St. Barbara, descending and ascending by Ladders; I ascended at one of six
hundred and thirty nine staves, or eighty nine fathoms. Siserus in K^rcher's
Mundus subterraneus makes such a dreadful description of this Mine, that it
might discourage any from attempting the descent, which makes me doubt, whether
he had been in any other Mine, especially where the descent is made by Ladders.

In a Laboratory, where the Quicksilver is separated by fire, I saw an heap of
sixteen thousand retorts of Iron, every one of which costs a Crown at the best
hand from the Iron Furnaces in Carinthia: herein are also at one time eight
hundred retorts, and as many recipients employed together in drawing over the
Quicksilver in sixteen Furnaces, fifty in each Furnace, twenty five of a side,
twelve above, and thirteen below of each side.

June 12. 1669. When I was there they carried out forty saumes of Quicksilver
into Foreign parts, each saume containing three hundred and fifteen pound
weight to the value of four thousand Ducats of Gold, though the conveyance be
not easy, for it is carried upon Horses backs, two small Barrels upon each
Horse, yet some is sent as far as Chremnitz in Hungary for the use of the Gold
Mine, and some into Sweden, and other remote parts.

In the Castle I saw three thousand saumes of Quicksilver together in Barrels*
the Quicksilver being first made up in double Leather; and in another House as
much rich Ore as can be destilled in two years, except they have great plenty
of rain to bring down the wood, but the Hills being high about them, it snows
at the tops of them oftener than it rains.

Those Strangers who come into the Castle of Idria, have their names set down
in a Register-Book, with the Country of which they are Natives, and the
Catalogue is large, but of English men there are few; of late years only Mr.
Evelyn and Dr. Pope, with their Company, of whose observations there is an
handsome account in the Philosophical Transactions some time since. This place
is the more grateful to Strangers in respect that it being a Frontier Town, and
bordering upon diverse Nations, many Languages are understood here, and I
observed that there were five spoken freely by the Officers and better sort of
People, besides French which was not excluded from this place, though not so
esteemed or desired. viz. Friulian, Sclavonian, German, Latin and Italian.

Leaving Idria I passed over Swartzenberg or the black Mountain, and descended
about ten miles through a stony Country far worse than the Crau or stony Plain
in Provence, and came to Adoshini, and then to Goritia Goritia.
or Noreja of old, the chiefest place of the Country of Goritia, well seated
and over-looking a fair Plain to the South-West. The Emperors Governor of this
Country lives in the Castle, and has had of late a Guard granted unto him,
having been set upon by a Gentleman of the Country, who for that fact was
banished, and his House rased.

Traveling in the night, we had sometimes about us a great number of large
Glowworms, which put into papers gave a dim light; and in some places in the
Plains the Air was full of flaming flies affording some delight to us.

The Carniolians speak a Dialect of the Sclavonian, but in these parts they
have a Language called Lingua Fullana, or Friulana; he that speaks Italian
may understand much thereof. The Lords Prayer in that Language begins thus,
Pari Nestri ch' ees in Cijl see Santificaat tuto nom, etc.

That neat kind of Acer whereof Violins and Musical Instruments are made,
prospers well in these parts, as also in Carniola and Saltzburglandt, where
they make Trenchers and Tables of it, and at an easy rate; I brought some of
the fair broad Leaves from thence.

Leaving Goritia I passed the River Sontius or Lisonzo which arising in the
Hills above runs into the Adriatic Sea. Near this River, Odoacer who had made
himself King of Italy, was slain in a Battle by Theodorick King of the Goths.
And hither the Turks came under the command of Asa-Beg in the year 1477. in the
time of Mahomet the Great, overthrew Jeronimus Novello Count of Verona and a
famous Commander of those times, slew him in Battle, together with his Son and
most of his Commanders, destroyed a Party of three thousand Venetians, and set
a hundred Villages on Fire. Afterward traveling on through Meadows, I came
unto the strong and well fortified City of Palma Nova, built since to hinder
the like incursions.

All this long Circuit until we came within a mile of Palma Nova we were in the
Emperors Dominions, which are much larger than commonly apprehended, and having
sooner or later seen the greatest part thereof, I cannot but be of that
opinion, for he possesses all Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, part of
Croatia, Istria, and Friuli, part of Alsatia, the large County of Tirolis, the
large Country of Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, and some part of Lusatia, and a
considerable part of Hungaria; from Presbourg to Tockay and Zathmar, above two
hundred and fifty miles, and the Inhabitants of these Countries being an hardy
stout and valiant People, I cannot but think him a great and powerful Prince,
and an happy Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks.

Palma Nova.
Palma Nova in Friuli is the largest regular Fortification I have observed, it
has nine Bastions, bearing the names of some noble Venetians, which have
little to be excepted against but their round ears, on each Curtain there are
two Cavalliers, the Rampart is much higher than the Wall, upon which there are
planted a hundred good Guns, and many more ready upon all occasions, the Ditch
is thirty paces broad, and twelve deep; it is kept dry to render the Town more
healthful, but may be filled with water upon occasion, as that of Vienna, much
whereof is kept dry least it should injure their deep Cellars; there are three
Gates, Porta Maritima, Porta di Cividal, and Porta di Vdine. Between the Porta
Maritima, and the Porta di Vdine lie these three Bastions Foscarini, Savorgnan
and Grimani. Between the Porta di Vdine and Porta di Cividal are three others
named Barbaro, Dona and Monte. And between the Porta di Cividal and the Porta
Maritima are these three. Garzoni, Contarini and Villa Chiara. They were then
making one fair Half Moon before each Gate: In the Center of the City is fixed
a Standard over a Triple Well, in the middle of a Sexangular Piazza, from
whence a man may see the three Gates and six Streets quite through the Town.
The Piazza is beautified with the Front of the Domo Church, diverse Statues, and
an Obelisk much gilded.

In the middle of the Bridge there is a Drawbridge made with such Artifice,
that the sentinel discovering any force approaching, may by only touching a
certain Iron with his foot draw up the Bridge; many handsome contrivances for
Draw-bridges I had seen in other parts, sometimes many upon one Bridge, and not
only one after or behind another, but also sometimes two or three on a breast,
the outermost ones serving for the retreat of the foot, that in the middle for
the Horse and Carriages. Some Draw-bridges are not to lift up, but to be drawn
on one side, and so by only turning of it like to the opening of a Gate
Passengers are conveyed over the Moat and landed; but those which pleased me
most were the Draw-bridges at Amsterdam, which part in the middle, and a Vessel
though under sail may pass them, without the help of any one on shore, for the
Mast, head, or break-water of the Ship* bearing against the Bridge in the
middle, opens it.

At Palma Nova the Venetians have made a cut from the Sea to the Town capable
of good Vessels, and broad and deep enough to bring provisions and supplies
upon occasion to this place.

This is at present esteemed one of the noblest Fortifications in Europe, begun
by the Venetians 1594. and is a notable Bulwark of their State and Italy, for
this way the Huns and barbarous Nations passed into Italy, and this way the
Turks have formerly made in-roads almost as far as Treviso.

Having seen many of the chief Fortifications in Europe, I had the greater
desire to take a view of this, because it carries so great a fame, and is said
to have been contrived by Military advice from all parts, and as also because
the Venetians would have it believed to be the noblest Fortification, not only
in Europe, but in the World; I heartily wish they may never know a complete
Turkish Army before it, especially when ever they are in no good condition to
relieve it. If the Emperor, through whose Countries the Turks must pass to come
to this place, and the Republic hold firm, it will be hard for the Turk to
come unto it, and if the Turk should be at such a peace with the Venetians as
may bind up their Fleet from assisting the other parts of Italy, he shall not
need to attempt it or make his way into Italy by that place, for whether the
Naval Forces of Italy without the assistance of the Venetians, be able to
resist a complete Turkish Fleet, so as to hinder landing and falling upon that
Country some other way, is much to be doubted.

From Palma nova I went to Maran St. Vito, a Port Town of the Venetians in
Friuli, so named from St. Vito, who is said to have been buried in this place.

At this Town we took a Felluca, and sailing by the shore of Friuli or Patria,
we passed by Porto di Taiamento, and came to Cahorle. In this Island there is a
Church dedicated to the Blessed Virgin seated upon the Sea-shoar nigh the
Waves, yet said never to be overflowed by the Sea, being as it were the Halcyon
Nest of its Patroness, and a place of remarkable devotion. On this shore we
refreshed our selves and were divertised at Sea in seeing them take Shellfish,
and then passing by Livenza, where the Sea came formerly up as high as
Opitergium, and afterward by Porto di Piave, I arrived at Venice entering by
the Porto de Castelli passing by the Carthusians Convent, and landed at the
Piazza of St. Mark.

Here I found the whole City highly concerned for the Hazardous State of
Candia, which was lost soon after, Dominico Cantarini the present Duke was
sedulous in that affair. The Voyage of Ghiron Francisco Marchese Villa, General
of the Infantry of Candia, with a journal of a Siege had been lately published,
and was in many hands.

There was also a supply of Auxiliaries in good readiness; it was at that time
a more than ordinary hot Season, and some of our English Sea Captains and
Masters told me, that they had seldom met with such hot weather even between
the Tropicks.

Having formerly had a view of Rome, Naples, Florence, and the great Cities of
Italy, and passed some time at Padoa a few years before, I made but a short
stay about Venice, and having reviewed what was most considerable, and renewed
my acquaintance with some worthy courteous Friends at Venice and Padoa, Mr.
Hales the Conful, Mr. Hobson, Dr. Cadined, and others. I disposed my affair for
my return to Vienna the ordinary way.

In order thereto I took Boat at Venice and landed at Mestre a pretty Town, and
the best place for accommodation for such as travel into Germany by Tirol, or
into Austria by Friuli; from hence I traveled ten miles through a pleasant
plain Country till I came to Treviso or Tarvisium, which gives the name unto
the Country about, La Marca Trevigiana, a handsome City adorned with good
Houses, Churches, Towers and Fountains. The clear River Sile or Silo runs
through it, and afterward into the Sea between Mestre and Murano; it abounds
in good Wines and Fruit, and was a chief Seat of the Lombards in these parts.
This old City, after having run various fortunes and been under the subjection
of the Huns, and other conquering Nations, and sometimes obeyed the Signori
della Scala, and the Carraresi was united to the State of Venice in the year
1388. It was converted to the Christian Faith by Prosdochimus a follower of St.
Peter. Eight miles from hence stood the Ancient City Altinum founded by
Antenor, and destroyed by Attila.

From thence I came to Lovadina, and crossed the great River Piave, Plavis, or
Anassus, which arising in the Mountains, passes by the Cities of Belluna and
Feltre, then to Concian or Coniglian, and next to Sacille or Sacillum, formerly
a Bishops See under the Patriarch of Aquileia, a pleasant and well built place
esteemed the Garden of the Republic, and seated by the River Livenza or
Liquentia, which passing by Motta runs into the Gulf of Venice.

Here I took a guide to conduct me through the Plains and Meadows, and came to
Spilimbergo, where I again took a Guide to cross the swift River Taiamento or
Tiliaventum; this is esteemed the greatest River in Friuli, arising above in
the Julian Alps, and running down into the Adriatic Sea, and often
overflowing a great part of the plain Country. This swift River put a stop to
the incursion of the Turks when Scander Bassa of Illyria broke into Friuli with
twelve thousand Horse and destroyed all before him, in the Reign of Sultan
Bajazet the Second.

Not far from Spilimbergo, I passed a neat River or notable Cut called La
Brentella, sixteen miles long, made by the Venetians for the better bringing
down of wood from the Mountains to be used in the making of Glasses at Muran;
it is all paved with a good Stone, bottom and sides, the bottom is round, so
that it is somewhat like a Tube opened or split in two.

Then I passed by St. Daniel seated upon an Hill by Hospitaletto, and came to
Vensone, a Town seated at the beginning of the Hills, and formerly the limit of
the Venetian Dominions; thence by Rejuta to La Chiusa, a place remarkable for
the straight passage of the Alps, where the Venetians keep a guard, and shut
up the passage every night; from thence I came to Ponteba or Ponte Fella upon
the River Fella, the exact Confines between the Venetian and Imperial
Dominions, and surely a man can seldom pass more clearly and distinctly from
one Country unto another than in this Town; on one side of the Bridge live
Italians, Subjects unto the State of Venice, on the other side Germans,
Subjects unto the Emperor. Upon the one side their Buildings, their manner of
living, their empty Rooms, large Windows, Iron Bedsteads show them to be
Italians: On the other side immediately their Stoves, higher Bed-steads,
Feather-beds one over another, square Tables, and their Basin and Cloth by the
Wall declare them to be Germans; the Bridge it self is also half Italian, half
Dutch, one part being built of Stone, and the other of great Trees laid over
after the German fashion of making bridges. Between Vensone and Po^teba there
are many great Cascata's or falls of waters; but of several passages of the
Alps this seemed unto me the best and most easy.

In these Mountainous places I was entertained with strange stories of the Snow
which covers these Hills in the Winter, as how many pikes length the Snow was
deep in some places, how round the Country would look when all the craggy Rocks
were covered, how a Snowball thrown down from a Mountain would so gather and
augment in the fall, as to do great mischief in the Valley, and that if the
smallest Bird should but scrape with her foot at the edge of an high Hill, that
little beginning might so increase in the descent, upon a thaugh, as to
over-whelm an House at the bottom.

From hence by Tervis, and Tirl, unto Villach, or Villach, an handsome Town,
and one of the chiefest in Carinthia; but before I came to Villach I went to
see the Natural Baths which were not much out of the way at the foot of an Hill
about an English miles from the Town and in good esteem. There are two clear
Sulphurous Baths, but very gently warm, and have an acid and no unpleasant
taste; the bottom is not planchered nor paved, but has its own natural Spring
and Settlement with it; yet into one there is a hot Spring let in which arises
by it; they are large and have stairs to descend into them, with little Rooms
of wood about them for accommodation, they are covered over, and they bathe in
them clothed with shirt and drawers as in Austria.

Not far from hence is a Lake called the Ossiacker See, from Ossiack a Town
upon the side thereof, and is one of the most considerable Lakes in Carinthia,
there being besides it, these which are remarkable, the White Lake, the
Millstatter, the Word, and the Forchten; this Lake does not only abound in
Fish, but affords great plenty of Ossiacker Nuts, which the people eat, and
some make Bread of; which notwithstanding upon examination I found to be no
other than very large Seeds of Tribulus Aquaticus, or water Gallthorps.

From Villach I soon came to the Werd See, and keeping it continually on my
right hand, I traveled by the side of it till I came to Clagenfurte, and then
passed again to St. Veits, where I met Mr. Donellan, from whom, upon my former
desires to him, I received an account of the great Lead Mines in upper
Carinthia at Bleyberg, where they have worked eleven hundred years, and the
Pits are deep; Federnus Stolen or Cuniculus is an hundred and ten fathoms deep
in the Earth, and the Hills so high about it, that upon the melting of the Snow
in the Spring, there is often much hurt done, the Snow rolling and falling in
such vast heaps that nothing is able to resist it, so that in the year 1654. it
fell so vehemently that it destroyed and carried away sixteen Houses. He
presented me also with many handsome natural Curiosities collected by him in
those parts, one of which among the rest I cannot but mention which was a rich
large fair piece of natural Cinnabar found in Crewalt, or in the Forest of Cre,
two German miles from St. Veit's in the Lordship of Oosterwitz, where there
has been great quantities found out, for the Herr von Staudach above thirty
years ago, as he was hunting in this Forest, being thirsty and laying down to
drink out of a little stream which runs from the top of the Hill, he perceived
the stream to be full of Cinnabar, but since it has been so diligently
searched after, that without working and digging for it, there is little to be
found.

From St. Veitz I continued my journey by Friesach, where formerly there was a
Gold Mine, and then by Newmark, Hundtsmark, Peltsolz, Knitelfeldt, Luihm, Prug,
Keimberg, Mehrz-u-Schlag, Schadtwien, Newkirckel, Newstadt, Solinaw,
Traskirchel, Newdorff, to Wien.

This my return from Venice to Vienna, about three hundred and fifty Italian
miles, was the most quiet journey I ever made, for not meeting with good
Company I performed it alone, and upon one Horse; and although there are
several Nations, and no less than four Languages spoken upon this road, yet I
met with no disturbance from any, nor did any one ask from whence I came, or
whither I would go, no trouble as to Bills of health, and good accommodation in
the Inns at an easy rate, they are for the most part a plain People, make good
Soldiers, little mutinous, but obedient to commands, and hardy, and are of
good use and service unto the Emperor.

In my travels in Germany I seldom failed to meet with Jews, but in this
journey I met with none, or such as I could not well distinguish, for though
there were then whole Villages of Jews in Austria, yet they were prohibited in
Styria, and severely banished out of Carinthia, so that for those Jews who
traveled between Venice and Vienna; the Emperor dispences with them as to
their Ruff, and the Venetians as to their red Hat.

To say any thing of Vienna may seem superfluous, diverse having written
thereof, and it might fall better in, if ever I should describe my journey from
the Low Countries to Vienna, and from Vienna by the way of Moravia, Bohemia,
Misnia, Saxonia unto Hamburg; mean while I would no longer defer to give some
account of places less known or less described in Pannonian, Dacian, Maesian,
Grecian, Noricum, and Illyrian Countries, which in their proper order are
delivered in this Work.

In my Travels through Hungaria and the Imperial Provinces, I could not but
take notice of some Assertions which I could not verify.

Belgrade is commonly counted to be in Hungaria, and so described by some
Authors, but if strictly considered it is seated in Servia, or Maesia Superior,
beyond the bounds of Hungaria.

That St. Jerome was a Pannonian may be granted, but that he was a Native of
Hungaria, strickly taken may be doubted, for he was born in Stridon, now
conceived to be Stredon or Streyna, on the inward or Western side of the River
Mur, before it runs into the Dravus, and is accounted in Steirmark.

It is said by Pliny Cursus Savi 150. mill passuum, that the course of the
Savus is an hundred and fifty miles, which if accounted from the head is much
too short, and not much more then half the measure thereof.

That the River Savus runs into the Dravus, seems affirmed by Strabo, Vicinus
Nauporto fluvius est Corcoras qui merces accipit, hic in Savum influit, Savus
in Dravum, that is, Not far from Nauportus is the River Corcoras or the Gurk
which receives the Merchandises, this runs into the Savus, and the Savus into
the Dravus, whereas the Savus never runs into the Dravus, and when it enters
the Danube at Belgrade is about an hundred miles from it.

The distance which Strabo makes between Aquileia and Nauportus or Labach of
four hundred furlongs or fifty miles, though somewhat too short* may be fairly
tolerated, but what he delivers of the space between Tergestum or Trieste, and
the Danube not to be made out. Iter a Tergesto ad Danubium, Stadiorum circiter
mill and ducenta, that the Lib: 7.
journey from Trieste to the Danube was about one thousand and two hundred
furlongs, or an hundred and fifty miles, which is too short a measure unto the
nearest part of the Danube, which will make about two hundred and fifty miles;
but the Ancients might easily err herein, since some of them were mistaken in
the true course of the Danube, which they conceived to have one branch to run
into the Adriatic Sea.

I went this Journey when the Sun was in Cancer, in the hottest time of the
year, and the heat was very offensive to me in the great Plains of Friuli, and
Austria; but in the Alps it was much more moderate, and the Country was all
green, and pleasant; when on the contrary all the Grass in Austria was burned
up by the Sun, and if there were not a continual breeze about the middle of the
day upon all great Plains, especially in Southern Countries, the heat would be
intolerable; and I could not but take notice how pleasantly the poor Peasants
in the Alpine Countries divertised themselves in the Fields, and after their
labor would be lively and brisk, sometimes play at Cards, with Cards of a span
long, such as they have in those Countries, while the rich Countrymen in
Austria were faint and gasping for breath, nor did it any thing avail them that
Austria was more Northern then Styria or Carinthia, for there may be as much
difference as to the temperature of the Air, and as to heat and cold in one
mile, as in ten degrees of Latitude, and he that would cool and refresh himself
in the Summer, had better go up to the top of the next Hill, than remove into a
far more Northern Country. I have been ready to freeze on the top of a Hill,
and in an hours time after have suffered as great inconvenience from the heat
of the Valley; at the rising of the Sun I have been upon a Hill with a clear
sky, and good weather, and have seen a Valley encompassed with Mountains and
covered all over with Clouds much below us, the Sun shining upon the upper part
of the Clouds made them appear like fine Down or Wool, and made the softest
sweetest lights and shadows imaginable; afterward when we descended into this
Valley under the Clouds we had no such pleasant Prospect, but were rained upon
the most part of the day. In that hot Country of Arabia Travelers complain
most of the cold they suffer in passing the Hills. The Mountains in Italy and
Spain are some of them covered with Snow and Ice all the Summer long. I have
heard that Mount Atlas is so also, from Dr. Butler who lately traveled in
those parts, and from others; when in Great Britain there is no such thing. At
London we have Winters for the most part favorable, when Captain James who
went to discover the North-west passage, and to search if there were any
communication between the Atlantic Ocean and the South Sea in the Northern
part of America, as there is in the Southern, suffered more hardship in the
same degree of Latitude then the nine English men who were left all the Winter
in Greenland, and Baffin, on the contrary, upon the same design had a pleasant
Voyage in an open Sea, and met with Inhabitants upon the Shore, till he came
within nine degrees of the Pole. But I shall wander too far out of the way, and
therefore will put an end to this Discourse.

A JOURNEY FROM NORWICH TO COLEN IN GERMANY.
IN the year 1668. I left the large and pleasant City of Norwich, and went by
land to Yarmouth, a Port Town in Norfolk, at the mouth of the River Hierus or
Yare; large, fairly built and populous, very considerable for the great Herring
fishing in the Autumn, and the commerce it maintains in the Streights; Baltic,
British and German Seas: With Italians, French, Spaniards, Dutch, Danes, and
Swedes. I was here nobly entertained by that worthy and obliging person, Sir
James Johnson, who also furnished me with Letters of Credit, to Amsterdam,
Franckfort, Venice and Vienna; Whereby I was readily and handsomely
accommodated in all Parts where I had afterward occasion to travel.

August the 14. about six a Clock at Night I went aboard the Angel-Ketch in
Tarmouth Road, a Vessel of about 55 Tuns, and we immediately set sail for
Rotterdam; we left St. Nicholas-Sand on the Larboard, and after that the
Nowles, a new Sand, not taken notice of to be raised above twelve years before.
We kept our course all night, East and by South, and East South-East. The Sea
burned at the head of the Ship at the beginning of the night, but the Moon
rising there appeared nothing but froth. In the morning we discovered
Gravesandt Steeple. It is the custom upon all this coast to send out
Pylot-boats continually to meet all Ships at Sea, and furnish them with Pylots
to bring them through the sands, and no Ship is to refuse one: Having taken in
our Pylot, we soon discovered Goree Steeple, and then the Briel. We entered the
River Mosa, or Maes, a Large and noble Stream, The Mae^*
which arising in the Mountains of Vauge, or Vogesus, passing by Verdun,
Dinant, Namur, Lie^e, Maestricht, Ruremond, Venlo, and many considerable
Places, does here fall into the Ocean, we had a very pleasant passage up the
River, sailing by many neat Villages, as Maese-sluys, Schedam, De^fshaven, and
handsome rows of Trees upon the shore, and arrived at Rotte^dam about six at
night. This is one of the three chief passages by Sea into Holland, the other
being by Flushing and the Texel. The nearest cut out of England into Holland is
from Laistoffe Point to Gravesandt, which is 28 Leagues, and the deepest part
of the Sea is about 28 Fathoms. There lay two of the greatest Ships Rotterdam.
in Holland at that time near Rotterdam, the Crane and the Wassenaer; this
latter built in lieu of that in which Admiral Opdam was blown up, fighting
against his Royal Highness the Duke of York, now King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, etc. who thus early exposed his life to these extreme hazards for
the safety of England and his other Kingdoms. The Heads or Keys between which
we entered the Town by water are handsome, and Ships of great burden are
received into the middle of diverse streets without difficulty, (their Channels
being deep and large) the houses are well built, and the Town populous, they
have an Exchange or place for Merchants to meet at, the streets are so clean
that the Women go about in white Slippers, they being paved with Bricks laid
edgewise. The Landthuise has a fair front. In the great Church the Organs, the
Tower and the Monument of De wit; upon the Bridge the Statue of Erasmus, as
also the house where he was born, and the Pleasure boats of the States are
worth the seeing. It being then the time of their Kermis or Fair, there were
Plays acted and many rarities shown, as Lions, Leopards, etc. and a great
noise was made about a tall Woman to be shown of seven foot high; but the Boor
of Leckerkir'k, not far from this Town, was higher. Parsons and Evans, Porters
to King Charles the first, did also exceed her, The Irish Youth who has not
yet done growing by diverse years, shown in many places, is already Seven Foot
and seven Inches high, but I have seldom heard of any that was taller than
Martin Wierski a Polander, who at the age of forty two years was presented to
the Emperor Maximilian the second, as a rarity of nature, and was full eight
foot high, whose Picture, as big as the life, I saw, near to the Franciscans
Convent at Vienna in Austria.

Del^t.
From Rotterdam I passed by Overschee to Delft, by the Powder-house, which is a
handsome one, built now at some distance from the Town to prevent the like
accident which befell when the former took fire and blew up part of the Town.
The Piazza or marketplace is a very fair one, having the front of the Town
house at one end of it, and the high Steeple of the new Church at the other. In
the old Church, Van-Tromps Tomb is very well carved upon the side of the Wall,
himself lying upon a Canon encompassed with Arms and trophies. In the middle
Isle of the new Church there is a noble monument, the Tomb of William of Nassaw
Prince of Orange, together with his Wife and Son, Prince Maurice; his Statua is
in armor with his Dog at his Feet, and four Obelisks are supported by ten
Marble pillars. In a house of this Town there were shown me in a Wall the marks
of the bullets shot at Prince William, who was thereby murdered 1584. and in
another Church which was broad and spacious I saw a handsome Tomb for Sir
Charles Morgans Lady, and the Monument of Peter Hein the Admiral, who took the
Spanish Silver-fleet.

The Hague, Haga Comitis, the ancient place of Residence of the Hague.
Counts of Holland, and now of the States general; is about an hours going
distant from Delft; in which passage, at some distance, we had a sight of two
of the Prince of Orange's houses. This place is well built; the Princes Court
handsome; The Piazza by it full of green Trees; many fair Houses. The Course
where the Coaches meet, the Pall Mall, the Wood, the Park, do much beauti^ie
it, and the way from hence to Scheveling, from whence his late Majesty King
Charles the Second returned into England, is very remarkable, it being a
straight way cut through the Sand-hills, and paved with Brick for three miles,
having on each hand four or five rows of Trees, and Scheveling Steeple at the
end of it.

The Hague and Madrid in Spain are accounted the greatest Villages, or open
unwalled places, in Europe, and the Hollanders have thought it more honor to
be Masters of the greatest Village, than of a place which, if it were walled,
would come short of many Cities; but this may prove a dangerous resolution, for
sormerly upon this advantage, Martin van Rossem, Captain to the Duke of
Gueldres, sacked the Hague; and it was lately in the like danger when the
French Forces lay at Vtrecht and Worden, if they had forced a passage into that
part of Holland.

Leyden is three hours or three Dutch miles from the Hague, at present Leyden.
one of the neatest Towns in Europe; Well built, has diverse large Streets,
beautified with rows of Trees, and the water passing through the middle of
them, and also well fortified after the modern way; I took notice of that
Antiquity called Hengist Castle, or the Berg, said to be built by Hengist the
Saxon, and went up to the top thereof: Upon the top there is now an Arbor, and
a Maze or Labyrinth round it, and a Well, out of which, they told us, they took
a Fish alive when the Town was almost famished during the Siege, which was
showed to the Enemy over the Wall, endeavoring to make their condition to
appear better than it was, and to dishearten the besiegers. There are now
handsome stairs from the top to the bottom, and a good house built by it, where
they have their public sales and entertainments. But a nobler Antiquity lies
under the Sea, than any above ground; not far from hence near Catwyck is a
square fortress called Arx Britannica, built by Caligula; in the declining of
the Roman Empire ruined in part by the Normans, and afterward neglected, and
overwhelmed by the Sea. But in some years, and great retire of the Sea, the
ruins have been discovered, and many noble Antiquities brought from it, some
having this inscription Ex. Ger. Inf. ex Germania Inferiori. The Stadthuise
has a fair front toward the Street. In the Anatomy Schools are a very great
number of Skeletons. Two legs of an Elephant. The Skeleton of a young Whale, of
a Horse, Deer, Cow, Cat, Fox, and many other Animals; diverse Skeletons of Men
and Women, some bodies preserved with their Muscles, and one entire, the flesh*
skin and all parts defended from corruption. I saw also here what Monsieur de
Bills pretended toward the preservation of Bodies, but more accurately
afterward at Dr. Ruisch his house at Amsterdam. The Physick-garden, although
but small, is well filled with Plants, where are also many other both natural,
and artificial Curiosities to be seen, and many sorts of Optick-glasses. Near
the garden are the Schools built of Brick with the Officina Elzeviriana on the
top. In the Churches I saw the Monuments of many famous men, in the French
Church is the Tomb of Joseph Scaliger, with a large Inscription upon it, and
these few words which he himself desired might be placed there.

Josephus Justus Scaliger
Jul. Caes. Fill.
Hic expecto Resurrectionem.
As also the Tomb of Carolus Clusius the great Herbarist.

Omnia Naturae qui munera pectore clusit
Clusius, herbifero clauditur hoc tumulo.
And with this following; Non potuit plures heic quaerere Clusius herbas:
Ergo novas campis quaerit in Elysiis.


i. e.

Clusius viewed all the Plants that this Earth yields,
And now is simpling in the Elysian Fields.
There is a Picture in the Chamber for the Burgermasters, representing the day
of Judgment, drawn by Lucas van Leyden, so much esteemed that, it is said, the
Emperor Rudolphus would have given for it as many Ducats of Gold as would have
covered it. The Table also upon which John of Leyden wrought whilst he was a
Tailor, is a Curiosity, because he proved afterward so considerable a
disturber of Germany, and came to be King of the Anabaptists.

This City endured a hard siege by the Spanish forces, and they were reduced
unto great extremity, but they saved themselves by overflowing the Country, and
so forcing the enemies to make away with great loss; and afterward coined a
memorial-Medal with this inscrption.

Vt Senacherib a Jerusalem, sic Hispani a Leyda noclu fugerunt. 1574.

Haerlem.
From Leyden I came to Haerlem, a neat City, pleasantly seated and having a
Grove near it. The great Church is esteemed the largest in Holland, with a very
high Lanthorn upon it. Within are many Inscriptions and Monuments, most of
which are transcribed and set down in Gotfr. Hegenitii Itinerarium Hollandicum.
In the Prince's house are all the Earls of Holland Painted upon the wall, and
in the Garden in the Summer House, the Picture of Laurentius Costerus, who is
said to have first invented the art of Printing in this Town; but others
attribute it to Johannes Gottenberg, a German. On the other side there is a
Picture of a Ship with Saws, in memory of the manner how Damiata in Egypt was
formerly taken by those of this Town, who, as they report, accompanied
Frederick Barbarossa in an expedition against the Saracens, and when the men of
Pelusium or Damiata had chained up their Port, by this invention of fastening
strong Saws to the keels of their Ships, they cut the chains in sunder, and so
took the Town. In the rooms are very good Paintings by Hemskerk, and Goltzius,
as his Prometheus and other Pieces; but Cornelius van Haerlem most delighted
me, in his pieces of Herod's killing the Innocent Children; his feast of the
Gods, in which Vulcans foot is esteemed at a great rate; and another Picture of
a Friar and a Nun at a Collation, not inferior to the rest, among many
Epitaphs in the great Church, there is this Dutch one, for a Man and his Wife.

Laet lopen die lopen lust
Onse tiit is verlopen wy leggen hier in ruste.
Let them run, that run will
Our time's run out, and we lie still.
The old Men's house, or an Hospital for sixty aged persons, is large and
handsome; having a good Quadrangle and a Garden in it. The Hospital also for
the sick is very cleanly kept.

Here I first saw the manner of punishing Malefactors by whipping them with
rods, which is more severe than I imagined; they lead them to a Post upon a
Scaffold, their hands tied and by a Pully drawn up as high as can be extended,
and then an Iron fastened about their wast to keep them steady; in which
stretched-out posture they receive sometimes fifty or sixty stripes or more,
according to the merit of their offense.

Not far from this place there is a great Water, or noted Lake called Haerlem
Mere about twenty Miles in length, which is frozen over in hard Winters, and
men swiftly travel over it by sliding or in sleds. When Haerlem was besieged
there was a Naval fight upon it; The Dutch having about an hundred and fifty
Vessels, and the Spaniards not many fewer. The Town was afterward taken by
Composition, but such Cruelty was used by tho Spaniards that they have not yet
forgot it Amsterdam.
.

From Haerlem I went to Amsterdam, a City at present for Riches, Trade,
Shipping, fair Streets, and pleasant habitations, scarce yielding to any other
of the World. It is seated upon the River Ye, and has its name, as it is
reported, from a Castle appertaining long since to the Lords of Amstel, to whom
this place also belonged: At the beginning, the seat of a few Fishermen; but
afterward increasing, it received many Privileges from the Counts of Holland,
and was made a Town or City by the favor of their Grants and Charters. In the
year 1470. it was walled about with a Brick-wall, to defend it against the
Citizens of Vtrecht, they having been in great danger to have fallen into their
hands, if those of Vtrecht had pursued their Victories. In few Months after
also, the whole Town was almost reduced to Ashes by fire, but by the increase
of their Traffic they easily overcame their losses, waded through all
difficulties, and rendered good Services to their Counts, and received the
honor afterward from Maximilian the Emperor to have the Imperial Crown over
their Arms, which ar^ three Crosses on a Pale.

About the year 1525. Gelen, sent from the new King of Munster, passed through
Friesland and came to this City; where having made a Party, and communicated
his design, he resolved to surprise the Town by night, at the time of the
sounding of the Bell; to which intent they were already entered the Market
place, had set upon the Townhouse: and cut in pieces those who resisted them.
When by great providence the rope to the great Bell was taken away; the
Magistrates had notice of it, and caused all the Streets and Avenues leading to
the Marketplace to be stopped up with Wool-sacks and Hop-sacks, whereby they
were hindered in their design of taking the Town by night, and the next morning
their number being discovered to be inconsiderable, they were set upon, driven
into the Stadthuis, and defeated.

Of late years this City is mightily increased and encompassed with a new Wall,
and fortified after the modern way. The new Streets are large and uniform: and
the whole Town being in a low Marshy ground, the water is let in through all
the considerable Streets. The River Amstel passes through the City, being let
in under a handsome well contrived Bridge of Eleven Arches, which is so built
as to make part of the Wall and Rampart, and is 26 paces broad. The whole Town
is built upon Piles, or high Firr-trees, driven down perpendicularly into the
Earth so thick together, that nothing more can be forced in between them: And
by this means they build Houses in the Sea, and lay Foundations strong enough
to support the geatest Buildings whatsoever, in places where no solid bottom is
to be found. But they must needs be at a great expense and labor before they
can lay the first Stone: And the number of Trees required to each Foundation is
considerable; since for the Foundation of one Tower or Steeple alone, over
against the Church of St. Katherine, Mr. J. de Parivall, who wrote Les Delices
de la Hollande, reckons that there was rammed into the ground a Forest, as he
calls it, of Six thousand three hundred and thirty four great Trees. About this
manner of work, for the fixing their Foundations, I saw them employed in diverse
places, particularly at the East-India-house and at a place where a Lutheran
Church was then designed to be built, So that it was not improbably said, That
if a man could see all under this City, he could hardly behold a greater Forest.

The Stadthuis or Townhouse, is the noblest Building in all these Countries. A
Pile of Freestone of an hundred and ten paces in Front, being larger than the
Magnified Front of the Church of St. Peter's at Rome, and eighty one paces
deep, or on the sides. The Chambers in it, the Pictures and Statues, are worthy
to be seen and admired. The first Room on the right hand, or Judgment-hall,
where the Malefactors receive their Sentence, is adorned with large Statues,
hanging down their heads in mournful postures, as if concerned or grieving at
what was then pronounced. The Floors are of Marble; the Roofs are richly gilt
and painted. Upon the top of all stands Atlas or Columbus, holding a Globe upon
his Shoulder made of Copper, of about ten foot Diameter, which is as large
perhaps as any Ball or Globe whatsoever employed to this ornamental use. That
upon St. Peter's at Rome, as having been in it, I judge to be less; as likewise
that at Florence. The Turkish Ornament to the Tower of their Mosques, is three
Balls one above another, and an half Moon over them, but they are less by far,
at least such as I have seen: and by relation from Eyewitnesses, the largest
of the three noble gilded Balls at Morocco are inferior to this. But I will
say nothing more of this great building, the Stadthuis, since there is a
peculiar description of it in Folio, with Cuts and Figures of the most
remarkable Curiosities in it. The Exchange is fair and large, and above it are
Shops: it is very well frequented, and he that comes after twelve pays six
stivers.

Diverse of their Churches are fair: In the new Church, the partition with
Ballisters of Brass, and the carved Pulpit, are noble. In the old Church the
Tomb of Van H^lse and Heemskerk are remarkable. Heemskerk did his Country great
Services in their first attempts upon India: for the King of Spain, having
confiscated some of the Hollanders Ships, who traded to his Dominions, which
were then the Staple for the India Trade, It was resolved by the permission of
Prince Maurice and the States, to set out a Fle^t of eight Ships for the
Indies; four of which were to pass by the way of the Atlantic Ocean, and the
Cape of Good-hope: And the other four were to search a passage toward the
Kingdoms of Cathay and China by the North-east, whereby the passage also into
those parts might be expected much shorter than that which was known to the
Spaniards.

To this intent these four last vessels sailed out of the Texel. June 5. 1594.
and returned in September, not being able to proceed by reason of the Ice. But
upon the relation of the Voyage by William Barenson, there were two other
Expeditions afterward to Nova Zembla; in the last of which they wintered
there, and Barenson lost his life. Heemskerk was the chief of the twelve which
returned from that cold habitation, where none but Bears and Foxes could well
endure the Winter, where he had been twice, and afterward made two rich
Voyages into India. Upon whose happy returns the Holland East India Company was
first established, and a prohibition m^de for any other of that Country to
trade thither for the space of One and twenty years.

But to proceed to other public Buildings in this City. The Tuchthuis or
Raspelhuis, or House of Correction for debauched young men, such as are
incorrigible and disobedient to Parents or Laws, has at the entrance of the
Gate two Lions bridled, a proper Emblem, with this Inscription, Virtutis est
domare quae cuncti pavent. This was formerly a Monastery belonging to the Nuns
of the Order of St. Clare, and converted to this use 1595. They who are put in,
are forced to work and gain their Bread with hard labor. I saw those who
rasped Brazil, having a certain task set them every day, work so hard, that
being naked and in a sweat, and the dust of the Brazil wo^d flying upon them,
they were all over painted of a beautiful red color. Which odd sight made me
call to mind the Fancy of my Lady Marchioness of Newcastle, of a Nation wherein
the People were of Orange-tawny color, and the King of Purple.

They told us that some that were committed to their charge, and not to be
brought to work by blows, they placed in a large Cistern, and let the water in
upon them, placing only a Pump by them for their relief, whereby they are
forced to labor for their lives, and to free themselves from drowning. One we
saw put into a narrow Dungeon, and kept from meat. Some are put into this House
for a longer time, some for a shorter. It has been a punishment for such as
have drawn their Daggers, or offered to stab any one. And some Citizens, though
able and rich enough, contrive it so, that when their Sons are extravagant and
masterless, the Officers seize upon them, and carry them into this House, where
they are not forced to any hard labor, but kept in till they see sufficient
signs of amending their life.

This way of Correction may seem severe to many, yet is not comparable to that
which is said to have been formerly used in Germany. Particularly at Colen, in
the White Tower, at the North end of the Town, near the Rhine; where it is
reported, that such Youths, who were not otherwise to be reclaimed, were in a
barbarous manner shut up in the White Tower. The height and thickness of the
Walls secured them from escaping, or from their complaints being heard. Near
the top was placed out of their reach a loaf of bread, the last remedy against
starving, which while their bold necessity forced them to reach at, they
executed their last sentence upon themselves, and miserably brake their own
necks.

Somewhat like the Raspelhuis is the Spinbuis, or House of Correction, for the
young women, who live loosely, are taken in the night, or can give no account
of their living. They are put in for a certain time, according as their fault
merits, and are bound to make lace, sew, or employ their time perpetually in
some honest labor.

Those of the better sort are permitted to have Chambers apart. In one large
Room I saw about an hundred of them, and some very well dressed and fine, which
was an unexpected sight to me, and would sure be more strange to behold in
France and England.

The Weeshuis, or Hospital for Children, where there are Six hundred Orphans
carefully looked after, and well educated.

The Dolhuis, or a House for such as are Delirious, Maniacal, or Melancholical
of both Sexes.

The Gasthuis, or Hospital for the Sick, being large, and has a great Revenue.

The Mannenhuis, or Hospital for old Men, and such as are no longer able to
labor toward their own support.

Besides all which, there are great Sums of money collected for the poor, so
that there is not a Beggar to be seen in the Streets, and upon all assignations
or appointments of meeting at the Tavern, or elsewhere, and upon many other
occasions, whosoever fails to come at the exact time, forfeits more or less to
the use of the Poor.

The East-India-houses are remarkable, and the great Stores of their
Commodities, Cinnamon, Green-ginger, Camphire, Pepper, Calecuts, Indico, etc.
The Ships are of a great burden: their House was then enlarging, although it
was great before; and a perfect Town for all Trades within it self.

The Admiralteyt, or Admiralty where their Stores for War and Shipping are laid
up, is encompassed with water; near to it there lay then 72 Men of War. In the
House we saw their Cables, Graplingirons, Pullies, Oars, Charges for Powder,
Lanthorns for Ships, etc. At the entrance of the Gate hangs up a Canoe which
seems to have a man in it, dried up, so as to be preserved from corruption, and
a Paddle in his hand: enclosed up to the wast in the Canoe, in such sort, as
the Fish-skins, which were the cover to it, being so sewed together that no
water could get in, he might keep the Sea in the greatest Storms without
danger. The top of this House, as of diverse others also in this City, is a
Reservatory for Rainwater, which they have the more need of, because they have
little good water hereabouts.

The fairest Streets in the Town are Harlem-street, the Cingel, Princes Graft,
Kaisers Graft, and the New Buildings in the Island toward Gottenburg. And if
they continue to build with Freestone, they will still surpass these, which,
I Will assure you, are in no small measure beautiful.

I saw a Globe to be sold, made by Vingbomes, between six and seven foot
Diameter, valued at Sixteen thousand Guldens: The Meridian alone, being of
brass, cost a thousand Guldens. The Globe is made of Copper Plates excellently
well painted, with all the new Discoveries in it, as that of Anthony Van Dimons
Land, found out 1642. in 42 degrees of Southern Latitude, and 170 of Longitude,
those toward the North-west of Japan, and those places both about Nova Zembla,
and also in the Tartarian Sea beyond the Streights of Voygats, New-Holland,
West-Friesland, Cape d' Hyver, etc. but I have since met with a Book, which
does somewhat contradict this; entitled A Voyage into the Northern Countries
by Monsieur Martiniere, who went in one of the three Ships belonging to the
Northern Company of Copenhagen, in the year 1653. and by that means had
occasion to converse with the Norwegians, Islanders, Laplanders, Kilops,
Borandians, Siberians, Zemblians, and Samojedes, who are Neighbors to the
Tartars and Tingorses, in his 46 Chapter he expresses himself after this
manner. There having fallen into my hands several Geographical Charts of sundry
eminent and much celebrated Authors, I am much amazed to see how they are
mistaken in the position of Zembla, which they place much nearer the North Pole
than really it is; they divide it likewise by the Sea from Greenland, and place
it far distant from it, when as indeed those two Countries are Contiguous, the
Coasts of Greenland butting upon the Coasts of Zembla, so as did not the great
quantity of Snow, and the violence of the cold render those Borders
uninhabitable, the passage would be very easy by Land from Greenland to Zembla
and from Zembla passing the Paternoster Mountains to enter into Samojedia,
from thence into Tartary or Muscovy, as one pleased: I was amazed likewise to
see they had described the Straight called Voygat, not above ten French Leagues
in length, whereas it contains above five and thirty Dutch Leagues, which is
six times as much. Again, they would persuade us that through that Straight our
ships might pass into the great Tartarian Ocean, which is a mistake. And
although they indeed do affirm that in the time of Prince Maurice of Nassaw, a
Dutch Vessel passed that way into that Ocean, yet it is a manifest error, that
Straight being bounded, as I said before, by the Paternoster Mountains, which
are half a League high, and the tops of them covered with perpetual Snow, which
never dissolves. And of this I can give a positive testimony, having been my
self in that Straight under those Mountains in the Dogdays, which is the
hottest time of the year.

From the Steeple of the old Church of Amsterdam, I had a good Prospect of the
Town, and the great number of Ships lying upon one side of it, like a Wood; and
all the Towns about it. The Roofs of the Houses being sharp, it is a most
uneven Town to be looked upon downward, as it is a handsome one to be looked on
upward; and is not so divertising or pleasing to the sight, as some Towns in
France and Italy, which have flatter Roofs, or else are covered with a fine
black Slat or Ardoise. Upon this, and all other Towers of the Town, a Trumpet
is sounded at Midnight, and in other parts of the City at six a Clock night and
morning. At eleven a Clock, the time of going on to the Exchange, there is good
Music at the Stadthuis, given by the Earl of Leicester. They make good Harmony
also every hour in playing upon their Chimes and Bells in most Steeples. And
there is a Musick-house or Entertaining-house, where any one is admitted for a
Stiver, hears most sorts of Music, sees many good Waterworks, and diverse
motions by Clock-work, Pictures, and other Divertisements.

During my stay at Amsterdam, I had the opportunity of seeing diverse Learned
Men, and Persons of Note. Dr. Ruish showed us many Curiosities in Anatomy, as
the Skeletons of young Children, and Faetus's of all Ages, neatly set together,
and very white; the Lymphatick vessels so preserved, as to see the valves in
them. A Liver excarnated, showing the Minute vessels, all shining and clear.
The Muscles of Children dissected and kept from corruption: entire Bodies
preserved; the face of one was very remarkable, without the least spot or
change of color or alteration of the lineaments, from what might be expected
immediately after death: he had then kept it two years, and hoped it would so
continue. Dr. Swammerdam showed us diverse of his Experiments which he has set
down in his Treatise De Respiratione; and a very sair Collection of Insects
brought from several Countries; a Stagg-fly of a very great bigness; an Indian
Scolopendria, or Forty-foot; a fly called Ephemeron, and many other
Curiosities. Old Glawber the Chemist showed us his Laboratory: And we received
much civility from Blasius the Physic Professor who has wrote a Comment upon
Veslingius.

The Jews live more handsomely and splendidly here, than in any other place:
Their chief Synagogue is large, adorned with Lamps of Brass and Silver. We
happened to be there at the Feast of their Newyear; so that there blowing of
Horns, shouting and singing was not omitted: Some of them understand diverse
Languages. I saw one Moses di Pas, a Learned young Man, and Orobio, a Physician
of Note. And I was sorry to see diverse here to profess themselves publicly
Jews, who had lived at least reputed Christians, for a long time in other
places: One who had been a Franciscan Friar thirty years; and another who had
been Professor some years at Tholouze, and before that Physician to the King
of Spain. Juda Leo, a Jew, has taken great pains in making a Model of the
Temple of Solomon, of Solomon's House, the Fort of the Temple, the Tabernacle,
the Israelites encamping, and other Curiosities. I was present at the
Circumcision of a Child; which is performed by thrusting a Probe in between the
Glans and Praeputium, and separating it, or dilating the Praeputium, so as the
inward Skin may be drawn forward as well as the outward; then by applying an
Instrument joynted like a Carpenters Rule, or a Sector, the Skin is held fast
beyond the Glans, and with a broad Incision-knife, or Circumcision-knife, the
Foreskin is cut off close to the Instrument; and what remains of Skin is
immediately put back, the blood stopped with Powders, and a Plaster applied;
the Relations and Acquaintance singing all the while, whereby the cries of the
Infant are less heard.

Leaving Amsterdam, I passed by a peculiar Burial-place of the Jews, who are
not permitted to interr their dead within the Walls* by Overskerk, Bamburg, and
in six or seven hours arrived at Vtretcht, in a Boat drawn with Horses through
artificial Cuts of Water, which is the way of Traveling in Holland, Vtretcht,
and diverse other Provinces of the Low Countries.

Vtrecht is an ancient, large, handsome City, and chief of the Province Vtrecht.
of the same name, called formerly Antonina, and afterward Vltrajectum. Long
famous for its Episcopal See founded by Dagobert, King of France, who endowed
it richly with Lands and Possessions: Willebald, or Willebrode, an Englishman,
was their first Bishop, who converted these Countries unto Christianity; and
the following Bishops grew so powerful, that they were able to bring many
thousand men into the field, and to wage great Wars against the Counts of
Holland: Their Succession also continued for above Nine hundred years. It is
now an University, founded by the States in the Year 1639. I shall not trouble
you with the Names of the Professors; the Learned Mr. Ray, whom I had the
honor to meet in diverse places abroad, having already caused to be printed the
Series Lectionum of this and many other Universities in the Low Countries,
Germany, and Italy, in his Observations Topographical, Moral, Physiological,
set forth 1673. The great Church has a very high Tower, or three Steeples one
above another: From the highest of which I had not only a good sight of the
Town it self, which lay under mine Eye like a Platform, but of many others
also; Vtretcht being in a plain slat Country, and so well seated, and
encompassed with so populous a Country, that in a days Journey a man may go
from hence to any one of fifty walled Towns and Cities. The English Church here
is an ancient Building; the Pillar in the middle of it, whose Foundation could
not be laid but upon Bullshides, is much taken notice of: It was built 1099.
and has the Picture of a Bull upon it with this Inscription; Accipe Posteritas
quod per tua saecula narres,
Taurinis cutibus fundo solidata columna est.


There is an old Library belonging to this Church, which contains diverse old
Books and Manuscripts. A large Bille in six Volumes, painted and gilded after a
very ancient manner: Two Idols, taken (in time of War) long since in Germany,
and given to this place by the Emperor Henry the Fourth, are worth the seeing,
not so much for their neatness, as their Antiquity and odd shape: As also a
Horn made out of a Tooth, said to be given at the same time. There are also
three Unicorns Horns, little differing in length; the longest being five foot
and an half: I drank out of one of them, the end being tipp'd with Silver, and
made hollow to serve for a Cup. These were of the Sea-Vnicorn, or the Horn or
long wreathed Tooth of some Sea-Animal much like it, taken in the Northern Sea;
of which I have seen many, both in Public Repositories, and in Private Hands.
Two such as these, the one Ten foot long, were presented not many years since
to the King of Denmark, being taken near to Nova Zembla; and I have seen some
full fifteen foot long; some wreathed very thick, some not so much, and others
almost plain: Some largest and thickest at the End near the head; others are
largest at some distance from the Head: Some very sharp at the end or point,
and others blunt. My honored Father Sir Thomas Brown had a very fair piece of
one which was formerly among the Duke of Curland's Rarities, but after that he
was taken Prisoner by Douglas in the Wars between Sweden and Poland, it came
into the hands of my Uncle Colonel Hatcher, of whom my Father had it, he had
also a piece of this sort of Unicorns Horn burnt black, out of the Emperor of
Russia's Repositorie, given him by Dr. Arthur Dee, who was Son to Dr. John Dee,
and also Physician to the Emperor of Russia, when his Chambers were burned, in
which he preserved his Curiosities. I have seen a walking Staff, a Scepter, a
Scabbard for a Sword, Boxes, and other Curiosities made out of this Horn, but
was never so fortunate as from experience to confirm its Medical Efficacy
against I oisons, contagious Diseases, or any other evident effect of it,
although I have known it given several times, and in great quantity, Mr.
Charlton has a good Unicorns Horn, Sir Joseph Williamson gave one of them to
the Royal Society. The Duke of Florence has a fair one. The Duke of Saxony a
strange one, and besides many others, I saw eight of them together upon one
Table in the Emperors treasure, and I have one at present that for the neat
wreathing and Elegant shape gives place to none. But of these Unicorns Horns no
man sure has so great a Collection as the King of Denmark; and his Father had
so many, that he was able to spare a great number of them, to build a
Magnificent Throne out of Unicorns Horns.

I had the honor to see diverse Persons of Note in this City; as D. Cyprianus
ab Oesterga, Dr. Regius, Voetius, the only Member then left alive of the Synod
of Dort and others; but missed the sight of the learned Anna Maria Skurman, who
was then gone out of Town, and was forced to content my self with beholding her
Picture, well drawn by her own hand, with this Inscription of hers under it:
Cernitis hic picta nostros in Imagine vultus,
Si negat a^sformam gratia vestra dabit.


The Painters Hall is considerable, wherein are many good pieces to be seen of
several Masters: Amongst which there are good Heads by Van Colen and Tuart;
Land-skips by Soft-lever; and good Drapery, especially in some Turkish Habits,
by Vander Mere.

This Town is also beautified with a fair Piazza or Marketplace, diverse long
Streets, and a Pall Mall with five rows of Trees on each side. In the Church of
St. Katherine is the Tomb of my Lord Gorge. Though I had seen France and Italy,
and the Noble Cities thereof, which are worthily admired by all, yet I was much
surprised upon the first sight of the United Provinces, especially of Holland,
and the adjoining places. He that has observed the easy accommodation for
Travel therein, both by Land and Water, their excellent order and regular
course in all things; the number of Learned Men: the abundance of Varieties in
all kinds; the industry, frugality and wealth of the People; their numerous
good Towns; their extraordinary neatness in their Buildings and Houses; their
proper Laws and administration of Justice; and their incredible number of
Shipping and Boats, will think it an omission to rest in the fight of other
Countries without a view of this. A Country of little extent, and soon
traveled over, but so replenished with People, with good Cities, fair Towns
and Villages, as not to be met with upon so little a compass of ground, except
perhaps in China.

From Vtrecht, in two hours, I came to Friswick, and passed over the River Leck
to Vianen, where there is little remarkable besides the House and Gardens of
Count Brederode, one of the Ancient Nobility of Holland, or according to common
esteem, of the most Noble Family of all; the Family of the Egmonds being
formerly esteemed the Richest; the Wassenaer's the most ancient, and the
Brederodes the Noblest. The Mount in this Garden serves for the Rampart to the
Town, and on a round Bullwark are diverse small brass Guns planted. The Statua's
of the twelve Caesar's, of Aristotle, the Pyramids and Partitions, with the
Paintings upon the wall, are the rest of its Ornaments.

From hence I passed still by Boat through the Land of Arkel, some say, derived
from Hercules; belonging formerly to the Lords of Gorchom and Arkeland, till by
Mary, daughter to the last Lord of Arkeland, it fell to John Lord of Egmond,
and was afterward sold to William, the sixth Earl of Holland. I arrived this
night at Gorchom, a Town well seated, near three Rivers, the Ling, the Wael*
and the Maes. The Marketplace is fair; the Stadthuis is sunk somewhat on one
side. The Governor has a good House, and the Church a very high thick
Steeple: the Works are of Earth: the Watergate is handsome, and over it in
Great Letters in this inscription; Civitas in qua maxim Cives legibus parent,
and in pace beata, and bello invicta. 1642.


The more remarkable because it made good its Inscription in the year 1672.
When Louis the Fourteenth, King of France, came down with so powerful an Army
into the Low Countries, that in that Summers Expedition he took thirty walled
Towns and Cities, this Watergate being the Limit to his Conquests this way,
beyond which his Forces were not able to attempt any thing.

Leaving Gorcum, I passed by Worcum, on the other side of the River, and then
by the Castle of Lovestein, strongly seated and well fortified; and therefore
has been often made use of to secure Persons of Note. Sir George Ascue of late
years suffered his Imprisonment herein, and formerly Barnevelt; upon which
occasion this Castle has been much spoken of, and has given the name to that
whole party who sided with him, well known at present by the name of the
Lovestein Faction. Passing on further by the Maes, I left Proye on the left
hand, and Huesden on the right, and the next day morning arrived at the Bosche.

The Bosse*
Hertogen Bosche, Sylva Ducis, Boscum Ducis, Boisleduc, Bolduc, takes its name
from a Wood belonging to the Dukes of Brabant. It is a strong pleasant City,
seated upon the River Disa or Deese, which enters the Maes, about two Leagues
below it; one of the greatest Cities in Brabant; and for its strength, for
which it is beholden both to Nature and to Art, the States of the United
Provinces possess not any one more considerable, and is a very good Frontier
against all Enemies on this side: It is encompassed on all sides with Fens and
Marshy Grounds. The Avenues to it are by narrow Causeys, made turning and
winding, to be commanded in all places by one or other of the six Sconces or
Forts built at some distance without the Town for its greater Security. Besides
which, the Hollanders having some reason to be jealous of the Inhabitants,
whose affections might incline them toward the neighboring Princes, of whose
Religion most of them are, they have built a Citadel within the Town, a Briel
or pair of Spectacles to look more accurately into their Affairs. It is a
handsome regular Fort of five Bastions, each Curtain is 84 ordinary paces long;
the Faces of each Bastion 63; and the Flank or Neck 24. There is a handsome
House of Stone for the Centry at the point of each Bastion, and the middle of
each Curtain, every one of which cost Seven hundred Guldens. Here is also a
Field Canon of an extraordinary length, said to be able to fling a Bullet
almost as far as Bommel. The Piazza in this Town is Triangular.

This City was made an Episcopal See, 1559. The Cathedral is Dedicated to St.
John. In the Quire are painted the Arms of many of the Knights of the Golden
Fleece. And over the upper Stalls or Seats, an Inscription in French, which
contains the History of the first Institution, and Model of this Order, by the
most High and mighty Prince Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, Lorain, and
Brabant, in the year 1429, who then named four and twenty Knights, besides the
head of the Order, to whom he gave a Chain of Gold, and a Golden Fleece; for
which this Inscription was thought fit to be placed upon his Tomb,

Pour maintenir l'eglise
Qui est de Dieu Maison,
I'ay mis sus le noble Order,
Qu'on nomme le Toison.
Besides diverse Statua's and Pillars. There are also several Monuments of the
Bishops of Bosche and others.

This Town was taken from the King of Spain by the Forces of the Confederate
Estates, in the year 1628. after a long and chargeable Siege; in which the
little Sconce, one of the Forts toward the South, did excellent Service.

Diverse of the Nuns were still alive in this Town, but at Vtrecht they were all
dead.

Breda.
From the Bosche we traveled through a plain Country, somewhat Sandy, to Breda
upon the River Merck: A place very considerable, pleasantly seated* and
well-fortified. It has formerly had more Outworks than at present: For they
have taken away the Crown-works; and left only the Half-moons and Horn-works,
and Conserves or Contregards about the Half-moons. There is a large Ditch of
Water round the Counterscarp, and a small Ravelin between each Bastion, joined
to the Rampart within side of the Ditch. There is also a double Hay or
Quickset-hedge almost quite round the Town, besides Palisado's. The Parapet is
very thick, and strengthened with a row of Elms, and seconded with another row
at three or four yards distance, round the Town; the bodies of the Bastions are
sunk down or hollowed away, and filled with a thicket of Elms. The Half Moons
are the like without the To wn, and after all, a brest-work between the Town
and the Bastions; and Cavaliers upon several places of the Rampart.

This Town belongs unto the Prince of Orange, unto whom it has descended by
the right of the house of Nassaw, by the Marriage of Engelbert the seventh Earl
of that house, with Mary daughter and Heir of Philip the last Lord thereof,
about the year 1400. It was taken by the Spaniards in the beginning of the Low
Country Wars, and was afterward surprised by the Dutch, by a stratagem
performed by eighty men hid in a Boat covered over with Turf, and let into the
Castle. In the year 1625. the Spaniards took it again, as by Inscriptions and
Chronograms are to be seen in diverse places, as that over the door of the
Church.

aMbrosI spInoLae VIgILantIa breDa eXpVgnata. As also this,

Philippus hIspanIae reX gVbernante IsabeLLa CLara EVgenIa Infanta, obsIDente
spInoLa qVaternIs regIbVs frVstra ConIVrantIbVs breDa VICtor potItVr.
Afterward it was besieged and taken by Frederick Hendrick Prince of Orange, as
an inscription at the West end of the Church sets it down.

Auxilio solius Dei, Auspiciis confoederati Belgij, Ferdinando Austriaco
Hispaniae Infantae cum ingenti exercitu frustra succurrente, a Iulij 23
obsessam ad 19 Augusti oppugnatam. Fredericus Henricus Princeps araVsIVs
breDaMeXpVgnat seX^a OCtobrIs. The Church is fair and has many good Monuments,
as Renesse's Tomb; a Monument for Sir Thomas Alisbury set up by the Lord
Chancellor Hide; an old Tomb erected 1349. for John Lord of Lech and Breda; the
Tomb of Grave Engleberg Van Nassaw and his family on the side of the Wall; the
Here Van Horn and his three Wives; but the Principal Monument is that of Grave
Hendrick Van Nassaw, whose Armor is supported by four Warriers upon their
Knees; he built the Castle of Breda, which is at present both strong and
beautiful: I observed the place where the Turf-Boat came in, and where the
Prince came over into the Town. The Gallery, the Garden, the Walks, and Dials
are worth the seeing, the Town is handsomely built, populous, and generally has
a great Garrison in it.

Gertruydenberg.
Leaving Breda we soon came by Land to St. Gertruydenberg, the last Town on the
North of Brabant, where it joined to the Province of Holland, a small place,
but a good Town for fishing, lying upon a Hill near the great broad Water
called de Waert, made by the falling of the Maes and many other Rivers into it.
This Town is fortified and Garrisoned. The Church and Steeple have been Large
and fair, and the ruins of the Latter are observable, in regard that this
Steeple was shot down by a Stratagem of the Prince of Orange, while the
Governor and chief of the Town were upon it, to observe a false alarm in the
Prince's Camp, and so lost themselves and the Town. We passed from hence over a
large Water which has overflowed a great part of the Country upon one side of
it, no less than seventy two Parishes being drowned at once, the Village of
Ramsdun only escaping, and so by an old Tower called the house of Murvey, to
the Maiden Town of Dort, or Dordrecht.

Dort.
Dordracum, so called by some from Duri or Dureti forum, at present Dort, being
seated in the Waves of those great Lakes made by the Maes and Waal, is not
unaptly from its situation compared to a Swans nest, it is reckoned the first
and chief Town of South Holland, in respect of its antiquity, as having served
to secure Odocer in his retreat almost eight hundred years since, and also in
respect of its Privileges in having the Mint here, and being the Staple for
Rhenish wine and English Cloth.

In this Town are many fair houses and pleasant Gardens. The great Church is
large, the Steeple 312 steps high; the top thereof being made of four large
Dyalls. There is also an Exchange or Place for Merchants to meet. The English
have two Churches, and the French one. The Key or Head to the water side is
handsome, and the Country about very pleasant; we saw the Chamber wherein the
Synod of Dort was assembled 1611. a large fair room; and took a collation in
the same house, in a high turret overlooking the Town and Country: Our seats
Moving round about the Table continually; so as the diversity of the prospect
made it more delightful. The great Vessels roundbellied, which trade between
Coln and this City seemed strange; as also the long Luyck or Liege-boats; and
the number of People that continually live in them. At my going away from hence
I embarked in a Vessel bound for the Island of Walcheren, sailing by most of
the Islands of Zealand and in sight of diverse good Towns, as Willemstadt,
Zirickzee, Tergoes; observing in some places where the Sea had overflowed the
Land; and in others where the Industry of the Inhabitants still keep it out, by
keeping up their banks, and thatching the Shoars of the Sea. Ter-Vere.
We Landed at Ter-Vere, where there is a good Haven and Harbor for Ships, the
Walls were built in the year 1357, toward the Sea are round towers. The Piazza
is long. The Scotch have had a Factory here for above two hundred years, and
the Marquess of this Place did formerly make one of the three States, by which
Zealand was Governed. The Abbot of St Nicholas in Middleburg representing the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the Towns of Middleburg, Zirickze, Ter-Vere,
Flussing, Tolen, Martins-dike, Romerswal and Tergoes, supplying the Third: over
against this place where a Town had formerly sunk into the Sea, the Steeple
only remains to be seen. From hence to Middleburg the way is Paved with Brick;
as it is also from Town to Town in most places of Holland,

Middleburg.
Middleburg is the chief Town in the Island Walachria, seated almost in the
middle of it, being well built, large rich, and Populous, it is the fourth Port
for the East India trade: has a large, broad Water within the Town, and a
straight cut through the Land to carry Vessels out to Sea, the whole is very
well Fortified, the Officers here are chosen by strangers or Foreigners, the
Churches are many and remarkable, the new Church is of an eight-square figure
with a Cupola, the Tower of the old great Church very high, the Stadthuise with
the old statua's about it, the round Piazza, and many private buildings are
Considerable, and the whole Country about it is fruitful; either divided into
Gardens and Orchards, or Planted with Madder, Pompions, or Grain and Fruits.
The Zealanders are generally addicted to the interest of the Prince of Orange,
and great Lovers of his Person. I found them not a little delighted that the
Prince had been with them some days before, and was made Premier Noble, or
chief of the States of Zealand; which was chiefly brought about, as I was
informed, by Pensioner Hubert, le Sage, Duvelaer and Vriebergen, formerly no
great friends to the Prince, especially Vriebergen, who was the most earnest of
any to bring him in, in despite to the Hollanders, for General W^rts his sake,
who being set over the Zealand forces by those of Amsterdam lately affronted
Vriebergen's Son, who was a Colonel at the Head of his Regiment. I was
entertained at Middleburg very courteously by Mr. Hill the Minister, who also
sent his Kinsman with me to Flussing. Flissinga or Vlussing has Stone-Walls
toward the Sea, Flushing.
and Mudworks toward the Land; a very good Port, and a strong Town; the waves
of the Sea washing it walls; it was one of the first Towns which the Low
Country men took from the Spaniards in the year 1572, and was made Cautionary
to Queen Elizabeth together with Rammaki ns and the Briel. 1585. The renowned
Sir. Philip Sidney being the first Governor of it, and surrendered by King
James to the United states, 1616. The Sea shore here abouts is not only faced
with rushes, flaggs and reeds staked down as high as the Tide usually arises,
but it is also strongly bound over with Osiers and hurdles and great Posts
driven in to break the force of the Water, and secure the Piles which make the
Harbor or Havens mouth. The Townhouse is handsomely built, standing in the
Piazza, having three rows of Pillars in the Front one above another; the Lower
Dorick, the second Ionick, and the highest Corinthian; and on the top there is
a Gallery or Balcony to Discover ships at Sea. This is the third Port for the
East- India trade; Amsterdam and Rotterdam being the first and second: here lay
many great ships in the middle of the Town, and considerable men of War, as the
St. Patrick, and the Admiral of Zealand: we saw them also building of diverse
ships, and when the Prince was here they lanched one to divertise him, to which
he gave the name of William Frederick, they also presented him with a Golden
Bottle; that being the Arms of the Town: the Prince Landed at Armuyden, and
went from thence to Tergoes, and thence to Breda; they reported his
entertainment in Walcheren amounted to fifty thousand Guldens. The Women in
this Island wear most of them red Cloth and straw-Hats; if a Man dies a great
bundle of Straw is laid at the Door, if a Boy, a little one if a Woman, the
straw lies on the left side of the Door: when any woman is brought to bed, they
fasten a piece of Lawne to the ring and rapper of the Door, and make it up into
a little baby or puppet finely pleated, and in such manner, as to distinguish
of what sex the young Child is.

Returning to Middleburg by Land I observed there was a row of Trees round the
Town between the moat and rampart, where ordinarily there is only a breast-work
or a hedge, and embarked at Middleburg again, and passed down the River by the
fort Rammakins, and so for the Schelde, Sailing up that noble River till we had
passed the Fort, Frederick Henrick, and came to Lillo; where we stayed till the
Vessel was searched. Over against Lillo, lies another Fortification, called
Lifgens hoek; the Fort de la croix is the last that belongs to the Hollanders,
and lies on the North side of the River; the Banks are cut nigh to it, and the
Country drowned for its greater Security. The Spanish Forts hereabouts to
defend the Frontiers, are the Philip, the Pearl, and the Maria.

The River Scaldis or Scheld mentioned by Caesar is a gallant River, affording
plenty of Fish, and convenience for Navigation and passage unto several noted
places: It arises in the Country of Vermandois, passing to Cambray,
Valencienne, so to Tournay or Dornick, Oudenard, Gaunt, Rupelmond and Antwerp,
and pursuing its course is afterward divided into two streams, whereof the
Southern is called the Hont; the other runs by Bergen ap Zome, and afterward
into the Sea between the Isles of Zealand.

Antwerp.
The next day morning we went on our Voyage still up the Scaldis or Schelde,
and arrived at Antwerp. Where I had the good fortune to see Mr. Hartop; one
very well known in all those parts, and of high esteem for his personal
strength and valor. A Gentleman also so courteous that he makes it his
business to oblige strangers; he showed me many curiosities in this City,
carrying me with him in his Coach.

The Walls of Antwerp are very large, faced with Brick and Freestone, having
diverse rows of Trees upon them, broad walks, and conveniences for the Coaches,
to make their tour upon. The Bastions are not so large as generally they build
now a days, yet after the modern* way. The Ditch is very broad and deep, the
Country about it, all Gardens. The Citadel is a regular Fortification of five
Bastions, wherein lies always a Garrison of Spanish Soldiers: upon every
curtain there are two mounts or Cavaliers; and between them below, a row of
building or lodgings for the Soldiers; the ears of the Bastions are cut down,
and Casamates made or Case matte, and Palisado's set round upon the Esplanade;
the Walls are lined with excellent Brick and Stone, nor is there any where a
more regular beautiful Fortification of five Bastions that is finished: it
commands the City, the River and the Country: besides this Citadel there is
another Fort within the Town near the Schelde, to command the River, having
eight Guns in it, called St. Laurence Fort.

The Exchange is handsome, supported by 36 Pillars, every one of a different
carving, four streets lead unto it, so that standing in the middle we see
through every one of them. The Mere or Largest street is considerable for the
water running under it, and for the meeting of Coaches upon it every evening to
make their tour through the streets of the City, which are clean and beautiful;
at one end of it stands a large Brass Crucifix upon a Pedestal of Marble. The
Jesuits Church goes far beyond any of that bigness that I have seen out of
Italy. The Front is noble, with the Statua of Ignatius Loyala on the top. A
great part of the inside of the Roof was painted by Rubens, and some of it by
Van Dyke: there be many Excellent pieces of flowers done by Segers a Jesuit;
the Carving and gilding of all the works is exquisite: The Library of the
College is great, and the Books disposed handsomely into four Chambers: the
Founder hereof was Godfridus Houtappel, whose Monument, together with his Wife
and Children are worth the seeing, in a Chapel on the South side of this
Church. In the Church of the Carmeli tes is a large Silver Statua of our Lady,
and models of Cities in stone. Onser Lieven-Vrowen Kerck, or the Church of our
blessed Lady is the greatest in the City; and the Steeple one of the fairest in
World, five hundred foot high: one of their feet is eleven of our inches; so as
it is 459 of our feet: In this Church there is much carving, and a great number
of Pictures highly esteemed; among which one piece is much taken notice of,
drawn by Quintin at first a Smith, who made the neat Iron work of the Well
before the West door; and afterward to obtain his Mistress, he proved a famous
Painter; his head is set up in Stone at the entrance of the Church, with an
inscription and this verse; Connubialis amor de Mulcibre fecit Apellem.


I was at the famous Abbey of St. Michael, pleasantly seated upon the Schelde;
where, among other curiosities, I saw a glass, which represented the Pictures
of our Savior and and the Virgin Mary, collected from the putting together of
diverse other heads: One was represented from a Picture wherein were thirteen
faces, and another from one of twelve: over the blessed Virgin was this
Inscription; Diva nitet varis expressa Maria Figuris.


The Countess of Brabant's Tomb, who was drowned, and her Statua, as also the
Monument of Ortelius, are here shown. Marcarius Simoneus was then Abbot, the
Monks 63. Near unto the Wharf-gate is the Church of St. Walburgis, an English
Saint, who contributed much toward the conversion of these Countries.

The Townhouse is fair, the House built for the East-country Merchants is very
stately and large, but runs now to ruin, in this I saw, among other
curiosities, diverse strange Musical instruments, which at present are not
understood, or at least not made use of: The Hessen house has been also
formerly considerable. The water which they make use of in Brewing, is brought
by an Aqueduct from Herentall about thirty miles distant from hence; and is
conveyed into the Town by a large Channel, peculiarly walled in by it self
where it passes the Ditch; in this City are many good collections of Pictures
both Ancient and Modern, and excellent Miniature or Liming by Gonsol; one fine
piece, which I saw was peculiarly remarkable, it being the work of 35 several
Masters.

Brussels.
From Antwerp, I passed to Brussels by water changing Boats five times, and
going through diverse locks, by reason the Country is so much higher about
Brussels, and the water above two hundred foot lower at Antwerp. At Fontaine a
league and half from Brussels, three Rivers cross one another: one of them
being carried over a bridge. The Piazza of Brussels is fair, and oblong in
figure; upon one of the longest sides stands the Townhouse, and over against
it the Kings-house, where upon a Scaffold hanged with Velvet, Count, Egmond and
Horn were ^^headed, the whole Piazza being hanged with Black Cloth. Upon the
top of the Townhouse, stands St. Michael, the Patron of the City, in Brass,
Count Marsin's house formerly belonging to the Prince of Orange, has a fair
Court, and overlooks a good part of the City, but a quarter of it is ruined by
Lightning. The Thunderbolt or Stone which they affirm to have effected it, is
bigger than two Men's heads, and hangs up upon the door at the entrance. The
Jesuits Church is handsome, and in it the fair white Tower is beautifully
gilded at the top. The Carmelites Church has a noble Altar, and near unto the
Church is the Statua of a pissing boy, which is a continual Conduit. The Armory
was well furnished as we were informed, before the Governors of the low
Countries sold the Arms; and Cassel Roderigo, the Governor, left it very bare.
There remains the Armor of Charles the fifth, of Duke Albert, of the Prince of
Parma, Ernestus, and of the Duke d'Alva, and of the Duke Alberts horse, who
being shot saved his Master, and died the same day twelve month; Spears for the
hunting the wild Boar, one with two Pistols; The Armor of Cardinal Infant,
and of an Indian King; A Polish musket which carries six hundred paces; Charles
the Fifth's Sword for the making the Knights of the Golden Fleece, and Henry
the Fourth's Sword sent to declare war; Good Bucklers for Defense, and some
well wrought; especially one with the Battle of Phrrhus and his Elephants; and
banners taken with Francis King of France, at the Battle of Pavia.

Somewhat like Godfrey of Bouillons shooting the three Pigeons near the Tower
of David, is the shot which Infanta Isabella made, when with an Arrow she
killed a Bird, in memory whereof, a Bird pierced with an Arrow is set upon the
top of a Tower in the Court, which is large; and if the New Buildings and
Design were continued, it would be very handsome Before the Court stands five
brass Statues. The Park is pleasant, with Trees set in order, and adorned with
Grotto's, Fountains, and Waterworks, which come very near the Italian; one
piece somewhat imitating Frascati, in which all Musical Instruments are
imitated, and a perpetual motion attempted: and on the Front of the Buildings
stand the Caesar's heads. But the Echo is most remarkable; which may perfectly
be distinguished to ten or twelve Replies. The greatest Church is that of St.
Gudula; in which is her Statua, the Devil striving to blow out the Light of her
Lanthorn. The two Chapels therein are remarkable; the one built by Leopoldus*
very fair on the outside: the other toward the North, has been visited by
five Kings; in which is the Host which bled being stabbed by the Jews. In the
Dominican Church is the Monument of the Duke of Cleve and his Duchess, in
Corinthian brass. But for a New Church that of the Begennes, or Pious Maids, is
very considerable; there being Eight hundred of them in this City, who have a
particular place allotted to them, where they have built this milk-white
Church. The Plague was much in this place at that time, three hundred Houses
being shut, up and Garlands placed on the doors, in the middle of which was
written IHS. I saw the English Nunnery, and other considerable Buildings. And
after I had refreshed my self at the Fish-Tavern, which is worth the seeing,
especially for two Rooms in it, furnished from top to bottom with very good
Pictures, I returned to Antwerp.

October. 4. I traveled through an open Country, and lodged at Molin Brusle,
brusle. The Spanish Soldiers met us upon the Road this day, some of them well
mounted and armed, and begged of us, and were well satisfied with a small
Benevolence. The next day we entered the Country of Liege, and passed great
Heaths, and on the Sixth, in the morning arrived at Maestreicht.

Maestreicht.
Trajectum ad Mos^m or Maestreicht, is a strong Town, seated upon the Maes,
four Leagues below Liege. The Outworks are very considerable; the Wall is old.
Toward the South-east lies a Hill, which arises gently, and overlooks part of
the Town. Under this Hill is one of the noblest Quarries of Stone in the World.
To secure the Town from the disadvantage it might receive from this Hill, there
was formerly a Fort built upon it, but it has been long since slighted; and
they have made out an Horn-work within Musket Shot of it, and the Bastion
answering to it is made very high, to cover the Town. On the other side of the
River stands Wicke, very well fortified also, and rather stronger than
Maestreicht, into which they might retire if the Town should be taken by Storm,
it being united to Maestreicht by a handsome Bridge over the Maes, consisting of
Nine Arches. All about Wicke the Country is flat: there are many Inhabitants in
it, and a handsome Glass-house.

The private Houses of Maestreicht are generally covered with a black Slat, or
Ardoise, otherwise not very beautiful. The Townhouse is fair, seated in one of
the Piazza's, built of white Stone; it has Nine large Windows in a row on each
side, and within is very well painted by Theodorus van der Schuer, who was
Painter to the Queen of Sweden. In another Piazza is a Fountain, rows of Trees,
and the great Church. This Town was besieged and taken from the King of Spain
by the Confederate States in the year 1632.

October the Seventh I dined at Gollop, a small place, and came that night to
Aken, Aix la Chapelle, or Aquisgrane, an ancient noble City, the Inhabitants
Courteous, and much frequented by reason of its hot Baths, of which I shall
speak more particularly in my Journey from Colen to London. Leaving Aken I
traveled toward Juliers or Gulick, but it being late before we arrived, the
Gates were shat up, so as we went only under the Walls, leaving it on our right
hand. Near unto Gulick runs a shallow swift River, called the Roer. At the
Mouth of it, where it falls into the Maes, is seated a considerable Town,
called Roermonde, through which I passed in the year 1673. when Sir Lioncl
Jenkens and Sir Joseph Willamson were sent Plenipotentiaries to Cologne, in our
Journey from Antwerp to that City. We then pas^ed the Country of Brabant, by
the way of Thornhaut, Weert, Roermonde, and the next Night passing by Erkelens,
lodged at Castro, or Caster, in Gulickland, where there are still the remains
of an old Castle, Roermonde.
formerly built for the Defense of that part of the Country. Roermonde is
seated upon a rising Hill, near the River Roer, has a College of Jesuits in
it, a handsome Piazza, and an old Abbey with diverse Monuments very ancient,
founded by Gerard Earl of Guelderland. From this Town their Excellencies were
saluted with the Guns from their Walls, charged with Bullets. The Spaniards in
most places striving to express the highest of their respects.

From Gulick I traveled to Cologne, where I arrived October the 10 th, 1668.

A JOURNEY FROM COLEN TO VIENNA.
COlen, Coln, or Colonia Agrippina, was anciently the Capital City of the Vbii,
a people who were at first possessed of the Countries now called Berg and
March, but being overrun by the Germans next to them, Agrippa, Lieutenant of
Gallia, received them into protection, and placed them upon this side of the
Roman shore of the Rhine, where they built this place, and called it Opidum
Vbiorum, and the Romans seating themselves here for the defense of the Country,
in Honor of Agrippina, daughter to Germanicus, and wife to Claudius, whose
Birth place it was, gave it afterward the Name of Colonia Agrippina. It is at
present one of the largest, if not the greatest, of any City in Germany,
secured toward the Land by a high Wall, and two deep Trenches, and toward the
Water by a Wall of Stone. The Rhine renders it delightful upon one side and
diverse rows of Trees enclose the Town toward the Land. They have some
Outworks, as Half-moons and Ravelins, but their best security is in the great
number of men which they are able to raise within themselves. Many of the
Streets are broad, and paved with broad stones.

It received the Christian Faith very early, and Maternus was their Bishop
above 1350 years since, who subscribed, amongst others, to the Council of
Arles. They have a great number of Churches, and well endowed, which take up a
great part of the Town; the Prebends and Canons Houses having in many places
Vincyards, and large Gardens adjoining. Toward the North end of the Town, the
Church of St. Kunibald is considerable. The Convent of the Dominicans is fair,
and newly built, with a Garden in the Court, and all the Chambers uniform. The
Jesuits Church is well built and stored with rich Copes, Altar-pieces, and
other Ornaments. In the Church of St. Gereon, a Saint of great name here,
martyred about Colen in the time of Maximianus, are about a thousand Saints
heads, and on each side of the Altar a large Statua, whereof one is of a Moor;
and under the Quire another Church. The Convent of the Carmelites is also
considerable, wherein the Treaty of Peace was held with good accommodation in
it, though with no success, in the year 1673. In the Church of St. Vrsula is
her Tomb and the Tombs of diverse of the Eleven thousand Virgins, martyred by
the Huns. Upon the Monument of St. Vrsula is this Inscription; Sepulchrum
Sanctae Vrsulae indicio Columbae detectum.
Upon many of the Tombs which are old, are Crosses and Lamps. Many Bones and
Heads of the Martyrs are also kept in this Church. The Cathedral is dedicated
to St. Peter, and is very large, but not finished. The Body of the Church has
four rows of Pillars within it. The Quire is handsome and very high: behind it
are believed to be the Tombs of the three Wise men which came from the East to
worship our Savior, or the Kings of Arabia, of whom it was prophesied that
they should bring Gifts, commonly called the three Kings of Colen: Melchior,
who offered Gold, Gaspar Frankincense, and Balthazar Myrrh. Their Bodies, as
the account goes, were first removed to Constantinople by Helena, the Mother of
Constantine the Great; then to Milan by Eustorsius Bishop thereof; and they
have now rested at Colen for above five hundred years, being translated from
Milan hither by Rainoldus Bishop of Colen, in the year 1164. There are also
diverse other Monuments of Bishops, and Noble Persons in Brass and Stone, and
one in the shape of a Castle with six Towers. The Canons of this Church are all
Noblemen; among whom the Duke of Newburg, who ordinarily resides at
Dusseldorff, about twenty English miles below this City, upon the Rhine, has
two Sons. In a Church dedicated to all the Apostles, they show us a Tomb, which
being opened by Thieves, intending to plunder it, the Woman buried in it arose
up and went home, and lived with her Husband diverse years after. In one of the
Streets is a Tower, or rather one Tower upon another, which seems to be
ancient, now made a Prison. Upon another Ruin also in the Streets lies a Tomb
made out of one Stone; of which sort of Tombs there are many in this City and
other places; but the greatest number of them I ever saw was at Arles in
Provence.

The Senate House is Noble, having a fair Tower upon it, from whence there is a
good prospect over the City. Upon the Front of the Senate House is a Man in
Basso relievo, fighting with a Lion, who, as it was related to me, was formerly
one of the Consuls, who having had a contest with some Clergymen about the
Government of the City, on a sudden they caused a Lion to be let in upon him:
upon which occasion he behaved himself so well, as he delivered himself, and
slew the Lion.

The Elector or Archbishop of Colen has two Places in the City, but by
agreement between him and the Town, he is not to stay here above three days
together. Only this present Archbishop, upon the coming down of the Imperial
Forces, and his loss of Bonna, took Sanctuary here in the Convent of St.
Pantaleon, where he continued a great while.

The City is Imperial and Free, and yet it does Homage to the Elector, much
after this Form: We free Citizens of Colen promise to the Archbishop, to be
faithful and favorable unto him as long as he preserves us in Right and
Honor, and in our ancient Pivileges, Us, our Wives, our Children, and our City
of Colen. Most of the City are of the Roman Church, and the whole Town so full
of Convents, Churches, Churchmen and Relics, that it is not undeservedly
styled the Rome of Germany. The Lutherans have also a Church within the Walls,
and the Calvinists at Malheim, half a League down the stream on the other side
of the Rhine.

Over against Colen lies Dutz, a small Village, inhabited chiefly by Jews. The
Vessels which come out of tho Low Countries hither are long, round bellied, and
of great burden. Near to the Wall of the Town, upon the Quay or Key, is a kind
of Harbor made for them, into which they may be drawn, and escape the Injuries
they would otherwise suffer by the Ice in Winter.

Besides the rich Clergy, there are many wealthy Citizens and Merchants here,
and they maintain a Traffic and Correspondence with diverse Countries,
especially by the convenience of the Rhine. They speak not the best High Dutch;
but Latin and French are understood by many: Diverse Hosts in Inns speak Latin,
and the Servants French; which proves a good help unto Travelers. It was made
an University about the year 1388. Besides the General Hospitals for young and
old persons, there are two for the Sick, and well accommodated. They have a
Pharmacopaea Coloniensis, or a Dispensatory proper to the place, whereby
Apothecaries compound their Medicines. I was acquainted with one of the best,
Mr. Elburg, a knowing and obliging person, who was his Late Majesty King
Charles the Second's Apothecary while he resided at Colen, and whom my honored
Friend Sir Alexander Fraser, his Majesty's chief Physician, made use of, who
lived in great reputation in this City.

Two hundred years since Aeneas Sylvius left an high expression concerning this
place, Colonia quae de conjuge Claudii matre Neronis, Agrippina dicta est, and
trium Magorum ossibus illustrata, nihil magnificentius, nihil ornatius, tota
Europa reperias: which though, if strictly construed, will hardly be admitted
by any who has beheld Paris, Naples, Venice, etc. yet does it declare the
nobleness of this City, even in former times.

We left Colen about four a Clock in the Afternoon, being drawn up the Stream
with Horses, they being made fast by a very long Rope to the Mast; we lodged in
a small Village, having had a good prospect of Colen all this Evening from off
the water. Near to this Place Julius Caesar made his Bridge over the Rhine. The
next day we came to Bon, the Seat of the present Archbishop and Elector of
Colen, Maximilianus Henricus, Duke of Bavaria, Bishop of Hildisheim and Liege,
and Arch-Chancellor of the Empire throughout Italy. This place was formerly
called Bonna, or Castra Bonnensia, the wintering place, in the time of Tacitus,
of the sixth Legion. It was not long since very well fortified by the order of
the present Archbishop, and the direction of Colonel Biser, a blind man, having
Cataracts in both his eyes. The Archbishops Palace is very Noble, and there is
a Chamber seated a good way into the Rhine, to which they pass through a
Gallery. This Night we lodged at the foot of the highest of the seven Hills by
the Rhine, which are seen at a great distance; and upon diverse of them stand
old ruined Castles. On the 15 th we passed by a pleasant Island with a Convent
in it: at Remagen is also a Convent upon a Rock, fortified with round Towers.
In the Evening we lodged near to a Castle, ruined four years before by the
Electors of Triers and Colen, it belonging at that time to the Duke of Lorrain.
On the 16 th early in the Morning we came to Andernach, where the Plague was
very much at that time, and they kept a great many of their sick in Boats upon
the Rhine.

Andernach.
Andernach, of old Anten^^um, was one of the Roman Fortresses. Upon this River,
some think that Caligula was born, and that Valentinian was buried thereabouts.
Near unto this place are also Mineral Springs, well frequented, and much made
use of. The Town is encompassed with an old Wall; and the Gates were shut up by
reason of the Plague: Notwithstanding, there being diverse Friars in our
Company, several of the Townsmen sent out dishes of Meat to them, which we eat
in the Field upon Trees which were laid along near the Town. This day the
passage by water seeming tedious to us, Mr. Mulstroh, a worthy German
Gentleman, with whom I traveled as far as Spire, was willing we should hire a
Coach together, which we did, and invited the Friars with whom we had
breakfasted, to go along with us in it to Coblentz. We passed through a very
pleasant Country, between rows of Walnuttrees, in sight of two of the Elector
of Triers Houses, and near to a House belonging to the Count de Were.

We passed the Mosella over a handsome Stone Bridge of thirteen Arches, built
by Archbishop Baldus, or Balduinus, in the year 1344. and coming into the Town,
we went to the Dominican Convent, which is pleasantly seated near the Banks of
the River Mosella; but the Prior of the Convent, whom we had brought with us,
was so obliging, that he would not part with us that night; and we were very
civilly entertained by him in his Lodgings: He invited also some of the Convent
to bear us company; and after a handsome Supper, with plenty of excellent
Mosella Wine, we went to bed between two Feather-beds.

Coblentz.
Coblentz, or Confluentia, is a Town of a Triangular Figure, seated at the
meeting of two great Rivers, the Rhine and the Mosella, which make two sides
thereof, and the third is made by a Line drawn from one River to the other;
which is now well fortified after the most regular Modern way. The Wall within
these Works had many old high Towers; and formerly there was another still
nearer to the uniting of the Rivers, and consequently containing a less space
of ground: This Town is under the Elector and Archbishop of Triers, Carolus
Caspar, of the Noble Family of the Leyen, Arch-Chancellor for the Empire in
Gallia Belgica, and the Kingdom of Arles. It was given to the Church of Triers
when Medoaldus was Archbishop, above a thousand years since, in the time of
King Dagobert. The Situation is pleasant and convenient, and lies over against
the Castle of Hermanstein, or Ehrenbrei^stein, that is, The Stone of far
extended Honor; at the foot of which Castle, upon the shore of the Rhine,
under a great Rock, stands a very Noble Palace of the Electors, two large Wings
and the Front with five Pavilions standing toward the River, and from it a
long Bridge of Boats over the Rhine to Coblentz: when any great Vessel passes
by, they let slip three Boats, whereby the passage lies open, and make them
fast again afterward. In the German Wars the Spaniards thrust in a Garrison
into this Town; which was afterward beaten out by the Rhinegrave for the King
of Sweden; and the strong Castle of Ehrenbreitstein being put into the hands of
the French, the Emperors Forces seized upon the Archbishop of Triers, who then
was Philippus Chris^ophorus, and carried him away to Vienna.

In places where the Rhine runs through a low Country and a sat Soil, it washes
away the Banks: to secure which, in diverse places they have made great Works of
Wood, and also to secure Vessels from the danger of the Ice. And I remember,
riding near the Banks of the River Loire in France, I observed them in some
places to be handsomely defended for a long way together with Freestone.

Near unto Coblentz, upon a Hill, is a Convent of Carthusians. October the 17
th we went up the Rhine to Boppart, a walled Town, upon the western bank, where
Van Trump was at that time: It is a very old Town, one of the Roman Fortresses
against the Germans, called anciently Bodobriga; some would have it called
Bopport from Beauport, Fai^haven, or Bonport, a good convenient place for
Vessels to retire into, or to ride in.

On the 18 th we dined at St. Guer, a pleasant Town belonging to the Landtgrave
of Hesse, who has a Castle here. Coming on shore we met with an odd custom:
for upon the Wall side there is fastened a Collar of Brass at present, but was
formerly of Lead, and given by Charles the Fifth; into this most Strangers that
come put their Necks, at which time they ask them, Whether they will be
sprinkled with water, or drink wine? and if they choose the latter, they give
an entertainment of Wine to the Company. The Queen of Sweden passing by this
place, gave a great Silver Cup; out of which they now drink at this Ceremony.
We lodged this night at Wesel, a Town situated between a high Hill and the
River, belonging to the Archbishop of Triers. Here in the Marketplace they
showed us the print of St. Hubert's Horses foot in a Freestone.

Baccharach.
On the 19 th we came to Baccharach, or ad Bacchiaras, belonging to the Elector
Palatine; a place famous for excellent Wines. We passed by an old Castle seated
upon a Rock in the middle of the Rhine, being of an irregular figure, called
P^alts, where formerly the Prince Psalts Cast.
Palatines of the Rhine were born, the Princesses being sent hither to be
brought to Bed. We came this night to Dreickshausen; the next day we went by a
dangerous Passage, there being many Rocks under water, which cause the River to
run very rapid and unequally. A little above this we came to a round Tower, on
a Rock in the Rhine, called Mouse-Tower.
the Mouse-tower, built by Hatto Archbishop of Mentz, in the year 900. who, as
the Story goes, in a time of great Scarcity, pretending to relieve the poor who
wanted bread, invited them together into a Barn, where he burnt them all,
saying, They were like the Rats and Mice which would devour the Corn. After
which he was so persecuted with Rats and Mice, that to avoid them he caused
this Tower to be built in the middle of the Rhine, which did not avail him, for
they followed him thither also, and at last devoured him. A little above this
lies Bing upon the Western shore; a considerable Town, belonging to the Elector
of Mentz: here our Boat stayed to pay Custom, as it had done also at Bonna,
Liutz, Hammerstein, Andernach, Coblentz, Lodesheim, Bopport, St. Gower, Cub,
and Baccarach. For the trade of the Rhine being great, Princes and Lords who
have Towns upon it, make use of that advantage, which, though it abates the
gains of the Merchant, brings considerable profit to themselves.

Bing.
Bing, or Bingium, was an old Roman Fortress upon the Rhine, where the River
Navus or Naw enters into it; over which latter there is a handsome
Stone Bridge: In this Town were many of the Duke of Lorrain's Army sick and
wounded, who three weeks before had maintained a fight against the Forces of
the Elector Palatine, near this place. From Bing we continued our Journey to
Mentz: at Rudesheim in Rhinegaw, a place noted for good Wine, they showed us a
Boy, whose hair was thick and woolly, like to the African Moors, but of a fine
white color, which being somewhat an odd fight, I took away some of his hair
with me.

Mentz.
Mentz, Moguntia, Moguntiacum, and by the French Mayence, is seated over
against the Confluence of the River Main, with the Rhine, or rather a little
below it; in a fertile Country, abounding in all Provisions and good Wine; it
lies at length, and is most extended toward the River; and that part excels
the other toward the Land, which is not so populous or well built: It is a
strong place, and well guarded; it has many Churches and Monasteries, and some
fair Buildings, especially those of public concern, as the Palace of the
Elector, and others: But the narrowness of the Streets, and many old Houses,
take away much from the beauty of the City. It is an University, begun about
the year 1486. or as others will have it 1461. This place also challenges the
Invention of Printing, or at least the first promotion or perfection thereof:
And the Territory about it is famous for the destruction of the Roman Legions
under Varus, by the Germans. Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, was wonderfully
pleased upon the taking of this City, 1631. entering into it in State upon the
14 th of December, it being his Birthday, which began the 38 th year of his
life, and kept his Court and Christmas here; where at one time there were with
him six chief Princes of the Empire, twelve Ambassadors of Kings, States,
Electors, and Princes; besides Dukes and Lords, and the Martial men of his own
Army. At the taking of the Town, they found great store of Ordnance and Powder;
and the City redeemed it self from Pillage by giving the King a Ransom of
Eighty thousand Dollars; and the Clergy and Jews gave Two and twenty thousand
more; of which the Jews paid Eighteen thousand; Archbishop Wamhold saving
himself upon the Rhine, and retiring to Colen. The King caused also two great
Bridges to be made, one over the Main, founded upon fifteen great flat bottomed
Boats, the rest being built upon great Piles of Wood: Another over the Rhine
supported by sixty one great flat Boats, each lying the distance of an Arch
from one another; and many Families of people living sometimes in the Boats
under the Bridge. The Bridge over the Main is taken away; but that over the
Rhine is still continued: Upon which I saw the present Elector passing in his
Coach; a Person of great Gravity, of a middle Stature, having long gray Hair,
and was very Princely attended; his Name is Joannes Philippus of the Noble
Family of Schoenburg, Elector and Archbishop of Mentz, Bishop of Wurtzburg, and
Bishop of Worms, Arch-Chancellor of the Empire for all Germany; the first of
the Electoral College; in all public Conventions he sits at the right hand of
the Emperor, and is a Successor of the famous Boniface, an English man, Bishop
of Mentz, who very much promoted the Christian Religion in these parts. But
though his Dignity and Place excel the two other Ecclesiastical Electors of
Colen and Triers, yet his Territories come short; and they lie not together,
but scatteringly with those of the Palatinate, Spier, Franckfort, and diverse
places in Franconia. But of late he has much increased his Power, by seizing
the great City of Erfurdt in Turingia, which he has since much beautified and
strengthened by a Citradel built upon St. Peters-hill.

In the year One Thousand one hundred and fourteen, the Emperor Henry the
Fourth sent an Ambassador to the King of England, Henry the First, requesting
that Maude the Kings daughter whom he had formerly espoused by Proxy, might
now, being Marriage-able, be sent to him: to which request the King most
willingly condescended, and the Princess was presently conducted by his
greatest Peers into Germany, and at Mentz was married to Henry the Fourth, and
there Crowned his Empress. Franckfort.


From Mentz I passed by water up the River Main, to Franckfort, a free City of
the Empire, called Trajectum Franconum, a Passage or Ford of the Franks, as
serving them for a Retreat, when they entered or returned from Gaul; at present
Franckford upon the Main, to difference it from Franckford upon the River Oder,
which is an University: It is a large Town, divided into two parts by the
River; the lesser called Saxonhausen, or Saxon-houses, united to the other by a
Stone Bridge over the Main, of twelve or thirteen Arches. It is a place of good
Trade, and well seated for it, as having the advantage of the River Main, which
passes by Bamberg, Schweinfurt, Wurtzburg, Guemund, or Gaudia mundi; and also
the Tauber, and other Rivers running into it, affords convenience for Commerce
with the remoter parts of Franconia; and the Main running into the Rhine, makes
a large communication both up and down that Stream.

But this place is most remarkable for the Election of the Emperor, which, by
the Laws of the G lden Bull, should be in this City, as also for two great
Marts or Fairs kept in March and September; at which times there is an
extraordinary concourse of people from remote parts, in order to buying and
selling of several Commodities, especially for Books, as well printed here as
in other parts, whereof they afford two Catalogues every year, and have no
small dealings that way, by the Factors of the Germans, Hollanders, Italians,
French, and English: although at other times their trading in Books seems not
great; for when I was there out of the time of the Mart, the Stationers Shops
being shut up, made but a dull show. Here are also a great number of good
Horses bought and sold: and on the North-side of the City there is a spacious
place for a Horse-Fair. The City is strong and well fortified; and most part of
the Town are Lutherans. In the German Wars, the King of Sweden having taken
Hanaw, sent a Messenger to Franckfort to know whether the City would peaceably
and speedily set open their Gates unto him, and accept fairly of a Garrison, or
stand to the hazard of a Siege: And although they were unwilling to yield, yet
for fear of the worst, they consented, That the King should have free passage
for his Army through the City; and that for the better assurance of it, six
hundred of his men should be received for a Garrison into Saxonhausen; and also
that the Magistrates and People should take an Oath unto his Majesty. So that
upon the 17 th of November, 1631. the King's Army passed through Saxonhausen
over the Bridge, quite through the Town. Colonel Vitzthumb was left Governor
in Saxonhausen; and the King himself rode bare headed through the Streets: and
by his obliging behavior did generally win the affections of the beholders;
and three days after returned thither again with the Landtgrave of
Hessen-Cassell, and the Landtgrave of Hessen-Darmstadt, where they met the
Seventeen Earls of the Wetteraw, or Veteravia, and were feasted in the same
room where the Emperors at their Coronation use to be entertained.

In Saxonhausen there is a House anciently belonging unto the Knights of the
Teutonick Order, which has the privilege of a Sanctuary for Man-slayers and
Bankrupts; but it is a security but for fourteen days. Upon this side th^re is
the largest portion of Land belonging to Franckfort; on the other side very
little.

This being a trading place, it is no wonder that there are so many Jews in it;
for a distinction they wear great Ruffs, their Sons Bonnets, and their Wives a
peculiar dress of their Head.

The Collegiate Church of St. Bartholomew, where many of the Emperors have been
crowned, is large, has a high Steeple, and is built of a red stone. There are
diverse handsome Fountains in the Town, and good Houses; in one of the best of
which live Monsieur Pierre Neufville, a great Merchant, and a civil worthy
person well known in most places of Commerce; who obliged me with Letters to
Venice, and other places. Darmstadt.


From Franckfort I continued my Journey through the Bergstraes, passing by
Darmstadt, which belongs to one of the Brothers of the House of Hessen,
commonly known by the name of the Landtgrave of Hessen Darmstadt; and
afterward through a fruitful plain Country, in the sight of Hills, and
sometimes near them: the whole Country planted with Walnut-trees, Vines, Corn,
and in some places with Tabaco; till I arrived at Heidellerg.

In coming into this Town we passed over the River Neccar, Nicer, or Necarus,
upon a Bridge covered over from one end to another, with a large Roof of Wood:
in the same manner is the long Bridge covered at the entrance of the City of
Alessandria della paglia in Italy.

The River Neccar.
The River Neccar arises near the Sylva Martiana, now Swartzwald, or Black
Forest, and passing through the Territories of the Duke of Wittenberg, runs
into the Rhine at Manheim: This, though none of the greatest, yet is a
considerable River of Germany; and has diverse good Towns upon it and near it,
as Sultz, Tubingen, Wirtingen, Essingen, Stutgard, Canstat, Lauffen, Hallbrun,
Heidelberg.

There being Wars at that time when I was in this Country, between the Elector
Palatine and the Duke of Lorrain: The Elector resided for the most part at
Frankendale, to be near his Forces.

Heidelberg.
Heidelberg is seated on the South Side of the River Neccar, between it and a
ridge of high Hills, so as it cannot well admit of a modern Fortification, or
hope to be extraordinary strong, as being over-looked by the adjacent
Mountains: It lies most at length from East to West: It has been an University
since the year 134^. at which time it was begun by Rupertus, Count Palatine,
and at present is much frequented. In the great Church was kept the famous
Library, which, after that the Spaniards had taken this Town 1620. was carried
to Rome, and added to the Vatican, where I saw it in the year 1664. being
placed upon one side of a very long Gallery belonging to the Vatican Library;
and the Duke of Vrbin's Library placed on the otherside, over against it: both
which made a notable addition to the Papal Library. In this Church and the
Church also of St. Peter, are diverse Monuments of Princes of the Palatine
Family, and of Learned and Famous Men. The French have a Church here, and the
present Elector is of the Order of the Holy Ghost; and his Son a Marshall of
France: and good French and High Dutch are both generally spoken here. The
Lutherans have also a Church in this Town, by the favor of the present
Elector; although he himself be a Calvinist: and to express his generous
kindness the higher in this point, the first Stone was laid by himself and his
Son; and it is called the Church of Providence, according to the Elector's
Motto, Dominus Providebit.

Upon the Townhouse is a Clock with diverse Motions, and when the Clock
strikes, the figure of an Old man pulls off his hat, a Cock crows, and shakes
his wings, Soldiers fight with one another, and the like. The Prince's Stables
for above a hundred Horses are seated upon the River very conveniently, but
were fairer formerly, above half thereof having been ruined by the Imperalists;
as also diverse of the Statues on the outside of the Castle, which is seated
high above the Town.

The present Elector is Carolus Ludovicus, Son to the King of Bohemia,
Frederick the Fifth; he was born in the year 1617. and passed his Youth an
Exile from his Fathers Kingdom and Electorate: and at the pacification, at
Prague 1635. he was excluded from any restitution to be made to him. But at
length in the Treaty of Munster 1648. he was restored to the lower Palatinate,
and 1657 returned to the possession of his Fortunes: a highly accomplished
Prince, much honored and beloved by his Subjects. In the year 1650. he married
Charlotta, Daughter to William the Fifth Landgrave, and to the famous Amelia
Elizabeth, Landgravess of Hassia; by whom he had the Char Prince, or Electoral
Prince Charles, and a Daughter, the Princess Charlotta Elizabetha; but upon
some discontent the Princess Electress since returned to her own Friends and
Country. This Elector is also Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
Great Treasurer of the Empire, and together with the Elector of Saxony, Vicar
of the Empire.

In his Palace or Castle at Heidelberg, are diverse things remarkable; a very
great Tower to be equalled by very few; within which is a Theater for Comedies.
This was formerly called Trutzkaisar, or the Tower that bad Defiance, or
threatened the Emperor; but since the Restoration of the Elector, there are
some Works drawn about it in the figure of a Star, and the olddisobliging Name
is by Proclamation forbidden to be continued, and it is at present called
Sternschanz, or the Starfort. By it is a handsome Garden; in the Ditch whereof
there was then kept a great Bear, and a very large Wolf. The Grotto's and Water
works are very handsome: they were also making diverse others, having the
advantage of the side of the Hill to bring down the Water, and to make Grots
and Caves in the Rock. Amongst other Fountains, that of the Lions head with a
Frog in his Ear, is taken notice of. The Cellars are very large and cool,
filled with Vessels of no ordinary size; yet inconsiderable, if compared to the
great Tun kept in a great Building joining to the Cellars; it was built by this
present Elector's Orders, 1664. and goes far beyond any made before: It
contains 204 Faiders and odd measure, or about two hundred Tuns: instead of
Hoops it is built with large knee Timber, like the ribs of a Ship, which are
painted and carved, and have diverse Inscriptions upon them, and supported by
carved Pedestals. Upon one side of it is a handsome Stair case to ascend to the
top of the Vessel; upon the top of which is a Gallery set round with
Ballisters, three and forty steps high from the ground.

About an English Mile from Heidelberg, between the Hills, is a solitary place,
where three large Streams or Springs gush out of the Mountain, and presently
fill five Ponds, have three handsome Cascates or Falls, and after run into the
Plain, and are strong enough in a small space to turn four Mills; this is
called Wolfsbrun, or the Wolfs Fountain, from a Princess who formerly retired
into a Cave in this desert place, and was here devoured by a Wolf.

While I was at Heidelberg, two English men came kindly to me, Mr. Villers, and
Timothy Middleton, belonging to Lobensfeldt Cloister, a Convent formerly of the
Jesuits, but since let out to about an hundred English, who left their Country
1661. came up the Rhine, and by the permission of the Elector, settled
themselves a few Miles from hence, living all together, Men, Women, and
Children, in one house; and having a Community of many things: They are of a
peculiar Religion, calling themselves Christian Jews; and one Mr. Poole,
formerly living at Norwich, is their Head. They cut not their Beards, and
observe many other Ceremonies and Duties, which they either think themselves
obliged to from some Expressions in the old Testament, or from some New
Exposition of their Leaders.

From Heidelburg I made an excursion, and had a sight of Spire, seated in a
Plain, on the West Side of the Rhine; a place of Antiquity, conceived to be
Vrbs Nemetum of old; a large place and populous. The King of Sweden in the
German Wars demolished the Works about it, not willing to spare so great a
number of his Soldiers as was required to Garrison it, and make it good. It is
an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Mentz: there are many fair Houses in
it, diverse Churches, and a fair Cathedral, with four large Towers. The
Romanists, the Lutherans and Calvinists preach in it at several hours. It is
the more populous, and filled with people of good quality, by reason of the
concourse of persons from other parts of Germany, for the decision of Law
Suits: For here the Imperial Chamber is held, and many differences which arise
in the Empire are determined, and the Electors and other Princes, in some
Trials at Law, may be called hither. It is a settled Court, which Maximilian
the First, for the better ease of all persons, placed first at Worms, and not
long after it was fixed at Spire, from whence it cannot be now removed, but by
the consent of all the Estates. Things Cognoscible in this Court are determined
by an Imperial Judge, and sealed with the Emperors Arms, so that there lies no
appeal unto the Emperor.

Another day I went to Manheim, formerly a Village, seated at the Confluence of
the Rhine and Neccar; but walled about by the Elector Frederick the Fourth, and
since is much increased; all the Streets being large and uniform, and a Noble
Citadel built; within which, over against the Gate, the Elector designs a
Palace, the Model of which I saw: and at present, on the right hand, there are
three Pavilions of Lodgings: in one of which lodges the Elector Palatine; in
another the Prince his Son; and in the third the Princess his Daughter: behind
these there is a handsome Garden and Lodgings for Degen Felderen, the
Churfursts Mistress. Here are some good Pictures, as a Head of Hans Holben, and
a Landscape with the Story of the Union of the Swissers. The Bridge over the
Moat of the Citadel into the Town, is also remarkable, as having six
Draw-bridges upon it, three great ones, and three small ones on the side. There
are Palisado's all along the bottom, in the middle of the Ditch, and without
upon the Esplanade.

From Heidelberg I traveled to Nurnberg in the Company of Captain Wagenseyl,
who had been in the Polish and Hungarian Wars, and was employed a little before
in blowing up the Castle of Launsteyn, belonging to the Elector Palatine, to
prevent its surprisal by the Duke of Lorrain. He was then employed to raise a
Company at Nurnberg, for the Service of the Elector Palatine. I had a good
advantage in my Journey by his Company; for he traveled with Authority, and
was a generous, knowing, and courteous person.

The first day we traveled near to the Neccar, in stony and rocky way; and it
being dark before we came to Mospach, the Peasants conducted us from Village to
Village with bundles of lighted Straw.

The next day we came to Poxberg, where there is an old Castle, and in the
afternoon reached Morkenthal, or Mergetheim, the Seat of the Grand Master of
the Herrhn Deutchern, or the Teutonick Order. The Town is well built, has a
fair Piazza, with a large Fountain in it, and a Statue of one of the Grand
Masters, with a long Corridore from his Palace. This Order has been of great
Fame, and has had large Possessions, as may be seen in the exact Account of
the Teutonick Knights of Prussia, made out from the best Authors, by my worthy
honored Friend Mr. Ashmole, in his Noble Description of the Order of the
Garter; and as Lewis du May, Counselor unto the Duke of Wirtenberg, has set
it down. For the Knights Templers and of St. John, having fought prosperously
against the Infidels, raised an Emulation in some German Gentlemen, who waited
upon the Emperor Frederick the First, in his Expedition to the Holy Land, to
take the Croisado. And because they were installed in the Church and Hospital
of St. Mary at Jerusalem, they were called, Marianites. Their Order differed
nothing from those abovementioned, but in the form and color of their Cross,
and was approved by Pope Celestin the Third. Afterward when Jerusalem was
taken by Saladin, those Knights betook themselves to Ptolemais, from whence the
Emperor Frederick the Second, sent them back into Germany, and employed them
against the Prussians and Livonians, who at that time were still Pagans. But by
the Valor and Piety of those Knights, their Souls were brought into subjection
to Christ, and their Bodies to the Order which began that War in the year 1220.
a little while after these Knights found themselves Masters of a Country of
very large Extent, which obeyed the Order, till the year 1525. at which time
Sigismond, King of Poland, gave the investiture of Prussia unto Albert Marquess
of Brandenburg. In the year 1563. the Great Master became Secular again, and
took a part of the Lands subject to the Order, with the name of Duke of
Curland. And Livonia having been the Subject and Theater of many Wars between
the Polanders, Muscovites, and Swedes; these last did at length become Masters
of it, and have it in possession still. So that there is no more remaining of
the Teutonick Order, but some Commanderies scattered here and there in Germany.
And the Great Master has his Seat and Residence at Mergenthal.

They wear on a white Matle a plain black Cross. The Dignity of Grand Master is
generally held by some Great and Honorable Person; and in the Great Assembly
he takes place of al Bishops. The present is the Baron of Amring; and the Grand
Master before him was Leopold William, only Brother to the Emperor Ferdinand
the Third.

From hence we traveled to Lauterbach, near which we passed through a Wood,
and found a Noble Church upon the top of a high Hill, which being much
frequented by Pilgrims, they have made handsome stone Stairs from the bottom to
the top: then to Rotenburg, and lodged at Burgperner, and the next day by
Schantzbach we came to Nurenberg. Rotenburg is an Imperial City, which some
have likened unto Jerusalem for its Situation upon hilly places and many
Turrets in it. It is Situated near the head of the River Tauber, which may be
accounted the second River of Franconia, passing by Rottingen, Lander,
Nurenberg.
and Werthaim, where it runs into the Main.

Nurenberg is the fairest City that I saw in Germany; the Houses most of them
of Freestone, very high; and diverse of them painted on the outside, and
adorned with gilded Balls on the top; many are of six or seven Stories high.
Der Herr Peller has one of the fairest. The City is very populous and full of
Trade, although it stands in a barren Country, and wants a Navigable River. The
three best Churches are the Hospital Church, lately built very fair; St.
Laurence, which is very large, with two high Steeples in the Front; and St.
Sebald the best of the three. The Body of St. Sebald being laid upon a Cart
drawn with Oxen, in that place where the Oxen stood still, they buried the
Body, and erected this Church in his Memory. In this Church is a Crucisix of
Wood, very well carved, and esteemed at a high rate. The Crucisix without the
Church is very great, and of a black color: and some fancy that the Raht
Herrn, or Magistrates of the Town, have reposited a Treasure within it. The
Pulpit is well carved and gilded, and the whole Church so stately, that it may
pass in the first rank of Lutheran Churches; that Religion being here practiced
in its splendor. The Priest every morning reads the Scripture to the people
for half an hour, or preaches a Sermon. The Townhouse is well worth the
seeing: In it the Hall is spacious, as also the Chambers, and furnished with
good Pictures, and Stoves well gilded and painted with white and gold, green
and gold, dark colored and gold, and the like. There is one Picture of most of
the Great Persons in Germany entertained in the Great Hall; another of the
three Brothers of Saxony; one of an Elephant as big as the life; a piece of St.
John and St. Mark, and another of St. Peter and St. Paul, both by Albert Durer:
but the most rare piece is that of Adam and Eve, by the same Master, with this
Inscription.

Albertus Durer Almang faciebat post Virginis partum, 1507.
Another excellent one is that of St. Luke drawing the Picture of our Savior
and the blessed Virgin: Over the Gate at the entrance of the Shambles is a
large Ox carved in Wood, and painted over, with this Inscription: Omnia habent
ortus suaque incrementa, sed ecce
Quem cernis, nunquam Bos fuit^^ic, Vitulus.
The Castle stand upon a high Hill, from whence the Town makes a handsome show:
In it are observable a very deep well, the Emperors Chapel, his Picture, and
the Pictures of the Electors; good Night pieces; and one of a man behind a
white Curtain transparent, very well expressed. The Armor of Hebbele van
Gailinghen the great Sorcerer is here shown; and in the Wall of the Castle the
marks of his Horses feet, when he leaped from thence over the Town ditch.

The new Fountain was not then finished; but the Statua's in Brass made for it
were excellent; the Sea Horses large, the Sea-Nymphs much bigger than the life;
and N ptune, who was to stand on the top, is above three yards and a halfhigh.
When I came first into this place, I was not a little surprised to behold the
fairness of the Houses, handsome Streets, different Habits, industrious People,
and neatness in all things, more than I had observed in German Cities before;
and no place has greater number of curious Artificers in Steel, Brass, Ivory,
Wood, wherein they work at an extraordinary cheap rate; and there are Officers
to inspect and enquire into the works of Artificers, that they be true, perfect
and without fraud: they make strong and handsome Clock-work. The King of Poland
presented the Grand Seignior with a very noble Clock, who took so much delight
in it, that when it required some mending (the Turks being ignorant in
Clock-work) he sent it from Adrianople as far as Nurenburg to be set in order
again.

Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, was more magnificently received and
entertained in this City, than in any other of Germany; which so incensed
Wallenst^yn, that he afterward encamped before their Town, and did great spoil
upon their Territories: But the King of Sweden, marched thither toward their
Relief, and from thence toward Lutzen, where in a bloody Battle he lost his
life.

The River Pegnitz runs through Nurnberg, and has diverse Stone Bridges over
it; and below the Town, joining with the River Rednitz, runs into the River
Main at Bamberg; and the Main runs at last into the Rhine. The Reduitz arises
at Weissenberg, and is not far from the River Altmul, which runs into the
Danube, toward Regens^urg. Upon this convenience, Charles the great designed
to make a Communication of passage between the Danube and the Rhine; and made a
C^nal^ thirty paces abroad between the Rednitz and the Altmul, to join those
Streams for the commodity of Passage by Boat; but after he had prooceeded two
German miles in this work, Boggs, Rains, and his warlike Diversions made him
give over that noble Design, whereby there might have been a Commerce by water,
from the Low C un ries to Vienna, and even unto the Euxine Sea.

The Roman Lieutenant in Nero's time, had a desire to unite the River Soane and
the Mosella; and to make a passage between the Mediterranean and the German
Ocean; having been at the mouth of the Mosella by Coblentz, and passed from
Chaalon upon the soft and noble River Araris or Soane unto Lion, I cannot but
think these very goodly Streams, and fit for such a purpose. The present King
of France has a design to unite the River Aude with the Garonne, and so to
have a passage by Boat from the Mediterranean Sea by Toulouse and Bourdeaux,
into the Ocean. When I traveled in those parts, viewing the Country well, I
thought it would be a difficult work, and so it proves: but the King has
proceeded already very far therein.

About four Leagues from Nurnberg lies Altdorff, belonging unto it, made an
University in the year 1623. containing when I was there, about 150 Scholars.
The Physic Garden is handsome, and well stocked with Plants, to the number of
two thousand. Dr Hoffman the Botanick and Anatomick Professor, showed me many
of the most rare of them; and presented me diverse. The Anatomy School is not
large; yet the only one in those parts of Germany: And they have diverse
curiosities preserved in it, as the Skeleton of a Heart, of a Horse, of a Man,
of a Bear bigger than a Horse: And some Pictures, as one of a Ninivite, and
another of Moses, which they take to be Ancient. Dr. Wagenseyl, Professor of
Law and History, brother to Captain Wagenseyl, who traveled with me from
Heidellerg, invited us to lodge at his House, and showed me his Library, and
all his Rareties and Coyns, whereof he has a good Collection, having lived in
most places of Europe, and speaks many Languages well; he gave me a piec^ of
the first money that was coined in Germany. In the University ^^brary I saw a
fair Hortus Eystetensis, and Toungerman's Collection of Plants by his own hand.

At Nurnberg I met with the Son and the Secretary to the (...) Ambassador in
Turkey, who had traveled hither over-land from (...) stantinople in their
return into the Low Countries, traveling in Greek Habits.

From hence I went to Newmark, a good Town in the upper Palatinate belonging to
the Duke of Barvaria, and the next day through Heinmaw, subject to the Duke of
Newberg, to Regensburg.

Ratisbona, Regensburg, Augusta Tiberli, Colonia Qua^tanorum, the chief place
of the Ramans in this limit of the Empire, where the fourth Italick Legion had
a constant station; was made a Colony by Tiberius in the year, as some
conceive, of the Passion of our Savior. It was much augmented and adorned by
the Emperor Arnulphus, who had a great affection for this place, so pleasantly
seated, and in a good Country. Here the River Regen runs into the Danube; from
whence it was called Regensburg. There are two Bridges, one of wood below the
Town, and another Bridge of stone of about fifteen Arches; which is the fairest
stone Bridge over the Danube. It is an Imperial City, but not without some
acknowledgement to the Duke of Bavaria: And although it be strongly fortified,
yet it was taken by the Swedes in the German wars. There are many fair
buildings in it, both private and public; and though I am not able to confirm
what some report, that there as aremany Churches and Chapels in this City, as
there are days in the year; yet are there many fair Churches and Convents: As
the Cathedral of St. Peter, on the South Side of which is the Picture of St.
Peter in a ship; andon the North another of the Apostles first Mission. In the
Piazza stands a neat little Church, the Convent of St. Paul, founded by St.
Wolfgangus, Bishop of this place, the Convent of St. Emerammus Bishop of
Ratisbone, a Saint of great Veneration here, though Rutisbone.
but of little mention or name in other parts. The name of Albertus Magnus,
Bishop of this place, has also added unto the Fame of Regensburg.

But that which chiefly promotes its luster, is the General Diet or Parliament,
which is often held in this City, and is not to be called in any part out of
Germany; and the place is not unfit for the accommodation of such a noble
Convention, as are the Estates of Germany. The Vice-Marshal takes care to
provide Lodgings respectively to their persons* and sees that all things be
brought hither, and at a just price; that the Hall or Place of Assembly be
furnished and adorned suitably to the dignity of the Persons convened, and has
an especial eye and regard toward the Public safety. By this Convention the
great Concerns of Germany are much secured, and their peace and quiet
Established. Wherein Germany seems to have a better advantage than Italy; For
Italy being likewise divided into many Dominions and Principalities has no
Common Diet or Great Council, whereby to proceed for their Public safety:
Which makes them often so divided in their common Concerns in times of Danger,
and when they most need a joint Combination.

I entered the notable River Danubius at this place, which has already run a
good course, and passed by many fair Towns or Cities; as the large City of Vlme
in Swabenland, where it begins to be Navigable; as also Donawert, Neuburg, and
Ingolstadt, and has already received the considerable River of Licus or Leck
whereby the Commodities of that great trading City of Augsberg, are brought
into it. When I first embarked at Regensburg, I thought I might have taken
leave of the Danube not far below Vienna, but an opportunity made me see this
great Stream beyond Belgrade, as I have declared in another Account of my
Travels.

The first day we passed by Thonawsteyn, where there is a Castle seated upon a
high Rock, and came to Pfeter or Vetera Castra of old, now but an ordinary
place. The Boats upon the Danube are generally painted black and white, are
flat bottomed, and broad at the Head and Stern; there is a Chamber built in the
middle; and the Rudder is very large, to be able to command the Boat where the
River is rapid, and of a Swift Course.

Straubing.
The next day we came to Straubing, a handsome walled Town, belonging to the
Duke of Bavaria; the Streets are straight; and there is a Tower in the
Marketplace, painted all over with green and gold color: There is also a
Bridge of wood over the Danube. We passed by Swartz in the Afternoon, where the
Church is seated upon a Hill, and is frequented by Pilgrims, and lodged at
Deckendorff, where there is another Bridge. Near this Town comes into the
Danube that considerable River Iser, or Isara, having passed by diverse
considerable Towns; as Landshut, Frising, and Muchen, the Seat of Ferdinandus
Maria, Elector of Bavaria, Great Steward of the Empire, and at present the
first of the Secular Electors, and he is to take place immediately after the
King of Bohemia, it being to concluded on at the Treaty of Munster, where
Maximilian Duke of Bavaria was allowed to hold the Electorship, which was
confirmed upon him by the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, when he excluded
Frederick the Fifth, Count Palatine, and in lieu hereof there was an eight
Electorship erected for the Palatinate Family, who also, if the Bavarian branch
does fail, are to re-enter into their ancient Electorship and the other newly
erected is to be abolished.

Thursday, November the fifteenth, we came by Wilshoven to Passaw, Patavia, or
Boiodurum, a long and noble City in the lower Bavaria, or Bayern, made up of
three Towns, Iltzstadt Passaw, and Innstadt, at the concurrence of the River
Inn* the Danube, and the jltz. As Towns are commonly of great Antiquity which
are built at the Confluence of great Rivers, for the Strength of the Situation
and convenience of Commerce; so is this accounted ancient, as being a Roman
Colony, and the place of the Castra Batava in old time.

The Church of St. Stephen is stately, besides other fair Churches. The Bishop,
who is Lord of the City, has a strong Palace upon a Hill; his Revenues are
large, and besides what he possesses hereabouts, he has the tenth part of the
notable great Lead-Mine at Bleyberg in Carinthia. This place had lately
suffered much by fire; but a good part was rebuilt, and very fairly after the
Italian manner: So that this may well be reckoned as one of the ten
considerable Cities, which are upon the Danube, accounting from Vlme unto
Belgrade, as Vlme, Ingolstadt, Ratisbone, Passaw, Lintz, Vienna, Presburg,
Strigonium, Buda, Belgrade; all which from Ratisbone I had the opportunity to
see before the end of my Journey. Near to a Wall over against the great Church
at Passaw, which was then repairing, I saw a vast Head cut in stone, the Mouth
whereof was two spans wide, and the rest proportionable. The River Iltz, which
runs in here from the North, is considerable for the Pearls which are found in
it; and the noble River Inn or Oenus, from the South, is the greatest River
which has yet entered the Danube; having passed by Insbrug, and taken in the
River Saltz, upon which stands Saltzburg; and arising in the Alps in such a
high Country as Tirolis, it runs in here with a great force, and adds much unto
the swiftness of the Danube.

Upon the Sixteenth we came to Lintz, the chief City in the higher Lintz.
Austria, not very great, but as neat and handsome a City as most in Germany.
There is in it a very great Marketplace, with never a bad House in it, the
whole Town built of a very white Freestone; and the Castle upon the Hill is of
Mordern Building, and very large. There is also a Bridge over the Danube. The
Imperial Forces rendezvoused here when Solomon came to Vienna. This was also
besieged by the Peasants of Austria in the time of Ferdinand the Second; they
having got a Body together of Forty thousand men, and many pieces of Ordnance,
but were stoutly repulsed after many Assaults, and at last overcome by
Papenheim. Not far below Lintz the River Draun enters the Danube; this comes
from the Gemundner Sea, or Lacus Felicis, passing by Lampack, Weltz, and other
Towns, and has a noted Cataract or Fall of Waters.

The Whirle-poole in the Danube, I. Oliv^r (...)


The next day we passed by Ens, Anisia, upon the River Anisius, or Onasus,
which taking its original in the Borders of Saltzburgland runs into the Danube,
and divides the higher from the lower Austria, having received into it self the
River Saltza, upon which stands Cell, or Maria Cell, a place of the greatest
Pilgrimage in Austria. Near this Town are many Roman Coyns and Antiquities
found, and Lauriacum stood of old, a Roman Garrison, and afterward a Biship's
See: we came to a Village on the North shore of the Danube, called Greim, where
the Graff von Leichtensteyn has a House. A little below this are two dangerous
passages in the River; the one called the Strudel, where the River running
amongst vast Rocks, some under water, and some above, the waves are broken with
great force, and the Current is rapid, foaming, and troublesome; and some skill
is required to pass between the Ledges of Rocks which are under water, and when
the water is low the passage is very difficult. The other is the Wurbel, or a
kind of Whirlpool, where the water turns about with great force, being hindered
in its direct Course by a great Rock. Upon the top of a high craggy Rock stands
a large Cross, and at the foot a little Church dedicated to St. Nicholas, who
is Patron of this dangerous place, and is believed to take peculiar care of
such as pass this way, and therefore a little Boat comes to you as soon as you
are out of danger, and recieves what Acknowledgment you please, or what perhaps
you may have promised to give, when you were in some fear. This night we lodged
at Ips, Ipsium, or Ibissa, a Town on the South Side of the Danube: over against
it lies Besenbeug, or Vsbium Pt^lom^ei. Two German miles below Ips stands
Pechlarn, conceived to be Arlape in former times; and here the River Erlaph
enters the Danube: A mile and a half below this lies Melcke, Nomale, or Mea
dialecta, in former days the Seat of the Marquesses of Austria, until St.
Leopold removed to Kalenberg, and his Successors to Vienna. The Town lies at
length upon the South Side of the River; but the noble Cloister of
Benedictines, which takes place of any other in Austria, stands upon a Hill
which over-looks the Town, the River, and the Country about; is richly endowed,
and remarkable for the Monuments of many great Persons, and the Tomb of St.
Colman, much honored in these parts. We dined at Steyn, where there is a
Bridge over the Danube. Near to this lies Crembs, another walled Town; and over
the water Mautern; and not far from it the rich Convent of Ketwein; After this
the River Traisn, or Tragisama, comes in from the South. Having passed by the
noted Town St. Pold, or St. Hippolitus, we lodged this Night at St. Eldorff,
and the next day passed by Thuln, Stockerau, and Cloistor Neuburg, to Vienna.

THE DESCRIPTION OF VIENNA.
VIENNA, or Wien, which the Turks call Beach, is the Chief City of Austria, in
the Latitude of forty eight Degrees, twenty Minutes, not much differing from
the Latitude of Paris. The old Seat of the Dukes of Austria, and for a long
time of the Emperors of Germany. According to ancient account it stands in
Pannonia superior, the Bounds of Pannonia extending unto Kalemberg, or Mons
Cetius, five or six Miles Westward of Vienna; beyond which still Westward all
that lies between that Hill and the great River Oenus, or Inn, which runs into
the Danube at Passaw, or Castra Batava, was anciently called Nori^um.

It was an ancient place of Habitation in the time of the Romans, and called
Vindobona, as the Learned Petrus Lambecius has at large declared, where the
Classis Istrica sometimes lay, and the tenth German Legion had its station; all
this shore or side of the Danube being famous for the Actions of Roman Emperors
against the Marcomanni and Quadi, who possessed the Country on the other side
of the River, and especially for the Wars of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus
Philosophus, who notably defeated those Nations, and who, as Aurelius Vic^or
(who was Governor of Sirmium in Pannonia in^erior, in the time of Constantius)
affirms, fell sick at Carnuntum, now Petronel, and died at Vindobona, now
Vienna. And to confirm the Antiquity hereof, besides what Wolfgangus Lazius
has delivered, not many years since some Antiquities were found. For in the
year 1662. when a Wall was dug up near* the old Palace, the Workmen digging
still on below the Foundation, found a Stone Trough or Coffin, containing hard
Earth and Bones, with a small Gold Coin, a Glass Urn enclosed in a Brass one,
an Iron Knife like a Sicespita, or Knife used about Sacrifices, a little Roll
or Scroll of pure Gold, shut up with a Golden cover at both ends, wherein was
an Inscription in strange Characters: Not far from the Sepulchral Monument were
found a Head in Brass, a Brazen Patera, Lamps, Lachrymatories, and other
Vessels, and a Copper Coin of Antoninus Caracalla. The writing in the Golden
Scroll, which no man could read, was conceived by the Learned Lambecius to be
the old Pannonian Character, and that this might be the Monument of some
Pannonian Priest in the days of Caracalla, who, as good Authors deliver, spent
some time about these parts.

It is seated on the South Side of the Danube, on the ripa Romana, that side
nearest to Rome, and many Roman Colonies, according to the usual position of
Roman Stations, both upon this River and the R^ine, as may be exemplified in
Colen, Bonna, Andarnach, Coblentz, Ments, Worms, Spier, and Strasburg. And in
like manner in the old Roman Stations, on the South or Roman side of the
Danube, which were in no small number in or near the Austrian shore, as
Carnuntum, or Petronel, Vischmund, or Aquinoctium, Ebersdorff, or Ala Nova,
Melck, or Ncmale, Arlape, or Pechlarne, Lentia, or Lintz; for hereby they
better secured their Conquests, and hindered the incursions of the Barbarians
before them.

It is not seated upon the main stream of the Danube, but by a branch thereof;
for the River running through a low Country; it is divided into several
Streams, and makes many Islands. A small River named Wien runs by the East part
of this City, and enters the Danube, below it, which upon floods does often
much hurt, yet sometimes low and very shallow, so as I have stepped over it;
some will have it to give the Name unto this City: it divides part of the
Suburbs from it, and has diverse Bridges over it. For that we may have a
distinct apprehension of Vienna, we must consider the City and Suburbs thereof;
the Suburbs are very great, and not without fair Houses, Gardens, Walks, and
all Accommodations at large.

The City it self is that walled and fortified part, designed not only for
convenience of Habitation, but also to sustain a Siege, or any Attack from the
Turk, and is now separated from the Suburbs by a fair Esplanade, or open
Ground, above a Musket shot over. The Houses near the wall were pulled down
since the last Fortification in the Turkish war, when they were in some fear
that the Turkish Forces about Gran and New-husel, would move toward them. It
is fortified a la moderna, with ten Bastions toward the Land, and a very deep
Ditch, into which they can let the Da^ube: and with two other Bastions toward
the water, on that part of the River which lies on the North-side of the Town.
These two latter are called the Works of Gonzaga. The Bastions are large; upon
one of them I saw Count Souches muster a good part of the Militia of the City.
The Ditch is large and very deep, into which although they can let in the
River, yet it is commonly kept dry, lest they might incommode their deep
Cellars. There are two walls, the one old and inward, little considerable at
present, built at first with the ransom of our King Richard the First, who in
his return from the Holy War, was detained Prisoner by the Duke of Austria upon
the 20 th of December, 1192. The Austrians pretending they had received some
affront from the King at Joppa, and that he had taken down the Ensign and
Banner of Duke Leopold in a contemptuous way. The other outward of a great
breadth, made of Earth, and faced with Brick, edged with Freestone, so well
built, as to render this City one of the most considerable fortified places in
Europe. The Esplanade gently descends from the Town for three hundred Paces;
there are very few Outworks.

It is very uncertain who was the first Builder of Vienna, and after it had
been long built it ran to decay again for Four hundred years together, till
Henry the First, Duke of Austria, in the year 1158. did much repair it; and the
ransom afterward of King Richard beautified it.

The whole compass, taking in the Suburbs, makes a very large Circuit, but the
City it self, which is walled in, may be about three miles in Circumference,
and is exceeding populous, as full of People, for the bigness of the place, as
most of the great Cities. And I could not but take delight to behold so many
Nations in it, as Turks, Tartars, Graecians, Transylvanians, Sclavonians,
Hungarians, Croatians, Spaniards, Italians, French, Germans, Polanders, etc.
all in their proper Habits.

The chief Gates are six: 1. Stubnthor, or the Stuben Gate toward the East. 2.
Karnterthor, or the Gate of Carinthia toward the South. 3. Burg^hor, the Town
Gate, or Castle Gate. 4. Schottenthor, or the Scotch Gate. 5. Newthor, or the
Neagate; these two last toward the West: And 6. the Gate of the red Tower
toward the North, which leads unto the Bridge over the Danube: and toward the
waterside there is also a Port by the Emperor's palace, and a Cloister or
Nunnery in the Town has the Name of a Port called Himmel port, or the Gate of
Heaven. The five first of these Gates are vaulted and arched with long passages
through the Town-wall, and have good Bridges of Wood, with Draw-bridges to pass
over the Town ditch: The sixth is under a Tower, and leads to the Bridges of
the Danube: For that River runs here in a flat low Country, divides its
streams, so that to pass it quite over, there are at present seven long Bridges
made up of many thousand Trees laid one by another, after their way of making
Bridges. There is also a Bridge within the City of Vienna, called the Hochbrug,
or High-bridge, which is made by the crossing of two Streets at equal Angles;
the ground of one street being as high as the tops of the Houses of the other,
so th t to continue it, they were forced to build a Bridge or Arch in the Lower
street, to let the upper to pass over it.

The City is fairly built of stone, and well paved; many Houses are of six
stories high; they are somewhat flat roofed after the Italian way; the Streets
are not narrow, but the compass of ground will not admit them to be very broad;
and their Buildings are remarkable both above and below ground; their Cellars
are very deep. To satisfy my curiosity, I went into some of them, and found
four Cellars one under another; they were arched, and had two pair of Stairs to
descend into them. Some have an open space in the middle of each roof, to let
the Air out of one Cellar into another, and from the lowest an adit or tube
unto the top, to let the Air in and out from the street, somewhat after the
manner of the Mines.

Aenaeas Sylvius, about two hundred years since, commending the City of
Nurnburg, among other expressions lets fall this: Cuperent Scotorum Reges tam
egregie quam mediocres Cives Norinbergenses habitare. The Kings of the Scots
would be content to dwell so well as the middle sorts of Citizens of Nurnburg.
I must confess, when I first entered Nurnburg, I was much surprised to see such
a noble, large, spruce, rich, and well built City: but Vienna does also deserve
the commendation which he affords it: Vbi Palatia digna Regibus, and Templa
quae mirari Italia possit. Where there are Palaces fit for Kings, and Churches
which Italy may admire. And this being spoken so long ago, is now better
verified of it.

The Imperial Palace is very Noble, Substantial, and Princely furnished,
consisting chiefly of two Courts; the one very large, the other lesser, wherein
the Emperor lodges. At the Entrance over the Gate, are set in Capitals Letters
the five Vowels, A, E, I, O, V; whereof the Phancies of men make various
interpretations. That which was told me, was this, Austriae est imperare Orli
Vniverso; or, Alles Erdreich Is It Osterreich Vnterthan; i. e. All the World is
subject to Austria. Although I could hardly believe this was the first intended
meaning. Besides these two Courts is another small one, where some of the Pages
lodge. I took notice of a large rough Jaspis stone lying upon the ground,
little regarded or observed: it is about nine foot Diameter; it was presented
unto the Emperor by the Archbishop of Saltzburg, whose Country assords notable
Quarries, and stones of many sorts; a little piece of it polished, assords fine
yellow, red, black, and white Veins. The Palace of the Count de Draun, and that
which Count Rothal has lately built and nobly furnished, are very
considerable; with many others.

There are also many fair Churches, rich Convents, and Conventual Churches; as
that of the Carmelites, of the Franciscans, of the Beredictines, of St.
Nicholas; In this Church I could not but take notice of the late Sepulchral
Monuments of Count Strozzi and Cardinal Harach. The Dominican Convent is very
fair. The Augustines have a large Church, in the middle whereof they have built
a Chapel after the manner of the Holy House at Loretto; upon the top of which
hang the Colors taken from the Turks and Tartars, many of which Ensigns are
not square like ours, but made Escucheon-wise, some filled with Circles,
wherein are expressed half Moons. The Jesuits Colleges are large, who seldom
fail of noble Convents, especially in places where they have so good footing as
in this. The Front of one of their Colleges opens into a fair Piazza, in the
middle whereof stands a large and high composite Column of Copper upon a
Pedestal of white stone, with four Angels with Escucheons, and on the top the
blessed Virgin; Inscriptions also, in which the Emperor dedicates Austria unto
her Patronage and Tuition.

A noble copper Column Standing before the Jesuits College in Dienna
John Oliver Fecit

In another Marketplace, where the Townhouse is, there is a handsome Statua
of Justice in Copper.

I could not but observe the Scotch Church and Cloister, which gave also the
name unto the Scotch Gate of the City, because I somewhat wondered how the Scots
in old time should be so considerable in this place; but I found by
Information, and the Account of Lazius and Matthaeus Merian in High Dutch, that
this Convent was in former times a great Receptacle for the Scots in their long
Pilgrimage unto Jerusalem, founded and endowed by Duke Henry the First, in
memory of St. Gregory: and it may seem less strange that the Scots should have
a Convent here, and be numerous in these parts in former Ages, if we consider
that St. Colman, one of the Saints of the greatest Veneration in this Country,
was a Scotchman, and said to be of the Royal Blood of Scotland, who, in his
passage to Jerusalem was murdered by the Baurs or Country people at Stockerau,
four German miles from Vienna, and hanged on a Tree, where, as the Story goes,
his Body remained uncorrupted for a year and a half, and diverse Miracles being
affirmed of it, it was taken down, and honorably interred near Stockerau; but
by Meginhard Bishop of Aichstadt it was translated unto Melk, and afterward
sent into Hungary, and his Head kept a long time at Stullweissenburg, or Alba
Regalis, according to the Account which is here given of this Saint.

The Church of St. Peter is also considerable, not for its Splendour but
Antiquity, as being accounted the oldest in the City, standing in a place where
in old time there stood an Altar in honor of Domitian, called Ara Flaviana. In
this Church lies the Body of that famous and learned Person Wolfgangus Lazius,
with this Epitaph or Inscription:

Magnisico Nobili Clarissimo atque summa eruditione ornatissimo viro Domino
Wolfgango Latzio Vien. Philosophiae atque Medicinae Doctori and Professori
Primario, Celeberrimi Archigymnasii Viennensis Rectori and Superintendenti
Caesareo, and ejusdem Sacrae Caesareae Majest. Ferdinandi Sanctissimae memoriae
Consiliario and Historico Peritissimo defuncto Anno Domini M D LXXXVI.

In the Church of the Capucines Convent, are interred the Emperor Matthias and
his Empress, and the Empress Maria, wife to Ferdinand the Third, who out of
their Devotion and Humility, chose to be buried in a Church of this poor Order.
And the Capucines not admitting of Magnificent Monuments in their Churches, as
in the Churches of other Orders, no Tombs are erected worthy so great an
Emperor, and such Empresses.

But the Cathedral Church of St. Stephen, contains diverse Monuments of many
Princes and Great Persons, and is a large stately Building, but somewhat dark
by reason of the thick painted Glass: not covered with Lead, but with Tiles of
wood, which is the only blemish thereof, yet makes a good show. The Steeple and
Spire are very remarkable, as being high, large, strong, and handsome. On the
top or Weather-cock-place of the Spire stands a Cross under a Star and half
Moon, according to the Figure I have elsewhere set down, which the People think
to be of Gold, or at least very well gilded: and in the time of Thunder and
Lightning it looked pale and whitish.

They have this Account how these came first to be set up in this place: That
when Solomon the Magnificent besieged Vienna, perceiving the Forces in the City
to be obstinate, he had an intent to batter down the Steeple about their ears:
But some of the Bassa's and great Commanders, advertising him how unprofitable
a business it would prove, and withal when he took the City, what an honor it
would be unto him to have such a Noble Pyramid in his Dominions: He sent word
into the Town, That he was willing to spare the Steople, upon condition that
they would set up the half Moon and Star (the Turkish Arms) upon the top
thereof. They returned Answer that they would, if he would send the same unto
them; which he did, and they placed it where it stands.

This Spire has the largest Crockets I have observed in any, they being above
a yard long, and adorned with foliage work. The Spire of Landshute in Bavaria,
is accounted the highest in Germany; that of Strasburg, the neatest and
fairest; and this of Vienna the largest and strongest. And therefore it is no
wonder, that when the Ambassadors of Bosna formerly came unto Vienna, they so
often viewed and admired this Fabric, and plainly said, That all the money in
their Country was not sufficient to have built it.

This Steeple is accounted about four hundred sixty and five foot high, being
about half way up three hundred and thirty eight steps. Besides other Hills, I
could see Haimburger Hill within two miles of Presburg, and a great part of
Austria, which the long Course of the Danube rendered very pleasant and
delightful into the eye. In the Chamber or Room from whence I had this
prospect, there is a Clock, whose Case being of wood, was in part burnt down by
Lightning, and therefore there is water always kept in this place to extinguish
the fire, and a man continually watches in the place where the Bells hang.
There is also an Instrument of wood, or wooden Bells or Hammers, which they
make use of from Good Friday till Easter-sunday, all the time that our Savior
was in the Grave, during which time they permit no Bells to ring.

The Cathedral Church of S.t Stephen in Vienna
(...) Oliver: Fecit.



At one of the doors of the Church there is a stone placed in the wall, which
is generally conceived to be one of the stones wherewith St. Stephen was
stoned. It seemed to me some kind of pebble, and is worn and polished by the
hands of the people, who when they enter at that door, do touch it with their
fingers. I was also showed one of the stones which killed St. Stephen at St.
Sernine, or St. Saturnine's Church in Toulouse in France, which is a Church
abounding with Relique-Rareties, and where they also think they have the Bodies
of seven of the Apostles, of St. George, of our King St. Edmund, and of forty
Saints.

In this Church of St. Stephen, besides many Monuments of great Princes and
famous Persons, diverse learned men have Sepulchral Inscriptions; as Johannes
Faber, Bishop of Vienna; Johannes Cuspinianus, and Sebastianus Tengnagelius,
formerly Library Keeper, Historiographer, and Councellor to the Emperor, an
extraordinary learned man, and skilful in fifteen Languages, as the Inscription
delivers; as Hebrew, Syriack, Chaldee, Persian, Arabic, Turkish, Aethiopick,
Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, German, Belgic, and English.

The University of Vienna is also remarkable, if we consider the Antiquity
thereof, the number of Scholars their course of Studies, their accommodations,
privileges and advancements. This is said to have been begun by Albertus the
Third, above three hundred years past; and their Rules, Orders, and Statutes to
have been borrowed from the University of Paris, and the Students were
distinguished into four Divisions or Nations; who, besides the General, have
their particular Rules and Officers, and were comprehended under the Classis of
Austrians, Nations of the Rhine, Hungarians, and Saxons.

In the Austrian Division were contained the Friulians, all of the Diocese of
Trent, all Italy, with the other Provinces beyond the Mountains.

In the Classis of the Rhine were comprehended Suevians, Alsatians,
Franconians, Hassians; also all the Provinces to the South-west, as France,
Spain, Navarre, Holland, Brabant.

In the third Classis, or Natio Hungarioe, were contained Hungarians,
Bohemians, Polonians, Moravians, Sclavonians, all that speak the Sclavonian
Tongue, and also Germans.

To the Classis or Natio Saxonum, were reduced Saxons, Westphalians,
Frislanders, Turingians, Misnians, Brandenburgers, Prussians, Livonians,
Lusatians, Pomeranians, with the Vltramarine Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
Ireland, Sweden, Norway, and Denmark.

These Divisions take up all the Nations of Europe; and indeed there are
Students here of many Nations: and upon Contentions and Differences the several
Classes will hold unto their own, and take parts, and bandy against each other,
but will all unite and hold together in differences with Townsmen or Jews,
which happen sometimes unto an high degree.

They follow here the old beaten way of Knowledge: and I met with few who had
any good insight in new Philosophy; but there are many good Philologers, and
are well versed in Languages, History and Antiquity: and there are many Learned
Men either educated here, or come from other parts. Some who had taken notice
of the Royal Society in London, were very inquisitive after it; and when I had
satisfied them in all particulars, were very much pleased therewith. If they
should fall into the way of Experimental Philosophy, being very industrious,
it is very probable they may do much therein, and they were sure to have the
countenance of the Emperor. I found them also much affected with the English
Society in other parts of Germany. At the University of Altorff I was much
enquired of concerning it: and a Magistrate of Nurnburg, who had got a
Tilescope from London, invited me to his House, to practice the way of using
it. Der Herr von Aldershelme of Leipsick, a Person of great Curiosity, was very
inquisitive after the same Society. And of late years the Curiosi of Germany
have held Learned Conventions and Correspondence, and printed their
Observations at Leipsick. And since my Return into England, I have been
solicited from Cassovia in Upper Hungary, to send the Transactions into those
Parts.

During my stay at Vienna, I went unto a public Anatomy of a Woman that was
beheaded: the Lecture lasted so long, that the Body was Nineteen days unburied.
It was performed by a Learned Physician, Dr. Wolfjtregel, who read in Latin to
the satisfaction of all persons. What I most particularly observed therein was
this, The Pyramidal Muscles very plain and large; the Vterus larger than is
usually observed; the Cartilago Ensiformis double; the Lungs very black; the
Eye was very well shown; he produced an artificial Eye of Ivory, and another
large one of Pastbeard and Paper, contrived and made by himself; the Muscles of
the Pharynx, Larynx, Os Hyoides, and the Tongue, after their dissection, he
reduced very handsomely into their proper places again to show their natural
situation and position. The Anatomy-Theatre was of capacity to receive above an
hundred persons; but of Anatomy-Theatres, until of late, there have been few in
Germany, or none. And when I was in the Anatomy-School at Altorff, near
Nurenburg, that learned civil Professor, Dr. Mauritius Hoffmannus, told me that
the same was the First in Germany.

Paulus de Sorbait, Prime Professor, Physician unto Eleonora the Empress
Dowager, and Knight of Hungary, was the Rector Magnificus. Zwelfer, who writ
Animadversions upon the Dispensatory of Ausburg, was in great repute in Vienna,
and had built for himself a Noble House in the City, but he died some time
before my coming thither.

In fine, the University is noble, their Advancements considerable, their
Privileges great, and they have the power of life and death, from Ancient and
later Concessions of their Dukes and Emperors.

But the greatest luster unto Vienna is the Residence of the present Emperor
Leopoldus; he was born in the year 1638. he was Son unto the Emperor Ferdinand
the Third; he was baptized by the Names of ^^^opoldus, Ignatius, Franciscus,
Balthazar, Josephus, Felicianus. His lest Brother Ferdinand, King of the
Romans, died of the Small Pox his Fathers time. His Brother Carolus Josephus,
Master of the ^uto^ick Order, dyed 1662. He married Margareta Infanta of Spain,
^ughter unto King Philip the Fourth, whose Children died Infants; virtuous,
affable, grave and worthy Prince, and seemed to me to ^e very happily here, in
the love and honor of his People, Soul^iers, and Clergy.

His Person is grave and graceful; he has the Austrian Lip remarkably, his
Chin long, which is taken for a Good Physiognomical mark, and a sign of a
constant, placid, and little troubled mind. He is conceived to carry in his
Face the lineaments of four of his Predecessors, that is of Rudolphus the
First, of Ma^^imilian the First, of Charles the Fifth, and Ferdinand the First.
He was very affectionate unto his Empress, who, though but young, was a modest,
grave Princess, had a good aspect, was zealous in her Religion, and an Enemy
unto the Jews. He showed also great respect and observance unto the Empress
Dowager Elconora, who was a sober and prudent Princess, well skilled in all
kind of curious Works, and delighted sometimes to shoot at Deer from a Stand,
or at other Game, out of her Coach. He was also very loving unto his Sisters,
beautiful and good Princesses; whereof one, the eldest, was since married unto
that Noble Prince Michael Wisnowitzski, King of Poland. And afterward to
Charles Duke of Lorain.

He speaks four Languages, German, Italian, Spanish, and Latin. He is a great
Countenancer of Learned Men, and delights to read, and when occasion permits,
will pass some hours at it. The worthy Petrus Lambecius, his Library Keeper,
and who is in great esteem with him, will usually find out some Books for him
which he conceives may be acceptable. While I was there he recommended a
Translation of Religio Medici unto him, wherewith the Emperor was exceedingly
pleased, and spoke very much of it unto Lambecius, insomuch that Lambecius
asked me whether I knew the Author, he being of my own name, and whether ^he
were living: And when he understood my near Relation to him, he became more
kind and courteous than ever, and desired me to send him that Book in the
Original English, which he would put into the Emperors Library: and presented
me with a neat little Latin Book, called Princeps in Compendio, written by the
Emperors Father, Ferdinandus the Third.

He is also skilful in Music, composes well, and delighted much in it, both at
his Palace and the Church, which makes so many Musicians in Vienna; for no
place abounds more with them; and in the Evening we seldom sailed of Music in
the Streets, and at our Windows: And the Emperors delight herein makes the
Churchmen take the greater care to set off their Church-Musick, for he goes
often to Church, and not to one, but diverse, especially the best Conventual
Churches: and in his own Chapel some of his own Compositions are often played.
He has also excellent Music in his Palace, both Vocal and Instrumental; and
his private Chapel is well served, where besides the excellent Music, there
are always eight or ten Counts, Pages to the Emperor, who serve at the Altar
with white wax Torches in their hands; and after the manner of the Italian
Princes, diverse Eunuchs to sing.

For his Recreations abroad, he delights much in Hunting, especially of the
wild Boar in due seasons; I have known him bring home six Boars in a morning.
Some stout persons, particularly count Nicholas Serini, would encounter a wild
Boar alone, but at last he unfortunately perished by one, which has made
others more wary since; and therefore when the Boar is at a Bay, the Huntsmen
so stand about him, that the Emperor, or other great persons, may more safely
make use of their Boar-spears upon him.

Surely there are great numbers of them about the Country, for they are no
unusual or extraordinary Dish in the City, though of a delicious and pleasing
taste. They feed upon Acorns, Beech-mast, and Chestnuts, upon the spring or
sprout of Broom, Juniper, and Shrubs, and upon the roots of Fern, and will
range into Cornfieldsd, and come out of Forests into Vineyards. The Huntsmen
are notably versed and skilful in that Game; for though they see it not, they
will distinguish a wild from a common Swine, and guess whether that which they
hunt be Male or Female, old or young, large or small; fat or lean; and this
they chiefly conjecture from their tread or foot, and the casting their
hindfeet out of the track of their forefeet.

The Emperor being so good a Huntsman, it is the less wonder that he is
esteemed a good Horseman. Certain it is, that he has a very noble Stable of
Horses, procured from all parts, Turk sh, Tartarian, Polonian, Transylvanian,
Saxon, Bohemian, Hungarian, Naples, etc. and they are well managed; and they
ride them to the satisfaction of the Beholders.

Having seen the Arsenal at Venice, the Stores at Chatham, and the Naval
Provisions at Amsterdam, I am not like to admire any other, especially so far
from the Sea, and looked for nothing of that nature in this place
Notwithstanding I found an Arsenal, and place for Naval Vessels to be set out
upon occasion, and some thereof were employed in the last Turkish war, when
they attempted to destroy the Bridge of Boats which the Turks had made over the
Danube, a little above Gran and Barchan. They are built somewhat like Galleys,
carry great Guns, and a good number of Soldiers, and will make a fight upon
the broad deep stream of the Danube, and may be handsomely brought into the Town
behind one of the Bastions, when the River is high: and hereof there are some
at Rab and Komora as I have declared elsewhere.

The Emperor has many Counselors, great Soldiers and Courtiers about him;
among which these seemed of greatest Note.

Eusebius Wenceslaus Duke de Sagan, Prince Lob^owitz, Prime Counselor,
Hoff-meister, of the Order of the Golden Fleece, a person of a grave and sober
Aspect, somewhat blunt in conversation, but of a generous temper, and free from
all covetousness, who spent his Revenues nobly, and unto his great reputation:
He was chief favorite unto the Emperor; and though some had no great opinion of
his Abilities, yet he was the first that discovered the last Hungarian
defection and revolt, whereby those Noble Persons, Count Peter Serini and
Nadasti (whom I saw at Vienna) were brought unto their ends.

Henricus Gulielmus, Count of Stahrenberg, Ober-hoff-Mareschal, or Lord Marshal
of the Court.

Johannes Maximilianus, Count of Lamburg, Oberst Kammer-Herr, or Chief of the
Chamber, a Person of great esteem. The Gentlemen of the Bedchamber are
numerous, and many are in extraordinary; there may be an hundred of them, all
Barons and Counts. Every one of them wears a Golden Key before his Breast; and
the Grooms of the bedchamber wear one of Steel: Two of each attend every Night.

Gundakerus, Count Dietrichstein, Ober-Stall-Meister, or Chief Master of the
Horse.

These are the Chief. These following are also considerable.

Count Sinzendorff, Oberste-Jag-Meister, Grand Veneur, or Hunts-Master, a
Person in good favor with the Emperor, who very much delights in Hunting, as
have most of his Predecessors.

The Count of Aversberg, Oberst-Falken-Meister, Chief Falconer, who has twelve
Falconers under him.

The Count of Paar, Chief Master of the Emperors Post.

Leopoldus Wilhelmus, Marquis of Baden, Captain of an hundred Hartshires, who
are the Horse-guard, and ride with Pistols and Carab^nes out of the City; but
within Vienna they carry Lances and Javelins with broad points.

of the Foot-guard, of a good Personage, and well esteemed of by the Emperor.

Sixty, or more, Pages; for the number, is uncertain, and not limited; most of
them Counts and Barons.

Raymundus, Count de Montecuculi, was his General* President of the Council of
War, Governor of Rab and the Confines about it, and of the Order of the Golden
Fleece; a tall Person, somewhat lean, but has a spirit in his look: he is one
of the oldest Commanders in Europe, and performed good Service in Poland,
Hungary, Germany in many places, and is esteemed a prudent, valiant, and
successful Commander.

The Count de Souches was also a Commander of great Fame, and in high esteem
with the Emperor. He was a Native of Rochelle: he first served the Swedes in
the German wars, and was a Colonel, but upon some disgust he forsook the
Swedes, and served the Imperialists, and was made Governor of Brin, the second
Town in Moravia. After the taking of Crembs in Austria* General Torstenson,
besieged Brin, and sent word unto the Governor de Souches, That if he refused
to deliver up the Town, he would give him no quarter. Who answered him, That he
would not ask any, and also give none: and defended the place with such
resolution, that after many Assaults* Underminings, and Attempts by Granado's,
Torstenson was forced to rise, after a Siege of four months, which was so
advantageous unto Austria and the Imperial affairs, that the Emperor took
especial notice of him, made him a Buron, and of his Privy Council. He
commanded also all the Forces in Vienna, and did notable Service in the last
Turkish wars. He took the City of Nitra, or Nitria, not far from Strigonium or
Gran; and took and slew six thousand Turks which were sent by the Vizier of
Bada against him: a worthy Person, and of a good Aspect. Count Souches the
younger, his Son, an Heroic Commander, is Governor, of the strong fortified
place Leopoldstadt by Freistadt, a Person of great Civility, unto whom I was
much obliged.

Count Lesly, Nephew unto Count Lesly, who was sent Ambassador to
Constantinople to the Sultan from the Emperor, is a Commander worthy of that
esteem he has with the Emperor; a Person of great Courage, Civility and
Humanity, which I must ever acknowledge.

The Courts of the Empress, and of the Empress Dowager, are filled with Persons
of Note; and there are a great number of Soldiers in this place of great Fame,
as the Marquess Pio, Spork, Cop^, and many more. Many of the Clergy and Men of
Learning, are in good esteem with the Emperor; but the Jesuits Moelner and
B^ccabella, are his near Favorites. Many Strangers both Soldiers and Scholars,
have built their Fortunes here. And surely Strangers of parts and industry, so
they be of the Roman Church, are not like to raise their Fortunes any where
better than in these parts.

Though the Emperor goes not to war in Person, yet has he been successful in
his wars, especially in the Battle with the Turks at St. Godart, where the
business was handsomely and actively managed, to set upon the body of the Turks,
which had passed the River Rab, before the whole Forces of the Vizier could
come over, to the great slaughter of the Janisaries and Turks, who fought
stoutly, and were first put to a Retreat by the French Cavalry. For at first
the Turks seemed to prevail, and had slain a great part of two Regiments of the
Auxiliari^s which came out of Franconia, and after their custom, had cut off
their Heads.

But his later wars have been still more fortunate, wherein he has not only
relieved Vienna, and taken diverse cities from the Turks; but remains still
Master of the Field in Hungary. Among the many notable things in Vienna, the
Imperial Library is very remarkable. He who has seen the Bodleian Library at
Oxford, and the Vatican, at Rome, would be much surprised to find such a
notable one here, as may compare with them; especially upon the extreme Borders
of the Learned part of Europe.

The number and nobleness of the Books does much exceed the receptacle or place
which contains them, as making no fair show at the entrance, and somewhat
wanting light. But as for the number and value of the Books, they are of
opinion here that it yields unto none, but rather excels any other Library in
Europe. There was a place designed for the building of a fit receptacle for
them; but, I know not how, a Theater for Comedies is now built in that place.

It is divided into eight Chambers or Rooms, which are so well filled, that
many Books are fain to lie upon the Floor; and the Shelves stand so close, that
there is but just room to pass between them. The Manuscripts, stand distinct
from the printed Books, according to their Languages, being divided into six
Classes, Theological, Juridical, Medical, Philosophical, Historical,
Philological. There can scarce be a more admirable Collection than the
Manuscripts in part of the first Chamber, of Hebrew, Syriack, Arabic, Turkish,
Armenian, Aethiopick, and Chinese Books.

It was begun, at least the Books began to be placed in this receptacle, by
Maximilian the First, but has been much increased by succeeding Emperors, most
of them, since Rodolphus the First, being much addicted unto Learning, there
having been large accessions from many noble Libraries, and most upon the cost
of the Emperors. The choicest Books in the famous Library of Buda, of King
Matthias Corvinus, Son unto Huniades, are now in it. The notable Library of
Wolfgangus Lazius, who was Library Keeper, was brought hither, and Three
thousand Books of Johannes Sambucus are now in this Repository.

Augerius Bushequius, sometime Library Keeper hereof, added much unto it; and
in his two Turkish Embassies procured a great number of noble Greek Manuscripts
at Constantinople, which are inscribed with his own hand, Aug. de Busbeck. emit
Constantinopoli. A great many were added from the Library of the Learned
Johannes Cuspinianus, Library Keeper, and Councellor unto the Emperor. The
notable Libraries and Mathematical Instruments of Tycho Brahe, Kepler, and
Gassendus, were purchased for it. But the largest accession was made by the
noble Library of Count Fugger, which consisting of sixteen thousand Volumes,
was purchased by Ferdinand the Third. Many were brought, some few years past,
from the Ambrasian Library by Inspruck, by the Learned Petrus Lambecius,
Library Keeper, Historiographer, and Councellor unto the present Emperor; who
has also an excellent Library which is like to be added unto the Imperial. He
then reckoned the Volumes in this great Library to amount at least to Fourscore
thousand; and by this time that number may be increased, for he adds some
yearly. And the number might almost be endless, if they would make use of their
privilege, for the Emperor ^ ath a right to have two Books of all that are
printed in Germany.

They have also a great advantage at Vienna to acquire good Manuscripts from
the Turkish Dominions, for the Emperor is obliged to have a Resident with the
Grand Sei^nior wheresoever he moves or orders him to be; even at the last fight
of St. Godart, the Emperor's Resident was in the Turkish Camp. And when I was
at Larissa, in Thessaly, the Resident Signor de Casa Nova, was inquisitive
after Books to be found among the Greeks in Monasteries and other places. And
this Emperor, like his Father, will spare no cost toward such Acquiries.

By the especial favor of my noble Friend Lambecius, I went many times into
this Library, and he was so courteous as to let me have what Books I desired
unto my private Lodging: He would show me diverse Books upon what Subject I
required, and offered me a sight of what Books he thought rare and estimable;
and amongst others I could not but take notice of these following:

A Letter of the present Emperor of China, in the Chinese and Tartarian
Languages, unto the present Emperor of Germany, weaved in a very fine Roll.

Another old Roll written in unknown Letters, yet a little resembling the Greek.

A Book in the Runick Language.

A very fair Manuscript of Ptolomy, with the Maps drawn in Colors.

The oldest Manuscript and true Exemplar of Livy, in large Letters, without
distinction of Words or Sentences, very uneasy to be read, a thousand years
old, and brought, not many years since, from the Library near Inspruck.

An old fair Greek Manuscript of Dioscorides, written eleven hundred years
since in very large Letters, without distance of Words, or Accents, wherein all
the Plants are lively painted; also the Pictures of Dioscorides, Galen,
Pamphilus, Cratevas, and other ancient Physicians, bought of a Jew at
Constantinople for an hundred Ducats, by Busbequius.

A Book of Geometrical, Propositions demonstrated in the China Language.

Another fair one in the China Tongue with Pictures.

A noble old Greek Manuscript in great uncial Letters, without stops, points,
or distance of words.

An ancient Greek Manuscript of the Book of Genesis, in large Letters, without
distance or accents, thirteen hundred years ago; wherein are Forty eight
Pictures or Draughts in Miniature or Watercolors, much conducing to the
knowledge of ancient Habits, the manner of Feasting, postures at Meals, waiting
of Servants and Musical Instruments: Wherein I could not but take notice of the
Golden Spot upon Joseph's breast; and the manner of the Execution of Pharaoh's
Baker, his head being put through a forked piece of wood, and his Hands tied
behind him.

A fair Book of Albert Durer, wherein are many fine Paintings in Miniature or
Limning; as also a Sphere, and within it a Globe carved and painted by him.

A fair Book of Michael Angelo, wherein, besides many rare things in
Architecture, are all the paintings and designs of the Belvedere, in little.

A fair Alcoran in Arabic, interlined with the Turkish to explain it.

The Bible in the Coptick, and Persian Languages.

Luther's own Bible, marked with his own Hand, and interlined by him with Notes
in many places.

A fair Greek Manuscript of the New Testament, fifteen hundred years ago
written in Letters of Gold upon Purple.

There was also a Magical Glass, obtained by the Emperor Rodolphus, whereby to
see Appariti^ns, and converse with Spirits; which some conceive to be the same,
or of the like nature with that used by Kelly.

Of ancient Greek, Roman, and Gothic Medals and Coyns, in Gold, Silver, and
Copper, to the number of sixteen thousand. Among the Copper Coyns they pretend
to have two of the Emperor Marcus Otho.

I let fall some Drops into this Ocean, adding some Coyns, Intaglia's, and
Inscriptions not to be found in that large work of Gruterus; which having found
in the Emperors further Dominions and Turkish parts, long out of his
possession, where there had been no great enquiry after them; were showed unto
his Imperial Majesty by Petrus Lambecius, and so well accepted by him, that he
said I might have the use of what Books I desired: and at my return into
England he gave me a formal Pass in Latin for my safe Travel, and that my
Trunks or Goods might not be searched, which takes off a great deal of trouble
in passing so many Principalites and free Cities, Commanding all in his own
Dominions, and Requesting all Princes in Germany to favor me, and permit me to
pass freely without molestation: It was thus Subscribed,

Leopoldus Leopoldus Gulielmus Comes in Kinigseggs. Ad mandatum Sacr. Caes.
Majestatis proprium Beuer.
The Rareties of the great Duke of Tuscany, The Treasure of Loretto, St Mark,
St. Denis in France, of the Duke of Saxony at Dresden, and others, were very
satisfactory to me. Yet having a fair opportunity, I would not leave Vienna
without a sight of the most noble Treasury or Repository of his Imperial
Majesty; especially having heard so much thereof, and knowing it to be the
Collection of many succeeding Emperors. I therefore took a fit opportunity to
remain diverse hours in it, and was extremely delighted with the rich and
magnificent Curiosities thereof. To set down all I saw, were a work too large
for this Volume; and the Catalogue of them, which is kept in this place, takes
up a large Volume in Folio. I shall therefore only mention these following,
whereby some conjecture may be made of the rest.

In the first Cupboard or Case were many noble Vessels, turned and shaped out
of Ivory, a Cup turned by the Emperors own Hand; another turned by Ferdinandus
the Third. Gallant Cups of Amber; Spoons and Vessels of Mother of Pearl: many
noble works in Coral; a fine Galley in Ivory, and Cups made out of Rhinocerot's
horn.

in the second,

An Elephant of Ivory with a Castle, upon his back, and over the Castle a Ship,
with much other fine work in the same piece. Two fair Pillars of Ivory; good
Basso Relievo in Ivory; a fair Cranium or Deathshead, and much other variety of
Ivory work. A Picture in Oil of Ganymede, by Corregio.

In the third,

A fine Picture, of an old Man's head in Oil by Albert Durer: great Variety of
Watches and Clock-work in Silver: a fine Centaur in Silver which is a curious
Watch.

In the fourth,

More Watches and Clock-work; a gallant Ship of Silver, a Triumphal Chariot, a
Turk riding and attended, a Globe and a Sphere in Silver, a curious Landscape in
Oil by Corregio, a Cupid by the same hand, with a fine Copy of it.

In the fifth,

A curious Filegrane Handkerchief, and two fair Filegrane Plates brought out of
Spain by the Empress Margarita; an Indian Basket of an Indian sort of Filegrane
mixed with Birds; a Basin of Agate finely wrought with silver Craw-fishes in it.

In the sixth,

Is contained a strange Collection of Intaglie and old Roman Stones, admirable
for their work and largeness. A large Agate whereon is wrought the History of
that Victory which Augustus Caesar obtained over the Dalmatians and Pannonians,
in the ninth year of our Lord; about five inches long, and four broad, highly
valued: An exact Cut of which is here inserted.

An Onyx with the Head of Alexander, and Olympia.

A Shell with a Battle carved in it.

A Chain with the Heads of all the Austrian Family.

A Dog in a very large Sardonyx.

In the seventh,

A noble Head in Oil by Hans van Ach. The Head of Maximilianus the First in
Plaster, with a lock of his own Hair. Mother of Pearl in many shapes. Fine
Baskets, and the twelve Caesar's Heads.

In the eight, most of Crystal,

A noble Vessel about a yard and half high, made out of one piece of Crystal.
An Vrne. The Head of the Empress. A fair Dragon. The Head of the Queen Mother
of France. A Crystal in which the Picture of our Savior may be seen thrice
one way, and once another way.

The ninth of Crystal also,

A noble Ewer. A fair Vessel of very clear Crystal, lately bought. A large
Head. Fair Crosses, and other Varieties.

The tenth of Gold and precious Stones.

Five Crowns. The Imperial Crown; rich in Jewels, and has a very large blew
Saphir on the top. A Model of that Crown with which the Emperor is crowned,
much richer than the Original. A Paragon Diamond of seventeen Carats and a
half. Very large Rubies. A Scepter of Unicorns horn, set with rich Stones. A
Locket of the greatest Diamonds. A magnificent Scepter, Globe, Cross, and
Crown, which cost seven hundred thousand Crowns. An Opal bigger than my hand,
as it was taken out of the Mine; and many other fair Opals. A very large
Emerald. A Ship in an Emerald. A fair Ring-Dial.

The eleventh of Gold.

A noble Basin used at the Baptism of the Austrian Family. Scepters, Scimeters,
Knives, and other rich Presents from the Turk. Three rich Dog-Collar's, sent by
King Charles the Second with three Dogs, out of England, with this Mark on them
OCOC. A large lump of pure Gold, as it was taken out of the Mine, as broad as
my hand. A fair piece of Gold Ore, wherein the pure Gold shoots upon a white
Stone. Diverse great Basins of Gold and Coral.

In the twelfth.

Vessels of Jaspis, Agate, Lapis Lazuli, Oriental Granates. Cups of Onyx,
Sardonyx. Large ones of Lapis Nephriticus: and a great one of an Amethyst.

In the thirteenth,

A large high Vessel of Bohemian Topaz. Flowers well made out of precious
Stones. A Cup of an Hungarian Diamond. A piece of Ambergriece as big as a man's
head, sent from the Grand Seignior. A noble Jaspis-stone. A large Stone of
Agate on the outside, and a bed of large Amethysts naturally in it in the
middle, which is an extraordinary and pleasant Rarely.

In the rest,

Noble Chrysolites, Jacynths, Crien'al Granates, Beryls or Aquamarines. The
notable rich Smaragdus, or Emerald, or a Cup, out of that Stone. Three great
ones having been already taken out, valued at three hundred thousand Crowns. A
Picture in Oil of the little King Vladisllaus Lokeli, King of Hun ary. Ten rich
Turkish Saddles, with Furnitures for Horses, set with fair Turcois Stones. A
great number of Gold Vessels and fine Figures in Coral Turkish Knives,
Gauntlets, and Table men of Gold. Delicate Pictures in Wax. Very large Bezoar
stones. Indian gold, Cards and Counters. A vast Medal of the Emperor's Arms,
weighing two thousand two hundred Ducats, or a thousand pounds English. A Cup
out of Solomon's Temple. Fair Amber. Rare Inlaying, in Wood. Bacchus and other
Statua's out of a very high Rhinocerot's horn. A fine Picture of the Mountain
Vesuvius. Jewels with black Feathers given by the Turkish Ambassadors. A
notable Picture of a lean Skeleton Priest, who lived so four years. A notable
Cabinetclock with large motions. A fair Basin and Ewer of carved Ivory. King
Philip the Second of Spain in Diamond Armor, set in Gold. A neat Picture of an
old Man courting a young Woman, with this Motto:

Arctum Annulum ne gestato. A Knife swallowed by a Peasant near Prague, which
was nine months in his Stomach, and safely cut out 1602. The like happened also
to a person in Prussia, of which Daniel Becker has written a peculiar Tract
under this Title, De Cultrivoro Prussiaco. A fair Crucifix of Pearl. Indian
Pictures made of Feathers. The King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus's Buff-coat in
which he was killed at the Battle of Lutzen. Tilly's Sword. An Angel in Ivory
with Hair and Clothes of Filegrane of Gold, A neat Crucifix of Wood by Albertus
Durer. Two very large Looking-glasses with the Frames of Silver. All the
Gospels written and painted. Many brave Statua's and Pictures every where. The
Haed of Charles the first King of England, in white Marble. A Ped stal of
Amber, over which a Cross. The Head of St. Valerius Bishop of Triers. The
Picture of St. Catherine of Sienna, drawn by Sigismund King of Poland. A
Picture of the Emperor as he gives Audience, to be looked upon through a little
round hole. A neat Table of Inlaid Stone made by the present Empress Dowager
Eleonora. A Nail of our Savior's Cross almost a foot long; our Savior's
Blood; and two Thorns of his Crown, the one whiter than the other. Priests
Garments covered all over with large Pearl. The great and high esteemed Agate
Dish, between three and four spans. Diameter with XRISOS naturally in it. Unto
which one applied that of St. Luke, Dico vobis quia si hi tacuerint, lapides
clamabunt.

Unto which magnificent Rareties there is one more added, the noble Chain of
Pearl of eight yards long taken from the Graff Teokeoly in the late Hungarian
war, as I understand since my Return.

I went unto diverse noted Places about Vienna: I walked unto the Hill of
Vienna, two English miles distant from the Town, going up all the way by an
easy Ascent; from whence I had a prospect of the City, and the Compagnia about
it, together with the high Mountains in Steirmark covered with Snow: and in my
return saw the Palace of the Empress Dowager without the Town, called la
Favorita, and passed by the Convent of the Paulini.

About two English miles Eastward from Vienna, there is a very noble
Garden-place belonging to the Emperor, built by Rodolphu^ the Second, which
has been formerly well furnished, and provided with Plants, but now seems to
be neglected, and somewhat ruinous. It consists of an inward and an outward
square Garden: The inward is two hundred ordinary paces square, about the same
bigness with the Place Royal at Paris: It has a Portico or Cloister, supported
by Forty Pillars of white Stone on each side, and is covered with Copper; as
are also the Pavilions which the common people think to be Gold. Besides this,
there is an handsome row of Buildings well seated, called New-gabau, in which at
present are many wild Beasts kept. Lions and Tigres breed here, and have young
ones. Some say this was the place of Solomon the Magnificent's Tent when he
besieged Vienna. But it is rather the Figure of his Pavilion which was placed
on the other side of the City.

There is also, about two or three miles from Vienna, a noted place of
Devotion, called Arnols, much frequented, especially in Lent, diverse carrying
Crosses very heavy all the way upon their shoulders. There is here a little
House built exactly after that of the Scpulchre at Jerusalem; and also a
handsome Copy of the Picture of our Savior and the Virgin Mary, with their
exact heights. That of our Savior is about two yards high; that of the blessed
Virgin three or four fingers breadth lower: These are taken from the Original
in St. John de Lateran at Rome. Hither the Empress desired to go one morning
from her own Palace on Foot, out of Devotion, which she performed, though with
a great deal of difficulty, she being not used to walk, and the way was dusty.
The Emperor accompanied her and all the Court followed on foot, which made a
handsome show.

Nearer unto Vienna there is also a remarkable place for Devotion, called
Itzing: and in the way from Vienna unto it, the twelve Stations of the Cross
are marked out in imitation of what is observed near Jerusalem, in the Via
Crucis, or Dolorosa, in our Savior's proceeding from the City unto Mount
Calvary; the the Figures thereof are printed, and the several paces between
every Station set down. The Emperor has a handsome Park near Vienna, called the
Brater, wherein I beheld the effects of the great Lightning and Thunder which
happened three days before, upon many great Trees which were torn, split, or
twisted. There is a House of Pleasure in it, where among other things, I could
not but take notice of a Musical Instrument which I had not seen before, a Seat
or Chestdrum; it has a Cord like that of a Sea-trumpet, but sounds like a
Kettle-drum.

I went also unto Laxamburg, whither the Emperor often retires; he has a House
in this place, but it is old, and not large. There is also a House of Pleasure
in the Mote, into which there is no other passage but through a high Corridore.
The Castle is commodiously seated for the Emperors recreation; and there is an
eight-square House in the Marsh, from which the Nobility and the Empress
Dowager sometimes used to shoot, she being very expert therein. Over the Gate
of the Emperors House hangs a great Rib and Jaw Bone, whereof I could get no
better account, than they were the Rib and Jaw Bone of a heathen maid. They
seemed to me to be Bones of an Elephant. But many things that are old or
obscure, they call, in this Country, Heathen: as Roman Coyns, they call Heathen
money. And the Peasants brought me, in a place which had been formerly an old
Roman Station, part of the bit of a Bridle dug up, which they concluded to
be a Heathen Key.

From hence I went unto Mannersdorff, seated not far from the River Leyta,
where there is a natural h^t Bath, called the Wildebath; it arises under a
Church, the Church being built over the Springhead. The water of it is but
Lukewarm, and therefore when they desire it hotter, they boil it, and so bathe
in Tubs in a large room. From that Substance which sticks to the sides of the
Coppers in the boiling of it, they judge it to be impregnated with Sulphur,
Saltpeter, and Chalk. The water colors the stones, and makes them look, when
wet, like fine Turquois^s. And the vapor of the Bath hanging upon the Moss on
the sides, gives it an Amber or Gold color. The ^hysicians of Vienna have
given a good account concerning the use of these Baths in High-^utch. Not far
from hence is a noted Quarry of Stone, out of which a great part of Vienna is
built. The Stones are large and they cut, and square them at the Quarry.

From hence I proceeded to the Newsidler sea or Lake, so called from Newsidle,
which is a Town seated upon the Northern part of it, consisting of one street
and some back-houses, and a small, square, old Castle upon a Hill, from whence
I had a good prospect over the Lake. It is about three German miles broad, and
seven miles long. The fairest Lake in these parts affording plenty of Fish;
encompassed and thickly set about with small Towns and Villages; and has no
River, at least not considerable, running into or out of it. A little way from
the Gate of N^^sidle they dig out a black earth, out of which they make
Saltpeter. In this Journey, not far from Himburg, we passed by a place called
Rauckward, which, though it seems not high, looks over a great part of Austria,
and as far as Brin, the second City of Moravia, a part also of the Kingdom of
Bohemia, and a part of the Kingdom of Hun^ar^a. I went afterward four English
miles up the Stream of the Danube, to see a noted Quarry of Stone in a Hill
called Altenburg. The beds, rows, or cases of the Stones lie not horizontally,
but rather elevated Northward, about the height of the Angle forty, yet are not
always so regularly placed, but rather follow the shape of the Hill, and
according to that are differently situated. Here I also observed a Substance
between a Clay and a stone called Leberstein, or Liverstone; and upon many of
these Stones I found the figures of Trees and Leaves, though not so deep or
neat as upon the Stones by Florence; yet very prettily marked, and often with
broader Leaves, than I had elsewhere observed. I passed forward to
Closter-Neubur^, a Town most of it belonging to that notable rich Monastery
seated here, founded by St. Leopoldus Marquess of Austria, and since much
enriched by succeeding Donations.

Matthaeus Merian has a good cut of the Prospect of the Danube hereabouts, and
in what manner it passes downwards between the two great Hills of Kalenberg and
Bisnberg. Upon one Peak of Kalenbreg live diverse Camaldulenses, of an Order the
most severe of any, living most upon Roots and Herbs, in the manner of
Hermites. Near their Cells they had paved the ground with those Stones I
mentioned, which were naturally marked with the Shapes of Trees and Plants.

After an open Autumn there followed a sharp Winter at Vienna, in the months of
December and January. The branches of the Danube were soon frozen over. The
main Stream, by reason of its swift Current, held out longer, but was
afterward also frozen. Some have thought that this River is more apt to freez
than others. And we read of Battles which have been fought upon this River
frozen; but I could not make any regular Observation thereof. This hard
weather, the ground being covered with Snow, afforded handsome Recreations unto
men, and some unto the Ladies, in running Courses in handsome Sleds and Devices
upon the Snow. Their Sleds were well contrived in the shape of Griffins,
Tigers, Swans, Scallop Shells, Dolphins, Peacocks, and the like Curiosities,
cared, painted, and gilded. The Lady sits in one of these, richly habited in
Velvet, lined with rich Furrs, set off with Lace and Jewels, in a Velvet Cap
lined with Sables. The Sled is drawn by a Horse, dressed up with Feathers of
all colors, and Bells hanging about him, a pair of Stags horns behind his
head, Ribbons and other Ornaments: one or more Pages ride by on Horseback with
Torches in their hands. And after this ^anner they perform their Course upon
the frozen Snow about the streets of Vienna, in the night, with good speed one
after another. A Gentleman sits behind the Lady and guides the Horse. But the
Frost breaking up put an end to these Recreations. The Frost began and ended
here the same day that it began and ended in England.

The Festivity of Christmas was observed much after the same Manner,
Ceremonies, and Solemnities, as in Italy. On Christmas Day the Emperor dined
publicly, attended with many Nobles and great Persons, and three remarkable
low Dwarss. Upon St. Stephen's day he went to the Cathedral of St. Stephen, and
went up to the Altar, kneeled, and kissed the Plate whereon the Hostia had
lain. At the Epiphany or Twelfth-tide, the old custom of choosing King and
Queen was observed at Court. Count Lesly happened to be King, the Emperor laid
the Cloth, and the Empress filled out Wine, together with other old Customs,
Fetched perhaps in part from ancienter times, Saturnalium diebus, mos Romany,
praebere servis convivium sic ut ipsi officia serv^rum obirent.

Before Christmas there was extraordinary mirth and jollity at the Court upon
occasion of a Marriage: For Count Serau, Governor of Gratz in Styria, married a
natural Daughter of Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, which was observed with
many noble Solemnities and Braveries. And the Nobility and Ladies were so
substantially splendid, that I was much surprised thereat.

This was followed by a Funeral Solemnity for the Count of Draun, who was
Colonel of the Forces in Vienna, and who had one of the noblest Houses in the
City; his Corpse was brought out of Italy, and interred in the Dominican Church,
where he formerly built a very fair Altar; there was raised for him a Castrum
Doloris, handsomely contrived and set round with white Wax Torches and Candles.

While I was in Vien^a, the Empress Margarita was delivered of a Daughter,
which was Christened by the name of Maria, Antonina, Josepha, Benedicta,
Rosalia, Petronella, but she lived not many months. When the Empress came
abroad, she brought the Child to the Augustines Church, where Cardinal Carlo
Caraffa, the Pope's Nuncio, received it, blessed it, and laid it upon the Altar.

During my stay here, the Election was in readiness for a King of Poland, after
the voluntary resignation of that Crown by King Casimir; and Couriers often
passed between that Country and this. There were Competitors the Czar of
Muscovy's Son, the Duke of Newburg, and the Prince of Lorrain. The French moved
actively for the Duke of Newburg, the Emperor for the Prince of Lorrain, who
was then at Vi nna, in great favor with the Emperor, who greatly promoted his
interest; a Person of great esteem, and who if General Lub^mirski had been
living, who was his intimate Friend, in all probability might have obtained the
Crown; and thereupon it was conceived that he should have married the Emperor's
Sister. But the Poles made choice of one of their own Country, who was no
Competitor, Michael Wisnowitski deceased, who also married the Sister of the
Emperor.

When I was here, there were many Ambassadors of Note, D^n Balthazar de la
Cueva, Marquess of Malago^, and Brother to the Viceroy of Naples, was
Ambassador for Spain. Cardinal Carlo Carassa was the Pope's Nuncio. The
Venetia^ Ambassador Extraordinary, solicited for assistance for Candia, and he
obtained the Regiment of Porcia under Marquis Pio. Count Souches the younger,
who was Governor of Leop ldstadt, and many noble and valiant Soldiers were
preparing for that Expedition. The Turks gave assurance of the Grand Seignior's
intention to maintain the Peace inviolably; and requested the Emperor not to
assist the Venetians, or Transylvanians, nor to promote, but rather hinder, the
Election of the Emperor of Muscovy's Son to the Crown of Poland. The Bishop of
Beziers, sent by the King of France to the Election of the King of Poland, came
not hither, but passed through Nurenburg, where I lodged at the same Inn: They
were generally here against the French Interest, and so were a great part of
the Polish Nobility. An Ambassador came also from the Cham of Tartary, to
confirm a Peace, and afford mutual Assistance upon occasion. Cha Gagi A^a was
the Ambassador, who brought a Present of the best Tartarian Horses, which are
of high esteem for swiftness, hardiness, boldness in passing frozen Rivers, and
taking and swimming over great Streams. He was dismissed with noble Presents of
Plate. The Emperor presented the Cham of Tartary with a fair Silver Basin and
Ewer, and a curious Watch; and sent Presents unto the Chammine his Wife; and
also to his Sister and four Brothers. His Followers were stout men, of good
stature, coarse Complexions, wearing long furred Vests and Calpacks, or furred
Caps. Some of them had silver Rings with the same Signatures of the Turkish
Seals. They took much Tabaco in very long Pipes. Their Tabaco is not in Rolls,
but in Leaves, and dry. They went about wandering and gazing at most things, as
Churches, Houses, Shops: And took much delight to be in the Fair, where they
would take much notice of small trifles. Yet these are the men that make such
sad Incursions into the Eastern parts of Europe, and carrying away so many
thousands, sell them to the Turks, and so repair the defect of People in Turkey.
And now after the Consumption of men in Constantinople, and the Country about
by the Plague, are like to be active in that Trade, hoping to find better
Markets for their Plagiaries and Depredations.

There are diverse Greeks, who trade to Vienna, and many live in the Town, among
which I met with three considerable persons. One a grave Abbot, who was forced
from his Convent by the Turk, upon suspicion that he corresponded with those of
Candia. Another, who went by the name of Constantinus Catacuz^nos, and was of
the Blood Royal of the Catacuzeni. The third was Jeremias a Greek Priest, who
had traveled through Italy and France into England, and from thence through
the Low Countries and Germany to Vienna, and intended for Constantinople. He
came into England to enquire after a young man who was in a Ship which was
first taken by an Algerine, and afterward by an English man of war in the
Levant. He was very kindly used in England, and particularly at Cambridge. He
did a great deal of honor at Vienna, unto the English Nation, declaring that
they were the most civil, generous, and learned people he had met with in all
his Travels, and that he no where found so many who could speak or understand
Greek, or who gave him so good satisfaction in all parts of Knowledge: And as a
testimony of his respect and gratitude, requested me to enclose a Greek Letter
unto Dr. Piers^n, now Lord Bishop of Chesler, and Dr. Barrow Master of Trinity
College in Cambridge.

M st men live here plentifully, there being abundance of all provision. They
have great quantity of Corn, which upon Scarcity, by the help of the Danube,
might be brought to them from remoter parts. The Country affords such plenty of
wine, that they send a considerable quantity up the River. They have also rich
wines out of Hungary and Italy, and such variety, that there are more than
thirty several sorts of Wine to be sold in Vienna. They are not also without
good Beer. Halsladt in Austria affords them Salt, where they make it by letting
in water into the hollow parts of a Mountain, where it drinks in the Salt of
the Earth, and is afterward let out and boiled up. This affords great profit
to the Emperor, and therefore the Hungarian Salt is not permitted to be brought
higher than Presburg. They have also plenty of Sheep and Oxen; but for Oxen at
present they are also supplied from Hungary, nor only from the Countries in the
Emperors Dominions, but from the Turkish parts, by permission of the Grand
Seignior; and they are brought hither by the Eastern Company of Vienna. They
eat much wild Boar, whereof the Fat is delicious, like that of Vension with us.
They want not Hares, Rabbets, Partridges, Pheasants. A Foul called Hasenhendal,
or Gallina Corylorum, is much esteemed by them, which made me the more wonder
to meet with some odd dishes at their Tables; as Guiny-Pigs, diverse sorts of
Snails, and Tortoises.

The Danube, and many Rivers which run into it, afford them plenty of Fish,
extraordinary Carps, Trouts, Tenches, Pikes, E^ls, several sorts of Lampreys,
and many fishes finely colored; the white Fish, Crevisses very large; the best
come out of the River Swechet, not far from Vienna. They have also that
Substantial large fish, called Scheiden, or Silurus Gesneri, larger than Pike,
S^lmon, or any of our River Fishes; but the great Fishes called Hausons, or
Husones, in Johnstonus, for largeness exceed all others; some being twenty foot
long. Some think this to be the same Fish which Aelian names Antacetus, and
speaks largely of the fishing for them in Ister. I was at the fishing places
for Hausons in Schut Island, between Presburg and Komard, for they come not
usually higher, especially in shoals; and it is much that they come so high,
for they are conceived to come out of the Euxine-sea, and so up the stream.
They eat them both fresh and salted; they taste most like Sturgeon. It is a
Cartilagineous Fish, consisting of gristles, and they have a hollow nervous
chord all down the back, which being dried serves for a whip. When they fish
for them they blow a Horn or Trumpet and know where they go by the moving of
the water. From Venice they are supplied with Oysters, with salt Sturgeon, and
sometimes with red Herrings, and great variety of other Fishes pickled up: as
also with Oranges, Limons, and other Fruits. Observing much freedom, music,
and jollity in the City. I wondered how they could content themselves without
Plays, for there were few while I was there, till the Players came hither out
of Saxony, and acted here for a time. The Jesuits would sometimes entertain
the Emperor and Empress with a Comedy at their College; and I had once the
favor to be at one when they were present.

But they have Dancing and Fencing often, and every Holy Day after dinner, the
people flock to some Inns where there is Dancing in the inward Rooms, and
Fencing and Playing of Prizes upon a Stage in the Yard; and at the Windows, or
from the Galleries, they behold the Fencers playing at several Weapons; and
commonly pass the rest of the day in delights and merry Company.

In Treason and high Crimes they cut off the right Hand of the Malefactor, and
his Head immediately after. I saw a Woman beheaded sitting in a Chair, the
Executioner striking off her Head with a Foreblow, she behaved her self well,
and was accompanied unto the Market place by the Confraternity of the Dead, who
have a charitable care of such Persons, and are not of any Religious Order, but
Laymen; among whom also in this place there are many Fraternities and Orders,
as of the Holy Virgin, of the Holy Cross, and others. Another person also
executed after the same manner; as soon as his head fell to the ground, while
the Body was in the Chair, a man run speedily with a Pot in his hand, and
filling it with the Blood, yet spouting out of his Neck, he presently drank it
off, and ran away; and this he did as a Remedy against the Falling Sickness. I
have read of some who have approved the same Medicine; and heard of others who
have done the like in Germany. And Celsus takes notice, that in his time some
Epileptical persons did drink the Blood of the Gladiatours. But many Physicians
have, in all times, abominated that Medicine. Nor did I stay afterward so long
as to know the effect thereof, as to the intended cure. But most men looked
upon it as of great uncertainty: and of all men the Jews, who suffer no Blood
to come into their Lips, must most dislike it.

At Presburg they have a strange way of Execution, still used at Metz, and some
other places, by a Maid, or Engine like a Maid finely dressed up with her hands
before her. The Malefactor salutes her first, and then retires. But at his
second salute she opens her hands and cuts his Heart in sunder.

Though the Winter was sharp, yet the advantage of Stoves and lying between two
Feather-beds made it tolerable: For they use Stoves here as in other parts of
Germany, where they lodge and eat in Stoves; and great Persons have Stoves in
the Church, or such as look into the Church. There are Stoves also in the
public Schools where Lectures are read. And this way of lying between two
Feather-beds, with a neat laced sheet spread over, is more convenient in a cold
Country, than most others they make use of. For in the common Inns in Germany
they generally sleep upon Straw, and also in Hungary almost every where; and
more Easterly upon the ground, spreading a Carpet or Saddle-cloth under them:
and more Northerly they content themselves with the Skins of Beasts, Bears,
Elks, or the like; upon which they sleep in the night. Those that sleep lowest
are coolest in a Stove; those that lie upon Tables, Benches, or higher, are
more exposed to the heat. The Citizens of Vienna are well attired, and use Furs
very much The Women wear a high Velvet Bonnet, lined or faced therewith. The
Place seemed to be healthful; but they speak much of the Colica Austriaca, as
an Endemical and Local Disease, very hardly yielding unto good Medicines. They
speak good German at the Court and in the City; but the Common and Country
people seemed to speak grumblingly, and besides their accent, have diverse words
different from other parts.

They have a Custom upon St. Nicholas-day to put some small Gift into the
Childrens shoes; among other things they put in Medals and Dollars made of
paper and flour, gilded and silvered over, yet scarce worth a penny. They sell
Trochies or Tablets in the markets, made of the pulp of the Fruit of Hip-briar,
made sharp with Spirit of Sulphur, very refreshing. Some carry about them a
Thunder-stone as a defense against Thunder: and they rub their Childrens Gums
with a Wolf's tooth instead of Coral.

When I was at Venice, in the time of the Carnival, I observed many Recreations
and Shows, as Rope-dancing, flying down the Rope, cuting off Bulls-necks with
Swords, and many other. But at Vienna a notable trick which I saw there,
pleased me much: A man of a middle Stature laid down upon his back, and a heavy
Anvil was placed upon his Breast, as much as two men could well list, then two
other men with great Hammers laid on, until they had given almost an hundred
blows, and cut in sunder a great Horshooe of iron, about half an inch thick.

Here is no Christian Religion publicly permitted but the Roman, and therefore
those of the Protestant, and Reformed Religion are fain to resort to Presburg,
Forty miles off, for which they have some convenience by the Danube, and a
Coach which goes every day. In the time of Maximilian the Second, they were
permitted the Exercise of their Religion in the Church of the Holy Cross, in
the City of Vienna. But afterward were prohibited by Rodolphus the Second. The
Emperor Matthias gave them permission to meet at Hernals, a little more than an
English mile from Vienna; and gave leave to their Ministers to come into the
City, and there to christen, marry, baptize, and visit the sick. From which
time they increased very much, till Ferdinand the Second, returning from the
Battle of Prague, banished their Minister from Vienna, and Arnolds,; sent the
Freyherr Jorger, to whom the Castle of Arnolds belonged, Prisoner unto Lintz;
and never gave over till he had taken away their Privileges and Freedom of
meeting publicly in any part of lower Austria.

But here are no small number of Jews, who have a distinct Habitation assigned
them over the Water. They have also a Street allowed them in the City for the
day time, but they must all depart at night beyond the River into the Suburbs.

They are much distasted by the Citizens and Tradesmen, and the Scholars agree
but ill with them. While I was at Vienna there was a quarrel between them to an
high degree. For the Scholars assaulted the Jews Town, beat, wounded, and threw
diverse of them into the River. Diverse Scholars were wounded, some killed, and
also some Soldiers, who were commanded out to compose the Fray: and the Jews
Town was guarded many days by the Soldiers of the City. This begot such ill
Blood, and Complaints, that a good number of the Jews were to be banished at a
certain day. The Jews, to ingratiate with the Empress, then with Child,
presented her with a noble Silver Cradle, but she would not receive it; and
there was great danger of the general banishment of them when I left that City,
which was afterward effected, they being severely prohibited from living, not
only at Vienna, but in any part of Austria, where there were formerly whole
Villages of them, so as they were forced to betake themselves into the
Dominions of the Turk, unto Venice, into Poland and Bohemia. They being not
permitted to dwell in the Neighbor Countries of Hungary, subject to the
Emperor, Styria, or Carinthia. But many of them went to Buda and were besieged
there in the year 1684 and becoming obstinate haters of the Germans, they
assisted the Turks with their Purses and with what else they were able to
maintain the Town against the Imperial Forces.

I must confess they seemed useful to Vienna for ready accommodation of any
thing, either by sale or exchange, but the people looked with an ill eye upon
them, as taking away much of their Trade and Employment. They also looked upon
them as useless to them in war for the defense of the place as Soldiers; and
were not without some jealousy that they held Correspondence with the Turks,
and gave them Intelligence of their Affairs. Yet the Soldiery dealt much with
them, and Captains for the sudden habiting, furnishing, and accommodating of
their Companies. And dining one day with a Commander at a Jew's House, amongst
other Discourse, I asked the Jew concerning the ten Tribes, and where they
were? He said they were far off in Asia, b yond a great Lake which was
continually stormy, and scarce passable, but upon their Sabbath Day, upon which
days the Jews do not willingly travel.

I have seen their Circumcision at Rome, Padua, and other parts. Their
Physicians, ordinarily profess great skill in Vrines; and the common people
resort unto them rather than unto Christians, and are so credulous, and have
such an opinion of them, that they might be made to believe they have some old
Receipts of King Solomon.

There are many Jews in Italy, yet they seem to me to be in greater numbers in
Germany. In Amsterdam they are also grown very numerous. At Franckfurt they
told me there were seven thousand of them, which seemed scarce credible. At
Colen they are in great numbers: at Hamburg not a few. But the greatest number
surely is in Prague.

Though they be permitted in many Countries, yet diverse Christian Princes and
States have assigned them some mark in their Habits, to distinguish them. In
Avignon their Hats are yellow. In Italy their Hats are covered over with
Taffate. In Germany they wear Ruffs and Gowns with great Capes. In Holland I
observed no distinction. But the Jews there, most of them having come out of
Portugal, there may be some suspicion of them from their complexion.

Lastly, when I consider the old strength of Vienna, consisting in an old wall
and a deep Ditch, I cannot much wonder that Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary,
took this City. And I must ascribe it, under God, unto the singular valor and
resolution of the Defendants, that Solomon the Magnificent, with two hundred
thousand men, was not able to take it, and though he made large breaches, could
never enter it, but lost some thousands at an Assault, and departed at last
with the loss of a great part of his Army. But this place is now in a far
better condition strongly fortified, and able to resist the greatest Forces of
Turkey. The houses are cleared from the wall; and yet for better security, when
I was there, Count Souches advised the Emperor to pull down part of the Suburbs
upon the other side of the nearest branch of the Danube, left the Turks might
take advantage to play upon the two Bastions on that side.

It would be a sad loss for Christendom, if this place were in the hands of the
Turk; and no man knows where he would rest. If he should begin with this place,
and take it, the strong holds of Rab, Komara, and Leopoldstadt would want their
support, and soon fall into his Possession; and if he were Lord of Austria, a
great part of Germany would lie bare unto him: and probably it would not be
long before he visited Italy, into which Country he would then find many ways.
Yet this has since been attempted, with great force, and violence; when in the
year one thousand six hundred and eighty three. The Grand Seignior sent Kara
Mustapha Bassa, with an army of an hundred and fourscore thousand men into
Austria, who besieged, assaulted, and stormed this place for two months
together, till such time as the Christian Army came down and relieved it. For
the Garrison under the Command of Count Stahremberg having behaved themselves
most courageously, and daily shown much valor and Bravery, in such sort, that
before the Seventh of September they had destroyed fifty thousand of the Turks;
The King of Poland, the Elector of Saxony, the Elector of B^varia, came five
days after, all at the head of their own forces. The Duke of Lorain^, the Duke
of Saxen*Lawenburg, the two Marquisses of Baden, the Prince de Croy, and the
Emperors Generals, and Colonels, Caprara, Leslye, Rabbata, Dunwald, Pa^fy,
Baron Mercy, Halweil, Diepenthal, and others. And thus united, totally routed
the Turkish army, and made the Grand Vizier, Kara Mustapha, fly before them and
leave all his provision, Ammunition and Riches behind him, having nothing left
him, but a sad repentance for his rash attempt, and time to consider how little
he was like to be beholden to those who employed him, wishing to himself, no
doubt, by this time, that the ^ttoman family had never come to this greatness
as to be able to command him, and so many thousand more to run their heads, to
no purpose, against the strong walls of Beatch. And would then have been well
satisfied, that old Ertogrul, and Dunder had all along continued Shepherds in
the East. Like many of their family before them rather than ever to have
attempted to march Westward, or that Bajazet's hawk had never flown cross the
Hellespont, to discover Countries that must thus prove burial places to the
Musulman. However to Belgrade he was forced to fly, and there, for all his
pains and labor, dye by the loss of his head, which he yielded quietly to an
Aga of the Janisaries, sent on purpose to receive it. Only with this
intimation, That the Sultan had promised him otherwise. Those at Vienna, in the
mean time, giving God thanks, rejoicing, triumphing, and coining Medals in
memory of their deliverance, two of which, of Gold, I have here inserted.

The first has on the obverse the head of the present Emperor Leopoldus
encompassed and supported with arms, and Trophies; with this Inscription; Imp.
Caesar. Leopold. 1. P. F. Augus. P. P.
Imperator Caesar Leopoldus Primus Pius Faelix Augustus Pater Patriae.


And on the reverse an Arm coming out of a Cloud, over the City of Vienna,
which supports the Imperial Crown, Sword, Scepter, and Globe with this
Inscription;

Consilio et Industria. The Second Medal has high Dutch Inscriptions. On the
obverse the Seige of Vienna, with this about it;

This is the Finger of God. And on the reverse this Inscription;

The Turkish pride which straightened Vienna, from the fourteenth of July, to
the twelfth of September, 1683. was that day totally destroyed by the hand of
the Lord. To these, I have also added a noble Gold Medal of the Emperor
Ferdinand the second. These are all delineated bigger than they really are,
that they might appear the more plainly; yet this last weighs above sixteen
Guinneys, and is no ordinary Piece.

A JOURNEY FROM VIENNA IN AUSTRIA TO HAMBURG.
TAking a farewell of the Imperial City of Vienna, I ordered my Journey for
Prague in Bohemia, which is usually six days Journey by Coach in the Summer and
eight in the Winter. I went over the great Bridge of Vienna, upon the large
Stream of the Danube, passing by the chapel of St. Bridget, of an eightsquare
Figure. This Bridge is a very great and massy work, supported by many high
Trees and Timber, and has between two and three thousand Trees laid upon it
cross, or side by side, from one side of the Bridge to the other, for the
passage over it after the German manner of making Bridges. At Ratisbone there
is a handsome Stonebridge over the Danube, and between that place and Vienna,
diverse of Wood; but from Vienna to Belgrade I observed none but what were made
with Boats.

Having passed the River, I entered into the Trans-Danubian Austria, or that
part of Austria which lies between the Danube and the River Corneuburg.
Theya, and came unto Corneuburg, a pretty Town, about which place the Emperor
often hunts; it is near the Hill Bisneberg, which is opposite unto Kalenherg.
The Swedes advanced far when they took this place in the last wars, and held it
so well, that they were not easily forced out of it. From thence I came to
Stockerau, near the mouth of the River Mida, where it runs into the Danube. A
place much noted for the death of St. Colman, a Scotch Saint, highly honored
in these parts. From thence to Guntersdorff, so to Colnedorff or Koldorff,
which although it be on the South of the River Theya, is accounted the first
Village of Moravia, and then came unto Znaim.

In all this part of Austria, which extends a great length on the North side of
the Danube, conceived to have been anciently inhabited by the Marcomanni and
Quadi, there are few or no Towns of antiquity, largeness, or note; for the
Romans made their Stations and Colonies upon the South Side of the Danube; but
the Country is full of Villages, and populous. One of the chiefest Towns is
Crembs, which some call Cremona Austriae, which I saw as I came down the
Danube. A great part of this Country was notably harrassed and plundered by the
Swedes. The Soil is light and easy to be ploughed.

Znaim.
Zanim is a handsome place, with many Painted Houses in it, and accounted the
fourth chief Town in Mahren, or Moravia; (Olmutz, Brun, and Iglaw being the
other three) this place is famous for the death of the Emperor Sigismund. It is
seated by the River Theya, which divides Moravia from Austria and running at
last into the River Marck, affords accommodation of passage into the Danube.

Iglau.
From thence we passed by Vlverskirke^, Paulitz, and Moravian Budweisse, to
Zimmaw, and by Byrnitz came to Igla, or Iglau, upon the River Igl^, which at
last runs into the great River Marck, a very pleasant place, seated upon a
Hill, on the Frontiers of Bohemia. It is well fortified a la moderna, upon one
side, and has one of the largest Piazza's that I have seen.

Moravia, is a pleasant and fruitful Country affording plenty of necessaries
for life; the people are plain dealing, stout, and make good Soldiers. It is
commodiously furnished with Rivers, the greatest whereof is the Mora or Marck,
which arising in the Northern part thereof, runs quite through the Country, and
enters the Donaw by Teben not far from Presburg. The other considerable Streams
are the Theya or Thaisa, the Swarta, the Schwitta, which run into the Marck. In
the last Turkish wars the Tartars having passed the Wag in Hungaria, made
incursions into Moravia, and carried away some thousands of the Inhabitants.

Leaving Igla, we soon came into Bohemia, first coming into Ste^ken, then to
Teutchin Broda by the River Sac^ua, formerly a strong place taken by Zisca, the
famous Bohemian General, who then forced the Emperor Sigismund to fly out of
Bohemia by the way of Igla From thence we came to Haberne, and so to Janikaw:
At this place, upon the 24 th of February, 1643. was fought that, memorable
Battle between the Swedes, commanded by Leonard Torstenson, and the
Imperialists under Count Hatzsield, Goetz, and other Commanders. The
Imperialists had the better at first; but falling upon the Enemies Baggage, and
being two greedy of Booty, they were defeated, three thousand slain, four
thousand taken prisoners, with their General Hatzsield, and six or seven
Colonels. The success hereof gave the Swedes advantage to proceed further, and
into Silesia and Austria. In this Town meeting with a Gentleman who came from
Schaclitz, which is not far from the Risgeburg, or Mountain of Gya its, about
the Head of the River Elbe, I enquired of him concerning the spirit Ribensal,
which is said to insest that Country, but he could say nothing therein of his
own knowledge; and though he was confident that there was such a Spirit, yet he
confessed that for twelve years it had done no hurt. In Hills, Moun^ains, and
places of Mines such reports are ordinary. It is reported that a Spirit haunts
the Silver Mines of Brunswick: and another to be in the Tinn Mine of
Slackenwalde in this Country of Bohemia, and to walk in the shape of a Monk,
who strikes the Miners, sings and plays on the Bag-pipes, and does many such
Tricks. And Agricola in the latter end of his Sixth Book De re M tallica, gives
this for one reason why Mines, or passages in Mines, are given over.

Czaslaw.
From Janikaw I traveled to Czaslaw, a good Town, and the chiefest in the
Czaslawer Circle: In this place they say that Zisca was buried, that famous
Bohemian General; he lost one Eye by an Arrow, and was at length blind of both,
yet gave not over the war, and proved successful in it. He wished his Friends
to make a Drum of his Skin, which should serve to fright away their Enemies.
And though he cared not for any Sepulchral Monument, yet he had one in this
place.

Cottenberg.
From Czaslaw we came to Guttenberg, or Cottenberg, about eight Bohemian miles
from Prague, every mile being five or six English miles. A large Town, and much
frequented, not far from the River Albis or Elbe, of especial note for the
Silver Mines about it: The Hells near it are not high, and consequently the
Mines are not so deep as those of Hungary, and some others in Germany; yet some
are above seventy or eighty Fathoms. They have wrought at these Mines seven
hundred years, and there are about thirty of them. I went down into that which
was first dug, but afterward lest for a long time, but they work there now
again, it is called the Cotna, or Aufder Cotton, upon the Cotton, or Coat-hill;
and as the Story goes a Monk walking over this Hill found a kind of a Silver
Tree sticking to his Garment, which was the occasion that they afterward
dug and built these Mines, and the place retains the name of Cottenberg.

The Mine into which I descended near the Town, is but nineteen Fathoms deep;
the chief Vein of the Ore runs South, and is about a foot in breadth: the Ore
holds or contains in it Silver and Copper, so that out of an hundred pound
weight of Ore, they ordinarily get an Ounce of Silver, and eight, nine, or ten
ounces or more of Copper, even to pounds, but it is not well known, for the
Copper-works are the Emperors. The Undertakers get out what Silver they can,
and afterward sell the Ore, unto the Emperors Officers; but some Ore is so
rich as to contain eight or nine ounces of Silver. A blew Earth which they meet
with in digging, affords the best hopes of Ore. Two men lately perished in this
Mine, having made a fire in it, being either choked with the smoke, or, as
they thought, by the poisonous exhalations forced out of the Minerals by the
fire. I have read that Libussa the Princess, and reputed Sorceress of Bohemia,
foretold many things concerning these Mines; but certain it is, that for the
advantage and profit these bring, the Town has suffered much in many wars. The
Emperor Sigismund made have out of it upon the approach of Zisca, and seeing he
could not hold it, burnt the Town; but it was soon rebuilt and possessed by
Zisca, whose party called it the Purse of Antichrist.

Prague.
Leaving Cottenberg, I came to Colline and to Bohemian Broda, so named to
distinguish it from Dutch or Teutonick Broda before mentioned, a considerable
good Town, and from thence came to Prag, or Prague, the Capital and Royal City
of the Kingdom of Bohemia. The Walls of this City seem to enclose the greatest
Circuit of ground of any I have seen in Germany but the Hills and void spaces
within it take up a large Tract, and therein it is like the City of Lion in
France; it is seated upon the River Muldau, by the Bohemians named Vltaue, a
large rapid River, arising in the South part of Bohemia, and before it arrives
at Prague, receives the River Sarsua and the Watta into it; and Northward of
Prague the River Egra, and joins with the Elbe.

This great place consists of three Towns, named the Old, the New, and the
Kleine Seitten, or lesser Town. The old Town lies upon the East of the River
Muldau, is very populous, full of Buildings, private and public. Very
considerable in this part is also the University, wherein are great numbers of
Students and Scholars, there being but one University in Bohemia; many persons
also resorting thither from other Countries. It is scarce credible what is
reported of the number of Scholars in Prague in former Ages, as has been
delivered by diverse Authors. And Lewis du May, Councellor unto the Duke of
Wirtenburg, affirms, That there are at present scarce so many Students in all
Germany, as there were at Prague in the year 1409. when they reckoned above
Forty thousand under the Rectorship of John Huss. Charles the Fourth Emperor,
and King of Bohemia, founded the University of Prague, giving equal privileges
to the Bohemians, Polanders, and Germans: and when he would retrench his
favors toward Strangers, there went out of the Town in a weeks time twenty
four thousand Scholars, and a little after, sixteen thousand, whereby we may
judge there were more Scholars in Prague than other persons in some great Citi
s. There are also in this old Town diverse Colleges and Cloisters. The Jesuits
have a fair handsome College, near unto the Bridge, but the Buildings of the old
Town are inferior to those of the lesser Town.

The new Town is large, and together with the River, encompasses the old, and
is divided from it by a large Trench or Ditch, into which they can let in the
River. The Irish have a Cloister of Franciscans near unto an old Tower in the
Wall of the old Town. The Jesuits have also begun a large Cloister, which, if
finished according to its beginning and design, will be very spacious and
noble. They are now making Bastions about the Town at one end thereof; there is
also a Citadel, but not finished, at Wisseraht, or Wissegrade, formerly The
Princess Libussa.
the Seat of the Princes of Bohemia, and also of the famous Princess Libussa,
the Daughter of Crocus, and Wife unto Primislaus.

The Kleine Seitten, or lesser Prague, far exceeds the other for pleasantness
and beauty of Buildings and fair Palaces. This part lies Westward of the River
Muldau, which between this and the old Town, is passable by a strong
Stone Bridge, consisting of sixteen great Arches, being about Seventeen hundred
loot long, and Thirty five foot broad, and two open Gates under two high Towers
of Stone at each end. A great part of this Town lies high, and upon the Hill
stands Hratschin or Upper Prague, and a Summer House of the Emperors, besides a
Magnificent Palace of the Emperors, as King of Bohemia; and by it a fair
Cathedral Church dedicated to St. Veit, first built by St. Wenceslaus, Duke of
Bohemia, 923. from whence the Town and River is best viewed. In this Church are
diverse old Monuments for great Persons; as for Pogiebrachius, a Bohemian King,
Wenc^slaus* Rodolphus the Second, Charles the Fourth, Ladislaus, Maximilian the
Second, and other Archdukes and Emperors. There are also many Houses of the
Nobility in this part of the City. The Palace and Garden of Colaredo is
exceeding neat, though small. But I was most pleased with the Palace of Count
Wallensteyn, Duke of Friedland, General unto the Emperor Ferdinand the Second,
who being suspected to Usurp that Kingdom, was afterward killed at Egra. This
Palace was built upon the Ruins of an hundred Houses, purposely plucked down to
make room for it; wherein the Hall is large, the Garden handsome; upon one side
whereof there is a place to manage Horses, and near unto it a Fish Pond: in
another part there is a noble Aviary with a Garden and Trees in it, after the
manner of the Aviary of Prince Doria at Genoa, which is eightpaces long, and
eighteen broad. The Stable is large, and worth the seeing, wherein there is a
Marble Pillar between each Horse, and for every Horse there is placed in a
niche of the Wall a Rack of Steel, and Manger of Marble, and over his Head
hangs a Picture of the Horse, as big as the Life, with his Name under it. Among
the rest, I observed that a Bay-horse had for his Name Monte d'Oro, a Mare, Bell
a donna, another Espagnoletta, and his most beloved Horse was named Mas Queride.

Some have thought that the best high German is spoken in this part of Prague;
and there living so many of the Nobility and great Persons, it is not to be
wondered at, that their Language is better than ordinary. But the common
Language of Bohemia is a Dialect of the Sclavonian, though very many speak also
High dutch, as we found in all our passage through that Country. Koningsmark
being with his Forces on the Frontiers of Bohemia, a discontented Colonel of
the Imperialists, came unto him, making it probable that he might surprise
Hratschin, and the lesser side of Prague, which he suddenly attempted, and so
successfully, that he surprised many Officers, and old Colaredo in his Bed,
getting so great a Booty, that he could scarce carry it away.

A Part of Prague is inhabited by Jews, and called the Jews Town; there are no
small number of them, and many rich, as trading in all Commodities, and have
good skill in Jewels, and several sorts of Stones dug out of the Mines in
Bohemia: I bought some Boh^mian Topazes of them, neatly cut and well-figured,
and some which were very large and clear, were at the rate of seven or eight
Dollars. During my s^ay here, I had a great desire to have saluted Johannes
Marcus Marci, a famous Physician and Philosopher of Prague, and also to have
induced him to a Correspondence with the Royal Society, but I understood that
he had left this World, to the great grief of Learned Men in these and other
parts.

Many here do speak still of John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, and I have seen
Silver Medals of them. They were surely very notable men; and I shall only set
down what Aeneas Sylvius, or Pope Pius the Second said of them. Johannes aetate
major and authoritate, doctrina, and ^acundi^ superior Hiero^ymus, pertul^runt
ambo constanti animo necem, and quasi ad Epulum invitati, ad incendium
properarunt, nullam emittentes vocem quae miseri animi posset ^erre ind cium:
ubi ardere ceperunt, hym^um cecinere quem vix ^lamma and fragor ignis
intercipere potuit, nemo Philosophorum tam forti animo mo tem pertulisse
tradi^ur ^uam isti incendium. In Hist. Bohemica. John was of greater years and
authority, Jerome of more Eloquence and Learning: both of them endured their
Death with great constancy, and went unto the fire as though invited to a
Banquet: when they began to burn, they sung an Hymn, which the flame and fire
could scarce intercept. None of the old Philosophers endured their death with
such a courageous mind as these the fire.

The same Author compares Prague unto the City of Florence in Tuscany,
wherefore having seen both places, I cannot omit to say something, I had a view
of the City of Florence from the top of the Domo, or Cathedral, and of Prague
from the Church of St Veit, upon the Hill in the lesser Town: Prague seemed to
my eye to contain a far greater Circuit than Florence; it seemed also more
populous, and to exceed it very much in the number of People, the Streets
larger, and the Windows of Palaces and fair Houses being of Glass, looked not
so tatter'dly as the ragged Paper Windows of Florence. The River Arno, which
runs through Florence, is not to be compared with the Muldau at Prague, having
run about an hundred miles from its Head. The large, massy, long Stone Bridge
exceeds any of, if not all, the four Bridges of Florence. The Emperors Palace
also upon the Hill is very stately: But as for the well-paved Streets of
Florence, the Domo, or Cathedral with black and white Marble, with a Cupola,
second only to that of St. Peter's of Rome, for the incomparable Chapel of St.
Laurence, and the Dukes Gallery and Rar^ties, I must confess I saw not any
thing in Prague which a^swered them. At Wissenberg, or the White Hill near
Prague, that deciding Battle was fought November. 8* 1620. between Frederick,
Prince Palatine of the Rhine, elected King of Bohemia, and the Forces of the
Emperor ^erd^nand the Second, which such a deep blow unto the Protestant Party,
wherein so many of Frederick's Forces were slain and drowned in the River in
their flight, wherein also that famous Commander Papenheim was found lying
among the dead, who notwitstanding died not of his wounds, but was reserved to
end his days with the King of Sweden in the memorable Battle of Lutzen.

From Prague I designed to pass by water down the Muldau, which unites with the
Elbe about Melni^k, and so down the El^e unto Hamburg. But the Winter
advancing, and the Weather proving cold, the Boats did not go as in Summer, and
therefore I took my Journey by Land, and leaving Prague and the Muldau on the
right hand I passed the first day to Zagethal, the next to Weluerne, and so to
Budin and Labasitz upon the Elbe. Having passed over the Egra, a considerable
River, arising not far from the City of Egra, and at last running into the
Elbe; the next by the Castle of Kriegstein, or Warrestone, seated upon a high
steep Rock, I came to Ausig, a small City not far from the Elbe, having little
remarkable in it, like many other small Cities of Bohemia, and so forward to
Nolndorff, where we lodged upon Mount Kninsberg, the day after we entered into
Misnia, passing by Peterswald and Hellendorff the first Village in Misnia, and
Kisibel, where are Iron Mines about eighteen Fathomsdeep, and Iron works.

We now understood that Bohemia was a larger Country than we expected; it lies
round, and some say it is three days postage over; others that the Diameter
extends two hundred miles. From Igla upon the Con^ines unto Hellendorff, it
took me nine days Journey in November by Coach, not reckoning the time I staid
at Prague. In many places there are very ill Passages, and so rudely mended
with great Trees, laid side by side, that they are often very troublesome to
pass.

We traveled afterward toward Dresden, in a fruitful Country, wherein were
many Deer in most parts of the way, in sight of the Castle of Pilnitz, a strong
place, and seated high. I could not but cast an eye on the Rocks behind us in
the Forest of Bohemia, which looked like the Ruins of a Wall which formerly
enclosed Bohemia, which Country is described with a Forest or Woods round about
it.

But I confess I did not really perceive that there was such a Wood round about
it as is commonly set forth in Mapps; only both within, and also in many parts
of the Borders, there are great Woods which are conceived to have been part of
the Hercinian Forest.

The Bohemians are a strong, stout, and hardy People, make good Soldiers, and
have made wars both at home and abroad; and Histories are full of their warlike
Exploits. The chief Magazine of the King is at Egra* a strong City, accounted
the Second of Bohemia. The Country affords also lusty and strong Horses. The
common sort of People are boisterous, rough, and quarrelsome, especially in
drink, whereto they are too much addicted. The Nobility and Gentry are civil
and kind unto Strangers. There are many great Families of the Nobility, among
which that of Rosenberg and Popel is ancient, and of high esteem. Since the
unhappy accepting of the Crown by Frederick Count Palatine, and the ill success
upon it, there has been a great alteration in this Country, both as to People
and their Manners; for thereupon many thousands left the Kingdom, and many who
remained, turned their Religion. And the Emperors have used the like severity
upon others in their Hereditary Dominions.

Dresden.
The next considerable place we came unto was Dresden in Misnia, as well worth
the seeing as almost any Town in Germany. Dresden is the S^at and Residence of
the Elector of Saxony, seated upon the River Elbe, over which there is a very
noble Stone Bridge of Seventeen Arches. The City is very well fortified after
the Modern way, the Bastions covered or lined with Brick, and in each Bastion a
Cavallier: It has also a large Trench or Ditch about it, in some places
double; and the River Elbe adds unto its strength. The Walls are very strong:
and they say, that when the first Stone was laid to build them, there was
placed in the Earth a Silver Cup gilded, a Book of the Laws, and another of
Coyns, and three Glasses filled with Wine. It has also three Gates. The places
most worth the seeing are these: The Italian Garden in the Suburbs; the Hunters
House in the old Town beyond the River; the Electors Palace; his House for wild
Beasts; his Stable-house and Arsenal, of which I shall set down some things
observable in their kind. In the Electors Palace, the Hall is very large, and
handsomely painted with Cities, Giants, and the Habits of several Nations, and
set out with seven large branched Candlesticks: But that which affords the
greatest delight is his Kunstkammer. Art-Chamber, or Collection of Rareties,
both of Art and Nature. In the first Partition are to be seen all manner of
well made Instruments belonging to most Trades, as Joyners, Turners, Barbers,
Smiths, Surgeons, and other Artificers: Instruments to force open Doors,
Chests, etc. In the other Chambers these and the like are observable.

A Tube-glass four Else long. A large blew Turkish-glass. Variety of Coral and
artificial Works of it. Fowls made out of Mother of Pearl. Drinking Cups in the
shape of Dragons, Elephants, etc. Castles of Gold and Mother of Pearl. Many
Fowls and Cups made out of Nautili, and other Shells, and out of Oestrich-eggs.
A fine Oestrich made out of its Egg, with the Feathers of Gold. A Cup made out
of the Ball taken out of an Oxes Stomach, richly set, about a foot long. A
Stone as big as my fist, like a Bezoar-stone, taken out of a Horse. A Purse
made out of the Linum Incombustible. Silver Ore from the Mines of Freiberg,
almost pure, in strings and shoots. A Natural Cross of Silver Ore. One hundred
and twenty one Heads carved on the outside of a Cherry-stone. A Religious Man
or Friar of Japan carved in Box. A Crystal Cabinet, sold by Oliver Cromwell,
wherein is kept a Ring which has Stones in it in the shape of a Castle. His
Majesty King Charles the Second on Horseback, carved out of Iron. A Head of
King Charles the First. A Glass Organ. Topazes unpolished, ten Inches in
Diameter. A Cup out of a Topaze. Emeralds an inch in Diameter, as they grow in
the Rock, resembling the Vitrio^um Nativum, as I saw it in Paradise-hill by
Schemnitz in Hungary. Stones named Thunder-stones, smelling of Fire. Rocks made
out of all sorts of Ore, and the names of the places written upon them from
whence they were dug.

The Figures of Fishes in Stones out of Mansfield; the Stones are
dark-colored, but the Fishes of a Gold or Copper color. All sorts of Stones
which are to be found about Saxony and Misnia polished. Two large pieces of
pure Virgin Gold out of the Mine. A Cabinet of all sorts of Apothecaries
Instruments and chief Druggs. A Heart with a Cabinet made in his side,
containing all Medicines taken from a Heart. A white Heart as big as the Life,
made out of the shavings and filings of Hartshorn, and looking like Plaster.
Figures printed in Trees. A Spur in part of a Tree. Horns in Trees.

A Chamber of all manner of Mathematical Instruments and Charts. A good Library
of Mathematical Books. An Vnicorns-horn, which they will have to be of a Land
Unicorn, being neither wreathed nor hollow. A Dart of Vnicorns-horn. Among the
Pictures in the same Chambers these seemed remarkable: A Picture by Colier, of
the Siege of Jerusalem, with great number of Figures, and highly esteemed. Four
Heads of the Elements made out of the Creatures which belong to them in
Caricatura. A painting of Merchants Letters stuck behind green Tap^. A Storm by
Rubens. Two Nuns by Lucas van Leyden. A Picture of Dr. Luther in the Cloister,
in his Gown, and after his Death. There is also great variety of excellent
Clockwork, and an attempt for a perpetual motion by a rolling bullet. A Cuckoo
sings by Clockwork, a Horseman rids, a Ship sails, an old Woman walks, a
Centaur runs and shoots, a Crab creeps upon a Table so well as to amaze and
delight; but among all, the Crab seems to be most naturally imitated.

In the Stable-house, besides the extraordinary noble Stable of Horses, wherein
every Horse eats out of a Rack of Iron, and Manger of Copper; and on a Pillar
by him his Comb, Bridle and Saddle, and other Necessaries, hang; besides a
handsome Window with a Curtain before him. There are observable a very fair
Fountain and pond set about with handsome Ballisters, where the Horses are
watered. A long walk arched and painted with Horses; over which is a Gallery
with the Pictures of all the Dukes and Electors of Saxony, both in their
Military and Electoral Habits. Two Beds of Marble. Drinking Cups which seem not
great, yet so co^trived as to hold diverse quarts. A Spring which causes a
Horseman in Silver to come riding in, bringing a Cup of Wine in his hand. A
pair of noble Pistols with all the Stories of the New and Old Testament upon
them. A Glass Gun. A Gun which shoots off Forty times without charging again. A
Piece which shows the manner of the first invention of striking Fire in Guns. A
Lock without a cock.

A Chamber of rich Sleds for Horses, made use of in Jollity and pompous Courses
upon the Snow. A white Bears skin stuffed. Tigers and Lions Skins. A Cassowares
Skin. Good Armor for Men and Horses. Many sorts of Indian Money, Duntans, and
other sorts. A Picture of Laplanders and their Customs. A Lapland Drum with
Figures to conjure by. A Chamber of all Hunting Arms and N^cessaries.

The Armamentarium-Armory or Arsenal, is a long, square Building, wherein are
about Four hundred brass Pieces of Ordnance, great number of Muskets and Armor
in the upper Room, Silver Coats of Male. Pieces of Ordnance to be charged
behind. Retorts and Alembicks in the shape of Granados. The Steeple of the
chief Church was lately burnt by Lightning, and the Canon melted which were
upon it.

In the Hunting-house, in the old Town, are fifteen Bears very well provided
for and looked unto. They have Fountains and Ponds to wash themselves in,
wherein they much delight: And near to the Pond are high ragged Posts or Trees
set up for the Bears to climb up, and Scaffolds made at the top to sun and dry
themselves; where they will also sleep, and come and go as the K^eper calls
them. The Horn Gallery is also remarkable in this place, out of which there are
three Chambers; one painted with several sorts of Hunting; another with all
sorts of Fowl; and a third with great variety of Beasts.

In the House for wild Beasts I took notice of a Marian, which is a four-footed
Beast, that hangs upon Trees by the Tail. Also a wild or Mountain-Cat of a
large size. Five young Bears. Five old black Bears. A white Bear very large;
the feet, the head, and the neck are longer than those of the black, but not so
thick. Two Lions. Ten Luekses; very fine Beast, in bigness, color, and shape
between a Tyg^r and a wild Cat; the tips of their Ears and Tails are black,
their Eyes lively, their Skin Lyon-coloured, and spotted, especially about
their Eyes.

The Italian Garden and Summer House, in the Suburbs is very noble, wherein are
two Obelisks, two gallant Fountains, a Theater and good Landskips. This Garden
and Summer House were built by two of the Prince Elector's Eunuchs, and
afterward sold unto the Prince for six and twenty thousand Dollars.

Dresden is but a late City, and was formerly a Village. The Churfurst, or
Elector, was not in the Town; but the Chur-prince his Son was there: A Person
rather of low than middle Stature, his Hair long and yellow, his Face ruddy,
his Body well set and active, and he is very well beloved. The present Elector
of Saxony, is John George the The Elector of Saxony his Bear Garden at Dresden
in Misnia.

Oli^er. F^

Second, Grand Marshal of the Empire, a great and powerful Prince, who keeps a
Royal Court and Attendance, having his Guards and Officers after the manner of
King^. His Dominions lie in Misnia, Thuringia, Voytland, and part of Lusatia.
His Revenues are large, from Impositions upon Commodities. His Profit great,
from the Tax upon Beer, which arises to no small sum, especially in Wittenberg,
Torga, and Leipsick. And his Silv^r Mines are considerable. And the Funeral of
the last Elector, Joannes Georgius the First, was very magnificent 1657. at
which there were twenty four Horses of State covered with black, and the
Electoral Escutcheon embroydered thereon, and every one led by two Gentlemen,
and three thousand five hundred persons in mourning.

Dr. Luther's Holiday was kept when I was there. The chief Church is very fair:
They preach every morning at seven a Clock. The Lutheran women mourn in white,
as others do in Black; and the woman of the House does ordinarily say Grace
instead of the man. The best High Dutch is spoken in this place, and other
parts of Misnia, which is a very pleasant fruitful Country, and full of good
Towns and Villages.

Leaving this noble place, I took not the nearest Road, but turned out of the
way unto Freiberg, a place noted for Silver Mines; whereof I Freiberg.
had read something in Agricola, and heard very much in these parts. About an
English mile or two from Freiberg, there are many remarkable Mines. I took
notice of three of them: One called Auff den hohen berg, or upon the high Hill,
which is the deepest in these parts, as being seventy seven of their Fathoms
deep; each of their Fathoms contains twelve of their Else, and three of their
Else makes one of our Fathoms. So that the depth of this Mine exceeds any of
those wherein I was in Hungary. There is another Mine called Himmelfurst, or
the Prince of Heaven, wherein not long since there was Ore found so rich, as in
an hundred pounds weight to contain an hundred and thirty Marks of Silver, or
sixty five pounds in the hundred, but there was not much of it: And where the
Veins are richest, they are observed to be thinnest, about two fingers broad;
but the ordinary Ore is but poor, holding an ounce, or an ounce and half, in an
hundred pounds weight; and if it holds but half an ounce they work it. Nor is
this much to be wondered at, for in the vast rich Mines of Peru and Chili, they
will work the Silver Ore which contains four or five ounces in a Silver Mines*
hundred pound weight; and ten or twelve ounces is the ordinary rate of the
common Ore of that rich Mountain of Potosi, out of which Hill alone, if we
believe Albero Alonso Barba, Curate of the Parish of St. Bernard in that City,
there has been more Silver taken than would cover all Misnia over and over:
For thus he says, Potosi has already yielded between four and five hundred
Millions of pieces of Eight. A quantity sufficient to make such another Hill of
Silver: It is hard to form a conception equal unto so exorbitant a heap of
Riches; but the better to help our imagination herein, I know, that if the
Ground were covered with so many pieces of Eight, laid as close to one another
as is possible, they would take up the space of sixty Leagues square.

Here at Freiberg they have many ways to open the Ore whereby it may be melted;
as by Lead and a sort of Silver Ore which holds Lead in it. They have also
Sulphur Ore found here, which after it is burned, does help much toward the
susion of Metals: And besides these, Slich, or pounded and washed Ore; and
Slacken, which is the Dross or Cake, or Skum taken out of the Vortiegel, or Pan
which receives the melted Minerals, let out at the bottom of the melting
Furnace. Their Treibshearth, or driving Furnace, where the Litharge is driven
off, agrees better with the Figure of it in Agricola, than those of Hungary:
Some of the Litharge is green: Their Buck-work and their Engines which pound
the Ore, the Coal, and Clay, are also very neat. Much of their Ore is washed,
especially the poorest, and that which is mixed with stones, quarts, or sparrs.

This is peculiar in their working, that they burn the pounded and washed Ore
in the Roasthearth, before they melt it in the Smeltzoven, or melting Furnace.

At those Mines of Hungary where I was, they used not the Virgula divina, or
forked Hazel, to find out Silver Ore or hidden Treasure in the Earth; and I
should little depend thereon: but here they have an esteem of it. And I
observed the use thereof, and the manner how they did it. But I shall omit the
Description of it, because it is set down in diverse Books, and it cannot be so
well described as shown to the Eye.

I saw also another Mine, called Auff der Halsbrucker, about eighty of our
Fathoms deep, and much worked: They have diverse sorts of Ore; but they contain
either Silver and Copper, Silver and Lead, or all three; but they work them
only for Silver. They have diverse damps in these Mines, where it is deep. The
Mines are cold where the outward Air comes in; but where not, warm. The
greatest trouble they have is by dust, which spoils their Lungs and Stomachs,
and frets their Skins. But they are not so much troubled with water; and have
very Brimstone Mines.
good Engines to draw the water out.

The Sulphur or Brimstone Ore which is found here, is also rich; it is hard and
stony, as other Ores are; that which has red spots is accounted the best. They
use a peculiar Furnace to melt the Brimstone from the Ore; some whereof yields
three pounds of Sulphur, out of an hundred weight of Ore, which as it melts,
runs out of the Furnace into water, or the Exhalations from the Ore near or in
the Fire, are condensed into Brimstone by the Surface of the Water placed to
receive it; this is once again melted and purified. Some of the Brimstone Ore
contains Silver, some Copper, and some both in a small proportion.

After the Sulphur is melted from the Ore, the remainder serves for two uses;
that is, either for the melting of Silver, or for the making of Vitriol: To the
former only thus; A proportion is cast into the melting Furnace of the Silver,
to this end, to use the Miners expression to make the Silver which is hard,
fluid.

The other use, and which is more considerable, is for the making of Vitriol,
or Copperose in this manner: They take the Ore, out of which the Brimstone has
been already melted, and burn it once again, or let it still burn in the open
Air; then putting it into a large Fatt, they pour water upon it, so as to
imbibe and drink in the Vitriol; this Water is afterward boiled to a
sufficient height, and let out into the Coolers, where sticks are set in it, as
in the making of Sugar Candy: The purest Crystallized Vitriol sticks unto the
wood, the rest to the Two Miners in their habits

Virgula

Divina

The figure of an Iron retort such as are used at the quicksilver work at
Idria.

sides and bottom. Thus the Sulphur Ore, after the Sulphur is taken out of it,
still works upon the Silver Ore, and opens the Body of it in the Fire; but when
this Ore is also deprived of its Vitriol, it works no more upon Metals.

Friberg, is a round well-walled City; has handsome Streets, a Piazza, the
Elector's Castle; and five Gates. The Church of St. Peter is fair, where many
of the Dukes and Ducal Family have been buried, and have fair Monuments;
especial* Duke Mauritius Elector of Saxony, whose Monument in black Marble is
raised three piles high, adorned with many fair Statua's in Al^baster and white
Marble, and esteemed one of the noblest, if not the best, in Germany. And when
this Town was surrendered unto Holck and Gallas, October. 5. 1632* the Duke of
Saxony paid 80000 Dollars to save the Monuments of his Predecessors from being
ransacked and desaced, it being the fashion of diverse German Princes to be
buried in their Robes, with their Ensigns of Honor, Rings, Jewels, and the
like, which would have been booty, and probably have run the same fortune as
the Cloister of Haibr^^, within twelve English miles of Nurenberg where some of
the Marquisses of Onspach, who are of the Electoral House of Brandenburg, lie
entombed, where Tilly's Soldiers brake open the Vault, and robbed the dead
Corpses of the Marquisses, George Frederick, and ^^achim Ernest, of the Jewels,
Rings and other rich Ornaments with which they were entombed.

There are some Vaults and Subterraneous Cavities in the City, by which there
are passages into the Mines. This place was formerly straightly besieged by the
Emperor Adolphus, for the space of a year and a month, and at last betrayed by
a Fugitive, who let in a party of the Emperors into the Town by a Subterraneous
Passage near St. Donats Gate, and upon the continual Batteries made at the
Town, and concussion of the Earth about it, the Earth sunk down in many places,
and swallowed great numbers of the Emperors Army.

These Mines afford great benefit unto the City, and also unto the Elector;
They are said to have been found out in the year 1180. But there have been
other Silver Mines discovered since; as at Schneeberg, at Anneberg and at
Joachims Dale, 1526.

Having passing some time at Friberg, I ordered my Journey for Leipsick, and
traveling by Walthe^m and Coldick, came unto it. Leipsick.


Leipsick is seated upon the River Elster, which arising in Voytland, or Terra
Advocatorum, passes by it, and afterward runs into the River Sala. It is a
rich and great trading City; has three Marts in the year, and great resort
unto it from many parts: It is well built, and diverse Houses are seven stories
high. The Castle is strictly guarded, and has in it a strong white Tower. But
the Works about the Town are not very considerable, although they might be made
strong.

The Church of St. Nicholas is well adorned, and has the name to be the
fairest within side of any Lutheran Church in Germany; they have also a
remarkable Burial-place or Godtsaker, walled about, and cloystered near the
Wall, wherein the better sort are buried, as the rest in the middle and open
part. Which put me in mind of that noble Burial-place, which I saw at Pisa in
Tuscany, called Il campo Santo, because the Earth which the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa brought from the Holy Land, for the Ballast of his Ships, was laid
upon that Ground.

Leipsick is famous for two great Battles fought near unto it, in the last
Swedish wars; one between Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, and Count Tilly,
General of the Imperialists, 1631. wherein the Swedes obtained a great Victory.
Tilly was wounded, fled and lived not long after. Another some years after in
the same place, wherein Leonard Torstenson the Swede, overcame Archduke
Leopoldus Gulielmus, and Octavio Piccolomini, Generals of the Imperial Army.
And about a mile and a half from hence, at Lutzen, another great Battle was
fought, 1632. between the King of Sweden and the Imperial Army, commanded by
Albert Wallensteyn Duke of Friedland, wherein the Swedes obtained the Victory,
but the King of Sweden was slain; and on the Imperial side that famous
Commander, Godfrey Count of Pappenheim.

There is also an University at leipsick, first occasioned by the German
Scholars of Prague, who in the troubles of the Hussites came hither, to the
number of Two thousand in one day; and is still one of the Three Universities
in the Elector's Dominions; the other being Jena by the River Sala, and
Wittenberg upon the Elbe. In this University they are much addicted to the
study of the Law, but there are also Learned men in other Faculties.

The Magistrates of Leipsick are also considerable. Der herr von Adlershelme
was the Burgomaster, a courteous Learned Person, and great Virtuoso, who had
collected and observed many things: He has had five fair Daughters brought up
in all commendable ways of working, Drawing, Painting, Inlaying with Flowers,
with Mother of Pearl, Stones, and other pretty Works. And they spoke diverse
Languages, which they learned at a School in Holland: So that his house has a
great deal of excellent Furniture of his Childrens work, and is one of the most
considerable Curiosities to be seen in Leipsick. His Summer House is handsome,
painted both within and without: And in the Water about, are Muscovy Ducks,
Indian Geese, and diverse rare Fowls. In his Chamber of Rareties there are many
things considerable: But having seen diverse of them in other places, and lately
set down some Varieties of the Elector of Saxony, I shall mention but a few.

An Elephant's Head with the dentes molares in it. An Animal like an Armadillo,
but the Scales are much larger, and the Tail broader. Very large flying Fishes.
A Seahorse. Bread of Mount Libanus. A Cedar-branch with the Fruit upon it.
Large Granates as they grow in the Mine. A Sire^s hand. A Chameleon. A piece of
Iron, which seems to be the head of a Spear, found in the Tooth of an Elephant,
the Tooth being grown about it. The Isle of Jersey drawn by our King Charles
the Second. A piece of Wood with the Blood of King Charles the First upon it. A
Greenland Lance with a large Bell at the end of it. Much Japan painting,
wherein their manner of hunting and working may be observed. A Picture of our
Savior, the Hatches of which are writing, or written, and contain the story of
his Passion. Bevers taken in the River Elbe. A Picture of the murder of the
Innocents, done by Albert Durer. Pictures of diverse strange Fowls. A Greenland
Boat. The Skins of white Bears, Tigres, Wolves, and other Beasts. And I must
not omit the Garter of an English Bride, with the story of it; of the Fashion
in England for the Bridemen to take it off, and wear it in their Hat, which
seemed so strange to the Germans, that I was obliged to confirm it to them, by
assuring them that I had diverse times wore such a Garter my self.

Leaving this busy and trading City of Leipsick, I directed my Journey unto
Magdeburg, and traveled through a plain Country, between the River Sala and
the Elbe, by Landsberg, nigh to Petersdorff, where there is a small Hill which
overlooks all the Country, next to Koehten, the Residence of the Prince of
Anhalt, then to Caln, and over the River Sala, before it runs into the Elbe,
which arising at Mount Fichtelberg, now hastens toward it. Fichtelberg is a
considerable Mountain, near which are diverse Mines, Baths, and Mineral-waters,
of which Gasper B^uschius has written a Description. And from it arise four
Rivers, running to the four quarters of the World. The Maine or Maenus, toward
the West; the Nab or Nabus, toward the South; the Aeger toward the East; and
the forementioned Sala toward the North. These four afterward fall into the
three greatest Rivers of Germany, the Danube, the Rhine, and the Elbe. Then to
Sals or Saltz, a place noted for Saltsprings, and that night to Magdeburg.

Magdeburg.
Parthenopolis, or Magdeburg, is seated by the River Elle, formerly the
Metropolitan City of Germany, now under the Marquess of Brandenburg, of very
great Circuit, but little more than half built again, since it was sacked and
burnt by Tilly, and Thirty six thousand persons put to the Sword and destroyed.
I could not but observe the ruinous and destructive effects of the late wars in
many parts of Germany, but not in any so great and flourishing a place as this:
And a man might think, that after this great destruction of Houses and People,
this place should not be able to stand a Siege; yet a few years after, it was
besieged by General Hatzfield, unto whom (Bannier the Swede not being able to
relieve it) it was yielded. The Cathedral Church is very fair, and built like
an English one, by the Emperor Otho the First, and his Empress Editha, an
English Woman* Daughter unto King Edmund, whose Effigies in Stone I saw in the
Church, with nineteen Tuns of Gold by her, which she gave thereto. And to say
the truth, English money has done great things in Germany, for hereby, or with
a good part thereof, this Church was built or endowed. Leopoldus, Duke of
Austria, built the old Walls of Vienna with the ransom of King Richard the
First, whom he detained in his return through Austria from the Holy Land. King
Edward the First sent a great Sum of Money unto the Emperor Adolphus, for the
raising of Soldiers in Germany, which the Emperor employed in purchasing a
great part of Misnia for himself.

The Lutheran Churches are handsome, and their Pulpits are extraordinary noble,
and richly set off, as I observed, through all Saxony, Norimberg, and where
they are Masters of the Places, and have not their Churches only by permission;
here they showed me in the Cathedral Church of St. Maurice, the Statua's of the
five wise Virgins smiling, and of the five foolish Virgins lamenting, which are
very well expressed: They showed me also two odd Relics, which they still
kept as Rareties; that is, the Basin wherein Pilate washed his hands, when he
declared himself free from the Blood of our Savior; and the Ladder whereon the
Cock stood when he crowed after St. Peter's denying of Christ.

In the Ruins of the Cloister of the Augustines, there is still to be seen
Luther's Chamber, his Bedstead, and Table, and upon the Door are these German
Verses.

Dis war Lutheri Kammerlin,
Wan er in's Cl^ster kam herin;
Gedachnis halb wird noch itzund
Herin gesehen sein Bettespund.
i. e.

Luther did lodge within this little Room,
When first he did into the Cloister come;
In memory whereof we still do keep
The Bedstead within which he used to sleep.
I lodged at Magdeburg, in an old man's House, who would tell me many stories
of the burning of the Town, the cruelties and bloody usage of the people, who
were destroyed without exception: The Nuns, many of them being drowned in the
River Elbe. Alter which some observed that Count Tilly never prospered in his
Wars. He told me also that Dureus lodged with him, who was employed by King
Charles the First, to endeavor a reconciliation between the Lutherans and
Calvinists in Germany, and to unite them if possible. We were now in the
Territory of the Elector of Brandenburg. Fridericus Wilhelmus, Great
Chamberlain of the Empire, who is in effect possessed of Magdeburg, and next
unto the Austrian Family, is the most potent Prince in Germany, being able to
raise great Armies, and his Dominions so large, that they are reckoned to
extend two hundred German miles in length, from the further part of Prussia
unto Cleve, but they lay not together, but interspersed with many other Princes
Countries: Howsoever, a Horseman may so order his Journey, as to lie every
night in one of the Electors Towns, in traveling from one end of his
Territories to another.

I had now left the pure German Language behind me, for at Magdeburg comes in
another kind of German, called Plat-Deutch, Broad-Dutch, Niedersachsische, or
the Language of lower Saxony; a great Language, spoken in the North part of
Germany: They speak it at Hamburg, Dantzick, ^ubeck, and many great Cities: But
they can converse with the other High Dutch, and with some difficulty also with
the Netherlanders; the one speaking in his Language, and the other replying in
his.

At this City of Magdelurg was performed the first Turnament that was in
Germany, which was opened in the year 635. by the Emperor Henry, Surnamed the
Fowler, who coming from the War of Hungary, exceedingly satisfied with the
Nobility, would oblige them to exercise themselves in handling their Arms, and
managi g their Horses, and therefore instituted these Sports, whereby the
Nobility was powerfully attracted to Valor and Gallantry, and induced to
perfect and accomplish themselves in all kind of Chevalry. No new Nobility, no
Bastard, no Usurper, none guilty of High Treason, no Oppressor of Widows and
Orphans, none born of Parents whereof one was of base Extraction and Ignoble,
no Heretic, Murderer, Traitor, no Coward that had run away from the Battle,
nor indiscreet Person that had given offense to Ladies by word or deed, were
admitted to this Honor, nor above One of the same Family at a time. Princes
came into the Lists with four Squries a piece, Counts and Bar^ns with three, a
Knight with two, and a Gentleman with one.

The hour and place for the Turnamen^, being appointed, he that had a desire to
break a Lance there, came to the President's Lodgings to have his Name written
down, which was done in the presence of three Heralds, to whom the Champion
delivered his Helmet and Sword, and after he had been at confession, presented
himself in the Lists with one or more Squires, according to his quality. The
Horses of the Combatants were to be without fault or exception; the Caparisons
and Furniture such as gave no offense; their Saddles without any extraordinary
rising before and behind, and all things equal. After which they performed all
kind of Exercises on Horse back: and after the Jousts were ended, every man
repaired to the President of his Nation, to wait for the Sentence of the
Judg^s; and he that best deserved the Prize, received it either from the hand
of some Lady, or from the Prince that gave it.

These Pastimes were afterward disused, upon the Emulation it caused between
the Princes and Nobility, who strove to outvy one another; or upon wars, in
which there was no leisure for such Exercises; or perhaps upon consideration
that diverse brave men lost their lives in these Encounters: and no less a
Prince than Henry the Second, King of France, neglecting to wear his Beaver
down, was slain in a Turnament. And at Darmstadt also, in the year 1403. at the
Three and twentieth Turnament which was held in Germany, the Gentlemen of
Franconia and those of Hesse, drew so much blood upon one another, that there
remained dead upon the place seventeen of the former, and nine of the latter.

The Winter growing on called me to make haste to Hamburg, from whence I
intended to pass by Sea into England, and therefore I took the advantage of the
Stage-Coaches at Magdeburg, and in four days came to Hamburg. I traveled
through a Country for the most part barren, of little accommodation, or scarce
any thing very remarkable, through part of the Elector of Brandenburg, and then
through the Duke of Lunenburg's Country, passing by the City of Lunenburg, a
handsome walled City, beautified with diverse fair Churches, with high Spires.
The Church of St. Lambert, the Townhouse, and the Duke's Palace, are fair.
Here are salt-springs in the Town, very beneficial to the place, and supplying
the neighbor Countries. The Town is commanded by a Hill near to it, called
Kalkberg, which lies on the North-side.

In this Road through lower Saxony, I could not but take notice of many Barrows
or Mounts of Earth, the burial Monuments of great and famous Men, to be often
observed also in open Countries in England, and sometimes rows of great Stones,
like those in Wormius his Danish Antiquities: And in one place I took more
particular notice of them, where three massy Stones in the middle, were
encompassed in a large square by other large Stones set up on end.

Hamburg is a fair City, and one of the great ones in Germany; it is seated in
a Plain, being populous, rich and remarkably strong: It is fortified according
to the modern manner, much after the way of Holland, with works of earth, but
in no place yet covered or faced with brick or stone: The Territory belonging
to it is but small; it is divided into the new and the old Town. There are five
Gates: The Stone gate, leading toward Lubeck; the Dome-gate; the Alten-gate,
or which leads unto Altenaw, a place near the Town, belonging to the King of
Denmark, where the Romanists and Calvinists have their Churches; the
Bridge-gate; and the Dike-gate. The Buildings of this City are handsome, and
commonly have a fair entrance into them. The Senate House is noble, adorned
with carved Statua's of the Nine Worthies. The Exchange or place of meeting for
Merchants, was then enlarging, it being too small to receive those Numbers
which frequented it. Many of their Churches are very fair, with high Steeples,
covered with Copper. The Front of St. Katherines is beautiful. The Steeple of
St. Nicholas is supported with great gilded Globes. The other great Churches,
are the Dome-Church, St. Peter's, St. Jacob, the greater and less, St. Michael,
the New-Church, in the New town. The lesser Churches, are St. Gertrude, St.
Mary Magdalen, and the Holy Ghost. They have a Sermon every day, as in other
Lutheran Cities.

The River Alster runs through it into the Elbe, and turns many Mills: and the
Tide comes up into diverse Streets through Channels, although it be distant
eighteen German miles from the Sea, or Mouth of the Elbe. This place abounds
with shipping, and many of good Burden, and is well seated for Trade, as having
an open passage into the Ocean, and being but a days Journey from Lubeck on the
Baltic Sea, and being seated upon the long River Elbe, the third great River
of Germany, whereby it may have Commerce with a great part of that Country, and
as far as Bohemia.

Hamburg is full of Strangers and Merchants of several, Countries. The English
Company have good Privileges and a rich Trade, and Ships come laden thither
with Cloth to the value of an hundred thousand pounds sterling; and they live
here in good Reputation, and to the honor of their Country: they are Persons
of worth, courtesy, and civility; and I heartily wish them all success in
their Affairs. I must not omit the acknowledgment of my particular Obligation
to that learned and worthy Person, Mr. Griffin, Preacher unto the Company, Mr.
Free, the Treasurer, Mr. Banks, who has been in many places of Natolia, and
the Holy Land, Mr. Jenkinson, and my very obliging Friends Mr. Catelin and Mr.
Townly.

This place has the happiness to be quiet when the great Princes of Europe are
at war; for it desires to hold a strict Amity with Princes, and declines all
Dissension with them.

I found a Ship at Hamburg bound for London, and while it was fitting for Sail,
I made a short excursion into part of the King of Denmarks Country; and
returning to Hamburg again, I ordered my affairs for England upon the first
wind, and hoped the next Tide to get over the Altenaw-sand, and to pass the
Blanckness, but a cross wind prevented, so that I left not Hamburg till the
tenth of December, and then I had the good company of Mr. Hoyle, who came from
Narva, and set Sail in a new Ship; but the days being at the shortest, and the
nights dark in the New Mood, the Tide falling also in the day time, we were
able to get no further the first day than Stadt, or Stoade, upon Stadt.
the River Zwingh, a strong Town, belonging to the King of Sweden, where the
Ships that come up the River pay Custom, and where the English Merchants had
formerly their Residence, when they left Hamburg upon a Discontent.

Gluckstadt*
December the 11 th. we came by Gluckstadt* belonging to the King of Denmark,
where the Castle, the King's Palace, and the Church are handsome, and Anchored
that night before the Mouth of the River Oast, which arises in Bremerland, and
falls into the Elbe a mile from Brunsbuttel, on the other Holsatian shore.

December the 12 th. we lost sight of the Northern shore, and passed Cook's
Heaven, in full hopes to put out to Sea that night; but about Three in the
Afternoon we were becalmed a League and a half below it, where we were forced
to come to an Anchor again, lest the strong Ebb should set us on ground among
the Sands: we lay that night between Thicksand on the North, and Newark on the
South, right over against a Light house.

December the 13 th. the wind turning Westerly, and blowing hard, we returned
to Cook's Haven, and came to Anchor. Here I came ashore, and went up the Land
to the Fort in this place belonging to the City of Hamburg: It is a high square
Work, with a double Ditch, and and some Vessels come up to the Fort; but the
Ditch or Channel which comes thither out of the Elbe, is dry at low water. The
Town is called Reutsbuttel, not far from the Lands end. Two or three days
after, with a cold North-East-wind, we set sail for England. Coming out of the
Elbe, we were all the Afternoon in sight of an Island, called Heilige-landt,
Heil^ge-landt*
or Holy Land, belonging to the Duke of Holstein, which being very high Land,
is to be seen at a good distance, and is of excellent use to direct and guide
Ships into the Mouth of the Elbe, without which they would be at a great loss,
the Country about that Rivers Mouth being all very low Land.

Heiligeland is a small Island, having about two thousand Inhabitants, and six
or seven small Vessels belonging to it, which are employed a great part of the
year in bringing Lobsters and other Fish to London or Quinborough, the
Inhabitants living most upon Fish. We bore out to Sea all night, and the next
day made toward the Land again, and sailed in sight of Schiemoniekeoghe,
Amelandt, and Schelling: in the Evening we saw the Lights at the Vly and Texel;
when we were near the Land, we were much troubled with the Frost and cold
Weather, and less when we were off at Sea. The next day we had a fair wind, and
made such way, that in the Evening we took down our Sails, and let the Vessel
drive, not being willing to deal with the shore in the night. The next morning
we soon discovered the North foreland covered with Snow and came to an Anchor
in Margaret*Road, where the wind growing very high, we rode it out for two days
and two nights, and came safe on shore (praised be God) upon Christmas Day
morning.

Now having made so long a walk in Germany, I must confess I returned with a
better opinion of the Country, than I had before of it; and cannot but think it
very considerable in many things. The Rivers thereof are noble, and seem to
exceed those of France and Italy. Of the Rivers of Italy, the Padus or Po, is
the most considerable, which notwithstanding, has no very long course, before
it runs into the Adriatic Sea. And Italy being divided by the Appennine-bills,
running from West to East, the Rivers which arise from either side, cannot be
long, neither on the South Side, before they run into the Mediterranean, as the
Arno, Garigliano, and others: Nor on the North side, before they run into the
Adriatic, or the Po.

The chief Rivers of France, as the Loyre, the Seine, the Rhosne, and the
Garonne, I cannot but highly commend, having passed upon them for diverse days.
There are also four great Rivers in Germany; the Danube, the Rhine, the Elbe,
and the Oder, but none of France seem comparable unto the Rhine and Danube.
France having the Sea upon the North, the West, and the two large Provinces of
Languedoc, and Province upon the Mediterranean Sea, has the opportunity of
Noble Cities and Seaports: But some doubt may be made, Whether any thereof do
exceed Hamburg, Lubeck, and Dantzick.

The great number of populous, large, and handsome Cities, does afford great
content unto a Traveller in Germany; for besides about Sixty six free Imperial
Cities, there are many more of good note belonging to particular Princes, and
diverse highly privileged. And surely a true Estimation of the Cities and Towns
of these days, cannot be duly made from the Accounts and Descriptions thereof
lest an hundred years since or more, for since those times, Buildings have been
better modelled and ordered; Fortifications and Outworks more regularly
contrived; Convents and Public Houses more neatly and commodiously built; and
the fair Colleges and Churches of the Jesuits, which are now to be seen in
most, do much set off the Beauty of great Places. Every where we meet with
great and populous Towns Villages; Castles, Seats of the Nobility, Plains,
Forests, and pleasant Woods. And besides the satisfaction we may have from
Objects above ground, we may find no small content in the wonders thereof under
it, in Mines, Minerals almost of all sorts, of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron,
Tinn, Lead, Quicksilver, Antimony, Coal, Salt, Sulphur, Cadmia, and others,
where there are also singular Artificers and Workmen, in the several Artifices
thereof. Conversation with the People is easy, they behaving themselves
without much Formality, and are plain dealing and trusty, so that a Traveller
needs not to be so sollicitous and heedful of what he has, as in some other
Countries, which are esteemed of greater Civility. The Women are generally
well-complexioned, sober, and grave, and they have not yet learned the custom
of their Neighbors of France and Holland, to admit of being saluted by Men:
faithful to their Husbands, and careful in the affairs of their Houses.

They make good provision against the cold of their Country, by sleeping
between two Feather-beds and Stoves.

The common Stoves in Inns, wherein there are for the most part several
Companies eating, drinking, and in the night sleeping, are convenient,
considering the great cold, or at least tolerable; but they being rooms close
shut up, the smell of the meat, and especially of Cabbage, an usual Dish
amongst them, makes them unpleasant, so that sometimes I preferred the course
of hot Countries, while I called to mind, that in Province, and Italy we drank
frozen Julebs, which we dissolved with the heat of our hands; slept upon a
sheet, on the outside of the Bed, with all the Windows of the Chamber open; and
as we sat at dinner, there was a Fann in the middle of the Room, hanging over
our Heads, about two yards broad, which with a string was pulled backward and
forward to cool us, and diverse had Pans filled with Snow, to cool the sheets
when they went into their Beds.

Germany is a great Hive of men, and the mighty destruction of men made by the
last German wars, and by the Plague is so repaired, that it is scarce
discernible. They are fruitful, and full of Children: They are not exhausted by
Sea, Colonies sent forth, or by peopling American Countries* but they have some
consumption by wars abroad, when they be at peace at home: few wars being made
in other parts of Europe, wherein there are not some Regiments of Germans; the
People being naturally Martial, and persons well descended, very averse from a
Trading course of Life.

While I read in Tacitus of the old barbarous and rude State of Germany, how
poorly they lived, that they had their Houses at a distance from one another;
how ignorant they were in Arts; and it was doubted whether their Country
afforded Mines; that they lived by exchange of things, making little or no use
of money, and the like, I may justly wonder to behold the present advance and
improvement in all commendable Arts, Learning, Civility, splendid and handsome
Cities and Habitations, and the general face of things incredibly altered since
those ancient times; and cannot but approve the expression of a Learned Man,
though long since, That if Ariovistus, Civilis, and those old famous men of
Germany, should revive in their Country again, and look up to Heaven, beholding
the Constellations of the Bears, and other Stars, they might probably
acknowledge that these were the same Stars which they were wont to behold; but
if they should look downward, and well view the face of all things, they would
imagine themselves to be in a new World, and never acknowledge this to have
been their Country.

A JOURNEY FROM COLEN IN GERMANY TO LONDON.
DUring the Treaty of Peace at Colen in the year 1673. between the United
States of the Netherlands, the King of Great Britain, and the French King; many
English Gentlemen having accompanied their Excellencies, the Lords Ambassadors
and Plenipotentiaries in their Journey, had a desire also to view some of the
Neighboring Territories, and to divertise themselves during the heat of the
Summer, at the Spaa, the Baths of Aken, and other places. Having therefore, in
order to our Journey, obtained a Pasport for our Safety from Count Blondel, one
of the Spanish Plenipotentiaries, and from their Excellencies Sir Joseph
Williamson, and Sir Leoline Jenkins, we left Colen on Monday the Fourth of
July, and upon the Road overtook my Lord of Peterborough, who had been at
Dusseldorp at the Duke of Newburg's Court, and went afterward into Italy to
Modena, and brought over the present Queen of England. We dined at a small
walled Town called Berckem, which some think to be a name corrupted from
Tiberiacum, where we stayed a great part of the Afternoon, to accommodate an
unlucky Accident which happened: A Servant of one of the English Gentlemen
having casually shot a Horse, which belonged to a Commander under the Duke of
Newburg, lying at that time with a party of Horse at this Town, so that we
traveled in the Evening through the Woods, and came late to a place called
Steinstrasse, and the next day morning we went to Juliers.

Juliers.
Gulick, or Juliers, is a small Town by the River Roer, but very ancient, and
called by the Romans, Juliacum, conceived to have been founded by Julius
Caesar; the Seat sometimes of the Dukes of Gulick, before the uniting hereof
with Cleve; and since the dissolution of that Estate, possessed by the United
Provinces; and then again by the Spaniards; but at present is in the hands of
the Duke of Newburg. It being agreed at the conclusion of Peace between the
Spaniards and the Hollanders, That the Marquess of Brandenburg should have
Marck and Cleve, and the Duke of Newburg, Gulick and Berg. This is a handsome
well fortified Town, the Streets straight, and the Houses of Brick. The
Citadel consists of four Bastions, of a regular Fortification; within which is
the Princes Palace. The Piazza in the Town is handsome; and the whole
considerable for its beauty and strength.

Aken.
July the 5 th. we came to Aken, or Aquisgranum, five Leagues distant from
Gulick; the French call it Aix la Chapelle, from a Chapel in the great Church,
much visited by Pilgrims from many parts; and famous for the great number of
Relics preserved therein. When the Romans made War upon the Germans, they
possessed themselves of diverse places between the Rhine and Maes. And Granus, a
noble Roman, being sent into these parts of Gallia Belgica, about the year of
our Lord Fifty three, discovered among the Woods and Hills these hot Springs,
which to this day are highly celebrated in many parts of Europe; who a^terwards
made use of them, and adorned them after the manner of the Roman Baths, and
built a noble Habitation near them; part of which the Inhabitants would have
still to be standing, retaining the name of Turris Grani, an old Tower at the
East End of the Townhouse; a noble Antiquity: But the manner of its building
gives suspicion it cannot be so old. Hence these Thermae from their Discoverer
have been named Aquae Graniae, and came to be frequented; and the Town of
Aquisgrane built and flourished, till Attila, the King of the Huns, or
Hungarians, destroyed it.

About four hundred years after, Charles the great riding out a hunting in
these parts, as he passed through the Woods, his Horses Foot struck into one of
these Hot-springs, near which he also took notice of the Ruins of ancient
Palaces and Buildings long before forsaken; and being still more and more
delighted with the pleasant Situation of the place, and convenience of these
hot Rivolets, he renewed and adorned the Baths, built his Royal Palace near
them: and appointed that the King of the Romans should be crowned with an Iron
Crown here as with a Silver one at Milan, and a Gold one at Rome. He also built
a noble Collegiate Church, dedicated to the blessed Virgin, in the presence of
many Princes and Bishops, in the year 804, and endowed it with Revenues for the
maintenance of Canons, who lived together in a College at first, but at
present separately in the manner of Probends. He built also the old or inward
Wall of the City, so that it flourished till the year 882. at which time it was
again ruined by the Fury of the Normans, and the Emperors Palace burnt to the
ground. This City, besides these Devastations from the Irruptions of the Huns
and Normans, has been diverse times since destroyed by Fire; as in the year
1146. which loss it overcame in such manner, that Twenty six years after, it
recovered not only its former greatness, but was so much increased, that the
large outward Wall was built by the command of the Emperor Frederick the First.

In the year 1224. happened another great Fire, in which, not only the
Buildings, but many of the Inhabitants perished. And the Roof of the Church was
burnt in another Fire 1236. And now of late, for it is not long since, it has
recovered its losses by the Fire in the year 1656. when twenty Churches and
Chapels, and about five thousand private Houses were destroyed.

The Townhouse, or Senate House, was built 1353. being all of Freestone,
handsomely adorned with the Statues of the Emperors. The first and second Story
of this Building is divided into Chambers; but the highest is all one entire
Room or Hall, 162 Foot long, and 60 Foot broad. It is well painted in diverse
parts by Amisaga,: Two Pieces of whose drawing are much esteemed here; one of
the Resurrection, and another of Charles the Great, giving the Charter to the
City of Aken. Here the Emperors, at the time of their Coronation, used to keep
their Feasts, together with the Electours and other Princes. The Roof is
supported by four Pillars; through the middle of which, the smoke of all the
Chimneys of this Building, is by a handsome contrivance conveyed away.

Over against this House, in the middle of the Piazza, is a Fountain,
considerable both for largeness and neat structure, contrived by a great
Artist, Gerard Coris: where four Springs perpetually empty themselves from
above into a large Basin of Copper, of thirty Foot Diameter; from whence again
it descends by six Pipes into a Cistern of Stone, handsomely engraved, and
passes to many other Fountains in the Town. On the top of this Fountain stands
a large Statue of Charles the Great, Patron of this City, made of brass, and
gilded over. He is in Armor, and looks toward Germany. About the edges of the
great brass Basin is this Inscription.

Hic aquis per Granum Principem quendam Romanum, Neronis and Agrippae fratrem
inventis, calidorum fontium Thermae, a Principio constructae. Postea vero per
D. Carolum Magnum Imp. constituto ut locus hic sit caput and regni seeds trans
Alps, renovatae sunt, quibus Thermis hic gelidus fons influxit olim quem nunc
demum hoc aeneo vase illustravit S. P. Q. Aquisgranensis, Anno Domini 1620.

The Church of our Lady, built by Charles the Great, is of an odd Figure. At
the West End is a Steeple adorned with diverse Pyramids; and on the top a large
Globe and Cross. From hence, higher much than the Church, passes a Gallery,
supported by a large Arch, to a Cupola near the middle of the Church. At the
East End is also a small Turret or Lanthorn. The inside of the whole is adorned
with Marble Pillars of diverse sorts, Pillars of brass, gilded with Statues,
brass Doors and Partitions, and much Mosaic work.

In the middle of the Church, where Charles the Great was buried, hangs a very
large Crown, given to this Church by the Emperor Frederick the First. This
Crown is made of silver and brass gilt, adorned with sixteen little Towers, and
eight and forty Statues of silver, of about a Foot high, and thirty two which
are lesser. Between these stand eight and forty Candlesticks to receive the
Lights burnt here upon Festivals.

Of these large Crowns I have seen at Colen, and other parts; and it has been
an ancient Ornament in Churches. The Greeks have a Crown, or large Circle much
like this, in the middle of most of their best Churches; on which they hang
many Oestrich Eggs, and the Pictures of the Apostles and Saints. The Turks do
likewise imiate this in their Mosques, but instead of Pictures, place Lamps.

Frederick the First took up the Body of Charles the Great out of its Sepulcher
in the middle of the Church, and afterward buried it again; partly in a silver
Coffin under the Altar of the Quire, and partly near the Wall of the old
Building, covering it with the same Tombstone, as before; which is here
reported to have been first taken from the Tomb Rel^cks.
of Julius Caesar. It is of white Marble, and has the Figure of Proserpina
upon it. Out of this Tomb of Charles the Great, were taken up a great number of
Relics and considerable Rareties, which he had got together in his life time;
some of them given him by Aaron King of Persia, by the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and others; diverse of which are still preserved here: and these
following we had the opportunity to see. Some of the blessed Virgins hair. One
ring or link of the Chain with which St. Peter was chained in Prison. The Head
of Charles the Great. The bones of his Arm. His Sword which the Emperors wear
at the time of their Coronation. The Picture of the Virgin Mary, with our
Savior in her Arms, embossed upon a Jaspis, done by St. Luke, hanged about the
Neck of Charles the Great, and so found in his Tomb. A Noble Manuscript of the
Gospels found in the same Tomb. Charles the Great's Horn which he used when he
went ahunting. His Crucifix made out of the wood of the Cross. Our Savior's
Girdle of Leather, with the Seal of Constantine, the Great at each end. A piece
of the true Manna. Some of the Bones and Blood of St. Stephen richly enchased,
upon which the Emperors are sworn at their Inauguration. A piece of one of the
Nails of the Cross. An Agnus Dei sent from the Pope to Charles the Great; and
many other Relics. Here is also the Tomb of the Emperor Otho the Third, in
black Marble, who in the year 1000, first constituted the Electors of Germany.
The manner of making of Brass.


Near to this City are many sorts of Minerals found; as Lead-ore, the Sulphur,
and Vitriol-stone, Iron, Coal, and Cadmia, or Lapis Calaminaris: With this
latter we saw them make Brass or multiply Copper, in this manner. They take
calcined Cadmia, or Calmey, as they call it, Copper from Sweden, and the melted
dross of both; to twenty eight pounds of Copper they put an hundred pound of
Calmey: They put first into very large Crucibles, some old pieces of brass and
slacken, or the dross, and afterward the Calmey and Copper, and let them stand
in the Furnace twelve hours; after which, they put eight Crucibles full into
one, and let what will run over, the best sinking always to the bottom; and
then cast it into a Frame made of stone, bordered with bars of Iron; and run it
into brass Plates, which are afterward cut in pieces with large Cissors. The
Baths of Aken.


The hot Baths, are very much frequented at present. Within the inward Walls
are three convenient ones: The Emperors Bath, the Little Bath, and the Bath of
St. Quirinus. The Emperors Bath is in the same place, and fed with the same
Springs with that in which formerly Charles the Great took much delight, and
frequently used to swim therein; in which exercise sew were more expert than
himself; and spent the latter end of his days here, and would often invite to
the Bath, not only his Sons, but his Nobles, his Friends and Guards; so as it
was customary to Bath a hundred together in those days. But now they are
divided into lesser Partitions. The Emperors Bath having five Bathing Rooms;
and the Little Bath which comes out of it, three. These are reckoned to be
Nitro-Sulphureous; and arise so hot, that they let them cool twelve hours
before they use them. From under a great round Stone which covered a Well, in
which there were some of these Hot Springs, I saw Brimsto^e, hard, above an
inch thick, and Saltpeter, and a petrefied Substance finely variegated, taken
out.

Besides these, near unto the inward Wall of the City, there are Baths which
are not so hot as the former, esteemed to be Sulphureo-nitrous: The smell of
them is somewhat offensive, and the water in the Cisterns not transparent. The
first is the Bath of St. Cornelius, which has two Receptacles. The second the
Rose Bath, so called from Mr. Rose, a The hot Fountain.
Citizen of Aken, who built it. The third Compus Badt, or the Poor man's Bath.
Of this sort of warm Water there is also a Fountain, much resorted to and drank
of every morning in the Summer for many Chronical The Baths of ^orset.
Diseases. About a Furlong out of the South-gate of Aken, is a Village called
Porcetum, or Borset, from the great number of wild Hogs, which formerly
frequented that place; in which are many Hot Springs upon both sides of a
little Rivolet, and let into Houses, where they are distributed into several
Baths of Stone. There are fourteen of these Houses, and twenty eight Baths; the
Baths holding ordinarily about fifty Tuns of Water, each of them: the Water is
clear and pleasant, without any offensive smell; excessive hot when it comes
first out of the Ground, hotter than the hottest of Aken, and is left to cool
about eighteen hours before they use it. They use also an Instrument of Wood,
pierced with many holes, to help to cool them sooner, or to stir the Water when
any one goes in, whereby he is not so sensible of the heat. There are many cold
Springs rise near these hot ones, whereby they might be tempered; and surely
the quantity of the hot Water being so great, no place might be made more
delightful, nor no Baths more Noble. The Turks in our times, do most of any
Nation beautify their Baths, and render them serviceable to their Health and
pleasure.

In Austria at Baden, the Sawer Bath is built after the Turkish manner, with a
Cupola over it: and if any one hereafter shall build or beautify these, they
will yield to very few in Europe. At present most of them are of a square
Figure, of about five or six yards over; and the Houses in which they are, very
near one another. The first House has the name of the Ladies Bath; the second
is the Snake; the third and fourth the Sword; the fifth the Golden Mill; the
sixth the Fool; the seventh the Cock; the eight the Great Bath; the ninth the
Fountain; the tenth the Crab; the eleventh the World Inverted; the twelfth the
Glass; the thirteenth the Angel; and the fourteenth the Rose. There is also
another in the open Air, called the Poor man's Bath. In the Street is a Well or
Fountain of these Hot-springs, of as great a heat as any I have seen;
perpetually boiling or bubling. But of all these Baths Dr. Blondel and Dr.
Didier have written so particularly, as I A Mine of La^is Calaminaris.
need not to add any thing more, and particularly of their Uses.

Within two Leagues of Aken, in the Country of Limbourg, is a Mine of Lapis
Calaminaris, which we went to see having a Corporal and eight Musketeers for
our Security to pass the Wood. This Mine lies over against the Castle of
Einenberg. As soon as I had delivered a Letter to Mr. John Franck, Comptroller
of the Mine for his Catholic Majesty, he went along with us, to show us the
manner how the Cadmia grows in the Earth, and other Curiosities. This Mine
having been wrought Three hundred years, and being one of the most remarkable
of that kind, it may not be impertinent to set down some particulars concerning
it. It is about eighteen or nineteen Fathoms deep, lying all open like a Chalk
Mine, of an Oval Figure; they digg at present in several places, and the best
Calmey lies between the Rocks, in the deepest part of the Mine: They have now
found an excellent Vein so placed, of eleven or twelve Foot thick, which they
digg out with Pick-axes, with some difficulty, by reason that the Lapis
Calaminaris is very hard. The color of this Stone is of a dark yellow and red,
and has Veins of natural Brimstone mixed thinly in it. The Veins of the Lapis
Calaminaris, being so large, they follow them not only in one place, but digg
over one another heads, and frame their work into the shape of large Stayrs,
and one throws up what another diggs, and so upward till they lade the Carts
with it. Some of the Cadmia is blackish and dark brown; and there are Fluores
between the Cavities of the Stone handsomely figured, but most of a blackish
color. The works about the Mine the most remarkable, are these: 1. An
Overshot-wheel in the Earth, which moves the Pumps to pump out the water; and
this not placed in the Mine but on one side of it, and a passage cut out of the
Mine to the bottom of it, by which the Mine is drained; and another passage or
cuniculus, out of the place where the wheel is turned, which lets out the water
which turns the wheel, and also the water which comes out of the Mine into the
Neighboring Valley. 2. The washing of the Ore or Stone, which they perform, as
at other works, by letting the water over it, and stirring it; and this they do
wheresoever they begin to work near the Superficies of the Earth, for there the
Calmey is less, and more mixed with Clay and Earth: but the most remarkable
work is the calcining of the Ore (for all our Lapis Calaminaris of the Shops is
the calcined Calmey) and it is worth the seeing; for they place Faggots in a
handsome order first, and cover a large round Area with them, of about Forty or
Fifty yards Diameter, upon which they place Charcoal in as good an order, till
all be covered and filled up a yard from the ground; then they place ranks of
the largest Stones of Calmey, and after them smaller, till they have laid all
on; and then by setting fire to the bottom, the fire comes to each stone, and
all is handsomely calcined. They make Calmey also about two English miles from
Bleyberg in Carinthia, They make it after this manner, They take the Ore out of
the Mine, sometimes they wash it, and sometimes not, they burn it as they do
Roast. Then they take it, and beat it in pieces with a mallet; They choose the
best of it, and throw away the dross, the whitest is commonly the best. From
hence we went to Limburg, meeting with diverse Soldiers upon the Road, who
desired money of us, but did not attempt any thing against us, we being many of
us together in Company.

Limburg.
Limburg is seated upon a high Rock, which overlooks all the Country, and a
little River runs almost round it at the bottom. The Avenue to the Town on the
North-side is difficult all along upon the edge of the Rock; and the Gate of
the Town, over which is the Governor's House, spreads it self from one side of
the Rock to the other, and locks up the passage. Here we show our Passports
from the Spanish Plenipotentiaries; and in the Afternoon had a pleasant Journey
to the Spaa In the way we saw where the French Army had passed the Country
toward Metz, having lain about a Fortnight at Vichet, after the taking of
Maestreicht.

Spa.
Spa is a neat Village in the Forest of Ardenna, seated in a bottom,
encompassed on all sides with Hills, and on the North with steep Mountains. So
that it happening to rain while we were there, the place was, in some hours
time filled with water, the Hay washed out of the Meadows, the falls in the
River made even, and Pohunt, one of the Mineral Fountains, was drowned. There
was not much Company when we were there, although it were in the hottest time
of the year, which is most seasonable for drinking the waters; by reason of the
wars, and the danger of coming through the Country to them. But in Spa it self
all people are free from danger, all the Neighboring Princes protecting it,
and would count it very dishonorable to disturb a place which by the virtue of
its Mineral Springs, is so beneficial to Mankind. These Waters are not only
drunk upon the place, but are also sealed up in Bottles, and sent into many
parts of Europe. And Mr. Coquelet, at whose House we lodged, told me that he
sent it as far as Saragossa in Spain: and that he had at that time Thirty
thousand Bottles empty, and waited for a good season to fill them, which is the
hottest, dryest time of the Summer, and the hardest Frost in Winter; at which
times the water is strongest, sparkling, and brisk. The chiefest of these
Mineral Fountains are these, Geronster, Saviniere, Tonnelet, and Pohunt.

Geronster.
Geronster is in the middle of a thick Wood, about an English mile and a half
Southward of the Spa; it is the strongest of any, and the best adorned, being
built up with stone, and a Pavilion over it, supported with four handsome stone
Pillars. There is a green place cleared in the Wood near to it, and a little
House for the Patients to warm themselves in, early in the morning, or in cold
weather. The Arms of Sr. Conrade Bourgsdorff, who adorned this Fountain, are
placed over, on two sides: and on the other two this Inscription in French, and
High Dutch, in a handsome Oval.

Le Reverendissime and Excellentissime Sr Sr Conrade Bourgsdorff, Grand
Chamberlan, and premier Conseiller d'Estat, Colonel and Gouverneur General de
tous les Forts and Forteresses du Serenissime Electeur de Brandebourg dans son
Estat Electoral, Grand Prevost des Eglises Cathedrales d' Halberstadt and
Brandebourg, Chevalier de l'Ordre de St. Jean, and Commandeur du Baillage de
Lagow, de gros Machenau, Golbeck, Bouckow, Oberstorff, etc. etc. etc.

This Fountain smells very strong of Brimstone, and causes vomiting in a great
many, yet passes chiefly by Urine, as they do all; and strikes a purple with
Nut-galls more inclining to red, than the waters of Tunbridge. The Sediment is
of a light blew in the Fountain, but of a dark, dirty red every where else. Not
far from this is another large Spring in the Wood much like it, but not as yet
built and beautified.

Saviniere.
Saviniere is another Fountain, almost as far from the Spa Eastward, and built
after the manner of a Tower: the Acidulae are not so strong as the former.
There is another Fountain hard by this, almost the same, held to be
particularly good for the Stone and Gravel.

Tonnelet.
The third is Tonnelet, arising in the Meadow, and built up with stone: But
being there are no Trees nor Shades about it, it is not so delightful as the
others. And Henricus ab Heers in his Spadacrene says that this is more nitrous
than the rest, and causes such a coldness in the mouth and stomach, that few
can drink of it.

Pohunt.
The fourth is Pohunt, in the middle of the Town, from whence most of the water
is drawn which is sent abroad, if no particular one be sent for. This was
beautified with handsome Stone-work, by the Bishop of Liege, to whom this place
belongs, and this Inscription set over it, Sanitati Sacrum. It is also called
the Fountain of St. Remaclus, to whom it was dedicated; and these Verses are
likewise engraven upon it: Obstructum reserat, durum terit, humida siccat
Debil fortificat, si tamen art bibis.


Being at the Spa, we visited Franchimont one Afternoon; passing through a
thick Wood, there is an old Castle, and good Brimstone and The making of
Brimstone.
Vitriol works, the same Stone affording both; and I presume may also make the
Spa-water under ground, or at least be a principal Ingredient in it. We saw the
manner here how they melted, and cast their Brimstone first into great Pails,
the florid and clear parts remaining at the top and middle, the thick and more
obscure subsiding and adhering to the bottom and sides, and is that which is
sold for Sulphur Vivum. We saw also the manner of casting the Brimstone into
Rolls, or Magdaleons: And near unto this place a smoking, burning, little
Hill, which is thus caused: They throw out the burnt Pyrites, out of which
Brimstone has been distilled, and the Vitriol drawn out by infusion, upon this
Hill; which consists all of the same matter, and ferments in time, grows hot,
smoaks and burns perpetually, and withal drinks in a new Vitriol into its self.

From the Spa we crossed over to Frapont, a Village seated upon the pleasant
River Vta, or Ourte, where we took Boat and went down a rapid Stream, yet one
of the pleasantest I ever saw, winding and turning between many green Hills, in
part of the Forest of Arduenna. We descended afterward thirty or forty small
Falls in a long Boat made on purpose. The Oar or Pa^dle being only a square
piece of Board fixed to the end of a Pole, the Pole standing perpendicularly in
the middle of it. The delightful River Vesa, or the Wesdret, soon met us, and
joining together, we fell down with them into the Maes near Liege. Upon the
Banks of these Rivers all the Arms, Guns, and other Instruments are made, for
which the Country of Liege is remarkable.

Liege
Liege, Luick, Leodium, or Augusta Eburonum; Learned Men think this City to be
seated near that Valley, wherein two Legions of Julius Caesar, under Sabinus and
Cotta, were destroyed by Ambiorix, chief Commander of the Eburones. It is
seated upon the River Mosa, which entering with two Streams, makes some pretty
Islands. Three other small Rivers arising in the Forest, of Ardenna, are also
here received into the Maes, whereby they have plenty of Fish and other
Conveniences. The City is very populous, and so it has been in former Ages,
when as Charles Duke of Burgundy, sacked it, and destroyed an hundred thousand
of the people.

It abounds with fair Churches, stately Convents, and Religious Foundations,
richly endowed, so that it has been called the Paradise of Priests, and is in
that kind the most notable in all these parts. The Palace of the Bishop is a
noble Fabric, built by Cardinal Erardus, Bishop of Liege. The Cathedral bears
the Name of St. Lambert, who being Bishop of Maestreicht was murdered by Dodo
and others, about the year 622. The Sea was afterward translated unto Liege by
Hubertus, as it had been formerly from Tongres to Maestreicht, and the Body of
St. Lambert removed unto this Church, which is at present very noble, being
built of a reddish Stone, very much carved without, and handsomely adorned
within. Between the Quire and Sacristy, is this Inscription in very large
Letters:

D. O. M. Intemeratae Virgini Mariae, Sancto Lamberto, Ecclesiae and Patriae
Divis Tutelaribus, Maximilianus Henricus utriusque Bavariae Dux, Archiepiscopus
and Elector Coloniensis, Episcopus and Princeps Leodiensis, Ernesti and
Ferdinandi Bavariae Ducum, Episcoporum and Principum Leodiensium Nepos and
Sucessor, in sui and Predecessorum memoriam Ponebat. MDCL VIII.

The Canons here are of great riches and power, and have the Election of the
Bishop and Prince, who has also had the Titles of Duke of Bouillon, Marquess
of Franchimont, and Count of Lootz and Hasbania. In the Coin of Maximilian, the
present Elector of Colen and Bishop of Liege, I find this Inscription.

Maximilianus Henricus Dei gratia Archiepiscopus Coloniensis, Episcopus and
Princeps Leodiensis, Supremus Bullonensis Dux.

Speutus the Bishop of Liege, bought the Principality of Liege of Godfrey of
Bouillon, when he went to the Holy Land: And in the Treaty of Cambray, 1559.
the possession of Bouillon, and precedence of Ti le, was granted to the Bishop
of Liege, although at this time also the Houses of La Tour and Mark do bear the
same.

Of the Parish Churches that of St. John, and of St. Servasius are fair. Of the
Abbeys that of St. Jacob within the Town, and of St. Lawrence, built by Bishop
Raginardus upon an Hill out of the Town, are noble. There is also a College of
English Jesuits, well-seated upon a Hill, where the Garden is handsome, and the
Dyals, made by Franciscus Linus, are worth the seeing: And an English Nunnery
handsomely built. In the Church of the Gulielmites, out of the Town, lies the
Body of our famous Countryman Sir John Mandeville, who, after he had traveled
through many parts, took an affection unto this place, and here passed the
remainder of his life, and whose Epitaph, and some Rareties of his, are still
to be seen.

Bishop Notger, who was consecrated by St. Gereon, Archbishop of Colen, and
died in the year 1007. built the walls of this City, and being Tutor to Otho
the third, he found means very much to beautify it, to repair and build diverse
Churches, and endow them with rich Revenues, and let the River Maes into the
Town, which before ran upon one side of it.

As their Churches are fair and numerous, so are their Bells and Chimes
remarkable. In the Cathedral of St. Lambert there are eight large Bells, and
twelve lesser; and there is one so great, as it is said to require Twenty four
men to ring it. In the Church of St. Paul the Bells and Chimes are
considerable; as also at St. Lawrence and the crossed Friars. It is also an
University, and was so famous in former Ages, that they still take notice that
at one time there have been Nine Sons of Kings, Twenty four Dukes Sons, Twenty
nine of Counts, besides many of great Barons Students therein.

Their Speech here, as also at Spaw, is called Roman, and is a kind of old
French, or Dialect of that Languag, a great part of which is made up of Latin,
or Roman words: and they call the Neighboring Language of the Dutch, Tuiscon.
But many speak very good French. They have some Vineyards affording a small
Wine. The Hills about furnish them with Quarries of good Stone, and of several
kinds They have also diverse Mines and Minerals, and great quantity of Pit-coal
for Fire, in some places fetched deep out of the Earth, in others nearer the
Surface: and in one place I saw them beginning to dig where they immediately
found Coal. Their Pumps and Engines to draw out the water, are very
considerable at these Mines; in some places moved by Wheels, at above a
Furlongs distance, to which they are continued by strong Wood-work, which moves
backwards and forwards continually.

The Citadel stands upon a Hill, and is of great Strength; It was built to
keep the City of Liege under Subjection. For 1649. there being some
disturbances in the City, Ferdinand, the Elector of Colen, offering to come
into the Town to appease it, was opposed by the Consul, Jacobus Hennet, who was
soon after surprised and beheaded together with Bartholomaeus Rolandus; the
Consul having sworn the Elector should never come in whilst he were alive. And
the Citadel soon after was ordered to be built. The Bridges are handsome: that
over the great Stream of the Maes is very broad and fair, and has large
Arches. From hence we could read the Elector's name upon the Citadel,
Maximilianus, although it were at a very great distance, the Letters were so
large.

From Liege we had a pleasant passage down the Water to Maestreicht, passing by
Argentau, a Castle seated upon a high Rock on the right side of the River,
belonging then to the King of Spain, afterward by Vichet in the half way, and
then by Navagne, a strong Fort in the Maes, which commands the River, and at
that time did the Spaniard service; then by pleasant Rocks on our left hand,
wherein many Cuts and passages have been dug till we came in sight of
Maestreicht.

This Town having been a little before taken from the United States by a sharp
Siege, was full of French, and had a Garrison in it of about ten Thousand men;
and in the Marketplace stood about Two hundred large Fieldpieces. We saw the
places where they made their Batteries and their Mines, the Outworks were very
numerous, and many of them undermined. Colonel Storff showed us a handsome
Draught of all the Works, Approaches and Manner of taking of the Town.

A noble Quarry of Stone.
About a quarter of a Mile out of the Town we went into the great Quarry of
Stone, which is one of the noblest sure in the World. Between Padoa and Vicenza
I had formerly seen the famous Cave of Custoza, or Cubola, said to be above
Five hundred Fathoms in breadth, and Seven hundred in length, but this does far
surpass it: the Roof is very high and stately in most places, the Pillars not
to be numbered, all very large; we passed two miles under ground amongst them:
No Labyrinth can be contrived more intricate, and yet all parts are uniform.
The Floor all in a level, and the Roof in most places of the same height, and
so much has that uniform rule, which I suppose was set to those who first
dug, and so has successively been observed, added to the beauty of this
place, that there is scarce any thing more noble. It put me in mind of the
hundred chambers of Nero, which he caused to be made under Ground in the Rocks
at Baiae. And the Water which we met with in one place, made me think of Nero's
admirable Fish Pond, built in the like manner within the Earth. We came out
again near to a Convent upon the Banks of the River, and returned by water to
Maestreicht.

The next day we parted Company. Mr. Newton, Mr. Ettrick, Mr. Grove, Mr.
Carlton, and Mr. Newcomb went for Aken and Colen; Mr. Bates and Mr. Daston went
up the River again to Liege, at which place, staying a day or two to find a
convenience to pass to Brussels, we were nobly entertained at a Dinner with
Venison, Wild-boar, and other Dishes, by that worthy Person and Learned
Mathematician Franciscus Slusius, one of the great Canons of Liege, who also
continued his high Civilities to us to the last Minute we stayed in Town.

Leaving Liege we soon came in sight of Tongres, or Tungrorum opidum, Tongres.
the most ancient place in all these Countries. Ortelius would have it to be
called of old Atuatuca: It was a strong hold before the coming of Julius Caesar
into Gaul, and was afterward made a Roman Station, and in process of time
became so great, that Attila the Hun destroyed an hundred Churches in it, it
being at that time a Bishops See, which in the year 498 St. Servasius removed
unto Maestreicht. Many old Coins and Antiquities are still found here; and part
of an old Chapel, said to be built by St. Maternus, Disciple to St. Peter, is
still remaining. When the King of France made his great inroad into the
Low Countries, 1672. he borrowed this Town of the Elector of Cologne, and then
passed on to Maseick, where crossing the Country to the Rhine, by the sides of
these great Rivers, Rhine and Maes, he made that notable Incursion, and quitted
not Tongres till he had taken Maestreicht the year following. We dined this day
at Borchloe, and lodged at St. Truyn, or St. Truden, a handsome little Town, so
called from a Church and Abbey herein dedicated to that Saint.

The next day we dined at Tienen, or Tilmont, on the little River Geet, once
one of the chief Towns in Brabant, but long since decayed. In these Plain
Countries, in many places we saw small Hills, or Sepulchral Eminences of the
Ground: And near unto the Walls of Tienen, are three very remarkable ones, said
to be the Tombs of great Commanders. In the Evening we came to Lovain.

Lovain.
Lovain is the chief City of that quarter of Brabant, which comprehends
Arschot, Halen, and Judoigne; an ancient and large City, pleasantly seated upon
the River Dele; it is of great Circuit, and the compass of the wall accounted
above four miles about: but there are many void Spaces, Hills, Fields, and
Gardens within it, which makes it very pleasant and delightful. There are
herein diverse good Buildings, Convents, and Churches: the chief whereof is the
stately Church of St. Peter, the Convent of the Carthusians, the Hospital. The
public Palace or Senate House is also Noble.

It is the great University of these parts, said to have had its beginning
about 926. but endowed by John the Fourth, Duke of Brabant, and confirmed by
Pope Martin the Fifth, 1425. There are forty three Colleges in it; whe^eof the
four chief are Lilium, Falco, Callrum, Porcus. Goropius Becanus, a Learned Man,
and Native of Brussels, affirms, That no University in Italy, France, Germany,
or Spain, is to be compared unto it for its elegant and pleasant Situation. The
University is under the Government of a Rector, who is in great esteem and
honor among them. This University has produced many Learned Men: But neither
the Buildings of the Colleges, nor their Endowments do equal those of our
Universities, and the Situation thereof seems not to exceed that of Oxford.

We traveled from hence to Brussels, being most part of the way in the sight
of the very high Tower of the Church of St. Rombald at Machlin.

Count Monterei was then Governor of the Low Countries, and resided at
Brussels, the ordinary Seat of the Governors of the Spanish Netherlands; which
City he had taken care to fortify, and to make it more tenable, if it should
be attempted by the French.

From Brussels we passed to Antwerp, where we were handsomely treated by Mr.
Wauters and Mr. Hartop, and having visited some of our Friends, the next day we
passed the River Schelde, and took Coach in the morning, traveling through a
fruitful, plain, flat Country, set with rows of Trees in most places, and
arrived in the evening at Ghent.

Ghent.
Gaunt, Gandavum, or Ghent, is esteemed to be the greatest City, not only of
Flanders, but of all the Low Countries, and challenges a place amongst the
greatest in Europe; but at present it decreases and decays rather than
increases. And if Charles the Fifth were now alive, he could not put Paris into
his Gant, a greater Glove would not fit that City, which is so much increased
since his time. In Ghent are many noble Convents, among which the Jesuits is
one of the fairest: There is a Cloister also of English Nuns. The Cathedral is
stately, and the Tower belonging to it being very high, gives a prospect of a
pleasant and fruitful Country round about it. There are diverse Piazza's, large
and fair; in one of which stands a large gilded Statua of Charles the Fifth,
Emperor and King of Spain, who was born in this City. The whole Town is
generally well built, and the Streets are fair and clean. The Inhabitants
hereof have been taken notice of to be extremely given to Sedition, and for
their sakes a great many other Cities in Europe are punished, and have in a
manner totally lost their Liberties: For the Spaniards, to curb the Seditious
humor of the People of Ghent, were put upon the Invention of building
Cittadels in Cities, whereby a few Soldiers are able to suppress any
Commotion, or beat down the Town, so that here I saw the first Citadel that
was built in Europe by Charles the Fifth: It is not large, and the Bastions
little, and though of a Regular Figure, yet not so convenient as those of
latter days, since that Art has been improved.

From Ghent we passed by water about Twenty English miles to Bruges.
Bruges, a very elegant large City, and formerly a place of very great Trade,
being within three Leagues of the Sea; so that from the tops of their highest
Buildings, the Ships under Sail are visible, and at the same time a Fleet of
Ships, and a large Territory of a fruitful, pleasant Country, comes under your
eye. It is fortified with Works of Earth and deep Ditches. The Convents are
numerous: The artificial Cuts of Water from this Town to all places, makes it
of easy access; and though it has no Port, the Passage from hence to Ostend
by water is short: And they are at present upon a Design of bringing Ships up
to this City.

Ostend.
Ostend is about Ten English miles from Bruges, seated upon the waves of the
German Ocean, which wash it continually on one side: And they have now
contrived it so, as to let the Sea in almost round the Town for a great space,
whereby it is become much more strong and defensible than before. For when I
looked upon it, and considered what it was when it was besieged by Archduke
Albertus, and taken by Marquess Ambrosius Spinola, 1604. with an honorable
Surrender after three years Siege, I cannot but ascribe very much unto their
Supplies from England, and the obstinate Valor of the Defendants, especially
the English under Sir Francis Vere. Sluys being in the hands of the States of
the United Provinces, and Dunkirk under the French. The Spaniards possess no
other Port in Flanders but this and Newport; and this being the most
considerable they are now making the Haven large, and are upon a considerable
Work in order to the carrying of their Ships over into that Cut which goes from
Ostend to Bruges, out of their Harbor, by the means of a very great Lock or
Receptacle of Water, which is to communicate with both; which, when it is
finished, may be very advantageous to the Traffic, of the Spanish Netherlands.
This Town stands very low, but the Streets are straight, large, and uniform

Newport.
From hence I went all along upon the Sea-shoar to Newport, a handsome Town,
with large fair Streets, but low built. There were then a great number of small
Ships in the Harbor. This place is famous for the Battle of Newport, fought
here by Albertus, and Count Maurice, wherein the Spanish Forces lost the day,
and much of the honor of the Field was due unto the English under Sir Francis
Vere; since which time, although there has been much blood shed in these
Quarters, yet there has not been so considerable a Battle ever since, although
the English had also the fortune to do great Service hereabout at a fight
called the Battle of the Sandhils, when a part of the Army of French and
English, which besieged Dunkirk, fought with the Spanish Forces by Newport, and
overthrew them.

From Newport we put to Sea, sailing out of the Harbor, and intending for
England; but the wind being very high and contrary, after having been at Sea
all the night, and had leisure to take notice of the great number of Sands upon
that Coast, in the morning we put into Mardike, where at present there is only
a Fort of Wood just above the High Water mark, with some few Guns mounted. The
other Fort, more into the Land, being demolished.

Dunkirk.
Dunkirk, is much increased of late, and the King of France has not spared
money, to render it considerably strong. He has very near finished a noble
Citadel, begun by the English while this Town was in their possession, which
has the Sea on one side of it, the Haven on another, and the Sandhills toward
the Land, which when the wind is at South-west, does somewhat annoy it: To
prevent which, the French have made diverse Cuts and Channels through the Sands,
into which the Sea entering, does moisten and fix the Sand, so as they are not
so apt to fly. And every Bastion is sprucely kept and covered within with green
Turf. Beyond the old Wall of the Town, there are now great Works drawn, which
encompass so large a space of Ground, that the Town is made bigger by half: And
in this part stands the English Nunnery, and many handsome Buildings. The new
Fortifications are very large; and the Bastion toward the North the most
stately. The Port is large and capable of receiving a great number of Ships,
but at low water it is almost dry; and there are so many Sands before it, that
at that time the Sea comes not in any depth within a mile of it.

From Dunkirk we traveled by Land to Graveling, where the Works are of Earth,
large and high, the Church stately, the Streets broad, but Graveling.
the Houses low, and at present not populous. The Marquis de Bell -- fonds with
the French and my Lord Ruterford with his Scotch, and English, came before
Graveling, upon the sixteenth of August, 1658. and carried the place in twelve
days time; Don Christopher de Manguez yielding it upon the twenty eight, on the
same terms that it was delivered up by the French to the Spaniards 1652.

From Graveling I came to Calais, from whence setting Sail in the morning, we
came to Dover, and the same day to London.

A JOURNEY FROM VENICE TO GENOA.
I Traveled some years since, between Venice and Genoa, through many Countries
of early Civility, seated in the middle of the temperate Zone, in a fruitful
and happy Climate; affording plentifully all Necessaries for Life; and through
Countries which have not only been considerable for their copious production of
Corn, Fruit, Silk, Wine and Oil, but also for having been very fortunate in all
Ages, for bringing into the World Persons of great Fame and Renown, who have
rendered this Tract of Earth more than ordinarily remarkable for great Actions
in all times. The memory of which is still preserved not only in their
Writings, but also in their splendid Buildings, and Antiquities; though no
parts have tasted more deeply of the dangerous variety of fortune, these having
suffered the frequent Incursions of many fierce and warlike Nations. Having
therefore formerly enjoyed such variety of observable Objects, I could not
remember this Journey without some considerable satisfaction, especially having
at the same time had the good luck to travel a great part of it with my worthy
friends, Sir William Trumbull, Mr. Soames, Dr. Palman, Dr. James, and Mr.
Dashwood, which makes me bold, upon the opportunity of this second Impression,
to add further this short Account.

We passed from Venice to Padoa by water up the stream of the pleasant River
Brent, having all day long Houses of Pleasure, and well built Palaces on each
hand of us. We entered this River near Lizafusina, five Miles from Venice;
where formerly a Wheel, or Engine was placed, to convey the Vessels into the
River. The Venetians having long since stopped up the entrance of the Brenta,
lest that by the continual Descent of the Water, the Stream, and Channel might
be diminished, lost, or altered; and the passages for their Vessels rendered
dangerous, or inconvenient; but this is otherwise contrived at present, and
four large Locks or Sostegni are made use of, both to keep up the water, and to
facilitate the passage of the Vessels. These are placed at Stra, Dolo, Mira,
and Moranzan, and are very remarkable, considering that the River in these
places is locked up, and the Vessels which are to pass are brought in between
great Gates; and the water let in or out, as they have occasion to pass up or
down the River.

Padoa.
The landing-place at Padoa is handsomely set off with stone steps, continued
for a long space, along the side of the River, after the manner of the
landing-place at Ghent, and some other elegant Cities of the Low Countries. The
outward Wall is strong, being well fortified according to the Modern Rules of
Fortification* in the time of Leonardo Loredaro, Duke of Venice; and to render
it more strong, the Rivers of Brenta and Bacchiglione are let into the Town
Ditch. The inward Wall is now most considerable for its Antiquity, and for
retaining the name of its Founder; it being still called Antenor's Wall: It
contains a far less space of ground than the former, Padoa being built in this
respect like to the City of Aix la Chapelle, or Aken, having own Town within
another.

That Patavium, or Padoa is one of the oldest Cities of Europe, built presently
after the Trojan War, is confessed by Ancient Writers; and so generally
believed of old, that Livy lays it down for the Groundwork of his History;
beginning in this manner, Jam primum omnium satis constat, Troja capta, etc. i.
e.

In the first place it is sufficiently manifest that Troy being taken, the
Grecians executed the utmost of their rage upon the Trojans, Aeneas and Antenor
only excepted, by reason of their ancient friendship with the Greeks; and in
respect that they had always endeavored to make Peace, and restore Helena.
After various fortunes, Antenor brought a great Number of the Heneti, who
having lost their King, Pylemon at the Wars of Troy, and being driven out of
Paphlagonia, by a Faction, were now seeking new Seats and a Captain to lead
them; and came along with them to the bottom of the Adriatic Gulf, drove out
the Eugenians who inhabited between the Sea and Alps, and established the
Trojans and the Heneti in those Countries.

Martial also saluting Flaccus, a Padoan Poet, calls him, Flacce, Antenorei
spes and Alumine Laris.


And that you may more firmly give credit to it, you may further also have the
authority of a Goddess for it; for Venus is introduced expostulating in these
terms with Jupiter, in the behalf of Aeneas.

Virgil. Aeneid.
Quem das finem, Rex magne, malorum?
Antenor potuit, mediis elapsus Achivis, 1.

Illyricos penetrare sinus, atque intima tutus
Regna Liburnorum, et fontem superare Timavi;
Vnde per ora novem vasto cum murmr montis
It mare proruptum, et pelago premit arva sonanti:
Hic tamen ille urbem Patavi, sedesque locavit
Teucrorum, et genti nomen dedit, armaque fixit.
i. e.
What time, great King, shall terminate our woes?
Safe could Antenor break through all his foes,
Pierce to the bottom of the Illyrian bay,
View Kingdoms, where Liburnian Princes sway;
Pass the nine mouths of fierce Timavus waves,
Which rores upon the hills and over the valleys raves,
And there could fix; and on that foreign ground,
Great Padoa's towers* for after ages found;
New name the people, and free from all alarms
Hang up, in peace, his consecrated arms.
In those days when the art of Navigation was but in its infancy, and the
Mariners very unwillingly parted with the sight of land, Antenor was forced to
keep close, and creep along the Coast of Peloponnesus, and Epirus, and then
sail by the Illyrian, and Liburnian Shoars, which are very uneven and
troublesome to deal with, being full of Creeks, unsafe Bays, and Rocks; besides
very many Islands of various shapes* Whereas if he had crossed over to the
Italian coast, he had had a nearer voyage, and sailed with pleasure all along
an even, bold, brave shore.

The people of Padoa, are well pleased with the thoughts of their Ancient
founders and Progenitors, and they still preserve the tomb of Antenor, near to
which at present stands the Church of Saint Lawrence* and in their public
shows they will still be representing something of Troy, and the old Trojans,
and in one place I saw a horse of wood, about twenty foot high in imitation of
the old Trojan horse; but, I suppose, nothing near so big as the first
original: Yet when I consider that above eleven hundred years after the
destruction of Troy, when Towns and Buildings were very much amplified and
improved, Pompey coming in Triumph, could not enter even the great Triumphal
gates of Rome it self in a chariot drawn by Elephants, an Animal that seldom or
never comes to be so high as this Horse, it may well be supposed that they
could not have received, even this poor model of the first great one into the
old town of Troy without pulling down their walls.

The City of Padoa was always a friend to the Romans, and did them great
service in their wars against the Galli, Senones, the Vmbrians, Boians,
Insubres, Cimbrians and Carthaginians, and stuck close to their Interest till
the time of the declination of the Roman Empire; When Attila the powerful King
of the Huns with fire and sword destroyed it; and when after diverse years it
was rebuilt by the favor of Narses, the Eunuch, General to the Emperor
Justinian, it was again lamentably ruined by the Longobardian Princes, who by
shooting arrows, with firebrands fixed to them, set the City on fire, and took
it. But under the Empire of Charles the great, and his successors, it arose out
of its ashes again, and flourished for a long time; being governed first by
Consuls, and then by a Podesta, until the time of their dreadful Tyrant
Ezzellin, who harrassed, banished, tormented, and massacred the Inhabitants,
cramming their own Wells within the City, full with their The T^mb^ of Antenor.
mangled bodies, and amongst other severities, upon an angry distaste, against
them, slew ten thousand of them in one day at Verona. But notwithstanding these
cruelties, they recovered their liberty again after the death of Ezzellin, and
by degrees became very powerful, having under their jurisdiction, Vicenza,
Verona, Trent, Treviso, Feltre, Belluno, Ceneda, Seravalla, Ch oza, Bassano,
with its territories, all the Polesine or Peninsula, and the greatest part of
Friuli, with other important Places; when in the end, Marsilio di Carrara made
himself Capitanio or Governor of the City. This noble Family of the Carraresi,
very powerful in these parts, came from their Castle of Bassano, and lived in
Padoa* where they became very considerable and siding with the Pope against the
Emperor Frederick the second, they were driven out by Ezzellin, but when upon
the successful attempts of the Roman Legate, Ansedin, a commander under
Ezzellin, was overthrown, they were again restored, dignified, and established
in the government of Padoa; which they possessed, with some variety of Fortune,
from one to another in their own Family, for about an hundred Years, in the
conclusion of which, they were seized on by the Venetians, who thought fit to
put Francisco Novello, and his Sons to death in the year 1405. And after this
manner, by having totally extinguished the noble Family of the Carraresi,
without fear of any further claim, or dispute, they possessed themselves of the
City of Padoa, and hold it in their hands to this day.

The Buildings at Padoa, both public, and private, are very considerable; for
most of the City is built upon Arches, making handsome Portico's or cloisters on
each side of the street; after the manner of the houses in the Piazza of
Convent Garden, which at all times afford a good defense against the Sun, and
Rain, and many of the houses are painted on the outside, with very good
History-Painting in Fresco; their Churches are fair, and diverse well adorned;
The Domo or Cathedral Church is large, seated near the middle of the City;
endowed, and mightily enriched by the Emperor Henry the fourth; whose Empress
Berta lies buried here. The Revenues of this Church at present are reckoned to
amount to a hundred thousand Crowns a Year; and besides the Monuments of many
eminent persons, they preserve here the body of St. Daniel, of Cardinal Pileo
da Pratta, and of Cardinal Francesco Zabarella.

St. Anthony's Church at Padoa.
The Church of St. Antonio is visited by persons far and near, and the
exquisite Design, artificial Carving in Marble, the handsome Quire and rich
Ornaments make it worth the seeing. The top of the Church is made up of six
Cupola's covered with lead; the Chapel of St. Antonio is nobly set out with
twelve marble pillars, and a rich roof. Between the Pillars are carved the
miracles of this Saint, who lies interred under the Altar, upon which stand
seven Figures made by Titian Aspetti, a good statuary of Padoa, and behind the
Altar there is a most excellent Basso relievo done by Sansovinus, Tullius
Lomburdus, and Campagna Verone^sis. Over against the Chapel of St. Antonio
stands the Chapel of Saint Faelix; and his tomb nobly wrought, with colored
marble, and the whole splendidly adorned, with the paintings of the highly
celebrated Giotto. The chief Relics in this Church are, the Tongue and Chin
of St Antonio, a Cloth dipped in the blood of our Savior, Three thorns of his
Crown, and a piece of the wood of the Cross, some of the hair and milk of the
blessed Virgin, and some of the blood of the marks of St. Francis. Before the
Front of the Church there is a handsome brass Statue on Horseback, representing
the great Venetian General Gattemela. St. Ant^nio, lived six and thirty years,
dyed upon the thirteenth of June, 1231, and was canonized by Pope Gregory the
ninth in the City of Spoleto, 1237.

The convent of the black Monks of St. Benedict may compare with most in Italy;
and their Church dedicated to Santa Giustina, built by Palladio, is one of the
fairest in Europe. Saint Giustina was a Virgin, and Martyr, daughter to
Vitaliano of this City; she suffered Martyrdom in the time of Maximianus the
Emperor. In this Church there are still preserved, as they say, the body of St.
Luke, the Evangelist, of St. Matthias, the Apostle, of two of the Innocent
Children, of Prosdochimus, the converter of these Countries to the Christian
Faith, and first Bishop, of Padoa; of Maximus their second Bishop, and of Santa
Giustina. The Front of this Church looks into a spacious place called Prato
della Valle, where the Gentlemen meet in their Coaches in the Evening, for
their pleasure. In a handsome room or burying place on the Southside of this
Church is a round old red marble stone, upon which the heads of many Martyrs
were cut off; and near to it a fine white marble Well, called Pozzo d' Martiro,
or the Martyr's Well, a place of great Devotion.

Where the Temple of Juno stood in old time, there is now built a handsome
Church, dedicated to St. Augustine, wherein are diverse Monuments of the Family
of Carrara, the Tomb of Charlotta, daughter to James King of Cyprus, and of
Petrus Aponensis, a great Philosopher.

Il Ponte Molino, where there are thirty Water-Mills together, and the Castello
delle munitioni, both built by Ezzellin, are worth the seeing. La Corte del
Capitanio is splendid, and was the Palace of the Carraresi. The Palazzo della
Regione, where the Courts of Justice are held, is very large, beautiful, and
highly considerable, both without, and within; being built of Marble with rows
of Pillars without, and within there are Heads and Inscriptions for diverse
eminent Persons of this City; the length hereof is 256 Foot, and the breadth 86
without any Pillar or support in the middle.

The University of Padoa, was founded in the Year 1220. by the Emperor
Frederick the Second; and the Schools are fair, and large, containing one
Quadrangle, with rows of Pillars above and below; and besides handsome Schools
on every side, there is a very convenient Anatomical Theater* The Physic
Garden is large, of a round Figure, walled about, and well stored with Plants.
The Prefects hereof have been Men of Note, as Aloysius Mundella, Aloysius
Anguillara, Melchior Guilandinus, Jacobus Antonius Cortusus, Prosper Alpinus,
and Joannes Veslingius.

The Arena, or old Amphitheater at Padoa, is an Antiquity very remarkable; and
the remains of some of the Arches are to be seen still in the Gardens backward;
but the Arena it self, and the whole Podium, are preserved entire, free, and
empty: And at one end thereof, there is built a handsome Palace, the Front of
which looks directly into the open Amphitheater, and is a portion of an Oval
Figure, and the whole area, or Arena of the Amphitheater serves for the court
to it, in such manner, that the entrance being now at the end, directly
opposite to the house, the handsome prospect of it, and the clear Avenue to it,
is extraordinarily surprising, and extremely noble, and I could not imagine
that any Gentleman would ever desire to have a fairer Courtyard to his house,
than the spacious plain Arena of an old Roman Amphitheater, nor a better Wall
than a high entire handsome Podium, the like to which perhaps is not at this day
any where else to be seen. And I must freely confess, That of the Remains and
Ruins of twelve old Amphitheaters, which I have seen my self, I have not met
with any one that comes near it; for in the Amphitheater at Dove in Poictou,
which is cut out of a Rock, and being of a smaller dimension, and part of the
bottom being filled up, there is no visible beauty of the Podiam, the like may
be said also of that at Nizza, near the river Varus, and that at Puzzuolo. That
at Nismes is filled up with dwelling houses, in such manner that the upper
seats only are distinctly visible. The Amphitheaters of Bourdeaux, Xainctes,
Arles, Garigliano, that at Rome near to the Church of Santa Croce in
Gierusalemme, and others are at present so much ruined, that nothing of this
nature distinguishable is to be expected; nay even about the Arena at Verona,
and the great Colisseo, or Domitian's Amphitheater at Rome, the ground is now
risen so high, that the Podium is at present either buried, or disfigured. But
as the Arena at Padoa is clear, and evident in this part; so is it wanting in
all the rest: and he that desires at this day to view all the Parts of an
Amphitheater, must not see one, but many; and by joining them together in his
thoughts he may collect the figure, proportion, and dimensions of this
sumptuous sort of building of the old Romans.

From the Walls of Padoa, there is a pleasant Prospect of a plain Country to
the North, East, and South; and of the Euganean Hills to the West, which supply
the Town with variety of Plants, and great Number of Vipers. At a few Miles
distance are the hot Baths of Abano, and the Mineral drinking Waters of Monte
Ortone, as also Marchese Obizzi's Country House, which we saw with great
delight, it being well designed, and accommodated with a good Armory, a Theater
for Comedies, handsome Stables, and a Tennis-court* and nobly painted both
within, and without, by that great Master, Paulo Veronese.

Leaving the Ancient City of Padoa, in the Two Thousand, Seven Hundred and
Eighty Fifth Year after its first Foundation, according to their own compute,
and Traveling Eighteen Miles through a fruitful Country, we came to the
pleasant City of Vicenza; a place worth the Vicenza*
seeing, by reason that Palladius has here shown great skill in Architecture
in his Rotunda, in imitation of the Pantheon* at Rome, in his Theater exactly
proportioned to the strict Rules of Building, and other fair Houses in the
Town. There are also two Arches worth the observing, one near the Gate, behind
which there is a noble ascent up to Santa Maria del Monte, and another in campo
Martio. This City is filled with Nobility and Gentry, and drives a great Trade
in making Silk, but is not of any considerable Strength.

The Piazza della Signoria is as beautiful a place as can well be contrived,
and besides its being large enough to receive all the Gentry in an Evening, and
to have Tilting, and Tournaments performed in it, it is beautified with the
exquisite Front of the Palazzo della Ragione, of the Capitanio's Palace, and
also with the Buildings of the Monte della Pieta, where Money is lent out
without use to the poorer sort.

Vicenza is a rich Bishopric esteemed at twelve thousand Ducats a Year, and in
the Cathedral, besides other Relics, are preserved the Bodies of Carpophorus,
and Leontius, Martyrs of this Place; but the most celebrated Relic of all, is
kept in the Church of the Santa Corona, belonging to the Dominicans: It is one
of the Thorns of our Savior's Crown, given by Saint Lewis, King of France, to
Bartolomeo Breganza, a native and Bishop of Vicenza.

The City of Vicenza, or Vicentia, is watered with the River Bacchiglione, and
Rerone, or Eretenus, besides two other pretty Streams called the Astichello,
and Seriola, which highly confer to its delightful Situation, and Convenience:
but by reason that there are diverse Hills very near, it can never be made
strong, or able to make any significant Resistance; and to speak the truth, it
has really been forced so many times, by every next bold Intruder, that few
Cities, of this beauty, and perfection, have been oftener ravished. It is
thought to have been built by the Galli Senones, in the time of Tarquinius
Priscus; but most Authors reckon it to be more Ancient, and will have it to be
one of the twelve Cities built beyond the Apennines, by the old Tuscans; and
that the Gauls possessed it not, till the Tuscans were driven out. These in
process of time yielded it to the Romans, who enjoyed it long, even till the
coming of Attila the Hun, who notably sacked, and plundered it. The next to
these that were Lords and Masters of Vicenza, were the Ostrogoths; and after
them the Lombards: Till the time that Desiderius, the last of the Lombardian
Kings, having left his son Aldigier in this City, was taken prisoner by Charles
the great; and when it had served Charlemaigne, and his Successors with various
fortune, in time it recovered its Liberty, and set up for a free City; till the
Emperor Frederick coming upon it of a sudden, took, and burnt it. Next to him
Ezzellin ruled over it; then the Padoans; then Mastino della Scala first
Signore di Verona, and his Family after him, till Giovanni Galeazzo Visconte,
the first Duke of Milan, seized upon it, whose Duchess Catharina, after the
death of her husband, set them again at Liberty, and absolved them from their
Oath of Allegiance, when upon Various Consultations in what manner they should
govern themselves for the future and whether or no, they should unite with the
Swizzers; Henrico Caprasavio's Party prevailed, who persuaded them to give
themselves Voluntarily to the Venetian; by means of which free consent of
their's, at last they enjoy at present greater immunities, and privileges than
most of their neighboring Cities.

Verona.
From Vicenza we went to Verona, a noble, ancient, spacious City, of about six
Miles round, well built, and now handsomely fortified by the Venetians with
great Bastions. It has three Castles, or Forts; two upon the hill, and one by
the River side; many ancient and many handsome Churches, stately Convents and
Buildings, both public and private, and is very well watered with the pleasant
River Aiche or Etshe, Athesis, Adige, or Adice.

Athesis.
The River Athesis is a noble River, which arising above in the high Rhoetian
Alps and passing all along through the Vallis Venusta, comes rouling down by
Trent, and then winds, and turns, within the City of Verona; and afterward,
passing through the Fens near the l'o, enters the Adriatic Sea; and many
Authors report, That the great Incursion of the Cimbrians, was made by the
sides of this River; which is also confirmed by Hermannus Cruserius, Gulielmus
Xylander, by the Bishop of Auxerres and diverse other good Translators of
Plutarch, as also that Catulus laid encamped upon this River, to hinder their
further Invasion; nay some proceed to mention a triumphal arch erected at
Verona for Caius Marius his Victory, in these quarters: For Catulus the Consul,
Colleague with Caius Mariu^, who marched against the Cimbri, despairing of being
able to defend the tops of the Alp s; where, being compelled to divide his
Forces into several Parties, he might very much weaken himself, returned
presently into Italy, and placed his Army by the River Athesis, say they; where
closing up the passages o^ both sides of the River, with strong Fortifications,
he made a bridge whereby he might assist those on either side, if the Enemies,
having forced the narrow Passages should invade, and storm them. But the
Cimbrians ceme on with such Boldness, and Contempt of their Enemies, that
merely to show their Plutarel;
Strength, and Courage rather than out of Necessity, they went naked in the
Showers of Snow; and through the ice, and deep Snow, climbed up to the top of
the Mountains, and from thence, placing their broad Shields under their bodies,
they let themselves slide from the highest precipices down those vast Descents;
and when they had pitched their Camp at a little distance from the River, and
surveyed the Passage, they begun to pour in upon the Romans; and Giant-like,
tearing up the neighboring Hills, and pulling up Trees by the Roots, and great
Trees too,

Quales Aeriae liquentia flumina circum,
Sive Padi ripis, Athesin seu prop er amoenum, V. rg. 9. Aen^

Consurgunt geminae Quercus, intonsaque Caelo
Attolunt capita, et sublimi ver^ice nutant.
Such overtopping, uncut Oaks as grow
By pleasant Athesis, or the liquid Streams of Po;
And higher than the clouds, their lofty heads do throw,
Which seem to strike at Heaven, and not at us below.
And throwing in heaps of earth, and great Corners of Rocks whereby to turn the
course of the River, and heaving in huge massy floats, which beat against the
side of the Bridge, and broke down the supporters, the Roman Soldiers left
their Camp, and fled; yet notwithstanding all this, there may some doubt be
made, whether they entered Italy by the sides of this River, and Plutarch
himself does not call the River, near which the Cimbrians descended, the River
Athesis, but (...); the River Atise, or Tosa; a River, which is at a great
distance from any part of the Athesis; and arising in the Alps, runs evidently
into the Lago maggiore, or Lacus Verbanus; and is next to the River Lesia, or
Lesitis, which passes by Vercelli, and falls afterward into the Po: and when
Baeorix, King of the Cimbrians, challenged the Roman Generals to fight, and bid
them appoint their time, and place, Caius Marius returned this answer, that
although it were not the Custom of the Romans to let their Enemies know, where
and when, they intended to give battle; yet he would at this time accept of his
challenge, and appointed to meet him, in three days after, in the plains near
Vercelli, where there was space enough for both Parties to show their valor;
and to determine this Controversy in a fair, and open field; and where he gave
a total overthrow to one of the greatest Armies perhaps that ever invaded
Italy; and hereby it seems to me, that this great drove of Cimbrians, or a good
part of them, passed over Mount Sampion, or Mons Sempronius; from which
mountain the River Atiso takes its rise; and the Description of the vast
Precipices, and sliding down in their Shields, as it were a la ramasse, is by
no means agreeable, nor can it any ways be allowed for a tolerable Delineation
of the passage into Italy by Trent, where the road does no where lie over any
such vast Mountain; but the terrible description by Mr Raymund, and Mr Lassels,
of the bad way, and ill passage between Briga, and Domo, over Mount Sampion is
very suitable to the ancient account.

As the pleasant River Athesis is very serviceable to Verona, so the four
handsome Bridges over it, in this Town, are both useful, and ornamental; and the
Walls about it, in a great measure, remarkable; though Verona being now very
ancient, there is no good account at this day, to be found; who was the founder
of them, or by whom, or at what time, they were first built, it is manifest
however, that they long since did good service, and that in the civil wars of
the Romans, between Caesar, and Pompey; Augustus, and Antonius; Vitellius, and
Vespasian; Severus, and Julian; and others; this was a considerable place of
strength, and sided with Caesar against Pompey, took Augustus's part against
Marcus Antonius, was for Vitellius against Vespasian, and long after held out
for some time for Maxentius against Constantine the great. The Emperor
Gallienus took such particular care in fortifying Verona, that he left his name
to the Town, and diverse inscriptions upon the wall; for the Roman Empire being
much divided in his time, and the force of the foreign Nations increasing in
many parts, he expressly commanded, to render the walls of this place strong,
which being feated in the jaws of the Alps, was more likely to be swallowed
first by the Northern Nations. Theodoricus Amalus, that great Conqueror, and
excellent King of the Goths was in succeeding times, marvellously pleased with
Verona, amplified and adorned it, rebuilt and fortified its walls, which were
rendered, notwithstanding, in after ages, more considerable, by the Emperor
Charles the great, and his Son, King Pippin; who made this the head City of
Italy. In latter times, Albertus Scaliger, brother to Mastinus Scaliger, the
first Sovereign Lord of Verona, and his Son, Canis Grandis more fully enlarged
and fortified Verona, against the Incursions of the Germans: And the Venetians,
last of all have built large Bastions about itstrongly faced with Brick.

The City within is convenient and beautiful, the Piazza a handsome long
Square, the Streets large, and the Town being built part upon the Plain, and
part upon Hills, makes the variety of the Prospect more pleasing, looking
somewhat like the beautiful City of Lion in France. There are many good Houses;
Conte Augustino Giusto's Palace is particularly fair, and his Gardens
delightful, in which I saw the Aloe Plant in Stem and Seed, the Stem or Stalk
being about twenty Foot high; the Churches are beautiful, among which Saint
Anastastus is one of the fairest; and the Cathedral and many others of them are
ancient, this City being converted to the Christian Faith by Saint Euprepius,
their first Bishop, Seventy years after Christ. St. Zeno, their Eighth Bishop,
is their Patron, who lived in the time of Gallienus, and Four and Thirty of
their Bishops besides are Canonized. Peter Martyr was also Born in Verona, who
was assassinated between M^lan and Coma, was Canonized by Pope Innocent the
Fourth, and lies splendidly Entombed in Milan. Besides these great Religious
Men, others though not so Famous for Piety, have, notwithstanding been living
ornaments to their City; among which the excellent Poet C. Valerius Catullus is
one of the first, whom Ovid mentions.

Mantua Virgilio gaud t, Verona Catullo.
And Martial complements in this manner.
Tantum magna suo debet Verona Catullo,
Quantum parva suo Mantua Virgilio.
C. Cornelius Nepos, was also born in the territories of Verona, to whom
Catullus gives his Book.

Cui dono lepidum uovum libellum,
Arido modo pumice expolitum,
Corneli? tibi, namque tu solebas
Meas esse aliquid putare nugas.
Cornelius Nepos, excellently skilled in Antiquity is said to have written a
Chronicle of the Roman Affairs, and other works, and the Lives of Illustrious
persons, among which the life of Pomponius Atticus is only extant.

C. Aemilius Macer, a good Poet, was also of Verona. He lived in the time of
Augustus Caesar, and wrote of Plants, Birds and Serpents.

Ovid.
Saepe suas volucres legit mihi grandior Aevo,
Quaeque nocet sorpens, quae juvat herba, Marcer.
The next is Lucius Vitruvius, a great Architect and whose Statue with other
famous men of this City is set over the Court. The more known Marcus Vitruvius,
who wrote the ten Books of Architecture, was of Rome.

Caius Plinius Secundus was also an honor to this City; and of latter days
many learned men by being born and living here, have added much to its credit,
as Torello Sarayna, and Onuphrius Panvinius, who wrote expressly of the
Antiquities of their own City. Jeronimus, Fracastorius, Joannes Baptista
Montanus, Antonius Fumanellus, Alexander Benedictus, Gabriel Zerbus, Joannes
Arculanus who lived a hundred years here, Guarinus, Joannes Antonius Pantheus,
Joannes Baptista Bagolinus, and the admired learned Lady, Isota, Nogarola, who
among other treatises wrote a dialogue, in which she ingeniously discourses who
sinned first, Adam or Eve.

The Emperor Philippus was slain at Verona, by his own Soldiers. There was a
Colony settled here by Pompey; and one Pompeianus held out the Town against
Constantine the great in the year 323. The Emperor Valentinian, after that he
made his Brother Valens partner with him in the Empire and placed him in the
East, visited this City, and Theodorick, the Conqueror of Italy and great King
of the Goths lived long here. Placidia, daughter of Valentinian, the third, and
of Eudoxia, lived the latter part of her time, dyed here and was buried in the
Church of St. Stephen, which was formerly their Cathedral in which Church lie
also buried one and twenty Bishops of Verona, forty Martyrs put to death in
Dioclesian's Persecution, and four of the Innocent Children. But there are
other things which still add to the beauty of this City.

Vrbibus Italiae praestat Verona superbis,
Aedibus, Ingenio, Flumine, Monte, Lacu.
i. e.

Hills, Rivers, Lakes, Buildings and Arts do grace
Noble Verona above any place.
The Lacus Benacus, or Lago di Garda, is a very considerable Lake, near this
place, which stretches it self from Peschiera, on the South, Thirty five
Italian Miles to the North, and is in some places Fourteen Miles broad, and the
Winds often blowing fiercely from the Neighboring Hills, make it rough, and
troublesome, like a Sea.

Fluctibus and fremitu, assurgens, Benace, marino.
Cleopatra had once a design to carry her Ships and Vessels cross the Country
through Egypt, out of the Mediterranean into the Red Sea, over that Isthmus,
or neck of Land, which divides Africa from Asia, which would have been a
notable exploit: yet considering that Egypt is a flat Country, which renders
the design more feasible, and that the Territory about this Lake is very Hilly,
it is an action no less to be admired, which the Venetians effectually
performed, when they brought their Ships and Galleys out of the Adriatic over
Land into the Lago di Garda, to engage in a Naval Fight, upon this notable
Lake, with Filippo Visconte, Commander of the Milan Forces.

There are diverse handsome Towns and Villages upon the side of the Lacus
Benacus, as Lacisium, Bardolinum, famous for the pleasant Bardolin Figgs,
Garda, which gives it the modern name, Malsesenum, Ripa, Tusculanum, where
there are still some remains of old Benacus, which gave it the ancient
appellation, Maternum, Salodium, Desentianum, a populous Place, and of good
Accommodation, Pischeria, through which the River Mincius passes, and lastly
the ruins of old Sirmio, upon a neck of Land, which runs into the Lake, where
stood formerly the beloved pleasing Villa of Catullus.

Peninsularum Sirmio, Insularumque
Ocelle, etc.
The best Fish in this Lake, are the Eels, the Trouts, and a Fish peculiar to
it, called a Carpione, which is thought to delight in some particular Earth,
Soil, or Mineral at the bottom thereof, seeing that it will not easily live,
and thrive in any other place.

After the negligent reign of Gallienus, when the Thirty Tyrants sprung up, and
the remote Provinces of the Empire had taken the liberty to do what they
pleased, the Almans made use of this seasonable Opportunity, and breaking into
Italy, with an Army of two hundred thousand men, the succeeding Emperor,
Flavius Claudius, made a stout resistance, and at length overthrew them totally
near this lake of Benacus.

Mount Baldus*
Mons Baldus, or Monte Baldo near Verona, is esteemed the most considerable
Hill for Plants, and Medicinal Herbs of all the Alps; and the Calderian Baths
are a further Ease and Convenience to this ancient City.

Verona is called Verona Nobile, and Verona Antica, and very ancient it is
without doubt; for Just in says expressly, That the old Gauls built Milan, Como,
Breseia, Verona, Bergamo, Trent, and Vicenza; and Livy most particularly, That
the Gauls possessed themselves of those places where Breseia and Verona stand
at present, but our Modern Italian Writers who are very unwilling that these
spruce, polite Cities should owe their beginning to any rough tramontane
Nation, are very eager in asserting, That they were built long before that time
by the ancient Tuscans, but allow that they were afterward possessed, and
enlarged by the Gauls, and that Vera, a noble old Tuscan, laid the first
Foundation of this place, and called it Verona, after his own Name. It was long
after this, under the Romans, in the height and glory of their Empire; and in
the declination of it, this City shifted indifferently, till Attila took and
sacked it; and when diverse others set themselves up for Emperors, and Sovereign
Commanders, as ^lybrius, Glycerius, Augustulus and Odoacer, King of the Heruli,
and Turingi, it served first one, and then another, till Zeno the Emperor, sent
that renowned Christian Prince, Theodorick, King of the Goths, into Italy, who
conquered and possessed it, as the due reward of his valor; and by this means
Verona came to serve the Goths, till Totilas, and Tevas, the last of their
Kings were overthrown and slain by Narses, the Eunuch, who not long after
called in the Lombards, being disobliged by the Empress Sophia, who endeavored
much to have him recalled, instigated her husband, the Emperor Justinian,
against him, and sent him word after all his glorious Victories, and Services
for them, That she would make him come home, like an Eunuch as he was, and Spin
amongst her Maids; to which Narses returned this Answer, That he did intend it,
as soon as might be, and that he would Spin her such a Web, that she, nor all
her Maids together should never be able to unravel; and immediately sent to
Alboinus, the Valiant King of the Lombards, who had lately overthrown
Cunimundas, King of the Gepidae, and had taken his fair daughter Rosamund to
wife, but withal had Slain the King her Father, and made a drinking Cup of his
Skull. Alboinus was at that time possessed of Pannonia; but upon the invitation
of Narses came into Italy with his whole Force and Attendants, and took all the
Country called formerly Gallia Cisalpina, and began the Longobardian Kingdom,
which prevailed in Italy for about two hundred Years. This Alboinus being
excessively merry, and pleasant at Verona, where he had placed the chief seat
of his new Kingdom, amongst other Frolicks, he made poor Queen Rosamund, one
day, drink out of her Fathers Skull, which so digusted her, that she persuaded
Helmichild to assist her in the murder of her husband, for the reward of which
action she promised herself in marriage to him with the Kingdom of Lombardy:
but as soon as it was performed, they had hereby rendered themselves so
intolerably odious to the Longobardian nobles, and people; that they were
forced to fly away to Longinus the Exarch of Ravenna, who being at the first
sight wonderfully enamoured with the exquisite beauty of Queen Rosamund,
persuaded her to dispatch Helmichild and accept of him, to which in this
necessitous condition, she soon agreed, and when Helmichild was coming out of a
Bath, and called for drink, she had prepared such a high poisonous draught for
him, that before he had drunk half of it, he was sensible of what was done, and
laying hold of her, forced her to drink the other half, whereby they both dyed
together. After the Lombards, Charles the Great, Pipin, and the Berengarii, and
others placed their Royal Seats here; and in the time of Otho the first, it
became a free City. Then Ezzellin came in, and tyrannized over them. Next to
him, the Ancient Family of the Scaliger's, who for two hundred years together
had lived here in credit and repute, and were at length advanced to the dignity
of Sovereign Lords of Verona, which they held between two and three hundred
years longer, and diverse of their high raised Monuments are still to be seen in
the streets of this City. Antonio the last of this Family that reigned here,
was driven out by Giouanni Galeazzo Visconte, after him came Francisco di
Carrara, then the Venetians, who lost it again to the Emperor Maximilian; but
in Conclusion, in the year, 1517. this City gave it self up totally to the
State of Venice under which they live happily at present.

The Amphitheater at Verona.
But the greatest remarkable curiosity, and the most noble antiquity in Verona,
is the old Roman Amphitheater, the most entire within side, of any now
standing, and one of the first Magnitude when it was built, the description of
which deserves a Volume by it self, the Building being beyond, imagination
glorious and whoever enters it at this day is presently surprised with its
magnificent Structure, I have here inserted a Cut of it, as it may be imagined
to have shown it self, when it was first built and entire; which if it had been
then divided into two parts, and one half removed from its Bases, the inside of
the other half would have appeared in this manner. It is called at present the
Arena, it was Prud.
also formerly named Amphitheatrum and sometimes Cavea.

Quid pulvis Caveae semper funebris, and illa
Amphitheatralis spectacula tristia pompae?
A. Is the Altar placed in the middle of the Arena, in the perfect Center of
the Amphitheater, a sacred business.

-- Quid sanctius ara
Quae bibit egestum *per mystica tela cruorem?
This holy Altar drinks of blood,
By Mystic Weapons spilt, a flood.
This was dedicated to Diana Scythica, to Saturn or to Mars; Deities that
delighted in the spilling of Human Blood, or to Jupiter Latiaris or Stygius.

The inside of the Amphitheater at ^erona.


Hae sunt deliciae Jovis infernalis
The Arena.
B. B. B. Is the Arena properly so called, or the sandy floor of the
Amphitheater, upon which the combatants fought: It was covered with sand to
suck up the Blood, for if it had been paved with Stone or plastered, upon great
effusion of Blood, the Gladiators would have been apt to have slipped or fallen
down; but being of Sand, or Gravel, it was easy to be turned, or raked away,
which it seems they did sometimes; and this Martial mentions, speaking of a
Lion that broke out of his Den and killed two Youths.

Nam duo de tenera juvenilia corpora turba,
Sanguineam rastris quae renovabat humum,
Saevus et infelix furiali dente peremit.
Martia non vidit majus Arena nefas.
Two tender Striplings of the younger band,
As they were raking up the blood sand,
A Lion slew, a sight more cruel never
Was seen in Mars's Amphitheater.
They sometimes also made use of Stone dust; but the extravagant Emperors,
Caligula, and Nero, caused the Arena to be strowed with Vermilion, and Gold
dust, or with the dust of a Mineral, which resembled Gold. The Figure of the
Arena is Oval. In pacing it from one extreme to the other, I found, it to be
ninety paces long; two of my paces make five foot; and this is agreeable to the
measure of Monsieur Desgodetz, and Joannes Carotus, the Painter of the
Antiquities of Verona, who reckons it to be two hundred and twenty four foot
long, and one hundred and thirty five foot broad; but the Arena of Domitian's
Amphitheater at Rome, is a hundred and fifty of my paces long, or three hundred
and seventy five foot.

The Portul^.
The Arena is walled about with a wall of thirteen or fourteen foot high, in
which there are diverse Portulae, C. C. C. or little Gates, or Doors, belonging
to the inward Caves and Dens, from which the wild Beasts usually come out with
Swiftness, Force, and Violence into the Arena, and when the fights are over,
those which are left alive are driven back again into their Dens, with several
Wheels and Engines. Sone^a.


Carriculi rotarumque versata facies Leonem redigit in Cavuam.
Nor is it to be much admired, that the force of the, Rota, and, Axis, which is
able to remove any thing, should be powerful enough to drive back a Lion. This
device, at present, being much improved at Florence, where they place a man
within a Monstrous green Dragon moved upon wheels, which runs upon the wild
Beasts, and drives them back: and whilst the Lions sometimes turn, and stare
upon this formidable machine, the man within thrusts two lighted Torches, out
of the eyes of the Dragon, able to out stare any Beast, and to shine more
flaringly than the bright Golden Iris in the Lions Eye. In the hunting and
baiting of Lions, in former ages, they made use of great Oval flat Shields,
which covered their whole body; and in this posture came on unseen; and if the
Lion were still so bold, as to advance against this moving wood, as he would
sometimes, and overthrow one of the hunters, yet still the Huntsman kept
himself covered with his Shield, and the Lion was satisfied with leaping upon
him, and pawing the Shield, whilst the man laid in safety under it. And the
manner of this hunting of Lions is finely expressed, in Painting, in the
Sepulcher of the Nasonian Family, lately discovered in the Campania di Roma,
whereby we may understand in what high value, and delight, the Old Romans held
these huntings and fightings with Beasts, whilst they Painted them in their
Tombs, to recreate the Shades below, and thought them sports worthy to be
exercised and continued in the Elysian fields. In another part of the same
Sepulcher there is painted the manner of the hunting of Tigres which is
performed by the huntsmen uniting their Shields together* and bearing up
against him, whilst one lifts up a lance above the Shields, and wounds the
Beast, or else by placing a looking-glass in a wood, which the Tigre spying,
comes to it, and as he regards, and admires his own shape in the glass, a
Hunsman placed above, wounds him with a Spear or Javelin.

These Caves are now clearliest to be seen in the Amphitheater of Nizza, Arles,
and Dove.

The Podium
D. D. The top of this Wall makes the Podium, behind which the first row of
seats begins.

This part of the Amphitheater was sometimes richly gilded and adorned, and the
Figures of Victory placed upon it, and Statues handsomely contrived to throw
forth tinged, and perfumed liquors to sprinkle and refresh the Knights, and
Senators; and upon the outside of the Podium, there were placed nets, and loose
rowlers, which turned upon an axis, to hinder the wild Beasts from climbing up,
and whereby the Lions, Tigers, Leopards, when they leaped up of a Sudden, by
the quick turning about of these rowlers, they immediately fell down again.

Suggustum Imperatoris:
E. Is the Suggestum Imperatoris, the Pulpit, Seat, or Throne of the Emperor, a
little Chamber, or Box, built for the Emperor's person, in which he might
either sit privately, and see through lattices or have the forepart of it open
upon the Podium. This was first caused to be made by Julius Caesar, and is
mentioned by Suetonius among other excessive honors which he received, and
which were thought too great by some, that is, that he permitted his Statue to
be set up amongst the Kings, and a Throne, to be built for him in the chief
place of the Amphitheater, and when in Nero's time by the help of Machines,
they attempted to act Icarus, the poor fellow that was to fly cross the
Amphitheater, fell down near the Emperors throne* and imbrued it with his
blood: But Trajan had the lowest Seats of the Theaters, Amphitheaters, and
Circus's made plain, and equal, as at first; where the People were highly
pleased to see, not the Box, as formerly* wherein Great Caesar sat, but to see
him in person sitting equally with the rest of the Nobility.

The Seats.
The seats of the Amphitheater are next to be considered, which in this at
Verona, at first, were five and forty; but three of the lowest rows are now
under ground. There remain visible at present, all of The outside of the
Amphitheater at Nismes Round about which there are one hundred and twenty
Arches and as many Pillars, sixty in the upper row, and sixty in the lower
good Stone, forty two, each of them about half a yard high.

F. F. are the lower Seats, appointed for the Senators, and Vestal Virgins; for
the Emperor Nero considering, That the Virgins devoted to the Goddess Ceres,
were invited to the Olympian games, made an order, That the Vestal Virgins
should also be alloted seats in the Orchestra, or most honorable places of the
Amphitheater.

G. G. are the Equestria, the middle places, for the Equites Romani, the Seats
appointed for the Roman Knights, and Gentlemen; and there were Officers on
purpose to place every one in his due Rank, and these were called
Dissignatores, and Tribuni voluptatum.

H. H. are the Popularia, the Places for the Common People, for the ordinary
sort of both Sexes, and where the Women sat, whom their Husbands could not
keep at home, and who would flock in such numbers as to ^ill the Amphitheaters
up to the top, and bring Chairs and Stools to set upon the top of all, and in
the Portico's and Galleries above.

Venimus ad seeds, ubi pulla sordida vest
Inter faemineas spectabat turba Cathedras.
I. I. I. are the Vomitoria, or square holes, or entrances, through which the
Spectators came pouring in, to take their places; for considering that the
Amphitheaters were Buildings capable of receiving vast numbers of People, (that
of Titus at Rome being able to contain fourscore thousand persons conveniently)
it was necessary also that the Entrances should be numerous, that the
spectators might come in and out without confusion, in this Amphitheater of
Verona in every ninth and tenth row of seats, there are rows of Vomitoria,
every one at an equal distance from one another, eighteen in a row, which make
seventy two distinct entrances, to every one of which there is a peculiar
Staircase, coming out from within the Arches, which support the Amphitheater;
beside all other Stairs, and Passages within, and Ascents from one story to
another, which alone is enough, to show, that these were vast extraordinary
Buildings.

L. L. L. are the rows of Arches within, built round the Amphitheater to
support the Seats and upper Buildings.

M. M. is the Caenaculum, or upper Gallery, built for the Strength and ornament
of the whole, into which they might retire, and walk, and refresh themselves.
This part is found but in few Amphitheaters, and in those only of the larger
kind, and there is but little remaining of it at present in this, most of it
being thrown down by a great Earthquake in the year eleven hundred eighty
three, as the Annals of Verona declare.

N. N. N. are the holes left in the building of the outward wall of the
Amphitheater to stick masts into, for the better fastening of the Ropes, Sayls,
and Curtains to shade the Spectators; for the Romans not wearing hats with
brims when they sat long in these open places, were often injured by the Sun,
which forced some to make use of Thessalian Caps and Vmbrella's, till that at
length Q. Catullus brought in the Mode of using Sayl-cloths and Coverings of
Linen to shade the Seats, which Julius Caesar, according to his splendid
humor, caused to be made of Silk of various colors, of Yellow, Red, and
Crimson, and yet was exceeded herein by the Emperor Nero, who ordered his own
picture to be embroidered in these colored Silks, in the posture of Apollo
driving the Chariot of the Sun, and round about him, the Stars, and
Constellations in Gold; and Lucretius takes notice of the graceful, beautiful
shades, which these coverings made somewhat after this manner.

When purple Coverings, Yellow, or deep Red,
Over the Amphitheater are spread,
Which mighty Masts, and sturdy Pillars bear;
And the loose Curtains wanton in the Air,
Whole Streams of colors from the top must flow,
And with diffused beams stayn all below.
The more the Curtains spread, the more the Dye
Rides ore the Silver Air, and courts the Eye.
Rich colors spread themselves over every thing.
Each man's as glorious as a purple King.
But the outside of the Amphitheater of Verona, was as splendid as the inside,
though at present a Portion of it only remains, as much as between, O, and P.
By this small part however the whole is easily known, especially in so uniform
a building as this. The outside therefore being all of marble, about a hundred
and twenty foot high, consisted of three rows of Pillars and Arches, one over
another, which opened into large walks, and spacious Portico's within, quite
round the Building; and above these three rows of Arches, there was a handsome
wall with Windows over every Arch, and Pilasters over every Pillar beneath;
each row consisted of seventy two Arches, and seventy two Pillars of a great
height; the upper row moreover is said to have been adorned with excellent
Statues. But the outside of the Amphitheater at Nismes, being the most entire
of any now standing, I have also inserted a Cut of it, that nothing might be
wanting to the clear understanding of the manner of these buildings: and as
that at Verona, has three rows of Pillars, and a wall above them, this at
Nismes has only two rows of Pillars on the outside, and the seats withinside
reach up to the top of it, and it has no Galleries above. To supply this
Amphitheater at Nismes with water sufficient to represent naval fights therein,
the great Pont du Guard was built, which supports an Aquaeduct passing from one
Mountain to another, a Cut whereof is also inserted, it being one of the most
magnificent Roman Antiquities now standing in Europe.

These wonderful Structures were first raised by the Romans, for the more
convenient exhibiting of Shows and Fights to the People; and these Fights were
either between Beasts and Beasts, Men and Beasts, or between Men and Men. The
Fights between Beasts and Beasts are still continued; for the Gentlemen of
Verona take that care of this Ancient Venerable Building, that there is not at
present one Stone wanting of all the Seats within; and when they would see any
strange hunting, fighting, or baiting o. Beasts, they presently enter their own
old Amphitheater, where at this time, three or four and twenty thousand Persons
may sit and see distinctly every Action, and pass away part of the day in
pleasure and delight.

Pont du Guard near Remolin within four Leagues of Nismes in Languedoc a
Remarkable Antiquity one hundred and eighty six foot high from the river A A to
the top of the Aquaeduct. B. B.


But these Sports were pursued with much more eagerness in the time of the old
Romans, who brought strange Beasts from all Parts of the known World to fight
before them, in these public places; in consideration whereof, upon the
successful Achievements of Sylla in Africa. the People of Rome were not so
much pleased with his making their inveterate Enemy King Jugurtha his Prisoner,
as they were infinitely delighted with the thoughts of the great familiarity,
that Sylla had with Bocchus, King of Gaetulia, whereby they hoped, that he
might obtain most strange unheard of African Monsters of Beasts, to be shown in
their Amphitheaters; and Pompey the Great most wonderfully gratified the
inclinations of his fellow Citizens, when he first brought a great Rhinoceros
to Rome; After him Augustus Caesar brought another, and following Emperors the
like. This Beast, as it is reported, performed strange things there; and when
irritated, would with his great strong Horn, presently throw up all other
combatant Beasts to the Skies, and a Bull could not toss up a Ball Higher than
he would toss up Bulls and Bears together.

Martial.
Namque gravem gemino cornu sic extulit Ursam,
Jactat ut impositas Taurus in astra pilas.
And again;

O quam terribiles exarfit pronus in iras!
Quantus erat Cornu, cut pila Taurus erat!
The Fights between Men and Beasts were more unequal for the most part
performed by Slaves, Captives, and Condemned Persons, yet some of good quality
have also polluted themselves with these Brutish Sports, and acquired the true
title of Bestiarij. That which happened to Androdus a Dacian, upon this
occasion is well known now, but was surprising at first, who standing ready in
the Arena, and having a Lion let out upon him, received no hurt; for the Lion
came gently to him, caressed and fawned upon him, and he likewise stroaked, and
made much of the Lion; and after the loud shouts of the People, being asked how
this came to pass, he let them know, That being with his Master in Africa, to
get rid of his hard service, he had fled into a Cave, whither this Lion came
with a Splinter in his Foot, and held up his wounded Paw to him to cure; which
having performed and freed his Foot from the splinter and healed it, the Lion
kept him and provided meat for him three years, and when he came away the Lion
followed him so far, that he was also taken and brought to Rome, and that by
the further cruelty of his old Master he was now condemned to the Beasts, where
they found him; whereupon his liberty was granted him, and the Lion given him
for his pains, with which he afterward got his living, every one being
desirous to see the Lion that was the man's Host, and the man that was the Lions
Surgeon.

The Fights between Men and Men, were of diverse kinds, for they sometimes
fought on Horseback, as the Andabatae, sometimes in Chariots, as the
Essedarij, and sometimes in Ships and Vessels, and this either in the
Amphitheaters, (the Arena being filled with water) or in a Building made on
purpose, called a Naumachia; or in artificial Ponds, and cuts out of Rivers;
and the Emperor Claudius exhibited a Naval Fight upon the Fucine Lake, the Lago
di Celano, or lacus Fucinus, a days Journey from Rome, where at his first
appearance both Fleets saluted him with an Ave, Caesar, morituri te salutant.

But the greatest number of their Fights was performed by Gladiators Retiarius.
on foot, of which there were also diverse forts; as first, the Retiarius, who
was armed with a Trident in one hand, and held a Net in the other, with which
he entangled, and caught his Enemy; or otherwise, if he missed of his foe, he
then fled swistly away; Tota fugit agnoscendus arena.
Through all the Amphitheater he flies
Like lightning through the Azure skies.


Until such time as he could gather up his Net again and prepare for another
encounter. The whole habit and way of fight is exactly described by Juvnal, in
the eighth Satyr, where he reprehends a noble Roman, one of the great Family of
the Gracchi, for taking upon himself this kind of gladiatura. It was thought to
be brought in fashion first, in imitation of Pittacus, one of the wise Men of
Greece, who being challenged by Phryno, came into the field like a fisherman,
and involving his Enemy in his Net, slew him with his Trident and Dagger; but
some were delighted to see these Gladiators slain, for being that they fought
without Armor, only in a short coat and barefaced, they might the better take
notice of the last Motions of their Limbs, and the Alterations of their color,
Famous Statues of old still preserved in Rome.
lineaments and features in their dying agonies: And I have seen the Statue of
a dying Gladiator in Ludovisio's Gardens at Rome, so well represented, and so
exquisitely carved that it may compare with the Figures of the most famous
Statuaries in any age; since it is thought meet to be numbered in the first rank
with the works of Phydias, and Praxiteles, and is not less esteemed than the
wonderful Statue of Pyramus in the same gardens, nor Farnese's Hercules made by
Glycon the famous Greek, nor the old Egyptian Term; Nay the beautiful statues
of Antinous, and Apollo Pythian, in Belvedere, the garden to the Vatican, are
not at this day more to be admired. Nor the rare Figure of Venus her self in
Medici's Palace; nay furthermore the Grecian Statue of Peace, and the Greek
Shepherdess that holds up her garments, to show her due proportions, are no
ways ashamed to be ranked with him, who by good Artists is held in the same
esteem with Farnese's bull, and the never to be outdone Laocoon and his Sons,
the joint work of the rare ancient Masters, Agesander, Polydore, and
Athenodorus. This whole order of the Retiarij was devoted to Neptune, and
generally fought against a party, who were followers of Vulcan, fire and water
not being like to agree. These were called Secutore.

Ju^enal.
Cum Graccho jussus pugnare Secutor.
Secutor.
The Secutor was guarded with a Shield, which he carried high, to hinder his
head from being catched in the Net, and with a Spear or long Sword.

Prud.
Altius impresso dum palpitat ense Secutor.
These fought, and followed after the Retiarii, and other Gladiators, with
fierceness and courage, and were favored by diverse Emperors, who liked this
way of fighting; and when five Retiarij had yielded to five Secutores, and
thrown down their weapons, the Emperor Caligula, commanded the Secutores to
kill them; which they did to the last man, who becoming desperate took up his
fork again, and slew all the five conquering secutores, and this loss of his
dear friends was bemoaned by the Emperor in a public Edict, with the exclusion
of those who endured to see it, from being present, for the future at any
sacred rite. But the Emperor Commodus not only encouraged these Gladiators, but
took their parts in his own person also, and fought along with them in the
Arena; and when the flattering Romans cried him up for a Hercules, a Mars, and
shouted out that he fought like a God of war, he thought that they mocked and
laughed at him, and immediately called to his marine Legion, that were tending
the Ropes and Sail cloths, come down, and kill the Spectators.

Another order of Gladiators imitated the Thracians in their fights, and
bearing a small Parmula, or little plain Thracian shield, but trusting chiefly
to their broad strong Swords with their points turning upward, like the present
Turkish, or Persian Cimitars. They were called Threces, Threces.
or Thraces, and were terrible slashing* cutting Swords-players, and derived
this custom, manner, and occasion of fight, from the old Thracians; even before
the time of Herodotus, when they fought with the same weapons for prizes and
rewards at the suneral, and tombs of their great men in Thrace; and these
Fencers fought either against one another or against other Gladiators.

Myrmillones.
A Myrmillo was a notable Sword-player and fought after the Gallick way,
dopping, and squatting low and frisking about, and covering himself with his
great oval shield, and had his head armed with a strong Helmet, upon the Crest
of which was the Figure of a Fish; and when his Enemy lay bare, or gave any
occasion of a thrust, he would leap up briskly of a sudden, and run him through
and through with his sharp pointed Sword. Who could contrast with such a
cunning, strong, and active combatant?

Quis Myrmilloni componitur aequimanus? Thrax.
The Thracian fighter would often engage with him, and the Retiarius many a
time, and would come up to him with his Net in his hand, singing this; Non te
peto, piscem peto,
Quid me fugis, Galle?


Another sort of Gladiators were named Samnites, whose armor is described by
Livy. Their shields were inlayed, engraven, and imbossed with Silver, and with
Gold: One end of their shield, with which they guarded their breast, was flat,
broad, straight, and even; the other end next their shoulder, was narrower,
that it might be turned and moved with more ease; besides which, they had a
long strong Sword, a Breast Plate, a Helmet with Feathers upon the Crest, and a
Boot upon their left leg. These Gladiators were in great request in Campania,
from whence the Romans learned many of their Amphitheatrical sports, and
exercises; and they fought against the Pinnirapi, and the Provocatores.

Dimachari.
Besides these, there were others called Dimachaeri who fought with Laquearij.
two Swords, and others named Laquearii, these were dangerous fellows that
fought with Sword and Halter, and had two ways with them to entangle, and
destroy their Enemies.

Meridiani.
The Meridiani were a bold desperate Crew, who came rushing into the
Amphitheater at Noon, when the Gladiators had concluded, and the Spectators
were dismissed, and with their drawn Swords ran at one another without Order,
Art, or Armor, and scorning to make use of Head-pleces, Shields, and such like
Hindrances and Delays of Death, butchered one another presently.

But that which is still more strange, the tender Female Sex was not exampted
from these sharp, rude exercises.

Statius.
Hos inter fremitus novosque lusus
Stat Sexus rudis insciusque ferri,
Et pugnas capit improbus viriles.
They picked out the most beautiful, comely, lovely young Women that could be
found, and put them to School to a Lanista, or Master of Defense, to be
instructed in the Art of Fighting; where a tender young Gentlewoman that had
scarce strength enough to exercise at a carving School, must be fencing every
Morning with a great Fellow, and be set such rude Lessons as these:

None of your shifting Gallick play,
Great Caesar likes the Samnite way.
Come close, strike home, and you will one day
Bear your Foes life and Fame away.
And if you miss of Victory,
In graceful postures learn to dye.
For those who were put to a Lanista in the most severe way, were bound to be
burnt, whipped, and fall by the Sword.

Igne uri, virgis caedi, ferroque necari.
Now to see one of these fine young Women fight, well dressed, with her golden
Shield, and her fair Plume of Feathers, the Emperor himself could not forbear
commending, and crying out sometimes, Well played fair Lady; or as Xerxes said
when he beheld from a high Hill ^^r^do^s.
the Sea Fight at Salamis, and Artemisia had sunk one of his own Ships instead
of one of the Enemies, well fought Queen Artemisia, my Women fight like Men,
and my Men like Women. However we have very good Authority to assure us that
the Women fought stoutly.

To see o^e of those spruce Dames lay it on
Like any right bred raging Amazon.
You Would think your self near to fierce Thermodon.
Stat.
Credas ad Tanaim ferumque Phasim
Thermoden^iacas calere turbas.
And that they generally fought after the manner of the Samnites we may learn
from Juvenal, where he takes notice, what a fine Credit it would be for a man
to cry out at a public Sale of his Wives Goods; who gives most for my Wives
Boots? who bids Money for her Corselet, Helmet, Gauntlets?

Quale decus, rerum si conjugis auctio fiat,
Baltheus, and Manicae, and Cristae, Crurisque sinistri
Dimidium tegmen?
But Domitian the Emperor went still beyond this, when he set his Gladiators
together in the night, and made his Dwarfs fight, those little Pygmaean
Creatures: But we need say no more of them, for it may be thought by some that
Whether they slew, or whether they were slain
They Would both make but one Morsel for a Crane.


And indeed it is high time to leave this omnium Daemonum templum, as
Tertullian calls it altogether, and pass forward to more pleasing objects.
Parting therefore from Verona in the Morning, we traveled through a delightful
plain Country 24 Miles, and came early in the Afternoon to Mantua.

Mantua*
Mantua is pleasantly seated in a Lake like to the Description of the situation
of the great City Mexico. This Lake of about five Miles long, is made by the
opening of the River Mincius, or Mentzo, a delightful stream, which runs
slowly, spreads it self wide, and bears its name high amongst the noted Floods
of this Region.

Frondentibus humida ripis
Colla levant pulcher Ticinus, and Addua visa
Caerulus, and velox Athesis, tardusque meatu Mincius*

Mincius.
And again; Volucres quas excipit amne quieto
Mincius.


This River runs into the Po, and rises out of the Lacus Benacus, and is so
full of Reeds in many places, especially near Mantua, that I cannot omit
Virgil's proper elegant way of mentioning his own Country Rivers.

Hinc quoque quingentos in se Mezentius armat,
Quos patre Benaco velatus arundine glauca
Mincius infesta ducebat in aequora pinu.
The entrances into Mantua over the lake are made good by strong Causeys, of
five or six hundred paces long, having Draw-bridges at each end; and that over
which we passed, called Ponte di St. Giorgio, has a covered Bridge for a great
space together, and a Tower in the middle. The Ponte de' Molini has twelve
Mills in the Arches, called the twelve Apostles, which afford the Duke a
considerable Revenue. The Streets are large, strait, and clean. Here are eight
Gates, eighteen Parishes, and forty Monasteries. The Domo or Cathedral is built
after the design of Giulio Romano, the Roof of which is painted with Azure and
Gold; in this Church they preserve the Body of St. Anselm, Bishop of Luca; in
the Church of St. Andrew, is the Body of St. Longinus the Martyr, together with
some drops of the Blood of our Savior, which are said to be brought hither by
that holy man. The Duke's Palace is stately and magnificent, and was the best
furnished of any in Italy, till the Imperial Army plundered it, in the time of
the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, in the year 1630. There are three Suburbs
which appear like to so many distinct little Towns, Porto Forteze, Borgo di St.
Giorgio, and Il Te. The Duke has also diverse Country Houses, as that of
Marmirola, in the way to Verona, which is nobly furnished, has Royal
Apartments, good Gardens, Fountains, and Waterworks. La Favorita is upon the
side of the Lake, and has about a hundred Rooms in it. La Virgiliana is
another pleasant Country House with a Farm adjoining to it, called thus, by
reason that it is near to the Village of Petola, formerly called Andes where
Virgil was born.

Mantua Musarum domus, atque ad sidera cantu
Andino evectus.
Mantua the Muses dwelling all along,
But raised up to the Stars by the Andine song.
The Palazzo del Te, at no great distance from one of the gates of the City, is
well worth the seeing, where the hall is painted with the history of the Giants
storming of heaven, and so artificially roofed, and vaulted, that it makes a
double whispering place, where, at the opposite corners of the room, every
little sight and whispering is distinctly heard, and in no other place; and he
that stands between hears nothing of it. I had formerly been in whispering
places at Padoa, Montpellier, and elsewhere; but those were single ones, made
by the contrivance of the roof, upon this rule, That the Angle of Incidence, is
always equal to the Angle of Reflection, and the whole top of the room so
proportioned as to reflect all to one point, that comes from another opposite
to it; but these far exceed them all, being contrived with a double and cross
Arch, and make a large double cross whispering place.

Threescore years before the Trojan war Eteocles, and Polynices, sons to
Oedipus, King of Thebes, contending for the Sovereignty, that City was invaded,
besieged, and ruined by the Greeks, when Mantho, the great Theban Sorceress,
seeing that her Country was destroyed, fled first into Asia, where she built a
Temple, and dedicated it to Apollo, then sailed into Italy, and went to
Tyberinus, King of the Tuscans, by whom she had a Son named Ocnus, who
afterward passed the Apennines, and the Po, and built this City, and called it
after his Mothers name, according to the Mantuan Poet.

Ille etiam patriis agmen ciet Ocnus ab oris,
Fatidicae Manthus et Tusci silius amnis,
Qui muros matrisque dedit, tibi Mantua nomen.
The Galli Cenomani, afterward beat out the Tuscans, and made Reto fly into
that part of the mountains since called the Rhetian Alps. The Romans overthrew
the Gauls, and Mantua followed the various Fortune of the Western Empire till
the Emperor Otho, the second, gave it to Tedaldo, Count of Canossa, Boniface
succeeded, and Beatrix his Countess; then the Countess, Mathildis, who made
great wars in Italy, sided with the Pope against the Emperor, and left large
possessions, and revenues to the Church. The Family of the Bonacolsi; in
process of time, obtained the Lordship of this City, Passavino the last of that
stock was slain in the market place by the people in the year 1328 under the
command of Lodovico di Gonzaga, the first Lord of Mantua of this Family that
reigns at present. Frederick, the second of this line, was made Duke of Mantua,
by Charles the fifth, and Vincent the first was afterward created Duke of
Montferrat. The present Duke is Carolus Ferdinandus Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua,
and Montferrat, and of Niveronis, and Retelois in France, perpetual Prince and
Vicar of the holy Empire, Marquess of Gonzaga, Viadana, Gazolo, and Dozolo,
Count of Rodiga, Lord of Luzara, and chief of the order of the Knights of the
Blood of Christ, which order was instituted in the year 1608, by Vincent, Duke
of Mantua, who had been three times in Hungary, Austria, and Croatia, in the
wars against the Turks.

Eridanus.
From Mantua we traveled to the great River Eridanus, Padus, or the Po, which
arises from mount Viso, or Mons Vesulus, one of the highest mountains of the
Alps toward France, and rolling down in diverse branches at first, without any
fixed channel unites at the foot of the mountain, and falls under ground, and
after a mile or two appears again, and running with a swift course through
Lombardy, after it has received thirty Rivers more which fall from the Alps
and Apennine, discharges it self by diverse mouths into the Adriatic sea, and
this being by far the greatest River in Italy, it is mightily magnified by the
Latin Poets who would have it no less than the Nile, and the Danube, and
mention it by the name of the King of Rivers, and the greatest in the world.
And it must be confessed, that it is a noble flood, and that it is the only
River that has a place in Heaven: or that has the glory to be made a
constellation, and placed in the Chambers of the South, near to the stormy,
tempestuous Orion; andsince that it is adorned with thirty eight stars, which
shine visibly in the Firmament, to be called Starry and Celestial, are but its
due Terms of honor: but sure there are many Rivers upon earth in Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America that far exceed it.

The Po being very swift we passed it by boat, not without some peculiar
Contrivances, and Engines, and the kind assistance the sisters of Phaeton, who
mourn here for the dismal fall of their Brother, when Jupiter struck him down
from Heaven into the Po.

Excipit Eridanus fumantiaque abluit ora.
Ediranus did his Limbs embrace
And washed his smoking Sunburned face.
And having stood so long by thebanks of this River, they may be though to be
more conversant with its Course and Passages. They tie ropes in this Country to
the tops of high Poplars, one end on one side of the River, and the other on
the other, or build high Beacons, or Posts like those made use of in the
Strapado; on each side of the River: and upon a line fixed to them, they put a
running Pully, to which they fix another long rope, and to the further end of
this rope the boat is tied, and by steering the head of the boat obliquely
cross the River, the force of the Stream makes the pully run from one side to
another; by which means we passed it without labor or trouble.

Ovid.
Sine Remig is ictu
Concava Trajecto Cymba rudente vehit.
A rope drawn through a Pully soon conveyed
Us cross the Po, without the Rowers aid:
And a small boat, without broad sayls and oars,
Did gently waft us to the neighboring shores.
I had formerly passed the Po, as high as Turin, and at another time went by
boat through a cut made out of the Po into the Athesis, and once I traveled
for some space together on horseback at the bottom of a branch of this River,
where the banks being broken down it had forsaken its channel.

Guastala.
The next town we came to was Guastala, belonging to a Sovereign Prince, the
Duke of Guastala; a handsome small Town at present, but formerly larger, and
more considerable when there were two General Councils held here, one under
Pope Urban the second, and another under Pope Pascal the second.

Brescello.
From Guastala we traveled by Gualtea, to Brescello or Brixellum, a compact
close strong Town, fortified after the modern way, upon the side of the Po: An
old Roman place of habitation, where the Emperor Otho staid in his journey
against Vitellius, when after the conflict at Labiuta, then called Bebriacum,
he took a resolution of dispatching himself, not out of any despair of
overcoming all difficulties, but rather out of his modesty, as Suetonius
relates it, and unwillingness to seize upon, and continue so great an Empire,
with the hazard of so many brave men's lives that served him, and therefore
early in the morning after a draught of cold water he stabbed himself with a
dagger under the left Pap, in the ninety fifth day of his reign, and the thirty
eight year of his life. This town has at present about three or four thousand
Inhabitants, and a good Garrison belonging to the Duke of Modena, it being near
to the state of Milan, Mantua, and Parma. The Spanish Troops, under the command
of the Marquess of Carracena, attempted to surprise it in the year, 1655, but
were repulsed by the Duke of Modena's forces. Having passed Briscello we
crossed the River Nicia, now Lenza, and soon came to Parma.

Parma.
The Dukedom of Parma, is guarded by the Apennine mountains and diverse Rivers,
and is a very fruitful Country, affording plenty of excellent wines, and some
good Muscatelli, fruits of various sorts, rich pastures plenty of Cattle, the
best Cheese in Italy, great store of Chestnuts, and Tartufali Truffes, Tubera
terrae, Roots without Stems, or Plants growing from them, which they hunt after
with a pig which smells them out, and discovers where they are; these are a
great dish in Italy, and though they seem to have no great nourishment in them
are esteemed to be provocative. And besides these, this Country affords some
mines of Copper and Silver, and very fine Wool.

Velleribus primis Apulia, Parma secundis
Nobilis.
The City of Parma is very ancient, inhabited long since by the Tuscans, then
by the Boii, next by the Romans; a Colony being sent hither from Rome about a
hundred and eighty two years before the coming of our Savior; and another in
the time of Augustus Caesar. But upon the declining of the Roman Empire it ran
through diverse fortunes, served sometimes Venice, and sometimes Milan, till it
was conquered by Pope Julius, the second, and given by Paul the third to his
Son Petro Luigi Farnese, about a hundred and thirty five years since, in whose
Family it still continues.

It is a Delightful, Airy, well seated City, the Houses being low, the Streets
broad, and the River Parma running between the City and the Suburbs, both of
which are well fortified with good Bastions and a broad Ditch. It has three
handsome bridges over the River. The Duke's Palace is splendid, his Coaches
extremely rich, his Gardens worth the seeing with the Grotto's, Fountains,
Waterworks, and Bows of Orange Trees. The lodgings are furnished with
excellent pictures, vessels of Porphyry, A gath, and Jaspis.

The Cathedral is fair and stately; In the Capucines Church is the tomb of
Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, one of the greatest commanders of his time,
and of his Duchess Maria of Portugal. The Church of St. John is large, and
beautiful, and adorned with the paintings of those great Masters, Corregio, and
Parmegiano, and the Benedictin Convent adjoining is one of the largest and
fairest of the order. This City was formerly besieged for two years together by
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who in hopes to make himself Master of it
built another Town near to it called Victoria, but those of Parma behaved
themselves so stoutly, that they freed themselves, and ruined his new Town of
Victory.

Fornova.
From Parma we went to Fornovo ten miles from thence, seated upon the swift
River Taro, and rendered remarkable by the battle gained here by Charles the
eight, King of France, against the confederate Princes of Italy in the year
1494 in hisre turn from the conquest of Naples. Taro.
The River Taro is a remarkable River, which runs and plays about the plains,
before it falls into the Po, and is very swift, although it be not straight,
but notably winding and turning. At first sight I conjectured that it would
prove a troublesome River, when it was shut up between the Hills: and so we
found it; for as soon as we had left the open spacious plain Country in which
we had traveled with pleasure from Padoa hither, and had got in between the
spurs of the Apennine, and entered the Val di Taro, the valley in which this
River runs, we were forced to travel many times inconveniently upon the sides
of the hills, on the right hand, and on the left; and furthermore to cross the
River it self above forty times, and in one passage, one Gentleman's Mule fell
down with him in the middle of the River; but after we came past Borgo di Valle
the River was less, and we turned more to the right hand, and climbed up the
Apennine Mountains.

Borgo di Valle.
Borgo, or Borgo di Valle is a walled Town at the upper end of this valley,
upon the side of the hills, where we show our bills of health, and where the
Duke of Parma keeps a Garrison. The Banditi appearing in these parts the day
before, the Governor sent a guard of Musketeers with us to convoy us with
safety over the hills into the State of Genoa.

The Apennine Mountains.
The Apennine is a row of Mountains of many hundred miles long, beginning at
the Alps, continued from one end of Italy to the other, and ending by Reggio,
or Rhegium upon the Sicilian Sea, and in some places are more than a hundred
miles broad, and by this means take up the greatest part of Italy, and render
it a Mountainous Country, and though there be many valleys between, yet the
hills do really reach* and extend themselves from the Tyrrhene to the
Adriatic, from the lower to the upper sea, conformable to the description of
them by Lucan.

Hinc Tyrrhena vado frangentes aequora Pisae,
Illinc Dalmaticis obnoxia fluclibus Ancon.
And this makes the traveling in Italy to be generally on Horseback, or upon
Mules; whereas in France one may travel five hundred miles together in Coaches,
and in Germany all over the Country; and if it were not for Campania foelix,
and the great continued plain Country between the Alps and Apennine, Italy
could never make good the high Character it has.

Ovid mentions the Airy Alps, and cloudy Apennine, and most Mountains have
clouds about them, and in the evening the Clouds, floating in the Air after Sun
set slip away toward the next high hills, and take up their rest in the hollow
spaces of the Mountains, and when the Sun rises next day, and warms the Air,
the clouds dislodge again, rise up, and wander through the Skies; but the
Apennines are more cloudy generally than other hills, whether for having the
Seas on both sides of them, or for other reasons, I leave to the more accurate
searchers into nature to judge, and we have traveled for many days together in
the Countries of the Apennine Mountains with the Clouds continually about us,
either a little over us, under us, or passing through them, not without
admirable variety of prospect and from the top of a Mountain to see a valley
with Houses, and Towns in it, and then the clouds creeping over the next hill
to cover the whole valley between them, and make it look like a lake, and the
top of the clouds gently waving, and to describe the Suns, rising, and coming
to shine upon the upper parts of them, and to beauti^ie, and gild them all, is
beyond the expression of words.

Virgil naming the Apennines, ranks them with Mount Erix in Sicicy, and Mount
Athos in Greece.

Great as Mount Athos, or high Erix crowned
With those green Oaks, whose shaking boughs resound,
Or Father Apennine, who loves to rise
And list his Snowy head up to the Skies.
And indeed many of the Peaks of the Apennines are very high, and some of them
covered with snow; and others are rocky, but in general they are earthy, muddy,
or full of clay; whereby they stain and tincture the Tiber and many other
Rivers which flow through them, and give an umber, brown, or dirty yellow
color to those streams, which being also for the most part very swift, the
Apennine Rivers hereby lose much of their grace and beauty, and become also
less serviceable; and to speak the truth, not navigable with any pleasure: And
this tincture which is communicated to them is of so deep a Dye in many places,
that it is not easily altered or diluted, and I have seen diverse Rivers run
down from the Apennine with that force into the Adriatic, that the stream or
color of them is perfectly distinguished a mile or two into the Sea, as if the
Gulf of Venice were painted in those places with a straight yellow stroke for
two miles together.

We were told that the name of the hill which we here passed over was called,
The Mountain of the Holy Cross, but the Mountain of the Cross, La montagne de
la croix, much spoken of in the South part of France is one of the great Hills
in the maritime Alps, in one of the passages from Provence into Italy. The
highest Mountain in the Apennine that I passed over, between Rome, and Loretto,
was Mount Soma in Vmbra; and the passage which pleased me most, was in the road
from Turin, between Otagio and Genoa; where after some difficulty having got up
to the top of the Mountains, we saw Genoa, and the beautiful suburbs of St.
Pietro di Arena under us at nine miles distance, and a vast tract of Sea before
us, the Eastern Coast on the left hand, and the Western on the right, and
descended by a broad way, and by large Windings and Turnings, upon the bare
marble rock, meeting great numbers of Mules, and Mulets tossing up their Nets
about their noses, which all together afforded an extraordinary prospect. But
this Mountain of the Holy Cross is not rocky but all green, and it being the
latter end of April we descended with ease and pleasure, and a good part of the
way upon the grass, till we came to the Seaside in the Evening, to Sestri or
Sestro called by Daute in his Purgatory, Sisteri, formerly Segesta, at present
Sestri di Levante, to distinguish it from Sestri di ponente, between Genoa and
Savona: for the whole Coast of Genoa being divided into the East and the West,
that which lies between Genoa and Legorn is called La Riviera di Levante, and
that between Genoa, and Provence, La Riviera di Ponente.

We hired a Felluca, at Sestri, and with the help of our Sail and Oars, had a
quick passage, Crossing first Porto Fin, and then keeping all along within half
a mile of the Shore, we entered the noted Port of Genoa, between the new Mole,
on the right hand, and the old Mole, and Fanale or watch tower on the left, and
went on shore not far from the foot of the new Mole.

THE TABLE.
A.
ADlershelme 172 Adom 24 Aken or Aix la Chapelle 181 Al^dorff 126 Amphitheater
at Nismes 209 Amphitheater at Verona 206 Amsterdam 95 Amurah the first slain 33
Andernach 116 Antenor's Tomb 196 St. Antonio's Church 196 Antwerp 108 Apennine
mountains 220 Arnols 150 Athesis 200 Attila King of the Hunnes 10 Augustus
Caesar's Jewel 146
B.
BAccharach 117 Baden in Austria 73 Banca 56 Basin of Copper 182 Baths 21 22
184 Belgrade 27 Bing 118 Bl^yberg 87 Bonna 115 Boinitz 70 Bourset 184 Bosse 103
Brass, how made 183 Breda 104 Brentella 86 Bridge of Esseck 25 Bridge of Vienna
160 Brimstone Mine 170 Brimstone, how made up 187 Bruges 192 Brussels 109 Buda
2 Buffalo's 41 Bulgarian habit* 29
C.
CAdmia, or Calmey 184 Camaldulenses 151 Carolus Clusius 94 Carraresi 197 Casa
Nova, a Baron 44 A Chapel in Austria built by King Edward the first 75 Charles
the great 1^^ Chermes-berry 42 Chremnitz 62 Cinnabar 88 Circumcision 100
Clagenfurt or Claudia 78 Clesch 57 Clissura a shining mountain 30 Coblentz 116
Colen 113 Copper Mines 67 Corneuburg 160 Cossova 33 Cottenberg in Bohemia 162
Crainburg 79 Crewaldt 88 Crown of Hungary 9 Curasse, a brook 24 Czaslaw 162
D.
DAnubius 2 Darmstadt 120 Delta, an Hungarian Mace 13 Delft 92 Despoina of
Servia 28 Dotis 19 Dort 106 Dresden 166 Dunkirck 193
E.
EDward the first King of England his Chapel in Austria 75 Eisenbach 61 Esseck
25 Eridanus 217 Execution by a maiden 155
F.
FIlegrane 147 Fishes of the Danube 6 Flusing 107 Franckfort 119 Freiberg 169
Freistadt 56
G.
GErmany 179 Geronster 186 Gertruydenberg 105 Ghent 191 St Giustina 198
Glass-hitten 60 Gluckstadt 177 Gold Mines 62 Gorchom 103 Gorritia 83 Gran 20
Grand Seignior 37 Granus an old Roman 181 Graveling 193 St Guer 117 Gulick 180
Gutta 55 Guttenberg 162
H.
HAbit of an Hungarian 12 Haerlem 94 Haemus mons 31 Hair of the head cut
variously by diverse nations 39 Hamburg 179 Heemskerck 97 Heidelberg 120
Heilige-landt 177 Herrn grundt 67 Hippocrates 41 The hole Cut through Mount
Leubel 79 Hunting house at Dresden 168 John Husse 164
I.
IDria 81 St. Jerome 88 Jerome of Prague 164 Jews 157 Iglau 161 Iron turned
into Copper 69 Itzing 150 Juliers 180
K.
KAlenberg 151 Kara Mustapha Bassa 158 Kermes 42 Knives swallowed and cut out
again 149 Komora 17 Kunst kammer at Dresden 166
L.
LAbach, or Lubiana 79 Lac Lunae 57 St Lambert 188 Lapis Calaminaris 184
Larissa 34 Laxamburg 150 Lazius his Epitaph 136 Lead Mines 87 Leipsick 171
Leopoldus the Emperor 140 Leopolstadt 56 Lesly 143 Leyden 93 Leubel a great
Mountain 79 Library at Vienna. 144 Libussa a Bohemian Princess 163 Liege 187
Limburg 185 Lintz 128 Lisonzo 83 Lovain 190 Ludovicus King of Hungary's death
25 Luther's Chamber 174
M.
MAes 91 Maestreicht 111 Magdeburg 173 Mala insana 42 Mand^ville 188 Manheim
122 Mannersdorff 151 Mantua 215 Manuscripts 145 Maroz 20 Martinsberg 19
Matthias Dollinger 62 Medals of Gold 159 Mentz 118 Mergerheim 123 Middleburg
106 Mincius 215 Montecuculi 143 Morava or Moschius 29 Mouse-Tower 117
N.
NAuportas 80 Neccar 120 Newgebau 150 Newhausel 18 Newport 192 Newstadt in
Austria 75 Newsidler See 151 Nitria 18 Nurnberg 124
O.
OLympus 35 Ostend 192 Ovid's Epitaph 9
P.
PAdoa 195 Padus or Po 217 Palma nova 84 Parma 219 Passaw, 120 Peneus 36
Petronel 14 Pfalts Castle 117 Philippus the Emperors Coin 11 Pohunt 187 Pont du
guard 210 Ponteba or Ponte Fella 86 Prague 162 Presburg 16 Prestina 33 Pyrlipe
31 Pythagon 35
Q.
A Quarry of Stone 190 Quicksilver Mines 82 Quintin 109
R.
RAb 16 Raspelhuis 97 Ratisbone 126 Relics 183 Rivers 178 Roermonde 111
Roterdam. 92
S.
SAal 77 Saltatio Pyrrhica 10 Salt-mines 71 Samandria 28 Saviniere 186 Saxonies
Electors rarities. 167 Scaldis or Scheld 108 Scaliger, Joseph 94 Schadt Wien 75
Schella 56 Schemnitz 57 Schinta 56 Sclavonian Language 8 Scopia 32 Seen or Sone
19 Sestri 221 Simerin a great mountain 75 Silver-mines 57 169 Skurman* Anna
Maria 102 Sleds of diverse shapes 152 Sleeping in the night, the manner in
diverse Countries 156 Snow 87 Souches 143 Spa 186 Spire 122 Stable house at
Dresden 167 Stadt 177 St Stephen's Church at Vienna 138 Stone Quarry 190
Straubing 127 Sultan Mahomet Han 37 Sultana 38
T.
TAiamento or Tiliaventum 86 Tengnagels tomb 135 Ter-Vere 106 Teutonick order
123 Thessalia 40 Tiberius's Triumphal Arch 15 Tilts and Tournaments 175 Tirnaw
71 Tongres 109 Tonnelet 187 Topolchan 57 Tornovo 42 Treasure of the Emperor 147
Trenschin 70 Treviso 86 Trinity mine 57 Tun at Heidelberg 122 Turkish Tombs 50
V.
VAcia or Waitzen 20 St Veit in Carinthia 76 Verona 200 Viaven 103 Vicegrade 20
Vicenza 199 Vienna 121 Villaco or Villach 87 Vitriol mine 65 Vlassing 107
Vomitoria 209 Vtrecht 101 Vnicorn's horns 101
W.
WAllensteyn's Palace. 164 Windschacht-mine 58 Wolfgangus Lazius 136
Z.
ZEmbla 99 Zigeth 25 The Ziment, new and old 68 Zirchnitz lake 80 Zisca 161
Znaim 161 Zoldfeldt with its antiquities 77
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for BENJAMIN TOOK at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
FOLIO.
HErodoti Halicarnassaei Historiarum Libri 9. Gr. Lat.

Francisci Suarez Tractatus de Legibus, ac Deo Legislatore.

The Works of the most Reverend Father in God, John Bramhall D. D. late Lord
Archbishop of Armagh, Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland. With his Life.

Walsh's History of the Irish Remonstrance.

A Collection of all the Statutes now in force in the Kingdom of Ireland.

Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England.

Bishop Sanderson's Sermons.

Sir Hum, Winch's Book of Entries.

Skinneri Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae.

M. T. Ciceronis Opera omnia, cum december Indicibus. 2. Vol.

Heylyn's, Cosmography, in 4. Books.

Matthew. Paris Historia Angliae.

Dr. Nalson's Impartial Collections from the beginning of the late Rebellion to
the murder of K. Charles the I. 2. Vol.

Heraclitus Ridens, or a Dialogue between jest and Earnest concerning the
times, complete or any of them single.

QUARTO.
SEparation of Churches from Episcopal Government, as practiced by the present
Nonconformists, Schismatical* By Henry Dodwel M. A.

Dumoulin's Vindication of the Protestant Religion.

Phocena, or the Anatomy of a Porpess dissected at Gresham-College.

The True Widow, a Comedy. By Tho. Shadwel.

The Beauty of Unity, in a Sermon preached at Preston by Rich. Wroe B. D.
Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of Chester.

The Vanity of the Dissenters Plea for then Separation. A Sermon preached
before the King at Windsor. By Rob. ^^hfeighton D. D.

Of Perjury, a Sormon preached at the Allizes at Chester. By John Allen M. A.
Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of
Chester.

A Sermon preached before the Hon. House of Commons, Nov. 5. 1680. By Henry
Dove D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor of the City of London on the Feast of
St. Michael. By Henry Dove D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

A Sermon preached before the King at White Hall, Jan. 25. 168^ being the feast
of St. Paul's Conversion. By Henry Dove D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to his
Majesty. Published by his late Majesty's special command.

The present miseries and mischiefs of sin, discoursed in a Sermon before the
Lord Mayor of London. By Robbert Wensely, Vicar of Chestlunt.

A discourse concerning the Devotions of the Church of Rome, especially as
compared with those of the Church of England.

Oration Anniversaria habita in Theatro Coll. Med. Land. a Georgio Rogers,
ejusdem Collegi Socio.

A Collection of Cases and other Discourses lately written to recover
Dissenters to the Communion of the Church of England. By some Divines of the
City of London. In two Volumes.

Causae Veteris Epitaphium. Accedit Caussa Vetus conclamata.

Concavum Cappo-cloacorum, or a view in little of the great Wit and Honesty
contained under a brace of Caps.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Sir Roger Bradshaigh Knight and Baronet.
By Richard Wroe B. D.

A Sermon preached before the King at Winchester, Sept. 9. 1683. By Francis
Turner D. D. Dean of Windsor.

A Sermon preached before Sir Henry Tulse Lord Mayor of the City of London, and
the Court of Aldermen, at St. Bridgets, on Easter Monday 1684. By Francis Lord
Bishop of Rochester and Almoner to his Majesty.

A Sermon preached before the King at Whitehall, Nov. 5. 1684. By Francis Lord
Bishop of Ely and Almoner to his Majesty.

The New Testament in the Irish Tongue and Character.

The Works of the Reverend and Learned Mr. John Gregory M. A. of Christ's Church
in Oxon. In two parts.

A Brief Account of Ancient Chur ch Government, with a Reflection on several
modern writers of the Presbyterians.

Ogygia seu rerum Hibernicarum Chronologia: ex pervetustis monumemis fideliter
inter se collatis eruta, at que exsacris ac prophanis Literis prim arum orbis
gentium tam Genealogicis quam chronologicis susslaminata praesidijs, etc. cum
Catalogo Regum in Britannia Scotorum. Authore Roderico O Flaterly Armigero.

A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith.

A Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints.

A Discourse concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the
Church of England.

A Discourse concerning Articular Consession, as it is prescribed by the
Council of Trent, and practiced in the Church of Rome.

Octavo and Twelves.
Two Letters of Advice. 1. For the susception of Holy Orders. 2. For Studies
Theological. With a Catalogue of the Christian Writers and Genuin Works that
are extant of the first three Cenurys. 8vo.

Some Considerations of Present Concernment, how far the Romanists may be
trusted by Princes of another persuasion, etc. 8vo.

A Reply to Mr. Baxter's pretended Confutation of a Book entitled; Separation
of Churches from Episcopal Government, etc. proved Schismatical. To which are
added three Letters written to him in the year 1673. 8vo.

A Discourse concerning the One Altar and the One Priesthood, insisted on by
the ancients in their Disputes against Schism. 8vo.

Dissertationes Cyprianicae. 8vo.

Two short Discourses against the Romanists, 12o. These six written by Henry
Dodwell M. A. late Fellow of Trinity College in Dublin.

Navigation and Commerce their Original and Progress. By John Evelyn Esquire.
8vo.

Of Gifts and Offices in the public Workship of God. In three parts.

By Edward Wetenhall, D. D. Lord Bishop of Cork.

The Skeptical Chemist. By Robert Boil Esquire.

The Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity. By Robert Dixon D. D. 8vo.

Ele^chus Antiquitatum Albionensium. Per Dan. Langhornium, S. T. B. 8vo.

Chronicon Regum Anglorum ab Hengisto, usque ad Heptarchiae finem. Per Dan.
Langhornium. 8vo.

Poems and Songs. By Thomas Flatman. 4 th Edition. 8vo.

Poems written on several Occasions. By N. Tate. 2 d Edition. 8vo.

The French Gardinar, out of French. By John Evelyn Esquire. 8vo.

Ataxiae Obstaculum. 8vo.

Gardinerus de Trinitate contra Sandium.

The Catechism of the Church of England, with Marginal Notes. By Edward
Wetenhal D. D. Lord Bishop of Cork.

Phaedri Tabulae ex recensione Chr. Wase.

The Country Persons advice to his Parishoners. 8vo.

Des Cartes's Metaphysical Meditations, with his Life. By William Molyneux
Esquire.

The Life of the Bishop of Munster.

The Aerial Noctilura. 8vo.

New Experiments and Observations made upon the Icy Noctiluca, both by Robert
Boil Esquire. Idem Latin. 12o.

Thealma and Clearchus, a Pastoral History.

Cooper's Grammatica Linguae Anglicanae.

Vulgar Errors in Divinity removed.

A Manual of Examples for School Exercise.

Of the Subject of Church Power in whom it resides. By Simon Lowth, Vicar of
Cosmus-Blene, in the Diocese of Canterbury.

Dictionarium Trilingue secundum Locos Communes, nominibus usitatioribus
Anglicis, Latinis, Graecis. Opera Johannis Raij M. A. et Societatis Regie
Sodalis. 8vo.

Reliquiae Wottonianae. 8vo.

Herbert's Country Person. 12o.

The Form of sound Words. By Robert Wensely, Vicar of Chestlunt, 12o.

An Enquiry into the Ministry of the Presbyterians. 12o.

Aero-Chalinos: or a Register of the Air. By N. Henshaw M. D.

Lingard's Letter of Advice to a young Gentleman. 12o.


