Johannes Brown, Regis Britannici, nec-non Nosocomij sui Chirurgus Ordinarius.
portrait R. White sculp.



The Royal Gift of Healing
R. White sculp.



ADENOCHOIRADELOGIA: OR, An Anatomick-Chirurgical TREATISE OF GLANDULES and
STRUMAES, Or Kings-Evil-Swellings.

Together with the Royal gift of Healing, Or Cure thereof by Contact or
Imposition of Hands, performed for above 640 Years by our Kings of ENGLAND,
Continued with their Admirable Effects, and Miraculous Events; and concluded
with many Wonderful Examples of Cures by their Sacred Touch.

All which are succinctly described By JOHN BROWN, One of His Majesty's
Surgeons in Ordinary, and Surgeon of His Majesty's Hospital.

Si multitudo Sapientum (Consiliariorum) sanitas est Orbis Terrarum, multo
magis Rex Sapiens firmamentum ac Basis Populi est.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb for Sam. Lowndes, over against Exeter-Exchange
in the Strand. 1^84.

TRactatum hunc Anatomico-Chirurgum* de variis Humani Corporis Glandulis, and
de Strumis cum suis Differentiis, Causis, Signis, etc. a Joanne Brown Regio
Chirurgo Ordinario Conscriptum Omnibus Anatomes Studiosis, Medicorum,
Chirurgorumque Tyronibus Utrorumque etiam peritissimis, perutilem esse
Judicamus.

Thomas Coxe Praeses Collegii Regalis Medicorum Land. Carolus Scarburghus Eques
Auratus Medicus Regius Primarius and Collegii Medicorum Land. Anatomes
Professor Publicus. Edm. Dickinson Medicus Regius. Ferdinandus Mendes Regis and
Reginae Med. Tho. Allen. Med. Regius Ordinar. and Censor Collegii. Richardus
Pile Regius Chirurgus Principalis. Jacobus Molins Regius Chirurgus Ordinarius.


Charles R.

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Our Loving Subjects of what Degree,
Condition or Quality soever within this Our Kingdom of England, Greeting.
Whereas We have been given to understand, That Our Trusty and Well-beloved John
Brown Esquire One of Our Surgeons in Ordinary, ha^ not only with great Art, but
at the Expense of much Time and Charge, Compiled a Book, Entitled, The Anatomy
of the Glandules, with a General Treatise of Strumaes, or Kings-Evil-Swellings,
and the Royal Gift of Healing; Which Performance of his is to Our great Liking
and Satisfaction. That We may express Our Approbation thereof, and give him all
due and ample Encouragement for the future, We do hereby signify Our Royal
Pleasure, granting unto the said John Brown the sole Privilege of Printing
the aforesaid Treatise; and strictly charging, prohibiting and forbidding all
Our Subjects to Copy or Import, Buy, Vend, Utter or Distribute any Copies or
Examplars of the same, Reprinted beyond the Seas within the space of Fifteen
Years next ensuing the date hereof, without the Consent and Approbation of the
said John Brown, his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, as they and every of them
so offending will answer the contrary at their utmost Perils: Whereof the
Company of Stationers of Our City of London, the Commissioners and Officers of
Our Customs, and all other Our Officers and Ministers whom it may concern, are
to take particular Notice, that due Obedience be given to this Our Royal
Command.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal, this 28th day of February 1682/3. in the Five
and Thirtieth Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Sunderland.

To the Most Sacred Majesty, CHARLES II. By the Grace and Providence of GOD,
KING Of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
THese Anatomical Exercitations of the Glandules, and Treatise of Strumaes, or
Kings-Evil-Swellings, lie prostrate at Your Majesty's Feet, humbly imploring
Your Majesty's Sacred Touch; Dedicated and Presented with all Obeisance to Your
Royal Hand by

Your Majesty's Most Loyal Subject, and Most Obedient Servant, J. Brown.

To the most Noble and most Illustrious Prince, JAMES, Duke, Marquess and Earl
of Ormond; Earl of Ossory and Brecknock; Viscount Thurley; Lord Baron of Arclo
and Lanthong; Lord of the Regalities and Liberties of the County of Tiperary;
Chancellor of the Universities of Oxon and Dublin; Lord Lieutenant General, and
General Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland; One of the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of His Majesty's Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland; Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber; Lord Steward of
His Majesty's Household; Lord Lieutenant of the County of Somerset; Lord
Lieutenant and Lord High Steward of the City of Bristol; Lord Steward of the
City of Westminster; And Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
May it please your Grace,
AS nothing confirms a Nobleman more Illustrious than Learning, so this makes
his Conjectures little less than Oracles: for that which comes nearest to
sense, does strike our Minds fullest, and leaves the most lasting Impressions
in our Memories; whereas bear Speculations, like thin and subtle Air, do most
easily slide from our Understandings, and leave but imperfect Impressions of
their Appearances.

And since Solomon's Conclusion is very Excellent, That it is a Misery to live,
if it were to live for nothing else, I presume to think it my Duty as well as
my Zeal to satisfy the World with the Phenomenon of Providence, in showing the
Admirable Composure and Contexture both of the Conglomerate and Conglobate
Glandules in Humane Body; wherein are illustrated their proper Uses and Variety
of Secretory and Excretory Offices.

A subject of very great Moment, collected from the Industrious Sweats of the
most Learned Men of our Profession in all the World: The which although it may
be pincht by the straitness and meanness of my Capacity, the Author wanting Art
to recommend it to Your Grace.

Yet herein he presumes the Trial will with ease secure the Design of its
common passage, Your Lordship affording it Your Honorable Passport; Whose Soul
is as Great as Your Name, and Your Illustrious Nature as Generous, as Your
Person is Eminent; You evermore being allowed the Father of our Nobility, the
Venerable Example of our Gentry, and the Universal Prayer of our Commonalty.

And as Your Graces Name does carry the Golden World in it, so Your Puissant
Nature does bear the Rich Pearl of Inestimable Value.

From Your Noble and Princely Loins have issued such Heroic and Highborn
Branches, of whom may be said, Virtutem ex te, fortunam ex aliis habuerint.
Their Early Titles of Fame came into the World with them, and will continue
without scratch or checquer so long as Time shall be allowed being therein.

My Lord,
Although I have presumed to Indulge my Pen to a considerable length in this
Address, being too free with Your Sacred Minutes; yet give me leave to say, The
Universe has not the like Subject for Age, Prowess, Loyalty, Learning, Honesty
and Goodness.

As Truth therefore does always play above-board, and eschews every Appearance
of Equivocation; so that which is really Excellent needs no farther popular
Estimation.

Pardon therefore* my Imperfections in this my Address, and be pleased to
reckon me in the number of those who pay all Reverence to Your Virtues, and
Obeisance to Your Illustrious Name, the which will highly Encourage me to
assume the Liberty of subscribing my self,

Your Graces Most Humble and Devoted Servant, JOHN BROWN.


AN Introductional PREFACE To the Studious READER.
Kind RAEDER,
THat great is the Industry of the Be, and rare its Economy, excellent the
Contexture; and very fine the thread of the Spider, wonderful the Spinning; and
curious the labor of the Silkworm, every considerate Man must acknowledge. But
when these are compared to the Fabric of MAN, or considred in the hour of his
wonderful Make, they must look but as Atoms in the Air, Rays to the Sun, or
Shadows to a Substance; for admirable is his Frame, excellent the symmetry of
his Proportion, and miraculous his Composure, made by the Almighty as the
Corollary, Navil, and Compendium of this great World, the Image of his Maker,
and the Prince of all Animals. Matter and Form being his two first Principles;
His innate Heat, by Philosophers, being compared to Fire; His Spiritual parts
to Air, his Solid parts to Earth, and his Moist parts to Water: The first
called Natures principal Agent in the World, carrying in it the two Engines of
natural Motion and Life; the second possessing the Animals Spirits, rare and
fluxile Bodies evermore allowed boundless as to Limits, spending themselves
into Liquefaction; The third bearing in it the Basis of the four Elements, and
therefore called by the Philosophers Primum Frigidum; Heat and Cold being as
Natures right and left Hands, under whose commands are Life and Death,
Generation and Corruption.

The first being nothing else but an Harmonical act begot out of Matter and
Form, making an individual Perfection lengthned into Continuance by a placid
motion of Spirits operating in the Nutritive Juice of the body; Death
concluding both the Actor and Act, by making a Divorce between the former:
Generation confirming a specifique Form inherent in the specifique Seed and
Matter, and Corruption only discovering the dissolution of corruptible Elements
already lapst into ruin.

The fourth being as Natures Menstruum, a Volatile and Spirituous Body
evaporating in Humor by a mean heat, and well enough called Humor its self:
This Diaphanous Body of Man being much like a Looking-glass heat by the rays of
the Sun, and drawn up by its likeness.

In Natures Elaboratory we may also find three several Offices provided for
variety of uses, as in the first, her Instruments, Vessels, and Consistences,
of Bodies kept and reserved in their proper places. Where we may see
Percolation made, which is a kind of separation of subtle Natures, the finer
spirits being separated from the grosser, and this maintained by the weight of
unequal Bodies.

Clarification shown by an equal distribution of Liquor with the tangible
parts, and by refining the Spirits themselves.

Impulsion or Percussion made good by a ponderous Body put into motion.

Fermentation in its Original Particles arising in our Bodies out of Sulphur
and Salt, Sulphur being the existence, and Salt the master of its Acrimony;
nothing entering our Bodies which do not bear a saline quality in it, and
Sulphur being herewith intermixed, dissolves this Salt and runs it into Fusion,
the which being loosned and attenuated by its Acrimony, does dissolve the same,
and so enters all the parts of the nutriments which we take into us.

A assimilation being made by many passages, Percolations, long continuance of
gentle heats, and circuits of Time.

Liquefactions also oft-times occasioned by detention of Spirits playing in the
Body, and opening the same.

Attraction acting in us like spongy bodies sending forth Air, and sucking in
Liquor or moisture thereinto.

Dilatation opening every compact Body, and causing a free passage therein.

Digestion taking its notion from living Creatures, and thence extended to
Liquors or Juyces, the highest notion thereof being fetched from the degrees of
alteration of one Body into another, as from Crudities to a more perfect
Concoction, which is the ultimity of the action and process.

Maturation of Liquors being wrought up by the congregation of Spirits, whereby
they are seen to gain and receive a better digestion.

Sublimation being nothing else than the separation of subtle and thin
Particles from those which are thick and feculent, making that which was once
impure, to appear more clear and pure.

Calcination making for a more apt Solution abating the Acrimony, its end being
twofold, as making that which was inflamable, impure, and crude; much abated,
altered, and better calcined, running the same into a more generous Liquor, and
changing its corporeous nature for a more spirituous.

Fixation being the equal spreading of tangible parts, and their close
coacervation which makes them less willing to issue forth.

Concretion of Bodies commonly solved by its contrary, thus Ice which was
congealed by cold, is dissolved by heat, these operations rather being the
returns toward their former nature, than alterations.

Coagulation made from the reduction of thin and fluid Bodies to a solid
substance, and this may be made good either by separation, segregation, or
comprehension, as when the whole is run into an uniform substanc, by Cold or
Viscidity, arising from a saline principle, Coction or Elixation.

Condensation made good in the Jejuness of the Spirits and their impurity with
the Tangible parts: These, or most, if not all of them being nearly concerned
in us, I have presumed to give a light touch upon them by way of Introduction.

In the next Office we find Natures varieties of Fermentative Menstruums,
Salts, and separating Juices, daily used in our Bodies, and these do bear the
names of Acids, Subacids, Salines, Acreds, Austeers, Viscids, Bitters, Acerbs
or Sowers, Oleaginous or oily Juices, Dulcorate, Insipids, and those other
Juices of the Glandules, etc.

We begin with Acids, where we find that every Acidity is a very great
Ingredient in Fermentation, all Acids being appointed for promoting and setting
forward its journey and progress; Thus an Acid humor prepared in the Stomach
out of the Nutriment and therein for some season reserved, does both promote
Digestion, and the subaction of the same, for all Acids which are reduced to a
fluidness having their Salts advanced, do both promote and assist Fermentations
and dissolutions of the same in our bodies, in which action both the Salt and
the Sulphur with which our Nutriments were replenisht, are hereby confringed
in the Ventricle and reduced into minute Particles; and hence is it that Chyle
it self thus being fermented, does get a Creamy color by its sulphurous
Particles being dissolved with the Salts, and mixed with an acid Ferment: But
then how these Acidities do get into our Bodies, we no ways making use of acid
things, may thus be made good. We cannot live without Acidity in Turgent
occasions, for there is an acidity in the Air, in which we breath, made good by
a Caput Mortuum, or Vitriol, being thereto exposed, which is seen to fetch out
hence an Acidity.

Gassandus and others do declare, That the Air is filled with Nitrous
Particles, and Niter every one knows does maintain an acidity in it; in Meats
and Drinks are acidities made good, and hence we need not run far to show how
Acidity happens in Man, we apparently seeing that by continual Fermentations in
our Bodies, many things which were formerly sweet and pleasant, or at least
temperate, have afterward turned most acid, the which may either happen by
dissipation of the Animal Spirits, or some other internal cause; and this
amongst Animals is not easily found out, unless it be by a melancholy Juice,
ferments of the Stomach, or Spleen, or Pancreatick Juice, or Morning Saliva, or
Spatttle; and as all Animals have their consistence from Fermentative
principles, so the whole World is filled with Fermentative Particles; and it is
the general opinion of Physicians, that whoever wants an acid Juice, can never
be allowed to digest well: We shall much enlarge upon these acid Juices, when
we shall treat of the Blood and Lympha.

Subacids take their names from their lesser quantity of Acidity, and thus the
Pancreatick Juice is called Subacid, made by the Blood and Spirits like it,
passing out of the smaller into the larger Ductus; and as a general remarque
hereof, as too much Acidity is seen a great procurer of Intermitting Fevers, so
Subacids do make a ready way for the discharge of the same, for so long as
Choler is predominant in our Bodies, Phlegm is less viscous, and the Pancreatick
Juice being lessened in its acredness, this makes the more ready way for the
dispatch of Diseases.

Salines, experience teaches us, do congregate into diverse Figures and
Angles, and all Bodies being naturally Saline, scarce perceivable in the family
of Vegetables; for Herbs have their fixed Salts from their Incinerations, and
Volatile Salts are seen extracted from the Blood of Animals by Sublimations; and
Lixivial Salts being either fixed or volatile, do infring Acidity, attenuate
Phlegm, correct acid and austeer Effects, hinder concretion of Bile, correct ill
Humors, and cleanse the Blood; and Volatile Salts do concenter and enervate
the Subacid Liquors of the Glandules; and although an acid Spirit is not easily
secern'd from a Lixivial fixed Salt, yet it is easily made good from a volatile
Salt; which volatile Salt may be contained in a legitimate Serum of the Blood
made out of laudable Bile, in which Serum whereof I suppose may be made an acid
Spirit apt enough for framing a Matter for the Lympha; as therefore there is in
the body of the Blood a laudable Serum, which may well enough be variously
changed either by outward causes, as Air, or Nutriments, or inward, by the
motion of the Mind, or Body, or the like, so may these beget and imprint a
strange quality in the Lympha, by making it either more acid, more subsaline,
more diluted or aqueous, or more thick and viscid. But we shall have more
occasion hereof in the Blood; all Natural Salts therefore, if they be urged by
repeated Distillations, do pass into lucid Liquors; Volatile Salts are always
seen white, and if they be exposed to humid air, they speedily run into a
reddish Liquor, not very salt, the volatile saline parts herein vanishing, and
the sulphurous parts only remaining which gives the color; the saline parts
of the Blood therefore lodge between Fixation and Volatization, then properly
called Fixed, when it adhears to the Sulphur and terene parts, and then
Volatiliz'd, leaving them both and sticking to the spirituous Particles thereof
and marching therewith, as is made good in distilled Spirit of Urine after a
long digestion: Thus in some measure the saline parts in our Bodies are seen to
mix with the Chyle, and run the same into digestion in the Bowels, they acting
orderly in us; and then are volatiliz'd into a Nervous Juice, and planted in
the middle constitution of the sanguine Mass, and then being exalted by a long
circulation and digestion they hereby become Volatile, and are partly joined
with the Spirituous Particles and exstill'd into the Brain with them, and there
become Animal Spirits, and at length turn into a Nutrimentitious Juice fit for
nourishing the sulphurous and solid parts of the Body through which they pass.
Salt therefore as it is allowed three states of Fusion, Volatization, and
Fluidness, so it acts accordingly in our Bodies, for when its saline Corpuscles
be mixed with the rest and made ready for dissolution, then it shows it self in
the first conception of Animals, beginnings of Fermentations, and indigested
Formations of things, and this bears the name of Fusion.

When from the first rudiments of Motion the Saline Particles are seen to
ascend with some Spirit having Sulphur thereto added, this invigorates the
same and gives it a volatization.

That properly called Fluor Salis when the saline parts which were formerly
collected with the Earth and Sulphur, are now associated to the Spirit, and
this knot of mixture being loosned, it thereby gets its freedom, and being thus
cleared and freed whilst the major part of the Spirit and Sulphur leaves it,
it takes chief place it self, and so is rendered insipid and free from all
saltness whatever.

Acreds do show their dependence from a Volatile Salt in concrete things, the
which being dissolved from their mixtures, do speedily lose themselves; and
hence is it that some Herbs although abounding with an acred Juice whilst
green, when they grow dry they are perfectly seen to lose their Acredity, as is
made good in Scurvey-grass, Watercresses, and the like. Again, the volatile
acred Salt being mixed with the Air in the Lungs and received into the Blood by
Inspiration, or taken into the Stomach with our Nutriments, or sucked into the
Body by its pores, or mixing it self with the Liquors of the Glandules or the
Blood, does both infect, enervate and vitiate the same. Acreds also in the time
of Fermentation do contract the Ventricle and promote an expulsive faculty
therein, moving the heat with more frequent contractions, making the Pulse bear
a part with it, and the Blood being stagnated, does hereby grow more acred, and
this runs it into Inflammation, and oft-times converts it into purulent or
corrupt Matter.

Austere Acids do generally arise in those bodies which are readiest inclinable
to Astringency, whose Particles are filled with many small prickings closing
upon the Fibers, and as it were contracting the same: Thus we see austere Acids
do breed and produce Glutinosities of fluid things by astriction, restore both
the Tone and strength of the parts, correct and temper volatization, amend the
fluidness of Choler, hardening the Excrements of the Intestines, oft-times the
mother of Suffocation, and whatever we take into our Mouths of Vitriol or
Tobacco, they are seen to leave an austeer gust upon our pallates.

Viscid Juices do variously bring Diseases upon our humane Bodies; Thus we see
that both Saliva, Pancreatick Juice, and Lympha, do err, and prove injurious by
their viscidities in Hecticks, and the beginnings of Catarrhs are allowed to
arise from viscid Nutriments and cold Air. Coagulation of Humors also are seen
to arise from a viscid Chyle, and an Intestinal Phlegm marching along in the
milky vessels, and its viscidity that makes flations, keeps so close to the
Stomach and in it, and which makes their exits thence so uneasy, and its
viscous and coagulate Blood that both stagnates the motion of the Blood, and
hinders the secretion of the Chyle, etc.

Bitter Juices carry in them both Sulphur and Salt, wherein they are seen very
equally concerned, and do operate in the Blood as they do in compound Liquors,
where contracting a new bitterness by being either burnt in their Concoctions,
or too much spent by evaporation; they do hence occasion a kind of bitter
smoakiness which they seem to purchase hereby, and bear the same in their whole
progress.

Acerbs or tart and sour Juices generally are in their proper nature very near
in kin to austere or astringent Juices, and do hurt our Bodies by obstructing
our Pores, wherein having once got entrance, they are not very readily or
easily to be thence discharged; they bear up their tart and sour nature, and
are not to be overcome with such which are of a more sweet constitution.

Unctuous or oily Juices are then allowed to be produced when the Particles of
any Body are seen sphaerical and globular, neither bringing much disturbance,
or pricking, or tickling therewith. Sulphur being herein master in chief, and
Oil being apt to take fire, if it once assumes it, it keeps the same up and
maintains it; and the Lixivial Salt once joined with Oil as often as it is
digested with any acid, it produces a notable heat; and thus the Blood so long
as Choler is chief master in it, is seen to turn saline and oily, Oil and Fat
being accounted the two chief ingredients of Bile.

Dulcorate Juices do declare themselves by their pleasant taste which they carry
in them, and when the saline Particles do grow equally together with the
sulphurous Particles giving the later another nature, they are both seen to
run into obtuse streaks; and this alchalizated Spirit and fixed Salt, of what
body soever it be mixed and circulated by long digestion, does there produce and
beget a dulcorated sweetness.

Under Insipid Juices, if they may so be called, may be reckoned Water, Rain,
the White of an Egg, and those may then most properly be so termed when the
Particles of any Bodies are not always rendered with an asperate, but with
levigated Superficials, in which the principles of Earth and Water are
predominant above the rest; and although indeed there is nothing in the world
can really be allowed Insipid, yet those are generally seen to carry that name
which are altogether deprived of Sapour and Gust.

These Juices are thus seen to bear concord and agreement in our Bodies, where
we commonly see Sweets and Acids very well agreeing together, and Sweets and
Austeers, the first shown in Syrup of Citrons, Conserve of Wood Sorrel,
Barberies, and the like; the later in Marmalade of Quinces, stewed Prunes, etc.

Sweets and Unctious may also well enough agree in the Palate but not in the
Stomach, they being very subject to occasion a vomiting and nauseousness.

Sweets never agree with Acred, Bitters or Salines.

Bitter Juices never are pleasant to the Palate.

Salines always agree best with acred things.

Acreds, Astringents, and sharp Juices do well enough agree with Sweets but no
others: Some of these do take their names from Heat, being the uppermost, as
Acreds, Bitters, some from exuberant Cold, as Acids, Subacids, Austeers,
Acerbs, or sour Juices; and others from moderate heat, as sweet, viscid, fat
and insipid, the first two of these inclining to Cold, the later two enjoying a
better degree of heat: And to conclude this, we may very well judge of the
Juices in our Bodies, as we may observe them in ripe Fruits which are sweet and
grateful to the palate, yet sour while green, and dry of consistence;
afterward this dryness leaving them, a softer condition possesses the fruit,
and when this change happens, this sowerness turns into sharpness, and this
sharpness by time and maturity forgets its acidity and becomes sweet. Thus salt
and bitter things can no whit be allowed agreeable with sweets, which are
allowed our nourishers, for all Nutriment turns to Blood, and good Blood is
hot, moist, and sweet; and therefore that Sapour which is nearest in kin to the
Blood, without all question must be allowed most proper for Nutriment; and this
brings me into Natures third Office, wherein we shall view her excellent
Liquids and and Balsamic Liquors, amongst which are reckoned Chyle, Blood,
Animal Spirits, Nervous Juice, Lympha, Salival Phlegm, Choler, Pancreatick
Juice, Serum, Urine, and Sweat, they conducing toward our welfare, life, and
motion.

Chyle therefore is a milky Juice like to that of Cream, prepared and excocted
out of Nutriments taken into the Ventricle, and these Nutriments are digested
in the Stomach after the manner of Fermentation and so become moist, and Chyle
thence extracted. What Fermentation is we have already in brief set down, we
therefore next do proceed to the cause of Chilification, and this is taken from
its propriety of substance, in respect of which, heat is otherwise operated in
the Stomach than it is in the Heart; it takes its creamy color from its
sulphurous parts, being dissolved with its saline, and those mixed with the
acid ferment of the Stomach; for whatever Liquor is impregnated with Sulphur
and volatile Salt, it gets hence a milky whiteness if any acid humor be poured
to it. Blood is the Royal liquid Balsam, and the chief Fermentative liquor of
the Body; the scarlet Juice whereof is made in the Heart out of Chyle for the
nutrition thereof, raised out of two Juices having a Serum intermixed; Sulphur
and Salt being its primary Particles, these also being allowed Juices when they
are produced into Fusion for the Sanguinary mass; and hence the Chemist gives
the name of the Third Mercury, when he writes that there is no Body framed by
Nature, but carries in it Mercury or Liquor, Sulphur or Oil, Sal or Salt;
Salt by Coagulation giving solidity to Bodies, Color and Gust; Sulphur
tempering the coagulation of Salt with a benign mixture, and this allows the
same strength and transmutation; and Mercury, like an Elixir, yielding virtue,
vigor, and secrets to the irrigation of the Vital and Vegetative Liquor. Again
the superfluities of Salt are separated by the Urine, Sulpure secern'd by the
Intestines, and Mercury the liquor of Nutriment sent into the Body; and if any
superfluous part thereof happens to keep behind, this is thrown out by Sweat
through the Pores, and the Blood it self having its consistence from these
three principles is hence made good; for Sulphur evidently explains it self in
it by our Nutriments which we assume, which are fat, oily, sweet, and
sulphurous, for we see many sulphurous and fatty parts of the Body generated
out of the Blood, the which do gain their softness, oilyness, and tenuity from
Sulphur; Salt we have from the use of salt Meats, which we do eat, and Serum
does as evidently demonstrate it self as any of the former; Vital Spirit is the
most subtle and efficaceous part of the Blood conflated out of the sulphurous
and saline parts thereof dilated by fermentation of the Heart and there united
together; the color which it is seen to bear it takes from its digestions and
dilatations which are made in the Heart, for out of the permixture of the Salt,
acid Particles with the sulphurous a red color is raised, as is evidently
made good in Chemistry by distillation of Sal Niter, which contains many
sulphurous Particles in it. Thus we see Pale Conserves and Syrups, by having a
few drops of Oil of Vitriol added to them, thus runs them into a reddish
color, and if any thing of Sulphur be thereto added, it gives them a more deep
ruddy stain. Thus if you mix any acid spirit with Blood, you will find the Blood
hereby becomes more or less coagulate; and this is thus made good, for if we
take Oil of Vitriol, or Sulphur per Campanum, Aqua Fortis. Regis, or the like,
besides the Blood's being herewith coagulated, you will find it changed into a
Chestnut color; if we also take sweet Spirit of Salt, Juice of Lemons,
distilled Vinegar, and the like, whose acid Spirits are more temperate, these
will give the Blood the thickness and consistence of a Syrup, its color
remaining altogether unalterable and no ways injured. And hence is it that the
use of Acids does keep Man from the Plague, not because according to the
opinion of ill Authors, they are Incisive and attenuant, but because they do
keep up the natural consistence of the Blood, and hinder the same, by how much
it is less affected with an acid volatile Salt, or in an air in which we
breath; and this was one cause which made Sylvius, in the great Sickness-time
at Amsterdam, before he ever visited his people which were troubled with the
Infection, to eat white Bread dipped in Marygold Vinegar, with which
Alexipharmick he so well preserved himself that no Infection ever reached him.
Acids also according to diversity of things wherewith they are mixed, are seen
to yield variety of colors. (And herein I must make a little stay, the
knowledge whereof being of great concern in our humane Pile, as to its Health
and its Diseases:) Thus pour an acid Spirit upon Vulgar Sulphur dissolved in
Lixivium, and you will find its Red color turned White. Antimony calcined with
Niter or Chalk, and boiled in Water, its limpid colature being separated from
its acid effusion will look yellow. Infusion of Galls mixed to a solution of
Vitriol, makes a black Ink, and adding hereto a little acid Spirit of Vitriol,
all its blackness will soon leave it, and it turns as clear as Water. Tincture
of Violets by adding a few drops of Oil of Vitriol or Spirit of Sulphur, turns
into an excellent Purple color. A Knife after cutting of a Citron in the
middle, unless presently wiped and purged from the acid Juice of the Citron,
will make it turn black. These versions of Liquors are also very proper to be
understood, by which we may make some probable conjectures compared herewith,
with the Juices and Liquors in our Bodies. Admirable also is it to see the
variety of Coagulums made by diversity of Acids severally placed in several
Liquors; As by adding Lemons, Verjuice, Vinegar, Vitriol, Sulphur, Niter,
Sloes, Barberies, and the like, in several Vessels wherein Milk has been put,
and see their wonderful diversity and Coagulums; all which are of near concern
in us and with us, being compared to the variety of Acid, Acerb, Austere,
Acred, Subacid, and the like Juices, mixing themselves both with the Chyle,
Blood, Lympha, Nervous Juice, Animal Spirits, and the like, in our Bodies; and
whoever examines Nature, in bestowing her variety of Nourishments convenient
for our diversity of Nutriment of parts, shall find that they are not all fed
alike; for some do receive greater and more subtle digestion, others less and
more incrassate concoctions. And thus we see some parts are made assimilated
out of sulphurous and saline parts equally mixed; And this is made good in the
fleshy parts; other parts are rendered more Oleaginous and sulphurous as is
seen in the fatty parts of our Bodies; others more salt and tartareous proved
in the Nervous parts and Bones.

Animal Spirits are allowed thin, subtle and volatile visible exhalations made
in the Brain, out of a few sulphurous and saline parts, and many volatile
parts of the Blood serving partly for the Natural and partly for the Animal
actions; and the Matter out of which they are generated, is the Arterial Blood,
whose consistence is from a salt sulphurous Juice and Serum, not of every one
alike, for the Saline parts by a peculiar quality of the Brain, are in a great
measure both dissolved and separated from the Sulphurous; their Serosity being
swet out, and so hence becoming volatile, and so thin and subtle, as to pass
the most minute and invisible Pores of the Nerves themselves, and are designed
for two substantial uses, as the performance of all Animal actions and motions
these commonly known by all; The other is, that natural use which is assigned
them, whereby they are allowed to help forward nutrition of the Spermatick
parts. And this is thus made good, for as we see the Blood continually does
flow from the Heart and by its Arteries, so the Animal Spirits do continually
pass from the Brain by the Nerves, and that naturally, without any
determination of thoughts or wills of ours; Nay when our wills are locked up by
sleep, as is evident in sleepy diseases, wherein these are not idle.

Lympha is a fermentatious Liquor separated out of the serous parts of the
Blood in the conglobated Glandules, not simply perfused with much fuse and
volatile Salt, and impregnated with somewhat sulphurous Particles, sent partly
to the Chyliferous Vessels, and partly to the Veins, making the one thinner by
its mixture, and giving it a larger dilatation perfected in the Heart; and
preparing the same for the Venous Blood less attenuated for their dilatation in
the Heart. And because I design to describe this and its uses more fully in the
Conglobate Glandules, when I shall offer at the Lymphatick Juice, I shall leave
it to that place. Salival Phlegm or Spattle, is allowed a light fermentaceous
Liquor both Serous and Lymphid, separated out of the arterious Blood, in the
Parotides, or those of the Auricular Glandules, or those of the Fauces, Mouth
and Throat, and sent thence into the Mouth by their proper and common Ductus.
What it is, is hence made good, for it is no Simple Body, but a Compound
Sublucid Liquor, less fluid than Water, and more viscid; It readily mixing it
self with any or all our Nutriments, and requires no great courtship to bring
it into an acquaintance with whatsoever we take into our Stomachs: Its use is
seen of great concern in us and with us, for it readily makes an easy
Deglutition, extracts all sapours and taste from dry Meats, quenceth Thirst,
keeps all passages moist, promotes Fermentation when it enters the Stomach, and
gives it a further Ferment in its progress; and when it marches in its true
order, as I have shown in its proper place, it arises from the serous part of
the Blood, which makes the Lympha's more glutinous passage through the
Arteries, and partly out of the Animal Spirits sent by the Nerves to the
aforementioned conglomorated Glandules. Now a Vicious Saliva may hence be made
good as well by proper as common sensible qualities, and this proved by its
taste which sometimes is seen salt, sometimes acid, sometimes sweet, and
sometimes bitter; the salt part being given to the Salt Serum in the Blood, the
acid to the plenty of acid humors in the Body, both as touching the Blood, as
also the defect of the Animal Spirits; the sweet arising like Saccharum Saturni
in the like Serum, it being no easy task exactly to explain all the
innumerable qualities of the Humors in our Bodies, not well understanding the
common Diet made use of, by which these Sapours may so readily take their
variable alterations; The bitter arises either from Choler sucked upwards,
leaving some of its relics in the Mouth, or having some of the same mixed with
the Serum, and so sent into the Glandules: The glutinous part hereof arises
from the phlegmatic part of the Blood, or from its more fluid or aqueous defect.

Phlegm is reckoned the crude part of the Blood newly made out of the Chyle, not
much circulated or dilated in the Heart; and the truth is, if we will give this
humor its true merit, it ought not to be reckoned amongst excrementitious
humors; it by all indeed is allowed Insipid, and (...), may be granted a crude
humor, by reason of its undue digestion in the Ventricle, which is both
tedious and no ways answering the others in its Concoction. The Blood also is
preternaturally concervated in the Conglobated Glandules, by reason of its
impediment of refluxion, and its first obstruction in the capillary Vessels,
frequently occasioned by Phlegm in the Arterial Channels, or in the Venose
interposition, for the Blood being coagulate, is seldom seen contingent; Now
Blood and Phlegm are seen to be coagulate in the Conglobated Glandules as well
as in the other parts, which makes them both unapt for motion being inherent in
the Vessels or their intermediate Channels, and here stopped in their progress,
and dispersed into the neighboring substance of the Glandules, raising the same
into greater bulk, and distending them into Strumous Diseases; and wherever any
humor is closely pinned up in the substance of the Glandules, making the same
more solid and compact, this breeds a hardness therein; and this may serve as
one reason of its Coagulation concreted there, and its being a proper Nurse and
Matron of Strumous Effects. Choler is a fermentaceous Juice or Liquor pressed out
of Venous Blood and Splenetick Juice, by a specifique digestion in the Liver
it is bred out of the sulphurous and oleaginous Particles of the Venous Blood;
for the Sulphurous Juice, although of its own nature it is Subdulcid, yet
being for a while Excocted with a subsaline Ferment, it becomes bitter, and is
seen to change its color; and this part of Bile thus excocted in the Liver,
any thin part of it remaining unmixt with the Blood, and so carried to the Vena
Cava, does bear in it a fermentative quality which it gives to the Blood, the
other parts thereof it sends by the Bilious Pore to the Guts; some part thereof
sent into the Vesicula Fellis, where it is made both more acred and bitter, and
therein requires a more strong fermentative quality: The natural color of
Choler is yellow, its taste bitter and subacred, and its substance fluid, but
all these are seen to take their changes and chances in us according to the
temper and constitution of the Body, the chief use hereof being ascribed to
Fermentation, of which we have already writ.

Pancreatick Juice, so called when it attains the Pancreas and passes through
its Ductus, is Sublimpid, and as it were, a Salival Juice somewhat austere,
bearing in it also some relish of a Subacid nature; It Is seen as well moderate
in quantity, as it appears useful and necessary in respect of the specifique or
rather Subacid quality it carries in it; for the setting forward and promoting
of the fluxion of Bile, mixing it self therewith by its new effervescensy of
the digested Aliments, lapst from the Stomach into the Guts, and therein making
an useful separation from that which is Excrementitious, and this effervescensy
is made from the Volatile Salt of Bile and Sulphurous Oil, getting
acquaintance with the acidity of this Pancreatick Juice. And hence has our
Health its great dependence, we having a sound Pancreas, the which being
diseased, is the only mother of many Diseases which former Ages attributed to
the vitiousness of the Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, and the like parts; and
whoever desires more hereof, let him peruse Regnerus de Graaf, who has a whole
Book of the same subject already communicated to the World.

Serum, by all Anatomists, is allowed the waterish parts of our Nutriments
excocted with the sulphurous and saline Juice of the same in the Ventricle and
other Bowels, plentifully bestowed on the Blood, giving it its tenuity and
flexibility, the which mediating herewith makes it run through its narrow
passages, washing away its Impurities and Crudities, and discharging it self by
Spattles, Sweats, and Urine. Urine is a great action of the Kidneys, separating
and discharging a redundant serous humidity from the Blood, sending the same
onwards in its journey by the Emulgent Arteries, and so thence into the Renal
Glandules, Urinary Fibrilla's, and Papillary Caruncles, a great part of the
Serum whereof is distilled and separated into the Pelvis, and thence dispatched
from the Kidneys by the Uriters into the Bladder, and what remaining of the
Blood is left behind and mixed with that part of the Serum (the whole Serum not
being separated from the Blood) is thence sent out by the Emulgent Veins to the
Cava. And this is thus made good, For as the best and most useful part (but
fluid and endewed with a milky color) and called Chyle, sent by the milky
Vessels to the Heart, is secerned by the Nutriments taken into the Stomach and
there fermented, and the thick and more feculent parts thereof discharged per
Anum, or the greater Guts; So out of the Chyle converted into Blood, is
separated a superfluous part of the Serum in the Kidneys, the which may
variously be obstructed in its long journey, as by ill affections of the
Caruncles, or Viscid Phlegm, or Glutinous Matter, the Caruncles herewith being
prejudiced, and suffer oft-times Coagulations, a common calamity usual with
them.

Sweat is seen ever more salt in taste, and hence this may be allowed the cause
thereof, whereas that part of the Nutriment which was fresh and sweet being
converted into Blood and Flesh, leaving this, and Sweat granted nothing else
than the part separated and secern'd from the former. This is seen to arise
more in the upper parts of our Bodies than in the lower parts of the same, they
being more plentifully stockt with Spirits. And hence may we allow the
difference between heat and cold, the Pores being both opened by the one, and
shut by the other, the one being but as Flame incenst into Air, the other
nothing more than Air condensed.

We next come to the Juices of the Glandules, and whereas they are various, so
their uses are also accounted diverse; and here therefore are we to enquire of
what usefulness they may be accounted after their secretion from the Blood, and
of what service they may be to the Economy of the Body; and he who examines
them with a careful Eye will find it no easy business to make out, especially
if we look into their motions; for when the Liquor of the Conglobated Glandules
is sent into the Thoracick Ducts, and mixed there with the Chyle, and to the
chief parts of Nutriment, it marches along with the same into the Jugular
Vein, or left Subclavian, whence necessarily with the descendent Blood it
marches thus confuse through the right ear of the Heart into its right
Ventricle; and hence by no means allowed either unuseful or excrementitious,
because the excrementitious humors thus excreted from the Blood, having no
further concern therewith, are dispatched from the Body; the which is clearly
manifest by the Urine in the Kidneys secreted from the Sanguinary mass, and
sent thence by the Ureters into the Bladder, whence by the laws of Nature it is
thence dismissed from having any further concern with the Body. Thus the Juice of
the Conglomerated Glandules effused through peculiar Ductus, into diverse
Cavities of the Body, where they are allowed necessary for nourishing some
parts thereof, is no ways to be thought excrementitious. Thus the Spattle in
the Maxillary Glands secreted from the Blood and sent forth into the Mouth and
thence dispatched into the Stomach, is no ways to be allowed excrementitious but
very useful; as is that of the Pancreas, and the like, already made good: Now
there is a great distinction between the Liquors of the Conglobate and the
Conglomerate Glandules, as I have shown in their proper place; for Experience
shows us, that out of the Conglobated Glandules, Lymphatick Vessels do arise,
and Lympha it self is prepared therein; and this partly bred from the acid part
of the Blood secreted from the other part thereof in the sound Glandules, and
partly from the Animal Spirits sent through the Nerves thither, and therein
permixt; and as these Conglobate Glandules in the Body are either entire or ill
affected, so this ill affection may either arise from the fault of Spirits, or
the acidity of the Blood; or its secretion from the Serum, wherein and whereby
is made a permixture hereof with the Volatile or Animal Spirits: How many ways
therefore this Lympha may be vitiated, no Man yet has undertaken to show, it
being a matter not only of great difficulty, but very near in kin to
impossibility; for this preparation of Glandulous Lympha, may be vitiated by
being either more sparing or more plentiful in quantity or quality, being more
or less acid, salt or glutinous, and the like: And although I may not have
followed the exact constitution of the Conglobated Glandules, yet I have
demonstrated some of its most common Maladies, made good by Tumor, Induration
and Inflammation, all which are shown in living Bodies, for dead Bodies lose
both their heat and bulk. And hence it may be granted by how many ways these
Glandules are injured, the Lympha therein receeds from its pristine state and
natural quality, and becomes both salt and acid; and out of this Lympha thus
distributed and sent through the Vessels in the habit of the Body, these being
lacerated by Effusion into the neighboring parts, do there produce Pains and
Tumors, the last being the usual product of Strumous effects. And as a Lympha
in all the Conglobated Glandules is generated, so also in the Conglomerated
Glandules is another peculiar Liquor begot, carried through every of their
Cavities. Thus in the Mouth two Ductus do apparently show themselves, called
Salivales, throwing their plentiful Liquor into the Mouth, whose uses I have
already described. Out of the Bile, Pancreatick Juice, and Salivary Phlegm,
arises that Triumviral humor which hastneth the Liquor to the Heart, and
gives it its natural consistence and coagulation to the Blood, and according as
the Blood it self is vitiated, this is co-partner with it, joins in its
vitiation, and where these or any of them are exalted, they are seen to create
intestine wars in us.

Now if the Glandules thus discoursed of, might be allowed Spinning or
Unraveling, as it is the opinion of some few of our late and best Anatomists,
this may very well make a Platform for Conjecture, that any or all of either of
these Acids, Subacids, Salines, Subsalines, Austeres, Acreds, and the like
Liquors or Juices, may run by or between these loose fibrous Contextures, as
through so many Trunks or Channels; wherein Nature may evince and declare her
times and tides of ebbs and flows of Sicknesses and Diseases, and the better
circulations of Liquors and separation of Juices, as well traced by the
Lympheducts into these two sorts of Glandules, as that of the Blood by the
Heart and its Arteries, into the Veins. And from hence for ought I know, may
more proper Conjectures arise how in Plenilunaries, the Brain should be
overstockt with Rheumatismes, Catarrhs, and Cephalic Defluctions, how
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and Convulsive Motions shall more readily declare
themselves then, and make their confident Attempts upon the Sons and Daughters
of Man; how the Tides become the presages of Sickness as well as of Health, of
Recovery or Death. If herein I may but raise a spark fetched by the collision of
conjectural Arguments, which may be invigorated and impregnated by a better and
more refined Alchymist, as to their separatory Offices, or may have hereby made
any likely Essay toward the more clearing out the new stream and current of
the several passages in our Bodies: I shall think my self extreme fortunate in
picking forth a stone which may be of any use toward this great Building. But
I fear I have been too tedious in my entrance; If I find any new thing worth
the Readers entertainment, that may abide the common Test and Trial for
advance, I shall as readily promote it for public good, and think my time well
spent,

VALE.
From my House at Charing Cross, Dec. 13. 1683/4.
To the AUTHOR Mr. JOHN BROWN.
WHilst your Great Galen scans each Human part,
( Galen, the Learned of the Noblest Art)
Its fine Contexture, Motion, Use, Surveys,
With clearer Demonstration he displays
The Godhead; than the wrangling Schools can boast,
Whose Reason in the maze of Terms is lost:
Such is thy Art, Famed Brown, whose Skilful Pen
Can Lym the Great Creator's power in Men:
The Purple Liquor in the smallest Vein,
Which runs, like Arethusa to the Main
In secret Channels, cant escape thine Eye,
Which does new Tracts in the lesser World descry:
Even Death begins to fear thy searching Art,
Lest thou should find a Balm against his Dart.
The Healing Virtue of the Royal Hand,
(Next to our King, the Glory of our Land)
Which Heaven on our Monarchs does bestow,
To make the Vain, Conceited Rabble know
That Power and Government, from Heaven flow;
And that there is some Divinity in Gods below,
Is now discovered by thy piercing Brain,
As far as Man can Miracles explain.
Tho. Walker S. C.

ADENOGRAPHIA, Or, An Exact Anatomical Treatise OF THE GLANDULES; Illustrated
with Variety of New Observations.

WHEREIN Are Discoursed their different Uses and Offices, with their proper
Names and Natures according to their Situations and Insertions.

Written by JOHN BROWN, One of His Majesty's Surgeons in Ordinary, and
Surgeon of His Majesty's Hospital.

Rerum ipsarum cognitio vera e rebus ipsis est.

Jul. Scaliger. LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb for Sam. Lowndes, over against
Exeter-Exchange in the Strand. 1684.

The First Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Glandules in general, and their uses allowed by the Ancients.
SInce Dissection of man had its first steps, as to its birth and origination
from our forefathers, it never arrived at that perfection which it is now seen
to wear. Prudent Nature giving former ages her light touches barely, leaving
them in their dead color. But by breathing whiles of time she has been both
more kind and liberal; and some ages have more generously received a finer
draught thereof than others, fetched by the sweat and study of its Industrious
Sons, and not purchased but by their utmost Ingenuity. And as former ages found
it no easy task to break way for succeeding generations, for their better
arriving at this Art; so in our times we have seen both the spark and the flame
much invigorated, appearing more bright and clear, and freed from many thick
obscurities which it enjoyed in its early days. The study of Anatomy.
This study of Anatomy is now visible enough to ocular inspection, whereby we
may view the fabric of Bodies both of Birds, and Bruits, and Men. But of these
we shall find a great difference between their being alive and dead. The one
giving the position, frame, sight, figure, and connection of all the parts
thereof; whilst the living man's Observation must adjust the account of their
motions, communications, circulations, congruity or disagreement; and declare
how his humors do separate, divide, attenuate, and digest his nutriment; as
likewise demonstrate the several excretions of the various Organs thereof, as
to their proper functions, both as to the advancing the Spirits, as likewise
touching their separation. Where we may also premise, as touching things only
accommodate to this present life, That in man there are some parts of greater
use than others, and designed for more noble ends; others thereof being framed
for more inferior services; and so according to their greater or lesser
degrees of usefulness, their Knowledge ought to be more or less eligible. This
study carrying recompense in its front, is thus made good, in considering both
its excellency and usefulness; in relation it is concerned with the most noble
of all creatures, Man; as to his station in this World, namely, a state of
regulated society and government; as also for the better knowing of our selves,
being not only useful to us for the present life in via, but also proportioned
to that state which is in Patria. And although in the knowledge of this Art,
there are many Phenomenon of Nature which have taken up the hours, thoughts and
study of many learned men, who have more than with an ordinary heat exercised
the same; and as well charged their passions, as forced many disputes about it:
And although its Knowledge is pleasant, curious and delightful, yet it does not
yield that fertile crop of satisfaction which may reward the studious mind. Our
Forefathers, and Industrious Indagators, ought to have our thankful
acknowledgements, for our first rules which we gained from them in this Art of
Anatomy. And since our present discourse ties us wholly up to the Anatomy of
the Glandules, or glandulous parts of the Body, which came into the World with
the first man, and have from his infancy, been found as so many Scavingers, to
suck up all excrementitious humors, which might otherwse disorder the humane
Pile, and thereby disturb the economy of its parts. The nature of Glandules in
general.
I shall presume first to demonstrate their nature in general; they being by
the most learned ever allowed Spongy Bodies, having in them a rareness, a fatty
substance, not framed like other fleshes, being more friable, attaining many
vessels designed in them, appearing to touch like Wool, but upon strict
compression, yielding an Oleagenous humor thence exstilling. They do seldom
leave the body either in sickness or in health, but do keep it company the
whole age of man. When they are affected, they are generally distempered with
this strumous or scrophulous malady, a disease being most familiar with them,
whose strumous Tumors do gain their increment from a large repletion of
Humidity, collected from all the parts of the Body, passing thence hither by
the Arteries, and whatsoever humor is thence dispatched and sent hither, it no
sooner makes its appearance here, but is readily sucked up by these glandulous
Bodies. And this fluxion being much and morbifique (the Glandules in the other
parts of the Body diffusing the same hereinto) does very often occasion a Fever,
and also both enlarges and inflames them: being much like a Channel of a River,
which being overcharged with Water, more than it conveniently can deliver out,
it necessarily breaks over the banks, to make its self room, and way for its
discharge.

The Glandules are more large, and do appear in greater quantity in the concave
parts of the Body, than in the exterior parts of the same: And here (as
Natures general Maxim is) we shall find that the moist parts of the Body do
declare their chief abode. The chief place of their abode.
And where these Glandules also are, and in what places thereof they are
resident, the hairy parts do also discover. For kind Nature framed both of them
for one and the same use, which is, to suck up the excrements they receive, and
to discharge the same; for we shall find the hairs of the Body as readily
taking up the moisture which is sent into the Glandules, and discharging it
which arrives at the exterior parts thereof, as the glandules do take the same
into them, when it once do arrive at them. And as a certain conclusion, we may
affirm, that we shall seldom or never meet with either glandules or hair, in
any dry part of the Body, they being here out of their proper element as well
as place. And as a further confirmation hereof, whenever you see the Parotides,
or glandules, placed behind the Ears, you will meet with hairs as their outward
guard. Under the Armpits where are planted the Axillary glandules, you will
meet the same; in the groins, where the Inguinel glandules are planted, you
will find them covered with hairs; about the privities, where are many
glandules, you will find them well stored with society of hairs, the glandulous
parts being by Nature appointed as her Scavengers, These parts appointed as
Scavengers.
and these hairs as her Beesomes, by which she sweeps and wipes up all the
excrements which she sends to these emunctuous parts, by sweats and the like;
all these wholly belonging to the exterior and superficial parts of the Body,
this discourse in general only touching thereupon, and keeping within the
outward guard thereof. Again, there are variety of glandules ordered and
planted in diverse parts of the Body, appointed for several uses; as those
which are placed in the groins, Their several offices.
armpits, behind the ears, neck, face, eyes, and testicles, and the like; some
of these being designed for commutation of the Blood, others given to the
Breasts for generation of milk; some bequeathed to the Testicles for generation
of sperm, and others appointed for defense of the vessels, and keeping them
warm, as those in the neck, and for the division of the jugular veins and
arteries, and for filling up several empty spaces in the Body, as the face,
neck, and muscles of the throat; some designed for sucking up all superfluous
humidities; as those of the Parotis, Axillaries, Inguens, the which are
properly called Emunctories, milking and straining as it were the humidities
which shall happen to fall therein, for Nature has placed the Parotides, as
its Sponges, for sucking up all superfluous moisture which shall be sent from
the Brain, and has given the axillary glandules for the same service of the
Heart; the Inguens performing the like office to the Liver, and she having
appointed a Scavenger to every noble part, they serve to clear in their proper
places, these parts from all impurities and superfluous humidities, which may
arise from the Lymphaducts, for these being stagnated, according to Dr.
Willis's opinion, there is very oft-times seen to follow Convulsive motions in
the head; and in his Book De Cerebro, he further writes, where any nervous
humor meets with obstruction in its passage, not only Spasmodical Symptoms
have thence succeeded, but strumous affects have also apparently showed
themselves. But to return to the glandules: I hope there is no man thinks me so
ignorant, (that is either honest to himself, or a friend to the Industrious) as
to give this our former discourse as a general assertion to all the interior
glandules of the Body, every Anatomist knowing they are designed for better
uses; and because I would not be mistaken, I shall presume to touch upon them
in a general order, being resolved to expatiate more largely thereon, when I
shall come to treat thereof in a more particular manner.

I begin with the glandules of the Neck, Of the Glandules of the Neck.
where we shall find them very frequently seated; others there are as
neighbors to these, and these are the Tonsillae, by some called the Almonds,
they in some measure answering the shape of Almonds; but these are there placed
for their proper uses. The Head being seated above all the other parts of the
body, hollowed and rounded, and gathering a large quantity of humidity from the
other parts of the body, this transmitting the same, and sending its fumes
arising thence upwards in form of a Lymbick, the which are sent back again, by
and through several parts designed for this purpose, the body being all this
while in a good temper, and habit, and void of all sickness, after it has
remitted this retraction, this fluxion marches to the glandules and glandulous
parts no ways molesting them, unless by coming slowly and moderately; the which
were this humor either much, and that sharp and inflamed, it would speedily
run the glandules into Inflammation and Tumor, and so distend the Neck, and by
its pursuit, passing or arriving at each ear, would speedily breed disorders
therein; if therefore the Fluxion thus happening, be either Pituitous, and
much, this will make an inflammation like it, and when this humor is grown
familiar and common in the glandules, it does readily form these Struma's, or
Scrophulous swellings, the worst disease belonging to them. But where a
plentiful stock of these acrid and serous humors do appear, they do always
produce Tumors, and the Inguinal glandules being herewith disturbed by the
overplus thereof, it enters them, swelling and running them into inflammation,
and so forcing them toward suppuration, as do those of the armpits and neck.
The Intestines have also their due health given them by meats and drinks sent
thither from the stomach, after digested, and do receive a moisture under the
Cuticula, by which it is also thence sucked up by the glandules there planted.
The Head it self is not without its glandules, The Brain by some improperly
called a glandule.
and the Brain by some (although improperly) is allowed a glandule, and by
former ages was accounted nothing else but a friable glandule; and for its sake
were the rest made which it keeps about it: And according to its large
situation, framing greater or smaller diseases than any of the other glandules
whatsoever of the body, they allowing that all fluxions do arise hence, as from
their chief fountain; the which it does diffuse and transmit through several
channels, which by nature are designed for the same purpose. Some of which are
adjoined to the Eyes, others thereof to the Ears, and Nostrils, and some sent
down by the Palate and Throat, and so forwards into the Gulet; others by the
veins passing into the Spinal marrow, and into the blood it self: All which
performing their parts alike, and in good order, they do cleanse and discharge
all excrements from the brain, and do transmit every descending fume and
vapor, which being stopped in their current, do most readily create a disease,
and bring the same into the body, into which having once got footing, and these
fluxions being as it were pinned up, wherever they pass not in their right
order, they do give trouble to the parts wherein they enter, and pain; and pain
being the common mother of inflammation, this does speedily produce a Fever to
it, commanding an attraction on the parts, and sending these acrid influxions
back again to the Brain, and there causing exulcerations, and having arrived
there, and this fluxion being plentiful, does not stop here till its major
parts be exhausted, and sending this collected fluxion toward the extreme
parts, and they as readily receiving the same, bringing with them an
unacquainted distemperiety, do both increase this attraction, and so frame
diseases; both which do spoil Nature in her due course, and put her out of
order, bringing much trouble upon her by breaking her intentions, and violently
assaulting her quiet, by the issue of painful affliction and disease. Thus the
Brain being distempered, and made infirm, by being robbed of its former
soundness, does receive many unexpected perturbations: the mind hereby becoming
disordred, and the body of the Brain it self convulst, and the whole man put
into a strange frame, hence producing either suffocation, or a sudden change in
him by Apoplexy, Lethargy, Epilepsy, and the like. And since it is time to
leave the grand Center, and to come to its fair and strong walls, which keeps
and environs it in safety, that none of its channels or passages may by any
overflow cause a deluge, or disquiet any of its Rivulets in their true course,
Nature has safely prepared many fair channels for the discharge of the same;
amongst the which, we do first arrive at the Eye, the delicate Instrument which
gives us the difference between light and darkness: But since sin has
checquered our best appearances, and put a dark shadow upon our whole
composition, there is found another fluxion which attends this best friend of
ours, our sight, and this by the Greeks is called Opthalmia; which shows its
signs as evidently as the Sun, by its tumefying quality; and if this borrows an
acquaintance with the Nares, it as readily stamps in them an Ozaena, or an
Ulcer which comes not without pain, neither will it leave it without trouble;
if it arrives at the Palate, and from thence creeps into the stomach (the
natural house of Digestion) it does most frequently occasion Dropsies, and
Scurvies, and other diseases, bred from its unhappy society. Besides, if much
fluxion does pass by the Palate into the Throat, as it is seen very oft-times
happening in Consumptive persons, their Lungs are seen overcharged therewith,
and by getting time and abode therein, they are exulcerated thereby, rotting
and spoiling those bellows which gave the poor man liberty to breath by.
Neither is this humor so kind as to work the end of humanity by one particular
method, but according to its variety of places on which it enters, it acts in
diversity of shapes, according to the parts on which it takes cognizance. Thus
if it greets the Spinal marrow, by sending a defluxion of humors from the head
thither, hereby its impetuosity entering the Os sacrum, or getting about it, and
its adjacent parts, it commonly brings that pain which we commonly call the
Sciatica; whereby it makes all its circumjacent parts take notice of its
appearance therein; and by its close twitches, bordring upon the nervous and
tendinous parts thereof, makes the poor patient perfectly weary of its tyranny,
and by its continuance therein, unless thence dispatched by Physic and other
proper means, it does by degrees shrivel him that endures it, into a
Consumption, by spending his vital Spirits, and making him truckle to its
direful and painful cruciations. Sometimes we see fluxions playing their parts
on man, as true Gamesters, working by advantage, and winning by degrees, giving
time for the exercise of their disguised and designed end, whilst at other
times, like people in a passion, do shower down as a torrent, their ready
wishes to their present humor. Hence fetching upon poor mortals, as their
speedy Votaries, either Delirium, Madness, Convulsions, Epilepsies, Apoplexies,
and the like other dangerous Cephalic Diseases; the which once taking fire, do
inflame the whole Body, and make it ready to receive any distemper whatsoever,
and when any part thereof does feel of its cruel usage, like Indian Poison, it
takes not this alone, but calls all its neighboring parts in to share
therewith. And nature being thus royl'd, and the glandules thus diseased, what
art and skill must be used for the bringing these into their right order again,
especially in womankind, who sharing in this distemper, any discreet man may
judge; since we shall find their glandulous parts sometimes affording Milk, The
difference between men and women, as touching their temper and constitution.
and denying the same at others. Man indeed may be wrought upon in a stronger
method, Courage being his Buckler; he being formed of a robust mass, his
passages being more narrow than those of Women, his growth and bulk giving him
much more strength and advantage, both as to all the parts of his body, and to
his glandules amongst the rest, he being born a full and thick creature, both
for sight, service and touch, who by his hard labor, trouble and sweats, can
more readily discharge these superfluous excrements sent into his glandules and
glandulous parts; whilst Woman by nature being made of a more delicate mass,
and better temper, and so gaining a more excellent composition; Beauty and a
fair make being her best dowry given by her Mother Nature, these being her best
supporters, and being made of a finer mould than man, and of a more delightful
stamp, of a more rare body, and so more fluid, and subject to the reception of
humidities, living a sedentary life, and designed as an idle creature by the
Almighty, and so estranged to labors and hard exercises, in her constitution
as well as in her temper, being both more loose and more rare than him: yet we
find although she is thus finely framed, and thus curiously fashioned, she also
is made a partaker of this distemper, and a great sharer in her youth with
mankind: Sin making both kinds as well sufferers as doers thereof. For being in
their humors sometimes very sharp, and these falling in earnest upon or into
their glandules, near their throats, we shall find them much addicted to
salivation or spitting, accompanied with Scorbutic pains, and other
Rheumatisms falling from their heads, with defluxions falling in and about
their teeth and other parts; and diverse other symptoms going along therewith,
which their calm nature is scarce able to resist, or capable to suffer. Let
this serve as a general touch upon some parts of the body as to its glandules,
we arrive now at a more particular treaty of the same, beginning our discourse
thereof with those belonging to the Head, and its parts adjoined thereto.

CHAP. II. Of the Brain, and its glandulous parts.
WE began this discourse with those glandulous parts which are said to belong
to the Brain: The Brain accounted a glandule by the Ancients.
And here we shall first see Hippoc. lib. de Glandulis numbering the Brain it
self amongst the glandules; where he writes, that the Brain is the largest of
all the glandules, it being white, soft, moist, and as it were subpingued; but
they err much who consent to this opinion of his, whereas any judicious man may
see that both in its structure and substance it declares the contrary; besides
the dignity and use thereof ought to gain a better opinion thereof, and the
principalness of its operation showing better things thereof, declaring it a
perfect bowel, as well as the Heart and Liver; and has in it, and does enjoy
its proper faculties as well as any of the other two. And in treating the Brain
according to the Rules of Anatomy, we shall find the Plexus Choroides, The
Plexus Choroides spun out of minute glandules.
which is most noble, and bred from the fine and thin membrane of the Pia
matter, spun and wove out of the most minute glandules and ramifications of
vessels complicated together, which ramifications are supplied by the surcules
of the Carotydal Arteries: This Plexus arising from the lower posteriour parts
of those ventricles, which the branch of the Carotid Arteries do eitherways
enter, the which do constitute the Rete mirabile for the Glandula Pituitaria;
by this Plexus is carried the arterial blood for making of the arterial
spirits, from whence by the small glandules, and scarce visible in some, the
more serous part thereof being unuseful for the preparation of any animal
spirits, is separated, emulged, and collected in the ventricles, not as an
unprofitable excrement, as conjectured by some of the Ancients, but as a
necessary humor prepared there for some useful liquor, A threefold use of this
liquor.
of which there is found a threefold use; as by its coldness first, cooling and
better tempering the blood passing this Plexus, and so better preparing it for
a more useful confection of animal Spirits. Next, that this flowing to the
glandules of the Tonsils and mouth, it there does keep the Larynx, Mouth and
Oesophagus generally moist. And a third may be this, That mixing it self with
the Liquor which passes through the Salival Ductus, it makes up the Saliva;
and hence further moving it self with the meat chewed in the mouth, fit to be
sent into the stomach, it helps forward its digestion, by its peculiarly
fermentative quality, in the same way and method as the Lympha, flowing out of
the liver and glandules, by the Lymphatick Vessels to the Chylifique Ductus,
does prepare the Chyle by a specifique manner, to which it mixeth it self. We
next come to discourse of the Glandula Pituitaria, Of the Glandula Pituitaria.
and this by all Anatomists is allowed a perfect glandule, both from its use
and composition; for it sucketh up the pituitous humors collected in the third
or middle ventricle, it is called by the Greeks (...), a coni figura; and by
some it is termed Cerebri penis: in man it is very small, but much larger in
Bruits, and whatsoever pituitous matter it sucketh up, it sends down to the
Fauces and Palate, by propinque cavities or orifices; or, as our Physicians and
Anatomists do write, by the venous Vessels, or Lymphaeducts; and not only to
the Fauces and Palate, but into all other veins, and mixeth it self with the
venous blood, as has already been proved, by other glandules of the body. And
whether this be the proper use of this glandule, let us further examine: Its
substance.
Its substance being harder than those of other glandules, and covered with a
thin membrane, brought to it from the Pia matter, proceeding from the
Infundibulum: And both Man and Beast are not without it; but in a dead Corpse
it is seen flagging; and in dead bodies not readily opened, it is scarce
discernable, as I have oft-times found in such dead bodies whose brains I have
examined very accurately. Silvius de le Boe gives nerves to this glandule,
Nerves given to this glandule.
and Wharton allows it two nerves, one on either side, arising from the upper
part of the Spinal marrow, being very small, and he that to view will
demonstrate these nerves, I am sure will find no easy task to make good. But
to enquire somewhat further as to its use; Its use.
it is allowed to take, and continually to receive that phlegm by the
Infundibulum, which comes from the third ventricle of the brain, the which
ought by some way or other to be dismissed and discharged thence, but there are
no ways yet found out for its discharge, or parts appointed for the reception
thereof; besides, this glandule by some is said to be exactly covered with the
Dura Matter, and firmly fixed to the Sella equina, the which membrane is never
open; how therefore can this happen, when it comes by the Infundibulum to this
glandule, that it can make no further progress; and should this flow further,
whether should it tend, for there is no part near it to receive it with safety;
neither can it without prejudice borrow any further acquaintance with any part.
Experience it self does convince, that a Serum and excrementitious humors have
been found in the brain, I mean in its ventricles; and since it is so, it will
be worth time to find out by what excretory passage these do discharge
themselves: And for proof hereof it is allowed as a general opinion amongst the
best of Anatomists, that this serous humor sent from the glandules of the
Plexus Choroides, is thence exstill'd into the ventricles, and this made
apparent by Hydropical persons, who have these ventricles generally filled with
liquor; the cause of which can only be attributed to the more aqueous part of
the blood, the which does depose the greater Colluvies of the Serum, between
the Circulation, the which is still retained in the glandules, or reduced to
the vein. Whereby we may satisfy our selves, that in those who have a more
aqueous part in their Cerebrum, or Cerebellum, and so less apt for production
of Spirits, this filling the vessels, if herein a greater quantity of Serum be
found, than can either be sucked up or contained in them, all the overplus does
fall into the subjacent cavity, and this declares whence and how this Colluvies
is carried between the ventricles thereof; and nature here shows her care as
well as her curiosity, by providing several pipes and channels for the
dismissing and discharging them, as we have already made good; planting in the
front of it the Processus Mamillares, and what she sends by them is dispatched
by the Nares, or Nostrils; at each side thereof she has in readiness the
Parotides, and these she makes use of by the Salival Ductus. But as a
confirmation of this Glandula Pituitaria, whose Ductus is inserted to its
Infandibulum, Willis does offer, that it does suck up the serous humors, and
do dispatch them outward, which he thus does signify, because, as he says,
not only those falling from the brains, but those also secreted or separated
from the blood sent into the brain, it admits between the pores; being thus
made good, by injecting Ink into one trunk of an artery, you will find the Rete
mirabile, and very often the inward texture of this glandule covered with a black
color; whence he asserts, that this glandule may and can suck up into it the
serous humors, the which it not only receives from the brain, but also from
the serous blood in its ascent thither, A double use shown thereof.
here being a double use made thereof; the first taking into it the serous
humors from the brain, which is but the least; the other which comes from the
blood, being of greater existence in its passage thither. And although we find
in man no Rete mirabile, yet we cannot deny Lymphaeducts in the brain, or the
like vessels, which are apparently visible; and this humor thus lodged in
them, is sucked up by the glandules: In this glandule, Silvius writes he has
found many small fibers spun out of a very fine texture; Stones found in this
glandule proved.
and he affirms, he once found therein a small round stone, much in bigness to
a fourth part of a Pea. Vanhorn, the most accurate Anatomist, writes, he found
a stone therein in the company of many of his Scholars, which took up the
better part of this glandule, the which he kept as a rarity in his Closet.
Various are the uses of this glandule, according to the diversity of men's
opinions, Various uses designed this glandule by Authors.
some of which I have already shown you; some being also very strong in
opinion, that this was made for the confirming and strengthening the use of
Plexus Choroides; others, with Galen, ascribing its use to that of a Valve,
shutting up and keeping in the animal Spirits; others are as ready to allow
this the place of the Soul, holding all principal faculties to arise thence,
and from thence to emit and dispatch its commands to the nerves, for their
working its effects throughout the whole body; some as highly declaring this
use thereof, whilst others as manifestly do vindicate other uses designed for
it: And amongst these, Cartesius says, that the Soul is joined to the whole
Body, but its chief exercitations by which it performs all its functions, he
affirms do primarily and principally dwell here more than in any other part
thereof. Regius Med. lib. 1. cap. 12. writes this for the Common Sensory, and
does also declare that the Soul has no other subsistence in any other part of
the Body but in this. But our Worthy Dr. Wharton does much doubt of this high
esteem which is given to this glandule, and thinks that its proper use may be
to suck up the excrementitious humidities which may arise from the upper part
of the Spinal marrow. And thus according to the various Opinions of men,
diversity of uses are put upon this glandule: I hope that as they have their
Opinions free, I may bring mine with as much safety, Obs.
where I shall scarce join in the Hypothesis with those who call this the place
of the Soul, and that from thence all animal faculties do flow as from their
Origination, when as we see all Animals, let them want imagination, memory, and
other animal powers and faculties, yet this glandule they have in them; and
till I be better confirmed as to the other uses given hereof, I shall presume
to believe that its use as yet is locked up from humane knowledge, and nothing
hitherto but a pure conjectural Opinion hereof has given it breath amongst men,
which is testimony enough to confirm the assertion, since as hitherto no man
has as yet positively affirmed its particular use.

CHAP. III. Of the Glandulous Caruncle of the Eye.
Why this was framed.
THat tears might not always flow from the Eye, the wise Creator has given to
either Eye a glandulous Caruncle, one that is both soft, and furnished with
many small sanguinary Vessels, with some almost invisible nerves; with two
others, conveying the Lympha (they being more perspicuous in Beasts than in
Men) arising from the interior part of the glandulous flesh; this covering the
cavity (and by some is called Glandula Lachrimalis) prohibiting the continual
efflux of the internal liquor, the which by us is called Tears, upon their
coming forth. This Caruncle being by cold air overmuch contracted, or so
occasioned by any sharp corrosive humor, or ulcerated, the cavity not being
exactly and close shut up, does not hinder the eruption of Tears thence
distilling, or their continual and involuntary efflux. Obs.
Floretus lib. 2. Obs. 10. writes of a Girl of nine years old, which had tears
dropped generally from one of her Eyes, which were cold, and no ways corroding
the same: this Child being of a pituitous constitution, was also accompanied
with a continual Catarrh. Obs.
A second observation of his is also very remarkable, where he writes, that
it is usual for tears to gush from the Eyes, but for drops of blood to come
thence is a matter of greater moment; where he also tells us of a thin and lean
Woman, from whose Eyes did generally distill bloody drops, yea, Blood it self;
her Urine being much in color to that tincture which is made of Saffron, save
only somewhat blacker, much resembling that of those who are troubled with the
Jaundice. She being asked, How long she had been in that condition? She
answered, That for about three weeks she had this bloody flux of Tears
distilling from her Eyes, and her Body was from that time colored with this
yellowish tincture, her Eyes not being very painful to her in this condition,
unless in the mornings, by reason of this continual flux, she not opening the
same without some difficulty, she finding some itching also going along with
the same, she being costive in her Body for about fourteen days together, by
the use of Catharticks, and other remedies proper for her disease being
prescribed by him, and other Topics outwardly applied, she recovered of all
her diseases.

CHAP. IV. Of the Palpebrae, or Eyelids, and both the Canthi, or corners of
the Eyes.
AMongst the external senses, that most excellent faculty which produces light
to the globular orbs of our Eye is first to be had in esteem, these being as
the windows of the mind, and messengers thereof transmitting a great and
visible part thereinto, and by the Ancients called the face of Love. In these
strong Orbits are the Eyes contained as in an enclosure, or in a globular soft
pillow, kept up by the safety of the eyelids, as its coverings, keeping both
dust and vapors, and every thing that might otherwise be injurious to them,
and defending them from too much light, and keeping them more pure and bright.
Julius Casserius has this Observation taken from the Palpebrae, that they who
have their upper Palpebrae elated, Obs.
are commonly proud and fierce, whereas such as have the same deprest, as
keeping the Eye about half shut, to be of an humble and mild constitution and
nature. These Palpebrae being open, they do frame two angles, called by the
Latins Canthi; the outward being smaller, near which Orbit of the Eye is
planted a large glandule, Here is planted Glandula innominata.
which some do call Glandula innominata placed in the upper Region of this
angle, thicker upwards, and thinner downwards, divided into some lobes, and
sending forth many small Lymphatick vessels, which thence passing between the
interior coat of the Palpebrae, they do break through the same with small
Formula's, somewhat distant from the Cilia: Nicolaus Steno being the first
which showed the same to the World in the dissection of Sheeps and Calves
heads, and the like. The inward Canthus is greater and larger, in which the
aforesaid glandule (which indeed is the true glandule, and by some said to be
more thick,) closing the Lachrymal Foramen or cavity, either of these glandules
do serve for the pouring out the Lymphatick liquor separated from the Blood
through the most thin Lymphatick pipes to to the Eyes, Its use*
both for their continual humectation, abstertion of the horney coat, and more
easy motion of the Palpebrae. At this very day many have ascribed the
production of Tears to arise from the Lymphatick vessels belonging to the Eyes,
but they do neither demonstrate the way of lachrymation, nor the vessels
themselves that should transmit these tears to the Eyes, till Steno had given a
view thereof; and in his Book de Glandul. Oculorum, he does not badly appoint
the serous humor, separated from the arterious blood, to be the chief agent of
these Tears; The chief agent of Tears.
but as to the manner and place of Separation, none before him has given a
peculiar judgment. Where also he thinks the Blood carried through the arteries
into the glandules of the Eye, its superfluous part thereof being sucked up by
the veins, the veins being truly anywise contracted or constringed (no ways
permitting this) and therefore by reason of a more tedious delay of this plenty
of Blood in the glandules, the Serum more plentifully being thence separated
does issue forth: Now the veins may be constringed by the glandules being
tumefied, produced by a more plentiful influx of animal Spirits, the which
being inserted in the glandules by small nerves, according to the pleasure or
will of the Patient, more or less, as in pain, anger, joy or sadness, may
discharge the same out of the glandules, and so move them either more or less,
according to the greater or lesser constriction of them. This new Hypothesis
does seem to carry in it a kind of specious acceptance, but has no great
matter of truth in it, not being able to maintain the fountain of Tears; for if
we compare the great plenty thereof suddenly flowing out, with the small
sanguiferous vessels of these glandules, we must allow it a little strange that
they thence should have their Origination, whereas the Arteries are both small,
and for the most part invisible, which are carried to the glandules of the Eye.
Again, if it might be allowed, that in the time of sadness the Blood should
more plentifully arrive at the Eyes, and that the glandules themselves should
herewith become more tumefied, and hence also both press and narrow the veins,
Reason it self must needs contradict this assertion, for in sadness the pulse
of the Heart and Arteries is both small and contractive, the outward parts
growing cold, the Heart calling from thence the Blood into its own Center, and
therefore does not so freely send it to the exterior parts; and so also into
the Arteries of the Head, neither is there any reason to be given, why in
sadness a greater plenty of Tears or of serosity should be thus carried to the
glandules, than to other parts. Obs.
Lusitanus Centur. 7. Curat. 63. writes of a young Child, who to all appearance
being in very good health, and yet in the interior part of her Eye, called the
greater angle, the head of a Worm began to show it self, not seldom occupying
and troubling the Eye it self; which sight much troubling her friends and
spectators, this Worm being drawn out thence, did equal the length of a span,
being of a whitish color, and having a moderate thickness; the Child received
no great hurt thereby all the while it was lodged in her, nor left any evident
sign of its abode, when it was drawn out. A case certainly admirable, and
therefore worthy our Observation.

CHAP. V. Of Tears, and whence they do proceed, as also of the Glandula
Lachrymalis.
HAving in my former Discourse mentioned the passages by which Tears do make
their deflux, these themselves as yet by the best of Philosophers being but
obscurely described, hoping it may seem no great digression, amongst the rest
to bring in my mite as to the History thereof, to show how these serous drops
do descend and fall from the Eyes, and what they are, and whence shown to
proceed: We shall therefore first introduce the Opinions of diverse worthy
Writers, Diverse opinions concerning Tears.
who have writ of the same. Empedocles believes they are made and framed out of
attenuated and eliquated blood. Joannes Baptista Scortias will have them to
arise and be generated in the angle of the Eye from the Animal Spirits, the
which being comprest by any sense of sadness, does speedily distill into water;
and gives this as his reason for his assertion, that as urin and sweat are the
excrements of the venous and arterious Blood, so Tears are the same which come
from the nervous juice that proceed from the Animal Spirits. But this opinion
of his cannot stand on firm ground, for we shall see many in their greatest
mirth have Tears dropping from their Eyes, without any thoughts of sadness at
all; neither has sadness itself that vigor in it to cause a tumefaction in
the glandules, more than mirth, or pain, or sorrow; for as to the Animal
Spirits, which Steno says, according to the command of the mind, do either
work more or lesser prevalently in us, and more or less sparingly in the
aforesaid passions, and so according to their greater or lesser quantity; this
shall be more clearly demonstrated by our succeeding discourse. But to proceed,
Georgius Nyssenus does suppose that Tears do arise from many vapors carried to
the Head by the perturbation of the Bowels, and by the coldness of the Brain
being condensed into water, the which is thrown out thence as an unuseful
excrement. Aristotle in his Problem* writes that Tears are sweat, or a certain
vapor; and Cartesius says, that there are not parts in the whole Body which
do afford vapors like the Eyes. Now as Dissenters to these Opinions, both
Aquapendens and Casserius do enter the Stage, as two strong opposers, and do as
readily affirm that Tears are a thin excrement of the Eyes, bred out of the
relics of the proper digestion, and collected in the fat and glandules.
Others there are that think Tears nothing else but Serum, which is separated
from the Blood sent up to the Head; the which by a certain motion of the
Spirits (the pores being thus disposed) do cause this outward fluxion, but this
goes as the former. And although Steno has been very fruitful in his
conjectures about Tears, and has with most excellent arguments seemed to
support the same, yet whosoever shall closely examine him about them, shall
find that he has not given the true cause of Tears, neither can involuntary
Tears arise hence. Thus with him many others have not arrived at this true
fountain of Lympha, although having filled many sheets with their conjectures
thereof, and likewise willing they should pass as current. That we may seem to
come and enter with a better and more true view thereof, The difference between
the Lachrymal and Lymphatick humor.
let us with Diemerbroeck, first examine the difference between this lachrymal
liquor, and that lymphatick humor, which is effused from the glandules to the
moystning and levigation of the Eyes, passing through the most thin Lymphatick
Vessels; their differences being thus shown, the Lympid being much thinner than
the Lymphid, the one flowing from the Lymphatick Vessels of the Eyes, the other
from the Ventricles of the Brain; a second reason is, this is less sharp and
saline, whereas Tears are to taste both sharp, saline, and erosive. Another is
this, being but small in quantity, not offending the Eyes by its plenty, as do
Tears, which do oft-times disorder them by their being showered. Again, this is
rather grateful to the Eyes than prejudicial, no ways corroding or fretting
them, perfectly crossing both humor and temper of Tears, which are sometimes
seen so corrosive, that they have consumed the Lachrymal glandulous Caruncles,
as we have already shown. These being premised, we arrive at the Tears
themselves, and their discourse, beginning with their definition: What Tears
are, and how made.
And these by most Authors are allowed as the thin and serous particles made
and framed out of a pituitous humor collected in the Brain, and thence flowing
out of the Eyes; Five causes thereof.
and there are also allowed five causes which do make for the expulsion of
these serous particles by the lachrymal cavities: One being the plenty of these
pituitous serous humors collected in the Brain; a second is their sudden
colliquation, or strong agitation; a third is the contraction of the Brain, and
its membranes; a fourth, no exact contention of the lachrymal glandule being
made by the glandulous caruncle; a fifth may be the obstruction of the spongy
Bone in the Nares. For the most part two or three of these causes do concur, as
shall be made good by the following discourse, when we come to examine how in
diverse causes Tears are seen to flow from the Eyes.

Tears in sadness shown.
Thus in sadness the membranes of the Brain, with the Brain it self are
contracted; and hence the serous humors of the arterious Blood, out of the
substance of the Brain it self, and Glandula Pituitaria, with the small
interjected glandules of the Plexus Choroidis are copiously expressed into the
Ventricles, and plentifully sent into the spongy parts of the inward Nares, by
and through the narrow papillary processes of the spongy Bones, the which when
they cannot readily entertain, coming faster upon them than was expected by a
copious and viscid flux; the thinner and more serous particles thereof do break
forth by the small lateral Foramina, or cavities, into the greater angles of
the Eyes, and so washing them therewith, make them discharge some part thereof,
and thus do form Tears; the thicker and more viscid parts thereof being much
apter for making obstruction in the spongy Bones of the upper Nares, and these
by degrees thence dispatched and discharged by the Nares and Palate, and so sent
out by the mouth; and by how much the more this obstruction of the Nares is
lessened, by so much the more is the production of Tears lessened therewith;
for this being sublated, these thinner and more serous humors descending in
their passages as through the Nares and Palate, there is nothing that can hinder
their proceeding in Natures appointment, and so no Tears can hence be expected,
Nature going on gladly in her designs, and unless a new obstruction be made by
this viscid matter, and so puts a stoppage to this her methodical proceeding,
we shall find no new stock of Tears begot, nor no room left for any further
commerce therewith. The same reason may be given for other passions; Tears in
joy, and how.
Thus in laughter we have seen a plentiful stock of Tears have issued out, and
yet not by the same reason as the former, for by this changing of the position
of the muscles of the Body, and the contraction of the membranes of the Brain
therewith adjoined, a great plenty of these serous humors are expressed from the
Brain, and its glandules into its ventricles, and from hence into the papillary
processes, the which do readily flow to the Nostrils and Palate, and these by
extraordinary laughter causing a spumous or frothy Mucus from the Nares and
mouth, they at the same time sometimes coughing, do hereby occasion and make an
obstruction in the passages, in which stoppage the thinner parts of this humor
do separate themselves from the more thick and mucous substance, and so do
force their passage through the lachrymal cavities, and thence do gush out by
the Eyes in the form of Tears, and because this concussion which thus happens
in laughter does not long continue, hence is it that those Tears which do thus
also happen, do not show themselves in that plenty as they do in sadness. The
same cause may be given why young men, and such as are given to amorous
Courtship, whose minds are not easily conversant with melancholy, being more
readily resolved against every appearance of the same, by enjoying the best
things they can produce or procure; they being not so easily disturbed by
sadness, or their brains contracted, and so not so readily bearing a part in
Tears; whereas we see old men, infants and children suddenly showing their
Tears: in these their glandulous caruncles being much drier, more inequal, and
more contracted, and they being in these both more soft and less firm, and the
lachrymal cavity so weakly closed up, that by never so small an impulse of this
serous humor, it makes a very ready way for a new shower of Tears. There are
many other causes of Tears, Many causes of Tears.
declared by several Authors, and amongst the rest, as a common one, is that of
Onions, these being seen both a ready and easy procurer of the same, and this
they do by their attenuating and incising acrimony which they have in them,
partly attenuating the humor in the Head, and so making it more fluxile, and
partly by their tedious trouble and vellication sent from their acrimony to the
Eyes and Nostrils, contracting hereby both the brain it self, as also its
membranes, sending forth and discharging the pituitous humors lodged therein,
and dispatching the thinner and finer part thereof by the Lachrymal cavities,
and by their acrimony forcing the same out by the Eyes from their absence.
Whereas Smoke, Dust, Wind, and the like, do fetch Tears from the Eyes another
way, for these do act by a painful vellication induced to the Adnata,
contracting herein the Lachrymal glandulous caruncle, and so covering the
cavity, the Brain with its membranes being hereby contracted by the painful
sense thereof, and sending forth as well as expressing the serous and pituitous
humors by this contraction, driving the same by the papillary processes
toward the Os Cribreforme and Nares, and whilst the thicker parts thereof are
sent through the Nares, the thinner parts thereof do flow forth by the
lachrymal cavities. Obs. Of Tears flowing from overmuch mirth.
And that Tears do sometime flow from overmuch joy is made good by Willis,
when he writes, that in gladness having admiration joined thereto, the
sensitive mind expanding it self very much hereat, does most amply diffuse its
Systarii, or emissaries, as it were fearing dissolution, does presently
contract it self; wherefore in such affect the Blood abundantly flowing into
the Brain, swells up all its Vessels, and by its surchage does distend them,
and after this its tumefaction, the vessels hereby being contracted, a flux
succeeds, and so does dispatch a great plenty of humor into the glandules,
which is thus dismissed by Tears.

CHAP. VI. Of the Parotidal Glandules.
Where the Parotides are planted.
AT the outside of the Ears are planted thick and large glandules, called
Parotides, not placed just behind the Ears, but rather under them, at the root
thereof on either side of the Head; amongst which are apparent two very large
ones, the smaller and foremost of which is said to be a conglobated one, the
other being spun out of mamany fragments of glandules, is both by Sylvius and
Steno called a conglomerated glandule: they both are very apparent in Sheep and
Calves. They are allowed to keep up the vessels sent to them, Their use.
and because they do also take into them the serous humors sent to them,
separated from the arterious Blood, and through which some Lymphatick and
Salival Vessels do pass, they do sometime gather together much pituitous
ballast into the Emunctories of the Brain; besides these, there are found many
other glandules planted in the whole spaces beneath the lower mandible, in
which Scrophulous, and many the like Tumors do frequently make their abode,
and these are not called Parotides, but by Wharton more properly named Jugular
glandules, These called by Wharton Jugular glandules.
whose number is great, and whose magnitude is but small. Horses are said to
have these glandules much larger than any other creatures; and Dr. Wharton
writes, that he has dissected a Horses glandule which has weighed nine
ounces, and yet was neither preternatural or tumemefied beyond its natural
state and constitution. Anatomists assign these three uses.
Anatomists do generally assign three uses to these glandules; as first to keep
up the division of the Vessels; secondly, to milk and suck up the excrements of
the Brain; and the third is to keep all the circumjacent parts in a good
moisture. The first of these, according to Wharton, is said to be but of small
moment, no large vessel either entering them or passing through them, they being
but capillary Vessels which gives them their acquaintance and company; as in
answering the second he thus writes, as to their sucking up the moist
excrements from the Brain, this would be of great use and weight, provided any
ways or passages could be shown or declared how these excrements should be
brought thence hither, and so made ready for their discharge. For in Catarrhs
and Rheumatisms we do appa^ently see these thin moist humou^s, plentifully
flowing through the Nares and Palate, distilling thither and thence very
frequently by the Cribreform cavities, but none of these are seen to enter and
pass the Parotides; when as therefore the excrements of the Brain do not at all
reach or arrive at these glandules, I cannot see how they should be any ways
allowed to pass thence, a more patent way being ordered for their passage, as
the Nares and Palate. And as to their third use ascribed them, these do no more
keep the circumjacent parts moist in these parts, than in the other parts of
the Body; and till some passage be found out, which should demonstrate their
discharge of excrement from the Brain into these glandules, so as to afford
this quantity and plenty of humidity thus discoursed of, I shall give as little
credit to this use given them, as to either of the former.

Fallopius and Wharton do give them these two uses, Two us^s assigned by
Fallopius and Wharton.
as that they do some of them receive the superfluities sent from a hard branch
of a nerve of the fifth pair, and do reduce the same into the veins; and
secondly, that they do refresh the Ears, and its circumjacent parts. Forestus
lib. 12. de Aurum morbis does tell us several Histories of these glandules, as
we may read in Obs. 16, 17, 18. libr. ejusd. One is of a Woman, Obs.
who in the sixth day of her sickness sending for him, being very feverish, and
perplexed with a great pain of her Head, and her Heart vexed, where she also
had not only the Parotidal glandules, but also all her Neck and Throat swelled;
he seeing this inflammation thus increasing with redness, a Surgeon, who
being formerly called to her, and he being then present also, anointed these
inflamed parts with Vnguentum Nutritum, and that very inadvisedly truly, his
duty rather being to discuss than repel the morbifique matter, which gave first
being to this large tumor and inflammation; but Forestus coming to her and
applying Cupping-glasses, with Scarification to her Scapula's, and using such
remedies ^s were most proper in her case* as are described by him in his
Observat. 16. she recovered of her sickness, and beyond all hopes, was reduced
to her former health. Obs.
A second of his is of a Woman troubled with a red face, being made of a
sanguiolent temper and habit, about thirty years of age, who in the glandules
about her right Ear, had a large and red tumor; he being sent for to this
Woman, and considering, she being feverish, and much troubled with this pain,
which continually dwelt in the affected part, and knowing that it took its
origination from Blood thus plentifully entering these parts, by convenient
purging her Body, venesection and the like Remedies used, and other external
Topics administered, her Fever ceased, her pain mittigated, and she perfectly
recovered. A third he has, Obs 18. Istius Libri, Obs.
which is of a poor Woman, who having a loose and aedematous tumor, seizing
the glandules about her right Ear, made of thick and viscid matter, without
much pain or Fever, upon his coming to her, not seeing any great plethory of
Blood in her, he in this case made use of no venaesection; but for the
lessening of this pituitous matter, ordered such things as should give a better
digestion thereto, by prescribing her purges and pills, and attenuating
decoctions, and the like; and by the use of proper medicines to the affected
parts, he both suppurated the tumor, and by Caustic opened the same,
cleansing the Ulcer, afterward filled it up with new flesh, and produced a
cicatrice to the recovery of the Woman, etc.

CHAP. VII. Of the Jugular Glandules. (Wharton.)
THese had their nam^s given them from Wharton, Their names given from their
places.
where having their habitation and abode near the Jugular vessels, he gave them
the name of Jugular glandules, as you may see Cap. 19. Adenogr. where he
writes, That in a Body dissected by him there were found fourteen in either
side thereof, and one above the rest somewhat longer, somewhat disjoined from
them, (lodging on either side at the root of the Styloidal process, between the
muscles of the Neck and the Jugular Vessels), some of these are larger than
others, and do vary in their magnitude even from the smalness of a Coriander
seed to the largeness of a Pea, as he there tells you. Some of these are
planted in the fore-parts, others in the back parts, some in the upper parts,
others in the lower parts thereof; the upper parts thereof do reach even to the
Styloidal process, and to the lower and back part of the Mandibles; the lower
thereof do descend near the sides of the Thyroidis, between the Spine and
Thoracick vessels, and Thymus into the Thorax; and in such who have arrived at
ripe age, this is taken by some for the Thymus. In Sheep and Calves, and the
like creatures, these glandules are seen to be very numerous, running from the
Throat to the Diaphragma, and so do descend even to second series of the
vertebres of the Neck and Thorax. Their color.
They do bear the same color of those of the Neck, save only that they are
somewhat redder which are planted downwards, those more pale which are placed
above. Their substance and figure.
Their substance and figure do no ways answer those glandules which are placed
about the Neck, Thighs, or under the Armpits; they seem to belong to the
reductive glandules, and are made for the same use, Their uses.
as for the reducing the superfluous humidity of the nerves, which they receive
into the veins and lymphatick vessels next to them; and this is commonly seen
in these maxillary glandules, and in many others planted hereabout, framed for
the exonerating and discharging of the superfluities of the nerves every way,
and therefore whether they do depose the same either into the veins, or into
any other parts by them, their use is of the same nanature in respect of the
nerves: And that which is worthy note, Struma's and swellings do most
frequently happen here.
is that Struma's and Scrophulous Tumors do most generally happen in these
glandules and the neighboring glandules, because these with them being any
ways obstructed, they do not perform their usual office, and so give a ready
way for the preparation and make of these said Tumors, as I shall more largely
demonstrate in my second Book, when I shall show the difference between
Struma's and Scrophulas, as to their Species and Originations.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Tongue, and its Tonsils.
THe Tongue in Latin called a Lingua a Lingendo, being the Instrument both of
Speech and Taste, and the help of sending down both meat and drink into the
Stomach, is placed in the mouth under the Palate; and this in its upper part
has in it somewhat of a glandulous flesh lodged under its Cutis; inwards and
downwards it is seen perfectly musculous, and does every way show the use of its
muscles. Arantius will have the Tongue a glandule, although improperly.
Arantius is one who will have this to be a glandulous part, and if we may
credit him, he does assign its composition to be framed out of three various
substances; for immediately under its membrane, there is somewhat of a pulpy
substance about its root especially, the other substance of the Tongue is
framed of most thin and implext fibers, amongst which is planted fat,
peculiarly proper for keeping them moist, and making them more fit for use, and
this may be one great cause why he was so ready to give it the name of a
glandule, and this his assertion he is ready to confirm with these three
arguments: As the Tongue has in its substance all kind of fibers, and these so
intertext, that they cannot be divided one from another, as may in other
muscles. Secondly, There Is no ligamental fibers planted in the Tongue for its
strength; as is in other muscles. And his Third is, No muscle tastes, but the
pulp of the Tongue is the instrument of Taste, as Piccolom; and therefore
Arantius affirms that the Tongue is no muscle, but a glandule. The Tongue
proved to be a muscle.
But we on the contrary shall find that the Tongue's fleshy part is musculous,
when as in all the differences of animal motion, to the most subtle vowels,
syllables, and pronouncing of Letters; all which do most suddenly express the
conceptions of the mind, never tired in their motion, being either contracted,
dilated, doubled, or laterally moved, according to the minds pleasure
performing all its actions; and without this were a muscle, and had others
joined in consent therewith, these laudable motions were not thus to be
performed by it. But our discourse at present not being concerned with muscles,
I shall show Dr. Wharton's Answers to Arantius, Wharton's Answer to Arantius.
where he first convinces, That the fibers of the Tongue do evince it to be
musculous; and that its substance, for the most part thereof is musculous,
which appears from its various motions which it performs, and the variety of
its fibers so diversely intertext, do only suffice for the diversity of its
motions. Secondly, it is no ways necessary that every Muscle must needs have a
Tendon, but that which has a fleshy beginning may have the like end. Thirdly,
That Nerves do pass through its whole substance, and this is perceived in a
Hemeplegia, in which is seen very often one part may be sound, and the other
perplexed with a Palsy. And then lastly, the musculous part of the Tongue does
not taste, but the membrane which does cover its glandulous pulp, especially
near its root; and thus by the intervention of this membrane it takes notice of
all sapours. Thus much of Dr. Wharton.

Of the Larynx.
The Larynx is formed of diverse parts that it may freely enjoy its office
modulation of the voice, and this requiring a continual stream of moisture to
afford it common liquoring, Several glandules given to it.

Two very large ones at the root of the Tongue.


it has several glandules placed as Sponges for its collective uses, amongst
which are two very large ones, conspicuous at the uppermost seat of the Larynx,
or rather at the root of the Tongue, one on either side; and these by the
Greeks are called (...). lodging in the narrow passages of the Fauces. By the
Barbarians they are commonly called Amygdalae, yet no ways carrying in them the
likeness or figure of an Almond; in Latin they are called Tonsillae, and at
this day do bear the English name of Tonsils amongst us: They are covered with
the same coat as is the mouth, and are endued with small Veins and Arteries,
arising from the Carotid Arteries and Jugular veins; and, as Wharton says,
although in sound Bodies they are less protuberant, yet in a morbid body, where
these are much inflamed or tumefied, they do carry a good resemblance of an
Almond; and hence it is presumed they had this name given them. They are loose
and spongy in their nature, and are of a similar friable substance, much
resembling Honey and Oil concreted together by cold, save only they are more
firmly adherent as it were by a membranous connection; soft to touch, but being
boiled, hard: for upon their boiling, they do lose their porosity, and so
become indurate: they have various Ductus's, They have various Ductus.
and these proper to themselves; they have one Sinus, both large and oval, on
either side opened into the mouth, whose skirt does obtain two large ones, and
much lesser cavities; in the same manner are also many protuberancies, like
little Papillae or Teats, dispersed through the glandulous root of the Tongue,
every of which have their proper perforations allowed them; and out of these
various Foramina is a Mucus sent forth, disposed thus by the root of the
Tongue, where these glandules are most thick (the mouth being opened) does send
the same by their common cavities into the Throat; and this cavity in an Ox
will admit the entrance of a little finger into it. Fallopius has observed,
that sometimes the opening of this great Sinus does in some measure represent a
small Ulcer, and is often times treated and taken by the inexpert Chyrurgion as
the same; this oft-times happening in the mouth by a plenty of Tumors falling
into this glandule, and so causing it to give its thus patent appearance, as
shall be made good by some Observations thereof at the end of this Chapter: Two
more under these, next to the lower part of the Larynx.
Under these Tonsils are planted two others, next to the lower Region of the
Larynx, one on either side; at the sides of some of the first Annulars, or
Rings of the Windpipe, these because they are guifted with many small Veins and
Arteries, do carry a more bloody and solid substance in them than other
glandules, and do resist the Knife in dissection more than others. There Is much
controversy about the uses of these glandules, A Controversy about their uses.
some supposing they are framed for moystning the Larynx outwardly with a
viscous and pinguid humidity, and so making the Cartelages more apt for motion;
but because there is not much need of them for this use, I do suppose they may
more properly give assistance to the Salival vessels; others, with Riolan do
affirm, that they are framed for collecting the humidities which are sent
thither from the Brain; and with him do allow that these were here planted for
preventing the fall of the same upon the Lungs; and that this may appear
somewhat probable, he enlarges upon the blowing of the Nostrils, and in sucking
in of the Palate, by which we find a kind of mucous slimy matter or spittle
coming thence, which must necessarily proceed from the Brain; so also he
supposes that that which enters the Tonsils, may also distill and fall from
thence, for in such creatures who do want these glandules, as Peacocks and the
like, who also want Teeth, nor do not chew their humidities, in such it does
immediately fall into the cavity of the mouth, not into the Thorax. Again, if
the excrements of the Brain must first necessarily fall into the mouth before
they enter the Lungs, and then into them likewise; these Tonsils will make
nothing for their sufflamination. Four uses allowed by Wharton.
A second use which some do attribute to these glandules is, that they do
convert the humidities sent to them from the Brain into spittle: Against which
assertion we offer this objection, What the humor is which is sent into the
mouth by them.
The humor which is thus sent into the mouth by the glandules is not spittle,
but rather some mucous and pituitous matter, not much unlike that which is
dispatched by the Nostrils, and what difference this carries from spittle, every
man may easily judge: but of this more fully, and more properly when we come to
the Salival glandules of Steno and Wharton. A third use given to these, is to
keep the Tongue moist, and all its circumjacent parts; this use may be allowed
them, the humor coming from them naturally being mucilaginous, and therefore
most proper for keeping the parts most lubricous; and moreover, the small
Lymphatick vessels or Salival vessels, as also the small cavites of the
membrane of the mouth may very well allow the same, especially when the Mouth
and Tongue are moved, the which every one may experience in himself when he
pleases. And hence when the nutriments are chewed in the mouth, partly
spontaneously, partly by the masticated nutriment, this liquor thus expressed out
of the glandules does much more plentifully flow into the mouth, both for the
framing a better mixture, useful for the fermentative preparation of nutriment,
as also for a more ready and more easy deglutition of the same: In rest
therefore when the Mouth is not moved, and when the effusion of this liquor
does also cease, as is generally seen in those which are asleep, the Mouth and
Fauces do soon become dry, being robbed and deprived of this liquor, especially
if they do sleep with an open mouth. A fourth use is, That they do help
Tasting, the Which cannot be done without moisture; of which Opinion our worthy
Wharton is, who allows these the primary Organ thereof, the moister parts most
relating to spitting; both which do much contribute toward the extraction of
the tincture of meats, as also toward a plentiful mastication; and so may more
properly be allowed to be framed for the purpose of Tasting or Gust's sake. For
dry things, without having some tincture in them, are altogether unuseful as to
taste; when therefore the mucilaginous humor is less fit for the extraction of
Tincture, and also less proper in mastication for mixing with the meats, how
far this may make toward tasting, any one may judge; but how far it may
conduce toward a gust, when it is as its proper Organ, is already described by
him. The true uses hereof, allowed by Wharton, are these five, Five uses
allowed by Wharton.
which I shall only name: As First, he declares these glandules the primary
Organ of Taste; where he also writes, That in all parts of the Mouth in which
Taste is perceived, this glandule by its intervening membrane does act the
same; Nature never interposing between the gift which is to feel, and the Organ
it self which feels it; when as therefore the part is seen every way exercised
in Taste, this approaches near the gustile object, and this is necessary that
it should be the instrument of Taste, and if it be the instrument, it does
thence convince its gift, which is by him called the first use thereof. The
Second use allows them as an excretory Instrument, its office being to separate
some mucous and pituitous matter, falling from the lower part of the Brain, by
the nerves especially; those of the third pair distilling and flowing thence,
partly from the sanguinary mass effused by the Arteries, and so refunded into
the Fauces and Mouth, as is already described by him; but this is readily
refuted by Diemerbroeck, when he writes, That whereas Wharton does say that
these glandules (without all reason) are endued with a notable sense, and that
they are the true and primary Organs of Taste, and supposes that the pituitous
matter flowing from the Brain to them by the Nerves, (as if thick and viscid
matter could pass through these minute and visible pores of the nerves so
plentifully) is a thing which requires not great difficulty to refute, he
allowing them to be a great productive toward this faculty of Tasting. A Third
use of these glandules he allows is, to moysten the Fauces, Larynx and Tongue,
for their better and more easy respiration, that the voice hereby may be more
sound, and that deglutition may thereby also with more ease be performed. His
fourth is, That in plentiful Catarrhs of the Brain, the Nostrils at this time
being obstructed, part of the matter being imbibed into their spongy substance,
may hence be dispatched and discharged by the mouth. And his last is, That by
its fermentative faculty, the liquor which thence comes into the Mouth, and so
entering the Stomach, does therein promote digestion; by whose acidity also it
does contract the same, the which does chiefly tend toward the promoting a
fermentation, and is the chief cause thereof.

History 1.
Langius Epistol. 7. Tom. 2. tells us there of a Noble man, who being afflicted
with a continual Cough, arising by a Stone concreted in his Tonsils; Physicians
using all drying Remedies, in hope of stopping his Rheum, which they suspected
was the occasion of his Cough; by the use of which the Muscles of his Larynx
were much tumefied; by Langius his advice, Emollients and suppurating Medicines
being prescribed, the Tumor began to grow soft; and a strong Cough arising
hence by this distillation, did herein frame a kind of Limestone, much like to
the Chalk-stone or Tophies which are usually seen in the Joints of those which
are troubled with the Gout, arising chiefly from glassy phlegm.

Joannes Jessenius also writes of one, History 2.
who having a Tumor in his Tonsils, so as that he could scarce breath, or
swallow any nutriment, who having made use of many drying Gargarisms made of
Red Roses, Balaustians, with Roch Allome, and the like; and not well mundefying
the whole, by which the thinner part was dried up, whilst the more Terrene part
thereof was left remaining behind (the which do frequently happen in Aedematous
Tumors) this grew into a Chalky and Stony substance, the which advancing in
hardness, and increasing in bulk, the Muscles of the Larynx being herewith
extended, his breathing grew more difficult, and a distillation thence arising,
by his strong cougheing, the patient forced out the Ston- which was lodged
therein, and his Spirits very speedily recruited, and he himself suddenly
restored to his former health.

History 3.
Forestus lib. 14. de Aegritud. Lingu. Obs. 26. has this History of a Woman
about 23 years of age, who for a long time having much pain about her Mouth,
near her Chin and lower Mandible, under her Tongue, in the Musculous parts
thereof, and about the root of the same; Peter Frederick, the Chyrurgion, who
visited this patient daily for some time, and perceiving a hardness still
continuing, did hope that he might bring the same to suppuration, the which he
endeavored by a cut Fig, applying it to the place; the tumor beyond
expectation growing more soft by the use hereof, at length did break, whence
issued a little Stone, somewhat hard, and forced it self thence without any
incision, the bigness of a Hasel-nut; this being gone, all pain suddenly
ceased, no suppuration, or Sanies or matter followed it; and that which herein
was worthy of Observation was, That the lips of the wound healed up without any
help of Medicine. Soon after which, he writes he saw just such another coming
out from these parts, somewhat larger than the former. And

Diemerbroeck tells us a History of a Woman of Breukelens, History 4.
who in the year 1659. in the month of April, upon eating of Damask Pruines,
which had been boiled, and upon her over-ready swallowing one of them, the
Stone thereof past into the mouth of the great Sinus of this glandule, whence
the glandule immediately tumefied, in that measure that it shut up both the
passages of her eating and drinking. So that in four days after the sick Woman
could neither eat nor drink, he being sent for to consult her distemper, her
Tongue being kept down, her glandule was seen very much tumefied in- the right
side, but little inflamed, and this apertion already discoursed of, more than
ordinarily opening, not seeing the Pruine-stone; she after taking the Decoction
of Barley, with Syrup of Marshmallows mixed together, he ordered her to suck it
into her Mouth, and putting his Thumb to the outside of the tumefied part of
the glandule, and strongly compressing the same, commands the Woman with her
utmost strength to swallow down the same which she had put into her Mouth; the
first liquor, upon her thus endeavoring, threw it self forth by her Nostrils;
but upon the second trial, when his Thumb had made a considerable compression
outward, and keeping the Tongue down and inwards, this stone flew out of the
glandule into her Mouth, presently after which she swallowed both meat and
drink very well, as she formerly did. And the same Woman, he also writes, in
the year 1664. had the like mischance happened to her again upon eating of
stewed Pruines, in the month of May, whose glandule caught into it another
Pruine-stone in like manner as the former, which was cured the second time, but
with more trouble. Another like case happened in the year 1661. in the month of
December, upon a certain Citizen, History 5.
who upon eating of Cheese, and having a piece of hard crusty Cheese fallen
into this cavity, hindering his whole swallowing; this Cure did not succeed, he
tells us, with the same ease as the former, but took many days trial before
this Cure could be effected.

CHAP. IX. Of Wharton's Salival or Maxillary Glandules, together with Steno's
new Salival Glandules.
THe Muscles being removed, besides the two longish and round glandules,
bordring at the beginning of the Aesophagus, are planted many other fleshy
Glandules, and conglomerated out of many others, as Glandules, Lymphatick
Vessels, Arteries, small Veins, and Fibers of the Nerves under the Tongue,
about its Bridle, bringing a continual Mador or Dew by the smallest Lymphatick
Vessels to the Tongue. Moreover, out of either side from this great and large
glandule, which carries in it the substance of the Thymus, or very much
resembling the Pancraeas of Man, The sublingual Salival Ductus.
coagmentated out of many small frustles of Membranes and Vessels joined
together, does proceed a certain Ductus or Pipe, planted upon the middle
Tendon, between the fleshes of the Digastrick Muscle, the which from its use
has the name of the Salival Ductus given it. And although this was unknown to
the Ancients, and kept in the Clouds in former times, yet this by Glisson and
Wharton is now brought into an apparent light: yet this was not altogether kept
from all the Ancients, for we may read that Avicen lib. 3. Fen. 6. Cap. 1.
calling these the two Salival effusories, keeping the Tongue moist. Galen also
lib. 11. de usu partium cap. 10. has these words of them, The Tongue being
dry, cannot effect its motions but very slowly, Nature therefore against this
has wonderfully provided, that it might not readily be surprised with this
affect; and in order thereunto, has at each side of the Larynx seated carnous
glandules, serving as Sponges to collect moisture for the Tongue's service.
Both these Ductus's, as they do carry the form, so also they do bear the
substance of Veins, but are somewhat thinner, having no great cavity, larger in
Man than in many Beasts, and yet in them seem larger in some than in others. On
either side does arise one out of the aforesaid glandule, Whence they do arise.
having many small Originations passing into one Ductus or Channel, ascending
obliquely upwards from this glandule, and carried even to the middle of the
mandible, planted between two small glandules, the which having past, it
marches directly on toward a Nerve of the seventh pair, the which having
arrived at and somewhat beyond it, it ends near the Frenum of the Tongue, about
the distance of a transverse finger from the Teeth, and is opened into a
peculiar glandule, the which by some is called Ranina and Hypoglottis, invested
with a thin and porous membrane, planted under the Tongue on either side, near
the Ranine veins; between the flesh which ties the Tongue to its neighboring
parts, and the glandules substrated at the Basis thereof, being there planted
as two soft Sponges, for imbibing the Salival liquor which thus comes from
these Channel pipes, and so receiving the same into them. Besides the aforesaid
Ductus, Two others lately found out.
there are two other placed, one on either side, found out in the year 1661.
and shown that Year in the month of January, by Jo. Vanhorn in the public
Theater at Leyden, and these he called Steno's Ductus's, he being the first
which demonstrated the same; these arising from the great glandule at the root
of the Ear on either side: These Steno calls the conglomorated Parotidal
Glandules, the which being dissected, many small branches thence arising, are
seen to spend themselves into these Ductus's; they run outward to the center
of the Muscle called Buccinanator, and do end in the cavity of the Mouth.
Besides these, Other Salival vessels.
there are some other small Salival Vessels conspicuous in the Mouth,
especially in the Palate and Cheeks, of which we have already discoursed in our
former Chapters. Des Carts his ^inio^ ^out the Origi(...) of Sp^.
Des Carts seems to be unacquainted with these Salival passages, when he
writes that this spittle does arise from the Stomach; and as a guard to defend
his assertion, he brings this reason, That some parts of the arterious Blood do
fall into the Stomach and Guts, the which do there perform the office of Strong
water, in promoting the digestion of nutriments; and from these being hot, he
says vapors may easily ascend by the Aesophagus into the Mouth, and by this
method allowed there to form this Saliva or Spittle. Now whereas it manifestly
appears that this Salival Juice or Liquor does proceed from the Head and its
glandules, and whatsoever does ascend from the Stomach does readily occasion
vomiting, the which does not readily happen in this Salival juice: When as also
in pituitous persons, and old men, whose Arterial and Venal Blood is both cold
and small in quantity, as to the supply of all parts, and also falling hence to
the Stomach, from whence a small quantity of vapors may be allowed to ascend
from thence to the Head by the Aesophagus; this Saliva cannot be small, but
most plentiful; and this does sufficiently deny Des Cartes's argument and
preposition.

It therefore remains, The true Origination of Saliva.
that this spittle does not pass and ascend by the Aesophagus, but that it does
fall from the upper parts downwards into the mouth; and since this flux is seen
so plentiful, our next enquiry should be by what vessels it should make its
passage, and to what glandules it is thus sent and dispatched, and how out of
the same discharged into the Mouth. Wharton writes, that the same does distill
out of the Nerves, but these having no such, sufficient passage in them for the
ready dispatch of the same, how can these properly be allowed its proper
Instrument? In this therefore his opinion carries not much vigor; some others
there are who do suppose that the same is drawn from the Chyliferous vessels;
but these not reaching so far, I cannot see how they can defend their
assertions. Deusingiu^ his opinion hereof.
Deusingius does suppose that this is poured out from the Lymphatick Vessels
into the glandules, and from thence to be sent into the mouth; which opinion,
although it may carry a fair resemblance of truth in it, yet certainly both the
Lympha and Saliva, although they do not much differ in substance, as to their
thickness, yet they have the same Origination, and do both arise from the Blood
it self; and since this is not done by the venous Blood, as drawn from the
glandules and other parts, yet this separated liquor may well be granted to
arise from the Arterial Blood, because the Arteries do infuse the Nutritive
Blood to all the parts of the Body, and amongst the rest to these glandulous
parts also; whose more serous and subsaline salival parts being most fit for
giving nutriment to the glandules, with the admixture of Animal Spirts flowing
through the small Nerves, is separated from the other particles, and sucked up
by the glandules, and in them by a specifique manner is there somewhat
digested, and brought into another manner of preparation, and whatsoever is
there redundant from their nutrition, is endued with a light kind of acid
quality, and this is that which falls thence into the Mouth by these Salival
Ductus's, as in other divarications of the Arteries, so also in these glandules
the Arteries are seen to obtain but small pores or passages, by which they do
depose this liquor into these glandules, and this large and great Salivations
do prove, be they either Spontaneous, or made so by Art, in which such a large
plenty of spittle is discharged, that nothing but the Arteries could yield them
such a supply; and it is also very credible, that these do take into them the
superfluities of some Nerves, as I formerly have shown, and do transmit the
same into the next Vessel, as it is the usual custom, amongst several of the
glandules: And when by chance a greater flux than ordinary is made by the
Nerves to the face, than can be prolated by the habit of the part, and this
remitted by the Lymphaducts to this glandule, the Face hereby is apparently
seen to swell, and blown up, as it were tumefied by an aedematous tumor, as we
find it frequently happens in such who having had pain in their Teeth, at whose
farewell we have commonly seen the Face to swell very much. And since we have
apparently shown how this Saliva does pass from the glandules into the Mouth,
our next enquiry will be, to find how it is separated from the Arterious Blo^d,
and also declare what this Salival Liquor is. Spittle therefore is a light
fermentacious serous and lymphid liquor, What Spittle is.
separated out of the Ar^erious Blood in the Parotides, and in various
glandules and glandulous fleshes of the Mouth and Fauces, effused by the
Salival Vessels and other Salival passages into the Mouth: The qualities of
Spittle.
As to the qualities of this Saliva we find little hitherto has been written
as touching them, nevertheless if we well examine them, they will sufficiently
show that this is not a simple body, but a compound and lubricous, a liquor
less fluid, but somewhat viscid; and yields no spumosity out of it self, but
gains the same by the motion of the Air and of the Tongue; of it self it has
neither Sapour or Odor in sound persons, the which in sick people it readily
entertains from their discrasy of humors, and mixtures of other humors
therewith: It Is no easy matter to describe its exact and singular composition,
the which notwithstanding is very admirable; for it joins it self with all
sorts of nutriments, and there is nothing which enters the Mouth, which it
takes not notice of.

Its uses are various and admirable, As to its u^^, being much and good.
as 1. Me^ts being chewed in the Mouth and this mixed therewith, it gives them a
more easy deglutition, without which they being dry, would not without much
trouble pass the same, as is seen in Fevers, and the like. Secondly, This takes
out the soporiferous quality from dried meats, that is, the sapid Salt, which
is not to be done without moisture. Thirdly, It extinguisheth thirst by giving
its moisture, whence it is that great spitters are seldom dry. Fourthly, It
moistens the inward parts of the the Mouth, Fauces, Aesophagus, and the like;
and then also it promotes fermentation of the nutriment sent from the Mouth
into the Stomach, and is its primary ferment, being as a light acidity tempered
with a Volatile Spirit in plentiful Water. Some Physicians do make this
difference between Sputum and Saliva, The difference between Spittle and Saliva
the first they understand to be a thin humor redundant in the Mouth with
trouble, such as is usually sent thither by Catarrhs, or generated by any
corruption of the Saliva, or thrown forth by coughing out of the Lungs: By
Saliva, they do suppose the natural liquor not superfluous in sound Bodies, nor
excern'd, but mixed for the moystning of nutriments of the mouth, necessary for
the preparation and fermentation of Digestions, as shall more fully be
discovered, when we shall treat of the Liver.

Sometimes it happens that these Salival Vessels are cut, as have been seen in
wounds of the Cheeks, by which there is perceived a plentiful stock of
lymphatick Salival liquor to issue out thence, and by this its continual flux,
it makes the wounded part not easily curable; Observat.
as happened to a Nobleman, whose Cheek being wounded by a piece of Glass
Bottle, the wound being almost cured by the Chyrurgion, save only in its
middle, whence issued a perfect and continual gleet, which continued for about
fourteen days (the which past by this Salival Ductus, unknown to the
Chyrurgion) he not with his utmost skill being able to put a stop thereto; by
consulting better advice, and by application of an actual Cautery thereto, it
speedily stopped, and the patient suddenly recovered. Aquapendens relates just
such another story.

CHAP. X. Of the Thorax, and the glandulous parts thereunto belonging.
THe Trunk of the Body is that we call the middle Venture, and this is that
cavity which is upwards circumscribed with Clavicles, downwards with a
Diaphragma, on either side with the Ribs, forwards with the Sternon, and
backwards with the Bones of the Back; in this, and under whose command are
planted the Breasts, the Pleura, Mediastinum, Heart, Lungs, Thymus, Larynx,
Aesophagus, to which also is annexed the Neck as its appendix. We begin our
discourse of the glandules here with the Breasts.

Of the Breasts.
The Breasts both in Men and Women are two in number, planted over the Pectoral
Muscle, and covering it; in Man they are smaller than in Women, they being
their proper instruments for lactation; and these do increase with their years,
and in some Countries they are seen to grow to a prodigious largeness, as in
diverse parts of the Indies, and the like. In some Women these have been so
large that they have been seen to suck their own Breasts; in others also the
Child has lodged sucking, as if he had laid between two Pillows; they
generally do obtain an Hemisphere figure, and a soft and whitish substance,
being framed of many glandulous Bodies, whose largeness are also various,
having several channels and pipes sent to them. Riolan and Wharton, Riolan's
and Wharton's opinions refuted.
against Autopsia or Ocular demonstration, do write that the Breast is nothing
else but one whole glandule, no ways divisible into distinct globulars; and yet
they do declare that in morbous Bodies they have seen these distinct
conglobated glandules: The which if in sickness, I am sure must also appear in
such as are in health. One great glandule is placed in the middle of the
Breast, the rest being but small, besides which, infinite plexures of the Milky
Vessels are interjected amongst these glandules, the which mediating, not only
the Milky Juice is carried to all of them, but the smaller glandules do also
effuse this Milk into the largest amongst them. Again, in these glandules are
many large and copious pores, in which, as in so many small Cells, is the Milk
reserved, till the time of its being sucked up, unless it does flow out thence
of its own accord, by its over plentifulness or thinness. The Nipple is planted
upon this great glandule, the which is a fungous small Body, invested with a
thin Cutis, and perforated with many pretty Orifices, the Lacteal Ductus does
terminate in these glandules, and the Milk, as through a pipe, is let out
thence, at the infants sucking the same. This glandule is of exquisite sense,
and carries and gives pleasure in the sucking or contracting thereof, by which
both the bulk of the Breast is lessened, as also its weight. The glandules of
the Breasts allowed five Vessels.
The glandules of the Breasts have five vessels allowed them, as Nerves arising
from the Intercostals, plentifully arriving at the Nipples, giving them the
sense which we see they do obtain. Secondly, Arteries for their nutriment.
Thirdly, Veins appointed for bringing Blood toward the same, the which in
Nurses sometimes having too much thereof, this is carried from the Breasts to
the Subclavian Veins, even as the Chyle is carried by the Thoracick Ductus; and
being numerous and great, for they do not only carry the remaining Blood,
collected from the Nutritive, but in such also as give Milk, they do discharge
part of the redundant Milky Liquor to the Subclavians, the which is performed
by these Veins. The Fourth are the Milky Vessels, and the Fifth the
Lymphaeducts bestowed upon them. Those Milky Vessels are perceived by the
Arteries and Veins being variously interjected in the glandules of the Breasts
enated from the lower part, and meeting together in the Center thereof, whose
communion and continuity with the Chyliferous Ductus lodging in the Trunk of
the Body, has not till of late been found out by the best Anatomists, they not
being conspicuous; the Chylous juice not remaining in them, nor more detained
in them than the Urine is in the Ureters, but by the compression of the
respiratory Muscles, and those parts through which they do enter, it is easily
propell'd, and through those that it passes. Neither is it much to be wondered
at, that these should not plainly show themselves to the light, when as the
Thoracick Chilifique Ductus it self being large enough, running according to
the length of the Spine, has never till of late been found out by the most
accurate Anatomists; nor by them could be demonstrated, the which in our days
appears as clear as the light it self; the use and reason of the carriage of
these to the Breast may very well grant the same, although denied and obscured
from ocular inspection. Antonius Everard Tract. de Ortu Animal. observing a
manifest deduction of the Milky Vessels in a sucking Whelp, thus says, That
some of these Ductus's do arise from the descendant trunk running about the
Abdominal Muscles under the fat, and that the glandulous substance of the
Breasts did carry the matter of Milk in them, the which having manifest pipes
framed for them, does convey this Milk into a common channel, and this is
thence sucked out by the Nipple. And Pecquet, anno 1654. before Riverius, found
and showed in a sucking Whelp, near her third upper Rib a Milky channel
reaching to the Breasts, from whence a great plenty of Milk succeeded; which
experiment he has very often shown in young sucking Puppies; and as this of
Antonius is found in Whelps to arise from the descendant Lacteal Trunk, so in
Women they are seen to arise from the ascendant Thoracick Trunk, planted at the
Breasts in the Breast. The which happened in a Scriveners Wife, who, History.
after her having lain in about a month or five weeks, and having received a
fall, complained of the little Milk she had in her Breasts, and that if her
Child should suck with any strength, she felt a great pain descending from her
Breasts even to her Back, and about the middle region between her Scapula's;
but somewhat lower she seemed to swell, and began to perceive some pain about
her loins, the which upon the Infants not sucking, she perceived nothing
thereof: And without doubt this happened by reason of some impediment which
hindered the transition of the Milky Vessels to the Breasts; and hence this
Suction being made in the upper part thereof, a plentiful Chyle not succeeding
from the Thoracick Ductus, this pain was excited by the same Suction collected
from the Breasts even to the Thoracick Ductus, she never having any great
quantity of Milk coming thence, so that the Child was forced to be put out to
nurse. Let this serve as one History, amongst many which might be introduced as
to the confirming the same. And this may suffice to confute all such who do
suppose that the Chyle is not carried to the Breasts by the Milky vessels, but
by those Arteries which with the Blood is conveyed thither, and from these
again separated from the Blood, and so turned into Milk. The use of the Breasts.
The primary use of the Breasts is to breed and to form Milk, and to prepare
the same as proper nutriment for the Infant. Milk it self being a sweet and
white Juice prepared in the Breast for their proper nourishment. I shall not
here enlarge as to its frame and make, being by some allowed to be made of
Blood, and others of Chyle; many other Authors having spent much time in giving
the Rudiments of its composition; my task more closely relating to the
glandules. All our best Anatomists allowing its generation to proceed from
Chyle, and this the substance of the Chyle does very well set forth, there
being no great matter of difference between them, either in their substance,
sapour, or color. And how this Chyle is converted into Milk, has as yet but
by a very few been demonstrated; all the glandules of the Body being designed
for one and the same use, that they may take into them some Lymphatick humor
out of the Blood (as Saliva in the Mouth) and perfuse the same with somewhat of
a subacid quality; and this is given both to the Blood, to the Chyle, and to
other humors, for their better and more ready separation. And because some may
question the truth hereof, Milk generated from Chyle.
by asking if this be true, that Milk is generated from Chyle, and not from
Blood, how happens it that in a large flux of Blood, the Milk does lessen in
its quantity, or grow defective? To which I give this as a ready answer, Milk
is not always deficient on this occasion, if the Woman eats well; and when this
is deficient, this happens because Nature is more intent in taking care of, and
providing for a greater necessity, as to the restoration of the Spirits of the
whole Body, by calling and summoning in all the Chyle to the Heart, and
converting the same to Blood; and does send none of it, or if any, but a very
small quantity thereof to the Breasts. And such who do defend the Milks
origination to proceed from Chyle, do strengthen their assertion with these
reasons: That they do suppose that the Chyle is either directly carried to the
Breasts from the Milky Vessels, The defense of the assertion thereof.
or first received into the Veins, and circulated with the Blood by the
Ventricles of the Heart, and so thence effused by the Thoracick Arteries into
the Breasts, and there the sanguinary part secern'd from the Chylous, and this
reduced by the Mamillary Vessels into the Body. And that this is Milk it self,
and kept and reserved in the porosities of the Breasts for the Infants use. The
first use hereof is defended by all Patrons of Anatomy, but the crowning this
demonstration, and confirming the assertion, would better appear when they
would please to show the peculiar Vessel, by which the Chyle should be thus
transmitted to the Breasts.

Christus a Vega Comment. ad Aphor. 39. lib. 5. Hipp. writes of a young Woman
of Bruges, History.
whose Menstrues being obstructed she had Milk in her Breasts; the Physician to
whom she was committed (did clear her from the blame which was put upon her by
her Master, and) did excuse her modesty, by affirming that a Woman might have
Milk by the retention or her Menstrues, without conception, she having
outlived above nine months in this condition, she hereby both showed and
declared her honesty and chastity, and so kept up her reputation; and in a few
days after her Menstrual flux broke upon her, and she continued well.

History.
Brasavolus Com. ad Aphor. 26. lib. 3. Hip. writes, That he has seen strumous
Tumors in the Breasts of Women; and he further declares, That he has not only
seen the same in Women, but also in the Breasts of Men; and in the year 1537.
in the Month of April he had for a patient a certain Woman, which had
Scrophulous Tumors, which accompanied almost every part of the Body, even to
her Groins.

CHAP. XI. Of the Thymus.
THis also is a glandulous Body, Is is distinguished with a threefold glandule.
soft, spongey and white; this part in Infants is distinguished with a
threefold glandule, and seems to carry somewhat of affinity with the substance
of the Pancraeas in such as are of riper years, but much thinner. It Is annexed
in the upper part of the Thorax to the division of the Subclavian Veins and
Arteries, greater in Women and moist Bodies, than in Men and dry Bodies, it is
of a delicate taste, and softer than the Pancraeas. Wharton writes in his
Adenagraph. Obs. that he saw in an Abortive about six months old, the Thymus
annexed to the Pericardium, in its lower part, and being thence bifutrated
under the Clavicles descending out of the Thorax to the sides of the Trachea.
In Calves it is seen adherent in the lower part to the Pericardium, and
increasing into a greater bulk, passing up to the Thorax, divided, and
descending on either side of the Trachea, running to the Maxillary glandules,
and sometimes to the Parotides.

Nerves given to this.
Wharton does attribute Nerves arising from the sixth pair to the Thymus, the
which he supposes do throw forth the nutritive liquor, inquinated either by
some impurity or acrimony, He herein refuted.
for its depuration sake into this glandule. But this sentence of his is
strange, for the Milky Vessels which are in these glandules can scarce be any
otherwise found out than by the inspection of a Calf newly born, or nourished
with Milk, as these that are interjected in the same manner in the glandules of
Milky Breasts, which he takes for Nerves, and describes for the same. And he
observes not what juice the Thymus does carry in it for the nourishing of the
Foetus, as whether it be Chylous or Milky, as Harvey ha^h it. The which Juice
does not pass thither by the Nerves, but by the Milky Vessels, and here made
more perfect, and so transmitted thence to the Cava, and from thence to the
Heart; and this Juice, because in young people, by reason of the over-dryness
of their Milky Vessels that way tending, sends none, or if any, very little
thereof to the Thymus; this part in such being either much lessened or
contracted, as is seen in the Breasts of Women, when they are dried up from
their Milk. Wharton also writes, Lympheducts passing through this p^rt.
That he has seen Lympheducts frequently passing through this part, and thence
discharging themselves into the Subclavian Veins; neither can it be dissenting
to reason, when as in the preparation of the Lacteal matter, this Lympha is
required for the promoting and forming the fervent fermentation in the Heart.
This allowed a conglomorated glandule.
Regnerus de Graaf calls this a conglomorated glandule, and in his many
vituline dissections (in which he has found this glandule always large, yet
that which he ever observed thereof, that it is not less lessened in Calves
than in other Animals after their Nativity) and that he has found a notable
Ductus in it, repleted with Lymphid humor, which he has accurately traced;
but being never so curious in his laying it bare, this liquor did generally
flow out of it, and the Ductus wholly vanished, before he could attain its
exit, and forced to try some other means to find out the same.

Of the Heart.
The Heart* although its called the Sun of the World, and the principal command
o(...) ^he vital actions, yet Vesalius (...), that he has seen the left Sinus
thereof to have in it near two ounces of glandulous flesh. Tulpius writes he
has found a pituitous Polypus in the left Ventricle of the same; the which I
also found in the dissection of a young Gentlewoman, when I lived at Norwich
some few years since. It was the Opinion of the Egyptians to measure the life
of Man according to the weight of his Heart; and this is both made good by
Terence, and confirmed by Dioscorides. History.
Vesalius lib. 1. cap. 5. de hum. corp. Fabric. writes of a young Nobleman, in
whose left Ventricle of his Heart was found two pound of glandulous flesh,
somewhat blackish; much like that of the Womb, extended in that greatness, that
it manifestly declared the contraction of the Artery, and with this thus he
lived many months: About his closing up his last sands, both his Animal
faculty, with the principal functions of his mind continued very well even to
his last minute, and that which forced this change upon him, was a Gangrene
which seized his left side in his Leg, the which bringing a further stoppage
upon this Arteries pulsation, did soon put out his Candle. And Dr. Walter
Needham declared in one of his late Lectures of Anatomy at the Chyrurgions
Hall, that he saw a strumous swelling hanging at the cone of the Heart, that
weighed two ounces.

CHAP. XII. Of the Aesophagus, or Gulet, and its Glandules belonging to it.
BY the Latins this is called Gula, being as the only round pipe and channel,
by which both the meat and drink which man takes into him for his nutriment and
sustenance does pass, and sent from the Mouth into the Stomach. This also is
furnished with glandules both soft and spongy, appointed here for keeping it
moist, and as some are appointed for the keeping the inward parts thereof
lubricous and humid, which we have already demonstrated; so for the keeping the
outward parts thereof in the same temper, Nature has planted two lower
glandules in the back part of the Aesophagus, near the fifth Vertebre of the
Thorax; Where these glandules are planted.
(in that place where the Aesophagus gives way to the great Trunk of the Aorta,
carrying it somewhat to the right) and very oft-times they are so much hid
between the Aesophagus and the Vertebres, that without much care and inspection
they are not to be found out; they carrying in them somewhat of a Kidney in
resemblance, cut in the middle, being inwardly unequal, and outwardly concave;
they do borrow their vessels from their neighbors, as Arteries from their next
Arteries, and their small Veins which they have, do come from their next Veins,
as well as their Lymphaticks, conveying the Lympha thence into the Lymphatick
Thoracick Ductus. Wharton writes that they have Nerves also arising from the
sixth conjugation, but whereas they do neither feel, nor are moved, these
Nerves thus said by him to be allowed them may be well enough questioned by
other Anatomists, they more readily being taken for Lymphatick Vessels, which
he writes for Nerves. Some Anatomists do write, that these do not only moisten
the outward part of the Aesophagus, Their uses.
but do believe that they do bedew the inward parts thereof for a more easy
deglutition. But this is none of their proper use, for there is no such need of
their outward irrigation, neither is there any transit made from the glandules
toward the inward cavity of the Aesophagus. Their proper uses.
But their proper uses allowed by most are, that they are here planted for the
collection of the Lymphatick liquor, and to gather and suck it up from the
neighboring parts, and so to effuse the same by the Lympheducts with the
Chyle, as I have already demonstrated. These glandules sometimes are seen to
swell so much by reason of affluxion of humors, that they do streighten and
make narrow the Aesophagus; and thus keeping back the meat and drink from going
in their right passage into the Stomach as its proper nutriment, by this famine
and thirst they do rob and deprive mankind of those principles which should
keep him from the grave. History.
Forestus lib. 1. Observe. Chirurg. fol. 95. Schol. 276. writes that he saw a
Beggar, whose whole Breast, Neck and Shoulders were altogether strumous, such
an object he was, that the like thereof he never saw in his whole life. Another
of Forestus is of a Struma in a Man's Neck, History.
which equaled the bigness of an Egg, who fighting with another, was wounded
in this part; his Father Jordan Forestus viewing this Patient, saw living Lice
lodged in the wounded part: This man who for many years had this Struma in his
Neck, no Chyrurgion daring to undertake his Cure, upon this accident having
occasion to make use of a Chyrurgion, both his Wound and Strumous Tumor were
by chance cured at once, and he discharged from his lousy companions.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Omentum or Kell.
WE now arrive at the glandules and glandulous parts which belong to the third
Venture, and having there laid bare the Muscles and the Peritoneum, the first we
meet with in this Region is the Kell called Omentum quasi Operimentum covering
the Intestines, it being a thin and double membrane, much resembling the
duplicature of a purse, arising from the Peritoneum, outwardly covering both
the Ventricle and Guts; in its forepart it is tied to the bottom of the Stomach,
and to the Spleen, in its back part to the Colon; perfused with much fat, and
plenty of Veins, and is therewith intertext like a Net. This Omentum, as
Veslingius writes, is accompanied with variety of glandules, and these not
alike not placed alike in all persons, This is accompanied with variety of
glandules.
some having more thereof than others; planted here for collecting and
gathering up, like Sponges, the superfluous moist humors which shall arrive
here. Riolan writes he could never find any glandules in this part; they
generally do appear but small, and that in the lower part thereof next to the
Pylorus, and to the Spleen. Wharton also writes that they do much resemble the
glandules of the Mesentery, They are said to resemble the Mesenterical
glandules by Wharton.
and are designed much after the same manner, and for the like use; and in his
12 Cap. Adenograph. he writes that he found two glandules in the Omentum, Two
large ones found by him herein.
one being large, not much distant from its commissure with the Pylorus; this
glandule receiving into it the Milky Vessels of the first kind, arising from
the bottom of the Ventricle, running in the Omentum according to its length;
and they are distributed into the substance of this glandule, as other Lacteal
Vessels of the first kind, and others arising thence are carried downwards to
the right end of the Pancraeas, and at the first view would be thought to enter
it; but passing by the same, they march on to the common receptable, and do
discharge themselves into it. The other somewhat less, is planted near the
Spleen, and this has been seen doubled and trebled, and sometimes manifold; he
there tells you he has seen it in a Horse, as twelve large glandules, whose
Spleen did weigh ten pounds. But this may be attributed either to preternatural
effects, or their number viewed to multiply and increase in morbous Bodies, as
in Strumous or Scrophulous diseased Bodies, they not so evidently appearing or
showing themselves in Bodies that are sound; as shall be made good by diverse
observations of Hildanus and others at the end of this Chapter; and where any
of these do thus succeed, they must fall upon the adventitious glandules. For
in the Omentum, Various preternatural effects shown in these glandules.
as also in its glandules, various preternatural effects do evidently show
themselves, their diseases arising from one and the same Origination, and do
for the most part bear the same cause, whose dependancy comes and proceeds from
Obstruction. Hence is it that this is sometimes seen to arrive at such a
monstrous bulk, as Authors have writ it has been seen to receive, and to
receive those unusual shapes and forms, which diseases are readily seen to put
upon it. As a truth of its running into a very great bulk, History.
Fabritius Hildanus does tell us of a very remarkable History thereof,
happening in a Woman, who being opened after her departure, her bowels were
seen very healthful, excepting her Kell, the which grew and increased into such
a vast glandulous bulk, that whilst the Woman was alive, it made such a
greatness about her Belly, as usually is seen in Hydropical persons; this bulk
was every way membranous, but inwardly glandulous, adipose and Scirrhous, in
its middle was found a fetid cavity which was filled with sordid Sanies,
weighing fifty six pounds, and was taken thence without injuring the other
bowels, and was seen wholly tied to her Stomach.

Another of his observations of the Omentum is of a young Gentleman, History.
about nineteen years of age, proposed by Horstius in his Observations lib. 7.
cap. 4. the which sometimes by the commotion of the Body, moved out of one side
into another: But in this person this large Tumor was fixed, and was observed
to tend toward the Navel, in an orbicular form, the breadth of the palm of the
hand conglobated with many glandules. Bartholine writes that he has seen a
Kell altogether fleshy. Wharton writes that he saw a Kell wholly fleshy, or
rather glandulous, brought to him by Dr. Wybard, History.
taken out from a Virgin of nineteen years of age, who for near three months
before her death was troubled with a Diarrhaea, as also a frequent vomiting of
porraceous matter, whose pulse was languid, her urine small and intense, her
Belly about the Navel being hard and tumefied, being afterward perplexed with
shortness of Breath, and dryness of Tongue, and a Fever thereunto adjoined;
three days before her Death she was much bound in her Body, and her Urine
wholly suppressed: The dead Body being opened, the Liver was seen of an ill
color, and the Bladder of Gall furnished with black liquor, her Kell, as I
said before, was thick and almost coraceous, so as it did as it were contract
all the Bowels in its Latitude, the intestines as it were glewed so to it that
they were not easily separable from it. The History declares the obstructions
of the Bowels of this Maid, the Omentum it self grown hard, and as it were
infarched with these glandulous fleshes instead of fat, and for certain her
being surprised with this Fever before her Death, was the nearest cause both of
her extenuation, as also of her Death. In Scurvies the Kell is seen frequently
to appear friable, as appears by this following History, writ by Wharton of one
Mr. Beale, History.
who being very melancholic, and afflicted with the Scurvy, and drinking
plentifully of Tunbridge Waters, upon his return to his House, he soon changed
his Life for Death; the Body being opened, Dr. Bathurst and Dr. Ridgley being
present, the Omentum was seen both black, lacerated, friable and almost putrid,
and destitute of fat, adhering in many places under the Navel to the
Peritonaeum, with black and turgid Veins, the only true signs of Obstructions.
Sometimes the Kell is seen to be removed out of its place, as by falling into
the Scrotum, as also in the Epiplocele, or by an umbelical rupture, as in
Omphalocele, of which Columbus does make mention. History.
And Vesalius lib. 5. cap. 4. de corp. hum. fabr. thus writes, he has seen
more than once the Omentum fallen into the coat of the Seminal Vessels, and in
wonderful manner to swell therein beyond its natural constitution: as when the
whole part of the Omentum somewhat falling upon the Intestines, has scarce
weighed a pound, or half a pound, yet herein he says he saw the Kell so
preternaturally swelled, that it weighed four or five pounds, and by its weight
did draw down the Stomach from its natural place, and by this weakness various
Hiccoughs thence arising, he collected thence that this weight was the occasion
of the man's death who was thus troubled.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Mesentery, and of its glandulous Affects.
THe Mesentery, which by the Greeks from its site is called (...), It has many
small and soft glandules.
which is placed (...), or in medio intestinorum, has many small and soft
glandules lodged in its membranes, whose number are various, not only in
diverse species of Animals, but also in various individuals of that species.
Where few in number* great in magnitude.
Thus in Man where they are found fewest in number they get it up in their
magnitude, all which are appointed by nature for the better attenuation, and
greater perfection of the Chyle, as is sufficiently manifest; for by and
through these do both many Milky Vessels and Chyle pass, affused into them for
the greater perfection of the glandulous humor, embrewed with some subacid and
light faculty, and sent out of these into the great middle glandule, by
Fallopius and Asellius called the Pancreas, and by most Anatomists at this day
called Pancreas Mesenterii, although improperly; the true Pancreas being more
truly planted under the Stomach, and thus by right and short Ductus's carried
on to the Receptacle of the Chyle, into which they do lighten the Milky Juice.
Ma^y diseases arising hence.
And this both Reason and Experience does evidently make good; for should these
glandules be any ways obstructed, or the liquor bred in them necessary to be
mixed with the Milky Juice, it would soon turn acid, and so the Milky Chyle
abiding herein would as easily curdle, and coagulate like Cheese, and by its
plentiful influx they would readily tumefie, and shut up as it were the Chyle,
and hinder the same from any further passage: Whence we have seen such as have
thus been troubled and diseased to have a Caeliacal flux second the same (and
this occasioned by the hindrance of the Chyle's distribution) as also a pain of
their Bellies going along therewith. And by reason of nutriment thus being
denied its proper passage, an Atrophy has necessarily followed, the which at
length spends those that are thus afflicted, even to death it self. And this
shall be made good by many Examples, which shall conclude this Chapter. By all
which it will appear clear enough when you have read them, that both a Celiacal
flux, as also an Atrophy may both hence arise from obstructions formed in these
glandules, and that those general uses bestowed on them by Anatomists, as their
serving to prop up and keep warm the Veins and Arteries dilated through the
Mesentery are altogether invalid. But herein we may affirm, Its use.
that in these as well as in other glandules, there is bred and begot somewhat
of a subacid fermentative liquor or juice, mixed with the Milky Chyle, and this
they do keep and reserve for the Milky Vessels; and these suffering any injury
hereby, or gaining any ill constitution hence, such as is frequently caught by
a vicious ferment which is admixt to the Chyle in the Duodenum, oft-times this
proves a great cause of a large Colluvies of bad humors, of small consuming
Fevers, of various contumacious and tedious affects, kept and upheld between
the membranes of the Mesentery. Various opinions about the Mesentery.
Various are the Opinions amongst Authors about the Mesentery; some thinking it
is the sink of the body, to which the whole Colluvies thereof do make its
conflux. Hence Fernelius writes it the cause of Choler, Melancholy, Diarrhaea,
Dysentery, Cachexy, Atrophy, of Fevers, and of Melancholic Diseases, of
Cholick pains, and of various Tumors and Abscesses, these parts being very
subject and obnoxious to mischiefs, and bearing the very frequent blemishes and
sufferings of our intemperance.

How these may be obstructed five ways showed by Wharton.
Wharton shows five ways how these Vessels may be obstructed, which are thus:
First, in their entrance of the Milky Juice into the Orifice of the Milky
Vessels. Secondly, in their passage by and through the glandules of the
Mesentery. Thirdly, in the transite of the Blood out of the Arteries into the
Veins, and from them into the substance of the glandules. Fourthly, in the
aqueous and lymphatick Vessels; and Fifthly, in the Nerves. First, if
obstruction happens in the narrow passage of the Milky humor, the Chyle is not
attracted out of the Intestines, whence follows a dejection of Appetite, and
the Chyle it self frequently, as happens in a Lienteria, is evacuated per anum,
and the Milky Vessels being destitute of the warmth and moisture of the Chyle
they usually had received, in time they grow parcht, and so runs the whole Body
into Consumption. Secondly, if obstruction of the Chyle happens, after its
entrance into these Vessels by the glandules of the Mesentery, it causes first
a lessening of the nutriment, and so consequently produces an Atrophy. Thirdly,
if the passage of the Blood be obstructed by these glandules, and so also with
it the Chyle lose its passage, these do both lessen the nutriment with their
obstructions. Fourthly, if it happens that the Lymphatick Vessels be
obstructed, which are very frail, and so easily rent, and so letting out their
liquor into the cavity of the Abdomen, hence suddenly an Ascites does certainly
follow. And Fifthly, if any obstruction should happen in the Nerves which are
sent to the Intestines, there would soon succeed a resolution thereof; as is
frequently perceived in a Palsy; and here for certain there must necessarily
follow a diminution and extenuation of nutriment, if not an Atrophy of the
Spermatick parts, the vital constitution being entire and strong enough.
Compression of these Vessels sometimes do also make them narrow, as sometimes
does happen in inflations both of the Stomach and Colon, in Cholick pains, and
also in some swellings of the Mesentery; and here we may see Tumors of two
kinds, Windy and Humoral, as Wharton has it. The Mesentery because it wants
cavity is seldom distended by Wind. Tumors, Three causes of Tumor in any
part of the Body.
happen in what part of the Body they will, they do demonstrate three especial
causes of their product, as afflux of the matter flowing to the place, its
transition impedited, and their felling; for where there is no afflux of matter
there can scarce any cause of Tumor be expected; thus in dead Bodies we meet
with no Tumors, because in these all afflux of humors do then cease. Tumors
with inflammation do argue some putridness of matter going along in the swelled
part, and many of these inflammations are allowed to arise in Dysenteries ill
cured: Tumors without inflammation, putridness and Fevers are various, and
these do take a long time for their growth, and these do frame Chronick
distempers, of this sort are reckoned Abscesses, Atheroms, Steatoms, Meliceris,
Strumae, Schirrhus, and the like. Riolan does place the root and foundation of
Struma's to be lodged here, and does declare that no Struma's do break forth
and show themselves outward, till the Mesentery be first filled with its
Scrophulated glandules; after whose opinion Guido seems to be a follower,
affirming that Struma's have no further affinity with the glandules of the
Mesentery, only allowed for a further preparation of the Chyle; neither can
Struma's be said to have any cause or origination in the Mesentery, when as
every days use thereof does teach that most strumous people being sound in the
Body, have suffered many troubles arising from this Mesenterick disease: of
which opinion Wiseman also is, when he writes, That whenever the outward
glandules do appear tumefied, we may safely conclude the Mesenteries to be so
also, they usually being the first parts which are attacked with this malady;
Which opinion of his Anatomy does very much confute, for I have dissected
several strumous Bodies, whose Mesenteries have not been tumefied with
glandules, and yet I have opened others which have been plentifully filled with
the same, but this will not keep up his general opinion of the Mesenteries
being the first part attacked with this distemper; All which is contrary to the
Curative method, This asser-contrary to Anatomy.
the which for the most part is performed by Topics, the which can no ways be
allowed available here, if the fountain of this evil should be in the
Mesentery, and this is manifest in the dissection of dead Bodies who have dyed
Scrophulated, in whom some of these have been found to have had their Mesentery
no ways touched with the same; and therefore Riolan's opinion must necessarily
meet with reproof as well as the other. In Wharton de Adenograph. you will meet
with a History of a Woman there cited by Paraeus, History 1.
whose Mesentery was swelled with an immense tumor, which weighed near ten
pound and a half, outwardly Scirrhous, in which was very many abscesses,
included in their several bags, as you may read more at large fol. 49. ejus.
Libr. Diemerbroeck does produce three Histories very much relating to this
present discourse, the which I do intend here to introduce, and then to bring
an Observation of my own amongst some others. The first is of a Scotch
Soldier, History 2.
who coming from the Indies, by making use of diet of ill juice, and hereby
pining away under a bad disease, with a Caeliacal flux, and gripes in his
Belly, after having for three or four months taken Medicines to cure this
disease, although in vain, he at length died Consumptive, and was spent (as our
English Proverb has it) to Skin and Bones, his Body being opened, his Spleen
was found to be large, hard and black, his Pancreas hard also, and much
swelled, and of an ash color, and very many glandules were found in his
Mesentery, scarce seen in sound people, these were very turgid and hard, some
of them exceeded the bigness of a Bean, and most the largeness of a Haselnut,
and some few of them appeared as big as a Nutmeg. These being dissected,
nothing but a certain kind of whitish Cream was found therein, hardened into a
Caseous or Cheesy substance.

The second was of a Girl about eleven years of age, History 3.
who being perplexed with such another kind of flux, accompanied with gripes,
and an extreme emaciation of Body, afterward dyed; she being opened, by the
desire of her Relations, in the company of many Physicians, in her Body was
found many and almost innumerable hard and tumefied glandules in the Mesentery
thereof, some of which exceeded the largeness of a small Nut; others of these
which were smaller, upon opening them, we found a most white Milky Chyle issue
thence, concreted into the form and hardness of Cheese, yet in her the Spleen
nor Pancreas did not exceed its usual bigness.

The Third was of one about seven or eight years of age, History 4.
who being troubled with a great Atrophia, acaccompanied with pains of her
Belly, for many months together, which at length overcame her life: She being
opened, the Liver, Spleen, Heart, Lungs, Kidneys, Stomach, and Guts were seen
all sound, her Pancreas only being faulty, swelled, and of an ill color; but
the true cause of her death was found to be the Mesentery, wherein was seen
many glandules tumefying it, made of a singular hardness, and some of these
being much larger and harder than others, all of them of a white color, in
which also was contained a Creamy substance, concreted into a Cheesy hardness,
hindering the transition of the Milky Chyle, which was thought the only reason
of the Atrophy, as also of her dissolution.

This fourth was an Observation of a Gentleman which came from Oxford, History
5.
and was my own patient, who having used several methods and medicines there
without success, came to his Majesty to be touched for the Evil, but at that
time was so far spent with weakness that he was forced to be carried to the
King; some while after he was advised to come to London, to see what better
hopes he might gain there, and was committed to Mr. Pearse's, his Majesty's
Chyrurgion, and my care, in whose sickness Dr. Lower was also consulted; upon
examining of whose Leg, which was both a great occasion of his lameness,
Hectic Fever, and Atrophy, we found a very large Tumor had seized the upper
part of his foot, and caused a rottenness or Caries in his Bones; London air
not agreeing with him, he after three or four days rest there, was ordered to
Kingsenton; where the best of advice and means were not wanting to him, but he
still consuming daily under our hands, who from the first had been under our
care not above twelve or fourteen days, at length closed up his day with the
night of Death: I being desired by some of his friends to open his dead Corpse,
amongst the things of note, as much as we could (for the dead Body had a very
bad smell presently seized it) we found his swelled Leg, upon opening it, to
have a perfect Caries past through it, so that I could very easily pass my
Probe through the same; his Intestines were extremely tumefied and discolored,
and his Mesentery filled up with an infinite company of large Glandules, his
Spleen was disordred, and his Liver was very large, exceeding its usual bigness
in a great measure, his Heart and Lungs being both very sound and entire.

CHAP. XV. Of the Pancreas.
THe Body being opened, and the Intestines and the Stomach being removed, the
Pancreas does next appear, of which, because many things of great note are writ
thereof, I shall presume to dwell somewhile upon this Chapter, and take a
survey of its bounds and limits, both as to its substance, sight, color,
figure, quantity, vessels, and the variety of uses designed it. It Is a word
composed (although not well to be allowed here) of (...) and (...), which
signifies a fleshy bowel. Its substance wholly glandulous.
The substance of the Pancreas is wholly glandulous in it self, for it is
formed out of many minute globular glandules, every of which have their
firmation and hardness given them, that they may endure separation one from
another, and from their loose connection they do form a soft body; so that by
some the Pancreas is said to be a soft and loose glandule; again, every of the
glandules constituting the Pancreas has a particular membrane given to them;
yet all seem as it were coupled together by this strong coat, it arising from
the Peritoneum, by whose benefit they are kept in their places. Its Site.
In Man it is planted under the back part, and in the bottom of the Stomach,
about the first Vertebre of the Loins, where, to the Peritoneum it is firmly
annexed, it is extended from the cavity of the Liver to the region of the
Spleen, and gets a transverse site there. If we take a view of its color,
Color.
it carries in it the pale color of many or most of the glandules, for the
Blood that passes into it, is of a very bright and light color. Its figure is
longish, Figure.
largest and thickest about the Duodenum, thinner and narrower toward the
Spleen, obtaining a various constitution in diversity of Animals. In sound
Bodies this carries but a moderate bigness, Quantity.
its length generally being about eight or ten transverse fingers, and this it
seldom exceeds in men of a good and healthful constitution. Its breadth is
generally seen two transverse fingers, and its thickness in dead Bodies, as
has commonly been observed, has not exceeded the thickness of one transverse
finger. Its weight is various, according to the diversity of man's constitution:
And Dr. Wharton says it generally is seen to weigh about 4 or 5 ounces, and in
Horses it weighs about 11 ounces. It has 4 sorts of Vessels allowed it.
Vessels.
viz. Arteries, which it takes from the Caeliacal Artery; Veins, which it takes
from the Splenetick branch, Nerves which it has from the sixth pair, and a
Ductus, which it has given it peculiarly proper to it self, unknown to the
Ancients, arising from its own Parenchyma. This Ductus being membranous, and
although thin, yet it is made very firm, whose greatness does very near equal
that of a Goose quill toward the Gut called the Duodenum. In its progress it
seems divided, and then attenuated into both greater and smaller lateral
branches, and running hence to all the glandules of the Pancreas, as to the
variety of uses given this Ductus, and the liquor which is kept in it, Regnerus
de Graaf has at large in his Book De Succo Pancreatico declared, to which I
shall recommend the Ingenuous Reader. As to its use also, Its use.
this has as many given it, as Physicians can well put upon it. Thus some will
have it as a Pillow to the Stomach; and this opinion Vesalius does defend, as
you may see in his Book de Omento cap. 4. but this opinion of his does not
carry much validity in it, because in Birds and Fishes, and many other Animals,
this is seen to bear no use at all. Others defend that it lets out the Chyle
from the Intestines; and this Baccius and Folius do vindicate, where they do
stiffly maintain the Chyles passing out of the Intestines to the Liver and
Spleen by the Pancreatick Ductus; and this also is contrary both to the light
of Sense and Reason, for none of this Juice is sent out of the Gut into the
Pancreas, but sent thence into the Guts. A Third sort do write that this part
does purge the Chyle, of which number is Veslingius. But he is readily confuted
both by Asellius and Riolan, and others, and Experience does join with them in
their opposition; for this humor contained in the Pancreas is never seen
bitter in taste, and therefore can no ways be allowed acquaintance with Choler.
Others there are who account it the bilious Vesicle of the Spleen, amongst
which the Worthy Bartholine appears, as to its conjunction therewith, as is
seen Anatom. cap. 13. where he writes, That Choler is expurged by this Ductus,
and so will needs have it the Biliary Vessel of the Spleen, being made for its
use. But this gets a speedy refutation also, this Ductus not reaching the
Spleen, neither has the Spleen any commerce therewith, by having any of its
Vessels sent either into its Ductus, or substance. Others also do write, That
the thicker and more feculent parts of the Blood are by the ordinary Law of
Nature purged out into this. Of which opinion is Lindanus, who affirms, That
this does purge the excrements of the Blood, and this seems to carry but little
truth in it. When as the Pancreatick juice, as often as it has been truly
collected, has appeared like the Lympha of Wine; and therefore what can be
conjectured of this excrementitious humor which he puts upon it? Others also
think that this part was formed for the reception of excrements which do fall
from the Nerves: And this our worthy Countryman Wharton does affirm in his
Adenograph. cap. 13. where he writes, That this glandule does administer as all
the other glandules to the Nerves, being as an excretory glandule, and does
receive the superfluities from the Nerves, the which does dispatch thence by
this proper Vessel into the Intestines. But because Nerves are made and framed
for the dispensing of the Animal Spirits, I cannot perceive how this most
excellent man would have an excrementitious humor pass through them, and why
they should be more deposed into the Pancreas, than into the Spleen, or any
other part of the Body, I cannot well understand; for the Pancreas is a long
way from the Brain, and too long, I am afraid, to receive its excrement, and
therefore by his leave, his opinion must meet with the same contradiction as
the former. Others also do suppose that in the Pancreas both every useful and
necessary humor is secerned and separated herein. And here Silvius de le Boe
gives the seventh opinion thereof, who writes that nothing is carried from the
Intestines through this Ductus into the Pancreas, nor that any unprofitable
excrement is in the Pancreas secreted by the same to the Gut; but a laudable
humor prepared out of the Blood and Spirits in it is thence carried to the
Guts, and this he thinks mixeth it self there with the other aliments. And
because perhaps he thought that nothing could be sent to the Guts, unless first
having past by the Stomach, and so sucked up by the Ductus Biliarius or
Pancreaticus, and did less consider that not only in Intermitting Fevers the
sick people are perplexed with various troubles about their Lumbar Region, but
in other diseases relating thereto, as Hypochondriack affections produced from
the Scurvy, or a Cholera, accompanied with gripings and the like, succeeding
them, by raising corrugations and acid humors in them. This Pancreatick juice
being in its own nature subacid, tempered with the Animal Spirits; and he
judging Choler, which is bitter, and so a perfect enemy to acidity, leaves the
pursuit of its generation to others, he himself acknowledging it being past his
knowledge to define. As to the collection of this juice, Regn^rus de Graaf has
most admirably in his Book De Succo Pancreatico satisfied in cap. 3. ejus.
libr. We now come to show that this Pancreatick Juice is no excrement, as is
made good by the division of the aforesaid glandules of the whole Body; and
that we may declare its true and proper generation, we must propose allits
glandules, by distinguishing them into conglobated and conglomerated glandules,
and Silvius de le Boe does make these two distinctions between them: The
difference between conglobated and conglomorated glandules shown.
And these he calls conglobated, being framed as it were out of one continued
substance, having an equal superficies, of which kind are the glandules of the
Mesentery Inguens, and many other parts of the Body. Those called conglomerated
glandules, which are formed out of many small glandules put or joined together,
of which sort may be reckoned the Pancreas; and many other in the Fauces,
Nares, Eyes, and the Thymus it self. The distinction between each of which
Glandules is not fictitious, but real, as experience does evidently evince:
Made good by demonstration.
For take off the Membrane or Coat which covers either of them, and send into
the Ductus Pancreaticus, or Salivalis, any liquor by a Syringe being thereto
fixed, or to the Arteries belonging to either of them, we shall see the
conglomerated glandules easily to separate, and part from one another;
especially if there be care taken in the division of the membranes, as they
spread into bulk. The which, use the greatest care you can, you never shall
expect to do the same with the conglobated glandules. By their substance.
Another thing which shows their difference, is their substance; for by Natures
Decree and Law, we find a Cavity in the middle of the conglobated glandules,
where I am sure none is to be expected in the conglomerated glandules. To the
confirmation of which, worthy Steno does readily assent; where writing of the
conglobated glandules, these are his words: Outwardly they are globous, not
hallowed inward with any Pelvis, yet if you trace their separation aright, you
will meet some lips, and cleft every way between their protuberancies. Again,
besides their differences as to their substance, And in their Vessels also.
their peculiar vessels do also declare the same. For the conglobated glandules
are properly framed for the Lymphatick Vessels, which marches upwards toward
the common Thoracick Ductus, whereas the conglomerated Glandules do depose
their liquor into peculiar cavities, as the Salivals into the Mouth, the
Pancreatick into the small Guts, etc. Various are the passages of Glandules,
and diverse are their substance; since therefore we have traced thus far into
their differences between these two sorts of Glandules, we must not leave off
here, but ought to search whether the liquor or humor which is found in them
be one and the same in quality. And here we shall find much difference as to
their quality, In respect of their quality.
for we shall find one humor in the conglobated, and another in the
conglomerated glandules; for that which is separated in the conglobated
glandules is always of one and and the same nature; which is not only proved
and made good by their substance being always alike, but by their passages by
which they do exonerate and discharge the same. Again, upon a strict enquiry we
shall find that the liquor which ordinarily does proceed from the conglobated
glandules has more of softness, and less of acidity in it than that which
comes from the conglomerated glandules of the Pancreas, and yet that this has
more of acidity and saltness in it than those of the conglomerated Salivals.
For upon tasting either of these liquors we wall find a notable difference; for
the Saliva is temperate and insipid, the Pancreatick juice is acid and Saline,
or thereabouts. And since we find their juices to be various, As also in their
uses.
let us enquire into their use, and this is thus made good; all the liquor of
the conglobated glandules is sent into the Thoracick Ductus, and mixed there
with the Chyle; as the chief part of nutriment, going along with it throughout
its whole journey: and runs along the Jugular and Subclavian Vein, whence
necessarily descending with the Blood being as yet confuse, it passes along
with it through the right Ventricle of the Heart, from or by the right Ear of
the same: And this, I hope, must no ways be allowed excrementitious or
unuseful, excrementitious humors being altogether separated from the Blood, so
that by Natures Laws they are to have no further converse therewith, but
utterly dismissed thence; the which is easily perceived in the Vein, secreted
from the Sanguinary mass in the Kidneys, and sent thence by the Uriters into
the Bladder, the which after a small while lodging therein do make its last
exit. Thus the juice of the conglomerated glandules being effused through
particular Ductus's into various cavities of the Body, where it meets with
other humors nourishing the same; this also is not to be allowed
excrementitious, for this works as the former, in their various places and
uses. Thus the Saliva in the Maxillary Glandules, as well upper as lower,
secreted from the Blood, is carried by the same Salival Ductus into the cavity
of the Mouth, where having met with the nutriments taken therein, and mixing it
self with the same, does march thence with it into the Stomach, and there
creates a ferment; and such therefore who do think this unuseful or
excrementitious, are as much to blame as those who accounted the former as
needless. What the Pancreatick Juice serves for.
Thus also the Pancreatick Juice lodged in the glandules of the Pancreas, do
work as the former Ductus, where we shall as readily find this Juice, secreted
in man four transverse fingers under the Pylorus, continually spending it self
into the Duodenum, and there mixed with the fermented nutriments which thence
descended from the Stomach, and driven thither downwards by the Peristaltick
motion of the Guts: In which propulsion its greater part, together with the
more pure and liquid part of the Chyle is thence discharged into the Milky
Vessels, and hence into its proper Cystern, whence by the Thoracick Ductus it
is sent to the Subclavian Vein, and so marches along till it arrives at the
right Ear of the Heart, and gets thence into the right Ventricle of the same.
And if these be excrementitious humors, those which do supply the whole
Economy of the Body may as well be allowed the same. These uses of these
glandules I do believe were altogether unknown to the Ancients, who thought
that they were framed as Sponges, to suck up all excrementitious and
superfluous humors; but our learned men of late, having with more care, study
and labor looked into this structure, do easily show how lame they were in the
uses designed thereto; and how former ages have lived in their errors, as
touching the noble uses of this Pancreas, every reading man may judge, by the
arguments already discoursed of the same. I shall close up this Chapter with
some Historical discourses hereof, where we shall find Riolan and Plempius
granting the Pancreas the seat of intermitting Fevers, and of Hypochondraick
melancholy, and the only cause of many Chronical Distempers.

Riolan. Anthropog. lib. 2. cap. 16. writes there, History.
That he has seen the Pancreas to have equaled the Liver in its bigness; and
this he makes good by the example of a Worthy Gentleman, Augustine Thuane, who
being of a melancholic disposition, troubled about four days with Cholick
pains, with weight and heaviness of his Stomach, his Hypochrondries no ways
swelling, but being seized by a Gangreen from the right foot upwards, died
within six hours, with direful cruciations: The Body being opened, his Liver
was seen Spherical, his Pancreas equalling the weight of his Liver, wholly
Scirrhous, accompanied with many Globes like a Pigeons Egg, and the Spleen was
so small that it scarce weighed an ounce.

History.
Highmore corp. human. Anatom. lib. 1. part 11. writes that he once observed in
a Noble Woman, who for some years was perplexed with Convulsions, Epilepsy, and
Hysteric passion, these having made her yield to Death; her dead Body being
opened, the Pancreas was wholly found ill-affected and ulcerated.

History.
Aubertus Progymn. Exercit. 44. ad lib. abdit. Fernelii, writes this story of a
rich Merchant, who in his virile age did enjoy all his faculties very briskly,
as eating and drinking, and the like; but when he endeavored to sleep, he had
both a cold sweat seized his whole Body, and fell into a swoon, the Physicians
that saw him in these fits did conjecture his disease might arise from his
Stomach being ill affected, and therefore did prescribe him Hiera Galeni, but
without any success, he being much worse after the taking the same than before;
after this they prescribed Cordials for him, but these had little success in
him; and all the remedies which they subscribed no ways lessening his pain, he
in this miserable condition put an end to his trouble, by leaving the World:
His Body being opened, in his Pancreas was seen a perfect abscess, accompanied
with much putrified matter, which infected his whole Body; and this was the
only occasion of his speedy departure.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Liver.
THe Liver is a vast Bowel, planted in the right Hypochondry, under the
Diaphragma, in its unequal or gibbous part it is round and light, in the lower
part thereof concave; it has a soft and reddish substance, Its substance made
of glandulous kernels.
much resembling concreted Blood. Malpighius who by his Microscopes has most
accurately shown the substance thereof. Lib. de Hepate cap. 4. observes first,
That its substance in man is framed of many lobes, and that these are formed of
glandulous Kernels, the which do afford this heap of Ramifications, and covered
with a proper Membrane. Secondly, That the whole substance of the Liver,
consisting of diverse glandulous kernels and ramifications of Vessels, that
they may perform their offices together, Nature thought it necessary to place
these glandules between them for the more ready execution of their offices.
Then, That the Vessels are not joined by any Anastomosis, but these glandules.
that the abovesaid Vessels are not joined by any Anatomists, but these
glandulous kernels chiefly framing the substance of the Liver are planted as a
mean between them; from which observations he concludes, that the Liver is a
conglomerated glandule separating the Bilis; and this he seems to confirm by
the abovesaid reason. And because this office is particularly due to
conglomerated glandules (as is seen in the Parotides, Pancreas, and the like)
he says this Vessel is the Biliary pore in the Liver, where, with the felleous
vesicle, it joins. These new observations of Malpigius have discust many things
of the Liver left in the dark by the Ancients, and have given the same a better
face of light. And that the unfortunate state of this Bowel being by them
called the principal Bowel, and put by Galen as the great Throne of
sanguification, and had in the highest esteem with them of any other part of
the Body, that in our times it should lose a great part o^ that excellency
which they bestowed upon it, and stripping it from all its bravery with which
they clothed it, like a Silkworm spinning its last thread, it only now gets
the name of a conglomerated glandule, and appears as a new vessel raised from
the Grave, gaining in it the new life of its knowledge and use. Asellius writes
he has observed a branch of Milky Vessels in the Liver; but without doubt he
was in the dark, he taking the Lymphatick Vessels to be that branch; there
being neither Lacteal or Chyleliferous Vessels any ways sent to the Liver, but
many Lymphaticks have been seen to arise thence. Thus Charleton lib. de
Oeconom. animal* writes, that never any part of the Chyle does enter the Liver.
The Original of Lymphaducts.
And indeed by all Anatomists the Lympha is allowed to arise out of the
conglobated glandules planted in the hollow part thereof, and so marching
forwards. And Fredericus R^ysch, a most accurate Anatomist, has observed that
he has seen many Lymphaducts arising from the Spleen, not only out of its
superficial part, but from its interior part also: And further affirms, that
he has seen them in many other parts of the Body, which have taken their
Origination from conglobated glandules, in which glandules he allows there
remains a specifique virtue, for separating the acid part of the Serum from the
Blood, and for giving the saline separated part a light acidity. And here he
writes further, That by ligature he has found that all the Lymphaducts which
are in the Lungs do exonerate themselves into the Subclavian, Axillary, and
Jugular Veins. Some do affirm that they have found conglobated glandules in the
Joints, and without doubt does thence deduce their Origination, and as to their
insertion, they do hence exonerate themselves into the Chylifique Vessels, and
diverse Veins. Its Vessels.
The Vessels of the Liver, by this glandulous substance or lobes, are mixed
after a wonderful manner, as is made good by a friable Liver, as Glisson does
demonstrate.

The Office of the Liver is to moysten the Blood with a sulphurous dew, Its
Office.
and with the assistance of the Spleen, does frame a ferment of the Chyle. The
action of the Liver, Spleen and Pancreas, made and designed for one and the
same end.
The action of the Liver, Spleen and Pancreas, are by most Authors allowed to
be framed for one end; for they together do prepare the ferment both of Blood
and Chyle; for the preparation of which there is required three several
offices, and this is not to be completed by any one or two of them. This, as
Flower, The manner of this preparation of ferment.
being put into warm water, mixeth it self with the ferment readily, and by
this the more terrestrial and thick parts thereof are dissolved, and the more
spirituous parts lying occult and consopite, are hereby likewise attenuated,
and thus framed into a whole lump or mass; and these attenuated Spirits being
thereupon poured, it becomes lighter and easier of digestion. Thus also is it
necessary for the mixing the ferment to the Chyle and venous Blood, whereof the
Spirituous Particles herein lodging, are attenuated, and thus the whole mass is
made more apt for a Hematosis, and nutrition. The ferment of this Bread also
(by which we may easily find out both the knowledge of the Blood and Chyle) is
generally made of some quantity of Flower, to which warm water is added, as
also some salt and acidity; and this kept in a warm place, till both the Salt
and subacid Spirits are by this heat somewhat volatiliz'd, and this gets
possession into the mass, and so does both dilate and separate the same; and
thus does by degrees make the whole mass subacid and fermentative. This being
done, a small quantity thereof is sufficient to leven the whole Loaf; for this
small quantity entering into the Dough or Paste, does both attenuate and divide
these Particles, and dissolve the Spirits lodging therein. And be the ferment
what it will, this for certain* must be allowed, that it is framed of subacid,
subsaline and corrosive parts, a moderate heat interposing therewith, with some
volatization and liquefaction; the which should they be either more thick or
dense, the force hereof would not so suddenly show it self, but require much
more time to act the same part: If therefore by some Sulphurous Particles
these grow more Spirituous and Volatile, they do sooner and more readily run
into ferment; as we see in Ale, the which in the space of half an hour or less,
does absolve: this work, because these spirituous acid Particles hereby getting
freedom, do also attain a more penetrating quality, and so show a quick
demonstrance of their intents and inclinations, making a more speedy
dissolution of the thicker parts, and so force also a more speedy suscitation
of the latent spirits; but a moderate heat is a main agent in this work, for
this is the master both of the acidity and also of the volatization. Thus
stands it with both the Blood and the Chyle; the which if they be not
attenuated before an Hematosis, and prepared by an admixt ferment fit for the
same, they do not sufficiently spirituize it in the Heart, that is, the Spirits
so lodged therein not being dissolved from the more thick and serous matter
therein remaining, the Blood hereby does soon become thick and aqueous, and so
less capable for nourishing the Body, making it hereby less able to perform its
functions: And thus the whole frame of Nature is put out of order, her natural
and animal faculties wanting that life and vigor, which gave them courage to
prosecute the same. The ferment both of Blood and Chyle made by the Liver, and
how this is performed.
This ferment both of Chyle and Blood is performed by the Liver, for whose
accomplishing whereof, the Chyle first passing from the Stomach, is afterward
entertained by the Duodenum, where it meets with the Pancreatick Juice as its
assistant; The matter of which the Liver frames this, is the venous Blood sent
from the Gastrick and Meseraick veins flowing hereinto by the Porta, to which
there is therein mixed a subacid or saline Succus or Juice, made in the Spleen
out of the Arterial Blood and Animal Spirits, passing through the Nerves, the
which is carried through the Splenitick branch into the Porta, and thence
conveyed with the Blood to which it is annexed in the Liver; and thus whilst it
bears a sharp and corroding quality in it, by the Specifique and Digestive
virtue of the Liver, both the saline and subacid Particles lodged in the Blood
are both dissolved and attenuated, and so becomes fermentated, and their
thinner parts, like the most fine and thin water, passing the conglobated
glandules in the caveous parts of the Liver, and so receding from the thicker
part of the Blood, are hence dismissed by the numerous Lymphatick Vessels out of
the Liver to various Veins, preparing the venous Blood toward the Heart; for
the furtherance of which performance, the Saliva passing by the Mouth, as also
the subsaline and subacid Lympha, collected out of the glandules of the
Axillaries, Inguens, and other places, as also of the Pancreatick Juice out of
the Guts, does sustain the Chyliferous Vessels, together with the Chyle. The
origination of ferment.
And if any enquire how these sharp, hot and fermented Particles do or may
arise in our body, I shall give them this answer, They do arise out of Sulphur
and Salt; the first being from Sulphur, but the chief acrimony does take its
substance from Salt; the which besides its Sulphurious quality it bears in it,
is innate in all our nutriments, for we eat nothing which does not carry in it
a saline quality; this Sulphur dissolves this Salt, and brings it into a
fusion, this being loosned and attenuated, does by its acrimony both corrode,
enter and dissolve all parts of our nutriments, and so does fetch out the
Spirit lodging in them, whose operation is Fermentation, without which no man
can be kept alive; and when this is either debilitated or vitiated, his life is
but very troublesome to him. And that we may trace this Fermentation more
happily, we by the natural Saline instinct of nature, which is in all
nutriments, do add our help thereto, by putting Salt upon the meats which we
usually do eat, making them of a hard substance, hereby giving them both a
greater fermentation, and a more efficacious ferment for their digestion; by so
much the more we love or affect a greater saltness in them, as in Beef, Pork,
or the like; because Salt in such is the only cause of their easy digestion; a
manifest example whereof we have in Herrings, the which being Salt, do easily
digest in the Stomach, but not being salt, and much boiled, they are not
digested therein without difficulty. And thus the true action of the Liver,
Spleen, and Pancreas, is said to make the ferment; whence follows, that where
these bowels are well, and do enjoy their proper functions, the whole Blood is
excellent good and spirituous, and the Body becomes active and brisk; but where
they are disordred, innumerable diseases do arise from an ill ferment of the
Blood and Chyle. And hence although the Liver does not carry the same Honor
with us as it did with the Ancients, who reckoned it as one of the principal
bowels, and the office of Sanguification, yet it wants not the reputation of an
useful Vessel, whose use we cannot well be without, its diseases being
dangerous, and the cure thereof not easily performed without difficulty.

History.
Cyriacus Lucius de Obs. propriis, writes that he showed in a dead Body a
globous Liver, ascending with the Diaphragmae into the Breast, and to the right
Breast, who also had a very large Spleen therewith. Fernelius lib. 6. cap. 4.
Pathal. writes, Another History.
That sometimes yellow Choler being lodged a long time in the Liver
preternaturally, and not timely purged out thence, has much thickened therein,
and produced very dangerous obstructions therein, the which also has grown
stony in process of time. Joachinus Camerarius de Observe. propriis does therein
write of a Gentleman, History.
who being seized with a great coldness of his Thighs, and of his whole Body,
with a consternation of mind, having also a Cough and Rheumatism going along
with it, the which did occasion a Tumor under the Cartilago Ensiformis, or
Sword-like Cartilage, which was hard, in color equal, without pain, swelling
beyond expectation; he neglecting the same, not in time using convenient
remedies, he fell into a Cachexia, or ill habit of Body, and vomiting, taking
its origination from his Cough; this Tumor very much increasing, and the Cutis
of the Abdomen being hereby much extended, the Patient seemed crooked, and, as
it were, drawn back into himself; and using Stomachick and hot Oils thereto,
without any success of ease, and this Tumor still growing more upon him, took
him from his Stomach, and caused a weakness in all his faculties; hence
followed swellings in his face, as also in his feet; in this condition he flies
to Physicians and Chyrurgions, amongst which the learned Dr. Volckerus declared
this Tumor showed it self to be an abscess, and needed opening, to the which
this Patient agreeing, and the others willing to subscribe thereto, it was
dilated, and not without admiration of the beholders, many Vesicles did break
forth with great force, some partly rent, some being whole, and filled with a
thin waterish humor; some of these were the bigness of a Hens Egg, or a
Pigeons Egg, and some lesser, the which were sent forth by his Cough; with
these Vessels did come forth a kind of thick humor, with a concrete
viscidness, as also not much irresembling fat, and did very well bear the name
of a Steomatical abscess; these Bladders were near three hundred, as they could
be guest, which were said to hold in them about 4 pound of Water: The third day
after this apertion, these Vesicles did not so frequently appear, but then
issued out a foetid matter, and viscous humor, but not so plentifully as
formerly; the Patient hence grew weak, and although all useful Medicines were
prescribed him, yet he at last dyed with a Consumption. He being opened, his
Liver was seen much tumefied, and livid in color, and in the upper part,
toward the Diaphragma, this abscess appeared full with Bladders filled with a
putrid matter, as it were a Cartilaginous Membrane, both which corrupted the
Liver, and corroded it even to the Bladder of Gall. In his Lungs also was found
a large abscess, wherein was contained putrid matter, to the quantity of near
six pounds. The third abscess, which was the bigness of a Goose Egg, was
annexed beneath the Liver at the Cholick gut, whose Membrane was thick; the
Heart enjoyed its true position, the Ventricle, Spleen, Kidneys, Intestines and
Bladder, being all firm.

Trincavilla lib. 3. cap. 27. de Comp. Medic. writes, That in the dissection of
Bodies, he has frequently seen Steatoma's in the substance of the Liver.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Spleen.
THe Spleen has also many small conglomated glandules, Many small conglobated
glandules herein, from whence does arise this plenty of Lymphatick Vessels.
from whence do arise those plenty of Lymphatick Vessels, endued with the which
by Malpigius are said to many Valves; contain a certain yellowish or reddish
liquor, and by perspicuous passages are seen to carry the same through the
Omentum into the Receptaculum Chili, they arising out of many small conglobated
glandules lodging in the Spleen, altogether denied by Wharton in his
Adenographia. Malpigius was the first which observed these glandules in the
substance of the Spleen worthy note: Of which he thus writes, cap. 5. ejus.
libr. in the Spleen are found and dispersed most copious branches of glandules,
much resembling Grapes; they carrying in them an oval form and shape, not much
differing from the Renal glandules; they have a white color, as he has always
observed; and although the Spleen be tumefied with black Blood, yet these still
do keep their color; their substance seems membranous, but soft, and easily
friable; and this is one reason why Wharton will not allow the Spleen
glandulous: Their cavities being very small are not to be seen by the sharpest
eye, they are very copious and almost innumerable, overspreading the whole
Spleen; they are wonderfully planted, and are pendant from the branches of its
Capsulae, or from the fibers thence arising; and consequently from the ends and
terminations of the Nerves and Arteries; they are only seen by the laceration
of the Spleen; in Man they are scarce discernable, if notwithstanding the whole
body of glandules be tumefied by any disease or distemper, they are more
apparent, increasing in multitude and magnitude; as he observed in a Maid that
dyed, whose Spleen was found sprinkled with these conspicuous conglobated
Glandules; We owe much to Malpighius for bringing us into this Light, be
demonstrating to us that with clearness, which was kept in the dark from the
Ancients, and only allowed conjectural. In the substance of the Spleen, The
Spleens Substance.
which is subacid (the which is easily perceived in a boild Spleen) are
contained many Glandules, and the Blood which is infused into those Glandules;
to which also are added animal Spirits, coming from the ends of the Nerves
ending in them, but much less in quantity, the which together making the
sulphurous Spirit of Blood, giving it some light acidity wherewith it is
endued by pressure of the circumstantial parts, it drives the same from the
same Glandules; and being sucked up by the root of the Splenical Branch, marches
by it to the gate of the Vein, and to the Liver, and before it attains the root
of the Veins, it stops awhile in the Cells, whose substance being Acid, by its
delay there, does obtain a greater Acidity, like Wine kept in a Vinegar bottle,
growing by its delay therein, both more sower, and more sharp; thus Choler
lodging longer than its usual time in the Bladder of Gall, gains a greater
degree of acrimony in it. Many uses are designed and ascribed to the Spleen,
Uses designed the Spleen.
amongst which, Galen and many of the Ancients did suppose, that its action was
to separate the feculent or melancholic part of the Chyle; and that it did
attract the same by the splenical Branch; and having once collected the same
into its Dominion, did therein give it another digestion. But these both
Bauhine, Riolane, and Bartholine have already refuted; for in the Spleen is no
ample Cavity to entertain this excrement; or if there were, there is no
apparent passage seen therein, for the discharge of the same out again. Others
there are, as Vesalius, Platerus, Bauhine, Spigelius, and Piso, with many
others, who will have the Spleen a Sanguificant Bowel; and with Aristotle do
call it the Livers Vicar. The Liver being ill disposed, this performing its
Office for it; and to back and strengthen their opinions thereof, they do
further tell us, That the Spleen was made for forming Blood for the Vessels
which are contained in the Abdomen, as the Liver was for the other parts of the
Body: but this loses ground apace, since neither by the Spleen nor by the Liver
Sanguification is made, but by the Heart only: Besides, the Spleen has no
Vessels in it, by which it could send any Blood forth to these Abdominal
Vessels; and that which destroys the whole Opinion, maintained and propagated
by them, is the Bloods Circulation, which originally does proceed from the
Heart, and thence passes through all the Arteries to all the parts of the
Body. The true use of the Spleen is to make a subacid Matter out of the
Arterious Blood, The true use of the Spleen.
from which being again excocted with sulphurous Particles in the Liver, in a
specifique manner, it there frames a Bilious Ferment both of Chyle and Blood,
How the Spleen does make the sower Juice.
because also this Acid Liquor herein generated, is not readily explained, we
shall see it thus performed. A subsaline Subacid, and sower Juice we have
already shown, is made out of the Arterious Blood in the Spleen, by the large
Splenetick Artery, sending the same vigorously into this Bowel; the which by a
plentiful affluxion of animal Spirits by the Nerves, and also by this Bowels
own mediate virtue, is instantly varied; and that sulphurous Spirit which was
formerly seen in it, is now obtunded, fixed, and suffocated, and the salt and
acid Spirit therein remaining, is produced into action; and the saline parts
being somewhat separated do take predominancy. And hence is it, that the fervid
and sweetish Blood flowing by the Arteries into the Spleen, and being a while
kept therein, the sulphurous Fervor with its sweetness lose themselves, and
it becomes subsaline and subacid, and so marches from the Spleen by the
Splenical Branch to the Liver. And that this primary matter of Ferment,
perfected by the Liver, does first come from the Spleen, is thus made good by
experiment: For take the Spleen of an Ox, Swine, Sheep, or any other Creature,
and cut it into pieces, and put them into warm water, and put some of this warm
water, wherein these have for some small time been laid, and put the same to
Dough or Paste, you will soon find it dilate the same, and frame a Ferment
therein, as well as Yeast or the like, the which will better declare it self,
if you will but add a little Vinegar thereto. We come now toward its
conclusion, How Diseases of the Spleen do arise.
where we may make some enquiries how diseases do arise from the Spleen; if
therefore the Spleen be weak, leaving its subacid quality, not being well
liquefied, attenuated, or volatiliz'd, but remaining thick, tartareous, and
terrene, a large part of the Spleen being accumulated with a plenty of this
viscous Substance, giving a great occasion to the Spleens increase into a
larger bulk; this spirit lodging in it, not being timely stirred up, but
boiling in its narrow confines, does in a great measure occasion its larger
distention, hereby making it very ready to receive any distemper whatsoever.
Thus when a Scirrhous Spleen being any ways obstructed, or otherwise vitiated,
in generating of an ill fermentative juice; this makes it subject to a thousand
evils, all which do show the action of the Spleen sufficiently evident.
Hildanus Obs. 44. Centur. 2. shows you there the Figure of a Spleen filled with
a greasy kind of Matter, where it appears as it was dissected. Hollerius writes
that upon opening a Woman who had a Stone in her Womb, she had no Spleen in
her, but was destitute of the same.

Various have been the Spleens seen in diverse People, both as to their weight
and bigness. History.
Thus Vidus Vidii lib. 10. cap. 10. de Curat. Membr. writes there of one whose
Spleen was no bigger than a Pigeons Egg, and that so hard and compact, that it
almost equaled the hardness of a stone. Whereas Columbus writes, History.
that he has seen Spleens weighing Twenty pounds, and George Garner de
Observat. propriis does there tell us of one of 39 years of age, who had a
Spleen so large, that it filled the whole Abdomen, suppressing both the Stomach
and Guts; the which being cleared from the Body, weighed 23 pounds, and being
cut in the middle cross ways, did every way answer the substance of a sound
Spleen, no ways changed in its color, save only the Blood which was in it not
being so black as usually it is; his Liver also was very hard, obstructed, and
very large, and weighed Eleven pounds, his Stomach being so small, that it
appeared but like a Bladder. Turneiserus in examine. Vrinar. there makes mention
of a Noble-woman, who had a Stone in her Spleen, the largeness of a Chestnut,
somewhat white, weighing Two Ounces, and a half, and a Dram, concreeted with
a crusty outside; this Woman was young and beautiful, and was taken with a pain
in her Left Side every full Moon for Three days together.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Kidneys.
THe Office of the Liver and the Spleen being discoursed, next in Order to the
Rules of Anatomy, we arrive at the Kidneys, where the Serum mixeth its self to
the Blood. The inward evacuatory passages of the Serum, being the Kidneys, and
the Bladder, we shall only Treat of the First, being nearest of kin to our
present Discourse. The Kidneys by the Greeks do take their derivation, (...)
fluere, the Urine passing through them as thorough Rivulets. The substance of
the Kidneys do appear to our view as they were fibrous, framed out of a
Concourse and commixture of small Vessels, Their Substance
having some carnosity interposing; in outward Contact hard, inwardly
moderately Spongeous. These things do offer themselves to ocular inspection, as
touching the Kidneys. But Malpighius by the advantage of his Microscopes, has
given us better knowledge thereof; by whose benefit he has delivered us from
many things which were kept in the dark from former ages. For in his Book De
Renibus, he writes, whereas in Men of growth the Superficies of the Kidneys
commonly appears equal; yet in a Foetus and young Children its found otherwise.
Infinite minute Glandules found out here.
The membrane of the Kidneys being ablated, and injection of spirit of Wine,
tinged with a black Color, being injected into the emulgent Artery. Malpighius
has observed innumerable minute Glandules, fixed every way to these bifurcated
Arteries, and that they have been colored with the same; which Glandules, with
the Sanguiferous Vessels swelling with this black Color, being produced into
the form of a specious Tree, they hang as an Apple. From these Glandules where
the ends of these Arteries do terminate, he supposes the Orifices of the Veins
do arise, and that small Nerves also are there produced. Their action is to
separate and discharge the serous redundant Humidity from the Blood; Action of
the Kidneys.
the which with it is carried by the emulgent Arteries, from which Blood in its
transition, a good part of the Serum is separated, and distilled into the
Pelvis, by the Renal Glandules, Urinary Fibrilla's, and Papillary Caruncles,
and so falls thence by the Ureter into the Bladder, the remaining part being
sent by emulgent Veins to the Vena Cava.

The Kidney is a common Receptacle, and does receive into it both moist and dry
things; and this is made good, both by History and Example. History.
Thus Langius 2 Epist. 40. writes of a Virgin, who by carelessness swallowed
down Five Needles into her Stomach, the which after Three days were discharged
from her by her Urine. History.
And Alexander Benedictus, Lib. 3. Anatom. cap. 9. writes, of one who having
swallowed a small Key imprudently, within a small while afterward having a
Stone drawn from him, the which Stone every way joined to this Key, and the Key
was its first foundation; this Key came from him with the Stone. History.
Nicolas Florentinus Sermon. 9. Tract. 4. cap. 29. tells us there, of one who not
well chewing Fungus's or Mushrooms, had some great pieces thereof came from him
through his Bladder with his Urine. History.
Julius Alexandrinus annotat. ad cap. 14. lib. de substant. Facult. nature.
writes of pieces of Smallage Roots being eaten by one, many parts of which he
has observed, have come out of the Body with the Urine. Thus Anise-seed,
Fennel-seed, and other Seeds, being swallowed down, many of these have been
seen to come whole out from the Body, by, and with the Urine; and its believed,
that all these things do pass the most narrow pores of the Kidneys, which the
Blood cannot pass; and whether this of the pores special Figuration, and
aforesaid Aptitude, be sufficient for doing these things, I can scarce believe:
For these hard and great things thus passing the milky Vessels, then marching
by the Vena Cava, and the right Cavity of the Heart, and then insensibly, and
without injury, to pass along thence by the most narrow and winding passages of
the Lungs, to the Left Cavity of the same, and from thence by the great Artery,
and emulgent Arteries before they come to the Kidneys, through all which
passages they must enter before they can arrive at them; and then, that these
can be transcolated by their Urinary Fibrils, and Papillary Pores, as no Blood
can go, does confound both Faith and Reason. Neither can this be made good by
experience; for in all my Reading, as to this point, in which I have taken a
little more than ordinary pains, could I ever find that any Physician or
Anatomist, has declared he has seen, either Needles, or Keys, or such hard
things, or Seeds of any sort, in their opening of their dead Bodies, either in
the Vena Cava, Ventricles of the Heart, or in the Lungs, or the great Artery,
or in the Kidneys, but in the last, Stones have frequently been seen and found
there.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Renal Glandules.
THese Renal Glandules are by Casserius called Succenturiati, Their Name.
and by Bartholine Capsulae Atrabilariae. The Omentum and Pancreas being laid
aside; these do readily show themselves; And Wharton calls them Glandulae ad
Plexum. Their Site.
They are Two Glandulous Bodies, one being given to each Kidney, planted under
the Diaphragma, above the Adipose Membrane, so as the right is joined to the
Vena Cava, and the Left put toward the Ventricle; they are found in the place
where the Plexus of the Nerves do appear, to which they are firmly affixt; they
do not generally exceed the number of Two, carrying in them much of the
substance of the Kidney, save only their being more loose, of a Reddish Color,
somewhat inclineable to Fat; they are seen to carry and bear several Figures in
diverse Persons and Animals, being seen sometimes Oval, sometimes Triangular,
and sometimes Round; their Magnitude is not always alike in young People,
Magnitude.
they equal the bigness of a small Nut, and are small, and the Right does
generally appear larger than the Left, and it is very seldom that the Left do
get the same advantage; they do not increase in proportion according to the
other parts of the Body, nor bear a like time therewith as to their growth, and
about pubertation to further Increment, they plainly do cease their growth; in
large creatures these Glandules do appear larger, than they do in those who are
of a more slender and smaller growth; and age coming on, they leave off growing
with it; and when many other parts of the Body do by sickness or disaster meet
with change, as to their former Being, yet these parts do seldom feel any thing
thereof, for they do retain their bulk, as is made good by the example of Dr.
Glisson, History.
in his Book De Rhacitide, where writing of a Child falling from the Rickets
into a Consumption, and Fever superveneing, forced her to quit her Life; she
being opened, although her Thymus was near consumed, yet these Glandules were
found firm. They are covered with a thin Coat, by which they are firmly annexed
to the exterior Membrane of the Kidneys: They have an apparent sinuous Cavity,
Cavity.
but this is so small, that it scarce admits a Pea into it; and this is better
seen in a Foetus than afterward, the which contains a black and feculent
Matter in it, with whose color its inward guard is tinged. In the greater end
of this Glandule is seen a certain conspicuous Cavity, into which many Cavities
arising from the substance of the Glandule, do terminate with open mouth, and
this Cavity opening its self into the next Vein, is defended with a Valve
opening toward the Vein, and shut backwards. They do for the most part take an
Artery from the Emulgents, sometimes from one, or many Membranes of the Aorta,
or great Artery.

Uses.
The Use of these Glandules is yet unknown, but many conjectures are past upon
them; thus some with Veslingius do suppose, that they do assist the Tract of
the Serum, and do collect the Atra bilis; the which like a Coagulum or Crud,
does promote the separation of the Serum from the Blood; others do suppose,
that they do defend and keep up the divisions of the Reteform plexus of the
Nerves; Some think that they do give warmth to the Stomach. Glisson does write,
that they do separate the Juice designed for the nutrition of the Nerves, from
the Blood, that hereby it may be sent to them more pure and refined: All which
Opinions are merely conjectural; and whereas there are some who do think that
in these, some Coagulum is made, which thence passing to the Kidneys, do there
make a fit separation of the Serum from the Blood; although this Opinion may in
all likelihood carry much Truth in it, yet till these passages, which make
their way through these Glandules to the Kidneys be more apparent, how this
separation is performed (as we have already shown of the Spleen) this must only
come under the name of conjecture. And since their use is at this day kept in
the dark, and that no Physicians or Anatomists have given any light as to their
uses; many diseases being believed to arise hence, some ingenious Men would do
the World good service, and their Profession, Reputation, to make known
thereto, what observations they have made of them in dead Bodies, both as to
their Diseases and Distempers.

Eustachius lib. de Renib. does give a very remarkable story of the Kidneys of
a Woman, History.
who after her Travel in Childbearing* and a plentiful excretion of Blood
which came from her, she dying, and her Body being opened, her Kidneys were
seen white, fragile, and putrid, under whose proper Membrane so much of Wind
had been collected, that it seemed as it were divided from its subject flesh;
being so distended and turgid, that it very much resembled the species of a
great Tumor. And that we may see all parts are not in all men made alike, we
shall find Jacobus Carpus in Isagog. Anatom. telling us there, That in the year
1541. he saw in a public Anatomy, one Artery, making or framing a passage out
of the Emulgents into the Right Side out of the Kidney; the which past in a
notable distance under the Kidneys into the Uritery passage, arising from the
aforesaid Kidney, and both went, or were carried by one channel to the Bladder;
yet this Emulgent Artery also entered the Kidney in its due place; and in this
individual, the Kidneys were whole and seemed as one, and had two Arteries, and
two Emulgent Veins, and two Ureter passages, covered with one only pannicle,
which also kept the usual places of the Kidneys, about the middle of the Back,
that is in that place, between the Spleen and the Liver, a little beneath it.
Hercules Saxoniae observat* History.
showed the whole flesh of the Right Kidney cut away from its proper Membrane,
fallen into the Bladder, before Fifty and more of his Auditors: where also he
tells you of the whole substance of the Kidney being resolved in Caruncles, and
these being sent into the Bladder, did there produce such a suppression of
Urine, that it procured the death of the patient which was therewith troubled.

CHAP. XX. Of the Testicles both of Men and Women.
THis Discourse begins with the Testicles, so called from the virility which
they bear witness of, whose substance by Galen is wholly said to be glandulous,
Allowed by the Ancients to be glandulous though improperly.
whose opinion of which is owned and allowed by Riolan, Fallopius, Spigelius,
and Veslingius; every one of which affirming, that they are made of a white,
soft, and glandulous substance. But Regenus de Graaf. and Diemerbroeck do
plainly show their errors, who allowed this substance glandulous; they neither
having in them the substance, temper, or use of the Glandules, but are parts
designed for noble uses, showing and declaring the strength of Man, and are of
great excellency, both as to his procreation and conservation. How they are
ordained for Generation.
For in Man are two Organs framed, which serve for Generation, some for making
the Seed, and others when thus made, for sending the same into the Womb, as
into its fertile Field. Our present discourse only touching upon the First, I
shall pretermit the Second; And because Nature, which preserves her issue by
Procreation, and Humanity gets further growth and friendship in the World by
Progenity, both Sexes being therein and therewith concerned, I shall in this
Chapter give you a small draught of each Sex, as to the composition and
substance of their Testicles, and then declare their use. They are generally
Two in number, Two generally in number.
and therefore by Herophilus called (...) gemelli; partly that the generation
of Seed might more happily proceed, and partly, that one being lost, the other
might perform its Office: In Man they are planted outward at the root of his
Yard, Not planted alike in Men and Women.
but in Women they are kept inwards, placed in the lower Cavity of the Abdomen,
two transverse Fingers from the bottom of the Womb, to whose sides they are
annexed by a strong ligament, by most Anatomists called Vas Deferens, because
the Seed by this, may the better be transmitted from the Testicles to the Womb:
these are not suspended by a Cremaster Muscle, and are lodged in the inward
Cavity of the Belly, for the better performing of their Office there designed
them; in their lower part they do obtain a semi-oval gibbosity; in their upper
part they are plain, their largeness do somewhat vary, according to age,
constitution, and bulk. Those in Women much differing from the same in Men.
Their substance being much different from that which is in Man; their inward
substance being framed of many sibrillous Membranes loosely tied together, in
whose aforesaid membranous substance are lodged many vessels filled with
Liquor, Nerves, and preparing Vessels, running along much in the same manner to
the Testicles as they do in Men, and covering their whole substance, in whose
coats many plentiful branches do vanish in a copious divarication. But to
proceed with the Testicles of Man, and herein we are to enquire into the
greatness of his Testicles, where also we shall meet with variableness as to
their largeness, the general bigness not exceeding that of a small Hens or a
Pullets Egg, and in old and decrepid persons they do not arise at this
magnitude, but are much less, and do grow flaccid. The Right is by the general
consent of the Anatomists, both larger and hotter than the Left; and hence is
it that some do declare, that the Right does beget Males, and that the Left
does generate Females. And now to enlarge upon their substance according to the
Ancients, and here we shall see Galen lib. 3. de Aliment. Facultat. cap. 6.
does there pronounce the substance of the Testicles glandulous. Riolanus also
joining in Opinion with him, lib. 11. cap. 3. where he says, that the
Testicles are glandulous and spungy bodies, framed for forming the Seed.
Fallopius, Various Authors proving them glandulous, but these confuted.
Spigelius, and Veslinguis, as I have already shown, do all maintain the same;
when they write that the Testicles are made of a substance which is both
glandulous, white and soft. And N. Higmore. lib. 1. Part 4: cap. 11. does add
this to the opinion of other Authors, that in the middle of the glandulous
substance of the Testicles, there is found a certain white, and thick Body, not
much irresembling the Vas Deferens, furnished with no apparent Cavity; or if
with any, a very small one, ascending from the bottom of the Testicles to the
upper part thereof, into the inward part of the albugineous coat into which it
is strongly implanted; neither is it only affixed to this coat, but does
perforate the same, and is seen to insert its self into the head of the
Parastatae, to which it so closely adheres, that it is not thence separable but
by incision, tied in the lower and middle part of the Membrane by the
intervention of Vessels. Wharton in his Book De Adenograph, writes, that the
substance of the Testicles is both glandulous, white, soft, loose, cavernous or
spungy; the which although it does want a manifest Cavity, yet it is perviated
into a nervous Channel running through its middle, its whole length. But when
you have read the Opinions of all these great Men, you may easily see how they
have walked in the dark, as to the substance of the Testicles: Their Opinions
carrying in them, no shadow or appearance of Truth, they writing that the
Testicles are glandulous Bodies, they hereby creating a strange mistake, they
having in them no resemblance at all of a glandulous substance; and he that
exactly examines their fabric and substance, shall easily find their errors,
They are made of nothing else but of minute Vessels.
for they are made out of nothing else but a mass of minute Vessels framing the
Seed; for they are easily seen unravel'd, and that sometimes to a good length,
the which no glandule can admit or allow: and for the proof hereof Regnerus de
Graaf de Organis Virorum, fol. 56 ejus lib. he there brings this Observation;
Take the Vessels of a large Dormouse, and you will readily see the Vessels of
the Testicles appear transparently, white with Seed by the Albugineous coat;
the which being laid bare from the aforesaid coat, if they be thrown into a
Basin full of water, and stirred a little about therein, you will see each part
separate from other, the which if they were not made of the ends of Vessels,
they would not thus admit this separation and division. Such as do want these
Testicles, we do generally call Eunuchs. And whereas in some persons very often
times one Testicle has been seen; so also in others there have been found more
than two. Of the First sort John Riolan writes of a young man about 25 years of
age who had but one Testicle, History.
as you may read in lib. 1. cap. 31 and Petrus Borellus Cent. 11. Obs. 60.
writes of a Monk having the same. And Regnerus de Graaf. in lib. de Organ.
virorum, History.
does tell us of a Man opened at Leyden who had but one Testicle, no Cicatrice
being found either in his Inguen or in his Scrotum, he having had Four Children
by his Wife, and she being seriously asked whether she knew he had more, she
ingenuously told him, her Husband had never but one Testicle in his life.
Contrary to these, we also read of some who have had three Testicles, and that
these have so gone along in some Families. Thus some Anatomists have writ, that
amongst some of the chief Families of Colen, many have been seen to have Three
Testicles. And Fernelius lib. 1. Patholog. cap. 8. writes, History.
he knew several Families in which many had Three Testicles; and Forestus lib.
27. Obs. 15. writes in his Scholio, That he knew a Citizen of Antwerp which had
Three Testicles, and was a man who was extraordinarily addicted to Venery. And
Petrus Borellus does also tell us of both Father and Son, who had each of them
Three Testicles. Johannes Riolan, and also Anthropolog. lib. 11. cap. 29.
writes, That he knew a Nobleman who had a plentiful stock of Children by his
Lady, who had one of his Testicles, that is, his Right Testicle lodged in his
Inguen or Groin, which deceived both his Physicians and Surgeons. And
Silvius de la Boc. writes, That in a Nobleman he saw his Testicle lodged in his
Abdomen.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Epididymis or Parastatae.
THE Epididymides are frequently by Anatomists, called Parastatae, and by
Fallopius are described long Bodies tied to either end of the Testis; planted
at its head. Vesalius does very acurately describe their Figure, Various
Opinions about their substance.
and so does Regnerus de Graaf in his Book De Organ. Virorum. But as touching
their substance, various are the Opinions of Authors. Thus Vesalius writes
their substance, much resembling the substance of a dry Nerve. Fallopius
opposes his Opinion in Anatom. Obs. fol. 290. saying this has not well been
observed by Anatomists; for although the exterior part of the Epididymis appears
nervous in man, yet its inward substance is wholly glandulous; and being cut or
divided, you will find it woven out of many minute Glandules. To whose Opinion
both Bartholine, Veslingius and many others do willingly assent. And Highmore
seems willingly to err with them, when he says, lib. 1. Part 4. cap. 11. that
the beginning of the Parastatae is made of a glandulous substance, like that of
the Testicle, being allowed no Cavity, and framed of many glandules, knit
together by Membranes. And although Highmore has writ the best of the Parastatae,
of any of the former; yet in this Opinion of his, he apparently errs: For
whosoever does strictly examine the Epididymis, It is made of several flexures.
shall find, that it is a Body made out of various flexures, and that this is
evident, its first and upper Membrane being laid bare which covers its Body,
and tied to the Testes, you will find many are fractions and windings, the
which may with ease be separated each from other by the knife, without any hurt
to the Vessels, and these have after this separation, been seen drawn out to a
sufficient length; for they are generally seen revolved from one side into
another, and are kept in their site by a Membrane which they take from the
Albuginea. But to proceed as to the Epididymis, they have not only been seen
extended, but also sub-divided, the body being dissolved, and this performed
without much difficulty; if the thin Membrane which kept up these anfractions
be divided, where you may see the Vessels thereof, as well as you did in the
former, whose flexures are so closely knit, that by former Anatomists they were
taken for one Body; the which, with a little dexterity and patience, may easily
be confuted, especially if the Epididymis be tumefied by the Seed, or any other
ways by Liquor, sent thither by a Syringe. As to the uses of the Epididymis
Spigelius does unhappily give it the semnifique faculty wholly, Spigelius and
many other Authors uses, ascribed to the Epididymis, although not without error.
not allowing the Testicles this Virtue; no Seed being found in the Testicles,
as he supposes, but a serous Humor only; but he does not show how Nature made
a greater part for the separation of the Excrement, and a lesser for this
semnifique faculty and action: nor does he demonstrate by what passages these
collected Excrements should be discharged from the Testicles; but in this error
he is not alone by himself, for many others do keep company with him in his
Opinion; he supposing that the spermatick Vessels did not enter into the
Testicles, but arrived at the Parastatae, but that these do enter the Testicles
themselves, and not the Parastatae only, is abundantly manifest; and that the
Seed in the Parastatae is made spirituous in the Testes, That the Seed does
gain it further digestion in the Parastatae.
and passing out thence by many other invisible Vessels also, gains a further
digestion, and in its longer journey it attains a greater perfection, the which
it maintains till it arrives at the Vasa Deferentia, into which it empties its
self.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Prostates.
WE next come to the Prostatae, the which by the Ancients were called nothing
else but a spongy Body made up with many Glandules; This made up of Glandules*
and hence by Vesalius this was called Corpus Glandulosum. These Prostatae are
as assistants to the seminal Vessels, and are indeed as two Glandulous bodies,
hard, white, and spongy forwards, and backwards deprest, round from the sides,
about the bigness of a small Nut or Walnut, or a large Nutmeg, having a thick
fibrous and strong membrane from the Vasa Deferentia and lower part of the
Bladder. And although they may seem to contain little humor in them, seeming to
have but little commerce with the Vasis Deferentibus; yet in people much
addicted to Venery, they are seen to swell very much, presently after coition,
with some certain submucid serous Liquor, the which by compression does issue
out by two small Ductus's into the Vrethra and seminal passage. Its Substance.
These Prostates are said to have a double substance allowed them, as being
both spongy and glandulous, every way covered with a strong Membrane, framed
thus for the more aptly constringing the Body, for throwing forth, or
discharging this humor separated from the blood. These Prostatae, Its Sense.
or glandulous Bodies have allowed them as sharp a sense as the Testicles, and
do make much for the advance of pleasure in Coition. And although both Dr. Glisson
and Wharton do ascribe them many Nerves, yet Diemerbro^ck allows them but very
few, and these said to be very small. Its framed of an Oval Figure, and besides
the Nerves, Veins, and Arteries which it enjoys, whose ramifications are
plentifully spread over the exterior superficies of this glandulous Body: in
its inward Cavity are seen many Ductus's, all which as they are planted at the
sides of the great Caruncle, do exonerate and discharge themselves into the
Urethra, whose Orifices are accompanied with certain small Caruncles, so that
the matter made in this glandulous body, should not issue forth continually
after the act of Venery, or the Urine flow through these Ductus's into their
body.

If the Ductus of this glandulous body be distended by Wind, Obs.
and then tied up, you will find its whole body much distended; and if it be kept
dry after it has been thus distended by Wind, and tied up, it will wholly
appear spongeous, because the glandules, which first of all were found about
its superficies, do vanish upon its thus growing dry. As to its use and Office,
its allowed to give the Seed made in the Testes a greater perfection, Its Use
and Office
sending and dispatching the same into the seminal Vessels, and kept there as a
reservatory against future coition: Others disallow this use designed it, by
reason of the small and slender commerce there is between these Prostatae and
the seminal Vessels. The truth is, the use of this glandulous body, has more
than a little tired the best Anatomists; for the knot is not yet perfectly
untyed; Various uses designed this by Authors.
for besides, the former uses given it, others do assert, that herein is lodged
an acrimonious and serous humor separated from the body, made for giving a
greater titillation, or excitation of pleasure in the act of Venery: And some
also do affirm, that Seed is made and framed herein. But these are all easily
refuted; for as to the First, if this was true, there must necessarily be a
communication between the Vasa Deferentia, and these Prostatae, or Corpus
Glandulosum, as to their passing out of one into another. As to the Second,
this is quite out of doors; for if any one will taste this Liquor, he will find
no Acrimony in it: and this last has not hit the nail on the head, for
castrated people have sometimes been seen to eject their Seed. Wharton's
Opinion of this glandulous body does also meet with opposition, when he writes,
lib. de Gland. cap. 31. that the Seed has three several parts for its make;
the First and most noble part whereof he says is framed in the Testicles; the
Second and more serous part thereof in the seminal Vessels, and the thickest
and most viscid part in these Prostatae. But this his Opinion gains no
foundation: for as the Seed is made in the Testes, it gains a greater and
better perfection in its passage through the Prostatae; but much more arriving
at the Vasa Deferentia, wherein its lodged till the proper time of its
excretion, so that there is no need of this threefold method of making the Seed
in three several parts of the Body, as he supposed.

Having thus explained the uses both of the Testes and Prostatae, a question
may hence arise by some, which ought most properly to be allowed the Seat of a
Gonorrhea. This proved the seat of a Gonorrhea
And as answer to those confirmed by Regnerus de Graaf, this may well be
allowed the Seat of a Gonorrhea, as well as the Testes; which Gonorrhea takes
its name from (...) semen genitale, and (...) fluere, or if you please you may
call it genitalis seminis profluvium. And that this may be allowed the proper
seat hereof is thus proved; If this Body be so affected, that this kind of
matter is not only herein generated, but the same continually hence excern'd,
and this Flux is generally allowed a Gonorrheal Flux. For Physicians and
Chyrurgeons do not make any difference between this and the Seminal Flux, save
only that they do declare the one to be more virulent than the other. And that
such a Flux may happen, is proved from Tears and grief, in which a continual
plenty of Salival Matter, or pituitous Humor is excern'd by the vitiousness of
the Glandules. And that also a great Colluvies of other humors by the illness
of these Glandules may hence be excern'd, nothing can contradict or gainsay:
for the Patient having taken any Medicine, this has either spontaneously, or
by some way or other deposed the gathering together of these ill juices of the
whole Body; the which also may be allowed to have the same property and place
in this glandulous Body, especially it being debilitated by Venery, or any
other Malignity. For our Humors do keep in our Bodies, like Theives in a
Prison, where when they do intend to get free thence, they do not begin their
exit with the strongest parts thereof, by undermining them, but do seize the
weakest. Thus ill Humors lodged in our Bodies, do not enter the strongest
parts thereof, but do force their malignity upon those parts which are the
weakest, and so the more ready to give them entertainment; neither does Reason
only, but experience also prove, that this glandulous Body may be thus
affected. For there are many which by experience have testified, that in
dissecting of dead Bodies they have seen some affected with this Gonorrheal
Flux, even to their Lives end. And for the confirming our Opinion hereof, we
can make good by many examples, That those who have been great Riders, and
sufficiently shaken by their Horses, that they have by the same suffered a kind
of Gonorrhea, much resembling a virulent Gonorrhea, save only, that this does
not so readily prosternate the Faculties, nor proves so dangerous as may be
made good by Bartholine lib. 1. Anatom. reformat. cap. 23. where he writes of a
certain Patavian, who above 30 years labored under such a Flux, without any
detriment to his health.

History.
And Vesalius writes, lib. 5. cap. 33. of one perplexed with an involuntary Flux
of his Seed, whereupon opening him, and dividing this glandulous Body, as also
the Testes, they were both found full of Seed; and for the confirming hereof,
others as well as Bartholine do declare, that this glandulous Body may well be
allowed the Seat of the Gonorhea.

The Testicles also allowed the Seat of Gonorrhea.
And that the Testicles may also be allowed the Gonorrheas proper mansion, is
beyond all controversy; And this is thus proved, for we do frequently and
apparently find, that upon Quacks and Mountebanks not treating this Disease
aright, as by administering untimely Restrictive Medicines in this disease; And
this proved by unskilful giving of Restrictives* improperly.
they have given it an unhappy suppression, which has evidently shown its self
by the Testicles running into Tumor, which have be sometimes seen to swell to
that vast bulk, that those who have therewith been troubled, have been forced
to keep them up by Trusses, and other convenient bandage often used in the like
cases, the which thing could never have happened, unless they were the Mansion
and place of this Gonorrhea. And hence it is that when this Seminal Matter
which past through these Foramina, or small Cavities, is by the use and
application of these Restrictives, too much obstructed from any further flowing
into the Epididymis, and is so accumulated in the Ductus's of the Testicles,
that the Testicles with the Epididymis do run and increase into that great bulk
and swelling which we just before mentioned. Women also having no Prostates,
Women sometimes troubled with this disease.
sometimes (although more seldom than Men) are seen perplexed with a Gonorrhea,
which disease in them without all doubt, does proceed from their Testicles,
they wanting all other Organs allowed proper for forming their Seed. Forestus
Obs. 9. lib. 26. writes of a young man troubled with a Gonorrhea, History.
whose Spirits not being much spent, nor his Body emaciated, had this disease
seized him by over plenty of Seed, which so proved from too great a Plethory,
for the multiplicity of Sperm, does arise from multiplicity of Blood; he being
consulted, and finding the Patient Rubicund and Plethorick, by prescribing him
a thin Diet, cooling and drying Medicines, with other Remedies there set down,
the Patient suddenly recovered of his destiny. History.
Alexander Benedictus lib. suo 24. cap. 3. de Curand. Morbor. writes of a
Woman, who being much troubled with suppression of Urine, her Prostates being
dried up by Varices or Glands, planted between her Testicles and seminal
Vessels, without much pain and trouble, her Bladder not being unloaded, her
parts being by Unctious Medicines loosned, and her Urinary passages being well
cleansed and freed, she enjoyed her former health to admiration. Schenkius in
Obs. suis, tells us of Stones happening in this glandulous Body, which did
adhere to the neck of the Bladder, one of which is this following. History.
Where he writes, we have observed in this glandulous Body a Stone fixed,
whereby the Seed, unless it were small and aqueous, could not discharge its
self thence, in coition; This person being by a Mountebank cut for the Stone,
dyed in the Operation under his hand. Cornelius Manilius the Chyrurgeon writes,
that he has found a Stone in this glandulous Body. And Rhasis writes, that he
has seen Stones herein also, as Marcellus Donatus writes Histor. Med.
Admirabil. lib. 4. cap. 30. Aetius Tetralib. 3. Sermon. 3. cap. ult. tells us of
a young man, History.
who when he was concerned in Coition with a Woman, he could no ways send forth
his Seed, but being asleep it readily came from him, and frequently; whence may
be collected, that the Seed Vessels receiving much humidity with Cold, cannot
be warmed, whereas having in sleep been warm, they easily do discharge the
same, Rest warming the inward parts, and cooling the outward.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Glandules of the Artus, or Articulations.
WE conclude with the Axillary and Inguinal Glands, to which might be annexed,
some which are lodged in the flexures of the joints, as those of the Elbow,
Knee, or that great one of the Thigh, commonly called the Popes Eye; and the
only thing which offers its self as touching these, is to declare their
differences as touching their Names, Magnitude, Figure, and Uses.

As to their Names.
Some of these have proper Names given to them, thus those in the Inguen are
called Buboes; others known from their situation, and thus in the middle of the
Thigh we call the Popes Eye: And the Axillary Glands do take their Name from
their place belonging to the Armpits. These Glandules do very much vary also
in their Magnitude, Their Magnitude.
for those in the Thigh are by Wharton allowed to be Eight, and these seen very
large; the Armpits have Three usually given to them, but these are lesser than
the former; those in the Flexures of the Knee and Thigh smaller than both the
former, and that lesser than all the rest, which is planted near the Elbow;
their Figures also are various, some being round, others Oval.

Wharton in his Book De Glandul. Artuum. tells us of a great Affinity and
Commerce between these Glandules and the Nerves, Wharton's Opinion of these
Glandules.
so that he supposes the Nerves do conveigh to, and take from these Glandules;
for its proper enough to allow the Nerves bringing somewhat to them, as by
sending them some of their excrementitious juice; where also he writes, that
these Glandules do not discharge themselves into excretory passages, but into
the neighboring Vessels next to them, which is generally thought the only
reason of their being planted at the greater division of the Vessels, for the
more easy reception of the superfluities of the Nerves deposed into these
Vessels, to which they are strongly annexed.

And that they do also carry somewhat away from the Nerves, is as probable, (
vid.) a certain nutritive juice, the which being milkt out by a similar
attraction of this glandulous substance, does throw forth this mixture of its
Lympha into the Lpmphaducts, and by their virtue does keep the same thus
received from them, and this their own substance does sufficiently make good,
which is both sweet and delicate, and does carry a very near Nature with that
of the Nervous Juice.

Diseases happening in these Glandules, are either simple Tumors, commonly
called Buboes, or complicated with venereal or pestilential swellings. And
these Causes hereof by Wharton are generally reckoned Two, the First being the
Blood, obstructed in its circulation, and hence a Tumor arises, from the
hindrance of the Bloods impetuous Flux from the Heart by the Arteries, and its
recourse back again out of these by the Veins. The Second may originally arise
from the Nerves, as from their superfluities which they let fly and spend into
the Glandules, vitiated either by quantity or quality; now where these
superfluities do only err in quantity or quality, as occasioned by viscidity,
thickness, or the like, this occasions a simple swelling only* but when a
venenate or contagious Matter arrives here, it begets a Tumor like its self,
answering the same Matter of which it is made, be it either venereal or
pestilential.

Aetius tells us, History.
lib. 6. that strumous swellings have not only appeared in the Neck and Throat,
but have been seen and found in the Armpits, and Inguens, Sides, Women's
Breasts, and the like. And Julius Pollux Gramaticus affirms, that Scrophules do
not only arise in the Mesentery, but have been found in the Armpits and
Groyns. He tells us of a Woman in Florence who had a Scrophulous Tumor in her
Thigh, which weighed above 60 pound, whose substance did so mightily increase,
that therewith she was forced to keep her Bed for Five years together, the
which at length, was by strict bandage and cauteries wholly eradicated.

History.
George Wyrtz Physician, writes of a Gentleman who had a Struma in his Groin,
or rather if you please, a Steatome, which exceeded the weight of Forty pounds.

History.
Hollerius Obs. 23 lib. Propria, tells us of a noble Painter who had such a
large Ganglion or Wenn in his Thigh, that it exceeded the bigness of a Child's
Head; having another large Tumor annexed to it: both which were wholly
eradicated, and the Patient perfectly discharged from the same, and cured.

History.
Benivenius, cap. 14. tells us of a Woman, who had a very large strumous
swelling upon her Thigh, which weighed above Sixty pound, the which proved so
troublesome to her, that she was forced to keep her Bed, he being entreated by
her Prayers and Supplications to undertake her cure; by a strict Bandage made
of Hair and Silk wrought together, he cut the same near half way thorough; the
other part thereof he dispatched with a red hot Instrument, by which the flux of
Blood was wholly suppressed: the Woman being near dead, was put into her warm Bed
to refresh her self, and by having proper Cordials to support her Spirits,
great care used, and proper Medicines administered, she was brought to her
perfect health, by God's Blessing going along with his endeavors.

The end of the First Book.
CHAERADELOGIA: OR, An Exact Discourse OF STRUMAES, OR KINGS-Evil-Swellings.

Wherein are discovered Their Names and Natures, DIFFERENCES, CAUSES, SIGNS,
PRESAGES and CVRE, In that Modest and Plain Dress, That the Meanest Capacity
may hereby find out the DISEASE.

Written by JOHN BROWN, Sworn Chyrurgeon in Ordinary to the King's most
Excellent Majesty.

Art Florente Florescimus.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Sam. Lowndes, over against Exeter-Exchange in the
Strand. 1684.

To the Right Honorable, HENRY Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of His
Majesty's most Honorable Household, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Lord Lieutenant
of the County of Suffolk, etc.
My LORD,
SInce we generally do measure the Greatness of the Sun by the Shadow of the
Earth, and his Goings in the Dyal by the little Thread thereof; Those vacant
Hours of Leisure which I caught at Windsor this last Summer, were the only
Wings which gave first flight to my design in giving a Shape or Form to this
Strumous Discourse; a Disease as Universal as any other whatsoever in our Age.
In this therefore I have presumed to present your Lordship with the
Differences, Causes, Symptoms, Presages, and Cure thereof, according to the
best Medical and Chirurgical Method. And since I have shown that the Court is
extremely visited with this Popular Disease, and a multitude of poor People do
give His Majesty trouble too often for Curing their Diseases, they will have to
be the Evil, although not really so, save only in their own Conjectures; I have
herein undertaken to unmask the same in that Order, and give it that Light,
that the Meanest Capacity may become a good Judge thereof.

As my Obligations therefore to your Lordship are as well known to the World as
great in themselves, so I hope I may not appear troublesome in making a public
Expression of my Gratitude to your Honor, and humbly crave Protection under
your Wing for this my Scrophulated Treatise; whereby your Lordship will let the
World see, how great a Master of Condescension you are, in giving Countenance
to this Design, Life to my Adventure, and Breath to my Dedication.

The whole Kingdom knows your Lordships Integrity to your Prince, in the
Eminent Place of Trust your Honor enjoys, your Steddiness and Constancy in
that Religion we do profess; your Prowess, Justice, Piety, Temperance and
Prudence, are as so many Illustrious Gems of your Great Name; all which do both
sweeten your Noble Nature, appear as Laurels to your Virtue, and true Heralds
of your Perspicuous Luster.

If your Lordship will please to favor this Address with your Honorable
Acceptance, and pretermit the Lapses both of the Author and his Discourse, this
will infinitely secure me from the hard censure of others, and make me ever
more study how to declare my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient, and most thankful Servant, JO. BROWN*

To the Industrious Reader.
Ingenuous Reader,
SInce it is the Mode of the Age not to let any Book look into the World
without a Preface, it may well seem a wonder, that amongst the multitude of
Books with which the World has been so plentifully stockt, so little has
hitherto been writ of this Strumous or Kings Evil Subject; it evermore having
been a Disease of ancient standing, and so general concern with the Sons and
Daughters of Men; especially since there is scarce any kind of Skill but may be
learnt by Art, and brought into the Rules of a Curative Method, for the Benefit
and Advantage of poor diseased Mortals.

It was a Law among the Athenians, That every new Act should be heard with
silence and applause: which custom, as it gave a favorable and respective
appearance to the Actors thereof, and their Endeavors; so it finished and
completed the same with an inevitable danger of disgrace for the future, if
any lapse should succeed. The truth is, Men of Learning, Reason and Experience,
and such who have been free from Fumes, have evermore encouraged the
Industrious Hand: But we live now in such an Age, that an Author must as well
study the little Plausibilities of the People, who are the great and brisk
Masters of Fame, as the value of the Discourse, the reality of the Matter, or
the general good of the Design, (these being very kind and zealous where they
affect, and as cruel and clamorous where they resolve to contradict) and where
Men do once build their Wit upon contradiction, the best Subject must hazard
their Test, and suffer their Censure. And this I have evermore observed, that
never any yet entered the Lists with an Ignorant Bugbear, but he lost much by
the Encounter.

But to leave these: That I may somewhat relieve the Readers patience, I shall
enter the Subject Matter of our Discourse, wherein although I may well enough
agree with Columella's Opinion, that Nihil perfectum aut a singulari Industria
Consummatum, That no Man can observe all; yet I hope that Huntsman is not to be
blamed that catches some, although he may miss others. And because I know
there are some sort of Men may think that I live better upon Transcription than
upon producing new Matter; yet in this I hope the Crime is not very great, so
long as the Reader has it brought home clean. Others I full well know there
are, who will readily suppose that I have borrowed a part of my Treatise from
others; yet since I had it from the common Stock, and have distributed the same
for the advance of public good, I would willingly know where lies the Injury.

If in this also I have seemed to step aside from the Opinion of the Ancients
as touching these Strumous Effects and Diseases, I being rather inclined to
raise a new Pile of Matter for their Production and Generation, yet I suppose I
am not the first which have swum against the stream of their grave
Suppositions, or gray headed Thoughts, I evermore having been conversant in
Surgery almost from my Cradle, being the sixth Generation of my own
Relations, all eminent Masters of our Profession, some of the latter of which
have been extraordinary well known for their Parts and Skill by many of the
most worthy and knowing Masters of our Society. I came early also to the
practice thereof in this great City, and have for above Twenty Four Years seen
the Practick, as well as read the Theorical Part thereof; and this not at
Whiles and Intervals, but I had the Eye of the Hospital as my first and early
Gleanings: And since I could write Man, the late Wars had my Skill shown on my
self as well as many others who were committed to my Charge.

But to come nearer our Strumous Discourse, since I have been blessed by my Dread
Sovereign's Command to attend as one of His Chyrurgeons at all Healings,
(although the meanest) and have seen several Thousands approach his Royal
Presence for Ease and Cure, I thought it my Duty as well as my Zeal to search
into the Roads and Circuits of this Evil, which is seen thus frequently to
visit the Court. And the only reason which invited me to this Undertaking, was
partly intended to prevent the tedious Journeys of many poor People, who
unhappily have undertaken the same upon pretense of their being troubled with
this Disease, and partly to secure His Majesty from being cheated of His Gold:
The first of which is intended and made good in this, the latter demonstrated
in the following Treatise.

I have herein therefore (kind Reader) presented thee with a more plain
discovery of this Disease, than hither has as yet appeared in the World, and
this performed with that plain and easy Dress and Method, that the meanest
Capacity may be allowed a sufficient Judge in the description thereof by way of
distinction to prevent confusion.

In this Discourse therefore is laid down the Name and Nature of Strumaes or
Kings-Evil-Swellings, with all their Differences, Causes, Signs, Presages and
Cure, in a more full and ample draught than has hitherto been ever presented
to public view. And because I do not desire to keep the Ingenuous Reader too
long upon the Title, if he please to take an inward survey of the several
Causes of this Strumous Disease, he will find that I have introduced the Pox
and Scurvy as two great Clubbers toward forming the same, (especially in our
days, where the Families of Mankind are generally seen more or less tinged
therewith) and do keep equal pace with the same by Seminal Traduction: Both of
which being much altered from their first Beings, by getting an acquaintance
almost with every Disease, they having a very familiar and common dependence
one upon another, bred and begot from a tainted Fermentation in the Blood, and
an Ebullition of vitiated Humors, by which a common exchange of Symptoms is
kept up and maintained between them, according to the Inclinations of such
weakly and debilitated Bodies on which they do make their entrance. But lest,
kind Reader, I may be thought tedious in keeping thee too long in the Passage,
I have this only to say, That I have spent this last Summer with great
satisfaction in examining and tracing the Evil in all its Nooks and Corners. If
thou find any thing in it worth thy acceptance, take it freely; and what is
wanting in the Authors Capacity, make good in thy self by a richer piece of
Service.

VALE. From my House at Charing Cross London, April 3. 1683.
The Names of the Authors concerned in this Treatise.
AVicen. Aquapendens. Arnaldus Villanovanus. Jo. Andreas a Cruce. Aetius.
Paulus Aeginetta. Bauhinus. Brunus. Bartepalia. Bartholinus. Cornelius Celsus.
Joann. Colle. Diemerbroeck. Fernelius. Fallopius. T. Fullerius. Forestus.
Guido. Galen. Gro^cossius. Regnerus de Graaf. Glissonius. Hippocrates. Andreas
Laurentius. Malphigius. Petrus Pigraeus. Paraeus. Rondeletius. Schenckius.
Sennertus. Silvius de Laboe. Steno. Theodoricus. Tagaultius. Tookerus.
Valescus. Whartonus. Willisius.
The Second Book, In which are contained Seven CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. Of the Struma, or Kings Evil in general. Chap. 2. What the
Kings-Evil-Swelling is, with its proper Name and Nature. Chap. 3. Several
Differences of the Evil, both from the Ancients and Moderns. Chap. 4. Several
Causes of Strumaes, or Kings-Evil-Swellings. Chap. 5. Of the proper Signs of
Strumaes. Chap. 6. Of the true Presages of Strumaes. Chap. 7. The Practical
Curative Method of Curing Strumaes, or Kings-Evil-Swellings.
The Second Book OF THE King's Evil,
CHAP. I. Of the Struma, or King's Evil in General.
AS some Diseases are nearer of kin to England than to other Nations, so by the
general received Opinion of Physicians, they do hence take their Causes; their
relation to Distemperiety, associating with Diseases which are most general and
common with them. Thus we frequently see a vicious Constitution of Place
continuing for some time amongst us: or if for some small season leaving us,
and then making its quick returns upon the Sons and Daughters of Men, this in a
very great measure gives being and growth to a Disease.

And hence is it that diverse Countries have their own proper Diseases allowed
them, Diverse Countries allowed various Diseases.
(proved and maintained by all Ages.) Thus to Egypt is granted the Leprosy as
its proper Disease; Attica kept up the Gout; Hungary has its particular Fever,
Christened by its own name; Apthae, or Ulcers of the Mouth and Palate in young
Children, are very frequent in Syria Some have laid the first appearance of the
French Pox upon Naples, although it long ere that time dwelt in the
West Indies, and had longer being ere that in the World, as shall be
sufficiently made good in this Discourse. Plica is generally granted the Polony
Disease, and the Scurvy believed to Sail from the Baltic Sea. Sphacelus was
first thought to arise from a cold Country near the Northern Pole, bringing
with it a Mortification on the Nervous and Membranous parts. Carbunculus
allowed an Evil of the Province of Narbosensis, and Bronoochele is so common a
Distemper in Bergomy, that the Inhabitants thereof do not take any notice of
the same, they living without pain that have it, generally granted to take its
Origination from their common Liquor they Commonly make use of. And whilst we
have thus far traveled, we have only taken a view of the Diseases of other
Countries, let us come nearer home, and behold our own Island, and here we
shall find it to bear a part with Diseases and Distemperiety as well as other
Nations; and as England had once the Name of an English Sweat, English Diseases.
so it has been very fertile in producing Strumaes, or Kings-Evil-Swellings,
Jaundies, Rickets, Scurvy, Consumptions, and the like. And without our Bodies
had, and still were subject to change, we should not find them so readily
assume these sickly impressions. But Reason does sufficiently evince the same,
these arising either from the Diet therein made use of, or ill Habits therein
bred, or changes of Temper made by Air, and the like. Thus we read the Scab of
Ethiopia did arise from their excessive Eating, they commonly feeding upon
Locusts, which bred this depraved disposition in them. The Gowt in Attica also
had its being from delicious Food, and their over frequent use of Venery. And,
that Air may very well be allowed an expert Ingredient in forming Diseases, our
own Country can readily confirm, by sending of their numerous Ofsprings (of
this Evil we discourse of) up hither so frequently to be healed.

England very prolifique in producing Diseases.
For whosoever examines England in its Nature and Constitution, shall readily
find that it is as prolifique in producing of Diseases, as she is fertile in
procuring of Conceptions; and its forty to one, if she gives not as ready a
Remark of the one, as of the other, she being no more barren in the one, than
she is in the other. And hence is it that not only the strong and Vigorous Man,
who enjoys the delight and blessing of Wealth, but the weak and infirm Person
does propogate and beget Children, as every day makes good. And that Women also
who are infirm, and of an ill habit, and Cacochymick Constitution, do most
readily bear Children, this also is as plain. And whoever do consider these
both as they ought, may reasonably allow, that a Child begot and bred from such
a Parent, may both easily and readily derive a Disease from them, being by
Nature made like soft wax, which every one knows does with ease receive every
Impression which the Seal gives to it.

This Child therefore coming into the World distempered from its Mothers Womb,
enervated, Diseases from the Mothers Womb.
and every day giving greater and better Signs and Symptoms of its depraved
Constitution, what can deny its ready yiedling to any Disease whatsoever? I
would not willingly be here mistaken, (this not reaching the whole race of
Womankind) that they themselves are either all infirm, or that they must
necessarily serve the World with a diseased Offspring. But this I shall
presume to assert, that where such a mixture of ill conditioned Parents do meet
in Coitu, and therein and thereby do use their endeavors to raise a Natural
Stock; where such a product is made, their Children are very seldom seen to
carry better metal in them, than they have derived from their Parents; and may
as well be allowed to share of their depraved Natures and Constitutions, as of
their Estates and Fortunes. Several Reasons to make good the Assertion.
Several Reasons also might be given for the confirming the same; for how often
also has this been found to arise from the abuse of the Commodities chiefly
and mostly in use in the Country where these diseased People do inhabit? Thus
by eating too much Fruit, how many have we seen readily surfeited? by drinking
too much Wine, too many enfeebled with the Palsy and afflicted with the Scuvy
and Gout? by living very high, and at ease, not using much Exercise, have shown
themselves the most ready Masters for Venery, Debauch, and Lues? All which may
well enough be allowed to have sufficient Efficacy in them, to give Being and
Breath to Diseases, and do most readily either ex toto, or ex part, daily make
good the truth hereof, according to the Times, Places, Natures, Tempers, and
Constitutions of the Agents or Actors thereof.

And that this Struma, or King's Evil, may well enough also be allowed
Complication with Pox, Scurvey, Gout, Jaundies, and other Diseases, shall be
sufficiently made good by convincing Arguments enough: For if the Pox should
perchance keep company therewith, or sent, or derived thither, either by
Contagion begot from Nurses, or an Hereditary Right of Parents, this makes it
quite another Disease from what we have already been discoursing of, both in
its Nature and Essence, which by no means may be allowed to have any commerce
therewith: But this by time may also be granted to suffer a sufficient change
in its form and nature by the same, and may be allowed to gain Affinity
therewith, and take some measures of its Praeternatural Indisposition, as shall
be sufficiently made good in my Discourse of the Causes. The Scurvey we see
also gets very near acquaintance with this also, and this is either contracted
by Chance, or procured by an Hereditary Right in the tender Constitution of the
young Patient; or collected and gathered out of its ill Regiment thereof, as to
its Order of Diet, Air, and the like, all or any of which are powerful enough
to promote the same: for this has no more relation in Children in these
Diseases, than it has in others of a longer continuance; in which, by length
of time, the Blood becomes tainted, contracting a greater illness, and to this
it easily yields, by reason of the Infants a version to Motion, and Exercise,
the which does expose, or rather depose the Body to a Scorbutic habit; and
thus, according to the thick and viscid humors which the Blood contains in it,
scattering the same about some parts of the Body, does force these parts which
are thus therewith perplexed, to carry the same Marks, and bear the same
Symptoms as it declares and bears in its self.

CHAP. II. What the Kings-Evil-Swelling is, with its just Name and Nature.
WE come now to treat more particulary of a very frequent Distemper of our Age,
The King's Evil a Distemper of our Age.
which looks as if it got birth from Commerce and Conversation with Mankind; it
arriving at that numerous Offspring, that it meats us almost in every Street;
and this for the most part does happen in that Age which Philotheus calls
(...), or Tertia Aetas, and it is therefore reckoned by Hippoc. Aphor. 36.
amongst Childrens Diseases. Celsus, Aetius, Paulus Aeginetta, Antonius Mus.
Brasavol. Fallopius, Guido, and several others do call these Strumous or
Scrophulous Swellings (...), Its proper Name.
or Adenes Induratae, they allowing them their Originations from pituitous
Matter and Blood, generated in this Age of Children from their voracity, and
intemperance of Diet. This is a disease also in magnitude having been seen to
swell to a vast bulk, hunting out both the Animal and natural Faculties, lodged
chiefly in the Neck and Throat, called by Galen (...), or Adenes, or Strumae
induratae, as to their substance. Physicians at this day (as to their breeding)
are not agreed, some affirming that they do arise from a plenty of matter, such
as is serose and glutinous, coming into the Glandules; Galen affirming, Aphor.
36. that they are made of a cold pituitous Matter, Placentinus and Theodoricus
with many others as stiffly asserting that they are bred from Phlegm and
Melancholy. Celsus contrary to the rest, contends for their sharing from all
Humors in the Body, in working them up into Tumors. Scrophulae are by most
Authors derived from Scrophae, or Swine, these Creatures also being very
subject, and the Subjects of this Disease; this in them arising from their
Gulosity, bred and begot from thick Phlegm and Melancholy, having some fluxile
matter therewith adjoined for advanceing their increase. And as these by the
Latins are called Strumae, so by the Arabians they are called Scrophulae.
Wharton makes this distinction between them in his Book of Glandules, where he
calls Scrophulae, Wens, and Strumae, the King's Evil: of either of which he also
gives this Description, allowing Scrophulae to run into great Bulk, the which
have been seen of a vast weight, and do contain in them variety of Juices,
which gives them this massy substance; Strumae, not always increasing, but
sometimes seen to act their changes in Humane Body, being not always at one
stay, they sometimes disappearing, whilst at other times they have been found
to show themselves more apparently. Guido, Laurentius, and several other
Authors do declare Strumae to be indurate Tumors of the Glandules, or as I may
say a kind of Scirrhus therein; and most Authorities that I have stricktly
examined about them, do declare them indurate Kernels, lodged and contained in
a glandulous membrane, found evermore either in the Neck, Throat, Breast,
Axillaries, Inguens and the like, making their chief abode amongst the Vessels,
bordering on them, or related to them; Valescus, cap. propr. calls them
Apostems bred in the soft Flesh, or hard Apostems in soft Flesh bred from Phlegm
and Melancholy. Avicen calls them Glandulae Scleroticae. And amongst all these
Worthies, since we have given you a survey of all the Glandules in our first
Book, give me leave amongst these Worthies to assert my Opinion of this
Disease, commonly called the Evil, The Authors opinion of the Disease, and its
definition.
which is no fictitious Distemper, or imaginary Evil; but rather a proper
disease; and that the Matter of our Discourse may oblige every common Eye, in
its entrance, and make every believing Man join with me in the Truth thereof,
whereby every one may become in some measure a true Judge of the same, such
things as we have seen with our Eyes and treated with our Hands, shall justly
reach their view, and if possibly gain their Approbation.

What the Struma is.
This Strumous Disease therefore, or King's Evil so commonly called from his
Majesty's healing of the same, is a cold and moist praeternatural intemperiety,
generated in the Glandules from a Subsaline and Subacid Juice, collated from
the wheyish part of the blood; the which whenever it enters them, or approach
their Membranes, it does both harden, concrete, incrassate, and convert the
same into a coagulate caseous substance.

And whereas ever Disease is contrary to the part which it besieges, so it
does daily more and more damnifie and impair the same; and when this arrives at
any consistence, or gains a Habit or Constitution therein, nature her self
beginning to grow weary thereof, and so not able or willing to hold out the
conflict, or maintain the battle, is forced to yield thereto, by which the
Disease gets greater footing, and advances into Increment, and augment. For we
commonly see that although the beginnings of Diseases are obscure, and this
Disease sleeps as it were for some time, yet other whiles they give sufficient
Testimony of their appearance, and make the diseased apparently convict of
their near acquaintance. And as Phlegm, Phlegm a great Agent hereof.
which by all Physicians is allowed the colder and more moist part of the
Blood, or taken commonly for the serous part thereof, so it consequently must
be allowed a great Parent of this Evil Brat, through which carrying but a small
quantity of Spirit with it, it proceeds more slowly in its course, than the
other part thereof, and may therefore be well enough granted a great Agent of
the same as we shall manifestly make good when we come to treat of its causes.
It allowed a moveable constitution.


This Strumous Disease may also well enough be allowed a moveable Constitution,
it oft-times changing it self, and keeping its variety of Turns, of being
either remitted or intended without any dissolution of the whole, and may as
well be granted to arise from an inequality of Nutriment, no part excessively
increasing and running into greater Bulk than another without an inequality and
disproportion of Nutriment. Whereas the common Tone and Harmony of parts is
preserved and kept up by the common qualeties equally embraceing each other;
and where there is any recess from the just Mediocrity to either of these
Extremes, there must necessarily follow a viciousness of Harmony, Looseness of
parts a great favourer of Strumaes.
as is apparently made good in Strumaces, where we may perfectly behold a
Discrasie of Tone in this affect made good by looseness of parts, the which is
also a great Agent in forming of Tumors, and giving them their Increment: the
which being once over-stretcht, does not only run the part into a weakness, not
having in it strength enough to maintain its former vigor, but makes it every
day more pliable than other to its commands, till it has got that greater and
looser bulk which we find may suffice for giving entertainment to these
Swellings it is thus seen to possess and enjoy. Looseness and moistness two
inseparable Companions in our Bodies.


And that which does more clearly heighten the truth hereof, is, we shall
evermore find, that where there is seen a Lubricity of parts, Humidity evermore
keeps company therewith: for Lubricity and Humidity are inseparable Companions
in our Humane Bodies; so that wherever we meet with any Lubricious or loose
parts, we shall evermore find them moist; and both these together do call into
them a third Companion, which is Stupefaction, and there is nothing that I know
should forbid the same. For when the Spirits being in their Exaltation shall
contract an Acrimony, as is oft-times made good and perceived by Spirit of Wine
upon Aqua Vitae, the Aqua-Vitae being benumbed by the Spirits strength, by how
much this is advanced in Stupefaction, by so much there is made a greater
quantity of Lubricity, and a lesser of Acrimony: whence we may conclude, that
the dullness of the Spirits lodged in the affected parts, does much favor this
Looseness and Lubrici^y, and the Spirits thus losing their Vigor, do give us a
true remark of the same, as Doctor Glisson well notes in another case, and as
Galen has it, (with which I shall conclude this Chapter) Bodies of Children
are most passible, by reason of their Humidity, Laxity and Softness.

CHAP. III. Several Differences of the Evil, both from the Ancients and Modern.
STrumae is the common name given to this Disease; not Struma, Differences of
Strumaes.
because we seldom or never do meet with a single one, but many do from thence
arise, and that matter thereof which gives being to one in the Glandules, does
also make way for the entrance of another, the first growing harder, and so
making more ready way for a second and third; and these increasing into an
indurate substance, do also enlarge the looser parts, and make them more apt to
receive as many as they can get in. The manner of their Birth.
And thus whilst the Matter is flowing which is thin, serous, and waterish,
first forming a soft Tumor, this in time becomes concrete and indurate, and
this also incrassates therewith. And I presume this may be allowed a reasonable
account of their birth and beginning; the Matter again sometimes flowing into
three or four Glandules at once, and the Physician or Chyrurgeon endeavoring
to discuss the same, they hereby only discharging the thinner Matter, lay
platform sufficient for a Scirrhus, to build its self upon the thicker and more
viscous part which is left behind.

The patients strength or weakness is also another consideration.
Another difference hereof may be taken from the Patient's strength or weakness,
either of these having in them power sufficient to procure a greater or lesser
degree of this Strumous Disease: For as the Vital and Natural Organs do keep up
and maintain their Vigor and Harmony in their Constitution, so also the
Spirits may be allowed to contain in them more or less Vigor, and so be
granted more or less dangerous.

Another difference from its ^es.
Another difference may arise from the Times thereof, which by Physicians are
generally allowed four, viz. Beginning, Augment, State, and Declination; which
by Galen are thus described, when he calls that Beginning, when the Crudity of
Matter occasions the Disease; the Augment, when the same is better digested;
that the State, being drawn from its Excretion; and that allowed the
Declination, reducing the remainder to its Natural State: But this comes nearer
the Discourse of Fevers than Strumaes, they no ways maintaining such a regular
Order or Course. Amongst these also Strumaes may be allowed much to differ both
in their Magnitude, Nature, Place, Origination, Multitude and Multiplication of
Vessels.

In their Magnitude, In their Magnitude.
they being greater or smaller, from their Natural Condition, some being
therewith so slenderly affected, that one would scarce believe them concerned
or troubled therewith, they both eating, drinking and sleeping as well as any
Person whatsoever, save only now and then they have some twitches and marks of
its close acquaintance; and and these discovered either by their upper Lips,
Neck, Throat, Breast, and the like; and although this Disease may sometimes run
into great bulk, as is frequently seen, yet it is time alone that gives it this
Increment: for the Motion is slow and dull, and unless it be quickened by some
other humor which has power enough in it to mend its pace, and raise it into
a more speedy Motion, it marches on but slowly and leisurely.

In their Nature also they do much differ, Different in their Nature.
as also in their Constitution, some of them being benign and without pain,
others being more malign, and very painful; some soft, others hard; some
yielding to Suppuration, others expecting Discussion.

Different in place and mobility.
Different also in Place and Mobility, some of these being elevated, others
deprest; some superficial, others profound; some being fixed and immovable,
others being loose and moveable; some seen planted in the forepart, others in
the back-part, and others bordering at the sides of the Neck; some dwelling in
the Eyes, others in the Lips; some in the Neck and Throat, others in the
Breast, and some also in the Articulations or Joints: and besides all these
places, although some there are who pretend greater Judgment in the knowing of
Strumaes than others, yet do not, nor yet ever have shown their greater Reasons
for the same than others may; yet with their favor and leave we shall find
these Strumous Swellings exercising several other parts of the Body, as the
Fingers, Toes, Junctures, and the like, which I have often observed in
Childrens Hands, sometimes in their Wrists, sometimes found the same in their
Anckles, and at other times in their Feet and Toes; although these all allowed
not Strumaes by some, they very well bearing their Nature, and increase like
Strumaes; and that this may also be made out very well, more Glandules are
dispersed through our Bodies which may give being and growth to these Tumors
than we yet have found out.

They also do much differ in their Origination and Number, Different in their
Origination and Number.
sometimes these being seen (although rarely) single, many times double, and so
daily increasing their stock, some being few, others appearing more in number;
some large planted in the Plexures of Joints, where Glandules are appointed for
sustaining and keeping up the Vessels just under the Cutis; others being more
properly called Glandulous Bodies, whose Habitations are seen in the inner
parts of the Body, as the Omentum, or Kell, Breasts, Pancraeas, Mesentery and
the like; some are arising in the Neck, others in the aforementioned parts. And
amongst Phlegmatic Excrescencies are these following numbered, many of them
being very near related to Strumaes, or Strumous Effects, of which sort are
these: Glandula, Nodus, Lippitudo, Bronchochele, Artheroma, Steatoma,
Meliceris, Bubo, Testudo, Botium, Cancer and Spina Ventosa, of every of which I
shall presume to touch in their Order.

What Glandula is.
Glandula, which by Guido is said to take its name from Glans, it very well
resembling a Hailstone or Kernel, is soft, moving and separate from its
circumjacent parts, bred generally in the Emunctories. And that which shows the
difference between this and Struma is this: They being generally made both of
one and the same Matter, and bordering about the same places, the Strumae
generally living, if not always in the Glandules; and the Humors which feed
them being different from others; And herein lies the difference between
Glandula and Strumae, the Matter of the Glandule being more subtle and thin,
that of the Struma thick and viscid; and hence Galen, Lib. 3. de Loc. affect.
writes, that when this thin and subtle Matter does incrassate and grow viscid,
it readily forms Strumae; and this is also defended by Aeginetta and Avicen.
And because indurate Glandules are more separate from the Flesh, so that
although without much difficulty they may be known from the same, by the touch,
yet it will not easily appear, how these Strumae may be known from these Glands
acting the same parts in its Neighboring Flesh. Avicen tells us, these are
generally found in the Hands and Feet, as also in many other Nervous parts of
the Body, calling them Glandulous Apostems bred from Phlegm. Valescus says they
are seen larger or smaller according to their greater or lesser quantity of
Matter or Humor which gives them their Increment, allowed sometimes to grow
from a small Pea or Cizer, to the largeness of a Melon, as Rhasis writes he
once saw. Glandula therefore is an Excrescence framed by indurate Phlegm, and
Strumae differs from this because they are conjunct, and many planted together,
neither are they vexatious, or accompanied with much pain, Glandulae being
fewer in number, and not so easily traduced from one place to another.

What Nodus or Ganglion is.
Nodus or Ganglion is also bred from a hard, thick, and viscid Phlegm, happening
mostly in the Nervous and Tendinous parts, but chiefly in the Head and Joints,
on the Hands and Feet. A Node therefore being allowed a knotty-coagulated
Tumor, does much vary from Strumae, whose proper Abode and Habitation is in
the Glandules.

What Lippitudo is.
Scleropthalmia, or Lippitudo, being sometimes seen an Inflammation of the
whole Eye, but chiefly in the Conjunction, with redness, hardness, pain and
Rheum, arising either from Contuscon, extraordinary heat, or weakness of sight,
and a plentiful defluxion of Humors happening in young Children, and others
who are troubled with a weak sight, may in a great measure be allowed to bear a
part with Strumous or Kings-Evil-Swellings, the Glandules in the Eye being
Agents powerful enough to beget the same; and as a general remark hereof, I
have generally observed, That when ever this Humor has met with any
Obstruction, it generally and usually creates a hardness and swelling of the
upper Lip; and this I presume also is occasioned by some small passages derived
from the Lachrymal Glandule sent thither. And whenever such who have thus been
troubled have been touched by the King, these Swellings have very readily
abated, and some immediately upon the same have been seen to vanish. Besides
this Scleropthalmia, there is also another kind of Lippitudo, and this by the
Greeks is called Psoropthalmia, or Lippitudo Pruriginosa, arising from salt
sharp Rheum falling down into the Eye, and both these sometimes are seen to
meet together, the last increasing the pain of the other.

Bronchochele, What Bronchochele is.
so called by the Greeks from Bronchus the Windpipe, and Chele Hernia, or
Rupture. This Tumor by Celsus is allowed to arise between the Cutis and the
Windpipe, whose Matter being lodged in a Cystus, or Bag, is dull Flesh,
somewhat resembling Honey or Water. Or if you please, it is a large round
Tumor, generated from a Phlegmatic Matter, sometimes seen to take up the
greatest part of the Neck and Throat, wherein variety of Matter has been found
sometimes resembling that of Atheroma, sometimes that of Steatoma, or
Meliceris, some Countries affording more plentiful examples hereof than others.
Thus the Inhabitants of Piedmont are thought to take this Disease so common
amongst them, from the Liquor of which they make their usual Drink, being for
the most part as is reported made of melted Snow. And this by most Authors is
taken for another Companion of the Evil; and if you do accurately dissect the
Anterior part of the Neck from the right side to the left, you will assuredly
find first the Windpipe whence this Bronchochele takes its Origination, and
upon this you will meet very large Glandules, quartering under the Larynx, which
makes up these exuberant Swellings, commonly called Gozza in the Country it is
so frequent in. After this smaller in their sides, and these are those which
makes your Scrophulae, or Strumae, whose consistence hingeth either upon some
Internal Jugular Vein or Artery, and Recurrent Nerve: the which parts if you
curiously examine, you cannot be mistaken in finding a Bronchochele from a
Strumous Tumor, and likewise as readily prevent the dangerous extraction of
one from the other. I have known many people also cured of this by His
Majesty's gracious Touch only.

Atheroma, Steatoma, Meliceris, are generally allowed Flegmatical Swellings,
and Excrescencies; and they do differ from other Tumors by their being lodged
in several Bags or Membranes, and do every of them carry in them diversity of
Matter, they generally happening in the Membranous parts, and in those places
which are different distance from Muscles; and every of these do take their
Names from the variety of Matter which they do carry with them.

Thus Atheroma by some Authors is called Nodus Pulticulosus, What Atheroma is.
the Matter which is contained in its Bag or Membrane much resembling Pulse,
arising from mixed Humors, in which Phlegm is a very great Agent; for from this
it takes its white color it seems to contain in it, and does maintain other
waterish Qualities, it appearing much like Whey, and is a longish, round,
sublated Tumor.

What Steatoma is.
Steatoma also is called Nodus Adepinus, carrying in it the substance of Fat or
Sewet, much resembling Sewet, which the Greeks call (...), which bears a great
part of its Name, it being at first small, and by length of time purchasing and
contracting a hardness, becoming a round Tumor, not elevated, but rather
depressed; and as Aetius does affirm, it adheres firmly to the Cutis, its
substance not being fluid, but compact and coacted, and not contained in a
Cystus, or Bag as the former, but lodged between two Membranes or Coats, and
may in some measure be allowed to generate like Fat or Sewet from intemperiety
of parts, or discrasie of Blood.

What Meliceris is.
Meliceris is also called Nodus Melleus, containing in its Bag Matter much
resembling Honey, wanting pain, carrying a round Figure with it, by Aetius it
is thus described, being an abscesse enclosed in a Nervous Coat, containing in
it Matter much like Honey, wanting pain, having a round Figure, easily yielding
to touch, and as easily gaining its former shape and figure; all these are, and
have evermore been reckoned in the number of Strumous Tumors; and of this sort
also I have known very many cured by His Majesty's Touch alone.

Bubo taking its proper Name from its place the Groins, What Bubo is.
(which by our common Englishmen is also taken for that place which is called
Popes-Eye) bears in it the Strumous, as well as the Venereal and Pestilential
Swellings, this place being the part where the Nerves do send forth their
Excrementitious Juyces, as well as the Axillaries, both being Natures best
Emunctories, by which she discharges her Illuvies from the Humane Body, as also
the only places to which she designs the same. And as Venereal Swellings having
herein appeared by the Corruption of the Blood, it being deprived and stripped of
its former Vigor and Essence, and altered and changed by this malign Humor,
and the Plague acting in the same manner by poisoning these Glandules with
their Venom and Foetid Humor, so are both the Axillaries and Inguinal
Glandules seen usually afflicted with these Strumous Swellings.

What Testudo is.
Testudo is a Tumor both large and soft, its greater part being made of Phlegm,
and its lesser of Melancholy.

What Botium is.
Botium is always said to live in the Throat, and becomes larger than the
former, and its Increment does proceed from a Flegmatical Carnosity begot from
Rheum, distilling from the Brain into the Throat, happening more frequently in
some Regions than in others. Thus in Calabria, the Inhabitants thereof drinking
commonly a thick, viscous, and muddy Water, are frequently seen troubled with
this Distemper, being bred from a great part of Phlegm, and a lesser part of
Melancholy; and this does show its self more fluxile when Phlegm exceeds in
quantity, but when Melancholy gets the upper hand, this gives the Swelling the
hardness we find it bears; this by many Authors being also called Parysthimia.

What Cancer is.
Cancer, which takes its Name from a Crab, having expanded Claws and Feet,
being of a Livid or Cinerish Color, does much resemble this Tumor, whose
Figure is round and of a Livid Color, and does as closely adhere to the parts
on which it enters, as a Claw of a Crab in its gripe. And although some Authors
will needs have this to have affinity with the Struma, I cannot so readily
comply with them, unless the Struma proves Ulcerous, and then it may as well
prove Cancerous: for Phlegm, as it is a dull, heavy, flatulent Companion, and
void of pain, and does not carry much sense in it, or with it; yet when it
takes Adust Choler into its cognizance, and this gains better and nearer
acquaintance therein, this in time masters the other, and makes the Patient
feel the Vigor of its prevalency, by its corrosive, cruel and terrible pain
which it brings along with it.

Spina Ventosa is a Tumor of the Bones; What Spina Ventosa is.
and although the outward Shell thereof may appear hard, yet the inward Juyces
are all putrid and rotten within; and this does comprehend in it all the small
Bones of the Hand and Foot, Fingers and Toes, the Skull also and Mandibles, and
scarce a Bone in the Body but may be liable to this effect: these I have very
often thus found in Strumous Bodies in my own practice, where I have frequently
observed, that although the Cortex of the Bone has seemed sound, yet the Body
thereof has apparently shown its self spongy and rotten. And this was evident
enough in a young Gentleman which came from Oxford, who was Patient to Dr.
Lower, where Mr. Pearse and my self were concerned as his Chyrurgeons, whose
very small Bones of his Instep were so rotten, that I did pass my Probe quite
through the whole Instep, without any opposition whatsoever, after he was dead,
as several of his own Friends saw, and some other Chyrurgeons, who assisted me
at his opening.

The Evils proper Names according to its proper places.
The Struma, or King's Evil therefore, when it seizes the Eyes, its proper name
is Lippitudo, bringing frequently with it a hardness, swellings, and dryness on
the upper Lip.

If it arises behind the Ears, its proper Title is Parotis.

If it seizes the Neck and Throat, and so marches down all along the
Mastoideal Muscle, this is Struma, or Scrophula.

If it covers the Windpipe with Tumors, its called Bronchochele.

If it enters the Glandules of the Throat, Parysthimia and Botium.

If it seizes the Axillaries or Inguens, Struma Axillaris, or Bubonosa.

If it gets into the Bones, and begets a cariousness in them, Spina Ventosa.

If it carries variety of Substances in it, according to the Humor or Matter
which is therein contained, it may well enough be named, either Atheroma,
Steatoma, or Meliceris.

If Phlegm be the chief Agent, it may make Testudo, Ganglion, or Glandula.

If it meets other Humors therewith complicated, as Melancholy, or Adust
Choler, it may properly be allowed either Scirrhous or Cancerous. And thus much
as touching the Differences of Strumaes.

CHAP. IV. Several Causes of Strumaes, or Kings-Evil-Swellings.
^. Antecedent causes of Strumaes.
I Begin this with the Antecedent Causes hereof; and here we shall observe, That
such Diseases which may be allowed a near relation and affinity with this, may
also be granted to agree with the Essence thereof; as those which are of a cold
intemperiety, or moist, or relating to both: for this temper is the proper
Basis of this Disease, by which it produces such an innumerous offspring of
little soft Swellings, the which afterward are seen to run into Concretion,
and at length becomes incrassate and indurate; whereby we may also presume to
introduce this Observation, That violent Diseases do not so easily and readily
change into mild Distempers, as these do, or may do into Diseases which are
more forcible. Thus if a cold and dry intemperiety should happen in a Child, it
would from its own temper speedily beget a change as to a cold and moist
distemperiety; and hence is it that cold Digestions are made imperfect, and
hence Crudities and crude Homours do succed, the which in this tender age of
Infancy and Youth may well admit of a moist intemperiety to keep company with
them, every Man knowing that the Sperm of Creatures, by how much it is more
moist than the Creatures which are thereby produced, by so much also is it more
slippery, the Flesh of younger Creatures being more soft and slippery than that
of Old age, and the like.

Another cause hereof also may be referred to an inequality of Nutriment; 2.
This also may be allowed to inequality and disproportion of Nutriment.
not an inequality of Nutriment ascribed to it, for when we see one part thus
excessively increase, and another wants its due and decent quantity, there is a
necessity of allowing a disproportion and inequality of Nutriment, having some
prae-existency in the Body, where one part borrows and gets from another,
whilst the other loses and lessens in its mediocrity and true proportion: for
uneven Swellings do declare sufficiently the Liberal Nourishment in their
tumefied parts, which the extenuated parts do as readily show in their loss and
want thereof. But seeing this inequality of Nutriment is a depraved action, and
does appear and show its self as a cause of the Organical Vices, we hence ought
not to allow these Organical Vices the first Radix of this Disease, whilst we
show agility and activity of Body to heat and warm, and the coldness and
density thereof declaring themselves by their tardiness and slowness. Take this
therefore as a plain Demonstration thereof, when and where we see these helps
which do excite, increase and cherish heat in the outward parts, does in a
plentiful measure add to the Description of the Matter or Humor contained in
these Swellings; the which being cast together in a Lump, has power sufficient
to discard and banish this Disease, whereas a cold Distemper in its own natural
Constitution being first herewith affected, may very well be granted the
primary cause and essence of this Disease.

The Spirits also being defective in the affected parts, 3. Another cause from
defect of the Spirits.
do also declare and demonstrate an evident sign of their Lubricity; and as
their flaccidness does comprehend a looseness, so they do arise both from one
and the same cause; and as these two do include a certain vacuity or emptiness,
its evident that from the Stupefaction of the inherent Spirits, the plenty and
vigor thereof being augmented, the lank or flaccid member or part is easily
hereby rendered turgid and tumefied.

Provident Nature as a Guard to this has not excited Vital Spirits in the
Arterial Blood for their own sake only, neither are they distributed to the
parts, and joined to them only for their own advantage, but rather that they
might enliven and brisk up the inherent Constitution of the solid parts; and
hereby actuate, invigorate, and promote their Faculties. Hence we see all
Creatures, the more liberally they do feed, the fatter and more fleshy they
grow, unless some impediment does intervene: but if the due quantity of
Nutriment be subtracted, they grow lean and extenuated; when therefore any one
part has a more liberal disproportion thereof than another, reason must allow
this to increase, and grow into a Bulk, whilst the other becomes as it were
starved, being robbed and stripped of its just and even measures. For when the
attractive, retentive, and digestive Faculties do recede from their first
Vigor, and do unduly and ineffectually execute their Offices and Functions,
these may well enough be allowed also another primary cause of this Disease;
and for clearing hereof, where looseness, softness, and lubricity of parts, as
I have already mentioned, does appear, the expulsive Faculty herewith becomes
vitiated, and the breathing is too easy and dissipative, and the Circulation
of the Blood becomes slippery, the retentive Faculty also through weakness of
parts loses its pristine Vigor; and where the Expenses do exceed the Incomes,
there must consequently follow a decay of the public Stock, the Exportation
being found to exceed the Importation.

4 The purile age another cause hereof.
Amongst the other antecedent causes also may be reckoned the purile age; for as
Hipp. has it in Coac. praenot. from the 42 year of Man's age, even to the 60th
year thereof, neither Strum, Stone, Gravel, Dorsal, or Renal Pains are
generated, unless begun before, and so still continued: but of this more when
we treat of Hereditary Diseases.

These two following may appear as good causes of this Disease, 5. Two other
causes.
as when the Matter out of which these Swellings are made being thick and
viscid, having a contumacy therewith adjoined, and here the best of skill may
be shown to eradicate these Strumaes, and extirpate both them and their Radix,
by taking hence a new supply of Humor fitted for its purpose, there remaining
here some Ashes (as Galen has it speaking of Fevers, Agues, and the like)
which are apt enough to blow up a new Fire, being already warm, corrupting the
next Humors, and inflaming them, whence he supposes does succeed the
Renovations or Returns of Diseases which are daily seen to bear. A second may
be the Folliculus, or Bag to which every of these little Tumors are so close
adherent, that they are scarce thence divisible: whence it happens, that the
Matter thus left in them, although partly discharged, yet the remaining part
behind does give a very great occasion to the increase to a new Generation of
Strumaes, bred from a depraved Humor: and were this Bladder by the Industry of
Chyrurgery totally extirpated, yet there may be some Ramifications left behind
like Ligaments which may give being to a fresh growth and increment of the same.

Quest.
But here may arise a Question, How it happens that sometimes these Strumaes
shall be seen lodged in Bags, and other-whiles they shall be found free thereof?

Resp.
To which I shall give this Answer; These Folliculi, or little Bags, are nothing
else than some small Membranous Veficles, in which these various Humors are
lodged, and that these Membranes (as Hipp. has it in Libr. de Carnibus) are
made of the dryer part of the Blood, and that part thereof which is most
glutinous and congealed by cold, (he also writing that all Membranes are made
from the beginning of their Origination) while therefore this glutinous Matter
thereof is congealed by cold, we shall find it covered with a thin Membrane, as
we see the Blood is in Dissection of Humane Bodies, or in Phlebotomy, where the
thinner part of the Blood flies out briskly, being hot and moist, the which
when it is cold, we shall find the same as it were covered over with a thin
Membranous Vail. Thus Strumae, in which the Matter is void of viscosity and
glutinosity, although it may in time somewhat thicken and congeal, yet it does
not make any of this Membranous Coat: But on the contrary, when as there is
found a glutinous part therein, and when the Matter therein lodged is
concreted, as Hail is out of Snow by Coagulation, this kind of Cutis is made
about it as its proper Tegument, the which it properly takes to its self, and
in it does frame and form its Incrassation.

Tumors also which do obscurely and by degrees fall into the Nervous parts by
the Membranes from the external part of the head into the Glandules, 6. Another
cause.
and once getting therein footing, may be well allowed great Promoters of
Strumaes, and whenever adust Choler or Melancholy does intermix therewith,
they do generally beget a virulent and fierce Ulcer, which we commonly call
Struma Carcinomatodes.

Another cause is Congestion of Humors.
Another efficient cause hereof also may be allowed Congestion of Humors in the
Glandules; Now the cause of Congestion is Fluxion of Matter to a place, and
attraction, expulsion, or concited Motion in Humors is the cause of Fluxion,
the cause of all which is the Congestion of the same in the Body. Again, ill
Diet, looseness and weakness of parts, as I have already sufficiently made
good, are great instrumental occasions of Congestion; and hence is it that
young Children are so frequently seen troubled with those Swellings, and most
subject to these Diseases, they neither using any regular method of Diet, much
abounding with Crudities, and coacervated with many Excrements by want of
Exercise.

Avicen calls them Melancholy Products, 7. Phlegm another cause.
and Galen will have the efficient cause thereof to be Phlegm, which is the
Excrement of the first Concoction, the Liver in such being much better and
sweeter than in such who have lived to a greater age. And the truth is, whether
Phlegm be taken for the colder and moyster part of the Blood, or the Whayish
part thereof, or for Spattle, or for the Mucous Substance which passes from
the Nostrils, or Jaws, or for the Pancreatick Juice, take it for which you
will, if this be long continued and contained in the Body, it has a direct
reference to this disease, and may well enough be allowed the cause thereof:
for as it is cold and moist, so it is slow and thick, benumming the parts,
being but little Spirituous, and affected with an Internal Lubricity; all which
does evidently demonstrate this as a primary essence of the same. Wherefore
upon a superfluous Accumulation of this humor, managing a production of this
affect, it in justice ought to be allowed a proper cause, and primary Agent
thereof. Thus far have I traveled upon the general ground of causes, where I
have seen and shown them as they have been allowed by the best of Authority.

But because I am well satisfied these may not please every Master, I shall
take a Turn or two, and examine the Causes hereof nearer home, and trace this
Strumous Disease as to its Hereditariness from Parents to Children; wherein,
that we may fully satisfy the World, we shall make this good by comparing
Diseases which are properly, from those which are so improperly called: wherein
also the Parents faults are to be laid open in every respect, as giving being
thereto. Next we shall show the Causes of this Disease, being so incident to
Children: wherein we are to take notice of the five non-natural things in their
use, as to the Air, Meat and Drink, Motion and Rest, Sleeping and Waking; of
the other five things praeternaturally cast out and retained, and why this
Disease happens more frequently in England, Scotland and Ireland, than in any
other part of the World; and the reason of its natural inclination to them; and
as a conclusion to the whole, I shall make good, That the POX and SCURVY are
very great Clubbers toward its advance and growth, especially in this our Age,
where Debauch is so frequent, and Venery become the common Harlot of the Times.

We begin with the first, 8. Whether this Disease be Hereditary.
of which I shall presume to offer, That before we shall or can satisfy this
point fully, we must make good these two differences of an Hereditary Disease;
the one properly so called, the other improperly so termed. That which is to be
allowed properly so, is ever supposed to be pre-existant in both, or one of the
Parents, and from thence derived to the Successors; whereas an improper Disease
so called has not the same kind of pre-existence in either of the Parents: yet
the same fault preceeds which imprints the like in the Children, which thence
so readily fall into this improperly Hereditary Disease.

Again, A proper Hereditary Disease is twofold, either in Conformation, An
Hereditary Disease twofold.
as a lame Father begetting a lame Child, or a blind or deaf Parent acting in
its like, or in the Similary Constitution, as when a Gouty, or Scurvy, or
Strumous Parent begets the like Children. An improper Disease so called, may
also likewise appear in Conformation, or Similary Constitution: In
Conformation, when neither of the Parents are blind or lame, yet these have
begotten a blind or lame Child, by the very fault of Formation. And in Si^^ary
Constitution also there may lodge an Hereditary Disease so improperly called,
as when a Melancholy or intemperate Parent begets a Gouty Child, or a Strumous
Brat, although the Parent never himself was ever troubled with either of them.
And this we have apparently seen, that although neither of the Parents were in
their Infancy or Childhood afflicted with this Strumous or Evil Disease, yet
Symptoms thereof have suddenly shown themselves, and their dispositions
thereto in their Infants and Children; especially in such Parents who before
Coition were evilly disposed by vitiosity of Body, or error of Life, having
enough in them to transmit and transplant the relation thereof to their issue:
but of this more by and by, made good by Arguments prevalent enough.

Again, Children however they may borrow ill dispositions from their Parents,
as we frequently find it happens, which may produce the like effects in them;
yet they are seldom therewith troubled before they be born; and when at any
time they show themselves therewith perplexed, their effects are both violent
and turbulent; and for proof hereof we do affirm, (as worthy Dr. Glisson does
in another case) That this Disease does consist chiefly in a cold Distemper of
the first affected parts, with an inequality annexed thereto. And this inequal
coldness of the same parts is of so great moment in this Disease, and that also
in relation to the inequality its self, that it does much advance the inequal
distribution of the Vital Blood to the parts thus affected. But in the Womb
this inequality of Nutriment is much amended by an equal heat, the Womb equally
in each side embracing and cherishing the Body of the Embryo, and hereby drives
away a great part of this Disease, or at least does much hinder its invasion to
it.

We come next to give some account of the Parents cause of this Disease, 10.
Causes on the Parents side for begetting this Disease.
as being nearest in kin to them; and here may the faults of their Sperm enter
as a great Agent thereof in relation to the Generation of the Embryo, others
having reference to the Embryo ready conceived, and carried in the Womb. The
faults of the first proceed either from the Man or the Woman, or from the whole
Body, or some parts thereof designed by Nature for Generation.

The Parents faults depending upon the whole Body.
The Parents faults depending upon the whole Body, must necessarily be allowed
to have a powerful influence in the Child, transmitting such Matter to the Seed
in its Generation, as may improperly be thought fit to have abode in those
parts designed for this Office. And when we come to reckon up these parts, we
shall find them reduced to four Classes.

Four Classes hereof.
The first containing in it a cold and moist distemper of the Matter whereof the
Seed is generated, and this is bred from a cold and moist distemper of the
Parents, from whence unto which we also may refer a predominancy of ill Juyces,
especially that which is moist and phlegmatic. To this also may be referred the
French Pox, Scurvy, Jaundies, Rickets, and the like, in all which affects the
Blood is polluted with filthy Excrementitious Humors, corrupt Exulcerations,
and the like; all which are not easily to be changed into a laudable and
fruitful Sperm.

The second shows the slenderness and paucity of Natural Spirits, which should
be generated in good Seed; a good Seed never issuing from such a kind of
Matter; and the Causes which hastens this impure Matter to the Generative
parts, are the extenuated Bodies of the Parents, wasted or consumed either by
abstinence, or some vehement Evacuation of Hepatical Fluxes, or Chronical
Diseases, all which are powerful enough to spend the Radical Moisture, to
create an indigestion in the parts from an imperfect and defective Concoction:
And since such a considerable part of the Disease consists in the paucity of
Natural Spirits, it cannot otherwise be, but the issue which thence proceeds,
and is propagated by such a crude and almost spiritless Seed, should be tainted
with such a Natural Propension to this affect, the which is afterward deduced
into act.

A third shows the Stupor, or Dullness of the Matter transmitted to the
Generative parts, whereof the Seed is framed and produced; and hence is it that
Physicians do produce these causes of Diseases, when they allow the Blood and
Humors being either too fluid, or moving disorderly, or that sometimes it is
found unapt for motion, being less fluxile, and unactive to answer expectation.
But now as to Parents in this Strumous or Scrophulated concern, wherein as in a
Glass the Child's soft, loose, and effeminate Constitution, and its weak
Disposition, or (as I may better say) its Indisposition to exercise, and then
examine its great intemperiety of Diet and Epicurism, the two great products of
Crudities and Flatulencies, where meeting with an easy and sedentary life,
stripped from perplexities, anxieties, or vexations, as well as exercises, seldom
or never accustomed to labor, care or danger, these being the never-failing
Companions of peace, ease, and tranquillity; all which does most clearly
demonstrate a laziness and effeminacy in parts. And whereas the Blood in its
Circulation and passages through these parts cannot readily pass through without
borrowing somewhat of their nature and acquaintance, as well as cognizance of
their temper, it must necessarily therefore bear a part therein, and carry some
share thereof to the Generative parts; and I hope where such Influences are
derived in the Seed, it shall not need or require much trouble to prove, that
that Child who takes its Origination from such Principles, must with it also
take some of their Nature therewith, or at least some proportions conformable
to this stupidity; and that this proportion after birth, when the aforesaid
preservation is lessened and taken away of its equal cherishing whilst it was
in the Womb; this may as readily be reduced into act; and since this stupidity,
as I have already shown, may be allowed as a part of the primary essence of
this Scrophulous Disease, there must consequently follow some vitiated
principles, which may lurk in the Body, ready to create and stamp the like
effect derivative from one or both of the Parents.

The fourth shows a vicious disposition, if any such there be of the Parents,
who themselves in their Childhood were thus affected: for these do properly
indeed imprint a Continuandum thereof, and transmit the same to their
successive Generations. But because in our Discourse hitherto the fault of the
Parents may well enough be referred to any of these Classes, or all of them,
let this suffice,

The Genital parts allowed proper Agents of this Disease.
And come we now to a nearer Enquiry as touching their Genital parts, and
oft-times we shall see these the only faults or framers of this Disease, they
sometimes suffering a cold and moist intemperiety in them; and when ever an
over-plenty of moisture does enter these parts, it does create a looseness and
weakness therein, wherein and whereby the Seed thus ejected becomes either no
way fertile, or if so, it proves fruitful for Diseases. Again, we find these
parts frequently affected and afflicted with Gonorrhaea's, French Pox, and the
like, where the Seed thus thrown forth is either putrid, or not sufficiently
elaborated, or no ways capable of producing a firm or sound Embryo.

11. Fluor albus and Menstrues.
In Women also we shall as readily see them troubled with their Fluor albus, as
well as Menstrues, both which also can act a diversity of change in the
composition of the Embryo, all which does carry, transmit, and distribute of
their own nature and kind to the Seed thus prepared in them, and disposes the
same without any delay to their Progeny or Stock; and this as readily receives
the true effects thereof. And having traced thus far in our intended design, by
opening the very Womb, to search out the first cause of this Disease from
Parents, by examining their prolifique Seed, the great Production both of
Patient and Disease, we proceed now in a more gradual manner, and open the
Mothers fault, Man alone not being the great Instrument hereof: And here we may
begin with the time of her bearing this Embryo. Now where there happens a cold
and moist Distemper of the Womb it self, this may with ease I hope be allowed
to communicate the same to the Embryo which is kept in it by contact, or where
cold and moist Juyces do here arrive, these converted by Excrementitious and
corrupt Humors, in stead of laudable Aliment or Nutriment, pray what may
hinder a cold and moist imperfect digestion, not being timely concerned, and so
sent and transmitted with the Mothers Blood for the Nutriment of the Embryo?
And if a cold and moist intemperiety with this Matter does invade a Woman with
Child after her Conception, no question but this impure Nutriment which
nourished and cherished the Seeds, or the Diseases, may easily be allowed
transmission and dispensation to the Embryo. But hitherto we have been
discoursing of the Embryo whilst it was framing, and dwelt in its Mothers Womb;
now let us look upon it as it came into the World, and examine and trace its
way of living, and getting this Disease of the Evil which our Discourse has
chiefly aimed at, and this also comes under the Names of Its Causes.

12. Causes of this Disease incident to Children.
Our subject Matter therefore now is to show the Child as it appears in the
World; where we may offer, That those Children which are prone to this Strumous
Disease from their Nativity, are easily therewith affected: whereas others free
from distemperiety do not so readily fall thereinto, but upon more powerful
Causes, and yet these Causes must have somewhat of affinity therewith, and do
only differ in degree.

Quest.
And here a Question may be offered, Whether Contagion may be admitted amongst
the number of Causes of this Disease.

Indeed by its Circuits and Travels about the World, whereby it has made it
self so well known and common to the Sons of Men, and dispersed it self through
many Countries, any one at first view might think it carried a Contagion with
it: Resp.
But he who more closely looks into it, and its nature, will find it far
otherwise; for all Diseases conspire to change, and assimulate those Bodies
which are nearest to themselves, and yet this is not enough to make them be
called contagious Diseases: For to frame a contagious Disease, as Sennertus
well observes, is to create a certain Seminal Fermentation of its self, the
which secretly getting abode in our Bodies, may by degrees introduce a Disease
of the like Species into our Bodies. But in this, here is no such Fermentation
ever seen or found: for the first beginning of this Disease, (as I have already
sufficiently made appear) does arise from a cold and moist distemper, where,
not meeting a sufficient inherent Spirit to invigorate it, and this endeavors
an Assimulation in any parts of the Body, they do not only attempt, but enter
the same with or by open violence: For we have seen Children much of an age,
brought up in the same House, whereof one or two perhaps have been troubled
with this Strumous Disease, whilst we apparently find others thereof no whit
concerned therewith; and therefore if any Contagion went along therewith, or
this were catching, as some people do fancy, this could no ways thus happen.

And if we examine this Disease aright, we shall find that the five nonnatural
things in their use may be well allowed advancers hereof; and this was my next
Task to make good according to my Assertion. 13. Air a main cause of this
Disease.
Air therefore may well enough be allowed a great Promoter and Procurer of
these Strumous Diseases, as shall more appear when we come to speak of our
Neighboring Nations as well as our own. A cold and moist Air therefore does
very much contribute to the begetting this Disease: for seeing it generally
seiseth and enters the Circumferential parts, before it gets being in the
fenced Bowels, it directly imprints in them this inequal and tumefying
distemperiety. And whoever further traceth this Disease in its progress, shall
find that places near the Sea and Marish Grounds, where Rains most commonly do
fall upon, and fed with a number of Springs, are very fertile and fruitful
Friends to this Disease, these creating a more or less looseness in the parts,
and making the Circulation of the Blood too slippery; and hence is it that
Chyrurgeons are never seen to apply any cold or moist Medicine to these
Strumous Swellings.

As touching Meat and Drink also, 14. Meat and Drink another cause hereof.
whatsoever Diet is moist and cold, viscous and obstructing does manifestly
nourish and cherish this Disease, as Fish, Cheese, Curds, and the like
plentifully fed on: Feeding too liberally also is a great advancer of this
Disease, by choking the heat, and thereby accumulating many raw and crude
Humors.

And for Motion and Rest, 15. Motion and rest others.
these two also ought to be well considered in these Strumous Effects: for as
too much Motion and Exercise does speedily dissolve the Bodies of Children into
great sweat, so want of Exercise does give a very great being to this Disease:
for a stupidity of the parts is an occasion of their want of heat, being
sufficiently cherished, whence steals in this cold distemper, accompanied with
its Excrementitious and superfluous moistures, which ought to have been thrown
forth by due transportation. And here it loosens and softens the parts where it
enters, the Pulse hence and herein becoming stupid, the Blood also waxing slow,
and less in quantity, and more slippery, the Vitals lessening of their Vigor,
growing weak, all which do wonderfully evince the same an efficacious cause of
this Disease.

16. Sleep and waking others.
As to Childrens Order and Government, they ought to sleep longer and oftener
than Men, yet too much hereof gives a good essay to the growth of this Disease
also.

17. Another cause.
All our former causes may also in a great measure be reduced to this following:
for whatsoever is contained in the Body, and praeternaturally altered, as it is
praeternatural, it requires ablation, and may so far be allowed to be thrown
forth nevertheless of its being praeternaturally retained. And Nature has
provided so many and various ways of Excretion, or throwing forth into the
Body, that scarce any Humor can be produced by alteration which does not
relate to the secretive or excretive faculty of some Bowels, or some other
parts appointed for its evacuation. Thus the whole Mass of Blood being any ways
praeternaturally altered or infected with some Humor, the peccant Matter which
cannot be overcome by alteration, is quickly exterminated by excretion, made
from some part or bowel, unless therewith the expulsive faculty thereof be some
way or other obstructed.

We come next to show why old People are not so subject to this Strumous
Disease as Youth; 19. Why Old People not so subject to this Disease as Youth.
and here we may take in Children from a year or two, to ten and upwards: then
we take and make the difference between Young Men and Old, by calling the first
Juniors, and naming the latter Seniors. And upon examination hereof we shall
find, that younger Children are of a colder temper than elder, every day adding
heat to their temperament even to Man's estate. And here it is thought to stand
at a stay; and when it arrives at Old Age, here it is seen to decline daily,
and lessen. And seeing younger Children are more cold, no wonder if they be
thus subject to cold Diseases: And this makes the difference between Youth and
Old Age, the one being so framed by Nature in temper, the other being robbed
and stripped thereof by their continual expense of Spirits, which gave Man those
warm sparks which formerly did both enliven and invigorate his Faculties and
Functions. As young Children therefore are more cold, so also are they more
moist than elder; for the heat of the temperament is advanced from the time of
the birth, even to Man's estate. Young Children also, because of their
tenderness of parts, are much prone to dissipation, and colliquation of the
inherent Spirits, and therefore by consequence upon lesser and smaller causes
they are the more ready Subjects and Objects of this Disease.

Again, Their composition and consistance of parts makes them more subject to
diseases, being formed like young Twigs forced to yield to every blast of wind,
they wanting that strength and confirmation which Old Age enjoys. Again, young
Childrens Exercises are not to be named in the hour with those of elder Age,
who enjoy both a greater and larger degree of heat, which both nourishes and
cherishes them; and so this cold and moist Distemper is seen with more ease to
be got loose from them. And as a conclusion to the whole hereof as to their
Nature and Temper, we shall evermore find younger Children as they are less
capable to maintain the ground of this Disease, so also are they most ready to
comply therewith, they not in their own Nature, Temper, and Constitution, being
either able to resist it, or defend themselves when it once seizes them.

We come now to show some Reasons why this Strumous Disease is known to be so
frequent with us in England, Scotland, and the like, 20. Why this is seen so
frequently reigning in our three Kingdoms.
and why it is so natural with the three Nations.

A common Disease therefore properly so called, is either Original, 21. A
common Disease either Original or Adventitious.
or Adventitious: That supposed Original, which in the first Inhabitation of
the place infested the Inhabitants thereof, of which kind perhaps was reckoned
Bronchochele amongst the People who dwelt about the Alps; a Calenture under the
Torrid Zone; and Sphacelus near the Northern Poles by extremity of cold, with
many others which I have named at the beginning of this Treatise. A new and
Adventitious Disease is that which is brought into a Country by some common
cause, and this is threefold, this arising either from faults of the Country
prevailing over the health of its Inhabitants, or by some innovation or
alteration happening to the Country it self, or some discongruity between the
place, and the complexion of the Natives thereof. As to the first, it possibly
may be granted, that the strong and firm Bodies of its first Inhabitants might
powerfully resist the unwholesome Influences of the Country, and yet the
Posterity afterward may suffer a change therein both in Complexion and Nature,
and so made the Subjects of a common Disease. Thus Poland maintained both the
Plica and the Scurvy, which are both common Diseases to the Samaritans,
Polanders, and its Neighboring parts; and yet these are thought no old
Diseases. The second may happen by Innovations in Countries, or Inundations of
Waters, or some Malign Aspect, or bad Influence of the Stars. Those places also
are mostly the occasions of Diseases which have power enough in them to
transplant and form a Disease, being quite of another temper and nature from
that place wherein they formerly inhabited; and this is very often seen the
occasion of Diseases more prevalent than others. Thus Ireland is known to be a
fruitful place for producing the Dysentery, or Bloody Flux, Ireland a fruitful
place for producing D^seases.
as also of this Evil; and the West Indies thought to be the first ground of
the French Pox; the first of these depending partly upon the constitution of
the place, and their preposterous Diet; the other as readily annexed to the
Humors and Dispositions of the Inhabitants. The French we see commonly
troubled with an Itch and Scabbiness from their Air; the Scotch troubled with
the Scurvy and the Evil from their sluggish and lazy Dispositions. But to
leave them, and travel a while in our own Country; herein also we shall find
evidences enough to prove our Nation as fertile as any of the former, and as
common with the Evil as any of the former: Therefore I presume to offer, That
he who ever has traveled over our English Island, England as fruitfu^l as
Ireland.
must needs acknowledge with me, that it is an Island which borrows a plentiful
stock of moisture from the Neighboring Sea, it being furnished with an
innumerable company of Fountains, sending forth from thence variety of Rivulets
and Springs plentifully filled with its Liquor, the Heavens themselves being
thought by many to bestow more plentiful showers thereon than upon any other
Nation whatsoever: all which does declare its coldness and moistness. And since
a cold and moist Distemper is the greatest part of this Strumous Disease, pray
what can or may hinder its raging thus amongst us, more than in other hot
Countries? And as a cold and moist Distemper is a common part of the essence of
this Disease, and yet not so much as that every cold and moist Distemper does
produce the Evil, so we find England more readily disposing the Bodies of its
Inhabitants hereto than any dryer Regions whatsoever.

Again, Both strong and weak People are both very fertile in their Conceptions,
and not over subject to Abortions: Now where infirm Parents beget infirm
Children, the succession is generally seen to bear the Nature as well as the
Fortune of their Parents, as I have already made good.

Again, An idle sedentary life, 22. Another cause a sedentary life.
and a loose kind of living, is a great ingredient of a moist and soft temper,
and these every day filling themselves with Excrementitious Humors, their
Children which they beget must necessarily be sharers thereof with them; and
whosoever examines those troops of People which do yearly come to the King to
be touched for this Evil, must needs allow it has made sufficient remarks in
the three Nations of its abode and being; where although it has given to some
but its light touches, and gentle notices thereof, in others it has to a
wonder shown it self apparently to the World. And because I very well know that
every Man's Breath will smell of his usual food, and those who pretend to any
Novelties can but Inventis addere: And although my asserting the French Pox and
Scurvy to be the two great Clubbers toward the advancing and increasing the
Evil, may seem harsh to some People, who have a better opinion of themselves
and their Ancestors than to think, and therefore much more unwilling to approve
of the same; yet with their leave I shall with a Salvo to their Modesty show
the proof thereof. Where we shall find the Pox and the Scurvy, Pari Passu,
keeping equal pace therewith on Mankind by way of Seminal Traduction, from
Father to Son, and so becomes Hereditary, as I have already shown: And
whosoever does not observe the same in curing Diseases of this Age, (now the
Families of Mankind are seen generally tinged more or less) will mistake of his
aim. And although perhaps in this following Part I have and shall recede from
the common Opinion of the Ancients; yet I presume I am not the first that have
swum against the vulgar stream thereof. And this makes me fall upon the two
eminent Diseases of our Times, where if we examine their Nature, Existency, and
Origination, we shall find them of longer continuance than our late Writers
have been pleased to allow them.

I begin with the Pox, 23. The French Pox no new Disease.
which although it was formerly warmly treated at Naples, and had a plentiful
entertainment in the West Indies, yet it had being in the World long before
this, as History testifies.

The Scurvy also, 24. The Scurvy proved a Disease of long continuance.
although by some reckoned a Disease of late date, yet we shall prove this to
be of longer being amongst the Sons of Men. And who-ever looks into the Old
Testament shall find it more than once by its proper Name mentioned there: What
may we think of the first, when we read in Levit. 13.2. When a Man shall have a
Rising in his Skin, a Scab or bright Spot, or rather as it is in the Margent, a
Swelling, then he shall be brought to Aaron the Priest, and to the Sons of the
Priests. In this next you will meet them both together, Levit. 21.20. where it
is written, That no Man shall offer Bread to his God that is either
crook-backt, or dwarf, or that has a blemish in his Eyes, or be Scurvy, or
scabbed, or his Stones broken. And in the 23 Chapter of the same Leviticus,
Verse. 22. you meet all these three together, where we read that neither blind,
or broken, or maimed, or having the Wen, (or as I may well enough say, the
Evil, this being accounted one part thereof) or Scurvy, or scabbed, shall offer
up unto the Lord. And Hosea shows the reason of the whole, in Hos. 4.2. when he
tells us, that by committing of Adultery they break out. Thus much from sacred
Scripture.

And for a more ready clearing up of which, because I well know that these
Scabs here mentioned will be commonly taken as the marks of the Leprosy, I
shall next take the whole a pieces by examining the near affinity and
acquaintance there is between them both in their Nature and Essence.

What the French Pox is.
The French Pox therefore is a praeternatural disposition, by which the Body is
sensibly hurt in its Operations, and disordered in its Functions: And
Philosophy allows that so many ways as the Body is hurt by distemper
praeternaturally, and so hindering its action, so many kind of Diseases it
easily assumes. And this explains its self with all imaginable ease to such as
understand the natural action thereof, which is discovered by Complexion,
Composition, and common unity of Body: for in this Disease, as well as in the
Struma, many parts of the Body are extenuated, whilst others gain greater bulk
thereby, as also thickness, and these not only Similar, but Organick parts.
Whence we may rationally conclude, that this is a Compositional Sickness; and
this we do thus make good, the first kind of Compositional Nature we calling
Plasmatick or formal: for the better performance of which there is required a
good Figure, and a convenient Tone, accompanied with a due Asperity, and decent
Lenity. Now if any Member falls from hence, and gains a new quality, it frames
a Disease in form, and hence we take both its signs and cognizance. And that
the Members are made gross by this Disease, is apparent by the Pustles and
Pustulous Cutis, the Face oft-times seen swelled, and the Body appearing
Satyrick. Just as Galen mentions of the Leprosy, where he writes that they are
of that near kin each to other, that they are scarce to be distinguished by
their marks or symptoms: for in the one, so in the other are many Pustles found
in the Cutis, and these arising from abundance of black Melancholy, throwing it
self outward; of which kind also is the Leprosy; and in our days where we
shall see the Pox most common and frequent, we shall as readily perceive the
same, sometimes their Botches appearing white, sometimes red, with a kind of
Livid color admixt, both which do only represent the matter of which they are
made, being framed either of Melancholy Blood, Adust Choler, or Viscid Phlegm.
And Galen is of my Opinion, when as it grows populous, he writes it to be
allowed an Elephantiasis; and in his Book de Atra Bile, he says there are many
Pustles in this Disease without Fever, thickning, drying, and crusting up the
Cutis. And whereas the Blood of pale Women does generally look pale, so such as
are black have a more Grumous and Melancholy Blood go along with them in their
Constitution. The Figure of these Pustles also does make well for the knowing
of their cause; and whoever desires further knowledge herein, let him but
examine Nicolas Massa De Morbo Gallico, Jacobus Cataneus, Hieronimus
Fracastorius, Petrus Maynardus Veronensis, Alphonsus Ferrius, Antonius Gallius,
Casper Torr^ll^us, and several other excellent Authors, who have well writ De
Lue Venerea, and there they may be more fully satisfied both of the Pox, and
its near relation to the Leprosy. Thus much of the first part.

We next proceed to the Scurvy, What the Scurvy is.
and shall show it painted in its Colors: And here we shall offer, that a bad
Ferment is the general cause of most Diseases; and Sennertus says, That the
Blood of Persons touched with a Scorbutic Tincture, becomes of the Nature of
Vinegar; and such also is the Blood of Melancholy Persons, whereas in its right
state in sound Persons it is compared to Generous Wine; where also he writes,
that the Scorbutic Humor is bred much after the same manner as Vinegar is out
of Wine; where he says, that by casting a little leavened Bread thereinto, this
brings the Wine into its own Acrimoneous Quality, and Acid Nature. Thus when an
ill Scorbutic Ferment comes any way into the generous Liquor of the Blood, and
turns it into an Acid Ichorous and Acrimonious state; this will corrupt the
whole Mass of Blood: and this he further affirms, that the main cause of the
Acid state of this Blood arises from the abatement of its Sulphur and Spirit,
the which he confirms by comparing it with good Wine, which soon turns Acid
upon its Sulphurous part, being stripped from its Saline by Evaporation or
otherwise; and so that Salt which was formerly Volatile, becomes now fixed and
Acid, which is the true cause of its thus turning into Vinegar, which is made
good by putting Vinegar to a Candles Flame, and you will not see it burn, it
being robbed of its Sulphur, and its Winey Spirit extinct, and the more this
Sulphurous Matter and Spirit is lost, the nearer it is drawn from its true Body
and Substance.

Thus have I given you a short and general Discourse of the Scurvy also, of
both which I may well enough offer, although our Region was not the first
Mistress which they courted, nor the English the first Man that they greeted;
yet if I mistake not, we are here as well acquainted with these two Diseases in
our days, as any other Nation or Country whatsoever; and since both of them
have found the way to London, they have given sufficient remarques of their
close affinity and conversation; and we have received the Faults as well as
Fashions of our Neighboring Nations.

Now that the Pox has a very near affinity with this Strumous Disease, How
both agree with the Evil.
is hence easily made good, by sending forth of its Venereal Venom into the
Glandules, there tumefying them; and as other Symptoms by which we may know
its Complication herewith, we shall find it either from the Parent or Nurse
which were first infected; and thus therefore if Ulcers in the Head or Face,
Mouth or Nostrils, or eminent Pustles, or crusty Tumors do hence arise, not
giving way to ordinary Medicines; if hard or Nody Tumors keep company
herewith, or carry a rottenness of Bones in the Head, Feet, Thighs or Legs, or
any other parts; if Nocturnal Pains go along with the rest; if Inguinal Buboes
infest the Glandules with virulent Matter, or keep them tumefied by Venereal
Poison, all these may be accounted apparent Signs and Symptoms of the Pox, as
well as of the Evil.

If the Scurvy be herewith complicated, frequent looseness attends the
Scrophulated Patient, with difficulty of breathing, many Athritick pains go
along with this Evil, they have a more frequent and inequal Pulse, and frequent
Palpitations of their Hearts. And where we meet Strumaes untoward and unlucky,
this gives us no slender suspicion of some ill lurking inwards, especially
where they meet with a curted Neck, a short and narrow Forehead, comprest
Temples, and large Mandibles. Besides the former, we shall find the French Pox
and Scurvy both of them so strangely altered from their first appearance, that
we see them rather daily advance in their number, than in their nature, and
almost creep into acquaintance with every Disease as well as the Evil, and in
some measure do bear their Colors, and describe their Descriptions and
Symptoms, and are seen as often presented to the King under the disguise of
the King's Evil, as if they were really nothing else, they getting that
familiarity and common dependence upon one another, that no mean Artist may
pretend to be a true Judge between them: for as Intemperance of Diet, and
Luxurious Debauch does as well procure a tainted Fermentation, as an Ebullition
of ill and vitiated Humors, by which a common intercourse and exchange of
Symptoms is kept up and maintained; so when the Evil has got either a Pocky or
Scorbutic Ferment going along with it, bred from a vicious Habit of Body, this
may as readily be granted to be a sharer of the whole; for these two Ferments
do put on other Formalities, whether they proceed jointly or separately, and do
disguise themselves under the Habits of several Diseases, according to the
Inclinations of such weakly Bodies on which they do make their entrance, they
sometimes appearing like themselves when they march in the common road, but
when these Ferments do propagate themselves, they seldom appear like branches
of such a stock, but being tinctured in the Blood and Humors of the Body, they
do assume such a shape of Distempers as the Body is able to afford and allow
them. And whoever reads Zacutus Lusitanus Prax. Histor. Cap. de Morbo Gallico,
will find that he says, the Pox is an Universal Evil, and may be well enough
complicated with any other Distemper: for Distempers do herewith unite either
through likeliness of matter, or some other the like vitiousness of Humor. And
thus I suppose I have in some measure made good my Assertion of the Pox and the
Scurvy's being Clubbers to this Strumous Disease, or Scrophulated Evil, by
their affording this Disease a taste of their tainted Ferments, and a vitiated
tincture of their vicious and depraved Humors, by which they creep into its
acquaintance.

CHAP. V. The proper Signs of Strumaes, or Kings-Evil-Swellings.
OF what great concern an inequal Nourishment of Parts in this is, we have in
our last Chapter very plentifully discoursed: This presents you with the Signs
of Strumaes, which gives the fairest view and figure of the Parts thus
inequally discovered: where we shall meet with a greater fullness in the lively
Complexion of the Face, being compared with the other parts of the Body; and
yet this more apparent in some persons than in others, this Disease lying
sometimes more obscure before its public appearance, and as it were
unperceivable; and therefore this may be reckoned as one of the Signs, which is
a greater fullness of Face, it being and appearing thus, whilst it is as it were
in the Embryo, and arrived at no great matter of growth, or has gained much
substance or matter to give it a greater being and bulk.

This again having got some entrance amongst the Glands, as it infects them,
and advances into growth, it is most commonly seen to march along the
Mastoideal Muscle of the Neck, and this requires time to give it such a
progress, and where such appearance is made thereof, this infallibly denotes
the abode of this Disease.

When we shall perceive knotty Swellings and Excrescences in this affect in
other parts of the Body, as in the Eyes, Nose, upper Lips, Breasts, Axillaries,
Inguens, and the like, all which do declare their acquaintance therewith, where
these ever happen, they give us a Pathognomonical Sign of its Habitation, and
without all doubt do set forth the most clear species of its residence.

Wherever outward knotty Excrescences do apparenly show themselves, these may
justly give some suspicion of inward Glands in the Bowels; but if they do only
inwardly increase, no certain Sign can be demonstrated thereof.

Such as have short Necks, low and narrow Foreheads, comprest Temples, and wide
Mandibles, are mostly subject to these Strumatical Tumors and Excrescences,
and this is the general received Opinion of the best Physicians and
Surgeons, as being a most signal Observation of the Evil or Strumous Affect.

Again, other of these Strumaes are taken from their sight wheresoever they do
appear, and in what part of the Body soever they do show themselves, they
appear either round or longish, much of the same color of the Cutis under
which they lay, for the most part hard and without pain.

Rogerius gives us this method of them, and thus distinguishes them, by taking
Leaves of Ground Ivy and Cedar, the which being beaten together, and applied to
the Scrophulated parts, if the Tumors shall hereupon be seen to vanish and
disappear in three days, its a perfect sign they are Glandulae, not Strumae:
but if the Medicine thus applied does occasion pain in the part, so that it
becomes both inflamed and painful upon this Application, this perfectly
demonstrates them to be Strumaes.

In Bergomy where Scrophulous and Strumous Tumors are very frequent in both
Sexes, you will meet them very large planted in the forepart of the Neck,
being commonly moveable, soft, and pendulous, the which as they do bring no
great matter of pain along with them, nor hinder any action in Humane Body, so
they give them their acquaintance and company all their lives; and this Disease
is reported to be in their Nation bred from their Water which they commonly
drink, this having in it as strange an Antipathy to the Glandules and
Glandulous parts, as Cantharides have to the Kidneys and Bladder; the People in
those parts neither giving themselves or their Surgeons trouble of ever
being concerned therewith.

Again, these Strumae are seen to differ from Glandulae in their Color and
Constitution, the one made from Melancholy, the other begot by Phlegm, every of
which does declare their Frame and Constitution by the same; and hence some of
these by Avicen and Aetius, Cap. 5. Lib. 15. write, that some of these are seen
to be and appear very painful, whilst others are very mild; and according to
the greater or lesser quantity of the malignity, they prove sooner or latter
Cancerous; and where Choler and Phlegm join together, as I have already
mentioned, it must give pain to the part, and make it either a Strumatical
Cancer, or a Cancerous Struma.

Strumae do not enter one Glandule only, but many, wherein they show both their
hardness and inequality: for herein the Pox shows its self acquainted
therewith, but does still keep this difference, that the Pox seldom seizes
more than one, its venenate matter possessing the same, causing a hardness and
Tumor therein, and yet this not to be accounted a Struma; and therefore for
making of Strumae, there must be more Glandules than one concerned; for these
are seen to spread themselves like a Vine, swelling, increasing, and growing
hard.

Celsus says he has found Strumaes in Women's Breasts, as also in Men's
Breasts; and reason it self cannot deny this Assertion of his, because these
are Adenous parts; and he further tells us, that in the year 1537. in the month
of April, he saw a Woman Scrophulated all over her Body, even to her Groins.

Scrophulous Swellings are frequently bred in those parts, where crude and
viscid Diet is made use of, as well as in the Air that is of a cold and moist
temper, where also the Water of the place is viscous or muddy.

Again, the Signs of Strumaes are to be divided three ways, as considering
their Quality, Quantity and Essence. As to their Quantity, and hence they
gaining their largeness; as to their Quality, this showing their Nature and
Temper; as to their Essence, this demonstrating their Origination and being.

The multiplicity of Strumaes, and their overspreading the Body, and the
extraneous heats which go along with them, do frequently show that they are the
product of interior Scrophulaes, as Arnoldus observes. And hence he further
writes, that we may guess at the inward Swellings by the outward numerousness
of these Protuberancies; and that these do more frequently happen and fall upon
Children than upon Old Men, by reason of their gulosity and rarities of Bodies,
the which are not so in Elder People.

Henricus says, That those Persons who have a curted Forehead, comprest
Temples, and large Mandibles, are most subject to these Swellings; for in such
Persons this Scrophulated matter is more readily derived and conveyed into the
Neck.

Cornelius Celsus writes, That Strumaes and sick People do give much trouble to
the Physician and Surgeon; because let them be treated as well as possibly
Art can, and Nature likewise serve them, yet they will fly out again; and
although the best methods imaginable are used for their extirpation, yet we
usually find them relapse, and gain new birth again.

Strumaes, if they be benign, obtaining a moderate hardness, and free from
pain, inflammation, and Ulcer, being purely bred from Phlegm, are proper signs
of its good Nature: but when this Phlegm gets any commerce with Adust Choler,
this makes it malign, and here wait on it pain, inflammation, a hot pulse and
trouble, appearing inequal to touch, and vexed with every application of
Medicine.

Ambrose Farrey says Strumaes are Aedematous Tumors arising in the Glandules,
bred from a cold, thick, and viscid Phlegm, having in it somewhat of Melancholy
adjoined.

Aqua Pendens tells us, Strumaes are no Strumaes, but rather ought to be called
Cancerous, they not being made from Phlegm, and Melancholy only, but having an
Atra bilis or Adust Choler joined therewith, which gives them this Cancerous
Nature and Disposition.

And lastly, Joannes Colle Bellonensis gives this as a sign of Strumaes, which
ought to be understood as well in Genere, as in Specie, considering the place,
the form, and the effect thereof; It being a hard Tumor of the Glandules,
sometimes equal, otherwhiles inequal; sometimes appearing few in number,
sometimes many; if white and indolent, they arise from Phlegm; if bluish or
black, from Melancholy; if hard, exquisite, painful and red, from Adust Choler;
this last sign comprehending a great part of most of the rest. Thus much of its
Signs.

CHAP. VI. The Proper Presages of Strumaes, or Kings-Evil-Swellings.
EVery Physician and Surgeon, according to the Rules of Art, ought
diligently and prudently to contemplate on the Prognostic Signs of a Disease,
that he may the better be instructed in foreseeing the several events thereof;
and here both Diagnosis as well as Prognosis is very proper to be understood,
the one showing the present estate, containing and declaring the Origination
thereof; the other foretelling its growth, increase and consummation.

First therefore, this Disease being properly Natural, is most dangerous, and
do seldom, if ever, end in health, without new eruptions: For Zaculus Lusitanus
writes, that there is a depraved Excretion in the Seed, or a certain occult
quality infecting the same, and inherent in it, which imprints the like
Tincture in the Offspring; for the diseased defects of the Parents are derived
by force of the Seed to Generation, by which they do perfectly and exactly
resemble their Behavior, Gate, Countenance and Constitution. And because some
are very apt to contradict this passage, and assert, If this were true, it
would continue thus for ever; whereas others have as plainly seen, that it has
mist some of the same Stock, and has only fixed upon others of the same Family,
the first Generation having sometimes been seen wholly to miss and escape it,
and this has given none of its appearance perhaps till it came to the
Grandchildren of the same Family.

Small and Superficial Strumaes are more healthful in Children, and more easy
of Cure, than those that are malign, and more deeply fixed.

The more early the invasion of Strumaes is after the Birth, the more danger it
carries with it; for hereby the Spirits are both robbed, and much weakened; we
commonly also seeing as they grow up, they are better acquainted therewith, and
are better able, and more easily cured than younger Children.

That Struma which is bred naturally from Parents is harder of cure, than that
which is contracted by the mere error of the Nurse or Mother.

Again, That Strumous effect which the Infant brings with him from his Mothers
Womb, is of harder cure, and proves more desperate than that which is
occasioned by Air, Viscous Diet, or any other outward Effect.

The greater the Heads of Infants and Children are, the shorter their Necks,
the more comprest Temples they have, and the wider Mandibles, the more subject
these are to Strumous Diseases than others.

All those who do attain to the consistence of this Disease, do escape the
danger thereof, being carefully examined, unless by chance some other Disease
be therewith adjoined, or does afterward come after it, and disturb the
Patient with a higher increase.

If the French Pox therefore be complicated with this Strumous Disease, be it
either Hereditary, or contracted by Infection, it makes it almost incapable of
remedy.

If the Scurvy also be herewith complicated, this does very much retard the
cure, although not so much as the French Pox.

All Strumatical Tumors, either Internal or External, do not very much suspend
the hopes of Cure, although otherwise of themselves they are not easily subdued
in this tender age: for the external parts being inflamed with pain, do waste
the Spirits; but the internal much more, especially if they do invade the noble
parts with their weight and bulk.

Every Struma again is not to be overcome with ease, but such as do happen in
Children are better managed, than those which happen in old People.

Wherever they happen without pain, they are not easily to be extirpated.

Avicen declares that those who are acquainted with Struma, or Scrophula in the
Head or Neck, are generally seen to be of moist Complexions.

He also writes the places wherein they do generally breed, are the Neck,
Armpits, Inguens, and the like, where the Fleshes are soft, but their empty
spaces are filled up with Vessels.

Numerous Strumae entering the exterior parts, and so exercising diverse parts
of the Body with some Adventitious heat, these show that they are the
offspring, and bred of inward Glands, as Arnoldus de Villa nova writes, and
well observes.

Avicen writes that Strumae which have pain, and a hot Apostem adjoined to
them, with hot matter tending to Suppuration, are thereby easily cured.

Purging Potions, and Diuretic Decoctions, and Specifique Alterant Drinks, do
all much conduce to the curing of these Tumors.

Children by reason of their rarity of Body, and intemperance in Diet, are seen
frequently troubled with this Disease: Old Men on the contrary are seldom seen
troubled therewith.

Strumae at best are troublesome to the Chyrurgeon, for they never give way to
Medicine readily; and should they be cured either by Medicine or Instrument,
yet they are seen to break out afresh before a perfect extirpation be made.

Incision of these Abscesses in as much as may be is to be avoided, especially
happening about the Belly, Neck, and Commissures, by reason of their affinity
with the Veins, Nerves and Arteries, lest hereby such an Hemorrhagy be raised
by inadvertency, that is not easily to be allayed by the greatest of skill.

Those also are sooner cured which are pendulous, than those which are fixed.

Cancerated Strumae, and the like Tumors, they being closely concerned with
the Vessels, do bring great danger of Hemorrhagy in their Cure, where it is
performed by Incision, and are scarce to be taken off, they dwelling amongst
the Veins and Arteries, which are the parts of great concern as to our present
beings.

When a Constitution subject to error, or actually erroneous, is fixed to some
certain part, this highly concerns us to have a respect to that part in chief,
because this Constitution thus subject to depravation, does require a
particular preservation to be associated to particular Curation.

CHAP. VII. The Practical Curative Method of Strumaes, or Kings-Evil-Swellings.
THis Curative Method is generally guided by the two Assistants of Reason and
Experience, Reason and Experience the ground of practice.
both which together do comprehend the greatest skill of the Artist: For by
Experience was founded the History of Diseases, the Success of Medicine, and
the Judgment of its events: all which being weighed in the balance of
Approbation, are seen either to get or lose in their Weight and Measure.

Reason therefore is the Judge of Truth; for hereby Man is seen to comprehend
the design, to give reason for the same, to apprehend, comprehend or divide it.
And for the proof hereof, he must needs be thought unkind to Nature in
burthening her with the name of a Proposition, who is not himself apprehensive
of its Terminations, or ignorant of its propose on which its seen to consist;
every indication or intention seeming to call in Man's reason to consent as to
the Curative part, as well as his Opinion and Judgment. Now as every Indication
does declare somewhat which is to be done, or so intended from whence this Term
it self does properly arise; the thing therefore which chiefly relates to our
present discourse is, either a Modical or Chyrurgical Act, or both; the first
making good the design, the second prosecuting the same, he himself being the
Agent, and his Medicine the Curative Instrument.

Our Art first designed for the health of mankind.
Our Art therefore was first designed by the Almighty for the health of Mankind,
and the procuring their health was evermore the great Indication of the Action:
yet this is distinguished in the Duty of a Physician or Surgeon, because the
purchase of health is not always attainable, and therefore no part of their
Duties to maintain Impossibilities.

The Essence of this Disease therefore partly consisting of a cold and moist
Distemper, The Essence of the Disease to be chiefly minded.
this therefore requires somewhat which is hot and dry, and being also robbed
of its inherent Spirits, such Remedies therefore as can recruit the same, or
can restore or increase them, may very well be here allowed very useful.

Again, Stupefaction of Spirits have been premised another cause, and therefore
such things as do incrassate and thicken the Spirits, and so fixing them, are
to be utterly prohibited.

Another was the due Observation of the Tone of the parts, and their due
Harmony, the which being either soft, loose, or flaccid, they therefore do
require the favor of some warming and strengthening Medicines, having somewhat
of astriction added to them.

Again, All causes of Diseases to be removed.
as another cause was proved to be an inequal distribution of Heat and
Nutriment, some parts being too liberally served, whilst others are starved and
robbed of their just measures and proportion; these therefore also ought to be
brought into a Medium, by lessening the Bulk of one, and giving a more
plentiful proportion to the other. Thus far I thought convenient to keep time
with some of the most eminent causes which have been Promoters and Procurers of
this Strumous Affect.

And although these common causes do not immediately seem to attain to the
production of the Essence of a Disease, yet in respect that they do hinder
Nature in her designs, they may be allowed retarders of the cure, and therefore
their removal is required. And because the Humors which give being to these
Strumaes are seen slow, Preparation of Humors the first thing indicated.
gross and clammy, Preparation thereof ought first therefore to be considered
and thought upon, and the first thing indicated; and this is to be performed by
incisive and attenuating Remedies: And as the Disease becomes Chronical, the
matter not being wholly to be thrown forth at once, these preparing and
evacuating Medicines ought by turns to be made use of: and whosoever that will
herein proceed in a right method, must know and suppose that as Choleric
Humors do require one Preparation and Evacuation, so Blood, Phlegm and
Melancholy do each of them indicate their proper Preparations and Evacuations,
according to Hippocrates his Rule, Before you purge the Body you must make it
fluxible: And thus before we arrive at the use of Catharticks, we are to begin
with Preparatives.

All Constitutions therefore in this Strumous Affect being for the most part
weak and infirm, which may well be allowed from the Consideration of the
Patients tender Age and Nature, do therefore require both a general and
particular regard as to their Constitutions.

In this Strumous Affect therefore the election of the best Nourishers, and
such as are easy of digestion, are nearest of kin, and most agreeable to the
Age and Nature of the Patient.

Benign and gentle Evacuations therefore well corrected, are herein both very
proper and useful, and advantageous, and may be given in moderate quantity, and
in just and due time, all violent Purges being here utterly forbidden. Alterant
Remedies also, and such as can prepare the Humors, or correct the Disease, are
here also approved of, these in themselves being both kind to Nature, and a
Friend to the Patient; evermore taking this caution along in your Curative
Method, that the Remedy you design to cure Strumaes do arrive at the seat, and
penetrate the very cause of the Disease; and in regard that all Children are
naturally seen to loath Physic, the form thereof therefore is to be preferred,
which shall be observed to be least distasteful to them.

Timing of Diseases very material as to their cure.
Such Medicines also as you design Strumous Patients must be given in their due
time, for timing of a Disease aright is a very great matter in the cure
thereof. Thus we commonly see Evacuant, Directions for giving of Preparatives.
Attenuant, and Incisive Remedies are prescribed to be taken early in the
morning upon an empty Stomach; and if these be to be repeated, four of the
Clock in the afternoon is thought the most seasonable hour for giving the same.

Thus much as touching the general Rules and Method which ought to be studied
and observed by every Artist who desires and designs to cure Strumous Affects
according to Art.

We proceed now closer to the true Curative Method of Strumaes, whereas we have
presumed to premise, that the Medical Matter is to be found out by Experience,
so it must be continued to every cause of the same Affect.

This Curative Method is generally seen to be guarded by these three Heads,
Three Heads as to cure Strumaes.
wherein is declared the Pharmaceutical, the Chyrurgical, and the Dietetical
Matter. The first comprehending in it all Medicines useful for vanquishing and
overcoming of Strumaes, those only excepted which belong wholly to Chyrurgery,
as being either relative to the Causes or the Essence of the Disease; and these
are generally seen to march under two Heads, as Internals and Externals; and
these are ranked into Simple or Compound Orders. The Internals having most
respect to the inward parts, for cleansing their passages, and this is
performed by Preparatives and Catharticks, and Specifique Alterant Medicines,
and such as correct Symptoms. And yet in the Administration of these, these
three Rules are to be observed, that the Stomach be not herewith nauseated by
any ungrateful taste* which may beget an abhorrence in the Patient of all
Medicine for the future, nor load it with too great a quantity, nor yet so made
as it may be immediately thrown up again.

The several Humors to be severally treated.
The Humors which also are thus to be prepared, are either Phlegmatic, and so
cold and moist, which ought to be tempered with heat; thick, and so requiring
attenuation; or viscous, and so expect incision, or Choleric, and thus being
burning and corrosive, are to be allayed by lenifying and contemperating
Medicines; or Melancholy, and this either feculent or terene, and this to be
rendered fluxile. Now where these, or any of them do enter in any part of the
Body, they do require appropriate Medicines, and Remedies proper for the
discharging of any of these Humors.

Again, the matter of the Disease it self being prepared, and the passages
opened, The matter to be expurged.
we are next to study the expulsion of this peccant Matter; and this bears in
it a double relation, as both looking toward the Humors, also the parts to
which they flow, or are seen to lodge. And here we must also (as I have already
observed) give every Humor its just way of purgation, and always direct our
Catharticks at the Essence of the Disease, as its most proper white or mark,
which in its own nature ought to be moderately hot and dry, dispelling all
Stupefaction of parts, strengthening the softness and looseness thereof,
cherishing and nourishing the vigor and activity of the inward parts, and
warming and comforting the outward, always having a regard both to the age,
strength and complexion of your Patient. These things being premised, we fall
upon the Method it self, wherein as we find that evacuation is a great Radix in
the cure of Strumaes, by abating of its repletion, and dissolving of gross and
tough Phlegm, the great Mistress of its bulk and growth, so Subtilitation of
Regiment is seen as proper in this Disease, being hid and lodged in the softer
parts of the Body. General Rules as touching the Institution of Life.


And now for our General Rules here to be observed as touching the Patients
Institution of Life, we ought here (as I have already well noted) to frame our
Medicines according to the Temperament, Strength and Constitution with whom we
are or shall be concerned: for we are not to deal with Children as we do with
Men and Women, who have arrived at a better age and strength, who are as much
different in these, as they are in their age, complexion and abode. Great care
therefore is to be had to the fluent matter which is already got into the parts
from whence it is to be discharged, and that the Flux it self may be abated,
and stopped in its motion.

And he whosoever intends to deal with Children as to purging Medicines, must
also have the purile age both in his thoughts and view, and consider that it is
but infirm, and therefore requires a most kind, gentle, and easy method; this
rather also to be often repeated and reiterated, than advising stronger
Medicines, and more forcible Remedies, they very often bringing more hurt than
good along with them.

Bleeding.
As for Bleeding, neither the Age or Distempers of Strumous Patients do very
well admit thereof, unless this Strumous Affect does or shall happen in such
who are able to bear it, and then it may be allowed as useful and necessary as
any other Remedy whatsoever.

Various are the Opinions amongst Authors concerning Emeticks in this Strumous
Disease; Vomits.
Aetius is seen to commend and highly approve of them, others altogether do
condemn them; to which later Opinion I presume to make my self a true Devoter:
for although the antecedent matter may or might hereby be somewhat lessened by
Emeticks, yet the impact matter is but a very little hereby abated, but rather
more acerbated. Besides, it is certain that the Head is much more repleted by
Vomits, the Jugular Veins hereupon tumefying, and the whole healed by being
brought into consent therewith; and this was the only reason which made
Hippocrates cry so on it, or exclaim against Vomits in all Effects either of the
Eyes or Ears.

As to the Patients Diet, As to the Diet.
let all such who are troubled with Strumous Affects abstain from flatulent,
vaporous, and windy Diet, such as is Beans, Chestnuts, Pork, Cheese, Beef, as
also from Leeks, Onyons, and every thing else that has power enough in it to
beget or breed gross and viscid Humors; Fish and all Salt Meats also are to be
shunned.

Immoderate motion is very hurtful to Children.
Immoderate Motion in Children is also very hurtful, especially when they do
sweat much about their Head, because hereby the matter is moved, the which
afterward is precipitated, and this gives the increase to the Strumous Affects
which we commonly see they carry with them; Violent Motion and Exercise
therefore are to be shunned, and no ways allowed of.

As to the air.
Avicen says, The Air of Strumous People should be clear and serene, dry and
hot in temper, not cloudy, thick, troubled, waterish, marish, or too cold; and
daily evidences hereof make good that such that live in cold and moist
Countries are much more troubled with Strumous Swellings, than such as do dwell
in a hotter and dryer Climate. Long Sleeps are to be shunned, Fear, Sorrow,
Sadness, Melancholy, and every thing that may create, produce or force a plenty
of Humors to the Head and its parts, are utterly forbid.

Let the Exercise of the Patient therefore be moderate before and after Diet,
and let his Diet be both attenuating and of good digestion, as Veal, Capon,
Mutton, Lamb, What Diet most proper.
Rabbet, Cocks Broth, Pheasant, Partridge, and all small Birds, and the like.
Let his Bread be made of good Corn, to which may be added a little Salt. In his
Broaths may be boiled either Mint, Balm, Marjoram, Marygolds, or Pennyroyal;
let him abstain from all things which may be thought either to engender
Crudities, Rheumatisms, as superfluous Drinking, too much Eating, and the like;
let him drink Wine but in a small quantity, or mix the same with Small-Beer or
Water. Odoriferous Spices, or hot Seeds may also be put into his Broaths. All
these are the general Indications required in his orderly regulation.

We now proceed to the Medicines which are to be taken inwards, and these are
both Simple and Compound Preparatives, Simple and Compound Preparatives.
and proper Catharticks which here first do offer themselves: amongst the
Simple may be reckoned Syrup. Byzantinus, de Staechade, de 5 Radicibus
Aparativis, De Marrubio, Oximel. Simplex, and Sir. de Rhubarb, Manna, Cassia
newly extracted, Tamarynds, Rhubarb, Aloes, Turbith, Syrup. Rosar. Solutivar.
Machoacan, Jallap, Polypody, Senna, and the like. Of these may Compounds be
framed, as,

. fol. Scrophular. Plantagin. siccat. Decoction
Betonic. Menth. ana. M. ss. fiat decoctum cum aquae fontanae, q. s. ad iiii.
Colaturae, add Mel. vel Syrup. Rosar. Diamoron. Simpl. an. ss. misce, fiat
potio.

Vel,
. Aqu. Faeniculae Hyssop. Marrub. an. ii. Sir. Byzantin. de Schechad. Oximelit.
Scillitic. an. i. misce, fiat potio. Potion.


Altera Potio.
. Oximelit. Scillitic. vel Simpl. Sir. de 2 Radicib. an. vi. aqu. fumar.
Cichor. Marrub. an. i. misce, fiat potio. Potion.


Compound Potions may again be thus prepared for Strumous Affects.
. Senn. Alexandr. Epithym. an. i. Rhei. i. Sem. anis. Fenicul. Dulc. an. ss.
fiat infusio in aqua fontana q. s. Colaturae add Sir. Rosar. Solutivar. i.
aqu. Cinamom. hordeat. ii. misce, fiat potio. Another purging Potion.


Vel,
. Rhei ss. Senn. Alexandrin. iss. Agaric. Troch. i. Cremor. Tartar. i.
Tamaryndor. ii. Sem. anis. Caru. an. Zinziber. i. stent omnia in infusione in
aquae fontanae, q. s. ad iii. vel iiii. Colaturae add Sir. Rosar. Solutivar.
iss. aqu. Mirabil. iss. misce, fiat potio. Another Potion.


Bolus pro eodem.
. dulcis ss. conserv. Rosar. i. cum Sir. Rosar. q. s. f. Bolus post cujus
assumptionem sumat Syrup. Violar. Vel Rosar. Solutivar. i. horam post ejus
Assumptionem. Bolus.


Vel,
Bolus.
. dulc. aegr. vi. ad ss. pulo. Jallap. ss. cum Sir. Violar. fiat Bolus,
sumendus ut antea.

Vel,
Trochisks
. dulc. ss. Resin. Jallap. ii. Sacchar. alb. solut. in aqu. Rosar. ss. misce
fiant Trochisci, horum sumat patiens a i. ad ii. vel ad i. pro uno dosi.

Pil Vigonis pro eodem.
Pill.
. Pulv. Euphorb. Z. Z. Turbith. Succ. Ireos, Agaric. an. i. contundentur omnia
and cum Oximelite, q. s. fiat Mass. Pillular.

Pil. alter.
P^ll.
. Pil. Co^h Turbeth. an. ii. Sal. Gemm. Z. Z. an. Gr. iii. cum Succ. Ireos
fiant Pillulae.

Vel,
. Pil. Agregativ. Coch. an. i. Sal. Gemm. Z Z. Pil. Foetid. an. ss. cum aqu.
Hissop. q. s. fiant Pillulae.

Pil. Theodoric.
Theodoricus and Constantinus affirm, that the taking of seven of these
following Pills for thirty days together, Pil.
do perfectly dispel all Strumous Tumors, they being made of equal parts of
the Juice of wild Lilies, and Euphorbium mixed together.

Pil.
Pil.
. Pil. Assairet. Turpeth. an. ii. Sal. Gemm. Z. Z. an. Gr. iii. cum Oximelite
Simpl. q. s. fiant Pillulae.

Vel,
Pil.
. Pil. Coch. Turpeth. an. i. Sal Gemm. Pulv. Euphorb. an. ss. cum Sir. de
Shechad. q. s. fiant Pillulae.

Vel,
. Hellebor. Nigr. Euphorb. Portulac. Marin. an. iii. Mastich. iss. Aloes
Succotrin. ad omn. pond. fiant Pil. ad Mod. Cicer. harum sumat. a ss. ad i.

Euphorbium also taken in a Poacht-Egg does dispatch the Scrophulous Swellings,
and lessen them by siege.

Another Experiment has been taken notice of a Mole, Experiment.
which having been sodden, and afterward dried by the Sun, and then powdered,
and made into an Electuary by adding a sufficient quantity of Honey thereto,
Pil.
as will give it the Mass of Pills, and three or five of these being taken
every morning, the bigness of a small Pea has been known to discharge all
Strumous Swellings by siege.

Other Pills.
. Pil. Coch. i. Aurear. i. Troch. alhandul. Gr. ii. cum Oximel. Simpl. q. s.
fiant Pil. No. 18. sumat harum 2 omni mane. Pills.


Powders for discharging this Strumous Matter.
. Pulv. Cinamom. Caryophilor. Nuc. Moscat. Spic. Oliban. an. i. Piper. Alb.
Pulv. Sem. Coriandr. Diagrid. an. ii. Euphorb. ad caeterum pondus. hujus sumat
Patiens ii. in vino, semel vel bis in Hebdomade. Powders.


Vel,
. f^l. Siccar. Pimpinel. Pilosel. Rut. major. an. ii. Scrophular. Philipendul.
an. i. semanis Fenicul. an. iss. Zinzib. i. Senn. vi. Turbith. ii. Sacchar.
alb. iiii. misce fiat pulvis dos. i. ad ii.

Decoctions.
Decoctio^s.
. Brusc. Asparag. Polypod. Violar. Esul. Irid. Dracontii Scrophular. Elebor.
Nigr. Scilitic. Acor. rad. Shechad. Peon. cort. ulmar. an M* i. Euphor. Piper.
Cumyn. an. vi. stent omnia in infusione in vino albo. q. s. coquantur postea ad
med. consumpt. and colaturae sumat Patiens iiii. omni mane.

Another.
. Sarsaperil. ii. Chin. ss. Juris Pulli absq, Potion.
sale lb viii. Borag. Bugloss. Malu. an. M. ss. Liquirit. xi. fiat infusio in
s. q. ad med. consumpt. vel tertiae partis ejusdem, ex part colaturae fiat
Syrupus, and cum caeteris fiat potio frequenter sumenda.

A Purging Confection.
A purging Confection.
. Pulv. Turpeth. alb. and gummos. i. Z Z. v. Cinamom. Caryophil. an. ii.
Galang. Piper. long. macer. an. i. Diagrid. iii. Sacchar. alb. lb i. fiat
confectio cum vino Odorifero, dos. i.

Another for the same.
Another.
. Agaric. i. Sal. Gemm. iii. Spic. iii. Cinamom. Caryoph. Galang. macer. an.
ii. Diagrid. iii. Polypod. i. cum Sacchar. alh. vino Cydonior. and aqu. Rosar.
an. q. s. fiat Confectio dos. i.

A Purging Electuary for the same.
A purging Electuary.
. Agaric. Troch. ii. Squinanth. Gr. ii. infundantur in aqua Betonic. and facta
expressione, add mell. Rosar. ii. Electuar. de Psyl. i. misce, fiat
Electurium, saepe in die sumendum ad Q. Nuc. moscat.

Thus much for preparing and purging Medicines. The Diseases therefore being
thus prepared and evacuated, or at least in some measure conquered, the next
Instrument to make it quit its quarters, is the Specifique Alterant Medicines,
which, as it were with all speed does fly in the very face of the Disease it
self, they being formed of matter, perfectly contrary either to the nature or
temper of this Scrophulated Disease, against which they are wholly designed to
encounter when ever they are made use of, as you may guess by their following
frame and make: for whereas we see Strumaes arise from a cold and moist being,
so we shall not only likewise see these Remedies hot and dry, but also such as
are cherishing and refreshing the natural Spirits, and strengthening the parts,
they seem to attenuate all thick, viscid, and gross Humors, and brings a
certain equality to all the Juyces that have their Circulation in the
Sanguinary Mass; and these also are of diverse sorts, thus made good.

Arnaldus Villanovanus prescribes this as an excellent Specific Alterant
Powder in Strumous Tumors.

Powder. Powders.

. Spong. Marin Paleae Marin. Oss. Sepia Piper. long. and nigr. Z Z. Cinamom.
Sal. Gemm. Pyrethr. gall. Cupress. Gallar. Querc. Gallar. Spin. Rosar. omn. an.
ii. pulverisentur omnia except. Spong. and paleam marinam, quae debent comburi,
and eorum cineres cum caeteris misce, hujus pulveris sumat patiens in ore
frequenter and mane and vespere, and sumat etiam per palatum, and cum cibariis
suis quotidie utatur eo, servatur in pixide, and hujus sumat per mensem vel
menses Duos, Cerebro and Capite prius purgato cum Pil. Coch. Hier. pier. etc.

A certain Bononian Priest swears that he has cured some hundreds of
Scrophulated People with this following Specifique.

Powder.
Powder.
. Spong. Marin. paleae Marin. Oss. Sepiae an. ss. piper. Gr. 100. terentur
omnia and fiat ex his pulvis, and cum vino quolibet mane jejuno Stomacho sumat
Cochl. i. vel vespere etiam cum lectum intrat.

Another Specific Powder.
Powder.
. Ciner. Viperar. ii. Coru. Cerv. ust. ss. Galang. Irid. Cinamom. an. i. Sal.
ust. iiii. Piper. niger. ii. fiat ex his pulvis Tenuissimus de quo capiat
alternis diebus mane Cochl. i. horas 4. ante prandium.

Another both Specific and Alterant Powder.
Powder.
. Lign. Alo. Margarit. Perlar. Oss. de Cord. Cerv. Spic. Bezoart. Nuc. Moscat.
Caryophilor. Thur. Galang. Sem. Coryand. piper. Diagrid. in Pomo coct. an. i.
Ambr. Grisc. Gr. ii. Euphorb. i ss. pulverisentur omnia and misceantur, and
hujus sumat patiens and Nuc. Avellanae omni mane in aqua frigida, haec pulvis
and Specificans est and Scrophulas per se etiam purgat.

Opiatum Specificum and alterans. Opiate.

. Gladiol. condit. vel exsiccat. i. Ciner. Viperar. i ss. Ciner. Spongiar.
Matin. ss. pulv. de Gemmis i. cum Sir. Byzantin. q. s. fiat Opiatum.

An Alterant Decoction.
. Rad. Scrophular. Filic. Lilior. Convall. Decoction
Pentaphill. an. i. Matrisilu. Lupul. Haeder. terrestr. an. ss. Lign. Juniper.
Cuscuth an. ii. aqu. fontan. lb xv. fiat infusio S. A. coquantur ad Med.
consumpt. and coletur, colaturam serve pro potu Ordinario.

Another Specifique Decoction.
. Sarsaperill. ii. Rad. Scrophular. Filic. Decoction
Carn. Viperar. Mundat. an. ss. Chin. iii. passular. enucleat. iii. Juris Pulli
Gallianac. lb x. stent omnia in infusione per horas 12 coque postea ad med.
consumpt. cola, colaturam distilla, and liquor elicitus, fecibus calcinatis and
combustis fervens saepe projiciatur, cujus liquoris sumat patiens vi. omni
vespere per dies 40.

Specifique Pills.
. Troch. de Viperib. ii. Scrophular. Cran. Specific Pills.
human. Lil. Convall. Dictamn. alb. Cretens. an. i. cum Sir. de Staechad, q. s.
fiant Pillulae.

A Specifique Opiate or Bolus.
. Pulv. Rad. Brusc. i. Irid. ss. pulv. Sarsaperill. i. misce cum Mel. Rosar.
ss. and fiat Opiatum cujus sumat dimidiam partem and continuat patiens ejus
usus per dies 30 vel 40. Venice-Treacle and Methridate also are very proper
Specificks in Strumous Affects, A Specific Bolus.
given from a i. to a i. or upwards, as occasion may serve.

Having thus finished my intended design as to Internal Medicines, as they are
allowed properly to be administered and prescribed in all Strumous Affects; Our
remaining Discourse shall only touch upon the external parts, which we have
reserved to the last place, this being nearest related to our our own
profession of Chyrurgery.

The Chyrurgeons duty as to the outward parts.
The thickness and viscidity therefore of these Strumous Tumors is not
sometimes to be separated but by Putrefaction, Instrument, actual or potential
Cantery. But if this viscidness be but moderate, here the cure is to be
attempted with mollifying, dissolving, and dissipating Medicines, all which
scopes Averrhoes makes out very well in 7 Collect. 31. where he writes, that
when Strumaes are made of subtle and thin Matter, these are to be cured with
Emollient, incisive and dissolving Medicines: If from a hard, thick and viscous
Matter, purging Medicines are inwardly to be prescribed, and the outward
Swellings to be treated with more powerful Remedies, Instrument, or Caustic,
all which are to be acted by a dexterous, skilful, and knowing Hand.

If these Tumors do tend to Suppuration, The method to be used if they do tend
to Suppuration.
then this method is closely to be followed: for the Chyrurgeon must evermore
endeavor to treat Nature in her own way and method she her self designs, that
the matter may more readily de discharged and healed; and this is known by a
redness or bright color happening in the Tumor. Now Medicines proper for
performing this part of the Cure may be reckoned such as these following.

A Suppurating Cataplasm.
. Rad. and Fol. Alth. Malv. ad. M. i. A suppurating Cataplasm.
Lilior. albor. No. 2. pistentur and coquantur ut artis est, quibus add farin.
fabar. Tritic. an. ii. farin. Sem. Lin. Fenugraec. an. i. Butyr. recent. Ol.
Lilior. albor. anguent. Dialth. an. iss. Croc. ss. Vitell. Ovor. No. 2. misce,
fiat Cataplasma.

A Suppurating Emplaster.
. Rad. Brion. Alth. Cupil. Lilior. albor. A suppurating Empl.
an. lb ss. Gaepar. No. 2. fol. Malv. ficeat. and pulv. Ficuum. Passular.
enudeat. an. i. Sem. Lin. Faenugraec. an. ss. Croc. ss. cum Axung. Suill. Ol.
Lilior. Adip. Anferin. an. i. Unguent. Dialth. i. pulv. Euphorb. i. fiat Empl.
sub finem addendo Vitell. Ovor. No. 2.

Another for the same.
. Rad. Alth. Lilior. albor. an. lbss. coquantur in aqua contundentur, addendo
Allior. Another Empl.
sub pruvis coct. caepar coctar. an. iii. Ol. Lilior. Butyr. an. ii. Unguent.
Basilicon. i. Pingued. Anserin. Capar. an. iiss. Farin. Fabar. Paenugraec. Lin.
an. q. s. Vitellor. Ovor. No. ii. Croc. ii. misce fiat Empl. supputans.

Avicen, Rhasis, and Albuchasis do all advise, that where we meet with large
Strumous Tumors, When to use Emollients and discussives
here we are to treat them with Resolving and Discussive Medicines; and where
viscid, thick, and tough Humors are, these are to be softened and dissipated.

Emollients therefore are of this kind which are first to be made use of, such
as these following: Hens Fat, Man's Fat, Oil of sweet Almonds, Mucilage of
Linseed, Fenugreek-seed, Lilies, and Marshmallows, and the like, of which with
other Additions may be composed very excellent Emollient Remedies.

An Emollient Unguent.
An Emollient Unguent.
. Lithargyr. Aur. ii. Ol. Commun. iiii. Mucilag. Sem. Lin. and Faenugraec. an.
i. Mucilag. Alth. ii. misce fiat Unguent.

In stronger Strumaes.
Unguent.
Mel. and Aqua cum Stercore Caponum simul mist. fiat Unguent.

Or this following.
. Caricar. Pinguedin. nuclar. pinear. nuc. Jugland. Rad. Scrophular. Carn.
Viperar. elixat. an. iii. Pinguedin. Anat. Anser. Anguill. Axung. Suill. an.
ii. Aesyp. humid. an. i. Sarsaperill. Troch. de Viperib. Chin. Rad. Brion. Nyd.
byrundin. an. i. agitentur omnia in mortario ad Unguent. spissitudinem.

Empl. Laurentii Emolliens.
. Empl. Diachylon. cum Gummi iiii. pulv. Irid. i. Mucilagiub. Alth. an. ss.
fim. Columbin. siccat. ss. C^. Irin. q. s. fiat Empl. Empl.


Another.
. Gum. Amoniac. Galban. colat. an. i. Bdell. ss. Medull. Cerv. Axung. Anat. an.
iss. Mucilag. Alth. Faenugraec. Lin. an. ii. Lithargyr. Aur. ss. pulv. Irid. i.
Ol. Irin. Aueth. and Cer. an. q. s. fiat Empl. Empl.


Another Emollient Empl.
. Galban. Bdell. colat. an. i. Ammoniac. ii. Scord. Alveor. Apum Aesyp. an. ii.
Terebynth. venet. pic. Liquid. an. iss. Bacc. Laur. Staphis acr. Cumyn. Pyreth.
an. ss. Stercor. Caprin. Ovil. Anser. an. iii. Axung. porc. saev. Caprin.
Cervin. Vrsin. an. i. Ol. Camomel. Lilior. Cer. an. q. s. fiat Emplastrum. Empl.


Another.
. Serapin. iiii. Gum. Ammoniac. iiii. Empl.
Bdell. Galban. an. i. Euphorb. iii. solventur omnia in Spirit. vini. q. s.
tunc add Ol. Lilior. Amigdal. dulc. an. i. Cer. alb. ii. pulv. Rad. Breon ss.
misce, fiat Empl.

The concrete matter being softened it is next to be discust by Resolves.
The Concrete Matter being softened, our next Work is to endeavor its
Dissolution; and this is performed by Resolving Medicines, which are of three
sorts, as being mild, strong, and strongest. Amongst the first are reckoned
Figs, Calves Dung, Honey and Lilies, and many others. Amongst the second, are
Bean-Meal, Barley, Meal of Lupines, Linseed, Fenugreek-seed, and the like. And
for the third are reckoned Pigeons Dung, Goats Dung, Goose Dung, or Sheeps
Dung mixed with Honey, and so applied in form of a Cataplasm, which will answer
Expectation. Amongst the Compound Resolving Medicines you may please to take in
these following.

Resolving Emplasters.
Resolveing medicines.
. Ficuum Alb. immatur. i. Amigdal. amar. Bdell. an. i. farin. fabar. ss.
decoct. Camomel. and Malv. an. q: s. fiat Empl. Emollicus.

An Emollient and Resolving Empl.
Another.
. Lil. alb. Rad. ii. Stercor. Caprar. Ovium Nasturtii. Rad. Cucummer. Asinin.
an. ii. cum Axung. Taxi caeteris. contusis and contritis, fiat Empl.

Another.
Another.
. Rad. Filic. Asphodel. Ebul. an. iiii. coquantur in vino generoso, his add
Sulphur. vic. i. agitentur in mortario and fiat Empl.

Another.
. Gum. Ammoniac. aceto solut. and colat. iss. Diachyl. magn. Ircat. ii. Empl.
de great. Dei i. Terebynth. venet. ss. pulv. Hermodactylor. ii. m. fiat Empl.

Another both Emollient and Discutient.
. Farin hord. Lupinor. an. ss. Farin. Sem. Lin. Faenugraec. an. ii. Another.
Ammoniac. Bdell Galban. solut. in aceto and colat. an. ss. mel. opt. iii.
Stercor. Columbin. and Bubuli an. iiss. Succ. Ebul. iiss. Axung. Porcin vi.
misce, fiat Empl.

Another.
. Synap. Sem. Vrtic. Sulphur. Spum. Marin. Aristoloch. rotund. Bdell. an. i.
Another;
Ammoniac. Ol. Antiqu. an. ii. Diachyl. cum Gummi iss. misce, fiat Empl.

Paraeus says, that Empl. de Ranis cum in this case is very proper. I am sure
being mixed as it ought with Diachylon cum Gemmi Empl. de Mucilaginib. and a
little Gum Ammoniacum and Galbanum, it will resolve most excellently.

Empl. Dr. Bruni pro Strumis.
. Picis liquid. Ol. Antiqu. fim. Columbin. Alumin. Roch. Rad. Cappar. Axung.
Porcin. an. parts aequales, fiat Empl. Empl.


Or another of his is this.
. Sem. Faenugraec. ii. Sal. Nitr. ss. uniantur cum melle and fiat Empl. Empl.


Another.
. Sal. Ammoniac. Lithargye. Aur. Ceruss. an. i. Galban. Opoponac. an. iiii.
Sem. Synap. ss. Ol. veter. iii. Cerae Terebynth. an. i. acet. q. s. fiat Empl.

Thus much may serve for Emollients and Resolving Medicines, every of which is
very proper and effectual in its place and due application. But since we have
seen some Strumaes which have been very well treated by the best and most
proper of Medicines, and yet to little or no purpose; in such a case as this
Manual Operation is required, and where this is to be made use of, Manual
operation is sometimes required in curing Strumaes.
caution and skill ought to join together in the Operation: for since we find
that these incrassate and indurate Tumors do require Extirpation and
Extraction, so this also is to be so dexterously performed, as that no part be
left behind; which may either give occasion to a new Birth, or return of the
Disease, or the Disease renovate and renew by the remains that are left behind;
they being much like Galen's Ashes, the which being themselves warm, can
readily dispose of their heat to the neighboring parts, or as I may say, give
life to a second increase of these Swellings. Our greatest advice in the use of
the Knife is to have a particular and special care to the Vessels bordering
upon these parts, viz. The Nerves, Veins and Arteries, lest they being injured
hereby, may give too apparent signs of danger succeeding thereupon. For about
the Neck every Anatomist knows do lodge and are planted the Recurrent Nerves
appointed for the voice arising from the sixth pair, the Jugular Veins, and the
Carotid Arteries, all which do require the care and caution of the Operator.
Arnaldus de Villanovanus does therefore forbid the use of Incision as much as
in us lay, but when we are compelled and forced to make use thereof. Albucasis
gives us this Method, that is, When we find Strumous Tumors which are good
natured, and bears a kind disposition with them, whose color is not much
different from that of the Cutis, every way moveable, and no ways fixed or tied
to the Veins, Nerves or Arteries of the Neck, nor lodge so deep but that they
may be reached with ease here; and in such cases as this is, The Method thereof
thus shown.
we may begin our Dissection upwards, and so guide and trace our Knife to the
lower part of the Body thereof, then dilating the Lips, the Glands are to be
extracted with great care and caution, so as no Vessel whatsoever may be
injured by the Operation; and if any Flux of Blood may happen in this
Operation, it is presently to be stopped with Restrictives; and this method is to
be prosecuted till every part of the Cistus, or Bags thereof are perfectly and
thoroughly eradicated and extracted; the which being done, and the part clean,
mundifie the Ulcer, digest, incarn, and then induce a Cicatrice. And thus we
have given you a Draught of curing Strumaes, or King-Evil-Swellings: To all
which methods, if they will be so rebellious as not to yield, there is no other
hope left of Cure but by the Hands of our Sacred Majesty, whom God preserve,
that he may live many years to exercise this Healing Faculty.

FINIS.
AN Elenchus Of the Things contained in The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
Diverse Countries allowed diverse Diseases. English Diseases. England very
prolifique in producing Diseases. Diseases from the Mothers Womb. Several
Reasons to confirm the Assertion.
CHAP. II.
The Kings Evil a Distemper of the Age. Its proper Name by Authors. The Authors
Opinion of this Disease, and his Definition thereof. What this Struma is, or
the King's Evil Swelling. Phlegm a great Agent hereof. It allowed a moveable
Constitution. Looseness of parts a great Favourer of Strumaes. Looseness and
Moisture two inseparable Companions in our Bodies.
CHAP. III.
Several Differences of Strumaes. The manner of their Birth. The Patients
Strength or Weakness gives another difference. Another difference drawn from
its times. Different in their Magnitude. Different in their Nature. Different
in their Place and Mobility. Different in their Origination and Number. What
Glandula is, and why so called. What Nodus or Ganglion. What Lippitudo or
Sclerophthalmia. What Bronchochele, and whence it is derived. What Atheroma and
Steatoma are. What Meliceris and Bubo are. What Testudo and Botium are. What
Spina Ventosa and Cancer are. The Evils proper Names according to its proper
places where it enters in several parts of the Body.
CHAP. IV.
The Antecedent Causes of Strumaes. Inequality and Disproportion of Nutriment
another Cause. Defect of Animal and Natural Spirits another cause. The Purile
Age another cause hereof. Two other following causes hereof. Question and
Answer hereof. Another cause is, when Tumors by degrees do fall into the
Nervous parts from the External parts of the Head. Congestion of Humors
another cause. Phlegm another great cause hereof. Whether this Disease be
Hereditary, and so proves another cause. An Hereditary Disease twofold. Causes
on the Parents side for begetting the Disease. The Parents faults depending
upon the whole Body. Four Classes hereof. The Genital parts allowed proper
Agents hereof. Fluor Albus and Menstrues acting diversity of change in
Embryo's. Causes of this disease incident to children. Question and Answer
about the same. Air another main cause of this Disease. Meat and Drink, Rest
and Motion, other causes hereof. Sleeping and Waking other causes.
Preternatural Alterations in the Body other causes hereof. The whole Mass of
Blood preternaturally affected, another cause hereof. Old People not so subject
to this Disease as Youth. Why this Disease is so frequent in our three
Kingdoms. A common Disease either Original or Adventitious. Ireland a fruitful
place for producing Diseases. England as fruitful as Ireland. A Sedentary Life
another cause hereof. The French Pox no new Disease. The Scurvy proved a
Disease of long continuance. What the French Pox is. What the Scurvy is. How
both these agree with the Evil. Signs thereof, and the causes of the same.
CHAP. V.
One sign hereof is, that it is various in its appearance. It infects the
Glands whenever it enters them. Knotty Swellings and Excrescences another
sign. A material sign of such who are troubled with this Disease. Another sign
from their sight. Rogerius sign hereof. Signs hereof in Bergomy. Their
difference from Glandulae. Their signs shown by their hardness and inequality.
Signs of Strumaes in Women's Breasts. Signs of their being bred from Viscid and
Crude Diet. Signs from their Quantity, Quality and Essence. Signs from their
Multiplicity. General signs hereof. Signs of their flying out again. Signs of
Benign Strumaes. Strumaes are reckoned amongst Aedematous Tumors. Signs of
Malign Strumaes. Signs of Strumaes as well in genere as in specie.
CHAP. VI.
Signs of Strumaes or Kings-Evil-Swellings. This Disease being Natural is
dangerous. Small and superfluous Strumaes are more healthful and easy to cure.
The more early they begin, the more dangerous in their cure. The Natural
Strumaes harder to cure than those which come by the error of Nurses or
Mothers. Those which the Infant brings from its Mothers Womb, harder to cure
than those which happen by Air, etc. General Presages of Strumaes. Such as do
live to the consistence of the Disease do escape the danger thereof. The French
Pox makes the cure of Strumaes incurable. The Scurvy retards their cure also.
All Strumaes do not suspend the hopes of cure. No Strumous Tumor to be easily
cured. Where they happen without pain, not easily extirpated. Strumous People
generally of a moist Constitution. The general places of their being and
growth. Outward Strumaes the forerunners of Inward Glandules. Pain sometimes,
and a hot Imposthume joined to them. Purging Potions and the like very proper
in curing Strumaes. Children for the most part herewith afflicted. Strumous
Tumors seldom or never give way to Medicine. Incision of Strumaes as much as
may be avoided. Those sooner cured which are Pendulous, than the fixed.
Cancerated Strumaes bring danger of Hemorrhagy being cured by Incision. An
Erroneous Constitution requires particular Preservation.
CHAP. VII.
The Practical Curative Method of Curing Strumaes. Reason and Experience the
Ground of Practice. Our Chyrurgical Art first designed for the Health of
Mankind. The Essence of the Disease to be chiefly minded. All Causes of
Diseases to be removed. The Preparation of Humors the first thing indicated.
Such as nourish and of easy digestion, are most agreeable to the Patient.
Gentle Evacuations are here very useful. Alterent Medicines do very much
correct this Strumous Disease. Timing of diseases very material as to their
cure. Directions for giving of Preparatives. Three Heads as to the cure of
Strumaes. Several Humors to be severally Treated. The peccant Matter to be
expurged. General Rules as touching the Patients Institution of Life.
Directions as to Bleeding, and Opinions as touching Vomits. Rules to be
followed as touching the Patients Diet. Immoderate Motion very hurtful to
Children. Directions as touching the Air. What Diet most proper for
Scrophulated Persons. Simple and compound Preparatives, as Decoctions, Potions,
etc. Purging Potitions, Bolus, Trochisks, Pills used in Strumaes. Several
Purging Pills very useful in Strumous Effects. Several other Pills and Powders
here necessary. Decoctions, Potions, Purging Confections here also beneficial.
Purging Electuaries, etc. Specifique Powders very useful in Strumous Cases.
Specifique Powders, Opiate, and Decoction also here useful. A Specifique
Decoction, Pills, and Bolus. The Surgeons Duty as to the outward parts. The
method to be used if these Swellings do tend to Suppuration. Several
suppurating Cataplasms and Emplasters. When properly to use Emollient and
Discussive Medicines. Emollient Unguents proper in Strumous Effects. Several
Emollient Emplasters. The concrete Matter being softened, it is next to be
discust by Resolving Medicines. Some Resolving Medicines proposed. Several
other Resolving Medicines shown. Manual Operation sometimes required in curing
of Strumaes. The Method thereof plainly discovered.
Charisma Basilicon, OR, The Royal Gift of Healing STRUMAES, OR King's Evil,
Swellings by Contact, or Imposition of the Sacred Hands of our Kings of England
and of France, given them at their Inaugurations.

Showing the Gift its self, and its continued use, Declaring all persons healed
hereby, without any respect either to their Age, Sex, Temper, or Constitution*
with the Manner, Form, and Ceremonies thereof, and diverse General Rules for the
meanest Capacity to find out the Disease. The best expedient to prevent poor
People from unnecessary Journeys. The whole concluded with above Sixty
admirable Cures, performed with, and without Gold; by His Majesty's
Benediction; by his late Majesty's precious Blood, and the like.

Written by JOHN BROWN, Surgeon in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Datur alteri Gratia Sanitatum in eodem spiritu.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Lowndes, over against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand.
1684.

TO THE Right HONORABLE AND Right Reverend Father in God, NATHANIEL, Lord
Bishop of Durham, AND Clerk of the Closet to His MAJESTY.
My Lord,
SInce our Minds do naturally hunt after knowledge of Novelties, and scarce
rest satisfied with the present state of things, (such being the boundless
limits of our Conceptions): Man is generally seen to measure the length of his
Age by the fathom of his Knowledge: Judgment being as the President over all
his Actions, whilst Sense and Motion becomes the two Interpreters of his will
and pleasure. As History therefore is ever allowed the most proper direction
for the Life of Man, and Learning accounted the only Treasure which can enrich
his Mind: The one better teaching by example than Precept; the other making
fuller Discoveries of Men's Lives and Actions. If the actions therefore of
Princes may be granted the subjects of History, sure this of Healing ought to
take place, where it is not only to be recorded as History barely, but deserves
registring amongst the most Divine Gifts, and Eminent Qualifications of their
Majestic Virtues.

Amongst the best and greatest of which Worthies, I shall presume to present
this Healing Virtue of our Dread Sovereigns, in which action he appears as the
Soul to the Body; and is seen to maintain his three Nations in Health as well
as Peace: as Nature does rule in her humane Empire with three Faculties, for as
her Animal, Vital, and Natural Faculties are kept up and preserved by their
Nerves, Arteries and Veins, by which Mankind shows both his Motion, Sense and
Life: So whosoever considers the daily Blessings our three Kingdoms do receive
from his Sacred Majesty, must necessarily be convinced, That as the animal
Faculties lodge in his Royal Head, which gives that sense to every affair we
prosecute, so his Sacred Hands are sweetened with that sacred Salutiferous gift
of Healing, which both supports the Body Politic, and keeps up the Denizens
and Subjects thereof in vigor and courage.

And if we can give Faith to the virtues of inanimate Elements and Vegetables,
as Stones, Herbs, Plants, and the like, what shall we allow the Living Stones
of the Church, our Kings and Queens, its Nursing Fathers and Mothers, where we
shall find both their hands most admirably qualified? In whose right Hands are
the Nerves and Sinews of the Church and State, which gives them that decent
Form, orderly Motion, and admirable Discipline we see them enjoy. In their
Left, we see the life and spirit of the three Nations supported and preserved
by their miraculous Gifts of Healing: and as the first established them the
Defenders of the Faith, the second confirmed them the Preservers of their
People: The one displaying the Royal Emblems of their sacred Piety and Justice:
The other engraving the Remarks of their sovereign Clemency and Charity. The
former, making the whole World pay Veneration and Reverence to our English
Kings, and their Royal Names: The later, illustrating with wonder the sacred
Riches of their Divine Natures: Their Royal power manifesting their Majesty,
and this sovereign Gift of Healing, their higher Rays of Divinity. And as one
does administer Order and Peace, which gives life and being to Devotion; so the
other brings health and ease, which keeps up Society, and makes Communication
flourish in a Nation.

As Nature therefore, the Mistress of Society, does evermore prefer public
before private Good, and Man was born for conversation sake; so by the stream
of Duty, I have presumed to Elect your Lordship as the best Patron of this
Treatise, Entitled, The Royal Gift of Healing. Where if Congruity makes
Dedication bear correspondence with Design, I Am sure I am very happy in my
choice, if Your Lordship will grant me the freedom of my Election; Where
although I begin the show of my Devotion with a mean Sacrifice, wrought up by
an unskilful hand, yet I hope your Honor will not measure my good will by the
value of the Present, but by the brightness of your own Goodness, who are a
great Master of Excellent Learning, Religious Life, and Pious Conversation. My
Lord, The eminent and well-deserved place your Honor enjoys in the Kings
presence, as well as in his Princely and Royal Palace, being Clerk to the
Closet of his Sacred Majesty, does not only place you near your Sovereign, but
puts you at his Right hand, by whose clean hands the Royal Gold which is used
at our daily Healings, is presented to our Sacred Majesty. And this makes you
as great a Judge as Observer of these his wonderful and miraculous Cures so
frequently made good by his Sacred Hands: the which as they have been infinite
in number, so ought they to be accounted miraculous in their Nature. Your
Lordship has been a sufficient witness hereof, and can justify the Effects
and Events of the same to all the World. But lest I may seem tedious to your
Honor, well knowing the minutes of Great Men are Sacred, and not to be invaded
by every little Address, I commit the ensuing Discourse it self (whereof I
claim nothing to my self but the Faults) to Your Honorable Patronage, Begging
pardon for my presumption and lapses, humbly presuming to write my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient and faithful Servant, John Brown.

To the Reader.
Kind Reader,
IN this I have given thee the first onset, who might otherwise well wonder
to see me so suddenly again in Print; (the truth is, I cannot well blame thee)
Perhaps thou, like some others, may think me vainglorious; as also suppose
that I pretend to know, that I may be publicly known in Writing. But assure
thy self, the Vanity of the Writer shall never poison the Nation with his
Winter Endeavors, nor give Mankind the trouble of a Fly with any more of his
Summer Undertakings.

The Matter hereof, however mean it is, I call it my own. And although others
may refresh themselves with the sweet Flowers of Rhethorick, or please their
fancies with the gaiety of its smell; or satisfy their humors with the
beautiful Tapestry of its Figure or make: yet whoever shall lend this a few
hours Reading, will find this mean Production to be the Issue of an elaborate
Endeavor. Wherein although I have shown my last Follies to the Worlds
diversion, if my Zeal, or public Respect made me so apparently idle, I hope
the Ingenuous will with better Candor pardon my rashness. And although it
cannot be denied that I have been as great a Scribler in Surgery, as almost
any of my Time and Age, yet I have this as my Guard, I never yet Writ or
Published any thing, which did not bear my own Name: Neither was this ever
purchased by the easy terms of Familiarity, but forced from me by the strong
hand of importunity, or desired by the venerable and just demand of such
Nobility as were able to give Life to its intended design, and shelter to the
work it self: I being never tickled hereto by the itch of Printing, or puffed up
with the public desire of Ostentation, but readily yielding a generous
obeisance to universal conversation, as well as satisfying some Friends, who
put me upon this work in my own deffence; not miserably attackt, or drawn
thereto by the blind guids of Self-interest, and common Fame, the two general
Harlots of our present age.

The Truth is, in all my Books which ever yet saw Print, I never had the
happiness of Reading by another Man's Eye, or turning over my Books by another
Man's Hand, but without any kind of assistance (but what I purchased by no mean
endeavor from Authority) of mutual Physical help, or Chyrurgical cooperation;
so that this may serve as a Salve to cure the Men of little Thoughts, as
touching others. And amongst the rest, they may, if they will give themselves
the trouble to Read all the Books I have writ, by the style of the Penning, as
well as the method of the Matter, with ease, see that they all had but one
Father, which any honest Man, void of prejudice, may convince himself of, and
every one else, but he that wears Spectacles, which are made of contradictory
metal.

And since my skill for some late years past, has been questioned, as touching
this Disease; and my Judgment thereof has met with many uncivil rubb by some
of our Profession (although I cannot say many) my thoughts thereof might well have
cooled, and my resolutions chilled, had I not with new supply taken up fresh
courage to out-brave the spleen and malice of these desperate Opponents. But
since I am obliged to give the world some reason for this my so ready
appearance again in Print, to make good my former Assertion, Necesse est ut
aliquid haereat; and indeed to prevent any longer looking asquint, and lessen
the mean Thoughts I have purchased, I like a good natured Fellow, have taken
this task upon me, to demonstrate the Symptomatical appearances of the EVIL,
that every Man may see I am not afraid to appear for the Evil Cause, that is,
to show all the apparent Causes of the Evil in public, more fully than has
hitherto been shown; And since I have taken this public resolution, I am as
ready to defend the same, if I be at any time hereafter forced thereto by such
Men of our Profession, who must be better satisfied.

And because I would not have this Treatise of the Evil march abroad without
having its parts first viewed and examined, and see what shape it bears in the
World, as well as Figure, that it may not appear monstrous evil, I have
presumed the Favor as well as the Honor* to get my Brother Mr. James Molins,
one of His Majesty's Chyrurgeons, a Man of as great Reason and Judgment, as of
Art and Experience to look into, and trace this Discourse all over in its Three
Parts, before I designed it should see the Light, whose approbation thereof
with the most eminent of the College, and His Majesty's Physicians; as also
His chief Chyrurgeons, the which they have allowed by their Hands thereto, has
given Reputation enough to its Passport, and is a sufficient Defense against
all such who may be so evilly minded to Treat it ill upon the account of the
Author only. But lest I may be thought to write with Vinegar instead of Ink, I
come now to the subject Matter it self, etc.

But now to the Matter it self. When this Royal Gift of Healing does present
its self: I hope its Name bearing Majesty in its first Front, continued and
maintained by many Ages of Princes, will be Argument enough to bless my
Undertaking, and require your calm acceptance.

And as our Blessed Savior, his Apostles, and good Men in former Ages enjoyed
a Healing Virtue, as well as other Divine Qualifications, of Prophesying,
casting out Devils, and the like; all which were transmitted to their
Successors: So whosoever considers both the length as well as the strength of
their Divine Qualifications, may likewise see, that as they abated in their
number, so they lessened in their nature and appearance. And since I have tract
the steps of most Fathers, and shown the Gifts of the Apostles and Holy Men, I
shall begin next with Edward the Confessor, the first Undertaker of this great
Work in our English Nation, known from the others of his Name by the Sacred
Titles of Saint and Confessor. Of whom so much has already been writ, and that
with no sparing Pen of his praise, that I should but appear idle to live long
on it. In the Discourse I begin with him as the first Curer of Struma's, by
Contact or Imposition of Hands. The Design thereof, presents you with the
Origination of the Gift of Healing proved, in which are delineated both its
definition, and its efficient Cause, Man being allowed the Instrument, and his
Maker the Agent. In it are shown various Cures performed by diversity of Hands,
as by the Apostles and good Christians; with the difference between Nature and
Miracle, and the frequent use of these Miracles, even to the 600 year of our
blessed Savior, proved and made good by History and Authority.

Where Kings and Queens also, as Nursing Fathers and Mothers, have been always
thus qualified with this Sanative Virtue ever since the Confessor, and England
proved to have evermore kept up the same in the Regal Line, long before any
other Prince or Potentate whatever. And although the French King does Cure by
Contact, yet he derived the same from the English by Sprig of Right, and he
must evermore account our English Monarchs the eldest Brothers thereof,
confirmed by History, and made good by example, both which received this
salutiferous Gift with their just Rights to the Crown, confirmed and made good
to them at their Inaugurations. In this Treatise also you have the Chyrurgeons
Duty laid down, who discovers the Disease by examining the same, by whom
Certificates of the Sick People are to be taken in, and Tickets delivered out
to them. Herein is also shown a ready method for easing the Diseased of their
tedious journeys, and a present remedy of sending them back: He brings them to
His Majesty on his Knee, and delivers every sick Person to the Kings Sacred
Hand to be Touched. The next concerned is the Clerk of His Majesty's Closset,
and Chaplains, the First presenting the Gold to the King, the other Reading the
Ceremonies and Prayers appointed for this purpose; in all which is shown the
great Charity, Piety, Clemency, and Humility of our Dread Sovereign; the
admirable effects and wonderful events of His Royal Cure, throughout all
Nations, where not only English, Dutch, Scotch and Irish have reaped Ease and
Cure, but French, Germans, and all Countries whatsoever, far and near, have
abundantly seen and received the same; and none ever hitherto, I am certain
mist thereof, unless their little Faith and Incredulity starved their Merits,
or they received His Gracious Hand for curing another Disease, which was not
really evermore allowed to be cured by him: And as bright evidences hereof I
have presumed to offer, that some have immediately upon the very Touch been
cured; Others not so easily quitted from their Swellings, till the favor of a
Second repetition thereof Some also losing their Gold, their Diseases have
seized them afresh, and no sooner have these obtained a Second Touch, and new
Gold, but their Diseases have been seen to vanish, as being afraid of His
Majesty's Presence; wherein also have been cured many without Gold; and this
may contradict such who must needs have the King give them Gold as well as his
Touch, supposing one invalid without the Gift of both. Others seem also as
ready for a Second Change of Gold, as a Second Touch, whereas their First being
newly strung upon a White Ribond, may work as well (by their Favor.) The tying
the Almighty to set times, and particular days, is also another great fault of
those who can by no means be brought to Believe, but at Good Friday, and the
like particular seasons, this Healing faculty is of more vigor and efficacy
than at any other time, although performed by the same Hand. As to the giving of
Gold, this only shows His Majesty's Royal Well-wishes toward the Recovery of
those who come thus to be Healed. This Gold being hereat given as a Token of
His Sacred Favor, and Pledge of His best desires for them.

In this Treatise also you have the marvelous and miraculous efficacy of the
Blood of our late Sacred Martyr King CHARLES the First; wherein by strange
Examples are discovered this efficacious Virtue of Healing, by many true
Devoters of His Great Name, the which, although stripped of its Life, yet not robbed
of its vigor, made good by many, who collected the same in Linen, and applying
thereof to their Scrophulous Swellings, by which they found immediate ease, and
present relief. His very Prayers alone miraculously working and effecting the
same in the time of His Troubles; and this also made good by eminent Authority.

The Reasons of their Ceremony and their Use, serving only as Prayers, and
giving of Thanks for the Sick, and their Recovery; these being nearer akin to
the Solemnity, than assistant to the Cure, the bare Hands and Prayers of our
Kings effecting the same to a Miracle; the which Sanative Gift has for above
640 years, been confirmed and continued in our English Princely Line, wherein
is not so much of their Majesty shown, as of their Divinity, considering the
Liturgy thereat used is Holy; the Reverence of the Ceremonies performed with
all Decency; he that exercises it being thereto called by Divine appointment:
The Author of the whole Work being the Holy Ghost, and the Gift thence arising:
Where God is only Worshipped, His Holy Son Venerated; The King thus Sacredly
Gifted, and His poor and diseased Subjects perfectly cured; where no difference
is made between Peer and Peasant, delicate or deformed, not acted in the dark,
but in the face of His People, in His Royal Palace, and places appointed for
Divine Worship, in his Masters Temple; where the Holy Spirit meets His Sacred
Hand, and sweetens the same with its Sanative Virtue. In the consummating
therefore of the whole, you have the variety of Opinions shown about this
Curative method; concluding the same with many Historical Illustrations of
strange Cures performed by their Sacred Prayers, Touch, Blood, and the like.

And now although this rich lading has been hitherto hid from the public view of
the curious Eyes of strangers, and never as yet saw the face of Day, till
unhappily pusht forward by my mean Pen; I have presumed to offer it as
necessary, that this Princely Vail might no longer be kept over our Nations,
but that all the World may admire our English Isle, and have the most Venerable
and Sacred Thoughts of her Mighty Monarchs, who thus can banish Diseases by
their Touch, and heal the Country Infirmities by their Sacred Hands. I hope
this small labor will get so much kindness in the World as to raise Men of
greater parts to polish and refine this Discourse, which appears as it were a
Chaos, or indigested lump; If its greatness of Cures be not sufficient to make
it pass current, I hope the certainty of its reality may advance it, having
taken what is herein writ from the infallible testimony of mine Eyes, in a
great part, the which, although perhaps they may not be allowed the quickest
sight, yet they have several times had the Honor and Advantage of reiterating
their speculations, as to these His Majesty's Healings. And if he which vieweth
a long time, although his Sight may not be of the best, yet does commonly see
more, than he that looks hastily, be his Eyes never so good: so I who for
several years have had the opportunity of seeing, as well as the late Honor of
Waiting at these great Solemnities, have certainly seen as much as I write, and
can confirm the same with more certainty, although with less Eloquence. And where
you meet other Authorities, you meet their Names in the same line with their
own observations; about which also I have been as careful to take the valuable
measures of Truth, as the Worth and Quality of the Contributers.

And now kind Reader, if thou do detest Anarchy, and expect to share in the
good of this Blessing, acknowledge thy own happy Nation and present Government,
where our present Bliss, and English Interests are safely wrapped up in the
safety of our Prince, as well as in our Religion; where its Dissenters are
daily seen to crumble into Atoms, and its Churches Enemies so cowardized, as
not daring to tread any longer on English ground; where the greatest Sects are
found shifting themselves under diverse marks, ashamed of their own Follies, and
frightened by their own inconstancies. Let every Loyal Subject therefore, (for
with any of the Canting Tribe, I hope this will never get favor) offer public
Thanks and Prayers for His Majesty's Sacred Health and miraculous Preservation,
who Cures not only His Subjects, but Preserves also His Three Kingdoms in
Peace, Order, and Tranquillity; under whom I may presume to conclude, That
England does enjoy as many more Benefits and Blessings, than ever Rome did
suffer Miseries and Calamities under the greatest Tyrant.

Vale. From my House at Charing Cross.
THE THIRD BOOK, In which are Ten Chapters contained.
Chap. 1. This shows whether there be any Gift of Healing. Chap. 2. What this
Gift is, when and how often used. Chap. 3. Whether Diseases curable or
incurable. Chap. 4. How long it has been in use. Chap. 5. All Persons cured
hereby without any respect to their Age, Sex, Temper, or Constitution. Chap. 6.
This shows it a particular Gift to the Kings of England and of France. Chap. 7.
The manner and form thereof. Chap. 8. The certainty of its Cure, and its
admirable Effects. Chap. 9. This does resolve several Doubts about the same.
Chap. 10. Several miraculous Cures performed by His Majesty's Sacred Hand.
AN ELENCHUS Of the things contained in
CHAP. I.
THe Origination of this Method of Healing proved. Whether every one may
pretend to this Gift. Christ the first Author of Healing. These words explained,
They shall lay their hands on the Sick, and they shall recover. Whether
Apostles after Christ had this Gift of Healing.

CHAP. II.
The Definition of this Gift. Its Origination and Duration proved. The frequent
use thereof. Gods assisting hand gives perfection to the Cure. The efficient
cause of Healing. Whether this be inherent in Man or derivative from God. Man
the Instrument, God the Agent.
CHAP. III.
Apostles and good Christians allowed to Cure Diseases in former Times. This
Disease allowed Natural. The difference between Nature and Miracle, shown by
St. Augustine.
CHAP. IV.
Its long continuance proved in the Church, out of the Testimonies of various
considerable Authorities. St. Augustin's miraculous way of Curing, declared by
Possidoneus, a little before St. Augustin's death. Frequency of Miracles to the
600 Year of Christ, proved by History, etc. Some Cures wrought in the Church
after the time of Gregory. St. Augustin's, and others Miracles refuted. The
Diuturnity of Miracles, proved by Authority both of Ancients and Moderns.
CHAP. V.
Pious Men enjoyed this Gift of Healing, proved by Gregory. Fallacies, and
Cheats, Impostures, Witchcrafts, and calling up lewd Spirits to procure Cures.
If any Miracle wrought, this is to be attributed to the truth of the Church.
CHAP. VI.
Out of diverse places of Scripture, Kings and Queens as Nursing Fathers and
Mothers, thus qualified. Diverse Gifts given unto Men, but peculiar Gifts to
Kings and Queens only. Of the Gifts of the Kings and Queens of England. Edward
the Confessor, the first Curer of Struma's, or Evil. The French Kings endued
with the same Gift. The French had this Gift, after the Kings of England. Our
Dread Sovereign does excel his Predecessors herein. This Gift given him at his
Inauguration.
CHAP. VII.
The Chirurgions duty to examine the Evil, so commonly called, to take
Certificates, deliver out Tickets, and make ready for the Healing. The
Ceremonies thereof laudable, How the King touches, and How he puts over the
Gold.
A Recital of the Prayers and Services. The Piety, Charity, Clemency, and
Humility of the King shown in the Operation.
CHAP. VIII.
The admirable Effects and Events of His Majesty's Cure. Many strumous people
Healed, coming from all parts. Whether all are cured by His Majesty's Sacred
Touch. The reason of such who are not Cured thereby. Some not Cured by His
Majesty's first Touch, who upon the second have been perfectly Healed. Others
upon selling or losing their Gold, their Distemper has seized them afresh.
Those upon his Majesty's second Touch have been healed again. The Touching upon
Good Friday, a foolish belief only that it should have any greater efficacy
than at other Times. Many Cured without Gold given; this showing that Gold is
not the great Ingredient. A very great folly of some, insisting upon the Change
of His Majesty's Gold at their second Touch. Some Cured by his late Majesty's
precious Blood, having rubbed their Evil swellings therewith, with either
Handkerchiefs, or other Linen distained with the same. The imposition of the
Gold over the sick folks Necks, is only as a well-wishing of Health to the
Sick, and does declare His Majesty's Royal Charity to them who come to be
Healed. The Reading the Scriptures used at this Ceremony, relates to a
B^nediction for the Recovery of the Sick who thus do come to be Healed.
CHAP. IX.
Diverse Men of various Opinions as touching this. Ill affected Men, and
Dissenters, are of too little Faith to believe this Sanative Power. The whole
Ceremony used for the Recovery of the Sick.
CHAP. X.
This Concludes the whole, with about 70 wonderful and miraculous Cures,
performed by His Majesty's Sacred Hands.
THE Royal Gift of Healing.
CHAP. I. The Origination of this Healing Method proved.
THat England has her particular Diseases, as well as any other Country or
Nation whatsoever, is so great a Truth, that no considerate Man can deny. And
to view those many Distempers which have lately crept into the World
(altogether unknown to the Ancients) especially with us in Europe; as the
French Pox, Scurvy, Rickets, Struma's, or Kings Evil, Swellings so commonly
called, may well put a strange Face upon the Earth: Their proper Reasons and
Causes being as yet locked up from Humane Understanding. The truth is, whether
these do happen by vicissitudes of Things, Sins of the People, ill Habits, or
worse Constitutions, we cannot so easily satisfy. Sure I am, Sin is as great a
procurer of this, as it is of any of the former Diseases; for we daily see it
sporting its self slighly under several Disguises to afflict the Sons of Men.

But having in my former Treatises been more large as touching this, I shall
presume, with hopes to offer, that there is no Christian so void of Religion
and Devotion, as to deny a Gift of Healing: A Truth as clear as the Sun,
continued and maintained by a continual Line of Christian Kings and Governors,
fed and nourished with the same Christian Milk, which Divine Healing Faculty
did arise from the first time of Christianity, having thence been derived from
the great God of Heaven and Earth.

Hence may we presume to take a view, and behold the great Monarch implanting
Sovereign Dignity on his Earthly Majesty; giving him his Laws, making him his
Vicegerent, guarding his Tongue, preserving his Lips, blessing his Hands with
this Salutiferous Gift, and defending his Body from outward Injuries and
private Plottings. Thus we read, Prove. 16. Divination lodges in the Kings
lips, in Judgment shall not his mouth err, much less his heart, which is
governed and directed by the Almighty: For as the division of Waters, so is the
heart of the King in the hand of the Lord. And in another place, where there is
plenty of Wisdom, it appears as the health of the Nation, much more in a wise
King, as the Foundation and Basis of his People: For we are daily Witnesses of
those great and Divine favors which are transmitted from above to his Sacred
Majesty, ever denied to his Subjects, as being too High and Holy for their
reach and capacity. Thus Nature her self does by a Chain of Causes carry us up
to the acknowledgment of a Deity, by bringing every thinking Man to an Original
of every successful Individual by course of Generation.

And as to this great Gift of Healing, peculiarly given to his Gracious
Majesty's Royal hand, by the reception of the Holy Oil which at his
Inauguration he made use of, and which entitled him the Sovereign of our
Nation. Where I shall further satisfy, that England and France, as to their
Kings, had the honor of receiving this Holy Oil with their Sacred Titles, they
being generally anointed in three parts, as has been well noted. As first, on
their Heads, to signify their Glory: Next, on their Breasts, to show their
Sanctity; and then on their Arms, to denote their Power. And from hence did
arise the three equalizing Fames given to them, of being Holy, Sacred, and
Divine. And from those early days, whose Power and Sanctity was ever given to
their Sacred Persons; such Person whosoever should dare to strike upon the
Sacred Ground on which they did tread, should lose his hand for this his
presumption. And amongst the rest of his Divine Favors bestowed upon him, let
this Sanative Faculty amongst all Mankind, be reckoned one, which does denote
both his Right, Title and Merit, and as a second Gift given from Heaven, by
those many Thousands cured by him since his happy Restoration; and this
acknowledged not only by the Persons themselves who have been thus Cured, but
by relation of Physicians and Chirurgions, and others throughout his universal
Realms and Dominions: all which in a great measure does declare his excellent
Charity which sweetens the Gift, as also his Piety and Clemency in granting
poor Souls his Sacred and ready Touch.

We come now to prove the Origination of a Healing Faculty, The Origination of
Healing proved.
and this is proved out of Corinth. 1. c. 12. v. 8, 9, 10. For to one is given
by the Spirit the word of Wisdom: To another, the word of Knowledge by the same
Spirit: To another Faith by the same Spirit: To another the gift of Healing by
the same spirit: To another the working of Miracles: To another Prophecy: To
another the discerning of Spirits: To another diverse Gifts of Tongues: To
another the interpretation of Tongues. And this Scripture alone is enough to
prove a Gift of Healing.

The next Question which hence will arise, is, Whether every one may pretend to
this Gift.
Whether every one may pretend to this Gift, or whether it be distributive to
all persons at all times, and in all places? And this is as readily answered as
the former: For when our Savior ascended up into Heaven, he gave Gifts unto
men; as to some the Gift of Wisdom, to some the Gift of Knowledge, to some
Faith, and to others the Gift of Healing, and the like. And as in this no Man
can affirm that he enjoys all the abovementioned Qualities, so cannot any Man
say that he is stripped of all.

In the first Face therefore of the Primitive Church, as an Orient Gem, or
Fulgent Adamant, did this Gift of Healing appear with splendour and admirable
Form, so that the Church was perfumed with its Divine Qualities, where was
Wisdom declaring her self amongst the Learned, whilst others did as readily
demonstrate their great Knowledge; some showing their Faith by their Works,
others curing the Sick and the Lame: And whilst some lent the World the
sweetness of their Discourse, others as readily Prophesified of things to come.
And thus according to their variety of Gifts, they had diversity of Names given
them: some being called Apostles, some Doctors, and others Prophets: some
excelling in Virtue, others as richly qualified in this Gift of Healing. Thus
when poor indigent Souls had sought out Remedy from Physicians in vain, God in
his own time sent them ease by the assistance of his Holy Spirit, and made
those rebellious Diseases which scorned Medicine, and trampled on the best of
Remedies composed by the wisest Physician and most able Surgeon, in a moment
yield to Gods command, and retreat at His Majesty's Sacred Touch.

And might there any Question arise about the first Physician which cured by
Touch, the Answer is very ready: Christ the first Author of Healing.
The first and last, the best and greatest Recoverer of all Diseases is our
Savior Christ: For he ascended into Heaven, and gave gifts unto men: He past
through Galilee and its neighboring Nations, curing those which were oppressed
with evil Spirits, the which he discharged from them by his Virtue, and the
Holy Spirit; and not only these, but such as were troubled with the Palsy,
Leprosy, Lunacy, etc. Incurable by others, as you may see Luke 6. and Matthew.
6. v. 14, 15, 16. When Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wifes
mother laid sick of a fever; and he touched her hand, and the fever left her:
and she arose and ministered unto them. And when the evening was come, they
brought him many possessed with devils, and he cast out the evil spirit with
his word, and healed all that were sick. And all this done without the help of
Pharmacy, or composition of Medicine, for he cured by his own Virtue.

Matthew. 19. and 21. v. 14.
And he departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts beyond Judea beyond
Jordan, and great multitudes followed him, Matthew. 21.
and he healed them: and the blind and the lame came to him in the Temple, and
he healed them. Acts and Luke 6. 5.12.
And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold, a man full of the
Leprosy, who seeing Jesus, fell on his face, saying, Lord, if thou will thou
can make me clean; and he put out his hand and touched him, saying, I will,
be thou clean, and immediately the Leprosy departed from him. All which does
declare the brightness and clearness of our blessed Saviors curing and healing
of poor Souls.

Whether Apostles and Religious men had this Gift of Healing.
We next proceed to Apostles and pious Men, where may arise this Question
(Whether this Healing Faculty was transmitted to them?) It is without all
contradiction that there were twelve which did share therein: But whether
others arising from them had this Gift conferred to them, and so transmitted to
their Successors, will thus appear, from their being called into Society with
them, Matthew. 10. v. 8. Thus, When he called unto him his twelve disciples, he
gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all
manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases. Acts 5. Heal the sick, cleanse
the lepers, raise the dead. And that which gives greater light to this Answer,
is, That not only Peter, and Paul, and John, the sons of Zebedee were thus
qualified, but the other Apostles also; and by the hands of the Apostles were
many signs and wonders done amongst the people. And Mark 6. v. 7.13. And there
came a multitude out of the cities round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick
folk, and they were healed. And he called unto him the twelve, and sent them
forth two by two, and gave them power over unclean spirits, and they anointed
with oil many that were sick, and healed them. God Almighty* did wonderful
works by the hands of Paul at his coming to Ephesus, so that from his Body were
brought unto the sick, handkerchiefs, and aprons, and their diseases departed
from them, v. 12. And that of Publius's Father laying sick of a Fever and
Disentery, Paul visiting him, Praying with him, and laying his hands on him, he
was presently healed; which is evidence enough to convince the transmission of
this Gift from our Savior to his Apostles. They therefore who will presume to
put limits to the Almighties Power, or fix his Favors to particular Seasons,
Times, Persons, orders of Men, or diversity of Places, must be allowed so far
different from acknowledging a Benevolent Deity, that they do both lessen his
Power, and call in question his Authority and Sovereignty.

The Knowledge of Man dies with him, as well as his hours and his age; but this
Almighty Gift does continue to the very last Age of the World, so that we may
affirm, That not only the great Apostles, but their Successors, have been
sharers in their most excellent Endowments, as well as in their Natures and
Constitutions. This attending them as an expanded Pleasure of the Divine Will:
for the Almighties hand is not shortened, who says, He will be with his to the
end of the World: A Lesson too great for any Atheist to deny, and too good to
be let slip without a Reverential acknowledgement.

CHAP. II. Herein is shown what this Gift is, and when, and how often used.
OUr first Chapter looks but as the Rigging and Sails of a Ship which we are
Lanching into: This gives us the dimensions and its proper uses, where we are
to examine, Whether this Disease be naturally curable or incurable, not
hitherto fully described: And that we may not keep it too long upon the Sands,
we shall find it the Gift of God which makes it sail thus universally
throughout the World, Fetching and procuring Health by the Holy Spirit to the
Sons of Men, by whose assistance, one Man may as well guide her in her Curative
Passage as an hundred.

And as this is a Gift or Grace bestowed on Christians, given to them by the
Holy Spirit for the Cure of one or many Diseases, and this by the Imposition of
their Hands on them, and Prayers, and Gold put over their Necks, is a great
Gift beyond all dispute, and next to a Miracle done by any of the former
Apostles. And that this comes from above, I hope no considerate Man will deny:
For sinful Man can only call Sin his own. S. Augustine joined to this Gift,
Charity, Mercy, Clemency, and Sanctity; these being as the four Pedestals on
which this Royal Gift does fix its proper Basis: It is performed by the Holy
Spirit, from whom does proceed every good and perfect Gift; and this is not
given to all Men, nor to all Churchmen, for every Man has his particular Gift
allowed him, and Health does demonstrate the particular nature of Causes
arising from the habit and use of the Gift. God Almighty having an Infinite,
and Immense Goodness in him, not to be drained out by Time, or less'ned by the
utmost of Age. As therefore in the early Times of the Church this Gift received
much Honor; so because we do live in Times which do bear equal weight, and
share with the like Diseases; I ought to bring again to life this Divine Gift,
sent by the Almighty to our Sacred Majesty, thus exercised as the last and best
Remedy. To him therefore be given the greatest Reverence and Honor, to whom the
greatest Veneration is due.

The Definition of this Gift.
We come now to examine the Gift it self, what it is, as also in what times it
was first used: And that I may enter the Scene without fear, Truth being my
great General, I shall begin its definition which the Apostle makes mention of,
Cor. 12. which declares both the efficacy and action thereof: For the greatest
praise of this Gift consists in the action thereof. Who therefore shall presume
to make any further* doubt, but acknowledge, that he which has this admirable
Gift in him, The frequent use thereof.
may make use thereof at his own will and pleasure, for the Curing of poor
Mortals which shall approach his Royal Touch? Sure there is none but
inconsiderate Men, which either can or will deny this Healing Faculty, or make
any question of it, and that it is as plain as it is Hereditary, is as ready to
be assented to. For it is laid down as a general Maxim amongst the most grave
Senators, That they which are best gifted, or do excel others either in Art,
Wisdom, Knowledge, Oratory, or the like, most excellent Qualifications, these
are confirmed and established upon them as Divine Habits running in their
Veins, and excellent Qualifications going along with them throughout the whole
course of their lives, and transmitted more or less to their succeeding
Generations. And although these may seem strange to the Man less knowing, yet
every Ingenuous and considerate Person which has the rules of Understanding in
him, will find, That Wisdom does lodge in the Kings lips, and that the words of
the Wise are as goads and nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies: In the
same manner, he that has Faith, and is best instructed for the doing and
understanding of all things, has a greater degree of Divinity implanted in
him. Heb. 11. v. 32, 33. Thus by faith, the Fathers of old did overcome
Kingdoms. And what shall I say more? for the time would fail me to tell of
Gideon, and of Barack, and of Sampson, and of Jepthae, and of David also, and
of Samuel and the Prophets, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought
Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, etc. Faith being
like Virtue, evermore active: And such as the habit of Humane Body is, such
Fruits usually we shall find it yield, either to its excellency or demerit. But
as to this Virtue of Healing, and the like sublime Qualifications, as of
Prophesying, Gifts of Tongues, examination of Spirits, these do rise much
higher than the former; for this puts Man upon the thinking and considering
part. Thus when pious and good Men are stirred up by the Divine Spirit, they
open Miracles themselves, and puts advantage to the best of Thoughts. Amongst
these may I well place this most admirable Healing Gift of our Dread Sovereign,
appearing herein as a fixed Star in the midst of his People, or as a greater
Light among the lesser distributing according to his own will and pleasure, of
this his Curative Faculty, to his poor miserable and diseased Subjects of all
Ages, Sexes, Orders and Degrees whatsoever, Its duration proved.
by which they are stripped from their Diseases, and rerelieved from their Pangs,
and this not palliated or dismissed for a while, or done by chance or good
fortune, but he cures by deliberate and serious consultation, prepared
thereunto by the Almighty Power transmitting his Holy Spirit for the better
accomplishment thereof.

They must needs therefore be allowed no good Subjects, who dare deny this
Sanative Faculty, which so many thousands have received even to a Miracle. And
without doubt amongst the worst of Mankind, it must be allowed an Act of Grace,
and a great and pious condescension of his Gracious Majesty thus to give ease
and relief to every sick and lame Person, by his Sacred and gracious Touch,
wherein and whereby we may see the Almighty revealing many things to his, which
are denied to others; which does implant a greater Knowledge in them, and yet
they do not enjoy all Science, the perfection of the Divinity whereof he
reserves to himself: Neither are they ignorant or unknown to him, for were they
so, where would be their familiarity with the Holy Spirit, by whom this great
work is performed: for so often as they have therewith been concerned, they could
foreshew many things to come, as conversions of Republics, ruins of Kingdoms,
Death of Nobles, and many other the like Observations. This Healing Faculty is
always present with and in the Almighty, Gods assisting hand gives perfection
to the Cure.
his will consenting to his Sovereigns pleasure, and in the prosecution
thereof: and this is very useful and profitable, being conducted by a Divine
motion or instigation of the Holy Spirit. For the Almighty has given Man's will
its certain limits, and has circumscribed bounds thereto. The efficient cause
of Healing.
But as touching this Divine Qualification of Healing, whence it comes, and
what the efficient Cause thereof is, whether proceeding from the naked
discourse of the words used at the Ceremony, or the Solemnity of the Pious and
Religious action, or of any created Virtue arising hence, I shall presume to
offer this as a Foundation against all Dispute whatsoever. Whether this be in
Man, or derivative from God.
That no Miracle, howsoever glorious, which we ever saw, read, or heard of, was
ever done by an inherent Virtue created in Man alone, not this of His Majesty's
Royal Healing, procuring and affording hereby this Health to the Sick, which we
daily see and find they do hereby purchase and enjoy: But there is and must be
God Almighties hand going along with it, for no Mortals Virtue, or Piety, or
Power, has strength or efficacy enough in it to perform this Sovereign
sanative Faculty: Nor can the Ceremonies or Vestments any wise effect the same;
for as to these, those which were carried to Paul (viz.) the handkerchiefs and
aprons, were only signs and tokens for begetting and confirming the Faith of
those who were cured in Paul's absence. And for a more clear understanding
hereof, this Gift which he received from the Almighty, was not fixed or tied to
his Body, and so much the less dispensable to the sick people which thus came
to him for help, or sent to him, and which saw him not: But God wrought these
Miracles by his hands, and his hand was the only Instrument by which this great
Work was performed, whilst his Maker was the great Agent thereof: Much less
could the Ceremonies and Vestments procure this which are put upon it: Gods
Hand is the hand of Health, and his Arm wants no strength to perform every kind
of Cure beyond humane capacity: The which Peter well knew, when he tells us of
a Man, which was lame from his mothers womb* Acts 3. who seeing Peter and John
about going into the Temple, asked an alms; and Peter fastening his eyes on him
with John, said, Look on us: In the name of Jesus of Nazareth rise up and walk;
and he took him by the right hand and lifted him up, and immediately his feet
and ancle bones received strength, and went into the temple praising God. And
although Peter, through Gods assistance, did give this great cure to this
Cripple, yet primarily he received this Divine Power from above, before any
effect could be wrought. And that also is very remarkable, Acts 9. when Peter
did pass through all Quarters, arriving at Lidda, where he saw Aeneas, who had
kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy, and Peter said unto him,
Aeneas, Jesus Christ make thee whole, God the Agent, Man the Instrument.
arise, and make thy bed, and he arose immediately.

This shows the great Gift of the Almighty, performed by the lesser instrument
Man, even as the Sun is no ways lessened in its splendour by the light of the
Moon, or lesser Stars: For thus Man does receive this Gift from the Divine
Giver, as the Moon and lesser Stars do borrow their light from the Sun: For the
Almighty does display and communicate his Gifts to Mankind, whose Rays are
implanted in his mind, cleared up, and freed from all cloudiness, there to be
kept in him as his choicest Treasures and Divine Qualifications. Thus therefore
Man must be allowed the Organ and Instrument, God himself the chief Agent and
Master of the Operation, Man being his servant, which receives the honor and
glory thereof: and by this Divine and Humane conjunction, thus most excellently
agreeing together, this most admirable Healing Faculty is thus produced for the
benefit, advantage, ease and cure of many thousands of poor, miserable, sick,
lame, and distempered people.

CHAP. III. Whether Diseases Curable or Incurable.
WHat the Struma is, or Kings Evil, so commonly called from the Kings healing
thereof by his Sacred Touch, I have already satisfied in my second Book,
wherein is shown both its Definition, Causes, Presages, etc. For the
unravelling this skain, spun out of so many fine threads, in which are found
many knots about curing Diseases curable or incurable: We must begin to unty it
in its proper place, by examining its Age and Diuturnity. Thus Paul, when he
cured the Father of Publius of a Disentery and Fever, the Cure was admirable,
although both the Diseases naturally curable: for a Fever we see, be it never
so vexatious, its forced to quit its station by true Physic and a right method
used. The Disentery also is as readily conquered and by the like means. When
our Blessed Savior also cured the Palsy, or the Hemorrhagy: No man can deny
but that both these Diseases in themselves are curable, but our Savior cured
these by his own Power, which by others were not to be performed but by proper
means, and therefore this ought not to be allowed an ordinary way of Healing.

Hence Christ forbids not the curing of the Sick by the hands of Christian
Kings, Princes and Governors, Apostles and good Christians allowed in former
times to cure Diseases.
who do follow his Rules by Prayer and Imposition of Hands: For we have read of
many Holy and Pious people who have cured Diseases after several manners, and
where any thing of a Divine Influence is implanted, what should deny the hand
thereof to declare the same? and although this Disease is natural, no question
but this Method is supernatural, the which may be made good by Historical
Illustrations. For as this Struma, or Kings Evil Swelling is a popular Disease
(bred out of Matter and Blood, sent into the Glandules, and therein making a
further bulk according to the Quantity of Matter sent thither) and sparing
neither Age or Sex, and yet curable if any man considers its nature well;
unless it be suffered to run into a great extreme, whose Malice bids defiance
to all Cure, the time being neglected which might more mildly have given it its
dispatch: and since its Curableness or Incurableness consists in its Matter, it
must needs truckle to him who has this Divine Gift of Healing transmitted to
him. And as a further advantage to the clearing of this Point, we never see his
Sacred Majesty enquiring into the age of the diseased, or the Disease it self,
being relative either to youth or old age, Men, Women or Children, rich or
poor, all which he cures by his Sacred Hand; with some Ceremonies and Prayers
therewith annexed for the Poor thus waiting on him for their Health and
Recovery: The which I have had the Honor of being an eyewitness in the Place
and Quality which his Sacred Majesty has been pleased to confer on me, as one
of his Chirurgions attending at this great Solemnity, where I must, with St.
Augustine, presume to Offer, that this great Gift of his may well compare with
a Miracle and we ought to give it the same name, if not allow it the nature
thereof, when we shall see so many Diseased People come from all parts of the
World, even tired out of their Lives by their Distempers, and perplexed with
troublesome Swellings, thus readily to gain Victory over them, and become
sound, and stripped from all their enormous Swellings; and this with
extraordinary speed, only by the application of his Sacred Hand, and this seen
to be done without, and beyond all expectation of the poor People themselves,
their Friends or Relations: their Faith being as a great Ingredient to this
Composition. All which may well enough come within the Pale of a Miracle, being
done beyond our knowledge and the course of Nature.

St. Augustine, The Difference between Nature and Miracle.
Lib. 6. Contr. Faust. cap. 3. does there thus distinguish between Nature and
Miracle in its discriminancy. We commonly call that Nature which is known by
its course and custom: On the contrary, when God works or makes any thing
beyond this, this properly comes under the notion of Miracle. Under which last,
this Gift of Healing may well take place, whose miraculous Efficacy, although
there may be some inequality with it with Miracles, yet the Dignity thereof is
to be admired, and the use and benefit thereof being not much unlike, they
should bear alike date with us.

Christ tells his Apostles, That those who believe in him, the works which he
did, they shall also do, and greater than those: and whatsoever they shall ask
in my Name, that I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
Amongst the rest of Miracles, may be reckoned the falling back of the Sun, and
the standing still of the Moon; both which do declare the Divine Will and
Omnipotent Power of the Almighty. But to give sight to the Blind, to make the
Lame walk, to give Life to the dead, and cure to the sick of their Diseases,
and this only by the Imposition of Hands, is much greater: wherein is shown a
greater Measure of Divinity, which ought to be reckoned amongst the greatest of
Miracles.

Rarefaction and Densation of Air, or resolution of the same into drops, by the
Prayers of Moses and Elias, is a thing very great and stupendous: Yet this is
no Miracle. To give Health to Struma's, to help the Paralytick, and to
discharge and banish other Diseases, may not seem strange to a knowing
Physician, and to an able Surgeon, where a curative Method is used according
to Art: But to Heal by the Touch, or by Contact, and by Devotion of Prayers, to
procure Health to the Sick, and to banish Diseases from poor Mortals without
the help of Medicine; and this done immediately, this ought not to come much
beneath a Miracle.

CHAP. IV. How long this has been in use, and when began to flourish.
THat the apostles have had this gift bestowed on them, has already been shown
and made good: And that their Successors have been sharers therein with them,
may be cleared as bright as the Sun. For no Age of Christians, by the light of
Examples, has ever been without it, although some Ages has had it more
frequently than others, and the Repetition of its admirable Effects has
frequently evinced and made this good. That we may therefore satisfy all
Objections, and prevent Calumny where ever it may meet or offer its self, we
shall introduce some Examples of long continuance. Its long continuance by
Testimony of Authorities.


St. Augustine writes, That few Miracles happened in his time, neither were they
permitted to last long which so happened. Thus he writes, Lib. de vera Religione,
cap. 25. in these words, Lest the Soul should evermore hunt after visible
things, and Humanity in its search should hereby grow cold therewith, and its
novelty. This is true, that until their hands were put to be Baptized, they
never thus received the Holy Spirit: By which they enjoyed these Gifts of
Tongues of all Nations, or arrived at the Shadow or Trancision of the Teachers
of Christ: By which the Sick were thus healed, the which then happened, and then
afterward ceased. But our curative Gift runs not along in this Stream, and if
we look into the Times of St. Augustine, we shall find admirable effects
gaining strength in the times of the Apostles, even to the Age of Simeon, in
whose time the Church appeard incorrupt, and as a pure Virgin: and after him,
it carried the same vigor to the successors thereof. For as Eusebius
witnesses, The Divine Spirits did exercise themselves in his times, and showed
their admirable Virtues and excellent Qualifications, even to the times of
Adrianus, under Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius, then Governors; by which it
abundantly appears of what value and esteem this ancient Virtue of Healing was
in former Ages. Irenaeus, who lived a little after Tertullian, followed a long
time in these Gifts: Thus Irenaeus, although a Lad, heard Polycarpus in Asia:
Polycarpus also a Disciple of the Evangelist St. John, maintained the same Gift
of Healing, the which he thus expresses, Lib. 5. We have heard many Brethren in
the Church, having the Gifts of Prophecy, and of Healing, and of Speaking
universal Tongues by the Spirit, producing and bringing many things to view,
obscured and hid from former Ages, for use and explaining the Mysteries of God
according to the participation of the same Spirit; as also Lib. 2. cap. 58.
Some of these having in them the Knowledge of things to come, and of Visions,
and of Prophetic Sayings; and others of curing the Sick and Lame of their
Diseases, by laying their Hands on them, and so recovering them.

Its numberless to tell the Gifts of these from God throughout the World, done
in the Name of Jesus Christ, not by Invocation of evil Spirits, or Enchantment,
or black and dark Curiosity, but by pure, clear, and clean Prayers made to him,
who directs us in every thing* and gives a Blessing and Success to this
Undertaking of his own Anointed, which have been obtained above 600 years; all
which may be made good by the clearest light imaginable, and shall more fully
show it self in its proper place.

When Origin saw all these Divine and admirable Gifts perpetuated and continued
in the Church, and that as clear as the brightest Light, the Eyes of all People
being open to see and vindicate the Truth thereof, against any Opponent
whatsoever, he thus replies thereupon: These Miracles, (says he) are to be
examined by certain rules of Judgment, lest they bring Damnation unto men, or
correction to their manners: That we may distinguish between those done by the
help of Satan, from those which are performed by a pure and pious mind, adorned
with the Divine Spirit; some may enter and offer here, that in the Bloody times
of the Church, when it laid under Persecution for near 300 years, all these
Gifts or most of them continued in vigor, but when it once abated of its Flame
and Troubles, it lost of its power and efficacy, and became more sparing in its
appearance to mankind. It would be an infinite, as well as troublesome task, to
bring all things into number, omitting St. Athanasius, who lived in the time of
the Nicene Council, and one of the same Judgment, where he numbers Basilius,
Lib. 6. de Spiritu Sancto, where he writes the Gifts of the Holy Spirit to be,
Delight, Joy, Peace, Goodness, Prudence, Wisdom, Counsel, the Gift of Healing,
etc. But who is more curious in the search thereof than St. Basil? And if any
will still doubt of these Gifts, and of their perspicuousness, he is to be
brought into a mean; and if credit therefore cannot be given to St. Augustine,
or St. Basil, both evermore accounted good and pious Men; or to Origin or
Tertullian, who were ever esteemed men of great Learning; nor to Irenaeus, or
others of his Faith and Belief, the Faith of all History must perish. And if we
cannot lend our credence to these worthy Churchmen, in whose times these great
Miracles were wrought, we may as well slacken and tie up our Faith to any other
thing whatsoever. I know, and do expect that this Assertion will not go off
smoothly, or pass by the blasts of the Envious without a Reprimand, but must
take as much contradiction as their pleasures shall think best to put upon it;
yet in this I shall think my self happy, that I have a Cure for their evil
Breaths, when I shall offer no Authority but such as has evermore been
accounted faithful and praiseworthy in their Generations. And in order
thereunto, I would willingly know, who ever was a more Luculent Author than
Divus Hieronimus, or a more happy witness than blessed St. Augustine? who more
happy in their times for Prediction of admirable effects of theirs and their
former times? all their Books being filled with Wise Sayings, and cherished
with Worthy Examples; neither could any thing lie hid in the dark, which ever
arrived at the light of their Writings.

Kind Reader, What has thus been produced by Example, shows that it must be a
Holy and good Man, which is to perform this Cure, which is not to be performed
without a Divine Pleasure.

Quest.
But a Question may also arise: Whether our Sacred Majesty did consult his
Phsicians, before he applied his Hands to the Sick, and did take their Opinions
about the same?

Answ,
In Answer whereunto, There was no need hereof, since the great Physician of
Heaven and Earth being herein Invoked, and the Holy Jesus joined therewith; to
both which the Holy Spirit being interposed, what should or could hinder this
Divine efficacy of a Sanative Faculty?

Quest.
Some also will start another Question, which is: Whether His Majesty does Cure
that by his Gracious Touch, which has baffled both Physicians and Chirurgions
in their Undertakings, and hereby sending health to the Sick, which Art and
Skill could never arrive at or procure?

Answ.
And in Answer to this, St. Hillaries Oration shall be sufficient, where he
says, God working with him, he performs both great and small Cures by his
Servants, and by his or their Faith and Prayers to the Son of God, they do
receive the same, who tells them, Whatsoever they shall ask in his Name, shall
be given unto them. A blind Woman being brought to this St. Hillary, who had a
long time laid under this miserable condition, even till she had spent her
whole stock on Physicians and Chirurgions: He tells her, If that which she had
thus consumed had been given to the poor, Jesus the true Physician would have
made her well. She still earnestly begging and entreating his mercy, he spit on
her Eyes, and presently she became whole. And the more and greater Faith is
given to this Sanative Power arising from the Holy Spirit, the greater Efficacy
and Virtue it carries with it. Thus much of Hieronimus the great Man writ of
Antoninus and Hillarion, who arrived near at his Age; for he lived about 78 or
79 years, as Prosper testifies in his Chronicle. St. Augustine outlived him
much about that time, being as witnesses of his great praise: for should we
enquire into his Conversation, we shall find his Authority much esteemed as to
its verity, whose Judgment was sharp, whose Wit accute and subtle, even to a
Miracle, both in the knowledge and events of admirable Effects: No man need be
ashamed in following so good a General, who has been so curious a Searcher
into this matter which I have presumed to discourse of. Another sort of People
there are, who put us upon answering a fourth Question.

Quest.
Wherefore are not those Miracles which have been performed by the Preachers
and Pious Men of former times still continued?

Answ.
The Answer for such is ready and easy: It was necessary the World should be
taught Credence, that it might be brought into a state of Belief, into which
every one ought to enquire for Beliefs sake, for there are many Miracles done
attested by them; amongst which is that reckoned as one, Of Christ's ascension
into Heaven with the same Flesh, as he did arise: And this is beyond all
denial; and this was done, that it might be believed it was done: and they who
did give a more lively Faith thereto, had a greater share of Light thereof
given to them? St. Augustine is seen to mention this egregious Miracle in
several places, and particularly in his Book of Retractions, cap. 4. and De
Unitate Eccles. cap. 16. where he thus expresses it: Throughout the whole
World where our Communion went, there were such and so many admirable Gifts of
Healing delivered and revealed to the sick; where amongst the rest is reckoned
the blind Man of Millain, who for many years together had lost his sight, and
then again recovered the same. But we leave Italy and come to Africa; and here
at Carthage, amongst many other Histories, I shall set down that of St.
Augustine, which he mentions of a Religious and innocent Woman, who having a
Cancer in her Breast not curable by Medicine, and so judged to be taken off by
Hippocrates his Rule; and she being hereat much concerned, she threw her self
wholly into the Hands of her Maker, as her last and best Physician: This Woman
being admonished in her sleep to come to the Penticost, as the custom of that
Country was, to be Baptized; and being there Baptized, signifying the same by
the sign of the Cross, she recovered her health: Some while after, the
Physician who pronounced her Incurable, meeting her in so good condition, and
being desirous to know how she conquered this her terrible Distemper, the which
he supposed would have speedily robbed her of her Life; she telling him her
method she made use of, giving thanks for her happy success, he rather contemns
the same, than joins in thanks for her great Recovery: such being the Pride and
Opinions of some ill Men, that although they see some things done before their
Eyes, they have scarce Faith enough to believe them, or Civility sufficient to
acknowledge them: Not declaring with St. Augustine, That the Almighty is more
glorified hereby, by showing his wonderful and miraculous Methods to the Sons
of men. I should be too tedious and voluminous, should I reckon up these
Histories of St. Augustine, relating to these strange and wonderful ways of
Cure: those of Bassus of Hippomenes; of the young Man grieved with the Palsy;
of Paulus and Palladia, who both were troubled with a Trembling over all their
parts. And that he might not seem erroneous herein in his Histories, he gives
every of them their proper names, and proper places: And hence this Holy Father
concludes, That out of so many accidents, many Miracles have been performed by
the Almighty, by and through such Instruments as he shall please to appoint,
and when he pleases: That a more ready congratulation may be given to the
Almighty, he advises, That those who have thus received their health, should
let the World see what great things he has done for them, and to record the
same, that future Ages may behold and admire his Wisdom and Goodness to poor
Mortals. Let us therefore, Christians, who do live under the best of Princes,
and in the perfect Light of his Wonders, yield Praise, Thanks, and due
Obedience to him for the same; and not with the ungrateful Man, think and
suppose these things Fictitious. For who can be so blind, seeing these things
daily done and made good, as to deny the truth thereof, but should rather,
according to St. Augustines example, triumph in these Works done in England,
the which ought rather to be registered than forgotten: That succeeding
Generations may behold the Examples of the wonderful Cures which has been
performed before their days, by the Sacred Hand of our Blessed Sovereigns. St.
Augustines way of Curing declared by Possidoneus.
Possidoneus in Vit. August. cap. 18.29, 30. thus writes of St. Augustine, That
when he was afflicted with his last distemper, there came a Woman with a sick
Man to him, and desired that he would touch him that he might be cured: He
being told in his sleep, That if he went to St. Augustine the Bishop, and he
laid his hands upon him, he should be relieved of his Disease. Upon his coming
to St. Augustine, he tells him, If he would please to touch him he should be
whole: St. Augustine, it is said, laying his hands on him, he went home sound
and cured of his Disease. And Possidoneus writes this as one of St. Augustines
great Miracles: He dyed the fifteenth of September, Anno Christi 430. but left
this Gift of Healing behind him; for we shall find, after his time, this still
flourished and increased; for from his time even to Justinus the old Emperor,
that is to say, to the five hundred and eighteenth year of our Savior,
Frequency of Miracles to the 518 and 600 year of Christ, proved by History.
vid. Hooker.
it ran in the same stream near eighty years, in which many and wonderful Gifts
of Healing were exercised, as History does fully satisfy; and so continued
even to the seventh Age, that is, the Six hundred and tenth year of Christ,
even to the Council of Nice. We shall not trouble you with any other methods
and by-ways used for Cures, taken up in these days by evil Spirits, or unclean
Pseudomungers, rather naming the Virtues and Divine Gifts of Pious and Holy
Men. And that this Virtue has been transmitted through all Ages of the World,
not only Africa bears witness, but our Asia, called Europe, can testify the
same. And as the Meridian and Orient times were illustrated by these Gifts
bestowed on the servants of God above 670 years and upwards, so also our
Occidental times do receive the same by the Septentrional Light. And our
Britain can as well speak of this, as any Age or Country whatsoever: for out of
Prosperus his Authority it appears, that Germanus the Bishop of Auocerre was
sent into Britain from Celestine. Constantius says, that this Germanus and
Lupus Bishops of Troys (seeing all weather fair to willing minds) were both Men
of such Learning and Holy Lives, that a grave Father of their Time, called
Lupus, the Father of Fathers, and the Bishop of Bishops, and yet but a Second
to Germanus the Principal, much resembling Paul and Barnabas. They being sent
as two Legates into Britain, as the Chief and Principal of the rest; these by
their great Learning and Virtue did sweeten a great part of the Country with
their Doctrine, and confirmed the Orthodox Faith, and made many of the
Pelagians, whose Religion, or rather way of Worship, which they had formerly
used, to revolt from that which they had formerly taken up, and reclaimed the
Erroneous Preaching in Fields and Highways; and as the Kings presence did make
a Court, so theirs did make a Church. For at this time Pelagius, which was a
Britain, and had secured many Disciples to himself which came out thence, and
infected the People with the Pelagian Heresy, did begin to lessen both in his
number and reputation. For God Almighty, as it were by a wonderful Compendium,
did confirm the Catholic Faith, by showing a Miracle performed by a Man of the
Tribunative Power, who coming into Church with his Wife, and having his
Daughter blind for about ten years, they carried her to the Priests, where they
joined in Prayers with her Parents for her Recovery (whilst on the contrary
the Pelagians waiting to see the success) Germanus after having invoked the
Holy Trinity, the Daughter immediately was seen cured in the public view of all
the Bystanders.

Constantius remembers, that in the last Legation of this Germanus coming into
this Isle, that Elephias a great Man happened in his way, and placed his Son, who
although in the flower of his Age, had his Members withered, his Knee
contracted, and could not walk by reason of this contracted dryness which
happened in his Ham: this Germane made him presently to set down, and did extend
the contracted parts, and gave him a speedy cure, so that his dryness received
moisture, and the Nerves regained their proper functions: The Son returned to
his Father, the People hereat were all amazed, and the Catholic Faith by this
means grew very firm and stable in the Breasts of all Men. This Gift of
Germanus, as I have said, was founded on the Orthodox Faith, which both easily
and readily did confound its Enemies the Pelagians. This Pelagius also as he
was a Britain by birth, was by some called Morgan; and every Man, as Dr. Fuller
writes in his Ecclesiastical History, is born a Pelagian, naturally proud of
his Power, and needs little Art to make him think well of himself, and Britain
only bred him, and he himself begot and bred his Heresy; and in this, our
Island is as happy as unfortunate, for as it bred him it opposed his Errors;
even as the best Father may have an unhappy Child, who by the foresight of his
Sons extravagancy may quit him from his favor, and so give no countenance to
his evil Courses. And that which is almost as great a Miracle, is that one
relates of him, The same day that Pelagius was born in Britain, St. Augustine
was born in Africa: The Almighty sending both the Poison and the Alexapharmick
together into the World, in one and the same hour or day.

I shall not presume to appear so curious, as to look into the course of Gods
thus confirming his Truth with such Seals and Miracles done in the Church; we
ought rather to consult the Scriptures, which are the proper Fountains of Truth.

But to pretermit many Authorities with which I could easily swell up this
Discourse, Some Cures wrought in the Church, and after the time of Gregory.
I proceed to the time of Gregory the Great, who writes, That he saw Holy Men
working Miracles by many Virtues, as cleansing the Lepers, casting out Devils,
healing the Sick by touching them, and Prophesying by the Spirit of Prophecy:
and he brings John to the example of some of these; one of which, was the blind
Man which he cured; another was one born Lame and Dumb at Constantinople; yet
all Ages of the Church did not receive the purity of the Scriptures, nor
charity of Learned Men. Whence I cannot be so readily brought to believe, but
rather demur to their sayings, and the frequent miraculous Performances which
are said to be done by St. Augustine and his Companions, of which both Gregory
and Beda makes mention; neither can I believe all the Miracles said to be done
by him, but shall rather join in Opinion with Dr. Fuller, who says, That he
who believes all which St. Augustine and his Companions are said to have done,
had need to have a hard Plate in his Front that reports it, and he a soft place
in his Head which believes it: Many Miracles said to be done by him, being
rather but lightly to be touched, lest by long handling they come to be
crushed, and so vanish either into Smoke or Vapor. Let King Edward the Single
and Famous be our English Hero, and the Glory of Miracles about this time of
the Church, be alone had in Veneration, of whom I shall more enlarge in its
proper place.

Its Antiquity proved by authority of the Ancients and Moderns.
Here St. Malachias, the Bishop of Armach, of whom St. Bernard writes in his
lifetime, is said to perform many Miracles, the which he acted not according
to the form and method of former times: For if we read him aright, we shall
find, he neither wanted Prophecy or Revelation, nor the Gift of Healing, nor
changing of Minds, nor raising the Dead. And St. Bernard does place him before
his Companions, for he is said, in one day the Diocese of Constantinianus, to
cure eleven which were Blind, and ten Lame Creatures. And if Antoninus may be
believed, the true Witness of these Times, the Miracles of the Fourteenth Age
of St. Bernard, and St. Katharine of Senens there Recorded, are plainly said to
be incredible: Let their Faith be according to their Authors. As to the main
thereof, this I can affirm, as all the Miracles said to be done by them may in
no means be allowed false, but somewhat of Truth may go along with them, yet
what part thereof which is so, is so intermixed with falsehood, that it is no
easy matter to distinguish between them: And as I shall not much pin my Faith
upon their Miracles, so will I not detract from the Virtue of Gods Servants, or
rather the Finger of God working by them.

All Ages have had their false and seducing Lights of Faith in them, by which
we have seen the infinite shapes of Vizards, Prodigies, and Romantic Stories
most excellently delineated; all which were designed to cheat the foolish, and
to bring the illiterate into the ready Knowledge and Worship of unknown Gods.
Hence had our manifold Idolatry its first Birth and Beginning: hence followed
the Worshipping of Idols, Invocating of dead Souls, Adoration of Statues,
sending Indulgences from their dead Caves, and the like unheard of Fallacies.
Has not England its miraculous way of Healing, and in this do we meet any of
these Figments go along with it, or concerned with any part thereof? Does not
St. Augustine himself say, That all Saints have not this Sanative Power given
them, nor all the Gifts of Divination, more than the Gift of Prophesying, and
the like. St. Chrysostom does show some signs hereof, and answers the Question
when he faith, Signs are made that Men hereby might be brought to believe: and
he further enquires, Why in the times of the Apostles these signs were made,
and not in his time; he resolves this likewise, when he says, By how much the
more certain and necessary these things are, the less Faith they do carry with
them; and by how much the Argument is the more certainly demonstrated, by so
much the value of its Faith is detracted: therefore Signs in presence are not
to be done. And this for certain we may aver, that all Miracles are not fully
ceased, as may be proved both by Ancient and Modern Authority: For Centur. 4.
Lib. 2. Cap. 3. This is not to be past with silence, says Magdeburgensis, that
the Apostles did affirm the Gifts of external Miracles, should reach all Ages:
for without doubt, amongst the rest these would foreshew the Evangelical
Doctrines being confirmed: But they do not mention this Healing Faculty amongst
the rest of their Ministerial Functions: I exhort therefore, that
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men, for Kings, and all that are in authority, etc. 1 Timothy 13. But Paul was the
first which first taught this great Art of Healing, as you may see, 1 Cor. 12.
which was not distributed to all alike, for all have not this given to them.
Thus much thereof from Ecclesiastical Histories: it is most probable this still
does continue amongst us, yet it is not allowed as a Miracle, nor brought into
the same Number, nor Species, nor Dignity: It is a great Gift, and no vulgar
one, not proper to all sorts of Men; not to those of the Church, although
otherwise gifted* But is a Gift confirmed on Christian Kings, whose Patrimonial
Virtue of Sanative Power does run in the Royal Line, who do peaceably possess
the same to them and their Heirs, holding the same of the Almighty in chief;
and this may not much come beneath an External Miracle, the Church calls it.
The inward being allowed the Spiritual Miracles, and these are performed in all
places, and at all times, by Administering of the Word, the Prayers of Holy Men,
by the virtue of our Blessed Savior, and this dispensed by the Holy Spirit;
amongst which are reckoned the raising from the Dead, the keeping up the Church
against the Devil and all his machinations, and all those its evil Agents, who
make it their business to create rents in the same, and rob it of its pristine
Vigor and Excellency.

CHAP. V. In this is shown the Universality of its Cure, without any respect
either to Age, Sex, Temper, or Constitution.
HItherto has our Discourse kept company with its Witnesses, which has
plentifully declared its long continuance; and this attested as well by the
light of Examples, as by the fullness of Reasons, to take off all Calumny that
dare interpose upon this Sovereign and Royal Gift. This Gift and its use
evermore keeping time together, and are neither to be disjoined or discluded by
time or place: If therefore we would defend the Truth thereof, we ought to
consider the Qualities of the Persons thus gifted, what kind of Men they are,
how well Qualified, with what Holiness endowed, with what Faith exercised, with
what Manners instituted, with what Religion pollished, with what Dignity
adorned, and with what excellent Virtues cherished? all which do declare the
ascent of their Honor; being as so many steps to their height of perfection,
every of which do concenter in the search of the Cause by which they do arrive
at this Sanative Faculty. Its credible also that Ethnicks, and Antichrist, and
with him Antichristians and Heretics, and ill Christians, sometimes have been
seen making Signs and Prodigious things. But such as do the same in the light,
and in the view of the Church, must needs be of the number of the Faithful,
being in the order of pious Men, and such as do observe Religion in its true
order and decency. And Gregory does affirm this as a reason of the same, when
he says, Every fair work does adorn the House of God: And then he adds, We
have seen Holy men doing great and wonderful Things, as cleansing the Lepers,
casting out Devils, curing the Sick and Lame by the Touch, and the like. These
sometimes being shown and done by persons of another rank, Matthew. 7. who shall
in Christ's name be said to cast out evil Spirits, and yet keep the same Spirit
within themselves: And this Gregory justifies when he says, Many come, and say
they do work Miracles in Christ's Name, many in the name of Antichrist; and of
these Tribes are many false Prophets, and many workers in the Dark, who dare
not venture at the light of the Sun their miraculous proceedings.

Fallacies and cheats, imposters and witchcrafts, filling up evil Spirits to
procure Cures.
And as we allow all Pagans, Infidels and Atheists, to be out of the pale of our
Church, so we shall find both clean and unclean Spirits in it. And whatsoever
this black kind of pretended Curers may do, I am sure whatsoever is thus done,
is completed by the Devil their Tutor: Of this kind was the Magic of the
Gentiles, writ by St. Augustine. And without all doubt, This Master of Black
Art interposing with these his Pupils, can work wonderful things. Suetonius is
not to be contemned, who declares, That Vespasian the Emperor did restore sight
to the Blind man of Alexandria, and made the Lame walk. But Cornelius Tacitus
with more truth denies the Position; for this Cure was procured by ill method,
affirming, That those Diseases which are in their own Nature curable, do
require and deserve less of Diabolical Art to assist them. This Evil named by
Tertullian, was a Disease wholly generated from the Evil Spirit, the which
falling in one of his Eyes, and into one of his Feet, did hinder the use of his
Members; and therefore the means which hurt him, was found to be the best
Remedy to cure him.

Satan is a wonderful Artist, and a great Professor of admirable Operations:
The same may be said of Antichrist and his followers, all which are not to be
reckoned in the same day with the sublime gifts of good Men. Magicians and
Antichristians do work much after one and the same method, but neither of them
after the good Rules of pious and good Christians. For as St. Augustine writes,
Magicians do work Miracles one way, good Men another way; ill Men only by
Demoniacal Contract, If any Miracle wrought, this to be attributed to the
Church.
good Men by public Justice, evil Men under the resemblance of the same. Ill
men do work Miracles in the sanctity of the Church, not in the sanctity of the
Person, for confirming and establishing of his Faith: The which also is
imitated by the worst sort of Men, but in another form and manner. Gregory
tells us, That Corporal Miracles do sometimes show Sanctity, not make it, but
Spiritual Gifts wrought in the Mind, do not show the Virtue of Life, but do
form it: But this is scarce the property of any Saint. And St. Augustine does
give a very good reason for the same, when he says, These Miracles are not
given to all Holy men: Nor are the infirm to be deceived, for in these acts are
greater good things shown, than in the works of Justice, to which Eternal Life
is compared. Peter the Apostle raised the Dead, Simon Magus did many Wonders
which were beyond many Christians power and skill to arrive at or attain. But
whence had they this? Their names were writ in Heaven. In Miracles the
curiosity of the Eye is desired, but this is not from the Father. The true Rule
therefore of Miracles is this, If God gives the power of doing good to any one,
let him prosecute the same and prosper in the action. These being given
according to the will which can and will do what he pleases: In former times
we have showed that this Gift was bestowed on Pious and Religious Men, of which
sort in those times were great plenty to be found. But our succeeding Ages have
much lessened in the number thereof: For in our days, not only paucity of
People are thus gifted, but the Gift it self is celebrated and known of use by
its effects by very few; and those which are seen thus to enjoy them are the
Heads of the Church, and the chief Rulers of Nations and People; as Kings,
Princes, and Governors.

CHAP. VI. Whether Kings and Queens of England, as Nursing Fathers and Mothers
were thus particularly qualified with this Gift of Healing? and whether the
French King does cure by Stroaking the Evil, as well as our Kings of England?
KING Ptolomy asking the Question of his Wife Interpreter, In what occasions a
King should chiefly exercise himself? The Answer was thus given: To know those
things which formerly have been done; to read Books of those matters which
daily do offer themselves; and to enquire after those things which do most
conduce to a Kingdoms Preservation: All which three do most happily center in
this Gracious and Salutiferous Operation. For here may we see his Majesty
exercising his Royal Hand by performing what has been done by His Royal
Predecessors: At which Solemnity are read diverse Prayers which call down a
Blessing on his Sacred Touch; and that nothing can conduce more to a Kingdoms
Preservation, than the free Gift of this benign Charity by which they are kept
in Health, no man of sense can or will dispute or disprove. Our Discourse has
hitherto satisfied us of several Gifts given to diversity of Men, some of which
have been allowed more extraordinary than others, yet all found useful to
Mankind; and how these have been performed, we have cleared by Historical
Illustrations. And because every Age, Sex or Orders of Men have had in them
somewhat more excelling Faculties than others, these Gifts being given according
to the Divine Will and Pleasure of the Almighty: Thus we see our calling, Cor.
1.1. whereof not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many nobles
are called. And that this Gift is given to Kings, as Sons of the Church, and to
Queens as Daughters thereof, is shown by Isaiah, Isa. 60.16. Thou shall suck
the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of Kings: and Isa. 49.23.
Kings shall be their nursing Fathers, and Queens their nursing Mothers. Out of
every part of the Earth, God will take some of his People particularly to
himself, and will set up his Standard amongst them, by which they shall declare
the Power of the Almighty, which does bestow this admirable Gift on them. And
this Prophet does extend the same to Islands and to Kingdoms, when he says,
Bring the Islands unto me, and let the Nations tend from afar off: As the Poet
has it, Divisos Orb Britannos. And since there is nothing more apparent since
the opening of the Church, than that it is adorned with many noble and
excellent Ornaments, sure I am, where Kings and Queens are planted as its
Heads, it must far excel all other Churches which are destitute of their Royal
Presence. That therefore which happens in the whole Figure of the Body,
although it has most delicate Hands and Feet, and had therewith joined the
goodliness and beauty of many other parts, yet unless the Face, Eyes, Mouth,
and other parts, did carry the like symmitry and proportion of parts therewith;
these would but deform the whole, and lessen the beauty and esteem of the rest.

The same use may be made of the Christian Church, Many Gifts given to Men.
if some of its Denizens be endowed with this or that extraordinary Gift, or
furnished with more Virtue or Grace, or greater Gifts from the Almighty, who
should by the same appear as greater Lights, and more eminent amongst the
smaller and lesser Lights thereof; unless these Men who are thus supereminently
gifted and qualified, do declare and present the same to view by a more strict
and exact way of living, they do only make way for the lesser Lights to
outshine them. This enters the Discourse by the by, that all Men might
understand, that out of this heap of Celestial Graces, the Almighty does bestow
the best and richest Mercies and Plenty of Divine Gifts upon his Principal Men
and Primary Women; Peculiar Gifts to Kings and Queens.
viz. To Kings and Queens he transmits the same, whose Persons are Sacred with
him. Thus on Joshua he bestowed Fortitude and Courage; Meekness he gave to
Moses; an Heroic Spirit to Deborah; Magnitude and magnanimity for a time to
Saul; to David a heart according to his own heart; Judgment to King Solomon his
Son: To the chief Elders also he gave diverse Gifts; and out of his plentiful
stock of favors, he did distribute variety of Gifts to diversity of Men.

Thus to Constantinus he gave the Gift of proclaiming the first of the
Evangelick Emperors, commanded by him to his Successors: To Theodosius he gave
power to entrench and environ Religion, as with a quick Hedge, made and
confirmed by a knot of Politic Law, which had heretofore been shaken with the
various Storms and troublesome Tempests of Heresies. To Christian Kings, and
Princes, and Queens, he has given this Sanative Faculty, by which both their
and their Subjects Faith might the better be confirmed, and be more gloriously
commended to succeeding Generations. But every one has his proper Gift and
Talent allowed and afforded him, and some have more than others thereof; and
some of these are more particularly attributed to particular Persons and
Places. Thus our Kings of England, and the French Kings, do only Cure the
Struma or Evil, denied to all other Kings, Princes, Potentates, and Emperors
whatsoever. Guido tells us, That the French King in his time cured this by his
Touch only, some Divine Virtue going along therewith; he lived in the time
1348. under the Bishop Clement the Sixth. But our English Histories do procure
a better memory he^eof, and do give it a longer Being and Continuance with us,
the which both the French, Italians, and others, have already declared. And
John Tagnultius writes also in his Chirurgick Institutions, That the most
Christian King, endowed with this Divine Gift, does cure many Scrophulous
Tumors by his Touch only. And further he says, That King Edward also, as
Histories do report, did by his Touch cure the same, some Prayers and Hymns
being used and recited thereat: This Tagnultius was a French Man: an Italian
does also acknowledge the same. Laurentius also reports, That when Francis the
first King of France was kept Prisoner in Spain, notwithstanding his Exile, he
daily cured multitudes of poor people of this Disease, according to this
Epigram made of him, Hispanos inter sanat Rex Chaeradas estque.
Captivus superis gratus, ut ante fuit.
The whole Medicinal Virtue not being affixt to his prosperity but to his
person, this continuing with him his whole Life.

And this we must affirm for our British Glory (where every good Countryman
ought to contribute toward the Reputation of his Native Soil) that by how much
the Faith of Christ was taken sooner into the World by Britains, than it was by
the French; by so much in all likelihood, this gift of Healing had its more
early appearance in England than it had in France. For Britains were converted
to the Faith, made good by Gelda, in the time of Joseph of Arimathea, and in
the time of King Lucius, and Elutherius the Archbishop, who writ in the Year
167. Ye have received of late, through Gods mercies, in the Kingdom of Britain,
the Law and the Faith of Christ; ye have with you within your Realm, both parts
of the Scriptures; and according to the Prophet which was a King: O God give
Judgment unto the King, and Righteousness unto the Kings Son. And Tertullian
further says, Those places of the Britains to which the Romans could not
approach, were subject unto Christ, although it is not certain who first
Preached the Gospel to them, nor whether they were Greeks or Latins. The first
of the French Kings was Clodovaeus, who lived in the Three hundredth year and
upwards after Christ, as appears by the Faith of Worthy History: Its very
probable, that our Kings in the earlier times of the Church, did receive these
great and wonderful Gifts from God himself, and did exercise the same in their
Dominions: and it was then an old saying, That the Kingdom of England was the
Kingdom of God.

The French Kings The French King had this Gift after the English.
(whose whole Provinces were evermore subject to the Jurisdiction of our Kings
of England) did only borrow this Sanative and Salutiferous Faculty from the
Primitive Power of our English Kings, under whose Government most of the French
Provinces were once subjected. For it appears by uncontrollable Arguments and
Evidences, that both the Crowns of England and of France have for many years
been invested with this Miraculous Gift: so that our English Kings are the
eldest Brothers thereof, and had this in its first possession: For if St. Lewis
King of France, of whom we have already made mention, who was contemporary with
our King Henry the Third, was the first of that Royal Race which healed the
Evil; his Cradle was more than 160 years after the Coffin of our Edward the
Confessor, Edward the Confessor the Curer of Strumacs.
as most Authors have very well observed; from whom, as is abovesaid, our Kings
do derive this most Excellent and Divine Gift at this day by constant
Succession, as witness Andrew Chasne a French Author, and several others of
their own Countrymen.

The truth is, dark and obscure was the Morning of Healing, till cleared up by
the bright Sunshine of Edward the Confessor; and Polydorus does declare many
admirable Virtues which he had in him; and some Authors do write, and amongst
the rest, the Monks of his time had too heavy a hand in spicing his Life with
Miracles, making the relation thereof too hot for any Gust of moderate belief.
There is no question but that there are many things recorded of this great Man
which do carry abundance of truth in them; but again, many other things are
reported of him, which with safety of truth are not to come within the rule of
a general acceptance; and amongst the rest this may serve as one, That he was
declared King by consent of his Parliament, when as yet he was in his Mothers
Womb, his Father having many other Sons alive, the holy Monk Brightwold of
Glassenbury deploring their loss, had in Vision this Edward, then an Exile,
presented unto him by the Apostle Saint Peter himself, who then anointing him
King in his sight, telling him his Reign should be peaceable, and Twenty three
years for continuance: Brightwold being yet unsatisfied who should next
succeed, demanded the Resolution, and was by Peter answered, That the Kingdom
of England was Gods own Kingdom, for whose Successors himself would provide:
with such vain Predictions our otherwise true Stories of him are overcharged,
that Comineus being hereby therewith moved, seemed to tax the English with
overmuch credulity that way. As to this great Man's Birth, he was born at
Islip in Oxfordshire, and was Son of King Etheldred, Queen Emma being his
Mother, who by her Maternal affection sent him into Normandy to Duke Richard
her Brother, to rescue him from all Domestic Quarrels; and before the dead
Corpse of his Father was interred, with a general consent of the Nobles, he was
chosen King: his Coronation was at Winchester, the Celebration of which was
performed by Edsine Archbishop of Canterbury, upon Easter Day 1040. he being
then toward forty years of age, and was in number the 37th Monarch of England,
where he Reigned with that Justice and Clemency, that he obtained the Venerable
Name of Saint, and is distinguished from the other Edwards by the Title of
Confessor; and that he designed his Crown should continue in the English Blood,
he sent for Edward his Nephew, the Son of Edward Ironside, who so long kept out
of England, that he was called Outlaw, and him he intended Heir to the English
Crown, had not hasty Death prevented, and put a stop to his Inclinations: He
Reigned Twenty three years and six months, and died the fourth of January 1066.

And now as to his excellent Deeds; He appeared in the World not like a Mortal
Creature, his Miracles and Presages much keeping resemblance with those of the
Apostles, the which here to assert, were to fill up whole Leaves with a
needless surcharge, and create a suspicion of other great and admirable things
done by him. He was famous for many personal Miracles, the which he is said to
have entailed as an Hereditary Virtue on his Successors the Kings of England,
only with this condition, That they do support and maintain the Christian
Faith, as to the cure of this Struma, or the Disease commonly called The
King's Evil; the which Disease this King cured only by his laying his hands on
the sick party; and this has ever since continued in the Princely Line, where
the Scepter has been weighed by Gods Vicegerent. But as to the Origination of
this Cure, there is still much controversy kept up amongst the Learned, Diverse
Opinions about this Gift.
some numbering the same amongst (...), whose reason is not to be shown; others
do bring it to the power of fancy, and an exalted imagination. Thus when a poor
Creature who never saw the presence of a King, shall behold his Princely and
Royal Hand with a charitable confidence and touch to chase away his troublesome
and loathsome Swellings; to see a Hand so humble, of an Arm so high, show such
condescension; of a King so great to stroke the Sores of so mean, and low, and
despicable a Subject; to see Him who sits in his Royal Chair, vouchsafe his
Presence and helping Hand, where many or most of his Subjects would both stop
their Nostrils, and shut their Eyes at, as scorning to come near them; this may
well raise and enlarge the Patients fancy, summoning his Spirits to assist
Nature for the encountering this Disease with the utmost might.

Other Learned Men, and amongst these particularly Casper Peucerus, although
acquitting this Cure from Diabolical Conjuration, yet taxes the same as guilty
of Superstition; and with him all such others do lessen the brightness thereof,
who do or dare quarrel at the Ceremonies used at this Healing; being either
displeased at the Collect read here, as nothing relating to this purpose, or
unresolved at the efficacy of the Gold put about the Patients neck, or secretly
unsatisfied therewith: All which Exceptions must needs fall to the ground, when
it shall be avowed and made good* that notwithstanding the omission of such
Ceremonies (being nearer kin to the Solemnity than assistance to the Cure) the
bare Hands of our Kings having often effected the same to a Miracle. Some there
are again who make this a clear Miracle, with Gods own Finger put into the
Healing hands; so that when the Art of Physic is nonplust, and Surgery tied
up, and all other humane means baffled, that then this Disease which was made
by the hand of God, should be thus cured by the hand of his Vicegerent, does
not come much beneath one.

The truth is, I would willingly see what should give any denial to any
reasonable Man hereof, since we find every Vegetable has its virtue and energy
given to it, and allowed it: And that neither Stones, Metals, Waters, or Herbs
themselves, and the like, do but show forth and declare the honor of their
Maker, by showing us their various Virtues, and diverse distributive uses for
the good of all Mankind. And why should we Men, and Christians, and true
Denizens of the Church of England, be so narrow Soul'd as not to conceive, that
Christian Men, the most noble of all Corporeal Creatures; and Kings, the most
of Christians; and Kings of Great Britain, the first fruits of all Christian
Kings, should not receive this Christian peculiar Privilege and Sanative
Power; whereof daily instances do give us a greater light of the truth thereof.
And here we may see the difference between Papists and ill Protestants: the
first courting these Miracles, even in their Embrio, and before they come at
any appearance of Birth, greedy to catch hold at the very empty shadows and
resemblances thereof, whilst the ill-natured Protestant and Dissenter are so
far from giving credence to the truth thereof, which every day manifests to
their eyes, that they bend that little Faith they have utterly against it, be
it brought to them by the purest Light and brightest Reason. This Royal Gift
has been preserved in the Royal Line, and maintained by the same above 640
Years and upwards, and is seen every day more and more to flourish amongst us,
to the ease, comfort and relief, of many thousands of poor Souls: If therefore
there be any that can pretend to have had an earlier possession thereof than we
have, they must be of a more ancient Standing, and they must take it (as the
School has it) from God himself: and from the first of Christianity to its
eldest spinning.

As to the exercise of this Gift, Eilredus Rhivalensis does very well remember
it, in the time of Edward the Confessor, as may be seen in Vit. Edvard.
Confessor. ex Manuscript. Celeber. Antiquar. Cambden. Westmonast. who has
there writ of his Miracles with no sparing Pen: Hence did Miracles increase,
Signs multiplied, and more sublimely declared for the merits of Kings and
Princes, the hand of the Omnipotent taking them by the hand. And amongst the
rest, he writes of a young Woman newly married, who met with a double
disadvantage, as having her face deformed with this Disease, and Barrenness for
sometimes depriving her of her Breeding hopes; under her Fauces was indeed a
new Birth of unheard of Swellings, which made a strange and monstrous shape in
her Face, turning her blood into matter, by putrefying Humors lodged under its
Cutis, whence often times were Worms seen to proceed, which afforded a moist,
noisome and unpleasing smell; this Disease begot ill Humors in her Husband, and
her Barrenness lessened his affection to her; she lived very unhappily with
him, proved a trouble to her Parents, strange to her self, and uneasy to her
Friends by this amazing change of Aspect, as also by the loathsome smell she
ever carried about her: Hence contempt, sorrow and pining, were the only
Companions she enjoyed: Physicians seldom being seen ready of giving their time
and skill where plenty does not satisfy their pains, and from these she had
but little comfort; she being thus robbed of all hopes of Cure, and stripped from
every appearance of amendment: The great Physician of the World, most ready to
show his skill, when humanity had given over the Disease as irrecoverable, She
begs of the Almighty after this manner: Lord, Loose me from this trouble! The
Woman being in a Dream, she thought that she was commanded to be brought to the
Palace by a Vision which she saw, and to trust in the Kings Touch; the which if
she were once touched by him, and washed, and signed, she should receive Cure:
The Woman being awakened, and presenting her self to the King in the sight of
the Bystanders, before whom she laid open her condition, he prays for her
Health; and being overcome with Piety and Pity toward her, neither minds the
Filth or the Stench, but laying his hands on her, and putting the Sign of the
Cross upon her, and the like; all which being done, the Cutis presently rent,
the Worms turned out with Matter, the Swellings abated, the Pain ceased, and
she in a very short time, to all admiration, happily cured. And that nothing
may be wanting to extol this Kings Glory, This Woman is said after this to
become fruitful, and by her bearing Children to her Husband, did reconcile his
love to her. This Eilredus writes in the abovesaid Book, amongst the rest of
the Histories of this great King who lived in the same time with this Woman.

Our Gracious King does excel his ancestors herein.
Unto whom shall we most likely resemble, or presume to compare our Dread
Sovereign King Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. who sits as the great Moderator of our English
Isle: The great Parent of our Health and Safety, and the Royal Well-wisher of
our Lives and Fortunes as to our Prosperity and plentiful Enjoyment, who has
as far excelled his Predecessors in this Sanative Faculty, as King Edward did
his Ancestors; who as he was given to us for our health, and the health of our
Nation, so in this Curative Faculty he outshines all the World. And as he takes
in him the Ruling Power of his People, by which he governs by an Hereditary
Right from his Royal Ancestors, so he confirms the same to us by this Balsamic
and Sanative Power, derived to him from his Royal Forefathers inherent in him:
By which he helps and relieves all such Poor as do or may approach his Royal
Touch.

Fortune has her greater and smaller Regalities, as we have shown, This Gift
given him at his Inauguration.
considering either its State or Republic, or the felicity of the Church
therein: for what is more admirable, than to see a Prince excelling his People
in Wisdom, Prudence, Conduct, and the like, who is not only their Delight, but
also of him which made him; who does not only sway and rule his own Nations in
Peace and Tranquillity, but by his Advice and Council does keep and preserve all
others in Amity and Concord? And what can be said more for the Fame of a
Nation, than that England has a Sovereign, which for above thirty odd years,
has Reigned with Glory and Renown, has Ruled it both in Peace and in War,
both by Sea and Land, in which he has not only defended and protected his own
from their Enemies, but also kept them safe from all Foreign danger and hazard?
And in this Religious Work (which has taken up our whole Discourse) is not so
much of his Majesty shown, as of his Divinity. For this is the great gift of
the Divine Majesty, and is every where found worthy of a Divine Progeny, and of
a Royal Unction, who by right of both, to which his Sacred Rights and
Privileges being annexed and consecrated to him, he does in a moment send ease
to the Sick, and restore health to the Diseased. And I presume, there is no
good principled Man, or any so vain and inconsiderate, who having a little more
sense than a Brute in him, or that only desires to live upon contradiction to
all Sense, Reason, or to any thing that is good, will ever deny the same or
appear a Dissenter thereto, since it is the Kings Right, as his peculiar
Privilege given to him: By which his Royal Scepter does flourish in his Sacred
Hand, and his Princely Person gains more Veneration and Honor than his
Predecessors.

And because I have been often conversant, and attending at many of these
laudible Operations, having waited on his Sacred Person both at public and
private Healings, as one of his meanest Chirurgions, where I have seen many
thousands of poor Souls touched and cured by his Sacred Hand (and as a more
particular account has lately been given in, that he has healed above Six
thousand this very last year) I am obliged both by Duty and Conscience to give
my Faith to his Royal Touch, seeing the daily and innumerable effects thereof:
Many of which, as if amazed at the speedy farewell of their Diseases, have
immediately been cured to admiration, even in the Presence, before they have got
out of the Banqueting House at White Hall, where his Majesty does most usually
heal; and some, although brought in Lame and Blind, yet have within a very
little and short space of time, recovered their Limbs and gained their Sight,
as will plentifully be made good by diverse Examples in our last Chapter. And
whatsoever Opinion some men may have of our Prince and of our Religion we do
profess in England, as also of his great Piety, Charity and Clemency; yet this
I will not be afraid to affirm to any Man, of what averseness soever, That when
both in Town and Country, the best Physicians and Chirurgions have been
consulted for curing the Sick troubled with this Evil Disease, and their best
Skill and utmost Art has been exercised, and yet proved useless and of none
effect, such afterward who have come and obtained his Majesty's Gracious
Touch, their Diseases have been seen immediately to vanish, as being afraid of
approaching his Royal Touch. If he therefore were not the right Heir to the
Crown (which I hope the worst of Mankind dare not pretend to confute) and
conducted thither by Divine Authority, and established in his Throne by the
Almighty Power, these wonderful effects would not so apparently be seen
performed by him: For this Work carries more of Divinity than Majesty in it,
and is wholly the Gift of Divine Majesty; and when both these meet together,
and Center in their right Lines, you will ever find a Divine Blessing
interposing.

And as a farther acknowledgment of His Majesty's success herein, although I
may, perhaps, by the best of Authority, give as full an account of Struma's as
any before me, as to a Curative Method; Yet when I consider his Majesty's
gracious Touch, I find my self readily nonplust, and shall ever affirm, That
all Chirurgions whatsoever must truckle to the same, and come short of his
mavelous and miraculous method of Healing; and for further manifestation
hereof, I do humbly presume to assert, That more Souls have been Healed by His
Majesty's Sacred Hand in one Year, than have ever been cured by all the
Physicians and Chirurgions of his three Kingdoms ever since His happy
Restoration. Whereas should an Usurper or Tyrant surreptitiously, by Pride and
Bloody Massacre, forcibly enter his Royal Throne and touch at the same
Experiment, you will never see such happy success; as tried by the late Usurper
Cromwell in the late Rebellious Times, Influences flow from thence, he having
no more right to the Healing Power, than he had to the Regal Jurisdiction: His
Trial rather chequering and darkning the bright Rays hereof and so bringing it
into Obscurity, than affording it any appearance of Light. Let no Man therefore
presume to lay violent hands on Gods Anointed, he having from Heaven, as a
particular Mark and signal Token, this Curative Faculty transmitted to him, and
implanted in him as a Seal of his Mercy, Clemency, Goodness, Providence,
Omnipotence, and Truth thereof. And let this Healing Virtue of our King,
amongst our English, bear the time of a Miracle, if not allowed to keep equal
pace and touch with the same.

CHAP. VII. Part of the Manner and Form of the Healing; wherein is demonstrated
the Kings Excellent Piety, Humility, and Clemency in Curing Strumaes, with the
Ceremonies thereto.
WE come now to show the Manner and Form of His Majesty's Gracious Healing,
wherein we shall present the Ceremonies thereat used; in which Discourse, we
must acknowledge His Religion, Piety, Charity, Clemency and Humility, appearing
as so many Gems belonging to His Royal Person; into whose Sovereign Hand, above
all His People, is this most Divine Gift settled and confirmed, the which He
exercises as frequently as He pleases, being either supplicated thereto by
some of His Nobles, or of the Poor themselves who are thus afflicted, which He
performs both by public and private Healings: And as a signal favor of Him
herein, He never makes any exceptions of Persons, being either Young or Old,
Rich or Poor, Beautiful or Deformed, every of which do receive a like share of
His Sacred Touch.

And that none may approach His Royal Presence but such as are really troubled
with the Evil, several Officers are appointed for this great Ceremony; amongst
the first of which are His Majesty's Surgeons in waiting, who are to take in
Certificates, and deliver out Tickets in order to a Healing or Healings; where
this following method is to be observed.

No Patient having this Disease should come to the Surgeons for a Ticket,
without he or she brings with them a Certificate, signed and sealed under the
Ministers and Churchwardens Hands that they were never before Touched by his
Sacred Majesty. And that no Person whatever may lose their labor, as a very
proper Experiment by way of prevention for the future of any further Cheats by
counterfeit Certificates and the like, great care would be taken of the method
of Certificates, and their form: for as these are the only proper Instruments
to procure Tickets, so they should also come with that just conduct which may
defend the Bearer, and preserve the Kings Gold. Wherefore I presume to offer,
If Printed Blank Certificates were sent to every Bishop of his Diocese, and
these signed with their own Hands and Sign Manual, and thence communicated to
every Surrogate throughout his Diocese, who at their several Meetings and
Visitations should acquaint their Brother-Ministers thereof, or distribute of
the same to them, that such who have the Evil may have their Names certified
therein, together with the Ministers and Churchwardens Hands and Seals
likewise, and the Name or Names of such diseased Persons entered in their
Church-Register-Book, with the day of the month, and the date of the year when
such Certificate was delivered out. This would be an infallible Remedy against
all counterfeit Certificates whatever. And although this may at first view seem
to carry trouble in it, yet being once put into practice, it will prove both
very easy, and of great service to the King and Country.

And to prevent all tiresome Journeys, and tedious Travels of many indigent and
sick people, who do venture to march many hundred of miles not really having
this Disease, save only on their own supposition; for a more ready piece of
service to these, to bring them to a shorter passage, they should do well to go
to some Neighboring Physician and Surgeons, and get them to search and
examine them, to know whether their Disease be the Evil, or not: and if they
find it so, to signify the same under their Hands in the aforesaid
Certificate; so that this Certificate may very well be allowed of double use
and advantage, as by giving ease and satisfaction to the Patient, and quiet to
the Surgeon; the one satisfying that the Patient never before this came to
crave His Majesty's Touch, the other confirming the Disease by Men of Art to
the Surgeon in waiting.

This being cleared thus far, the Surgeon in Waiting should or ought to keep
a Register-Book, where every Parties Name is to be kept Alphabetically therein,
and their Certificates filled up. This Book also will show its self of great
service and satisfaction to other succeeding Surgeons: for as Surgeons
are no more Immortal than other Men, so we shall find that People do not always
inhabit and dwell in one place, or part of the World; and he that perhaps might
have lived this year in one County, may the next year live in another; and
since wherever he lives, if he has the Evil, and be not cured thereof, and
may in one County gain a Certificate, and by that, Gold; so in another place
where he goes to dwell, he may endeavor to procure another Certificate, and by
this cheat the King of a second piece; a trick not now to be learnt by many,
but rather studied by diverse, who look more after the Gold than the Cure: for
prevention of this, where any suspected person shall come to the Surgeon,
for the cure of such Cheats, he may look over the Alphabet in his Book, and
there see if he can find the Name of him whom he may or shall suspect therein.
I know of no other way imaginable to prevent this Cheat; and if there were such
who can find out a better, they would do great service to the Nation.

Another advantage he will have hereby, when by this true account-keeping he
may satisfy both His Majesty and the whole World how many are yearly Healed by
His Sacred Hand.

Thus far have I presumed to clear the method for poor Peoples making ready for
their Journey toward their being healed: But after this, great care would be
taken, (when they are arrived at their Happy Port, as I may well call it, it
being the only aim they had in all their Travel) to meet with a quick dispatch,
in order to their speedy return, and not to be kept so long in Town till both
their Money and Credit is gone, (which God knows amongst the generality of
these sort is not much nor great) and therefore does both require and merit a
short, ready, and speedy dispatch. But as the case now is, its harder to
approach the Surgeon, than obtain a Touch; and more tiresome for them to
wait day after day upon him, whose chief business should be to attend their
coming, than it was to get every thing in readiness for his dispatch of them.
But there may be a convenient Remedy found out for this Evil also, which is as
bad, if not worse, than the former: Could His Majesty's Pleasure be known of
his times of Healings for Summer, I mean at Whitehal, Windsor, and the like,
public Notice ought to be given hereof in the Gazette, by which all people may
readily understand His Majesty's Pleasure of Healing, and the times thereof,
after which none should dare to presume any further trouble. This being done,
as an absolute cure to delay, or any sinister blind way of management, if His
Majesty would be graciously pleased to appoint some place in Whitehal, or other
place, for the performance of this Service, where a Physician and two
Surgeons ought always to attend to view, examine, and dispatch the poor,
diseased, and maimed people; and there, after having His Majesty's order for a
Healing, acquaint them thereof, and when they are to wait to be healed: This I
am confident will be found an excellent, as well as joyful method to the poor
people, and a great deal of ease as well as satisfaction to the Surgeon, and
prove a signal remedy of lessening the ill opinion the Surgeon goes under at
their continual and tedious waitings at his House, and abate somewhat of the
hard censure is put upon him by several people.

In Winter also, when his Majesty touches altogether at White Hall, the same
method should be maintained, and His Majesty's pleasure understood about it,
which may easily be known by the former directions, and the Sick with abundance
of ease be conducted to His Majesty's presence to be Healed.

It would also be well, that the whole World might take notice how many, and
what great Cures have been performed by the King, as I have already offered,
and how they have arrived at a better state of health. And here may we very
well bring in another great mistake of several People, who when they have
received His Majesty's Gracious Touch, that this therefore must be doubled upon
them, and their Gold must as readily be changed, else their Cure must
consequently be ineffectual, the Kings Majesty not being allowed capable of
curing them, without he observes and complies with their Humors and abominable
Fancies: a confidence only grounded upon uncertainty, and kept up with
immutability: a Distemper which ought to be inspected as to its cure, as much
as the Evil it self; for its consequence is dangerous and deceivable; for here
we have an Anguis in herbis, which does both readily and greedily feed upon the
glittering change of Gold: and this Legerdemane trick is finely performed, by
putting the Change upon his Majesty, and yet this with a dishonest Man is not
easily found out or discovered, but where Truth, Justice, and an honest
Resolution maintains the Principles, and inhabits in the Center a perfect
detestation of such things does readily appear.

I would gladly see any Man of sense deny the easiness of the assertion, who
may at a very little hole perceive how a Man, whose humor does closely salute
advantage, and whose mind does keep company with self-preservation and
interest, looking still forwards to the yellow glittering Metal, to purchase to
himself an advantageous parcel of Gold in time, by taking leave of changing an
old piece of Gold for a new Ticket; or as I may say, cheating the King of his
first Medal, by giving a new Ticket for a second: These things I have heard
were in use very frequent formerly, and it were well if they be not by some to
this day yet put in practice. A Remark in this Point I hope is enough, for I
dare presume to aver and offer, that there is nothing which does more impose
upon his Majesty's Sacred Honor, or upon the welfare of them who come to
receive the Blessing, as well as the benefit of his Healing, than the lessening
this Royal Virtue communicated to his Sacred Hand by the Almighty, than for
such who should pay all Obedience and Veneration thereto, either to obstruct
the same if possibly, or abuse to it by their dark sinister or purblind
bribery: As a Cure therefore for this also, if His Sacred Majesty shall be
graciously pleased to allow any poor Soul a second Touch, let him or her, or
whoever they be, bring up their own Gold to the King, and put a new Silk Ribbon
into it, which if he pleases to put over them, will be sufficient for them
without any further charge of Gold.

There are another sort of People who makes it their study to cheat the King of
his Gold, who having been Touched and received their Gold, are ready to sell
and part with it; and were this not true, and very commonly put in practice,
without all question His Majesty's touching Medals would not be so frequently
seen and found in Goldsmiths shops; and since these Cheats are too apparent,
great care ought to be made as to their Inspection; wherefore I presume to
offer, that having, as I have already mentioned, a Physician and two
Chirurgions ready to inspect and examine people, such Cheats will not easily be
detected, for as the Proverb says, Plus vident oculi quam oculus; and the
Names of all people being set down in an Alphabetical order and method, the
King cannot so easily be cheated, nor his Chirurgions, whose care it should be
to prevent the same, be either deluded or questioned. Thus much as to the
Chirurgions Office and Duty.

The next Person which comes in order, is Clerk of the Closet to His Majesty,
who is the only proper Person for keeping of His Majesty's Gold used both at
private as well as public Healings, he being Check to the Surgeon. The
great Master of this Office, is the Right Reverend Father in God, Nathaniel
Lord Bishop of Durham, who always being in waiting, does present to His
Majesty's Sacred Hand upon his Knees, such Gold as is delivered out to every
diseased person: Under whom Mr. Tho: Donkelly, His Majesty's Closet-keeper,
does also attend with Gold on his Arms ready strung, and likewise does present
the same to the Clerk of the Closet; his Office being also to take an account
from the Surgeon how many Medals has at every Healing been disposed of by
His Majesty, and to have the same signified under the hand of the chief
Surgeon in Writing in his Register Book, which he keeps on purpose for the
same use, with the day of the Month and the date of the Year, and the numbers
of them that have been Healed: He also, as I am well informed, does give a
Receipt to the Exchequer for all the Gold he receives, to balance the Privy
Purse; so that from his Office a true and just account may yearly be given in,
how much Gold the King does expend on this charitable Office, and how much is
annually received for this purpose, a draught of which ever since his being in
this place, I have with his careful assistance, given at the end of our
Discourse of the Evil.

Thus much of these Persons and their Places.

The Tickets being delivered out, His Majesty does generally appoint his day of
Healing, of which the Surgeon is to acquaint those who are to be Touched,
the which for the most part does happen on Sundays; but whether on Sundays or
other Days, it matters not much, the effects of his Cure being as good at one
time as at another. The Day being come, before His Majesty does approach to His
Royal Chair, The Ceremonies laudable.
which is generally after Morning Prayers, the Chief Officer of the Yeomen of
the Guard does place the sick People in very convenient order for their
approaching the King without trouble or noise: The which done, His Majesty
enters his Royal Chair uncovered, at whose beginning there are generally two
Chaplains attending: One of which reading the Ceremonies appointed for this
Service, His Majesty all the while being surrounded by his Nobles, and many
other Spectators: The sick and diseased People being kept back by the
Chirurgions till the appointed time, where after having made three Obeisancies,
they do bring them up in order. The chief in waiting delivers them one by one
to the King to be Touched; the which done, the other takes him or her from him,
and this method is used throughout the whole number which comes to be Healed.

The whole Method is as follows. The Chaplain thus begins: The Gospel written
in the 16th Chapter of St. Mark at verse. 14. Jesus appeared unto the eleven as
they sat at meat, and cast in their teeth their unbelief, and hardness of
heart, because they had not believed them which had seen that he was risen
again from the dead. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and
preach the Gospel to all creatures, he that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, and he that believes not shall be damned: all these tokens shall follow
them that believe. In my name they shall cast out devils, they shall speak with
new tongues, they shall drive away serpents. And if they drink any deadly
thing, Where the infirm Persons are presented to the King on their knees, the
King lays his hands upon them.
it shall not hurt them. They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall
recover. The which Saying is continued between every Healing of His Sacred
Majesty, till all the Sick be touched by him; the which being finished, he
begins this following part.

So when the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into Heaven, and is on
the right hand of God. And they went forth and preached every where, the Lord
working with them, and confirming the Word with miracles following. The which
done, he begins the Gospel written in the first Chapter of St. John, ver. the
first: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was
the Word; the same was in the beginning with God, all things were made by it,
and without it was nothing made which was made: in it was life, and the life
was the light of men, and the light shined in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. There was sent a man from God, whose name was John, the
same came as a witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men, through him
might believe. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that
Light. Here the Chirurgions come up the second time, making their three
Obeisances as formerly, where the Clerk of the Closet on his Knees does deliver
to the King his Gold ready strung upon a white Silk Ribbond; and when these
following words come to be read, the King puts over the Gold.

Here again they are presented to the King, add the King puts the Gold about
their necks.
That Light was the true Light, which lightneth every man which comes into the
World.

This running through the whole course of the Ceremony, which words are
continually repeated between every one which receives the Gold. This being
finished, These following words are read: He was in the world, and the world
was wade by him, and the world knew him not; he came amongst his own, and his
own received him not; but as many as received him, to them he gave power to be
made sons of God: even them that believed on his name, which were born not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God.
And the same Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw the glory of
it, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of Grace and
Truth.

This being finished, the Chaplains, with the rest of the People on their
knees, do pronounce these Prayers.

Verse. Lord have mercy upon us.

Resp. Lord have mercy upon us.

Verse. Christ have mercy upon us.

Resp. Christ have mercy upon us.

Verse. Lord have mercy upon us.

Resp. Lord have mercy upon us.

Then the Chaplains read the Common Prayer; viz.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead
us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

These Answers thereto be made by them that come to be healed.
Verse. O Lord save thy servants.

Resp. Which put their trust in thee.

Verse. Send help unto them from above.

Resp. And evermore mightily defend them.

Verse. Help us, O God our Savior.

Resp. And for the glory of thy Name deliver us, be merciful to us sinners for
thy Names sake.

Verse. O Lord, hear our Prayers.

Resp. And let our cry come unto thee.

Then the Chaplain reads this Prayer following.
O Almighty God, who art the Giver of all health, and the aid of them that seek
to thee for succor. We call upon thee for thy help and goodness, mercifully to
be showed to these thy servants, that they being healed of their infirmities,
may give thanks to thee in thy Holy Church. Through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, Here he concludes.
and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all
evermore. Amen.

This being finished, His Majesty having by my Lord Chamberlain, or in his
absence the Vice-Chamberlain, and two other Nobles, brought up Linen, and the
Basin and Ewer to wash his Hands, He takes leave of the people, and they
joyfully and thankfully do every one return home, praising God and their good
King; and when this method is apparent to all men, and carries in it the
greatest truth imaginable, what man of Sense, Religion or Honesty can there be,
which shall dare to deny the truth and efficacy thereof, being both glorious
and praiseworthy? considering that the Liturgy used therein is holy, the
simplicity and reverence of the Ceremonies thereof being performed with all
decency, the person who performs this being hereto constituted by a Divine
permission, performing it without any appearance of superstition; the Author of
the whole Work being the Holy Spirit, and this Gift arising thence with both
its use and fruit. Here Is nothing but Benediction, and Prayers for the recovery
of the Sick, Imposition of Hands, and Contraction of Health, the same Ceremony
used as is used at Baptism, the putting over the Gold being but as a Sacred
Gift and Pledge of His Charity. In the whole, there is nothing but God
worshipped, Christ venerated, and poor Christians cured, without any Figments
or Cheats of Black Arts, Invocations of Evil Spirits, Characters, or the like
delusions, all which I hope may not come short of an English Miracle. How
therefore should all true Englishmen, and Sons of the Church, adore, and have
in high reverence that great Sovereign, who can give ease to the Diseased, by
his Touching such as are not only despicable to view, but fetid to smell, who
makes no difference, as I have already shown, between Great and Small, Peer and
Peasant, Delicate or Deformed? What therefore can there be which might not make
the most Ungrateful Man change his rude temper, and sweeten it with a better
belief? Let all the World therefore admire our English Monarch, who can by His
Salutiferous Gift distribute Health and Comfort to all His diseased Subjects,
not performing this in corners, but in the public view of all His Subjects, in
his Royal Palace, and in places appointed for Divine Worship, and in the Holy
Sanctuary. And this I hope may be a convincing Argument enough against any
Gainsayer or Dissenter whatsoever, who are neither kind to themselves, or civil
to others.

CHAP. VIII. This shows the Certainty of its Events, and the Admirable Effects
of its Cure.
THe truth is, this great Gift of Healing does call the Christians Faith, and
also Humane Reason into consent therewith; for without these do march together,
the Events will not answer expectation. And in truth would be against God
himself as well as His Sacred Majesty, to wish for Health, and not preserve the
memory of those great Cures done by Him; to read their Names thus cured, and
commended to Posterity, if Faith did not march along with it: For what is worse
than to bury the knowledge of the remembrance of Favors done? the only black
mark of Ingratitude, and nothing more kind than to allow the memorable Cures
done: For what is Piety but a willing consent thereto in its Parents? and what
more kind than to allow the same to the Father of our Nation? Our Faith does
therefore command our keeping in memory the Health we receive from our Gracious
Sovereign, and to register the same in our belief; since we find these Diseases
do no more spare the proud Citizen, than the despicable Countryman, and that
both these have found benefit by His Majesty's Gracious Hand, is as clear as
the Sun that shines: Has not the French, The admirable Effects of His
Majesty's Healing to all Persons of the World.
Dutch, Scotch, Irish, Welsh, and English, been all happy partakers of the
benefit of His Majesty's Gracious Touch? Has there been scarce any City, Town
or Country which cannot speak well of His Curative Faculty? Has there or is
there scarce a Street in this Populous City, that has not found the benefit of
His Sacred Hand? And yet as if this Disease did get a new Birth by
Conversation, it meets the King wherever He goes, with as much vigor and
plenty as if the work were now to begin. And as a very strange remark hereof,
although I do believe near half the Nation has been Touched and Healed by His
Sacred Majesty since His Happy Restoration; yet upon any new appearance of a
fresh Healing, they are seen to come in afresh, and as fast as if not one had
yet been Touched by Him: A thing as strange as monstrous!

To my own knowledge I have known many perfectly cured the first time, Some
cured the first time. Others not cured till the second Touch. Some selling
their Gold, their Disease has seized them afresh.
they having been Touched by His Sacred Majesty. Others again having been seen
healed upon His second Touch, which could not receive the same benefit the
first time. Some again having received His Majesty's gracious Touch, and losing
their Gold, their Distemper has De Novo seized them again; and these also upon
gaining a second Touch, and new Gold, their Diseases have been seen utterly to
have been chased away, and they themselves perfectly cured.

Now as to particular times and seasons of Healings, as Good Friday, and the
like, As to the Healing on Good Friday.
which do carry a strong Faith with some people, who unless they can be Touched
by the King that time, their belief is so weak and tender, that they do presume
and suppose any other time in the year is not so fitting, or do or can carry
the same efficacy. But to these delicate sort of people, The reason of some not
being cured.
who I am subject to believe are as wavering in their Faith as they are in
their Opinions; and unless the Almighty will please so far to condescend as in
every degree to answer their Humors, by working more than an ordinary Miracle
in them, they may with abundance of ease be brought to think that there is
little or no effect of cure in the whole. A sin I am sure it is to tie the
Almighty to particular times and seasons, and therefore not to be accounted
(amongst Men of sense) to have more efficacy than at other times.

And to put stop to another old received Opinion of the Gold; The putting over
the Gold only a token of Charity.
which is, If the King does not find, and give the Gold, as well as put the
same over their Necks, this will not answer expectation, some of these sort
putting a higher esteem upon the Gold, than upon the Hand that put it about
their Necks. But all such may know that this Gold thus used and employed, is no
more than a resemblance of Health, for the Cure has often been seen done without
any Gold at all given, sometimes the same has been performed only by Silver, as
shall be made good by several Examples in the last Chapter.

Another sort of people also there are, About changing the Gold.
who if they can procure the favor from the Surgeon to procure them a
second Touch, they must likewise have their Gold also changed, (some effect of
which I have already touched at) as if the later Gold had any more effect in it
than the former, they both coming from one and the same Royal Hand; an
unnecessary trouble, as little efficacious, and perhaps more deceitful. And
that Gold is not the great Ingredient in this Cure, may easily be thus proved,
by calling into remembrance the Rebellious Times, when Tyrants turned this once
happy Nation into an Anarchy of Confusion, and by their unlawful upset High
Court of Justice, or rather Injustice, forced the best of Kings, where He was
wont to show the Grandeur of His Majesty due to Princes, there to make His
Funeral Pulpit, laying down the Sacred Trophies of His Greatness, whereon the
Ensigns of Renown had formerly been planted, by their cursed Hands, and
compelled to quit His three Nations by their most cursed and barbarous
Cruciations; and yet all this done under pretense of Devotion and Sanctity,
bringing Him under their Tyrannical Judgment, to submit to their bold and
bloody Assassination; in whose horrid Massacre, and after whose inhumane and
barbarous Decollation, its precious Blood left not its vigor which it kept
whilst it was warm in His Purple Veins, being either taken up by Handkerchiefs,
or collected by other things, with which these Strumous Swellings being but
touched, or therewith concerned, they have seen suddenly to vanish and
disappear: and this also shall be made good by some Observations thereof in my
last Chapter. And if His Royal Corpse, stripped from Life, was thus accompanied
with this Divine and Heavenly Virtue, what shall we think and say of the Action
performed by the Life, as by the Blessed and Sacred Hands of our Dread Sovereign?
Besides, if the Virtue did wholly lodge in the Gold, I would have such as give
this great Reputation to the same, to make trial of a piece of their own Gold,
in putting the same about their own Necks, and see then if this will in any
measure answer their desired ends: The success I leave to them who shall show
their folly as well as give themselves trouble to make such a trial thereof.

These two may be very well granted convincing Arguments enough to prove the
truth hereof: for this of His Majesty's precious Blood was seen done, and known
to be performed in the midst of the Kings Enemies, and in those times when
Traiterous Usurpers took leave to enter the Royal Throne; where not only the
troublesome Mobile, but the rigid Masters of Presbytery and Independency, were
so far from agreeing and consenting to His Majesty's Healing Faculty, that the
little Faith they had, they employed to confound the same: such were the great
Reverence these Rebellious Tribes gave to this Divine Virtue. And in this I may
presume positively to affirm, that such as do not give Credance to the King as
Gods Vicegerent, and to the many thousands cured thus by Him, they do, ever
did, and ever shall be thought to give as little belief to God Himself, let His
Miracles be never so many, or never so great, such being their churlish Humor,
and ill composed Dispositions.

To the believing Man, I shall produce Saint Chrysostom's words, (...), That
according to their proportion of Faith they do, may, and shall be great Sharers
in this Sanative Faculty. And as a farther Confirmation of the same, he says,
(...) that is, Tantum influit quantum invenerit Oblatum sibi fidei vasculum.

Thus every unbelieving Man may rest satisfied, that without he brings Faith
enough with him, and in him, that His Majesty has Virtue enough in His Touch
to Heal him, his expectation will not be answered: whereas the Man of Faith,
who confides on the same, will as readily find the benefit of the same. And
although this method does not always answer expectation, yet its Effects are
wonderful, and its Cure most frequent, as is and has been sufficiently and
satisfactorily made good. And this may appear as a Vindication of the Certainty
of its Events, as also of the Admirability of the Effects of His Majesty's
Sanative Power.

CHAP. IX. Several Doubts resolved about this Curative Method, made by
Atheists, Sadducees, and ill conditioned Pharisees.
SInce there is nothing so excellent in its nature, or opinion of Men, or blessed
by good Men, and held in admiration by the Religious Men, but may be blasted by
the envious breath of the wicked and ill natured Man, and so made either the
subject of their scorn, or yield a sower taste of their malevolent Humor: I
shall in this Chapter endeavor to allay their fury, and somewhat blunt and abate
the edge of their calumny which they have evermore been ready to put upon this
Sanative Faculty. And in undertaking hereof, I hope I have made some onset
already: but lest this should not be prevalent enough to conquer their
incredulity, I shall offer this as a farther Answer: Whereas there are some who
do wholly deny the substance of the Action, and presume to call the thing in
question; Various Opinions as to this Cure,
and others, who do not so much blame the thing it self, as the substance
thereof and its Ceremonies, bringing hereby the whole Operation under
Superstition, whilst others by spleen, disdain, ridicule, and private injury,
will needs put a blind upon this most excellent Operation, although confirmed to
them by Ocular Demonstration as clear as the Sun; and are not to be brought to
the belief thereof, although they see it done before their eyes, no ways
allowing a Divine Power going along therewith, it being performed by Man. To
what an Age of Incredulity are we arrived at, where resolution, spleen, and
injury, shall confirm a Man's opposition to the very light of Reason and Truth
it self? where we shall have Men bid defiance to His Majesty's humility which
he shows in this Operation; to his Piety and pious bounty which he liberally
bestows on his Diseased Subjects, and to the Cures thus daily performed by his
Sacred Hand, who do daily study to ore-thwart, dispute, contradict, and speak
ill of this Divine and most Excellent Qualifications, rather than give Faith,
Reverence, or a just Acknowledgment thereto. And as a close to their black
lips, I will presume to offer, That when the most Learned have worthily, and
with all reverence writ hereof, and have neither been ashamed nor afraid to
proclaim to all the world the many miraculous Cures which have been thus
performed by His Sacred Majesty's Hand, and for many hundred of Years kept up
by the Princely Line, their Incerdulity may well be called into question, not
having validity enough in it to balance those weighty and great Opinions which
ever have, and still do maintain the same: And where I have as a guard to my
Opinion, the best of Antiquity opposing the greatest Scruples that can be made
as to this matter, seeing some so extraordinary hot for lessening wholly any
Virtue in the Gold or Silver, or the like, which shall be put about the
Patients necks, and abominate the use thereof with all their hearts, in any
other but in their own possession: Where this yet has been used by the Kings
Sacred Hand, we have found it of admirable use and advantage.

Others as readily do cry out against the Ceremonies, The use of the ceremonies.
being as little pleased therewith as the former, when they shall please to
vouchsafe, allowing them of some use in displaying a good and Religious Man's
life, and yet are not willing to grant this of any efficacy in this Healing
Faculty; whereas they may, or ought to know, that the Word of God is as great
an Alexipharmick herein, in working this Curative Effect: The saying therefore
of a certain Form of Word- at this Healing, is not to be condemned, unless we
will blame the word of Faith by our Impiety: For Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God, as Romans 10. ver. 6. But the Righteousness which is
of Faith speaks in this wise: Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. Thus therefore the legitimate use of the Divine Word, is to be
joined with a right Faith. But because I am sure I shall meet some even
opposing the thing it self, knowing there be too many who cannot in their
natures either speak well of any body, or of any thing, unless brought to their
test and approbation, and so despise all Virtues; speaking evil of Angels,
Saints, and the Almighty himself; laughing at his blessed People, evil treating
his Anointed and their Dread Sovereign; mocking the Holy Spirit, and affronting
his Gifts, Miracles, Scriptures, Sacraments, and all other Ecclesiastical
Ceremonies and Rights, which do not keep equal pace with their humor and fancy:
A sort of which we read of in Phil. 3. cap. 18. who are there called, The
enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory their shame, who mind earthly things: Should we to these
bring the brightest Truth, fetched even from Heaven it self; they are so
naturally inclined to contradiction, that they will believe them to be in the
dark: That you may with more ease bring an Atheist to believe there is a God,
than these to give Faith to the excellent works which are daily done by our
Saered Majesty at this day by his Sacred Touch.

There are another sort of Creatures, who are inward enemies to this Sanative
Gift, evermore doubting of its clearness; and these do hug themselves in
opposing and contradicting all such as shall speak well thereof. Of which sort
may Casper Peucerus be well reckoned one, of whom we have already given you an
account, both as to his Religion, and unhappy Opinion. And I believe we have
too many more of his Opinion at this day, who should they see our Sovereign
heal, and exercise the same Gift daily, yet this their cursed Opinion and Humor
sticks so close to them, that they will scarce give it leave to breath, or gain
any reputation amongst them: And although it may get footing into a more
favorable Opinion amongst some of them, that all this is done without any
Enchantment, or ill and black methods used, yet they do receive it with that
tenderness, that it must gain upon them by degrees, and takes sometime before
they can work them into any belief thereof. And since it does require no easy
task either to please or confute these Adversaries as to the Fact it self, who
cannot assent to the manner of performing thereof, although having less reason
to dissent from the same: These following Reasons, I hope, may in some measure
make the task neither so uneasy as may be expected. Thus therefore this
Healing Faculty is not produced, ex semine, by an Ingenite Faculty which may be
produced with the nature thereof, as many Physical Virtues are thence derived,
and by similitude of Bodies and Manners taking their first Idaea's thence, as
one Body being productive out of another, but no Soul thus produced out of
another, every Man generating his like in Specie, not in dividual Quality. Such
therefore who would thus press down with opposition this Healing Faculty, have
less need to doubt of that which the Learned has so highly writ thereof, and
maintained as in the Inaugurated Rights of the Kings of England and of France.
Since God himself is he that creates Kings, and Anoints their Royal Hands with
the Sacred Oil, as with a Royal Balsamic Virtue, by which does arise other
Gifts of Fortitude, Council, Prudence, and Governance like Christian Kings, as
well as in this of Healing. Peucerus unkindly calls this, The admirable
pastimes of Events, at which I wonder more, than at his other odd Persuasion,
whereas there is such a distance between them of Miracles, and the Divine Gifts
of Healing (not only attested by us, but by all our Neighboring Nations) that
our English have that perfect abhorrence thereto, that we are as much purged
and cleansed from the same, as the House of God with Hezechia and Josias was
purified from all its corruptions. But what need I bring Examples to confute
this ridiculous Opinion of his, since we find that he himself does fall to the
ground, and acts in the dark? Let us therefore recede from this one extreme, to
prevent our falling into another, by keeping the middle way. Peucerus only fell
from Augerius, even as the Meteologer does from the Philosopher, and both from
true Theology. Augerius Ferrerius de Gordonis says, That he and other
Physicians being much addicted to the Superstition of Charms, which were
prevalent against Bleeding, and other Chonical Distempers, having in them the
Faculty of curing intermitting Fevers, and many other Diseases of that sort,
thus proceeds therein. The event of which Cure is not to be taken from the
Characters, nor from the Chatm only, but this working such power in our minds,
that we therewith complying, this gets fancy also to join therewith, by which
it gains ground of the Distemper and overcomes it. Thus one Man acting by the
power of Persuasion, he gains on the Man on which he thus acts, with which he
does powerfully proceed in the same; he joining therewith, and giving a
coadjutant Faith to the Operation thus performed, the intended design does take
a speedy effect; and thus working by Characters or Enchantment, or the like,
for curing of Agues, and the Patients therewith so troubled, they believing
they shall hereby be cured, the Disease has suddenly been seen to vanish, and
they acquitted from their Distemper to admiration. Confidence and Persuasion
being two great Assistants in this Curative Method, especially amongst the
illiterate and unlearned, where Opinion having once got possession amongst such
as to their Charms and Characters, there is no farther need of outward
Applications, these in themselves leaving satisfactory Arguments amongst these
sort of People to work their effects. But leaving these dark and black methods
thus generally used amongst the ignorant, and less knowing: With his favor,
known Miracles may be brought to light by the strength of the mind.

And lest I may seem tedious in making good my reason for the same, as to this
Healing Faculty: This is not a gift of Nature, but of Grace, neither does it
live in Man but in his Maker; not in human confidence as these Charms and
Characters, but in the power of Faith derivative from the Almighty. Moreover,
our Gracious Sovereign does acquit all idle pretenses whatsoever hereto, by
neither questioning their Faith who come to be healed, nor asks their Belief
about the same; he only prays for them, blesses them with his Sacred Touch,
gives them his Gold, and thus does impart health unto them; from which clear
consequence, such as the Faith of them is who thus are touched by him, his
Curative Effects does most clearly evince and demonstrate. Genebrard of Paris
is very nice in allowing this Gift of Healing to the Kings of England, when he
says, Some of them have exercised this Healing Virtue: But he would have been
much kinder, and a better Master of Generosity, would he have been pleased to
show the difference between those which had this, and those which wanted the
same. But I need not to travel far for an answer ready minted for him, which
partly falls in one of his own Countrymen, which happened about the midst of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, after Pope Pius had let flown his Excommunication
against her: There was a stiff Roman Catholic (as they do delight to call
themselves) who being cast into Prison, See Tooker
and in a high measure visited with the Kings Evil, and having with pain and
expense long used the advice of Physicians without any success, at length
humbly addressed himself to the Queens Majesty, through whom, by Gods
assistance, he was completely cured; and being demanded what news, I perceive,
says he, now at last by plain experience, that the Excommunication denounced
by the Pope against Her Majesty, is of none effect, seeing God has blessed her
with so great and miraculous a virtue, as Dr. Tooker has it in Charismate,
cap. 6. page 92. And as a second satisfaction to this Frenchman, he tells us
another History of a Maid, when the Queen being in Glocestershire, and many
poor People afflicted with this Disease, who in uncivil Crowds did so press
upon her Majesty, that she let fall these words, Alas poor People, I cannot, I
cannot cure you, it is God alone who can do it. The which words some ill
affected persons did interpret, as her utter renouncing of this Divine Gift:
whereas she only removed her Subjects Eyes from her self, to desire their
looking up to Heaven. Before she left the place, she was pleased to admit a
general Healing; amongst which, the aforementioned Maid being Touched by Her
Sacred Hand, went away immediately recovered and healed from her Disease. And
whereas there is no need of Miracles, when the Truth of the Scriptures do show
the Dogmata Fidei, our Christian Faith not being founded on demolishing of
Churches, or dead Martyrs, nor in Murdering of Men, these being accounted by us
as no Faith, and if any to be allowed, but as an impious Faith: But by ours we
do give honor to the memory of Martyrs who dyed for the same; we do not worship
their Pictures with St. Augustine, but can look upon them with respect; we do
not damn the Faith of Signs, for Signs do not much conduce to the confirmation
of Errors, but rather to the glory of God and his worship.

This Divine Function is performed without any seducing Method: The King gives
freely, not calling the Angels to witness, nor sinking so low as others do, to
perform the same by Black Art or Enchantment; he does it with a pure Heart, in
the presence of the Almighty who knows all things, without Superstition, curing
all that approach his Royal Touch. And this I may frankly presume to aver,
never any of his Predecessors have ever exercised it more, or more willingly
and freely, whose wonderful Effects and certainty of Cures, we must and shall
acknowledge as long as we can speak, and tell our Children thereof, that they
may relate what wonders have been performed by his Sacred Hand to their
succeeding Generations.

CHAP. X. Several Examples of Miraculous Cures performed by His Majesty's
Sacred Touch.
ANd that no Man may say the Nut will not be worth cracking when he finds good
Meat therein; as our Discourse has hitherto given you a taste of the truth of
this Healing Faculty, so this comes like a happy Commander, bringing up the
Rear; wherein shall be shown part of those Gleanings which I have gathered up
from the large and fertile Crop of Strumous Persons, and these cured by the
Majestic Power of the Kings Sacred Hands. And since it cannot reasonably be
expected that I should gradually proceed from Edward the Confessor, even to the
time of our Dread Sovereign, which would perhaps be a Task more troublesome
than desirous, so I am sure of greater bulk than I designed or intended. And
that I may not live altogether upon the suffering point, I would gladly know of
any contrary Humor, which of our Kings of England did ever go without it, that
lawfully arrived at the Crown? my present Discourse not reaching any Usurper,
or Tyrannical Governor. But passing these by, as we begin from Edward the
Confessor, we ought to bear Record of some of his Miraculous Methods said to be
done by him: And here, as some sort of Men were not wanting to give too high a
Character of his Deeds, so the meanest Act which was performed by him, was not
let fall without an honorable Reverence. Amongst some of which we read of a
poor Man who chanced to come to him, History.
one who might have stockt an Hospital with Maladies, whose sight made all
Bystanders commiserate his condition; the Sick Man had a strong Fancy and a
bold Face, who desired the King himself to carry him on his back to the Church,
on assurance (as he said) that he thereby should be recovered. The good King
grants his desire, and this Royal Porter bears him into the Church, where so
strange an alteration is said to happen, that although he was carried in on all
four, he departed thence straight, and upon two; and it is said the Church into
which he was thus carried was St. Peter's in Westminster, built by him on this
occasion. Next to St. Peter he is said to be much in favor with St. John the
Apostle, who is reported to have appeared unto him in the shape of a begging
Pilgrim; the King not having present Money to supply his wants, did pluck off
his Ring from his Finger, and bestowed it upon him, by virtue of which Ring
given he is said to perform many and great Miracles. The same Ring some years
after is said to be sent him back again by two Pilgrims out of Palestine; and
if any do doubt of the truth hereof, they are desired to repair to Havering, a
Town in Essex, so called as they say from this Ring, where, by the Inhabitants,
satisfaction will be given.

This great and most Pious Prince being dead, Harold the Son of Earl Goodwin
next succeeded him, who assumed the Throne, and was Crowned King by Aldred,
Archbishop of York, next to whom was William the Conqueror, from whom began
the Computation of our Kings of England. I might after him name his Son William
the Second, and so proceed to Henry the First, King Stephen, Henry the Second,
Richard, John, the Edwards, and others, so to the time of Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth; but since I can find by no Authority that this Sanative Faculty have
been ever wanting, or removed from the Princely Line, I shall presume to take
leave, and begin with Queen Elizabeth, where amongst many other Cures done by
her Sacred Hand, take these following as they appear, the first two whereof I
have already described in the foregoing Chapter of the Frenchman, and the
other of Gloucester, the which I do here forbear to mention to prevent Tautology.

Dr. Tooker also tells us of one John Capel of Exon, the Son of an honest
Citizen, and a Daughter of the same Person, both troubled with the Evil, and
both quitted from their Distempers by her Majesty's gracious Touch.

Another of his is of a Maid, who was of the ancient Family of the Turbervils,
who was for ten years troubled with this Evil Disease, she being Touched for the
same, also recovered: he afterward beholding her Gold gone from her Neck,
demanded of her the reason thereof? she tells him her necessity compelled her
to sell it, and yet she remained well, whence He, as other wise Men, have
conjectured that the Gold given is only as the Kings Charitable Token, and no
more, for she lived many years after very well, without any relapse. Yet this
does not always so succeed, for I have seen many upon the loss of their Gold,
their Evil has come afresh, and proved troublesome, as shall be made good by
many Examples following. Many thousands are reported to have been cured of this
Disease in her happy Reign; King James succeeded her, and continued the same
Sanative Power in his Lifetime. After whom was Charles the First of ever
blessed Memory, who performed these Cures in a very strange and miraculous
manner, with and without Gold, by his Prayer and Benediction only, by his
Sacred Touch, as also by his Sacred and precious Blood. Of each of which in
their Order, where for remark, blessing and cure, none ever of his Predecessors
were able to be named in the hour with him. I begin with that wonderful and
miraculous Cure done by him at Winchester, only by his Prayer, related to our
Dread Sovereign, and his Brother his Royal Highness James Duke of York at
Winchester-Colledge, by Doctor John Nicholas, Warden of the College this last
Summer, where I had the Honor not only to hear it, but afterward saw the
Bottle. This following History I had from the aforesaid Doctor under his own
Hand, sent me in a Letter from my very good Friend Mr. Shadrack Line,
Apothecary of the same place, and is as follows.

Winton. October. 31. 1682.
Sir,
SInce my return from those Journies, which of late I have undertaken on my
College Affairs, Mr. Line has minded me to send you a Relation of that most
eminent Cure of the Kings Evil in this City, by the Prayers of King Charles the
First. The Person that labored under that Infirmity, was Robert Cole, well
known in Winton, being a public Innkeeper, first of the Three Crowns, next of
the Katherine Wheel, both Houses near the College of that place: 'Twas evident
to all persons that he was highly Diseased, and great Scars remained as
evidences of it after the Cure: His Throat was the place of his Soars, where
there were great Wounds, and the increase of them gave the Man daily and just
fears, that the passages for his Breath could not long continue whole and
useful, he sought for relief by a Medicinal Water, which he received from an
Apothecary of Sarum (I think he told me his name was Handcock) but as he, when
alive, assured me, although the washing with that Water did keep the Wounds
clean, yet it did not stop the increase nor the pains: He then in despair of
all other help but from His Majesty's Touch, endeavored to procure that means
of Gods mercy. But it being in the time when that Sacred Person was removed
from the Isle of Wight, and brought through Winton (where this object of
Charity dwelt) in order to the last of his Sufferings. There were Soldiers,
Guards and Spies, sufficient for to prevent such a gracious Act, and those had
malice enough to have hindered that Martyrs doing good if they could. The poor
distressed Man, on bended knees, at that time in the presence made several
Exclamations, and pressed nearer to the King that he might procure notice from
him, praying still loudly, God save the King: which provoked those inhumane
Attendants, to deal with the Petitioner as they did with their Sovereign,
barbarously: They struck him, removed him, and allowed him no opportunity to
come within the good Kings reach: The only effect was, that the importunate
cries of him which was impatient to be denied the last hopes of ease and life,
made the good Prince observe him; and since he could not be hindered from
reaching him with his Prayers, he gave the weak and now dispairing Man his
Blessing, in the like words to these: Friend, I see thou art not permitted to
come near me, and I cannot tell what thou would have, but God bless thee,
and grant thy desire; after which, the diseased Man without the Kings
stroaking, was forced to return to the Liquor that he had formerly washed his
Soars with: But although the Bottle that he kept it in had been secured in a
Cup-board, and is to this day without any crack in it, yet the Water was much
wasted: The next day he found a greater decrease in the Liquor, and so daily
until it was dried up. At length, the Bottle became scabbed in its sides, and
many Botches appeared in it, the glazing of the Bottle breaking off through the
round bubbles or botches that arose in the Earth: And as these effects appeared
in the Earthen Vessel, the Face and Throat of the Patient healed with equal
speed. I my self knew the Man so whole, that the Scars were the greatest
testimony that he ever suffered by that Disease. He was ever after freed from
any running issue, or pain, unless at one time, when (as he told me) a
Gentlewoman that saw the Bottle, attempted to pick off some of those
Excrescences that budded out of its sides: After this, the places that had been
affected in his Throat gave him new trouble and grief, but nothing was vented
there, which being over, he lived above twenty years in ease, and in that
Sickness of which he died, the Kings Evil had no share.

This practice of the Gentlewoman, and the fear of those times, made this R.
Cole conceal the Bottle as much as he might do, lest it should be injured after
he found his Face had a sympathy with it, or lest the Powers then domineering
should demand it from him, he preserved it in a Woollen Bag, and although it
might have been of great advantage to his Profession to have exposed it to his
Customers, yet he regarded his Safety more than his Profit, and concealed it
with all the Art he could; so that it was not seen but when an intimate
Acquaintance extorted that respect from him, with good assurance that it should
not be roughly handled; he being dead, the Bottle is until this day in the
Hands of his Widow here in Winton, where there are many other Witnesses of this
which you receive now from

Your very faithful Servant, JO. NICHOLAS.


At the same time I had this following at the College of Winton, given me by a
Person of Quality: Of two men, both Father and Son, either of them being
troubled with the Evil: The Father was touched by the late King and received
Gold; the Son never was touched, neither did he ever receive any. The effect
hereof was as follows: The Father being distempered and ill, keeps the Gold
about his own neck, which kept him in health, and gave him speedy ease and
relief: The Son falling ill, he borrows his Fathers Gold from his neck, and
puts it about his own, which likewise gave him ease and relief. The Father
after this by leaving his Gold, had his Distemper seized him afresh, and then
took the Gold again, and this made it as readily vanish. And thus by the
intercourse or change of Gold from Father to Son, and from Son to Father,
whoever of them kept the Gold, was defended against any new approach or
appearance of his Distemper; and this was kept and maintained by them for many
years together.

Another, not much unlike this, I had from John Hebden Esquire whose Mother being
healed by King Charles the First, of blessed memory, did in a very short time
recover, and was healed of her Disease. She after this going over into Russia,
where she afterward dwelt, met there with one Mr. Heath, a Russia Merchant,
who was likewise so extraordinarily troubled with the Evil, that he was said to
be near eaten up with the same: And although he made all the means he possibly
could to get over to England, to come to be touched by His late Sacred Majesty
for the same, yet the illness of the Weather, and the badness of the Season
prevented his designs. The great thing here remarkable is this, Madam Hebden
lending this Merchant her Gold which she received from the King, and he for
some time wearing the same about his neck, within a very small time after the
use thereof, he found benefit, and upon his continuance of the same in use, he
very speedily amended, and became so well, that he had no farther need of His
Majesty's Touch. The Lady her self is now alive, and ready to attest the truth
hereof, as I had it from her Sons own hand.

Mr. Foster, now an Inhabitant in Windsor, when he was about six years of Age,
and perfectly blind for about two years, so that he could neither see Sun,
Moon, Fire or Candle, who being perplexed also with many Scrophulous or Evil
Swellings about his Throat, and many others seizing his Face, Arm, Hands and
Fingers; and after having spent much money with Physicians and Chirurgions, to
little purpose, was after all this brought to his late Sacred Majesty to be
Healed, by the benefit whereof, within fourteen days, he presently recovered
his sight; and his Swellings which did frequently run into Suppuration and
healed in several parts of his Body, were as speedily dried up, and he has
ever since remained sound without any appearance of relapse. This I had from
himself this last Summer at Windsor, who I am certain will be ever ready to
maintain the Truth thereof to his dying minute.

There was a Woman Quaker which lived at Guilford in Surry, who being so
perfectly blind, that she was robbed of all light and sight: She coming to
Hampton Court, where our late King was then a Prisoner, to be touched by His
Sacred Majesty; so soon as she received the same, or within less than an hour
after the reception thereof, she went down to the Kings kitchen, and did there
tell the number of Spits which were turning upon the Range, and did there fall
down upon her knees, praying to God to forgive her for those evil thoughts she
formerly had of her good King, by whom she had received this great Blessing.
Mr. John Stephens of the Kings Backstairs, was an eyewitness of every part
hereof, he being then at the Operation, and afterward seeing her in the
Kitchen: At this time the King did only put over her Neck a Silver Two pence,
strung in a white Silk Ribband; and this may prove, that other Metal used and
employed by the Sacred Hand, does the same as Gold. All People which did here
come to be touched had only Silver given to them, and yet most of them known to
be cured; and such as failed thereof, happened chiefly from their unbelief and
incredulity. Mr. Henry Ewer, four years of age, was brought by the former Mr.
Stephens to be touched by His late Sacred Majesty at Hampton Court at the same
time; his Eyes being so sore and ill-affected, that he could not look upon any
Fire, or behold the light of the Sun or Moon, they were so weak and troublesome
to him: within a Month or six Weeks after his being healed by the King, he was
seen perfectly discharged from his pain, and recovered to admiration, and lived
many years free from all trouble: Both these Mr. Stephens is ready to maintain,
if at any time he may be questioned about the same.

Mr. Halford, one of His Majesty's Heralds, tells me this following of one
Helena Pain of Windsor, who having the Evil in that measure as it made her
Blind; this bred from a great Rhume and defluxion of her Eyes, with which she
was perplexed for several years together. King Charles the First being then a
Prisoner in Windsor, and commanded thence by the Regicides to London; this poor
Woman pressed to be touched by His Sacred Majesty as he was passing over the
Bridge, and presumed to take hold of his Coat, humbly supplicating His
Majesty's Sacred touch: The good King tells her he had no Gold; she still begs
for Christ Jesus sake, that he would grant her His gracious Touch; the which
she having received, within three days after she grew well and recovered, and
did after that retain her Sight to her dying day.

Another old Man came to my Lodgings at Windsor this last Summer, who told me,
That he having been Lame for several Years together, so that he could neither
go or stand; he being brought to our late King, of Blessed Memory, to be
touched at Windsor, he thereupon soon amended, and recovered his strength to
that capacity as I then saw him in, and has had the use of his Limbs ever
since to admiration.

Mr. Presgrave, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Arms, told me this following
remarkable History of a Gentlewoman, who was troubled for several years with
the Evil, who also had diverse running Soars about her Arm, she being a
Nonconformist and Dissenter from our Church, and having very little Faith of
His Majesty's Touch; but at length, by very great persuasions of her Friends
who had found benefit thereof, by their earnest persuasions did gain of her, if
possible, to procure His Majesty's Touch for the same. This being in the time
of our late King, of Blessed Memory, when he was at Hampton Court; she goes
thither and was healed by him, she having received His Majesty's gracious
Touch, and a piece of Silver about her Neck, immediately grew better, and within
a small time afterward perfectly recovered, so that her Soars dried up, and
she acquitted from all running Issues. But as a very strange Remark hereof,
upon the day of our Blessed Sovereigns cruel Martyrdom, her Sores broke out
afresh, she being in the Country and hearing nothing of the same: But within a
small while after they healed up again, and she appeared very well without any
appearance of Relapse.

Mr. Seymour Bowman sent these two remarkable Histories in a Letter to me; the
which, because I design to Print nothing but Truth, I do here present the
Reader with a true Copy of the same: The truth of which he is ever ready to
justify.

Sir,
TO add to that great Treasure which I understand you are Enriching the World
with, give me leave to contribute two Mites, which may be thus far grateful to
you, because they are upon my own knowledge. In the Year (...) when the great
Treaty was between the late King and Parliament at the Isle of Wight (whether
my occasions then called me) His Majesty coming home one Evening from the
Treaty-house, a Daughter of one Mr. Stephens (I think his name was) a Citizen
of Winchester, was touched for the Evil in her Eye, which as soon as His
Majesty had done he went to Prayers, (Dr. Hinchman and Dr. Sanderson, since
Bishops of London and Lincoln, officiating) in which time her Eye flew open; at
which she her self being surprised, told her Mother, who joyfully at the end of
Prayers proclaimed it as a Miracle; upon hearing whereof, I asked the Girl
about it, she told me she had been blind more than a Fortnight, and Mr.
Sergeant Paynter, then chief Surgeon in Waiting, assured me he looked upon
her Eye to be in great danger. By this time it arrived at His Majesty's Ear,
who came to the Girl as I stood by her, and in my hearing asked her how long
her Eye had been closed; she answered, above a Fortnight: Do you see now, said
the King? to which she replied (putting her hand on her other Eye) I see your
Majesty; I see any thing about the Room; at which His Majesty pausing awhile,
with a kind of Venerable admiration, took her by the hand and kissed her.

At my return from the Island, I lodged at Calshot-Castle (which is about the
midway to Southampton) with my Friend Captain Peter Bettesworth, then
Governor, who showed me a young Man, whom he told me had been infirm with the
Evil in his Thigh for nine years, that it was very unpleasant to behold, the
Flesh being rotted away to the very bone, so that more than two pounds of flesh
(by computation) could not equal one Thigh with the other, and for three years
he went with Crutches; so that when he went to the Island to be touched, it was
very troublesome for him to go in or out of the Boat, as both himself, his
Father and Mother acquainted me. This very night after the King had Touched
him, and put a shilling about his Neck which he brought with him, and showed
me, his Tents, which were of a very great bigness, fell out of his Wounds, and
could not be kept in: In three days he quitted his Crutches, and made use of a
Staff only. In three Weeks he was able to play at Nine pins and run after his
Bowl, and in less than a year he went to New Foundland as a Seaman.

Sir, If you please to insert these amongst the rest of your Miranda, I do
assure you they are undoubtedly true, upon the knowledge of,

Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, Seymour Bowman.
Dukes-head Bedfordstreet, Dec. 16. 82.

From Mrs. Booky near Charing Cross London, I had this following of one Mrs.
West, the Daughter of Sir John Jacob, who being extraordinarily afflicted with
the Evil, and perplexed with many running Sores when she was young, and having
spent several Hundreds of Pounds upon Physicians, Surgeons, and the like,
all which pretended to give her Cure, which never being effected, (her Mother
being very willing to use all means for her recovery, having no great Opinion
of His Majesty's Sacred Touch;) but Sir John her Father seeing all their
Remedies failed, and small hopes of amendment could be expected by their
Methods, resolves to use all imaginable means to procure His late Majesty's
Sacred Touch for her, by waiting on Him when He was at Holmby-House in order to
the same. The which he having obtained of His Sacred Majesty, bringing with him
his own Gold, which the good King was pleased to put over her Neck; she leaving
off her Plasters she formerly made use of, and keeping her Sores clean as she
was directed by His Majesty's Order, her Sores soon healed of themselves, and
she speedily grew strong and well, who for some time had been so weak and
infirm, that she could scarce stand or go. Some years after, she leaving off
her Gold, her Disease seized her afresh, by gathering again in one of her Eyes,
which proved both very painful and troublesome, her Head swelling also to a
very vast bigness, and in few days she grew perfectly blind again. Her Father
seeing this strange and frightful change, enquires the reason thereof, and
finding her not wearing the Gold about her Neck which had been given her, did
attribute this new and fresh appearance of pain and swelling to her want of the
same. And although it was some time before the Gold could be found, he not
knowing at present what was become thereof; yet by diligent search afterward
finding it again, and he putting it over her Neck, and she wearing the same,
her Swellings suddenly vanished, she recovered her sight, and has the use of
both her Eyes to this day, being in perfect health.

This following was sent me from a very good Friend of Mr. Bowmans.

Mr. Brown,
HEaring you are Publishing a Book of the strange Cures done by His late and
present Majesty concerning the Evil, give me leave to acquaint you with a
remarkable Cure done upon my own Son, about three years of age, the Disease
being so in his Eyes and Face, that he appeared troublesome to the Beholders,
and a very uneasy Object to himself: But he being touched with a Handkerchief
dipped in the late Kings Blood, lent him by one Major Gouge, a Commander then in
the Parliament Army, he was in 14 days perfectly cured of his Disease. And this
I aver under my Hand,

ROGER TVRNER.
From my House in Cursiters-Alley, October. 27. 1682.

This Letter was brought me by a very good Friend, and a Person of Quality, who
desired my inserting of the same.

I proceed now to some of those mavelous Cures done by His late Majesty's
precious Blood, where at this day, as true Devoters to His Sacred Memory, there
are many that have affirmed wonderful Cures performed by the same. And one
remark hereof, is that of a Woman at Deptford near London, who was cured of her
blindness, and many other Infirmities, she only being Touched with a
Handkerchief which had been distained with His late Majesty's precious Blood.

Dr. Francis Thompson, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, gives me
this following Observation under his own Hand* where he writes, That being at
Hadham with Mr. King, one of His Majesty's Pensioners, and going thither to Sir
Richard Atkins his House, where he observing a good Picture of a young Lady,
Sir Richard told him it was one of his Daughters deceased, of whom he had a
very remarkable Story to tell him, which was as follows: That a little before
the Kings Restoration, his Daughter having a Swelling in her upper Lip, for
which he had consulted several of the most eminent Physicians of the City of
London, who at last concluded it to be the Evil, and advised him to go to the
King then at Breda or Brussels, to be cured; whereupon preparing for his
Voyage, he happened to discourse Sir Orlando Bridgeman's Lady, who intimated to
him, that there were hopes of the Kings saving him his intended Journey; and
that however in the mean time, she would accommodate him with a Handkerchief or
Cloth dipped in His Sacred Majesty's Blood, which had done several Cures, which
certainly could do his Daughter no hurt, and if he would promise to restore it,
she would lend him it, to see if it might succeed accordingly with his Daughter
as it had with others; upon which he received the same, and his Daughter
frequently tapping her Lip therewith about a week or ten days, or thereabouts,
by Gods blessing, and the use thereof, she was perfectly cured to admiration.

From Sir John Pettus I had this following of Madam Bowyar, who having for many
years been troubled with the Evil, and finding no ease by any Medicine
whatsoever, she not having the happiness to come at our late Sacred King, of
Blessed Memory, to be Touched: and understanding of his barbarous Martyrdom
designed, she used all imaginable means, and applied her best Interest to
gather or collect a little of his precious Blood; the which she having obtained
in a piece of Tiffany, did wear the same about her Neck, and within a very
small time after her use of the same, she was perfectly discharged from her
Disease, and has ever since continued well, and is still alive to confirm the
truth thereof: And when she had found this great efficacy thereof on her self,
she lent several pieces of the fame, which had been likewise distained with
this precious Blood, and where ever they were applied to Kings Evil Swellings,
they were seen suddenly to retreat; and such as made use thereof, were as
speedily and successively cured to admiration.

Since my reception of the aforenamed History from Dr. Thompson, I had this his
Letter sent me, wherein as a farther vindication of the former, he gives me two
others, as follows;

Sir,
ACcording to your desire, I send you in brief the Import of what we
discoursed, abridg'd of some Circumstances; viz. That I being with Mr. King,
one of His Majesty's Prisoners at Sir Richard Atkins his House, when at Hadham:
He told us, That one of His Daughters had a Swelling on her upper Lip, which
the eminent Physicians of London concluded was the Evil, and accordingly
advised him to repair then to the King at Brussels (or Breda) for Cure. But
while he was preparing for his Voyage, he happened to receive a Cloth dipped in the
late Kings Blood, from the Right Honorable the Lady Bridgman (being famous for
many Cures) whereby his Daughters Swelling was perfectly abated within a Week
or ten Days, by Gods Blessing, only upon her frequent tapping the affected
place with the said Cloth. Since I told you this, I had it confirmed by my Lady
Bridgman in Person, and by another parallel instance; That in a few days it
cured a young Lady near related to her Ladyship (whose name must be suppressed)
of a Swelling also on her upper Lip, by dabbing it only with the same Sacred
Gore, being a little wetted therewith.

To which I may add, what I lately heard from an honest Loyal Citizen, of very
good reputation in St. Laurence Lane, that a person went from his House so
blinded with the Evil, that he could not discern a Door-place in the Room, when
he went out of it, and yet that very Afternoon walked without direction from
White Hall to his house, after he had been touched by his present Majesty, whom
God long preserve; and that he knew several others touched, and every one
cured.

This is all at present from, Sir, Your assured Friend and humble Servant,
Francis Thompson.
From my House in Silverstreet near Woodstreet, London, Dec. 21. 1682.

There was a Scotch Merchant, who made it his business every Spring and Fall to
bring People from Scotland and Newcastle, troubled with the Evil, to the King
where ever he was in his Troubles; as at Brussels, Breda, Bruges, Anwerp, and
the like; and before his return from the King, he generally acquainted Sergeant
Haynes of His Majesty's Chapel (from whom I had this observation) how those
Persons were which he carried back with him, after they had been Touched:
Amongst the rest of which, he related this remarkable Story, of one amongst the
rest that came who was refused a Ticket by the Chief Surgeon then in Waiting
(where he assured him, that all such who had obtained His Majesty's Touch,
received Cure therewith): But this poor Man being denied the Touch of the King,
by reason of the Surgeons not giving him a Ticket, telling him, He had more
need of an Hospital than of His Majesty's Favor; affirming, That his Disease
had more of the Pox than of the Evil in it: And he making great complaint to
Sergeant Haynes of his hard measure, with many protestations of his Innocence
with all or any Womankind, and that he should think himself utterly undone if
he might not receive the honor of his Majesty's Touch with the rest of his
Companions, desiring nothing more, they all bringing their own Gold with them.
The Sergeant having more pity on him than the Surgeon, made his application
to Dr. Earls on his behalf, that he would please to move the King for his being
Healed; the which having done, and the King granting his desire, The next time
the Merchant came to the King with fresh People, he acquainted the Sergeant,
that this poor man was perfectly recovered; and although his face was so
monstrous to view, and accompanied with many deplorable and fetid Ulcers, that
he was forced to cover them with green Silk, yet he received that great measure
of health by His Sacred Majesty, as any one could expect to enjoy.

When the King was at Brussels, there was a Daughter or two of the Marquess of
Carasceens, who was Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, which were brought to
be healed by the King for their Evil; both which, within a very little space of
time after the reception thereof recovered to admiration: At the same time
Sergeant Haynes told me, That not only Scotch, Irish, English, but several
French, Spanish, Dutch, and Walloons, who were troubled with this Disease, were
all healed by his excellent Healing Faculty.

From Dr. William Pain of Winton, I had this following Narration sent me under
his own hand: That he being to wait upon Dr. Earls, Lord Bishop of Sarum, and
discoursing of the Evil, Dr. Earls told him, That when he was in Holland with
the King, there was brought on a Bed a very infirm Woman, so weakened with that
Disease, that they were all unwilling to suffer her to be brought to His
Majesty's presence: The Surgeons were very much against it also, and Dr.
Earls himself did much dissuade it, lest she should dye under His Majesty's
hand, as was very much feared. But upon the Woman's earnest desire, they did
acquaint His Majesty with her condition and with her request: His Majesty was
pleased to permit her to be brought in, and did touch her, none ever thinking
to see her alive again. Dr. Earls, a few days after walking in the streets, did
meet this Woman with a large Basket of Fruit upon her head; he enquired of her
the way to some place whither he had occasion to go: The Woman knowing him
because he did attend at her Healing, did presently set down her Basket of
Fruit, and said, M^yn Here, Meyn Here, God bless your good King, and God bless
you, I am the Woman that was brought to your King to be Touched such a day,
naming the time, and see how God has blessed me with success beyond all hopes,
that I am so soon perfectly well and strong as you now see me. This Dr. Pain
had from Dr. Earls own mouth, and does attest the Relation thereof to be true,
as he shall answer before God. And as a second Vindication hereof, when I read
the same to the aforementioned Mr. Sergeant Haynes, he tells me he can justify
the truth hereof, he at the same time waiting upon Dr. Earls beyond Sea.

A poor Man that came out of England to Bruges to be touched in Flanders for
the Evil, by the King when he was there, having a neck as big as four or five
necks, and his Head very monstrous: He being touched by His Sacred Majesty, and
washing himself with the Water. By that time this Man reached Rotterdam,
onwards on his Journey to his return for England, staying there two or three
days, he sent a Letter thence to Mr. Sergeant Knight then in waiting, that he
was discharged from his Swellings, his Neck abated of his Tumor, and by the
advantage of his Touch, he received perfect health and cure. Mr. Tho: Morley,
Avenor to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, gave me this Observation, being
both an Eyewitness of this Touch, as also of the Letter sent to Mr. Knight
being then at Bruges.

I could mention many other Cures performed by His Sacred Majesty in his Exile
beyond Sea; but I now proceed to several Cures acted by Him since His happy
Restoration.

After the Kings Return from abroad, and entering His Royal Throne, where there
were frequent Healings at His first coming, as sometimes three in a week, and
these in great multitudes, as six hundred at a time, Mr. Sergeant Haynes tells
me he has observed amongst the rest that many which have been brought
perfectly blind to the King to be Touched, who having received the same, have
been seen suddenly cured, and freed from their Distempers.

One Mr. Edwards, in the Parish of Curry-rivall in Somersetshire, who being
sorely afflicted with the Evil, that both the sides of his Face were
Scrophulated and Ulcerated, he being hereby not only made a sad spectacle to
view, but his Eyes also made blind therewith, so much that he could scaree see
the Sun or Moon, he coming up to London at His Majesty's happy Restoration, in
order to be healed by His Sacred Majesty, within six weeks after His reception
of the same, he was seen so whole, that his Eyes regained a perfect sight, and
his Face was covered with new Flesh like that of a young Child, and lived many
years afterward without any relapse. This I had from Mr. Alford of His
Majesty's Chapel, who will always be ready to make good the same.

Mr. Butler Minister tells me of a Countryman, who having a Daughter very much
troubled with the Evil, she being about twelve years of age, about the time of
His Majesty's first coming into England, she being for some time made blind
therewith, this Countryman getting her Touched by our Sacred King, she no
sooner received the same, but her Eyes immediately opened, she looked upon the
King, and that very hour she was touched she received cure, and has ever since
continued in perfect health. This he had from the Father of the Child who was
thus miraculously cured.

The same Mr. Butler tells me, that within a small time after our Kings coming
into England, Elias Ashmole Esquire Comptroler of the Excise, acquainted him with
this following Observation, of one Arrice Evans, who then went generally by the
name of Evans the Prophet, who being troubled with a very despicable and
blasted Face, so that it was not only nauseous to view, but very fetid of
smell, he coming to Mr. Ashmole to request the favor of his getting him touched
by His Majesty for the same, he utterly refused it, not thinking him a fit
person to approach His Majesty's Presence; and being stripped of all hope or
advantage from him, as also from many others which he had endeavored to
procure: He being utterly denied the attaining the favor of the Kings Presence
by any interest of Friends, at last resolves with himself (with an assured
Faith, that if His Majesty did but touch him he should speedily recover) to
attend the Kings coming by him in the usual Walks he takes in St. James's Park;
the King at length coming that way, his Face being covered with a Red Cloth,
the which he lifted up till he saw the King near him, which he afterward
letting fall down, cries out, I am 'Rise Evans. The King coming nearer him with
his Attendants which waited on Him, some of them told His Majesty that he was
His Majesty's Prophet; the King coming at him, he kneels down, and cries, God
bless Your Majesty: The good King gives him His Hand to Kiss, and he rubbing
his ulcerated and scabbed Nose therewith, which was plentifully stockt with
purulent and fetid matter: within two days after his reception of His Majesty's
sacred favor, the abovesaid Mr. Ashmole saw this Evans cured, and his ulcered
Nose dried up and healed. This Mr. Butler tells me he had it from Mr. Ashmole's
own mouth.

From Mrs. Watson in Kingstreet Westminster, I received this of her own
Daughter, who was so severely afflicted with the Evil, and her Swellings did
arise to that bulk, that they very often threatened her suffocation, by too close
compressing the Windpipe, she using several means, and all fruitless, at length
gets her touched by our Sacred King; and when all other remedies failed her, at
His first touch her Swellings abated, she found speedy ease and relief, and
within a short time perfectly was cured and discharged from her Fears and
Tumors.

From John Plummer Esquire of Windsor I had this, of his own Child, who being put
to Nurse to one Harsnetts Wife of New-Windsor, who was her self troubled with
the Evil, after his Child had for some time sucked her Milk, she sucked her
Distemper therewith also: The Child being Touched the last Summer by the King
for its Distemper, did immediately recover thereupon. The great remark hereof
is this, That when the Child left the Nurses Breast, she her self fell ill, and
grew weak, and for want of her being Touched as well as the Child, she died of
the same Distemper within a small while after the Child had left her.

Mr. George Peryn, Gentleman-Harbinger to His Majesty, gives me this
Observation of a Maid coming from Portsmouth, the Kings Builders Daughter, who
was so miserably afflicted with the Evil, and a Person so deplorable to view,
that she affrighted her Spectators; she coming to Windsor to be Touched, and
getting to see the King at Dinner, her Face being uncovered, and she being
taken notice of, was forced speedily to quit her place. This sad Object being
within few days Touched by our Sacred King, she suddenly amended after it, and
her Face grew so whole, (which was furnished with many Ulcers) that there were
but very few marks left of her former miserable aspect.

From the Earl of Starling I had this following, who told me his second Son
being much troubled with a Scrophulous Swelling in his upper lip, having had
the best advice he could procure from the most eminent Physicians and
Surgeons to consult and advise about the same, they not giving him any
appearance of Cure, advised his Lordship to get his Son Touched by the King for
the same; the which some small while after he obtained: he no sooner received
His Majesty's Touch, but received immediate ease therewith, and he has
remained well ever since.

From the Mayor of Wickham I had this, who having a Son about five years of age
very much troubled with the Evil, that he was blind, and could not see, with a
hard Swelling on his upper Lip, and finding no good by all other means he used,
he brought his Son to Windsor to be Touched; which so soon as he had received,
his Eyes amended, the Swelling of his Lip abated, and he in a very short time
restored to health, the which he has ever since enjoyed without any relapse.

Sir Roger Hasnet, eldest Sergeant at Arms to His Majesty, tells me of a Child
of six years of age, who having several Evil Swellings about her Neck and
Throat, and so perfectly blind that she could neither see the light of the
Candle, Fire, or Sun, she coming to Whitehal to be Touched, she having been
formerly Touched and lost her Gold, her Distemper seizing her again, upon her
second Healing by His Majesty, and new Gold given, her Swellings speedily
vanished, and within two hours were seen to leave her, and in fourteen days she
was perfectly restored to her former health. Sir Roger undertook her second
Touch, and saw the effects thereof, and will satisfy any man which may
question the truth thereof.

Mr. Thomas, Clerk of His Majesty's Kitchen, acquainted me with this following
remarkable Observation, which was of a poor Girl which came out of the North
miserably afflicted with the Evil, to be Touched by His Sacred Majesty; she was
so perfectly blind that she was lead to Whitehal, having no sight at all: she
having been healed by the King, the Film which covered and obstructed her sight
did immediately break: after her Touching, she asked her Mother, Whether she
were her Mother? telling her she could see her. After this she went without any
help out of the Banqueting House at Whitehal, and within a little while after
the Healing, he saw this Child play with other Children before the moving
Wardrobe at Whitehal; and this he is ready to confirm as well as affirm.

John Hebden Esquire tells me his Lady, who after a long time having made use of
Physicians and Surgeons to little purpose, and being by their methods
brought so low, that she was not able to go or stand for two or three months
together, she being brought in a Chair to the Banqueting House at Whitehal to
be healed by His Sacred Majesty for the Evil, she no sooner received the same,
but immediately found a very great change in her self, and with the reception
thereof she likewise received a new strength therewith, so that she walked
without any help to the Banqueting House Door, which could not stir or go for
two or three months before, and amended speedily upon it, and she in a very
short time arrived at that degree of health, that she grew every day stronger,
and is now as well as ever she was in her whole life.

He likewise at the same time acquainted me of a Neighboring Fanatic of his
at Battersey, who having five Children, and all of them troubled with the Evil
at once, the Parents using several means, but all proving ineffectual, one of
these Children being got Touched by His Sacred Majesty, by His means did
immediately recover of her distemper: all the other for want of the same
blessing and benefit, died of the like Disease.

Sir Lionel Waldens Son tells me of one Markham, who having several Running
Sores under his Arm, whence issued out much stinking matter, and a very large
Swelling on his Face, he being several years so weak that he could neither go
or ride, he being Touched by the King at Windsor, in less than fourteen days he
was discharged from his Swellings, his running Sores dried up, and he has ever
since continued well and sound.

From Mr. Robert Muryell of Cambridge I had this following, concerning his
Brother who there lived, who having for several years been troubled with
Strumous Swellings along his Neck and Throat, he being healed by the King at
Newmarket, his Swellings speedily vanished, and has ever since continued in
health, and that this Distemper has for many years gone along in the Family:
he told me of fifteen of his Relations which were afflicted with the Evil, and
every one cured by His Majesty's gracious Touch; and amongst the rest he
likewise assured me that one of his Brethren, who was a Student in
Trinity-Colledge Cambridge, who leaving off his Gold, his Swellings did
speedily show themselves; but no sooner was his Gold put on again, but they
were likewise found as readily to vanish.

Mr. Thomas Dunckly, belonging to His Majesty's Closet, assures me that one
Mrs. Dorothy Philips, who was miserably vexed with the Evil for many years, and
had a very large Strumous Swelling in her left Breast, which afterward turned
to a Scrophulous Ulcer, so large, that he told me he could put his hand
thereinto, she being in a very weak and deplorable condition, not able for
above six months together to bring her Wastcoat together; and when she had
tired all the Physicians and Surgeons she made use of about her Disease, she
by Dr. Barwick was advised to go to be healed by the King; Mr. Dunckly gets her
Touched, which happened on a Friday; the Monday following she went down to
Loughburrow in Leicestshire, and returned back in a month very well and cured,
without any outward application, or inward Physic, and is at this day very
well, living at the Old Change in London.

Dr. Johnson of Brantry, Rural Dean of Bocking, sending another poor Woman to
Mr. Dunckly, in order to his getting her Touched by the King for the Evil,
which Woman was perfectly blind therewith for above four Months before, so as
she was led up and down about the House by her Mother; and whenever she went to
Church, her Mother was forced to lead her thither: This Woman, within a Month
after she had been healed by His Majesty, she regained her Sight, and was in
that happy condition, that she evermore led her Mother afterward to Church.

Mr. John Stephens of His Majesty's Back-stairs, acquaints me of a Gun-Smith in
Winchester, who being a Quaker, and very much troubled with the Evil in his
Neck, he coming to him to desire the procuring him a Ticket, in order to his
being healed by the King: No sooner had this Quaker this Ticket given him, but
he tells Mr. Stephens his Faith was so small, that he did not believe the Kings
Touch could much help him, or that there was any Power or Virtue therein, but
resolved notwithstanding to make use of his Favor. This Quaker no sooner sees
the King, but his Spirits immediately raised to a higher degree of Faith, and
begot a greater belief in him, telling Mr. Stephens that his mind was quite
altered, and he was certain His Majesty would heal him. This Quaker, within
less than 48 hours after his being Touched, was very much amended, and before
he could get home, was wholly discharged from his Swellings in his Neck: and as
a public acknowledgment to Almighty God for his great Cure, he went to the
Cathedral Church at Winchester the first Sunday following, to pay his public
Thanks: And when he heard the King prayed for, he was taken notice of being
more concerned than at any other part of the Prayers, by lifting up his Hands
as a greater and more sincere acknowledgment of the extraordinary Blessing he
lately received, and is and has ever since remained a true Son of the Church.

Marmaduke Ling, in the Parish of North-Petherton in Somersetshire, being a
School-fellow of the same Mr. John Stephens, did likewise desire him to procure
a Ticket (from Mr. Sergeant Paynter then chief Surgeon in waiting) for him,
he having so large a Scrophulous Swelling in his Face, being very hard, and
monstruously extended, that he scared knew him; he being touched by his Sacred
Majesty, within 14 days after his Swelling grew soft, and every day became more
and more pliable, so that in six Weeks time it was like the other side of his
Face: And in two years after Mr. Stephens saw him in Somersetshire there
perfectly well. This and the former, he is ready to make good, when ever asked
thereof.

A Servant-maid of my Mother-in-laws* living at Enfield, who having a very ill
constitution of Body, accompanied with many Scrophulated Swellings, and Evil
Ulcers, and running Sores in both her Legs, being both very noysom and foetid;
she having made use of many Chirurgions and others, but without any relief;
asking my advice, I ordered her to come up to London to be Touched by the King
for the same; the which she no sooner received, but found immediate ease, her
running Soars soon dried up, and in a small while her Swellings abated; she
leaving off her Gold, her Swellings began to appear again, as also a new vent
of running, and she her self became disordered: She craving my advice the
second time, I ordered her evermore to keep her Gold about her Neck, and ever
since she followed my advice, she has had no further appearance of running
Issue, Relapse, or Trouble.

A Nonconformists Wife, having more Faith in her than her unbelieving Husband,
being very much troubled with the Evil, was brought to the King, in my waiting
this last Summer at Windsor, to be Touched; who although she daily desired her
Husband she might come before, she was evermore denied the same, he telling her
it was a piece of Superstition, and that there was no more Virtue in the Kings
Touch than in another Man's: Her Husbands occasions calling him to take a
Journey, she resolves, if possible, to be healed by the King, and was brought
into the Presence, she not being able to walk up. I have it for certain, That
as her Faith was stronger than her Husbands, so the Effects thereof were as
prevalent, whereupon she presently amended, and received great help and
comfort. I should be evermore of this Woman's belief, had I been in her
condition, and should always desire with Dr. Fuller, that I might gain the
favor of His Majesty's Sacred Touch, and the happiness of being Healed by him;
where I ought also to join gratitude to God the Author, and all humble thanks
to His Sacred Majesty the Instrument of my recovery.

I having the great Honor of first waiting on His Sacred Majesty at his Chapel
Royal at Windsor on my Knee, at which time was above forty miserable and
charitable objects of Charity, as both Scotch, Welsh, Irish, and English, which
were troubled with the Evil; many or most of which did find present ease and
cure: Amongst the rest, I shall presume to present this as a public Remark of
that days Healing; which was in a Child about six or seven years old, being one
of His Majesty's Carriers at Windsor, who having a very large Swelling of his
Neck, which was but little before brought to Mr. James Molins, His Majesty's
Surgeon, and me to behold; we both advised a Caustic to be applied thereto,
the Matter which being therein contained being deeply lodged: But without
following our advice, this healing happening a few days after, I gave him a
Ticket in order to his Child's being Touched; the which the Child having
received, the Swelling the very next day did break, and Matter daily issued
thence which lessened its bulk, and in a short time I saw the Child perfectly
whole, and discharged from the Swelling.

A young Child of Mr. Bradlyes, near Charing Cross, being by me brought to the
King to be healed at a private Healing at White Hall, amongst some others,
where I only waited; being troubled with the Evil in her Eyes, which proved
very troublesome and irksome to her, very near spoiling her sight, and who could
scarce get any Nutriment into her Mouth, which very often threatened her
suffocation: This Child within six days after her being touched by the King,
her sight amended, the hot Rheum in her Eyes abated, and her Mouth, which was
so troublesome to her, became well, and she in a very short space perfectly
cured.

Mr. James Hollyer, the Son of the famous Mr. Tho. Hollyer Surgeon, and my
Master, who being troubled with the Evil, and having several running Ulcers
which could not be cured by his Fathers best Art, all imaginable means proving
ineffectual, he being at length touched by our Sacred King, his Sores suddenly
dried up, and never any appearance of relapse have since happened to him.

Elizabeth Williams having the Evil in her Eyes for many years, which made them
sore by their continual gleet, for which she had used many Medicines to little
purpose, she being Touched by the King for the same, did presently find ease,
speedily recovered, and continues now in health.

Benjamin Fuller having a cold Tumor which seized his Elbow, in so much that
he could not lift his Hand to his Mouth, nor remove it from any place without
the assistance of his other, he having received His Majesty's gracious Touch,
did speedily amend, and became very well soon after he had received the same.

Henry Onsly in St. Thomas Hospital had very large Ulcers about him like
Honey-Combs, which gave him that pain that he took no rest for many days and
nights; that very day he was Touched by the King for his Distemper, he found
ease, slept well that night, his Sores soon healed up, and he to admiration
has ever since continued well and sound.

Carington Bransell, a poor Seaman, who having a cold Swelling in his Hands,
that all the Tendons and Ligaments thereof were supposed thereby to be foul, he
upon receiving His Majesty's gracious Touch, recovered from his Swellings by
its abating and lessening it self every day, and in a short time after used his
Hand, and grew perfectly well. These five last I had from the abovesaid Mr.
Molins's Kinsman, left me under his Hand, and sent me from his Master.

Dr. Eaton tells me of two Women walking together near Oxford, which had lately
come from London, with the Daughter of one of them, who had for some time been
perfectly blind with the Evil, That day she received His Majesty's Touch, she
at Dinner so well recovered her sight, that she having a Handkerchief shown
her, she could tell what it was: These two Women told the Doctor with abundance
of Joy this History, with thanks for the great blessing the Daughter lately
received by His Majesty's Sacred Hand.

There Is also another remarkable Observation brought to me of our Sovereign's
late Touch here at Whitehal, just before he went to Newmarket this last
Meeting, where amongst the rest, a Child of an Innkeepers in Holborn, having
for some considerable time been perfectly blind, so that she could neither see
Sun or Moon, or the Light, who upon His Majesty's gracious Touch, the same
Child recovered her sight, the which she keeps, and is very well at the writing
hereof.

One Thomas Costland, (as another remark of His Majesty's favor) living near
Oxford, and having many Strumous Swellings about his Neck, for which he had
been touched and cured; but upon leaving off his Gold, his Swellings seized him
afresh: the Gold being new strung, and put again about his Neck, his Swellings
suddenly abated, and he to his dying day continued ever after in health,
without any appearance of relapse. This also I received from the aforesaid
Doctor Eaton.

From Dr. White I had this following of a Woman in La^^born in Berkshire, who
being so grievously troubled with the Evil, that it made her so blind, that she
could not see cross the Table; she having been touched for the same by the King,
within less than fourteen days she recovered her sight, so that she could
distinguish between every one at the Table; and she every day so mightily
amended, that in a short space of time she perfectly regained her sight to
admiration.

From Madam Waterman, His Majesty's late Physicians Lady, I had this following
Observation of a Person of Quality, who was much troubled with the Evil in her
Eyes, as also many running Soars behind her Ears; for the curing both of which,
all imaginable means were used before (His Majesty's happy Restoration) by the
most eminent Physicians and Chyrurgeons in London: She by all their skill and
advice no whit growing better, but having some appearance of help by longer use
of their Medicines, and did purchase greater hopes than she expected, at length
advanced to a very great measure of Cure; but this continued no long time: Some
Years after His Majesty's happy return into England, her Distemper seized
afresh in her Eyes, and by my Lady Ivyes advice used several Remedies (who for
some miles was sent for to advise about the same) but she using several means
to as little effect as the former, she being evermore compelled to keep in the
dark, or close place, where she could not endure the sight of the light, not
being able to walk in or out of the House without leading, no ways capable of
enduring the light of the Sun or Fire, or the very appearance of Day. This Lady
being touched by our Sacred King, within two days after could endure the light
without trouble; and in a Weeks time she received that miraculous Change (that
she without any further help) could walk abroad by her self without any help or
assistance, and has ever since continued free from any further Distemper,
although it has been above fifteen or sixteen Years since she received his
Majesty's gracious Touch.

The aforesaid Lady tells us likewise of Sir Nicholas Tucks two Children, who
both were also much troubled with the Evil; the one with running Soars behind
her Ears, which were not to be cured by the utmost of Art; the other with soar
Eyes, and an extraordinary Rhume: Both these being touched by His Sacred
Majesty the last Summer at Windsor, received immediate Cure; as I had from the
abovementioned Ladies own Lips.

The Daughter also of the Honored Dr. Waterman, being much troubled with the
Evil in her Throat, and Swelling, which proved very troublesome to her, so that
for some time she was not able to hold up her Head, or move the same without
pain; she likewise being touched for the same by His Sacred Majesty, within a
few days after it, she much amended, and has ever since continued well: But
she, upon leaving off her Gold for some time, she felt new Pains and Swellings,
but no sooner had she put the same Gold on again, but her Pain and Swelling
abated, and found as speedy a Recovery, as the want of the same gave her fresh
fears of its return.

This following I received also from the aforesaid Mistress Elizabeth Bookey,
which was of a near Relation of her own, of a Child of about two years old, who
having very many troubles upon her, as Fevers, Agues, Vomitings, and other
Illness about that time of her Age; for which advice being asked from the most
eminent Physicians, one amongst the rest judged it to be an Evil humor cruising
about her Body; others were of another Opinion, she being for some time kept
under the Physicians hands for some years; about the seventh Year of her age,
the Humor gathered afresh upon or very near her left Breast, which was so
violent that it drew the child crooked, and made her to bend like a Bow: this
sore was opened and dressed by an eminent Surgeon of our City of London; it
being for some time kept open, at length healed up of a sudden, but it very
quickly gathered again inwardly: The Relations then remembering the opinion of
one of the most eminent Physicians who had formerly been consulted, and that he
supposed it to be an Evil humor, or the same Humor that begets the same
Disease, used all imaginable means of having her Touched by the King: But he
that had the most immediate care of her, said it was the Evil, and if it were,
it was not Touching that could help her, but it must be other means that must
effect her Cure. The Relations not being herewith satisfied, they carried the
Child to Mr. Sergeant Knight, Sergeant Surgeon to His Majesty, who was of
opinion that it was not the Evil: A year or two after, this Distemper seized
her Eyes, where she met with such a violent Rhume, that it not only blistered
her Eyes, but made Scars also in her Face: They made their second Address then
to His Majesty's Surgeon, who seeing the Disease so apparently discovered
its self, that she had a Ticket, and was touched by His Sacred Majesty; the
which she no sooner had received, but she immediately found ease in her Eyes,
and has continued very well for these last ten years together, except upon
leaving off her Gold, whereupon she says she has met with some small ilness
in her Eyes, which upon putting her Gold on again, has as suddenly vanished.

The Healing before the Kings last meeting at New Market, which was in March,
before he left the City there was a very poor Country Woman brought in a Chair
to be healed, which could neither go nor stand: His Majesty affording her His
Royal Touch, she suddenly thereupon amended; the day following she was able to
walk about the Room; and in two days after she was so perfectly recovered, that
she went into the Country freed from her former Sickness, and discharged from
her Scrophulated Swellings.

At the same Healing another young Woman which was very near blind, and very
much disturbed with Strumous Swellings, and had also several running Soars
about her, she being touched then also by the King, received perfect Remedy by
the Royal Favor of his Sacred Hand. Both these, I my self was Eyewitness of,
and therefore do confidently assert the truth thereof.

Being in the Society of many Persons of Quality, I had this remarkahle
following Observation from an eminent Person of this strange Cure. A
Nonconformists Child in Norfolk, being troubled with Scrophulous Swellings, the
late deceased Sir Thomas Brown of Norwich being consulted about the same, His
Majesty being then at Breda or Bruges, he advised the Parents of the Child to
have it carried over to the King (his own Method being used ineffectually:) the
Father seemed very strange at his advice, and utterly denied it, saying, The
Touch of the King was of no greater efficacy than any other Man's. The Mother of
the Child adhering to the Doctors advice, studied all imaginable means to have
it over, and at last prevailed with her Husband to let it change the Air for
three Weeks or a Month; this being granted, the Friends of the Child that went
with it, unknown to the Father, carried it to Breda, where the King touched it,
and she returned home perfectly healed. The Child being come to its Fathers
House, and he finding so great an alteration, enquires how his Daughter arrived
at this Health, the Friends thereof assured him, that if he would not be angry
with them, they would relate the whole Truth; they having his promise for the
same, assured him they had the Child to the King to be touched at Breda,
whereby they apparently let him see the great benefit his Child received
thereby. Hereupon the Father became so amazed, that he threw off his
Nonconformity, and expressed his thanks in this method; Farewell to all
Dissenters, and to all Nonconformists: If God can put so much Virtue into the
King's Hand as to Heal my Child, I Will serve that God and that King so long as I
live with all Thankfulness.

The following Letter came very lately to my Hands, which I shall here insert
verbatim.

Mr. Brown,
I Am informed that you are Publishing a Treatise of The Royal Gift of Healing;
and knowing that many are of the Opinion that there can be no benefit received
without a strong belief, etc. Therefore pray to your many Obligations, add one
more, by inserting this in your Book, viz. I was very much afflicted with the
Distemper vulgarly known by the Name of the King's Evil, from seven years of
age, until the time that I received His Majesty's most gracious Touch: I was so
much afflicted with it, that at some times my Face would be so Tumefied, that I
could hardly see out, or speak plain: my Cheeks and Neck were full of
Glandules, and I had such a running Ulcer in my upper Lip, that at some times
it appeared like a Hare-Lip, and in a very bad condition I continued from the
year 1648, until the year 1662, at which time all my Friends advised me to get
the Favor of being Touched: but I believing no further than I could see
demonstrated, though none could exceed me in Loyalty, I refused to go: but in a
short time after I had some Business of another Nature to go to London, which
having soon after I came perfected, I did not dare go home again without being
Touched, because I made that the pretense of my Journey. So then I went to some
Friends in London, who gave me Recommendations to Mr. Sergeant Knight, who gave
me a Ticket, and I waited upon His Majesty as I was directed, and received His
Divine Touch; which had so good effect upon me, that in two or three days I was
very much at ease; and by that time I got home, which was within a fortnight, I
was perfectly well, to the great Glory of God, the Eternal Honor of His Sacred
Majesty, and the Lawful Heirs of the Crown, whom God preserve. Amen. Sir, When
I have the Happiness to Kiss your Hand, you shall have a more particular
account from

Your Humble Servant, Philip Williams.
From my House at the Globe in Whites-Alley in Chancery Lane London, Dec. 10.
1683.

A poor Country-woman came with her three Sisters from Oxford, to be healed by
His Majesty in the Week before last Easter: this Object of Charity came to my
House in a very miserable condition, and was as well by Sergeant Pyle, His
Majesty's Sergeant Surgeon, as my self, viewed, and her Distemper was
concluded by both not to be the Evil; her Legs were both extraordinarily
blistered; her Stomach was so weak, that she for some days could not eat any
Diet. I being upon pure Charity persuaded by her earnest Entreaties and
Requests to have her Touched, the which on her bended Knees she humbly
requested, with that perfect assurance, that could she attain it, she should
certainly gain her Cure; she at the public Healing at Whitehal was Touched by
His Majesty: that very night she eat two Eggs, that for above ten days before
nauseated any Diet. The day following she was Touched again, and with it she
received His Majesty's Gold: upon which her Sores and Blisters in her Legs
dried up, she speedily thereupon amended, and within a very few days to
admiration was perfectly retrieved from her Disease, and to this day is a
visible Object of His Majesty's great Cure, (the beginning and ending of which
I saw) to His Sacred Thanks and Glory.

From Mr. Whitacre of Winchester I had this following, of a Child of one Mr.
Harbins of the same place, who being perfectly blind with the Evil, and she
being Touched by His Sacred Majesty for the same at Whitehal, she immediately
received great benefit thereby, and recovered her sight to that great degree,
that walking the same day along with her Mother by the Maypole in the Strand,
she asked her Mother what that long Pole was for? which she thankt God she then
perfectly saw, and has continued very well ever since.

Elizabeth Dewolders of Flushing in Zealand, was touched by the King for the
Evil about thirteen years since, who having many running Sores about her Neck,
soon after her touching she immediately received benefit, and within a little
while after her Sores perfectly dried up. I saw this Woman my self, who came
with her Sister who was troubled with the Evil to be Touched this instant
October at Whitehal, and she is perfectly healed, and has continued so ever
since.

William Luke of East-Packham in Kent, a Blacksmith, who having the Evil very
much in his Eyes, was touched by the King for the same, and received immediate
benefit thereby: he was touched about Easter, and every year about the same time
he meets with a fresh return hereof: he comes about forty miles, and every year
he gains the Kings Touch, he receives Cure therewith, and goes home very well,
and follows his Calling. This I had from Mr. Doublebrook, who is one of His
Majesty's Yeoman-Ushers, and who always brings him to the King to be Touched.

From Mr. Millart, one of the Yeoman-Ushers to the Yeomen of the Guard, I had
this, of a poor Woman who was his next Neighbor, who being so grievously
troubled with running Sores about her Neck, that she was near wasted and
consumed to nothing, she was brought in a Chair to the King to be Touched, and
immediately found benefit thereby, and within a short time after she returned
home to Breda in Brabant perfectly recovered, and since that sent him a Letter,
with thanks, of her continuing well to this hour.

From Mr. Doublebrook I had this following also, of a Woman who came from
Virginia, whose Nose was almost eaten away with the Evil, and her Eyes consumed
with that Humor, she being brought by him to the King to be Touched,
immediately received benefit thereby, and returned to Virginia since, and as a
token of Thanks to him, she sent him a Pair of Gloves, with a Letter, wherein
she certified him that she was recovered from her Disease, and was perfectly
healed. This he received from her within a year and a half after, from Virginia.

I might have introduced many more Examples of the great Cures which have been
performed by the Sacred Hands of our Kings and Queens: but I hope these may be
sufficient to satisfy the reasonable Man.

May our Blessed SAVIOR therefore, the great Physician of the Soul and Body,
evermore add many years to our Sacred Majesty's Age, that he may always appear
more glorious, as the Rising Sun over his People, diffusing of his Healing
Rays: May Fortune and Glory be ever the Fruit and Pleasure of his Sacred
Person: And may he ever be himself free from all such Sickness and Diseases as
he cures in others; whose Health is the Health of his Nations, and whose Life
is the Life of his Kingdoms: And as the great KING of Kings has hitherto
miraculously preserved his Defender of the Faith, so may He evermore keep Him
from the Malice of his evil Subjects Tongues, and from the sickly Contagion of
their ill Manners. May the Preserver of Mankind furnish his Royal Person
continually with a strong Army, a faithful People, a flourishing Nation, a
peaceful Church, a serene Sea, an invincible Throne, and happy Islands; that as
all the World does pay Tribute to our Sovereign's great Name, so they may also
reverence his Divine Healing Nature.

An Account of the Persons touched by his Sacred Majesty King Charles the
Second, for the Cure of the Kings Evil, from May 1660. taken from a Register
kept by Thomas Haynes Esquire Sergeant of His Majesty's Chapel Royal.
Months. Number of Persons. 1660. MAy and June 900. July 1084 August 781
September 1691 November, December, January 1549 6725 1661. February, March,
April, 1425 May 136 June, July, August, 753 September 317 October 450 November
727 December 267 January, February. 542 4619. 1662. March 958 April 385 May 262
June, July, August, 337 September 343 October 578 November 789 December 249
January 104 February 270 4275. 1663. March 505 April 1284 May 930 June 499 July
60 August 31 September 374 October 447 November 142 December 60 January 31
February 364 4667 1664. March 742 April 1096 May 1137 June 80 September 303
3335

An Account of Persons Touched by His most Sacred Majesty King Charles the
Second, for the Cure of the Kings Evil, from May 1667. to May 1682. taken from
a Book or Register thereof, kept by Mr. Thomas Donkley, Keeper of His Majesty's
Closet belonging to His Majesty's Royal Chapel.
1667. Months. Numbers. MAy 10 June 32 July 21 August 15 September 109 October
382 November 384 December 133 January 59 February 378 March 984 April 571 3078
1668. May 422 June 57 July 57 August 19 September 263 October 191 November 262
December 300 January 69 February 217 March 360 April 1326 3543. 1669. May ^8
June 3^ July 40 August 13 September 53 October 000 November 512 December 205
January 000 February 131 March 819 April 1001 2983 1670 May 195 June 69 July 13
August 24 September 13 October 457 November 353 December 96 January 17 February
30 March 401 April 1709 3377 1671. May 43 June 13 July 133 August 215 September
119 October 67 November 390 December. 320 January 14 February 124 March 1212
April 918 3568 1672. May 122 June 18 July 37 August 36 September 67 October 116
November 692 December. 221 January 12 February 218 March 1488 April. 744 3771
1673. May 77 June 116 July 7 August 66 September 227 October 630 November 350
December. 157 January 57 February 93 March 950 April 1727 4457 1674. May 131
June 67 July 69 August 57 September 259 October 453 November 524 December. 278
January 17 February 351 March 713 April 2160 5079 1675. May 301 June 105 July
179 August 53 September 203 October 632 November 554 December. 39 January 11
February 505 March 282 April 607 3471 1676. May 339 June 77 July 35 August 33
September 224 October 452 November 613 December. 000 January 137 February 134
March 900 April 1450 4454 1667. May 544 June 55 July 72 August 177 September
104 October 261 November 272 December. 406 January 1 February 178 March 1953
April 584 4607 1678. May 401 June 98 July 34 August 40 September 259 October
233 November 24^ December. 000 January 10 February 2 March 607 April 1530 3456
1679. May 15 June 258 July 35 August 75 September 90 October 344 November 590
December. 26 January 19 February 000 March 1127 April 1173 3752 1680. May 377
June 64 July 50 August 13 September 88 October 83 November 322 December. 93
January 1 February 50 March 830 April 1825 3796 1681. May 222 June 103 July 50
August 120 September 95 October 399 November 1029 December. 184 January 419
February 711 March 214 April 2461 1682. May 260 June 339 July 106 August 49
September 1027 October 221 November 1371 December. 815 January 4 February 1594
March 220 April 2471 8577 Summa totalis, 92107.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Samuel Lowndes, over against Exeter-Exchange in
the Strand.
A Chronological History of France. Written by the Sicur de Mezeray.
Parthanissa, a famous Romance, Written by the Earl of Orerey. Clelia. An
excellent New Romance, Written by Monsieur de Scuderey. Degreys Complete
Horseman, Or Expert Ferrier. Dr. Hornecks Sermon, on the Anniversary Day, for
the Martyrdom of King Charles the First. Mr. Riveley^ two Sermons: one at the
Funeral of Bishop Reynolds: the other at the Inauguration of the Major of
Norwich. Mr. Glanvil of Witches* with the additions of Dr. M^r^, and Dr.
Horneck. Mr. Glanvil's Lux Orientalis, or a Treatise of the Praeexistence of
Soul^. Bishop Rust his Discourse of Truth, with large Editions to both. By Dr.
More. The great Law of Consideration. By Dr. Horneck. Papismus R^gie potestatis
Eversor. By Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln. Mr. Paul Festeaues French and
English Grammar. The Mirror of Fortune, or the true Character of Fate and
Destiny. The French Rogue. A very Comical History. The Situation of Paradise
found out, in a History of a late Pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Claudius Mauger,
his French and English Letters. Credulity and Incredulity in things Divine and
Spiritual. Written by Mereck Causabon, D. D. Prebend of Canterbury. The Fire of
the Altar. Written by Dr. Horneck. Idea Eloquentiae, sive Rhetorica. Cambridge
Jests, or Witty Alarms for Melancholy Spirits.

