THE Mutations of the Seas:

OR, A Manifest Reason given for all the MUTATIONS Observed in the SEAS.

AND THIS By ways so Natural, Plain, and Easy, that every man may understand
the Manner, and must conclude it to be so.

By JOHN BRYANTSON-

LONDON:

Printed by George Larkin in Scalding Alley in the Poultrey. 1683.

To the READER-
Reader,
IN the following paper you have the Solution of one of the greatest Secrets in
Nature, a manifest reason given for all the Mutations observed in the Seas, and
that by ways so natural, plain and Easy, that you and every man may understand
the manner, and must conlcude it to be so. As first, A reason is given why we
have two Tides upon all shores in 24 hours. Secondly, Why those Tides fall
exactly so many Minutes later every day, as the Moon does. Thirdly, By what
means these Tides are made to Increase and decrease every seven days and why
they are always highest when the Moon is in Conjunction or Opposition with the
Sun, and lowest when in a Quadrature, or 90 Degrees distant. Fourthly, The true
cause why the Spring-tides are higher in March and September then ordinary And
Fifthly, Why upon some shores the waters rise to a very great height, when on
Neighboring shores they are hardly discernable, with other Observations about
the Flux and Reflux of the Seas. And all these seemingly different motions of
the Seas*solv'd by one most easy, simple, and before (for any thing I know)
unthought-of motion of the Earth. But now I must tell you that I am a Seaman,
and then method and order will not be expected; being rarely found amongst men
of my Profession; and I shall not scruple to confess, that I have had some
trouble to patch it up as it is, finding by this little trial, that tho men
unlearned may sometimes think of such things as these not unsuccessfully, yet
they shall not without a great deal of trouble and disadvantage be able to
communicate their thoughts to others, as you may too plainly see by this; but
(I hope) in a little time you may see what is here wanting made good by an able
pen. In the mean time I have promised you much, and with more then usual
Confidence, persuading my self that the hopes of being made acquainted with
this great Secret, will engage you to take a little pains more then ordinary to
understand my meaning, which if you once do, you and I shall quickly be agreed;
you will then say ^ that you know the true cause of the Ebbing and Flowing of
the Sea.

If you think that I have made more words then needed about some things, impute
it to my fear that otherways I should not be understood, or to my Ignorance not
knowing the most expressive words, the shortest way. If in other things I am as
much or more too short, be so kind as to excuse me by thinking what your self
would do in the same case; and in this I am sure you will be of my mind, that
is, that he that knows he does not speak well, should say as little as he can.
And upon that account I have not troubled you, nor concerned my self with any
thing that I could any ways avoy'd.

Amongst many other defects you will find that my Ignorance in the
Mathematics, as well as other parts of Learning, has forced me instead of
Terms of Art (which would have been much better understood) to make use of such
Words and Terms as being known to me, I thought might best express my thoughts
to others: perhaps you will think that a very little time and pains in that
Study might have enabled me to have set this off much more advantagiously, I am
of the same mind, but the circumstances I stand in have not yet afforded me
that time. But I tell you again, you shall find the thing it self to be true,
and then surely you will not be angry with me for these things For if a man
should tell me that he would presently bring me to a place where lay un-own'd
and before Concealed Treasure, if now the way he led me was none of the
cleanest, and withal much about, and encumbered with Briars and Thorns, yet if
at last he put me in possession of the promised and much desired Riches, I
would certainly, by acknowledging the kindness, prevent his making Excuses for
not staying to inform himself better in the way before he undertook to be my
guide. The same upon the same Conditions is expected from you, by

John Bryantson.

The Mutations of the Seas:
OR, A Manifest Reason given for all the Mutations observed in the Seas.
THE Arguments brought by Learned Men to prove that the Earth may have Motion
has so far prevailed, that it will not be looked upon as an Extravagancy now to
assert it; So that I do not fear but that the Motion I suppose the Earth to
have (when well considered) will willingly be admitted; for if it may have any,
it may have this. But because the Motion and Hypothesis upon which it is
founded, is altogether new; it will (I think) be convenient, to endeavor to
lesson a little (if I can) the strangeness of it to prevent your throwing the
Paper by as a rash and wide conjecture, before you understand my meaning. For I
question not but that you will be supriz'd when you shall hear me say, that the
Moon and Sun give the Earth Motion, as they are carried round our Globe, but
content your self, and in two or three hours time (if you have but patience to
read so long, and be not altogether a Stranger to the Heavenly Motions) you
will find the Motion I suppose the Earth to have to be so far from any thing
you have yet heard or fancied to your self, and such agreeableness between that
and the Motions of the Seas, that what but just before you thought strange, if
not fabulous, you will then think not only easy but reasonable.

In the mean time you may consider that the Tides keep such equal pace so
exactly observe the Motions of the Moon, (even to a minute of time) that no wit
or reason of man is able to exclude the Effects of that Planet. It is most
certain, (and very wise and Learned men in all Ages, have been compelled to
acknowledge it) that the Moon by some secret virtue must give the Seas motion.
So that the matter may safely, be brought to this short Issue, one of these two
things must of necessity follow: Either the Moon must at the same time move the
Seas all over the World, and the Earth be yet immovable; Or else give the Earth
motion, and by that means, at the same time universally move the Seas.

Now if all those Learned men that have assigned the Sovereignty of the Seas to
the Moon (upon the considera ion of the manifest agreement that is found to be
between the Motions of the Ocean and that Luminary) have thought it not
impossible for the Moon to give the Seas Motion; Why may it not be thought at
least as possible for the Moon to give the Earth motion, and by consequence at
the same time universally move the Seas? As at the same time to move the Seas
all over the world, and let the Earth stand still. And so much the rather,
since it is certainly true, that Nature in all her opperations makes use of the
most facil and simple means. For take a Boat, set the head and stern North and
South, place in this Boat 15 or 20 vessels of water, now if you should bid one
to move the water in all those vessels at the same time with a constant regular
motion, you would think him no wise man, if he should attempt to do it any
other ways than by giving the Boat motion. Nay he could not otherwise do it
without a great deal of help. But if with one hand only he shall lift up the
side of the Boat a little, and then depress that side as much below the level
as before he raised it, and shall for some time continue thus to move it from
East to West, and West to East; he shall with as much ease, and at least with
as constant a motion, at the same time move all the waters in all those
vessels, as he can by any other ways move all the water in any one of them. So
it must be confessed that the Moon by only giving the Earth (the containing
vessel) motion, may at the same time, and with as much ease move all the waters
in the Indian, Atlantic, Paci^^tick, nd all other Seas, as by any other ways,
or means that may or can be thought of, move all the water in any one of those
Seas.

Besides, Nature commonly makes use of some inward Principle, for opperations
that are to be constant and regulat, as the motions of the Seas are known to
be; but if it should be granted that the Moon might by some occult quallity,
some unknown Principle, give the Seas motion, and the Earth be yet immovable,
the difficulty would remain; for no satisfactory reason has or can be given,
how by any influence or opperation the Moon may or can be supposed to have upon
the waters (...) should cause those different vicissitudes that are found in
the Tide of the Seas. Then if the appearance cannot be solved (as in truth they
cannot) by any influence the Moon may or can have upon the Waters. And that the
same mutations must of necessity ensue upon the motion of the Earth, and that
it is as possible for the Moon to move the Earth and Seas together, as to move
the Seas alone, and besides much the more facil and shorter way, why should it
appear so strange a Paradox to affirm that the Moon gives the Earth motion? Nay
who can doubt but that the Moon by some inward Principle gives the Earth
motion? And then you shall have this advantage into the bargain, that you shall
not be to seek for a Principle; for the Magnetic virtue or force of attraction
upon solid Bodies has been long known; And you cannot deny the Earth to be a
Magnetic Globe, except you will deny that to be in the whole, which more or
less is manifestly to be seen in almost every part, but most wonderfully in the
Lodestone which is apart of the true Primary and integral substance of the
Earth*

Now since there has always been acknowledged to be a very great Affinity
between the Moon and Earth, and likeness of parts, I think the Moon may
reasonably enough be concluded to be so too; And then these two great Magnates
hanging in the thin Air, must easily admit of motion, so that I cannot see
where the difficulty should be, or what should hinder but that the Moon may
give the Earth, and the Earth the Moon (if the Moon may be thought to have need
of it) motion. If you shall think the distance too great, consider that if a
small Loadstone will give a Librated Needle a very swift motion at the distance
of six or seven foot, or more, what distance may be thought great enough to
give bounds to the Attractive Virtue of Load-stones so immensly great as the
Terestrial Globe and Moon. And besides it is not improbable but that the Moon
may consist of such parts, that the Appetite and Desire of Union may be much
greater between the Earth and Moon, then between the Loadstone and Iron. Nay
who can tell but that the more in ten parts of this our Globe may be indewed
with a much more powerful attractive virtue then any piece of stone yet found,
or perhaps that may be found upon or near the surface of the Earth.

I shall add, that though perhaps the excellent use that is made of the
Lodestone in Navigation may seem to some men sufficiently to answer the ends
of its Creation, yet it cannot be denied but that the World was grown Old
before the use of it was known; so that Nature may be said to have endued the
Magnet with those admirable Virtues, from the beginning of the World till
within a few years last past, to no purpose (for I think there was little use
made of it before) But now if you shall look upon the Terrestrial Globe and the
rest of the superior Bodies, to be nothing else (as it is certain that the
Earth is nothing else) but great Magnates or Load-stones, you cannot think but
that wise Nature lodged these wonderful virtues in them for far more wonderful
uses, and that it would be unreasonable to think that those virtues have not
been kept in Exercise ever since the Creation. And you shall not need to
trouble your head to think how, for you shall be forced to acknowledge that, by
this Magnetic Virtue the Earth and Seas have always been kept in motion. Then
if you consider the many Benefits that we enjoy (which we could by no means
want) by the daily Tides you must confess it to be a very wonderful work of
Providence, and that as the same has been from the Beginning, so it must
continue so long as the Sun and Moon endure.

And then if those Bodies called Planets be Magnetic Globes or Worlds (as
surely that man never thought it worth his pains to consider whether or no they
might not reasonably enough be esteemed so, or else his Understanding must be
yet in its leading strings that thinks otherwise) and inhabited, then such a
Motion as I suppose the Earth to have will be necessary for them too; which
they may very well have, for Mercury and Venus (which are but the Sun's Moons)
may give the Sun, and the Sun them motion. And the like Friendly Offices may
mutually pass between Jupiter and Saturn, and the Stars or Moons that move
about them. And Neighboring Stars may give Mars motion. Only there must be
difference in the mutations that shall happen in their respective Seas, in
point of time, as well because some of them have more Moon's, as that some of
those Moon's take more some less time in discribing their Circles then our Moon
about our Globe, etc.

But further it is very probable that by the force of Attraction all those
Mundan Bodies not only keep their first designed distances, by having a
dependancy upon each other, but describe their several Circles. And then men
need not vex themselves with thinking what matter the Planets Orbs consist off,
for they may safely take their determinate courses through the Fluid Air
without any danger of loosing their way or interfearing on with another, and
too besides much labor might otherwise be saved, but enough and perhaps to
much of this.

The Earth then being a Magnetic Globe or Loadstone, it is certain that the
same virtues that are in the Loadstone, are and must of necessity be much more
powerful in the Earth. Now amongst many other virtues truly admirable in the
Magnet these following are well known to be peculiar to it. First, That every
minute particle of a Loadstone will constantly look with its determinate parts
toward the same and determinate parts of the Universe. Secondly, That theforce
of the Magnet is sent by infinite right lines through the Stone, the principle
virtue residing in the middle, the more remote from the Center, the more faint
and weak the virtue. Thirdly, That the greater Stone draws, more forceably than
the less, the compass of it is virtues or of its Activity is greater.

Let these faculties be supposed to be (as they certainly are) in the Earth it
will then be requisite to fix those lines and points of Attraction. Now I know
that a Loadstone or piece of Iron touched with a Stone) librated with a thread or
any other way: so that it be left at liberty to move, will presently direct it
self and point North and South, but the Stone in this way respect the Poles of
the Universe, for it is known that the Needle varies. direction in the same
place, as here at London, sometimes Easterly sometimes Westerly in a certain
period of time; and this cannot be in respect of the Poles of the Earth. And (I
think) none has been so curious as strictly to Examen whether or no the Poles
of the Stone had their Position North and South in the Mine, so that perhaps it
might be their East and West; for the Earth being at liberty to move in the
yielding Air, and its Poles of equal force (as the Poles of no piece of Stone
are and being with equal force drawn by either of the Poles of the Universe, it
may be direct its self to neither of them but to a point equally distant
between them, that is East and West. As we see that two Loadstones placed at a
convenient distance North and South from a Needle, shall draw that Needle that
before would willingly always point North and South to point, now East and
West and is the same as if those Loadstones were in those Points. More might
be said to countenance this, and perhaps you will think much more against it,
let it be so for I could as willingly as any man, for reasons that it may be
have not been thought off by many, let the Poles keep the places always.
Assigned them but when you shall know upon what grounds I have been persuaded
to think that the Earth has East and West Points of Attraction, you will find
that I have reason for it, nay you will think that it must be so, And then you
may take your liberty to judge, whether it may with more reason be thought that
the Position of the Poles in the Terrestrial (lobe is indeed East and West. Or
letting the Poles be North and South, The Earth may yet be endued with some
suchlike Magnetic attractive virtue in certain and determinate East and west
Points (if it may be thought to have any attractive force in fixed East and West
Points it will serve me. Then without more ado, I will now suppose that
infinite right lines of attraction (like as in the Magnet) run through the
Earth from East to West as in the Figure.

Where let A. B. C. D. be the Terrestrial Globe, A, C. the Meridian B. D. the
Horizantal lines, those lesser lines Infinite lines of Attraction running
through the Earth from East to West, the Horizantal line to cut the Equator at
140. and 320 Degrees of Longitude, and the Meridian at 50. and 230. And now the
Globe being by the Meridian Line A. C. divided into two Hemispheres, I shall
call them the Eastern and Western Hemispheres, or the Eastern and Western
Points of Attraction; and the Points D. B. where the most forceable Virtue
resides the Center of those Points of Attraction. And now if you please suppose
such lines and Points in the Globes of the Moon and Sun, which being granted
and the Earth poised in the flin'd Air with Equal Respect to the East and West
as well as North and South points of the Heavens now though the Earth thus
ballanc't would immutably keep its self directed with its determinat parts
toward the same and determinate parts of the Universe, yet that it may and
does easily and Willingly admit of Motion, and that I may come to the business
I do now affirm that this our Globe is kept in Perpetual motion from East to
West, and West to East every six hours (do not startle because I say the Motion
is for six hours from East to West, for it may very well be so though you have
not yet taken notice of it) by a Powerful Magnetic Virtue in the Moon and Sun
as they are carried round the Earth. And upon this Hypothesis without
introducing the least Novelty all the Mutations observed in the Seas shall be
manifestly resolved and must of Necessity ensue, But to render what I shall say
less perplexed I shall speak as if the Moon alone (being in this much more
Powerful) gave the Earth Motion, there being no need to take notice of the Sun
till I come to show you by what means the Motion of the Earth is abated and
increast every seven days, and then I shall examine what Interest the Sun has in
the Action, this being known I shall now tell you

After what manner the Earth is moved so as to make two Tides upon all Shores
in 24 hours.
LET the Earth be in its Center and the Moon in the Horizon East it is certain
that now the Moon cannot by any Magnetic Virtue give the Earth Motion except
it should be in a direct Line, which cannot be, for now the Moon is in the
Center of all those Lines of Attraction in the Eastern Hemisphere of the Earth
and so must have the same Advantage of giving the Globe Motion from west to
East, as from east to west, but as the Moon advances above the Horizon, she at
the same time by a very easy gentle Motion Attracts or lifts up the eastern
side of the Globe, or if you will give the earth Motion by turning it a little
in the Center from east to west, continuingand increasing the Motion as she
rises for three hours, that is till the Moon is South-east, And then and at all
other times when she is equaly distant between the Horizontal and Meridian
Lines she gives the earth the greatest Motion. The Reason why I say the Moon
gives and Increases the Motion of the earth as she rises above the Horizon is
plain, for take a Globe, set it upon its Poles, and Balance it so that it may
always have a Tendency, the same way; now if you shall fix a Line in the
Horizon, As in this Figure.

Where let A. B. C. D. be the Terestrial Globe, A. C. the the Meridian, B. D.
the Horizontal lines, E. F. the Orb of the Moon, G. H. I. K. L. Line drawn at
every 15 degrees, between the Horizontal and Meridian Lines in the Terrestrial
Globe to the same Points in the Moons Orb. If you shall now attempt to give the
Globe Motion by plucking at any of these Lines, and keep your hand to the same
Point in the Moons Orb it will be in vain, for you shall not give it Motion
from east to west, or the contrary. But if plucking By the line E. you shall
hold your hand, as high as G. in the Orb of the Moon, you will easily give it a
little Motion from east to West. And if you shall yet carry your hand higher to
H and I plucking yet by the Line E, you shall in using but the same or less
Strength give the Globe a greater Motion at H then at G. and I. then at H. So
the Moon in the Horizon, cannot give the earth Motion, but as she rises above
it she successively every moment drawn by lines more upright (I know not what
other Name to give them) from the Center of the Point of Attraction, or from
all those Lines or Points that from all parts of the eastern Hemisphere of the
Terrestrlal Globe dart out Rays of Attraction. But now according to this Rule
the Moon should give the Earth a greater Motion at K then at I and greater yet,
at L then at K. But Nature has wisely provided for this by bending (as I may
say) the Moon forces against her self. For the Moon by infinite beams, or Rays
of Attraction; has Influence upon that whole Hemisphere of the Terrestrial
Globe that Respects the Moon in her Diurnal Motion. So that the Moon no sooner
leaves the Horizon but she begins to have Influence upon the Western side of
the Globe and though the Beams of Attraction near the Meridian, are but Weak
and the Moon at a great distance Glances at them but oqliquely yet that litale
Impediment is enough (when the Moon is but a little above the Horizon (where
she could not if this Obstruction were not give the Earth but very little
motion) to keep this motion from being either sudden, or great, and that now
and at all times it may be most easy, constant, and Regular for as the Moon in
Rising above the Horizon, has every moment greater Advantage of giving the
Earth Motion, So the Influence she has upon the Contrary side of the Globe is
every moment greater, but yet notwithstanding this the Motion is increast till
the Moon is 45 Degrees above the Horizon.

I know what I have said is obscure enough, and I doubt I shall make it but
little plainer by a Figure, however I will venture though very unartificially
as before.

Let A. B C. D. be the Terrestrial Globe, A. C. the Horintal B. D. the Meredian
Lines -- Those Lesser Lines infinite Lines of Attraction, E. G. the Moon's Orb,
H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Lines drawn from the Eastern and Western Points of
Attraction in the Globe of the Moon, to different Points in the restrial Globe.
Now supposing the Moon in the Horrizon; and then she draws by the Lines H I.
(you may imagine innumerable Lines of Attraction more either from the Moon to
the Earth, or from the Earth to the Moon; it is the same thing for Magnetisme
must be from a propension or mutual iuclination in both Bodies) the Moon in
this place can give the Earth no Motion (for as I said before) she is now in
the Center of the Point of Attraction, and so can give the Earth no Motion; But
about an hour after this the Moon will be 15 degrees above the Horizon, and
then she draws by the Lines K. L. Now you may observe that the Line L. reaches
15. degrees West from the Mer idian, and then the Moon must have influence upon
all those Western Points of Attraction that are between that Point and the
Meridian. And on the contrary the Line K. Terminates in a Point 15. degrees
West trom the opposite Point of the Meridian, so that the Moon can have no
influence upon all those Eastern Points of Attraction that are between the
Termination of the Line K. and the Meridian. But the Magnetic virtue being
weak in Points so remote from the Center, the Moon notwithstanding this
impediment, by the advantage of drawing by Lines a little more upright from all
those other more powerful Points gives the Earth little Motion from East* to
West. And for the same reason continues and increases the Motion as she rises
till she is South East; and then she draws by the Lines M. N. both these Lines
terminate in Points equally distant between the Horizantal and Meredian Line*
that is in the North East and South West Points of the Globe, where note, that
when the Moon comes to be vertical to either of those Points she gives the
Earth as great a Motion as she does at the Point she is now in. So that now the
contest is at the highest, for though the Moon here is more advantageously
placed: to give the Earth Motion from East to West, then at any time since she
appeared above the Horizon, yet the advantage she has gained upon the
Western-side of the Globe, is now so great that here the motion of the Earth is
Arrested so that as the Moon from this Point move toward the Meredian the
Earth declynes again, for as the Moon in rising above the Horizon gradually
increastthemotion of the Earth till she was South-East, so now after the same
proportion it is abated as the Moon from the South East move toward the
Meridian. The nearer the Moon aproaches the Meredian the more advantage she has
of drawing from the Western Point of Attraction, and just so much as she gains
upon that side she must lose upon the contrary: so that the Earth now must move
back again from West to East, and by the same easy degrees as it was raised
returns to its place, as all other Magnetic Bodies do, when that which forces
them from their designed Stations or desired places, is either removed to such
places as renders it less powerful or altogether ineffectual. But to proceed.

The Earth now has had but three hours motion from East to West, nor will it
ever have a greater motion then now from East to West, or the contrary; yet
hereafter the motion will constantly be six hours from east to west, and from
west to east: for observe that the first three hours of the motion is always
that three hours time in which the Earth is returning to its place from which
the Moon before had made it vary. As now all the time the Moon is moving from
the South-east to the Meridian, the Earths motion (for the reason before said)
will be back again from West to east; and when the Moon has reached the
Meridian, then will the Earth be at its Level, and just as it was six hours
before, when the Moon was in the Horizon, for now the Moon being equally placed
between the points of Attraction, draws by the Lines O. P. and so must have the
same advantage of drawing from the one as from the other. But now though the
Earth be at its Level, yet the motion ceases not, for as you can no sooner say
the Moon is in the Meridian, but that she is out of it again, so this Motion is
not interrupted for a moment of time. The Moon no sooner leaves the Meridian,
but by the same easy motion that she raised the eastern-side of the Globe, she
now attracts and turns up the Western side, and by that means continues the
motion from west to east, till she is South-west; for the Moon must gain just
as much Advantage as she moves West from the Meridian till she is South-west,
by approaching every moment nearer the Western Point of Attraction, and being
further removed from the contrary; as she lost for the same reason, in moving
from the South-east, to the Meridian. Then now the earth has had six hours
motion from west to east, for it began three hours before the Moon reached the
meridian, by letting fall the eastern side of the Globe, and was continued till
the moon was three hours past the meridian, by turing up of the contrary side.
And now the motion will be back again the next six hours from east to west, for
look how much advantage the moon gained by drawing by lines successively more
upright as she moved from the Horizon to the South-east, so much she now must
lose by drawing by lines more declining as she moves from the South-west to the
Horizon. So that as the moon from the South-west declines toward the Horizon,
the motion of the Earth must be back again from east to west; and when the moon
shall be in the Horizon, then will the earth be at its Level, and just as it
was when the moon was in the opposite point of the Heavens. But now as when the
moon was in the meridian the motion ceases not, for the moon without the least
stay draws down the western side of the Globe, and after the same manner and
for the same reason continues the motion from east to west, for six hours, that
is, till the moon is three hours beneath the Horizon or North-west: The same
order is observed as the Moon moves round the Globe, for the next six hours the
motion will be back again from west to east.

If I have not expressed my self so as to make you master of my thoughts, take a
Loadstone made Spherical, set it upon its Poles, and carry another with a very
easy motion in a Circle round it, and you may see (I doubt not) this motion
very exactly, and as the saying is, to the life represented. And that you may
not think me so much wanting as wholly to neglect a trial, you may know that
when I had well considered the excellent agreement between the motion of the
Earth (as I had supposed it) and the Seas, It came presently in my mind that by
making a light Globe, and setting it upon its Poles so tenderly ballanc't that
it might but just have a Tendancy the same way, I might inform my self by the
help of a Loadstone, which would admirably suppply the moons place, by drawing
by invisible lines what motion the stone, carried in a circle round the Globe,
would give it, and how it would agree with the motion I had supposed the earth
to have, but unexpected and succeeding, troubles kept me at least three years
otherways employed; but then I made a Globe about seven Inches in Diameter,
with three small Osier Hoops, representing the Equator, Horizantal, and
meridian lines, through the Center of this; srom east to west, I fixed an Axis
of such Wire as Mariners, Needles are made of, and upon the ends of the VVyer
(which did but just appear through the Hoops) I Riveted two thin pieces of Iron
(each about an Inch long) pointed. I carried this Globe to a mathematical
Instrument-maker that was master of a stone (for I had none of my own) and upon
trial found that holding the stone either in the east or west points, or
meridianline, it gave it no motion (which I never doubted) but if it varied
never so little from those points, either from east to west, or the contrary,
it gave the Globe motion accordingly; but for want of an Arch to keep the stone
in all points at the same distance from the Globe, I could not precisely
observe at what point between the Horizontal and meridian lines, it had its
greatest motion, which was the chief thing I made the trial for. But the
Satisfaction I received by this, made me resolve upon a second, with a Globe
more artificially made, but unwelcom accidents have kept me from an opportunity
to this day. If any man shall think it worth his trouble, I doubt not but that
he may adjust such a Globe as I have been speaking of, so as to represent this
motion exactly enough; Only let the Equator be made in all parts of an equal
weight, for that that I made was so heavy in the East and West points, that
when the stone came near the Meridian, the Globe would decline with a motion
somewhat too quick, except I held the Stone very near, and then it carried the
Globe round with it. Its not to be questioned but,

That this Motion of the Earth must make two Tides upon all Shores, every 24
hours, or in the space of time the Moon is moving round our Globe.
AS before, let the Moon be in the Horizon East, and this to be the first time
of her going round our Globe the Earth and all Seas now without motion, When
the Moon takes her first steps above the Horizon she at the same time gives the
earth Motion by turning it a little in the Center from East to West, this must
cause an inequality in the surface of the water, and that presently produces a
motion; so that now the Indian, Atlantic, and Paciffick Seas first began to
move, and at the same time take their course West, the waters leaving the now
higher western, and failing upon the lower Eastern Shores, and this Motion is
continued till the Moon is South-East, and then is it high water and the first
flood upon all Eastern and low water and the first Ebb upon all Western Shores.
Now this Tide was but three hours for it wanted three hours from a preceding
motion, but hereafter every Tide will be exactly six hours. For now as the Moon
from the South-east moves toward the Meridian, the Earth returns to its level,
moving back again from West to East; and now all Seas take their first journey
East, leaving the Eastern and falling upon the forsaken Western Shores; and
when the Moon has reached the Meridian, then will the Earth and Seas be at their
first level, but now the* Motion seakes not, for as the Moon in her
never-ceasing motion leaves the Meridian and hastes away to the West, so the
motion of the Earth and Seas Eastward is continuedfor three hours longer* that
is, till the Moon is South-west, the Moon giving the Earth just as much motion
now from East to West; then this Tide was exactly six hours. And now the Seas
will take their course West again, for as the Moon from the South-west declines
toward the Horizon she lets fall the Western side of the Globe, and then all
Seas haste away to wash and fill the empty Eastern Shores. And this motion is
continued till the Moon is 45 degrees beneath the Horizon, or North-west, and
then it will be high water, and the Second flood upon the Eastern; and
low water, and the second Ebb upon the Western Shores. The next six hours the
motion of the Earth and waters will be back again from West to East, that is
till the Moon is North-east, and then will they have had two flood upon the
Western and as many Ebbs upon the Eastern Shore* And when about three hours
after this, the Moon shall be in the Horizon, that is, the same point of the
Heavens she was in when the motion began, then shall the Earth and Seas be at
their Level, the waters being just as high upon all shores now as then. But
though the waters now are neither higher nor lower upon the shores then when
the motion began, yet now it will be called half Flood upon the eastern, and
half Ebb upon the Western shores, for that three hours before by a preceding
motion of the Earth, the waters were so much higher upon the latter, and so
much lower upon the former, then they were 24 hours before. Then the three
hours Flood and Ebb that was then wanting upon those shores, is now made good.
So that in the space of 24 hours there has been two complete Tides upon all
Shores.

This is an order established by Nature, plain and without Mystery, its but a
gentle Rocking of the Earth in the Center from East to West, and west to east,
and though it may be hard to say precisely how much motion from east to west,
or the contrary, the Moon gives the earth, yet without troubling your head, you
may conclude it to be very little; for let it be supposed that upon indifferent
shores the water, rises ten foot (which yet is more then some will allow) five
foot of this is not to be acconuted for, the first three hours of every Flood
is but the return of the same water that by a contrary motion of the Earth
first fell from those Shores. For if the Earth was to keep its Level without
motion, the waters would be constantly as high upon all shores as they are when
we say it is half flood or Ebb, abating but so much as by the advantage of
falling upon shores that have a smooth and easy assent, or into Bays that open
with wide mouths and after are contracted into narrow Corners, or for some
other manifest cause they are made to mount. Now then what motion can you
imagine the earth to have to be little enough to swell the waters five, nay ten
foot upon those shores where the Seas are two or 3000 miles or more over, as
they commonly are; I am in the mind you will say, (and you may safely do it)
that this motion must be so little as to be almost altogether insensible. So
that though I have made a great many words about it, and talked of six hours
motion, from east to west, and west to east, yet when you have well considered
the matter, you may (without any Prejudice to your Judgment) very well suppose
the Earth always to have had this motion, though you knew it not. As shall be
abundantly confirmed to you by all that follows, for,

The Moon giving the Earth this Motion, the Tides must fall exactly so many
Minutes later as the Moon does.
THe other Motions of the Seas may as well be thought to depend upon the Motion
of the Sun as Moon; butin this the Moon seems to have all the sway, and has so
far outrivald the Sun, that men in all ages have willingly assigned the Empire
of the Ocean to the Moon, upon the account of the most exact agreement that is
found between the Moon and Seas in this Motion of Retardation, which is thus:
The Moon comes later to the same point of the Heavens one day with another by
about forty eight minutes, and the Tides observe the same. When the Moon is in
Conjunction with the Sun, it is always high water at London Bridge, at three a
clock, but now the same Tide will fall later every day as the Moon does, so
that when the Moon is in Quadrature with the Sun, the same Tide will fall six
hours later, that is, at nine a Clock; And so every seven days the same tide
will fall later by six hours till the Moon is in Conjunction again, and then
the same Tide will fall out at three a clock as before. If the Moon comes later
to the same point of the Heaven, 10, 15, or 20 Minutes this day (as it
sometimes falls out so) then the day before, the Tides observe the same all the
World over; and that so precisely, that no rule can be given to know the time
of high water but by knowing the true time of the Moons coming to the South.
And which is more, if strong winds keep back or accellerate the Tides (as
oftentimes it happens) half an hour or more, yet the very next Tide (if it be a
calm) shall observe the due time, it should have done, notwithstanding this
interruption. Then the question may well be asked whether or no the Seas
Universally may be made thus exactly to keep time with the Motion of the Moon
by any other ways or means whatever then by the motion of the Earth; but no man
can doubt but that if the Moon give the Earth motion after the manner that I
have supposed it, but that the Seas must observe the same even to a minute of
time: For if the Moon shall be South-east, South-west, North-west or
North-east, (at which points the Motion of the earth and seas from East to
West, or West to East always begins) this day at 12 a clock, if to morrow the
Moon comes later to these points 20 or 30 minutes, its certain that the Motion
of the Earth cannot begin till then, and by consequence it must be high water
so many minutes later. This is so manifest, that to say more would be needless.
And therefore I shall now let you know

By what means the Motion of the Earth and Seas are abated and increased every
seven days.
I Said before that the Moon and Sun by a powerful Magnetic attractive Virtue
gave the Earth Motion. I shall now add, That by reason of the exceeding swift
motion of the Moon, the Sun sometimes comes to be so posited as directly to
oppose the Moon in the Motion, and sometimes to assist with all his forces. But
that you may the better understand what I say, and at the same time fancy to
your self, how much the Sun contributes to, or impedes the Motion as he comes
to be every day diversely posited, I will now examine how much the Sun may be
concerned in the Action, which may easily be gathered from this, That when the
Moon is 90 degrees from the Sun, the Sun then directly opposes the Moon in the
Motion; and yet then the Tides here at London commonly rise about 12 foot. At
new and full Moon the Sun lends his utmost Assistance, and then they rise about
16 foot, now if when the Sun directly opposes the Moon, the tides rise 12 foot,
and whenhe assists with all his forces they rise but 16. its certain that if
the Sun did neither hinder nor assist, the Moon alone would give the Earth so
much motion as should constantly make the Tides rise here 14 foot: So that the
Suns interest can be but as two to 14. I do not pretend to be precise in this,
for perhaps there may be (especially at some times of the year) more then four
foot difference between the Neap and spring Tides here, and it may be the Neap
and Spring Tides rise not commonly so high as I speak of; but this is not so
far from the Truth, but that it may serve to make a pretty near Estimate; Then
now if you Understood after what manner I supposed the Earth was moved, and at
what points it had it is greatest Motion, You will easily know how that motion
comes to be abated or increast, which is thus

Suppose the Moon in the Horizon East, and in Conjunction with the Sun this
day, then the Tides must be at the highest, for now the Moon and Sun being
carried round the Earth in the same Point, they with their United forces must
give it as great a motion as at any time they can; For the next day, it will be
three quarters of an hour later before the Moon reaches the Horizon; and then
the Sun will be about 12 degrees above it: So that this day when the Moon shall
be South-east (the place of greatest advantage of giving the Earth motion) the
Sun will be 12 degrees nearer the Meridian, at which point the Sun cannot
altogether so powerfully assist the Moon, as the day before when they were both
at the same time in the South-east Point; So that this day the motion of the
Earth is a very small matter abated. And for the same reason the Motion every
day abates, till the Moon is in the quarter; For about three days after change,
when the Moon shall be in the Horizon, the Sun will be 45 degrees above it,
then this day all the time the Moon is moving from the Horizon to the
South-east, the Sun is moving from the South-east to the Meridian; in all which
points, especially near the Meridian, the Sun but faintly assists the Moon, and
in the meridian not at all. But the next three days the Sun does not only less
assist, but every day more then other opposes the Moon in the motion; For about
five days after Conjunction, when the Moon shall be in the Horizon, the Sun at
the same time will be about 60 degrees above it; Then this day when the Moon is
South-east, the Sun will be declined 12 degrees West from the meridian: So that
all the time the Sun was moving from the meridian to that point, The Sun
opposed the Moon, by drawing from the contrary point of Attraction. The next
day the impediment will be greater, and when the Moon shall be in the quarter,
or 90 degrees from the Sun, then will the Sun directly oppose the Moon all the
time of the motion: For then when the Moon is in the Horizon, the Sun must be
in the Meridian; so that all the time the Moon is moving from the Horizon to
the south-east, the Sun is moving from the meridian to the south-west: and so
directly opposes the Moon with all his forces; The Sun having in all those
points the same advantage of giving the earth Motion from West to East, that
the Moon has of giving it motion from East to West: now if the Sun did attract
with equal force, the Earth must this day be without motion; but the Moon (by
reason of her nearness) being much more powerful, gives the Earth motion,
notwithstanding this Opposition. Then now the Tides are at the lowest, the
Earth having now the least motion it can at any time have. For now for the same
reason that the motion was abated from the Moons being in Conjunction till she
was in the first quarter, it will now be increast till she is in Opposition.
The next day after the quarter, when the Moon shall be in the Horizon, the Sun
will be 12 degrees West from the meridian; then this day when the moon shall be
south-east, the Sun will be declined 12 degrees from the south-west, at which
point the Sun cannot so much impede this motion as the day before. And now
every day the Impediment will be less, and accordingly the motion of the Earth
and Seas will be increast, but especially three days before the moon comes into
Opposition, for then the Sun does not only less oppose, but for some part of
the time (every day more then other) assists the moon in the motion. And when
the moon shall be in opposition, the motion will be the same it was when in
Conjunction; for then when the moon is in the Horizon east, the Sun will be in
the Horizon West; and as the moon rises above the Horizon, and gives the Earth
motion from East to West, the Sun at the same time declines beneath the
Horizon, and assists the moon in the motion altogether as powerfully as when in
Conjunction. As the moon attracts or turns up the eastern side of the Globe,
the Sun at the same time pulls down the VVestern side, which is the same thing
as if they had been both in the same point, and the motion will be as great,
and the Tides as high, as at the new moon, The same order is observed till the
moon comes into Conjunction again, for as the motion was abated from new moon
to the first quarter, so now for the same reason and after the very same
Proportion it will again be abated till the moon is in the last quarter, and
then increast as before for the next seven days, etc.

Now let any man that takes pleasure in these things consider well with himself
how much every day the motion of the earth ought to be abated or increast,
(allowing the Sun to have such an interest as I spoke of before) and I dare
promise him all the satisfaction in it can be expected; for upon Examination he
shall find the increasing and decreasing of the Tides to corrospond as exactly
with it as he can desire, and much more excellently then I can express it.
Three Days before new and full moon, you shall find the sun very aptly placed
to assist the moon in the motion, and acordingly you will find the Tides to
increase. Three days after new and full moon the sun not much less assists the
moon (tho every day less then other) then upon the same day, and then you will
find the Tides to decrease but leisurely. Three days before either of the
quarters, you must think the sun notably impedes the motion, the Tides then
decrease a pace. Three days after the quarter, the Tides increase but slowly,
the sun those days less opposing, but not at all assisting the moon. There is
yet a fourth motion of the seas; that is,

That these Spring Tides are made to increase and decrease every quarter of a
year.
THis motion of the Seas has not I think been much taken notice of here, only
Learned men have observed that the spring Tides are usually higher in March and
September, then ordinary. But in the Mediteranean Sea it has been known long
since, that the spring Tides are constantly lower when the Sun is in either of
the Tropicks, and higher when in the Equator; and he that shall observe it upon
any shore that lies open to the Ocean in any part of the World, (I believe)
will find it so; but this place is by no means fit for these inquiries, for in
December Land-floods many times makes the Tides higher then usual, at other
times they are pestred with Ice, and that keeps them back, besides strong winds
at Sea often makes the Tides higher or lower then Ordinary, when perhaps its
calm here. And then in June, tho the spring Tides are lower then then usual,
yet it has been thought to be only for want of fresh water coming down so
plentifully as at other times; and indeed reason and Experience tell us that
when Land-floods happen at the new or full Moon, the spring-tides must be and
are then higher then at that time of the year they are accustomed to be; and by
Consequence when the Rivers are empty, the Tides must be and are then lower.
But then its well known that the waters in European Rivers are usually lower in
September then in June, and yet the spring-tides are then commonly highest, but
by reason of the aforesaid frequent Interruptions this has not been taken
notice of, though its discernable enough here to a curious observer. And the
Reason why the spring-tides are higher at these times then Ordinary, is very
plain, and may in a few words be dispatched. For suppose the Moon to be in
Conjunction with the Sun in the first degrees of Cancer, they now in their
diurnal motion describe the least Circle (except when in Capricorn, and then it
is the same) about the Earth; and then must give the Earth the least motion.
This you cannot question, for if you were to give a Wheel motion upon its Axis,
you would not lay your hand upon the Nave, or near it, but upon the Rim, the
greatest Circle, since you might with using but the same strength at the Rim
give it a greater motion then in any lesser circle. It Is the same with the Sun
and Moon, about 14 days after this, the Sun will be in the middle of Cancer,
and the Moon about the middle of Capricorn in Opposition with the Sun, (which
is the same thing as if they were in the same circle) and describe circles so
much greater* and by that advantage give the Earth a greater motion, so that
this spring tide must be a little higher then that that happened 14 days
before. And so every time the Moon shall be in Conjunction or Opposition with
the Sun, they will yet describe greater circles, and by that means give the
earth a greater Motion; and accordingly the spring-tides will increase till the
Sun has reached the Equator. And then being carried directly over the Body of
the Earth in the greatest circle, they must needs be thought to give the Earth
and Seas the greatest motion. So that now the spring-tides are at the very
highest; for now they will for the same reason decrease again, till the Sun is
in Capricorn, and the next quarter increase, etc. And this without doubt is the
only cause why the spring-tides are higher in March and September, and lower in
June and December.

I have endeavored to inform my self how much the spring-tides are higher when
the Sun is in the Equator, then when in the Solstices; and by the nearest
Observation I could make here at London, there is the difference of near two
foot, but I am not so well satisfied in it as I desire.

It will not be amiss to give you notice here that you shall hardly meet with
two men that agree at what time the Spring Tides are at the highest (I mean
those Spring Tides that happen at New and Full-Moon) some saying upon the day
the Moon is in Conjunction or Opposition, some the next day, others will have
it the third Tide after, by which it should seem the time is not fixed. I am in
the mind that for one half of the year the Tides may increase a day or more
after Full and Change, but not the other half; That is, from June to September,
and from December till March; my reason for it is this, in these quarters the
Sun is returning from the Tropicks to the Equators, and then though the Sun a
day after full and change do less assist the Moon in giving the Earth motion
then upon the day; yet it is so very little less, that the disadvantage is more
than recompensed by the Moons discribing the day after (having a very swift
motion) a greater Circle about the Earth. As the Sun goes from the Equator to
the Tropic, it is quite contrary; for then the day after full and change the
Moon describes a lesser Circle than the day before; and then the Tides should
not increase after New and Full-Moon, at least not so long.

I have made some agreeable observations about this, but have not had time for
a strict inquiry; though I have long thought of it. Those that live near this,
or any other River that Ebbs and Flows, may easily inform themselves whether
this be so or no.

But now besides these alterations of the Seas, it must follow upon this motion
of the Earth: first, that when the Tides rise highest, they must fall lowest;
Secondly, That the Tides in all Seas must set East and West; and Thirdly, That
the motion of the Seas must begin at the same time all over the World.

The first of these you may at your pleasure observe, and you shall always
find that the highest spring. Tide makes the lowest Ebb. And all experimene'd
men know the Tides set directly East and West upon all the utmost Eastern and
Western Shores in the World. And I think that Learned men are agreed, that the
motion begins at the same time in all Seas. Thus much is certain, that when the
Moon is South-west, or in the opposite Point of the Heavens, that is
North-east, it is always high water upon all the utmost open western Shores of
Europe and Africa, from Nova Zembla to the Cape of Good-hope. And that when
the Moon is South-east or North-west, it is high water upon the utmost Eastern
Shores of America. So that when it is high water upon the first named, it must
be low water upon the other Shores. When they have the first of Ebb upon the
Western Shores of Europe and Africa, they must have the first of Flood upon
the opposite Eastern Shores of America. By which it is plain that the motion
begins at the same time in all these Seas; and that what we call the Ebbing and
Flowing of the Sea, is nothing but the falling of the waters from off the
Western, upon the Eastern Shores, and the same back again every 6 hours. But
further, when it is high water upon the Western Shores of Europe and Africa,
it is high water at the same time upon the Western Shores of Italy, and upon
the Shores of Syria at the bottom of the Mediteranean Sea, and (take good
notice of it) when it is high water upon those Shores, it is low water at
Venice and on the contrary. Now this I take to be a very forceable argument to
prove the motion of the Earth, as I have supposed it, and then the motion must
begin at the same time in all Seas; for it is unconceivable how this should
otherwise happen: but if you shall fancy the Terraqueous Globe to have a little
motion from West to East, you will then say that it must make high water upon
all the first named Shores, and low water at Venice. But then let the Eastern
side be turned up, and it must make high water at Venice, and low water upon
all the other Shores.

The instances that may be taken out of this and other Seas to confirm this
motion of the Earth, are every where so many and so obvious, that they cannot
escape your notice if you will but take the least pains to inquire into these
things. Nor can you (I think) meet with any thing that shall seem to contradict
it. A reason now should be given,

Why upon some Shores they have almost no Tides, when upon others they have
great and almost incredible Floods.
I will only name some of those places that are most remarkable for great
Tides, or the contrary, without attempting to give a reason why it is so, being
almost confident that when you have observed those places well, you will say
that the Earth having such a motion, it must of necessity be so. I will begin
in the North parts of Europe, In some Bays upon the Shores of Nova Zembla, it
Flows 12. or 14 foot, but in some places upon the Neighboring Shores of
Lapland they have no Tides at all; and where they have most which is (as I
remember) near the Bay of St. Nicholas, one two, or three foot. Pet and Jackman
searching for a passage by the North*east to India, found the waters in some of
the Bays upon this Coast to be black, and like a standing Pool, without Motion.
Note that there are Bays upon those Shores that have the same Forms that those
have upon the other Shores where they have very great Tides. Upon the Western
Shores of Norway about 10 or 12 foot, but upon the Southern Shores, of Norway
they hardly exceed one foot or two; in the Baltic Sea no Tides. In the Bay of
Bristow 50 foot. At the Town of Orange in Normandy, they (...) rise somemes 80
foot. In the Bay of Biscay 18, 20, or 24 foot. Upon the Western shores of
Africa 10, 12, or 14 foot. But upon the Southern shores of Guiney and Benin
they have very little Tides, every ruffling Gale of Wind disorders them in many
places there. In Davis's straight (in some places near the Entrance) it flows
about 30 foot, At Port-Nelson, (which lies opposite to the mouth of the
Streights) where Sir Thomas Button Wintred, 15 foot: but in the South-part of
the same Bay, where (as I take it) Hadson Wintred, but one foot, observe this
Bay well. In the Bay of Foundy, Northward from New England, which place I had
never heard spoken of for great Tides, (though I had been twice in North-
America) but about two or three years since I saw a draught of the Sea Coasts
thereabouts described in very large form, where this Bay was represented in
such a Figure that I concluded that if the Earth had such a motion as I before
had supposed, that then in this Bay there must be great Tides. Not long after I
met with a Master of a Ship that traded into those parts, who upon my asking
told me, that it flowed there 12 or 13 fathom, but because I knew the man to be
one that loved to make things that were strange seem wonderful, I did not rely
upon his Testimony, but inquired of others, who agreed that it flowed there
above 60 foot; I now and always mean spring-tides; and in Bays or mouths of
Rivers; for where the Land is not indented, the waters never rise so high. In
other Bays upon the Eastern shores of North America, two or three fathom; upon
the Eastern shores of South- America, 10 or 12 foot, according to the largness
of the Seas, which are there very unequal. And because this may be a rule for
other places, you may observe that from Cape Frio (which is in the south-east
parts of Brasile) to the Streights of Magallan, the Land trenches away
south-west. Now when the first of flood falls upon the south-east shores of
Brasile, the waters rise considerably higher upon the shores, (as they do upon
all other shores) then the surface of the Sea at a very little distance is, now
the waters that next follow these, not finding it easy to mount this height,
and yet being pressed forwards by succeeding waters, are part of them forced to
follow the trenching of the Land at a distance from the shore. So that if in
all this Tract of Land any Promontory or Head-land that juts it is self farther
into the Sea then ordinary, to catch or Arrest these waters in their passage,
happens to lie on the Western-side of any Bay or mouth of Rivers, the Tide in
those Bays or Rivers shall be proportionably higher; but if the Land on the
Eastern side be strecht farther out then the Tides in those Bays or Rivers,
will accordingly be abated. It Ebbs and flows up the River of Plate (says Mr.
Purchase) an 100 miles. In the River Galegos near the entrance of the Streights)
and upon the shores of Fuego it flows 60 foot. In the Bay that lies between the
City of Martaban and Pegae, in the Gulf of Bengalia in India, the Tides set in
with a great deal of fury, and are said to rise there sometimes 40 foot. In the
Bay of Cambaja, great Tides, but they rise not so high, nor is the motion so
violent as in the former: In the Red Sea very little Tides: What Tides they
have upon the shores of New Guiney, I cannot learn, but without doubt very
notable in that great Bay, upon the western-shore. The greatest Tides in the
Mediteranean Sea, are said to be upon the Coast of Syria, where (I think) they
rise seven or eight foot. At the bottom of the Gulf of Venice, 5 foot; upon the
Western shores of Italy, not above a foot: The Waters run through the straight
of Sylla, and Caribdis, six hours East, six hours west, with a great deal of
violence, without rising or falling, or but very little; the like happens
between all the Islands in this Sea, only the course of the waters is not so
rapid, the passage not being so straight.

Now take a Globe, set it upon its Poles, the Horizon to cut the Equator at the
points before spoken of, and look upon any of these places, or any other place
that you know; or that Report has made famous for great Tides, or otherways;
and if the place be upon a Western shore, as the Town of Orange in Normandy,
then imagine the Globe to have a little motion, (you had best fancy it to be
exceeding little indeed, and your self not near, or else the very fear of being
overwhelmed with the falling Waters that must be crowded into this place, will
make you tremble) from West to East, but if the place be upon an Eastern shore,
as the Bay of Foundy, then from East to West; and the reason why these things
are so, will appear so manifestly, that it must be delightful to consider it;
but it would add to the Pleasure, if you had the Figures of those places you
had a mind to Examine, described in the largest Forms.

Take Notice, that in all those places where I have said there is great Tides,
that the bottoms of those places are sandy and smooth; which may indeed
Contribute to the raising of the Waters there, but cannot so properly be said
to be the cause of the extraordinary Tides in those places; As the great Tides
are the cause of that; for where ever the Tides sets with a direct Course into
the mouths of Bays or Rivers, they must have there always sandy smooth
Bottoms. Except in large Bays or Rivers that have narrow Mouths, and in them
the quite contrary may happen; for the greatest swelling of the Waters shall be
near the Entrance, and least of all in the Extremities of those Bays; and they
may have very uneven Bottoms, etc.

In a word, there is nothing of Mystery in these things; Nothing but what is
Consonant to the Laws, Principles, and Ordinary workings of Nature, and most
agreeable to Reason, nothing but what you may imitate, and at your pleasure see
exactly represented (what alterations happens upon the account of Rivers
excepted) by placing in a Boat (as I said before) 10 or more Vessels of Water,
of different sizes and Figures; let one of those Vessels be long and very
narrow, and stand as the Boat North and South: Now make a mark upon the Western
side of any of those Vessels, even with the Surface of the Water, and then in
three Minutes time lift up the Eastern-side of the Boat so high till you raise
the water half an Inch above that mark; and then in the like Space of time as
you raised it, let it return to its place, and (without letting the motion
cease) in three Minutes more (depress that side as much below the Level as
before you raised it, that is till the water be fallen half an Inch below that
Mark upon the Western shore; and now in other six Minutes raise it to its first
height, and if you shall con tinue thus to move it, you shall constantly give
the Boat six minutes* motion from East to west, and from West to East, and it
will be said to Ebb and Flow upon that shore where you made the Mark, a full
Inch. And you shall have two Tides upon al shores every 24 Minutes; and you may
make those Tides to fall later by three quarters of a Minute every 24 minutes,
and to increase and decrease in what Periods of time you please. Nay if a Hand,
a Sun, on the contrary side of the Boat, did sometimes hinder, sometimes assist
you, the Motion of the Boat and Waters must be abated and increast accordingly;
or if you should remove your hand 23 degrees on either side of the Equator (if
I may so call it) of the Boat, you shall not in using but the same Strength
give the Boat so great a Motion at the greatest Declination as in the middle
the greatest Circle; and if you have the Figure of those shores described in
some of these Vessels, where they have very great or almost no Tides, you shall
see the very same Alterations upon those shores. And when you give the Boat the
greatest Motion, you must have the highest Spring Tides and the lowest Ebbs.
The Waters must run directly East and West, and the Motion must begin at the
same time in all those little Seas. And whatever other Accidents happens in the
Flux or Reflux of the Sea, you may plainly see, even those Irregular motions
(as they are called) observed in the Euripus its self (as did I not think that
upon such a motion of the Earth as I have supposed the Reason of those
Alterations would manifestly appear, I should have made some words about it.)
And the motion of the Waters shall be in Proportion to the largeness of the
Vessels, only it shall be insensible in that narrow Vessel that stood North and
South in the Boat. Then it will not at all seem strange to you that the
Alterations observed in other parts of the Ocean are not discernable in the
Baltic Sea. And I know that you think it would be the same thing if that Sea
was placed at either of the Poles, or at the Equator: And that if the
Mediteranean Sea stood as the Baltic; North and South, that there would be
very little or no Tides in that Sea; But to be sure there could be none where
now they have the greatest Tides, that is, upon the shores of Syria* at Venice,
and at the Streights mouth. And that if the Baltic Sea was placed East and
west, the tides would be discernable enough in the Extremities of that Sea.

To conclude, I lately met with a couple of Observations about the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea in the Philosophical Transactions of the truly Royal
Society, not yet spoken of the first is: That the water neither flows nor ebbs
alike, in Respect of equal Degrees, but its Velocity increases with the tide
till just mid-water or half-flood, at which time its Velocity is at the
Strongest; and then decreaseth proportionably till high water or full Sea.

If you have understood what I have said, you cannot but know that the first
three hours of every flood and ebb is that three hours time in which the earth
is returning to its Level; then the business is to know whether it may be
thought that the Moon lets fall the side of the Globe with a Motion somewhat
quicker, then she raises it. Or, that the waters falling upon the empty shores,
must be thought to rise faster the first three hours, then they can when the
shores and Rivers are half full. I must leave this to the Determination of
wiser men.

The other Observation is indeed very notable, which is, that the morning tides
for one half of the year are higher by a foot (where it flows 18 or 20 foot)
then the evening tides; and on the contrary the other half year.

It would trouble a good head to give a Satisfactory Reason how this should
happen, if the earth has not such a Motion as I have been speaking of; but that
being alow'd, the cause of this odd effect is manifest enough. Nay I am
persuaded that the solving of this doubt would give much Reputation to the
Hypothesis, but because it would engage me to speak of things that at this time
I do not care for meddling with, I shall now let it alone, but if the Learned
shall think there is more in what I have already said, then mere Conjecture (as
I am under a strong delusion if there be not) then upon some other Occasion you
may know more of my thoughts about this. Till that be known, farewell.

FINIS.
To be Sold by William Gadbury, without the Bars in White-Chappel.


