A PERSUASIVE To the Stricter OBSERVATION OF THE LORDS DAY: In pursuance of His
MAJESTY'S Pious Order and Directions to PREACHERS Particularly about the
Observation of the LORD's DAY, etc. By Matthew Bryan, L. L. D.

Licensed

June 16t.h. 1686.


LONDON, Printed for S. Keble at the Turks Head in Fleetstreeet, and D. Brown
at the black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar, 1686.

Reverendo admodum In Christo Patri ac Domino, D. PETRO Providentia Divina
WINTONIENSI EPISCOPO, Et nobilissimi Ordinis a periscelide dicti Praesuli
Dignissimo; Copiarum, sub Rege maxim pio ac Martyr CAROLO primo, Duci
fortissimo; In Exilii Miseriis Benignissimi CAROLI Secundi servo and (...)
invicto; Rebellibus Occidentalibus, sub Rege Serenissimo JACOBO Secundo,
Terrori, Et Armis, and Precibus Regis Regnique Opitulatori, Bonorum Fautori,
Improborum Malleo, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Strenuo Vindici Et Ornamento, M. B.

Hanc de die Dominica pie observanda Concionem, coram Londinensibus habitam,
Humillime and cum devotissima Veneratione Offert.

A PERSUASIVE TO THE Stricter OBSERVATION OF THE LORDS DAY.
Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy.


IT IS an old Observation, in which there is a great deal of truth, though
sometimes urged for very ill ends, particularly to discountenance that great
Gospel Ordinance of Preaching, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius: which I might
English in the words of Solomon, though spoken by him on another account,
Eccles. 9.1.
There is no new thing under the Sun. There is nothing done or said, but it has
been done or said already. Tho this might seem to supersede all further
Inquiries, and attempts to document and instruct the World, and dispense
knowledge, and at once upbraid and silence the Undertaker, by telling him that
what he does is but actum agere to do that which is done already; yet
certainly, in regard there dwell in us treacherous and unfaithful memories, and
dull and drowsy affections, unapt especially to Spiritual and Divine Things,
it cannot be denied, that an honest Remembrancer is as necessary and useful as
the most eloquent Instructor to be imagined; which St. Peter seems to
acknowledge, by magnifying the office of a Remembrancer no less than three
times in one Chapter: 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 15, Wherefore I will not be negligent to
put you always in remembrance of these things, tho ye know them, and be
established in the present truth. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this
Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance: moreover I will
endeavor, that you may be able after my decease to have these things always
in remembrance.

We less want the knowledge than the practice of our duties. It Is not so much
the furnishing our heads with a richer treasure of speculations, as the
profitable improvement of what we know, that is, or ought to be the great end
of Preaching. The inculcating of duties therefore must needs be both necessary
and advantageous, the putting men in mind of what they know already. Now
amongst the several duties which in faithfulness I must put you in mind of, I
think it not unseasonable to put you in remembrance of that which this Day, or
rather, the Lord of this Day requires of you, viz. The hallowing and
sanctifying of the Sabbath; of late so much neglected and profaned amongst us.
Give me leave therefore, following the Example of St. Peter, to put you in
remembrance of these things, tho you know them, and be established in the
present truth and duty. Duty, may some say! Ay, would you would satisfy us to
that! For that is the scruple that lies upon our spirits. We know indeed, that
the first day of the Week according to the Scripture computation is enjoined by
humane Law, under a Penalty to be kept solemn and sacred for the Worship of
God, which seems to be contrary to the positive command of God held forth in
the fourth Commandment: which, by the Example of God himself seems to intimate
and command the observation of the Seventh Day from the Creation, as the
Sabbath of the Lord to be kept by the Lord's people. Now the Fourth
Commandment, you say, is of moral and perpetual obligation, part of that
Doctrine, which you say, is a Rule of Life to a Believer; and every Sunday we
are taught after pronouncing of this Commandment to beg mercy and pardon for
our breach of it, and strength better to keep it for the time to come, in that
short ejaculation, Lord have mercy upon us, and inoline our hearts to keep this
Law. Now it seems strange, that we should be obliged to a duty so seemingly
contrary to the Fourth Commandment: which yet we are taught to acknowledge
obedience to, and beg God to incline our hearts to keep it; when as at that
very time it seems to us that we openly break it, not keeping that Day which is
there mentioned.

This, I confess, has been a scruple that has troubled the spirits of many, and
drawn some into a practical error. For satisfaction therefore of the
scrupulous, and confirmation of the conscionable observers of the Christian
Sabbath, I shall labor to show you the indispensable Obligation of it: And to
that end, I have for my Subject pitched my thoughts on the Words of the
Commandment which seem to speak so much against it: but before I have done, I
hope, you will conclude with me that the observation of the Christian Sabbath is
not inconsistent with the duty held forth in the Text, Remember the Sabbath day
to keep it holy.

In speaking to this Argument I shall do these three things.

1. Show you the divine Institution of the Christian Sabbath, which we now
celebrate, that to observe and keep it is our duty, and that in obedience to
the Command of God.

2. I shall show you the manner how the Duty is to be performed, wherein the
right and due Observation of the day consists.

3. And lastly, I shall make some reflection on the whole by Application.

1. My first undertaking shall be to show you the Divine Institution of the
Christian Sabbath, which we now celebrate; that to observe and keep it is our
duty, and that in Obedience to the Command of God.

And truly Brethren, this Truth ought to be well settled and fixed in our
minds, as that which will mightily persuade us to the conscionable performance
of the duty of the day; for if I apprehend it to be only of humane Institution,
and the Command of Man, how will it abate the value and esteem, which otherwise
I should have for it, strangely lessen my Veneration and Reverence! how will it
damp my zeal, and clip the wings of my rising and exulting Joy, which would be
the result of this consideration, -- This is the day which the Lord has made,
-- the inference would then be easy and natural, Let us rejoice, and be glad
in it! Sirs! Whilst I believe that the Observation of this day, is but the
Command of a mortal dying man, my esteem is no more for it than for another
day: But when I believe, and am persuaded, and consider, that it is the Command
of the God that made me, the God that redeemed me, and the God that shall
shortly come to judge me; O how will this raise my mind, and enliven my
affections, and check my floath, and quicken my zeal, and awaken my Conscience
to a sense and conscionable performance of my duty! And therefore I would
willingly fix this as a great truth and immovable principle in your minds,
that to observe and keep this day in your Duty, and that in Obedience to the
Command of God. And here the better to make way to what I intend, I must
premise these two things.

1. That the Fourth Commandment is moral, i. e. of perpetual Obligation, as to
the substance of it.

2. That our Savior Christ, who was Lord of the Sabbath, had power to make
what alteration he pleased, as to the ceremonial part of it.

1. That the Fourth Commandment is moral, i. e. of perpetual Obligation, as to
the substance of it; (tho ceremonial for Circumstance) if not, then there are
but nine Commandments under the Gospel (for what was purely ceremonial relating
to the Jewish Economy is abolished) and in vain are we taught to pray after
the rehearsal of this Commandment; Lord have mercy us, and incline our hearts
to keep this Law,

To keep some Time holy the to Lord for his Solemn Service, is absolutely
moral, which the Light of Nature prompts men to. Now it is plain, a Sabbath God
must have by the perpetual Ordinance of the Fourth Commandment. Remember to
keep Holy the Sabbath Day, i.e. that day which for the time being, God has
marked out and appointed for his own. And he has declared his will concerning
the limitation of it, Six days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to
do, but the seventh is the Sabbath. The Seventh from the Creation was enjoined
to be kept by the Jews in remembrance of the Creation, according to God's own
example: In six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth; and rested the Seventh
Day; which was observed before the giving of the Law on Sinai. Well but
Christians observe not this seventh day which the Jews did, do they then break
the Commandment? God forbid! no, they do not break the Commandment; and this
will appear by the second thing which I have to premise, viz.

2. That our Savior Christ, who was Lord of the Sabbath had power to make what
alteration he pleased, as to the Ceremonial part of the Commandment. Our
Savior tells the Jews, St. Mark 2.28. that the Son of Man is Lord of the
Sabbath. He was so indeed, for 'twas he that made the World, and gave the Law
on Sinai: And he showed the true use of the Sabbath, that 'twas made for Man,
and not Man for the Sabbath, and as Lord of it, he had power to make what
Alteration he pleased. Now the Alteration he made was about the circumstance of
time, not as to the matter of the Commandment, one day in seven, but as to the
Circumstance of time, i. e. which day in seven he pleased. Now if I can prove
to you that our Savior Christ altered the circumstance of time, and that that
time which the Christians now observe is that Alteration, I hope you will conclude
with me that the observation of the Christian Sabbath is no breach of the
Fourth Commandment, but an indispensable duty incumbent upon the Church of
Christ, and that it is so will appear by these Arguments.

1. The First I shall draw from the immediate authority of our Savior, who, to
let the World know that his pleasure was to translate the Jewish Sabbath,
which was Saturday, the seventh from the Creation, to the first day of the
Week, was pleased,

First, To Honor this day with his Resurrection from the dead, which was on
the first day of the Week when he had finished the work of our Redemption, as
he had before on the beginning of the Jewish Sabbath finished the work of our
Creation. The Jewish Sabbath slept its last in the Grave with Christ, and at
his Resurrection immediately entered the Lords day; from the very day of the
Resurrection of Christ St. Ep. ad Jan. 19. c. 13.
Austin derives the beginning of the Gospel Sabbath. The Lords day, says he,
by the Resurrection of Christ, was declared to be the Christians day; Dominicum
diem quem vobis Salvatoris noctri Resurrectio consecravit, etc. Id. de Verb.
Apost. sermon. 15.
and from that very time it began to be celebrated as the Christians Festival.

This was the First day of our Saviors appearing to his Disciples, and during
the forty days he remained up on Earth after his Resurrection, he appeared to
his Disciples usually upon the first day of the Week, and gave them Orders
about the things concerning his Kingdom.

2. He honored this day with the first mission of the Holy Ghost. Act. 2.1,
etc. When the day of Pentecost was fully come, etc. Pentecost, that year, fell
on Sunday, the first day of the Week: Which I thus plainly prove to you.
There were three Solemn Feasts which were appointed the Jews every year; The
Feast of the Passover: The Feast of Harvest: And the Feast of Tabernacles; as
you may read Exodus 23.14, 15.

The Feast of Harvest (styled Deuteronomy 16.9. the Feast of Weeks) was fifty days
after the Feast of the Passover, Lev. 23.15, 16. This Feast of VVeeks is the
same which St. Luke calls here Pentecost; which is a Greek Word fignifying the
fiftieth day, and retained in our English Translation, which time we now call
Whitsunday: Which we observe is always seven weeks after Easter. Now this day,
which was seven weeks after the Passover, fell that year on Sunday, when the
Holy Ghost descended, as will appear if you consult Joh. 19.14, 31. Where you
find that the day our Savior was Crucified was the day of the preparation of
the Passover, and the next day was the Sabbath, on which the Passover that
year was celebrated, which is therefore styled an high day v. 31. (...), a
great day, i.e. a very solemn day in respect of the concurrence of a double
celebrity: the Sabbath, and the Feast of the Passover.

Now reckon seven Weeks from the Passover, which was Saturday, the Jews
Sabbath, to the day of Pentecost inclusively, which makes up the complete
number of fifty days, and you will find that it fell on Sunday the first day of
the Week, on which the Holy Ghost descended, as it were, to give birth to the
Christian Sabbath, which had it is conception at Christ's Resurrection. And
Grotius notes from Exodus 19.1. that it was the day the Law was given on, and
so on which the Spirit was given for the new Law.

So much for Christ's immediate Authority. If any say that all this is but
conjectural, that it serves to illustrate, but not to prove the point in hand,
speaking the probability, but not the certainty of the thing; I have somewhat
to offer in the next place that will put the matter out of all doubt; and
therefore,

2. My second Argument I draw from the Authority of the Apostles, who did
nothing of themselves but by commission from Christ, Mal. 28.19, 20. Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, etc. teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always even unto the end
of the World. How could he be with them when he was to be taken from them, and
depart into Heaven: He tells them, Joh. 14.26. where he promises to send his
Spirit, as his Vicar General, to supply his place, and absence, and direct them
about all things relating to his Kingdom. But the Comforter which is the Holy
Ghost whom the Father will send in my name he shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you, and
Chap. 16.13, 14. When he the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into
all truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that
shall he speak. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine and shall
show it unto you. So that what the Apostles did they did by Divine Warrant. Now
we have both Apostolical precept and practice to warrant the observation of the
day.

1. For Precept, 1 Cor. 16.1. As I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so
do ye: and what that Ordinance was, he tells them, v. 2. Upon the first day of
the Week let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prosper'd him,
that there may be no gathering when I come. He ordains their Collections for
the poor Saints, and oblations should be on that day. And why should that day
be the Collection day rather than any other, had it not been observed holy in
those times, and that Christians did use on that day to assemble? The
collection therefore being enjoined on that day, and that in the weekly returns
of it (for the collection was not to be made at once, and no more, but time
after time, till it swelled to a Treasure; (...), gathering a Treasure as the
greek word signifies, adding something weekly, as God had prosper'd every man)
this, I say, is an argument, that the day was celebrated as the Christian
Sabbath, the work being so suitable to the day, and then most effectually
promoted by the opportunity that offered it self through the numerous assembly
of Christians.

There is one thing objected against the validity of this place for the proof
of the point in hand, and that is the Greek phrase, which the Objectors say is
not truly translated, the first day of the Week, the words in the Greek being
(...), which word for word is, on one of the Sabbaths. So that, say they, the
Apostle intended the collection should be made on the Sabbath day, the seventh,
and not the first day of the Week.

To this I answer, that the Translation is good, and warrantable, Chrysostom. in 1
Cor. Hom. 43. (...), etc.
as St. Chrysostom, the learned Grotius, and Dr. Hammond observe; yea St.
Chrysostom interprets it the Lords day. The word Sabbath is oftentimes put for
the whole Week, which is signified by that Notion. Lev. 15.23. Seven Sabbaths
shall be complete, i. e. seven Weeks. So St. Luke 18.12. I fast twice in the
week; in the Greek it is, (...), twice in the Sabbath. And it is observable that
the same Phrase is used concerning the day of the Resurrection. Mat. 28.1.
(...), which is rendered without any objection against it the first day of the
Week: And so St. Luke 24.1. and Joh. 20.1. There is the like Phrase in the
Greek, and the like Translation in English. Now they may as well deny the
Resurrection of Christ to be on the first day of the Week, as the Christian
Assemblies to be on that day by force of the same Objection, the Phrase being
in each place the same, and therefore must needs have the same signification.
And St. Mark seems so to expound the other Evangelists, Chap. 16.9. (...),
which cannot possibly with any sense be understood of the Sabbath, but the
first day of the Week: and the Greek Scholiast confidently renders (...), the
Lords day, on which the Apostles were wont to keep their Assemblies; which is
the next thing that we are to take notice of and inquire into, viz.

2. Their practice. We find in the 2d. of the Acts, that the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ were assembled for religious exercises on the first day of
the Week, the usual solemn time of their meeting in honor and memory of their
Lords Resurrection. And Act. 20.7. We read that upon the first day of the Week,
when the Disciples came together to break Bread ( i. e. the Sacramental or
Eucharistical Bread) St. Paul Preached to them ready to depart on the morrow.

It Is true we have but a few hints in Scripture of the observation of the day;
which is enough however to signify the usage of the Church then; there being
no more need for the Apostles, to inform the Christians and others of that time
that the first day of the Week was the Christians day for the public and
solemn Worship of God, and religious exercises, than for an English Man to
write a History to inform his Country men, that Sunday is kept in England as
the Christian Sabbath, and that the Word of God is Preached, and the Lords
Supper administered on that day: it being matter of fact, of common and
notorious usage. Yea into so great Reputation, and such general and common
usage, was the observation of this day grown amongst the Christians, even in
the Apostles times, that it had obtained a peculiar name, appropriate to the
Original and occasion of it: as the Apostle St. John observes, Rev. 1.10. I was
in the spirit on the Lords day, in the spirit, i. e. in spiritual Exercises and
Meditations: on the Lords day, i. e. the first day of the Week, in which the
Lord rose from the dead. Observe, St. John does not say, on the day which is
worthy to be called the Lords day, but he speaks it as a Notion or Phrase of
general and common use, a Title given to the day, a known description of it,
whereby they might easily understand what day he meant: The Lords day, so
called, either because Christ rose on that day, and it was by the Church
peculiarly dedicated to his honor; or it is so called as the Sacrament is
called Coena Dominica, the Lords supper; and the Lords Prayer Oration Dominica:
because the Lord instituted the one, and taught, and commanded the use of the
other. Athanas. Homil. (...)
For so S. Athanasius says expressly, (...), our Lord translated the Sabbath to
the Lords day. Whether he did this immediately by himself, or by his Apostles
inspired by him all comes to one. That it was so translated is evident, and a
Christian Name given it, being not called the Sabbath, (and when we call it so,
stiling it the Christian Sabbath, it is not strictly and properly, but
analogically, and by way of allusion to the Jewish Sabbath, which was a day of
rest) but the proper, and peculiar, and Evangelical Name is the Lords day;
which the Jews styled the first day, and the Gentiles Sunday. But it matters
not much by what Name we call it, whether Sabbath, or Sunday, or the First Day,
so that we allow the divine right, and Institution, and observation of it: Only
I must observe to you that the Lords day is the most proper, and peculiar, and
Evangelical Notion; which was observed and used, not only in the Apostles
times, but in the succeeding Ages of the Church; which is an historical
Evidence of the divine Institution of the day, that it was not instituted by
the Church succeeding the Apostles, but by the Apostles themselves, and the
usage derived to the succeeding Ages of the Church, by Apostolical Tradition;
and the day generally observed by the Church immediately after the Apostles
days, and so forward, as I could show you at large by the Testimony of the St.
Ignatius who was St. John's Disciple, makes it, (...). The Queen, the Lady
paramount among the other weekly days. (...), etc. After the Sabbath let every
Friend of Christ make the Lords day a Solemn Festival, says the same Ignatius.
Upon the Sunday (...), a common assembly both of Citizens and common people is
held, etc. says Just. Mart. Apol. 2.

Upon that day ( i. e. Sunday) we Christians meet together in the common
Assembly, etc. says Tertullian Apol. cap. 39.

We Christians assemble our selves with much diligence, upon the Lords day, to
praise God, etc. Clemt. Romans Constable. Ap l. 2. c. 63. St. Basil de Spir. Sanct.
27. Numbers the Observation of the Lords day amongst Apostolical Traditions.
And St. Augustine's general Golden Rule proves it to be so. -Quod universa
tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. Aug. de Bapt. c. Donatist.
l. 4. cap. 24 Plin. Ep 97. ad Trajanum. lib. dec. p. 434. essent soliti stato
die ante lucem convenire: carmenque Christo, quasi Deo, dicere secum invicem
seque Sacramento, etc.


Ancients. But I shall only take particular notice of the Testimony of an
Enemy, as to the matter of fact, that the Observation of the day was as old as
the Apostles, and that is the famous Heathen Pliny, who informed the Emperor
Trajan (in whose Reign the Apostle St. John lived) that it was the use of
Christians on a stated day (by which he could mean no other than the Lords day)
to meet together to sing their Hymnos antelacanos, their Hymns to Christ, as
God, before daybreak, and to bind themselves by a Sacrament not to do any
wickedness, etc. This is the Testimony of a great Heathen, whose report as an
Historian is not to be questioned.

Nay the observation of this day was so taken notice of by the Heathen in the
Primitive persecutions, before any Imperial Edict or Canon of Council enjoined
it, that it became a constant interogatory to the Christians, when brought upon
their Trial and Examination, Have you kept the Lords day? To which their answer
was ever ready, I cannot intermit it, for I am a Christian, and the Law of God
prompts me to it.

Now put these things together, the historical Notices which occur in Scripture
of the Apostolical Institution and Observation of the day, and their
Approbation of it in others (for certainly they would not have approved of it,
but vigorously opposed it, had it been an usurpation, and contrary to the mind
of Christ) these things, I say, together with the concurrent testimony of the
succeeding Ages of the Church, and not only of Friends, but Enemies too, I
think sufficiently prove the Apostolical Observation of the day, and
consequently the Divine Institution of it, and that in obedience to the Command
of God in this precept, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it Holy; which may be
proved by an Enumeration or induction of particulars; what Christ the Son of
God did, that God the Father did, who sent him into the World; what the Spirit,
the Holy Ghost did, that Christ, who sent him, did; and what the Apostles, who
were inspired with the Spirit did, that the Spirit himself did: Thus in their
first Council, Act. 15.28: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us; and the
Spirit was to lead them into all Truth, and bring all things to their
remembrance, etc. Now I have proved to you both by Scripture and History that
the Apostles did command, and institute, and approve of the Observation of the
Lords Day: And if they did it the Holy Ghost did it, and if the Holy Ghost did
it Christ the Son did it, and if Christ did it, God the Father himself did it,
who here commands us, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it Holy.

So that there are two things whereon the Divine Right of the Lords Day is
founded: Upon the moral Equity of the Fourth Commandment, and upon Evangelical
Institution. Our Church reduces the Institution of this day as a weekly day to
the Fourth Commandment; and as the first day of the Week she foundeth it upon
Apostolical practice and tradition. For which I might refer you to the Words of
the Homily of the place and time of Prayer. As concerning the time which
Almighty God has appointed his people to assemble together solemnly, Book of
Homilies p. 214.
it does appear by the Fourth Commandment of God: Remember, says God, that
thou keep Holy the Sabbath day. Upon which day, as is plain in the Acts of the
Apostles, the people accustomably resorted together, and heard diligently the
Law and the Prophets read among them. And albeit this Commandment of God does
not bind Christian people so straightly to observe and keep the utter Ceremonies
of the Sabbath day, as it was given unto the Jews, as touching the forbearing
of Work and Labor in time of great necessity, and as touching the precise
keeping of the seventh day after the manner of the Jews. For we keep now the
first day, which is our Sunday; and make that our Sabbath, that is, our day of
rest, in the honor of our Savior Christ, who as upon that day rose from
death, conquering the same most triumphantly: Yet notwithstanding whatsoever is
found in the Commandment appertaining to the Law of Nature, as a thing most
godly, most just, and needful for the setting forth of Gods Glory, it ought to
be retained and kept of all good Christian people. And therefore by this
Commandment, we ought to have a time, as one day in the Week, wherein we ought
to rest, yea from our lawful and needful Works. Again, God has given express
charge to all men, that upon the Sabbath day, which is now our Sunday, they
should cease from all Weekly and Work day labor, etc. And a little after, God
does not only Command the Observation of this Holy day, etc. And again a little
after, Thus it may plainly appear, that God's Will and Commandment was to have
a solemn time and standing day in the Week, wherein the people should come
together, and have in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to render him
thanks for them, as appertains to loving, kind, and obedient people. This
Example and Commandment of God, the godly Christian people began to follow
immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ,
and began to choose them a standing day of the week to come together in: Yet
not the seventh day, which the Jews kept; but the Lords day, the day of the
Lord's Resurrection, the day after the seventh day, which is the first day of
the Week. Of the which day mention is made by St. Paul on this wise. In the
first day of the Sabbath, let every man lay up what he thinks good: Meaning
for the poor. By the first day of the Sabbath is meant our Sunday, which is the
first day after the Jews seventh day. And in the Apocalypse it is more plain,
whereas St. John says, I was in the Spirit upon the Lords day. Sithence which
time Gods people has always, in all ages, without any gainsaying, used to come
together upon the Sunday, to Celebrate and honor the Lords blessed Name, etc.
These are the words of the said Homily, which sufficiently declare the Doctrine
and sense of the Church of England (of which we are members) in this point.

To which, as not impertinent I will add the words of the Judicious Hooker in
his Ecclesiastical Polity. We are bound, Hook. Eccles. Polit. l. 5.
says he, to account the sanctification of one day in seven a Duty which God's
immutable Law does exact for ever; although with us the day be changed, in regard
of a new revolution, begun by our Savior Christ; yet the same proportion of
time continues, which was before, by way of a perpetual homage never to be
dispensed withal nor remitted.

And so I come to the second thing which I undertook to speak to, viz.

Secondly, The manner how the duty is to be performed, wherein the right and
due observation of the day consists. And this we may learn from the words of
the Text, from the Notions here [Sabbath, and keep Holy.]

To keep holy or to sanctify is not to infuse or put any moral inrinsick
Holiness into the day, as the Spirit does infuse holiness into the hearts of
men: But to sanctify here, is to separate from a common and profane, to an
Holy and religious Use. And thus both God and Man are said to sanctify.

God sanctifies by appointing and separating a thing from a common to an holy
and religious use: And Man sanctifies by applying to such holy and divine use
as God appointed. And to what use this day is sanctified or separated we may
learn from the Word Sabbath, which signifies a day or time of rest: A rest from
bodily labors, from the Works of our particular calling; but always with this
reservation, that we must make allowances for Works of necessity and Charity,
to which positive Laws must always give Place: S. Mat. 12.1, 2, etc.
(all Judaizing severities, being to be renounced and detested.) which our
Savior teaches in the instance of his Disciples gathering the ears of Corn, a
Work of necessity to satisfy hunger, v. 10.11. etc.
and healing the Sick and Lame, Joh. 5.16.
a work of Mercy and Charity, on the Sabbath day, Which indeed the Jews
quarreled with, accounting it unlawful on the Sabbath day. Which superstitious
strictness of theirs our Savior reproves by the allowed Instance of Mercy and
Charity to a Beast that falls into a Ditch on the Sabbath day; Luke 14.3, 4.
much more then a fortiori ought it to be extended to Man, Mat. 12.12. Mark
2.27.
the nobler Creature, for whom the Sabbath was made, and not Man for the
Sabbath.

So that making these allowances, for works of Necessity and Charity, it must
be a day of rest from bodily labors. But that is not all; it must not be a
bodily rest and no more, for then the Ox and the Ass keep as good a Sabbath as
we; but the rest must be consecrated to God, it must be an holy rest, a
vacation from the works of our particular, that we may attend those of our
general Calling. The day must be spent in religious Exercises, and
performances, both public and private, as Divine Service in the Church,
Reading, and Preaching, and Hearing the Word of God, and Celebrating, and
Receiving the holy Sacrament, and Catechizing, Ecclesiastical Censures, etc.
together with Prayer, reading the holy Scriptures and other good Books, and
Catechizing in private Families, visiting the sick, and relieving the Poor, and
meditating on the Works and Word of God, our Creation and Redemption, and
sitting and preparing our selves and our domestic Relatives for another World.
God has given express charge to all men; (says the Homily before mentioned)
that upon the Sabbath day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all
weekly and work day labor; to the intent that like as God himself wrought six
days and rested the Seventh, and blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it
to quietness and rest from labor: even so Gods obedient people should use the
Sunday holily, and rest from the common and daily business, and also give
themselves wholly to heavenly Exercises of God's true Religion and Service. So
that God does not only command the observation of this holy day, but also by
his own example does stir and provoke us to the diligent keeping of the same.
Good natural Children will not only become obedient to the commandment of their
parents, but also have a diligent eye to their doings and gladly follow the
same. So if we will be the Children of our heavenly Father, we must be careful
to keep the Christian Sabbath day, which is the Sunday, not only for that it is
God's express commandment; but also to declare our selves to be loving
Children, in following the example of our gracious Lord and Father.

Thus briefly of the second thing which I propounded to speak to; I come now in
the Third and Last place, to make some Reflections on what has been said by
Application.

This Doctrine of the Observation of the Lords day serves

1. For Reproof; and that of three sorts of Persons,

1. Those who keep the Jewish, but not the Christian Sabbath.

2. Those who keep both.

3. And especially those who keep none at all.

First, Those who keep the Jewish but not the Christian Sabbath: which is the
Error of those Christians who mistake the ceremonial for the moral Obligation
of the Fourth Commandment: Supposing the Morality of the Commandment to
consist in keeping the Seventh day, which God enjoined the Jews; whereas that
is the positive and ceremonial part of the Commandment, accommodated to the
Economy and political State of the Jews, binding them only, and not the
Gentiles, and no longer neither then till the entrance and settling of the
Gospel State by Christ, and the Holy Ghost. And now for any Christian, whether
Jew or Gentile, to keep the ceremonial Law, is in effect to deny Christ, and to
expect a Messiah yet to come; to keep the shadow and reject the substance; the
Ceremonial Law being but the shadow of good things to come, but the body is of
Christ.

Secondly, they likewise are to be blamed who keep both days, the Jewish and
the Christian too. Thus the Ebionites of old, who being Apes of others, would
keep the Sabbath with the Jews, and Sunday with the Christians. But truly, I
think our Charity ought to be extended to these as the more harmlesly
erroneous, and more pardonable Offenders; in regard partly through mistake and
weakness, partly out of a scrupulous and tender Conscience, they keep both
days, probably with an honest design and desire, and not out of peevish
obstinacy that they may be in the right. But though they are excusable a tanto,
yet not a toto: it is plainly an Error, and inconsistent with our duty enjoined
in the Fourth Commandment, which requires but one day in seven as God's
peculiar, and allows the other six for our own labors; and to keep two
Sabbaths in a Week seems to be wise above what is written, and to do more than
is our duty. And though, the Apostles, and the Christians with them, did for a
time keep both days, that is, the Jewish and the Christian Sabbath, yet that
was for the same reason that Circumcision was for a while kept a foot, viz. to
comply with the weakness, and prejudice of the Jews, (to whom St. Paul says he
became as a Jew that that he might gain the Jews) and to give the abolished
Ceremonies, which were dead with Christ, an honorable burial, but

3dly. And especially they are worthy of reproof who keep no Sabbath at all; or
at least in such a manner as is equivalent to the not keeping of it.

First. Some there are that keep no Sabbath at all, as the Atheist and profane
Worldling. There are a sort of men who sufficiently declare themselves to be
Atheists and Mammonists, who fear not to deny God his due, who have no manner
of sense of duty, which they owe to the Lords day, but purposely and designedly
oppose, and slight, and profane it. If they have any business to do, any visit
to make, not out of Charity but complement; any journey to go, any Accounts to
make up, any Letters to write, or the like; God's day must be the time for it;
tho it might be confessedly as well done on any other day of the week, no
necessity compelling. Yea when no business offers, they will frame excuses to
keep 'em from God's house, either they must sleep, or play, or drink, or talk,
or walk away the time, which others devoutly spend in the public Service of
God, and preparing themselves for another World. Nothing so irksome and
tiresome as what God Commands; no time so lies upon hand as on that day; they
know not what to do; they are weary of themselves and of the time, and study
for some diversion or other, and blame the lingering time, and wish and say with
those in the Prophet, When will the Sabbath be over, that we may set forth
Corn, that we may be at our traffic and Trades again? And if they are
prevailed with by some devouter Neighbor, or an argument ab inutili and damno,
which the Law presents them upon total neglect to go to the house of God, how
tedious and burdensome is the time there? What an insipid tasteless thing is
the Service of God? How do they tacitly chide the slow-paced sands in the
Preachers Glass, and grow angry with him if he exceeds his hour, when the time
spent on sports, and pleasures, and business of the World is thought too swift
of foot? An hour spent at a Sermon, yea and upon God's day too, is thought too
long, when a play of three or four hours is done too soon. If this is not an
evidence of an Atheistical and worldly spirit I know not what is. Is this the
Character of a man that fears and loves the honor of God? What and delight in
nothing less, shun his company, and fly from his presence, and avoid Communion
with him, and break his Laws and sacrilegiously rob him of his just dues: which
the Prophet Malachy wonders at Mal. 3.8, Will aman rob God? Will he rob God
that made him, and governs him, and that has power to bless or to curse him, to
save or to destroy him. This is a thing was never heard of amongst the most
barbarous and Idolatrous, whomsoever they rob, they will not rob their God.

The primitive Christians I am sure abhorred such sacrilege. But O how unlike
the Primitive sanctity is the practice of this sacrilegious Age, this perverse
and adulterous generation? They made it their meat and drink to do the Will of
God, they would not be absent for a World from the public Assemblies of the
Saints on the Lords day, unless invincible necessity did hinder, and would not
depart thence without the Christian viaticum, without the heavenly Repast and
Banquet, the Communion of the Body and Blood of their dear Lord.

Thus they kept the Sabbath indeed not doing their own but the Work of God, and
called, and accounted the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable,
and did honor him, not doing their own ways, nor finding their own pleasures,
nor speaking their own Words. But at what lame, and deficient, and preposterous
rate do the generality of Christians now keep the day? They keep it very well,
if to keep it be to break it, if to sanctify it be to profane it, if to
observe and honor it, be to slight and pollute it. They keep it very well who
seldom or never attend the public Worship, and are as careless of private
Duties; they keep it very well indeed who never received the Sacrament in their
lives, or at least observe it as a Passover Feast in the truest Notion of it,
as to the time, i. e. once in a year; and that to still the clamours of the Law
and their Consciences, not being moved from a principle of Love to their
Redeemer, to do this in remembrance of him; not at all affected with what St.
Paul insinuates and recommends in these Words, as often as ye eat this Bread
and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he come, but

Secondly, There are others that are partial Observers of the day, who think it
their duty to go to Church and be present at divine Service, and attend the
public Ordinances and performances (and in that they do well, and are to be
commended, and I wish there were more that did so) but then they think that the
duty of the day is over; they take little care to prepare themselves or their
Families before they go to Church, and as little when they come from thence,
that they may digest what they have heard and received there, by Catechizing,
Examining, Meditation, Conference, reading, singing of Psalms, and Prayer;
which are the private and Domestic duties of the day. The Sabbath must be our
delight, on which we must not think our own thoughts, nor speak our own words,
nor do our own Works, nor find our own Pleasures, that is, we must forbear and
withdraw our minds and affections, Isa. 15.13.
from such studies and employments upon that day, whereby the same might be
polluted or profaned. It must be sacred to God, and be spent in his service,
and in Spiritual Communion with him; which is to be promoted not only by
public, but private Duties.

On the other side there are some that pretend themselves very careful and
conscientious in the performance of private duties, but neglect the public,
vainly imagining and concluding, that they can pray and read the Scriptures as
well at home as at Church, yea and read as good a Sermon, (perhaps better) as
they can hear at Church. Admit it to be true, yet one duty must not justle out
another. The same God who has commanded private has enjoined also public
duties. The Children of Israel could undoubtedly read the Law, and did, and
pray too, in their private Tents and Houses; yet by God's Command they must
repair to the Tabernacle in the Wilderness, and the Temple at Jerusalem to hear
the Law and attend the public Worship and Service. Our great Evangelical
Lawgiver, does not only command his Disciples to pray in secret but openly, i.
e. in the Congregation, not only in the Closet, but the Synagogue and Temple,
to which he invites his Disciples both for public Prayer and Preaching, not
only by precept, but example too. He bids them hear the Scribes and Pharisees
which sit in Moses's Chair, and does himself Preach in the Synagogue and the
Temple, to which he showed so great a Veneration in obedience to the ancient
precept, ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary, that he
exercised an unusual severity in purging it of the pollutions and abuses which
he observed there. He made a scourge of small Cords, and whipped out the
prophaners of it, styling them Thieves and Robbers, sacrilegiously polluting
that holy place, dedicated to holy Uses. It is written, my House shall be
called an House of Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of Thieves, Mat. 21.13.

So that, he that has commanded private, has enjoined also public duties: his
public Ordinances were not made in vain: to each of which duties we must pay a
due respect: Our obedience must be regular and uniform. I have respect unto all
thy Commandments, says David. One duty must not excommunicate another. Public
must not justle out private, nor private public duties. And he that allows it
to be so, is but a partialist in Religion, and does his duty but by halves, and
is in God's account as if he did it not all.

A partial observing of the Sabbath is but little better than a total
neglecting of it, the not keeping it duly, equivalent to the not keeping any,
at least a very lame and imperfect Observation, as it will one day appear by
the Censure of Him who judges not as man judges, who will not be mocked or
imposed upon with fallacious appearances, or a partial piece meal Obedience.

Thus you see who are justly reprovable by this Doctrine, viz.

1. Those who keep the Jewish, but not the Christian Sabbath.

2. Those who keep both.

3. And especially, those who keep none at all: or at least in such a manner as
is equivalent to the not keeping of it.

2. Give me leave now to add a word of Exhortation, which may besuitable to
all; at least none ought to be offended at it: not the conscionable Observers
of the Lord's day; for to admonish, and warn, and exhort them to do the duty
which they do already, is but monendo laudare, to praise whilst we admonish;
and the Arguments which are used to persuade them that do not, may serve at
least to remember, and confirm and establish those that do their duty. And then
for the loose, and profane, and careless, (whom I will suppose to be convinced
of their duty, and that they ought to keep the Christian Sabbath) exhortations
and persuasions must needs be as necessary and suitable for them, as Physic is
for the sick and diseased. I beseech you therefore brethren, (to use St. Paul's
words to the Hebrews) suffer the word of Exhortation; and that it may be the
more prevalent and successful to the end for which it is designed, viz. to
persuade Christians to a due and conscionable Observation of the Lords day, I
will lay before you these Arguments or Motives drawn from the following
Considerations.

1. Consider, that not to keep the Sabbath, but to break and profane it, is to
sin against the Light and the Law of Nature, which prompts the rational
Creature to set a part some time for the Solemn Worship of God, the great
Being, in whom he lives, and moves and has his Being, of which the Heathen were
sensible by the dictates and Light of Nature, as St. Paul observed to the
Athenians, Acts 17.28. where he refers to a verse of Aratus a Greek Poet --
(...) -- In him we live, and move, and have our being: For we are also his
offspring. Now the Laws of gratitude require some grateful Returns to a
benefactor, which the Heathen thought themselves obliged to make to God their
chief benefactor, but not knowing the true God, they therefore did Worship
many; of which they made Images and representations in Wood, and Stone, and
Silver, and Gold, to which they instituted divine Worship, and Solemn times
for the performance of it; in which they were very devout and serious, and
would not rob their God.

And, O! how will their blind Devotion shame and condemn the indevout,
negligent, careless Christian: 'Twill undoubtedly at the great day, when the
account of all the World shall be scanned over, and every one judged according
to his Works: Then will Christ Jesus, the great judge of the World lay open,
O Christian, both thine and the Heathens Works. He will then animadvert upon
their diligent and blind Devotion, and thy negligence, and zealless cold
performances. Here stands a poor blind Heathen, who had only the dimmer and
obscurer Light of Nature, and yet how devoutly did he fall down to his stock
and his stone, and keep inviolable the time sacred to the honor of his Idol;
when thou, O profane Christian, who had the Light of Scripture, did
transgress the Laws of thy Maker and Redeemer, and fearlessly break their bonds
asunder, and cast away their Cords from thee.

2. Consider that not to keep the Sabbath, etc. is to sin against the express
Law of our Creator; who commands one day in seven to be kept Solemn and sacred
for his service, and will by no means dispense with the violation of it. And
what art thou, O man, that durst break it? Is not he thy Maker, and art not
thou his Creature, and consequently at his dispose? Art not thou accountable
for all thy actions to him? Did thou not receive thy Being, and well Being
from him? can thou live, or move, or breath without him, and yet do thou
act as if thou had received nothing from him, and owe nothing to him? Is
all thy dependence upon him, and yet will thou not at all live to him? Can he
save thee alive or destroy thee in a moment, and yet carest thou not? Do
thou neither value his favor, nor fear his displeasure? Are you not his people
and Sheep of his pasture? Is not the inference than natural, Enter into his
Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise, be thankful unto him
and bless his Name.

Consider, wherefore did God send thee into the World and continue thee in it,
what to live as the Leviathan in the Water, to take thy pastime therein, to
live to thy self only, yea the vilest part of thy self, that walking lump of
Clay, thy body, while the Soul, thy immortal part is neglected and God
forgotten days without number? Remember he whom thou sinnest against is thy
King; and if thou will live in Rebellion thou know not how soon he may send
out his warrant to attack thee, and drag thee to his judgment seat; and throw
thee into Hell. Why should he any longer suffer such a perverse obstinate
wretch that will not be reclaimed after frequent warnings and long forbearance,
such a hardened Traitor and Rebel that will offend still, and infect his fellow
Subjects, and draw them from their allegiance, such an old accustomed thief,
that will steal and rob still, and is ripe for Execution: Remember Christians
he whom you offend is the great Landlord of Heaven and Earth, and you are his
Tenants, and Tenants at will too, and the Sabbath is his weekly Court-day,
whereon he summons all his Tenants to come in and pay their Homage and chief
Rents, whereby they acknowledge that they hold all under him, and depend for
all upon him, and owe all to him. And if you omit your duty, and will not pay
your suit and service, what can you expect less than to be amerc'd and fined?
And you know not how soon be may send out his Officers, the Angels, and leavy
those fines and Amerciaments on you, and exact it of you: And in what manner is
at his pleasure, whether on your Goods or Relations, or Body or Soul; for all
is in his power and at his dispose; and he has several Instruments of his wrath
to execute his Will. He may send the Thief to rob you and steal your Goods, and
in that Act retaliate your thievish tricks, your robbing of God; the false
dealer to cheat you, and go away with your Goods and Money, now a Tempest at
Sea, to drown some, anon a fire by Land to burn the rest of your Goods, and
demolish your Houses, and turn you out of possession; one while he may send the
Murraine amongst your Cattle, another while Blasting and Mildew, the
Caterpillar, and Palmer-Worm, his Great Army, as he styles them [ Joel 2.25.]
and Blast and devour the Fruits of the Earth, and baffle your hopes and
expectations of a plentiful Crop; make the Heavens above brass, and the Earth
beneath Iron, withhold the Rain and break off the staff of Bread, and cause the
black horse to ride through your streets, yea and the Pale horse too, he may
send the Plague and noisome Pestilence, and other Diseases, and afflict you in
your persons and Relations: Now a Child, anon a Brother, now a Father, anon a
Husband, or a Wife, or a dear Friend may be taken from you and leave you all in
tears and sadness. It Is not unusual with God to snatch away some by death, and
that as an affliction and punishment to their offending Relatives. Yea the Fine
may be levied on your own persons that offend, and the payment exacted of you,
either by sickness which takes away your Health, by lameness which takes away
your strength, by madness which takes away your Reason, or by some sad
accident, or sudden stroke which takes away your Life. Or God may commute these
punishments, for temporal inflict spiritual ones; a hard heart, and a seared
Conscience, and a reprobate mind: which was that severe spiritual Judgment,
which God inflicted on the Heathen for their Pride and Rebellion, and rejecting
the knowledge of God, Romans 1.28. And even as they did not like to retain God in
their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which are not convenient. Or else he may epitomize along series of punishments,
contract them into that fatal Abridgment and Compendium of all miseries,
Eternal death.

That Is the second Argument.

Thirdly, Consider it is to sin against the Law, against the Obligation of the
Blood, and love of our Redeemer, to keep the Christian Sabbath is his Law: And
the chief design of it is to commemorate the work of our Redemption, which was
effected and completed by the shedding of his most precious Blood, which is
the greatest argument of divine Love: Which Sabbath Breakers seem to have very
little sense of, and very little love and honor for their Redeemer. But let
such know that the Blood and Love which they spurn at, and trample on will
plead against them in another day; the Blood of Jesus if despised and trodden
under foot will speak worse things than the Blood of Abel; the rejected, the
violated Law of Christ will exact a severer punishment than the despised Law of
Moses. So the Author to the Hebrews tells us, Heb. 10.28, 29. He that despised
Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses, (so did the man
that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, Numb. 15.32, etc. a small fault you will
say, but being a breach of the Law, and he the first violater of it, as
Theodoret says, therefore for example to all others in future times he was so
severly punished: but what he did was out of necessity; but how inexcusable are
they that do needless works, and break the Sabbath out of presumption and
contempt of the Divine Authority, and Obligations of the Blood and Love of our
Redeemer:) Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy
who has trodden underfoot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant
an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace?

Well, but perhaps all that has been said is no Argument to prevail with some.
They value not the Law of Nature, nor the Law of their Creator, nor the Blood,
nor Love of their Redeemer. They are not fond of the Character of being a good
Christian, but they aspire after that of a good subject (though I profess it is
a Riddle to me how he that is not a good Christian can be a good Subject, but)
this Title and Character they are proud of and glory in, and desire above all
things to be accounted good Subjects. Well, but tell me, you that are ambitious
of this Title, and are so little fond of that of a Christian, is he a good
Subject that breaks the Kings Laws? You Will readily answer no.

4. Consider therefore, which is my fourth Argument, that not to keep the
Sabbath, but to break and profane it, is to break the Kings Law, to trespass
against the Law of our temporal Governor, which enjoins the pious Observation
of the Lord's day by repeated sanctions of Parliament under Penalties to be
inflicted on the violaters of it. So that in a word, Sabbath Breakers are
neither good Christians nor good Subjects.

5. My Fifth and Last Argument is drawn from the benefits and advantages of the
due and conscionable Observation of the day.

This day is a blessed day; The Lord blessed the Seventh day and hallowed it.
It Is a day of blessings, of many blessings, and the chiefest and best of all,
spiritual ones, and the pledge of eternal.

This is the day wherein pardons are sealed to penitent Sinners, and the
Sentence of Guilt and Condemnation reversed, and Reconciliation ratified in the
blood of Christ. This is the day that the Sun of Righteousness arises with
healing under his wings, to dispel and scatter the Clouds, that sit upon the
angry face of God's Justice, to clear up the Heavens above, and make it serene
and pleasant on the Earth beneath, and take off the Sable Mantle, that black
and dark covering which over-spreads the troubled Breasts, the aching hearts and
afflicted wounded consciences of Sinners, and give them rest, and peace, and
joy in the comfortable and refreshing gleams, and illustrious shine of the
light of God's countenance.

This is the day of feasting and banqueting for the Soul. Now it Feasts with
Angels and with Saints; yea, with the whole glorious Trinity. I will come and
sup with him and he with me.

This is the Souls treasuring, it is enriching day. It lays up Treasures where
neither Moth nor Rust do corrupt, and where Theives cannot break through and
steal. Now the Soul is enriching it self, growing rich toward God. Now is her
attiring day, wherein she buys and puts on her glorious Robes; the white Robe,
the Upper Garment of her Savior's Righteousness, and those inner Linings of
inherent Holiness. These she now buys and puts on, that she may be in a
readiness to meet the Bridegroom.

And this is the Market Day for the buying of this Provision, this spiritual
Food and Raymment, and the getting of these Riches. Ho, every one that
thirsts (so runs the Royal Style of that gracious Proclamation, Isa. 55.1.)
Come ye to the water, and he that has no money, come buy Wine and Milk without
money and without price. And Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried
in the fire, that thou may be rich; and white raiment that thou may be
clothed, and the shame of thy nakedness do not appear. And he that neglects
the opportunity on the Market day for the buying of this Provision for his Soul
(for the other days of the Week are taken up in making provision for the Body,
in getting temporal food, and raiment, and riches) he, I say, that lets slip
the opportunity on the Market day for the buying of this Provision for his
Soul, this spiritual food and raiment, and the getting of these riches, when,
or how will he buy and get them? How can he expect that his Soul should be
nourished to eternal Life? How can he be but wretched, and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked?

Finally, this shorter is a pledge, to the due Observer, of that longer and
eternal Rest with we expect in Heaven: an Ante-past a Preludium of that eternal
Sabbath which we hope to celebrate in the other World; that Rest which the
Apostle observes remains to the people of God, Heb. 4.9. There remains
therefore a Rest to the people of God. The word in the Greek is (...), a day or
time of Rest. It Is not (...), which signifies any common rest, but (...) which
signifies a Sabbatical Rest, a Rest that has affinity with, a Rest bordering
and conterminous on the temporal Sabbath, which is a type and pledge, and
pregustation of that eternal Sabbath of rest which remains to the people of
God: a rest infinitely satisfactory and delighting, fully complete and perfect;
a rest from labor and working, from sinning and suffering, from diseases and
pains, from cares and fears, from the vanities and vexations of this mortal
Life. O let us labor to enter into that rest, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb.
4.11. And happy is that man that spends the temporal Sabbath of rest here in
preparation for, and expectation of that eternal Sabbath of rest hereafter.
Happy is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. He
will bid him enter into a better rest and joy. He will then take him by the
hand and conduct him from the Earthly to the Heavenly Jerusalem, from the
material to the Spiritual holy Temple where the Lamb is worshipped in the
Regions of Glory. He will translate him from Rest on Earth to Rest in Heaven,
from the Company of Saints Militant to the Chorus of the Saints Triumphant,
from the solemnities of a temporal Sabbath in the State of Grace to the
Celebration of an eternal Sabbath of Rest in Glory. To which God of his
infinite Mercy bring us all for Jesus sake, to whom be ascribed by us, and the
whole Church, all Honor, Power, Praise, Dominion, and Glory, now and for ever,
Amen.

FINIS.

