A Vindication Of the CASE relating to the Greenwax-fines, SHOWING How the
Rights and Prerogative of the Crown are diminished, Officers enriched, and the
Subjects oppressed by the Mismanagement of That Revenue.

ALSO, Disproving the Allegations used to hinder a Reformation thereof; as
Contradictory to the Reports and Resolutitions of the Judges and Lawyers, and
the Experience of Persons of all Ranks and Degrees in all Ages.

Proved by undeniable Matter upon Record; against which the Law allows no
Plea or Averment.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1684.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY, etc.
Great Sir, I Have Advised with many Eminent Lawyers, upon the ensuing
Treatise, who agree, The Statutes, Presidents and Book-Cases to be rightly
quoted; And I know the matter of Fact to be Truly Stated: Therefore humbly,
and in all Duty, beg of Your Majesty to Read and Judge how my dear Lord, and I,
have been misrepresented for promoting Your Service.

Your Majesty's Most Dutiful Subject, Yarmouths

TO THE High and Mighty Monarch Charles II. By the Grace of God KING of
England, etc.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WIthout Fines and Amerciaments, Your Majesty may have many Laws, but no
Obedience to them: Many People, but few Subjects. In this Age, men obey rather
for Fear of Punishment, than Love of Virtue: Rewards and Punishments are the
two Wheels, which make the great Clock of the Kingdom go right: The one keeps
the people within the Circle of Obedience; the other is the Golden Spur to
Glory, and all Noble Actions. The just Rights and Liberties of the Crown; like
Hippocrates Twyns, live and die together: Therefore Your Royal Progenitors, and
their great Ministers, ever termed such as blasted these flowers Regiae
Majestatis homicida: Every Subject within your Majesty's Dominions, at the Age
of 18. is obliged to defend them: Officers more especially upon every Admission
into Employments, to discover whatsoever they know or believe to be done or
suffered to Your Majesty's dishonor; Eclipsing Your Prerogative, or Deminution
of Your Profits, which made me discover such things as I (being educated in the
practice of the Law) knew to be actually committed and done: And your Majesty's
Council at Law, not only reported, that I deserved encouragement, and a Liberal
reward for the good service performed by the Discovery thereof: But
countenanced me therein, until they themselves became Judges, or perceived how
displeaing it was to forego Pretended perquisites, innovated Practices and
Fees; I have been at continual expense and trouble, besides the loss of my
Practice, by this long contest ever since October 1674. Clyents being unwilling
to employ a reputed enemy to the Courts. I humbly beg of Your Majesty, that the
Judges refusing to reform the Abuses discovered, in such manner as I propose,
may not deprive me of Your Majesty's Mercy and Bounty, seeing the discovery
thereof is all that is required in this Case of

Your Majesty's Most Loyal and Dutiful Subject, P. Brunskell.

THE CONTENTS Of this BOOK.
Diverse Abuses, with Proposals following every Abuse to Remedy it, from Page 1.
to page 30. Sir Francis Norths Report when Attorney General, in behalf of the
said Brunskell. p. 30, 31. Sir Francis Norths Evasions, Allegations, or
Retractions, upon his being made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. p. 31. Sir
Charles Herboards Report, upon hearing what the Lord Chief Justice North, and
his Officers, had to say. p. 31. Sir Francis Norths opinion, occasioned by Sir
Charles Herboards Report. p. 32. Sergeant Maynards opinions, and retraction. p.
32. Saunders several opinions, and how he evaded the same after he was made
Chief Justice. p. 32. Reymonds opinion, and how he sat mute after he became a
Judge. p. 32. Upon what occasion, Sir William Jones, Your Majesty's Attorney
General reported for Your Majesty's service, That many of the Abuses were true,
and fit to be remedied, that the discovery thereof was Good service already
performed, and deserved to be liberally rewarded: And how he and Mr. Finch,
your Majesty's Solicitor General, refused to give the said Brunskell
encouragement, pursuant thereto for your Majesty's service. p. 32, 33, 34. How
the Judges, and Barons confirmed Sir William Jones's Report, and agreed to make
Rules pursuant thereto. p. 33, 34. How Sir Robert Sawyer before and after he
was your Majesty's Attorney General; Argued as Council for, and Reported in
behalf of the said Brunskell. p. 34. Sir Robert Sawyers Allegations, Evasions,
or Retractions. p. 35, 36. The Judges appointed to meet at the Earl of
Angleseys, to setle Orders or Rules pursuant to Sir Robert Sawyers first
Report, because the said Earl had your Majesty's Commands to see them made: But
the Judges disappointed his Lordship, and met at Serjeants-Inn in Fleet Street,
where the late Lord Chief Justice Pemberton declared, that your Majesty had no
such Revenue. p. 35. Why, and wherefore Fines and Penalties were ordained. p.
36. Several Statutes enjoining the Judges and Officers to be careful of Fines,
Issues, and Amerciaments, from p. 36. to p. 39. Oaths now Administered to great
Ministers, and Officers, to make them careful of your Majesty's Honor, Rights,
and Profits.
To Bishops, Lord Chancellor. p. 39. Privy Counselors, Treasurers, Barons, and
Judges. p. 40. Justices of Peace. High-Sheriffs. p. 41. Lawyers, Officers, and
Attorneys. p. 42.
The inconveniences formerly experienced, when Judges sold Offices, and took
Fees and Gifts of other than the King. p. 42, 43. Diverse Resolutions of former
Judges and Sages of the Law, showing the great Veneration and Esteem they had
of Your Majesty's Casual profits. p. 43, 44. That Grantees by a Derivative
Power, take the small Amerciaments; yet Your Majesty's Officers who have
certain Sallaries to take care of Your Majesty's Profits, neglect them. p. 44.
That Fines inflicted, fall not upon High Sheriffs as alleged. p. 44. Several
Statutes declaring that Officers use many shifts contrary to their Oaths and
Duties, and the known Laws of the Land, to withdraw your Majesty's Fines,
Issues, and Amerciaments, and increase their Fees. p. 45. Examples Of King
Henry the 3d. 1. In settling Orders for the better management of the Green-Wax
Fines. 2. In Assigning it over for Payment of his Debts. 3. In allotting His
Judges Sallaries to be paid thereout. And 4ly. In Punishing Hubert De Burgh,
His Chief Justice, and Baron, for neglect thereof. p. 46. Of Queen Eliz.
countenancing Carmerthen upon the discovery of Abuses in the Customs. p. 47. Of
King James settling Orders upon the discovery of Abuses, in withdrawing the
Green-Wax Fines, and why Officers imbezled or lost them. p. 47.
Several Ficticious Allegations fully disproved and detected. p. 48. to p. 55.
How the said Brunskell, and Mr. Middelton, are better Entitled than their
Brethren, to be Commissioners in the Alienation Office. p. 55. The Antiquity,
and certainty of the Duty upon Pleas of Land, and how its to be improved, and
better managed then now; and that the said Brunskell, and Middelton are not to
blame for the non-Improvement, or better Management thereof, from p. 55. to p.
69. Heriotts and Reliefs, fully saved in the Crown: The Antiquity and great use
thereof. p. 70 to p. 75. The reasons of the Law in devesting, Judges of their
pretended Power to sell Offices; and many Reasons and Arguments, that the
Judges have no Power to sell, or to admit persons into Offices durante been se
gesserint. p. 75, to p. 82. Proposalls humbly Offered to your Majesty for
disposing of Offices. p. 83. 84. Reasons or Arguments, to maintain the
proposals, good in all points of Law, prudence and practice, from p. 85. to p.
90. A Particular of Offices. p. 91, 92, 93, 94. What the Profits of Offices
amoumt unto, and the nature of the Profits accruing thereby. p. 95. What the
Profits of Greenwax-Fines, Pleas upon Land, Heriotts and Reliefs amount unto.
p. 95. The nature thereof. Ibid. Instances which Reprove the Officers, for
Remisness in this Case. p. 96, 97. How Judges are Misguided by Officers and
Attorneys. p. 98.
ERRATA.
PAge 24. Line 18. Read Judicial. p. 25. l. 11. read Purprestures. p. 56. l.
19. r. Mortgagees. ibid. l. 12. r. Quia for Qui. p. 62. l. ultima r.
Commission. p. 66. l. 16. r. 40s. p. 71. l. 6. read pr. A. l. 10. r. praefat'
B. l. 11. r. praedict' A.

THE VINDICATION OF Mr. Brunskel's Discovery of ABUSES, And of his Proposals to
Remedy them.
Shows Abuse 1. That diverse Proceedings, whereon Your Majesty's casual
Revenues arise, are never recorded, because the head Officers, forsaking the
old practice to record Proceedings, (before any thing be done thereon) take
their own and Judges Fees upon signing thereof, and leave the Attorneys to
record them, when, and as they please: whereby they often deceive your Majesty
of your Capias pro fine, and put your Subjects to the trouble and charge to
record diverse Judgments upon Post-Rolls two or three Terms afterward; But if
the Paper Copies be lost, as some have been, Your subjects lose their Debts
thereby.

This may be prevented, if Your Majesty's Surveyor, and his Deputies may have
the signing of all Proceedings, for security of Your Majesty's Profits, as the
Officers have, for the security of their own and Judges Fees; keeping in like
manner a settled Office, in or near the Seal-Offices of every Court, for
convenience of Attorneys to repair unto.

Because the Surveyor is bound in point of interest, without the obligation of
an Oath, to be true to your Majesty's interest; whereas the head Officers
interest oppose your Majesty's: Therefore, as Judges, and head Officers
understanding Attorneys tricks, not trusting their own Fees to be paid
according to what the Attorneys and Practizers (in the voluntary performance of
their Oaths and Duties) Record, ever subjected them to reasonable Methods, upon
prudent Surmises, without formal Trials and Convictions by Suits in Law or
Equity, as fully appears by the Remembrances and Records of every Court. And
the Judges frequently stop Suitors motions until Affidavits be fyled, and
Officers Fees paid: Ergo (being enjoined by the Statute 18 Ed. 3. to do all
reasonable things to procure your Majesty's profits) They may subject the
Officers to this Method, or reduce them to the first practice, as your
Majesty's Attorney General advised to be done for your Majesty's interest;
because it is impossible to know what Officers neglect, unless it be known what
Officers ought to Record and Estreat.

2. Abuse, That Your Majesty's Capias pro Fine 1000 l. per annum.
Fines upon Judgments quod capiatur, in all Courts, amount at least to 1000 l.
per annum; but Officers (without any Grant or Warrant from your Majesty's Royal
Ancestor's or Treasurers) buy necessaries for the Judges, and repair the Courts
therewith, and detain part as Fees due to themselves, and render no account
thereof into the Exchequer, as they ought to do: Also oppress poor people, by
running them to the Outlawry, and putting them to 3 or 4 l. charge in the
Common Pleas, where your Majesty's Fine is but 6 s. 8 d. And to 10 l. charges
in the King's Bench, being forced to appear personally, whereby your Subjects
pay ten times more than your Majesty's duty.

This may be prevented, if Officers account in and receive a Warrant from the
Exchequer for their Allowances, as other Accomptants do: And if Officers
discretionarily tax, or add to the Suitors Costs, so much as the Fine upon the
Judgment quod Capiatur does amount unto; and take a Memorandum from the
Attorney, to take care to see the same paid when the Costs are levied, as the
Officers used to do for their own damage clear; because Costs, by the Statute
23 Hen. 8. Chap. 15. may be taxed more or less discretionarily, as they please:
and by this means your Subjects will be free from paying more than the duty.
The present Lord Keeper, by a Derivative Power from your Majesty, grants
relief even where the Laws are deficient: And the Statute 18 Ed. 3 (now in
force) enjoyneth his Lordship and all the Judges to do all reasonable things to
procure your Profits: And the Statute 13 Ed. 1. cap. 50. provideth where the
Law fails of a remedy, it may be supplied by your Majesty's writ: Ergo, your
Majesty wants not equitable or legal means to secure your Fines, with ease and
relief to your Subjects, as proposed.

3. Abuse, Issues of Jurors 8000. l.
That Officers and Clarks, for Bribes and Rewards, withdraw Issues of Jurors,
which in England and Wales amount unto 8000 l. per annum; whereby Juries are
supplied with indigent Freeholders, de circumstantibus, which Under - Sheriffs
or Bailiffs, at the instance of their corrupt Clients, may have packt: there
being little or no time to enquire of their Credit, so as to challenge them;
which occasioneth corrupt Virdicts: And vexatious Plaintiffs frequently make
Defendants dance attendance two or three Assizes, to draw them to comply with
their demands; whereby the Gentlemen at first impannell'd being still returned
as Jurors, are forced to the trouble, and charge to attend old Causes.

This may be prevented, if Officers to whom it belongs record all the Judges
Orders, as well general as particular, distinctly, in a Book, or
Parchment-Roll; then the Officer or Clark withdrawing Issues without the Judges
directions, may be easily discovered and convicted: And if Under-Sheriffs
return Freeholders to serve in their turns; then Gentlemen in all or most
Counties will not be returned above once in three or four years, nor be forced
to attend old Causes. This will make Gentlemen willing to be Jurymen: And if
your Majesty have not many Forfeitures, your Subjects will be endeared with
good Juries; Ergo, Reasonable.

4. Abuse, Forfeitures or Penalties upon Actions popular, and Informations,
10000. l.
That penalties upon Actions-popular, and Informations, amount at least to
10000 l. per an. and the Suits ought not to abate, without your Majesty or
Judges privity; to the end, that the wilful Breakers, or Non-observers of the
Laws, or the malicious Informers or Prosecutors, giving your peaceable Subjects
disturbance, without just cause, may be punished: But at this day due care is
not Note, The Prothonotary Robinson confessed this Abuse was true; yet the
Judges of the King's Bench, and Barons of Your Exchequer, never made any Order
to reform it. Ergo, if Confession, which is accounted as good as 10000
Witnesses, produce no better Effects, What can be hoped upon the Evidence of
one or two Witnesses at chargeable Trials at Law?
taken to record Plaintiffs Names in Actions-Popular, and Informations, before
Process for the Arrest issue out, whereby litigious persons may sue whom they
please, and by Instruments underhand get what they can by private agreements,
and the Defendants are liable to be sued ad infinitum upon the same account,
until the Action or Information be recorded; and by the Officers neglect to
file Informations, any person confederating with the Criminals, may foist in an
antidated Information, and plead it in bar to the real Prosecutors, whereby
your Majesty loses your share of your Penalty; and Criminals, upon breach of
penal Statutes, escape unpunished; and your peaceable Subjects, being harrassed
between Officers and malicious Informers, or Prosecutors, (for want of a
Record) cannot be relieved.

This may be prevented by ordering Officers to observe the Statute 18 Eliz.
cap. 5. (now in force) enjoining them to record Informations before the Process
for the Arrest issue out; and that Plaintiffs Names in Actions-Popular may be
recorded in a Book, or Parchment-Roll, for that purpose, before the Process
issue out; and that the like Orders may be made in the King's Bench and
Exchequer, as are made in the Common Pleas, to prevent the imbezlement of
Postea's.

5. Abuse, That Fines and Amerciaments are never recorded and prosecuted,
unless your agrieved Subjects, oppressed with the artifices of Under-Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, and Attorneys, add to their own misery, by seeing the head Officers
to do it; because the Officers Fees increase by delatory returns, and
Contempts, which multiply Proceedings, Orders, Motions, and Continuances, which
encourages vexatious Defendants to withstand just Debts, by suggesting a
feigned equity, and pleading fictiously to keep the Plaintiffs in suspense
three or four years with their own Money; so force them to an easy Composition
at last: Also vexatious Plaintiffs are thereby encouraged to be very litigious,
keeping Defendants from an Equitable Relief two or three years with Contempts,
until they swell to Commissions of Rebellion: Because the agrieved subjects,
who have no part of any Fines inflicted, cannot have them prosecuted, nor make
their grievances particularly known to the Judges, without great charge and
trouble of making Affidavits, Soliciting, Feeing Council, and Attorneys: And
the worst Actions admitting plausible excuses, it is easy for Officers to
escape Unpunished; which makes Your subjects sit down under great Oppressions,
rather than be at that great Expense and Trouble to hunt after an uncertain
Relief. Sir Philip Mountain, High Sheriff of Yorkshire, experienced it, when he
prosecuted Mr. Benson (the Clark of Assizes) for Extortion, and experientia
docet sed nocet. Its not the Offending, but the Offended and grieved Subjects
that are punished: As for instance, when the first Habeas Corpus is disobeyed,
the parties grieved pay to the Judges and Officers for every alias and plures
10 s. besides 20 or 30 s. to Counselors and Attorneys, for Fees, Motions, and
Orders; and Under-Sheriffs (or Jaylors farming the Jayles of them) prey upon
Prisoners with Diet and Lodgings: Whereas, if a good round Fine were set upon
the first Contempt, (though afterward, upon reasonable cause, remitted or
mitigated) the Offenders will then be punished, and the agrieved Subjects freed
from that expense, and the Fines and Amerciaments so inflicted upon every
Contempt of Rules, Orders, and Process, will amount to 20000 l. per annum,
Contempts 20000 l.
or Officers to avoid them, will expedite Suits; so that Your subjects ease and
relief will tant-amount what the Profits may fall short thereof; and by the
ancient course of Courts, Sheriffs were ever fined as the Law directs for the
Defendants nonappearance: For that reason the Statute 23 Hen. 6. cap. 10.
impowereth Sheriffs to take Bail-Bond to indempnifie themselves from your
Majesty's Fines; which shows, That such Bonds ought not to be sued, until
Sheriffs be actually damnified; and that the Action ought to abate when
Sheriffs are reimbursed; but Officers and Attorneys, to increase their own
profits, by projected Contrivances, fee Under-Sheriffs, (and indempnifie them
from your Majesty's Fine) to assign over such Bonds to Plaintiffs, to sue,
whereby they not only deceive your Majesty of your Fines, but wrongfully
harrass your Subjects upon their Bonds, because they can only plead to stave
off Proceedings thereon; until they can move the Judges for relief; who never
grant any, without making them pay all the Officers Fees, and Plaintiffs
Charges, occasioned by suing such Bonds; also making them give Bail to the
Original Action, though the demand be large and fictitious: so that the great
expense and trouble of feeing Council, Attorneys moving the Courts, and the
difficulty; when all is done, to find Bail to the Original Action, especially
if they live remote from London, forces poor People to disadvantagious
agreements: And Ejectments are practiced instead of Formedons; yet the
Declarations are not compounded in the Alienation Office, or such Fines paid
thereon, as were usually paid upon Formedons: And by the Statute 9 Hen. 3. cap.
11. Common Pleas shall not follow the King: Ergo, the Kings Bench may be
prohibited to meddle therein: And the Exchecquer is prohibited by the Statute 10
Edward 1. and 28 Edward 1. cap. 4. to hold Common Pleas. The Learned Lord Chief
Baron Hailes endeavored to overrule one Nosworthys Plea, when he pleaded that
Statute in Bar, or by way of Estopple, to an Action commenced in that Court:
Yet after a long Debate, the Plea was allowed, and your Majesty ought to have a
full Duty upon every Original Writ in Debt, viz. 10s. per Cent. (as a Lycense
to sue) and a duty of 6 d. for the Seal of every Original. But the Courts of
King's Bench and Exchequer have robbed the Common Pleas of much business, and
seldom or never proceed by Original Writs. The Judges formerly were so tender
of your Majesty's Profits in performance of their Oaths, That in the Earl of
Devenshires Case, 4 Jacobi, they resolved them to be Ornamenta pacis and
f^rmamenta belli, and of so high estimation, that every body is bound to
promote them: For that reason they Fined and Imprisoned Officers upon their
first appearance, as appears by Jeromes Case, who was Fined and Imprisoned for
withdrawing one Original Writ. But the Judges and Officers lately contrived an
Ac Etiam Bill, in the Common Pleas, whereby Plaintiffs may be encouraged to
commence many Suits, to increase Officers Fees and Perquisits, because they
(notwithstanding the Statute 13 Car. 2. Statute 2. cap. 2.) may lay their
demands as high and vexatiously as they please, to squeeze advantageous
agreements out of Defendants upon Arrests, and deceive your Majesty of the Fine
or Duty amounting to 1000ll. per annum, Fines upon Originals. 1000ll.
which was ever paid before Process for the arrest issued out, according to the
first demands; and hindered Plaintiffs, to oppress Defendants by holding them to
unreasonable Bail, by exceeding their real cause of Actions, as now. And
whereas, to excuse their contrivance of Ac Etiam Bill, it was alleged before
your Majesty, at the hearing, That the Moiety of all Fines upon Originals,
belonged of Right to the present Lord Keeper, and the Master of the Rolls, for
Diet and Board-wages, because they and their Predecessors ever enjoyed them.
This allegation may be presumed to be a great mistake, For amongst all the
things granted or allowed to them, or their Predecessors, there is not the
least mention of these Fines; and the Judges have resolved, in the Earl of
Devonshire's Case, That a long Enjoyment, by force of general words in
Letters Patent, cannot create a Right in Law to any Profits of the Crown. Also
the Statute 1 Hen. 4. cap. 6. provideth, That nothing shall pass out of the
Crown, without it be expressly named and granted. And it is well known, that the
late Lord Keepers and Chancellors have other and greater Sallaries and
allowances, particularly granted by your Majesty's Royal Father and
Grandfather, then their Predecessors ever enjoyed; and Qu. Elizabeth granted,
and King James confirmed, a Moiety of all Fines upon Originals to the Cursitors
in Fee; Ergo, Your Majesty has a Right to take or grant the other Moiety.

This may be prevented, if head Officers in every Court, to whom it belongs,
keep an exact Bill of Pleas, and record all Contempts therein as soon as
committed, and set the Fines and Amerciaments presently, taking it pro
confesso, if the person or Officer offending; at the day given, or before, do
not appear, and discharge himself that he is guilty, Your Majesty may lay Your
old duties upon the original Process now used: or reduce the Courts to their
first Establishments, seeing the Judges and Officers forego not their own Fees,
and persons holding Tolls and Franchises by grants from the Crown, permit no
Encroachments: And all Loyal and Ingenious Subjects know that Your Crown cannot
be supported without Royal aids or duties, which must Issue out of real or
personal Estates, Trade, Proceedings at Law, or Offices: And when your old
duties fall short to defray Your necessityes, it forces Your Majesty to ask new
Supplies, wherewith all Your subjects are generally Taxed; For that reason,
when it was perceived, That the Crown was deceived of a duty by projected
Recoveryes, It was Enacted by the Statute 32 Hen. 8. cap 1. that Writs of
Entry, shall pay as much as Writs of Covenant in Chancery.

9. Abuse, Fines before Justices in Air, Commissioners of Sewers, and Clarks
of the Markets, 1000 l. Amerciaments in Turns and Leets, 1000 l.
That Fines and Amerciaments, set by Justices in Air, Commissioners of Sewers,
and Clarks of the Markets, are not estreated, which amount to 1000 l. per
annum; also, Amerciaments in Sheriffs Turns and Leets, amount to 1000 l. per
annum at least; there being at least 600 Hundreds in England and Wales, besides
many Manors wherein Courts are holden twice a year, and all the Amerciaments
not granted away, belong to your Majesty; yet due care is not taken thereof, as
the Statute 14 Rich. 2. cap 11. and 11* Hen. 7. cap 15. direct, which the
Attorney General has reported ought to be observed; and Bailiffs of Liberties
observe it not, tho enjoined to do all things required of Sheriffs, by force of
the Statute, 27 Hen. 8. cap 24.

This may be prevented, by charging the Justices in Air, and Commissioners of
Sewers, to take care of their Clarks; also by charging the Clarks of the
Markets to Estreat all Fines and Amerciaments into the Exchequer: And if
Amerciaments in Turns and Leets be estreated, and returned to the Sessions, as
the Statute 11 H. 7. cap. 15. does direct, Duplicates may be returned from
thence to the Exchequer, to charge Accomptants therewith; Your subjects
presuming to have a Right of Common, or the like, not worth 2 d. will be at
expensive Suits to preserve their Rights, a multo fortiori, your Majesty may
preserve yours, because these Fines and Amerciaments being contingent things,
may happen at one time or other to be very considerable in all Courts
throughout the Kingdom; and all Stewards and Clarks of the Peace are enjoined
by Oath and Duty to do as the Statute directs; and Your subjects Rights and
Liberties cannot be injured by adjusting your Majesty's Rights; Ergo,
Reasonable.

7. Abuse. That the Officers of the Exchequer (disobeying the Barons Orders)
permit Under-Sheriffs to take their Bailiffs Returns and Accounts, de been
esse, and pass them as true in the Exchequer; whereby Wages are allowed for the
Clarks of the Peace, as Servants to the Justices not attending at Assizes or
Sessions, whereas they are no Servants within the meaning of the Statute 14
Rich. 2. to whom Wages ought to be allowed; and there being two Thousand
Justices of the Peace in England and Wales; a fourth part may be modestly
reckoned not to attend at one and the same time; whose Wages, computing the
Petit and grand Sessions, and Assizes in every County, one with another, at 4
s. per diem, and 2 s. for their Men, for every days non-attendance, Allowances
for Justices wages saved, 3000 l.
amount to 3000 l. per annum, and upwards, whereof your Majesty is wronged, and
the Justice get not a farthing.

This may be prevented, if wages be not allowed upon Under-Sheriffs Accounts to
Clarks of the Peace, deputed by the Custos Rotulorum, or any other, as Servants
to any Justices of the Peace, unless the Justices themselves do attend at the
Assizes and Sessions, as the Statute 14 Rich. 2. cap. 11. does direct; and that
the Bailiffs, or others, who pay the Justices Wages, may attest his or their
accounts upon Oath, before a Magistrate appointed to take Affidavits,
particularly showing what they pay, and to whom, that Under-Sheriffs may
produce the same to account by in the Exchecquer, as the Barons have ordered;
because the Under-Sheriffs swearing their Bailiffs returns to be true, for
ought they know, signifies nothing; for that reason diverse Under-Sheriffs
formerly passed their accounts by Proxies.

8. Abuse, That the Nomina Villar', whereby the Boundaries of Liberties are now
adjusted, were taken at first upon the Information of Under-Sheriffs, who
received the same from their Bailiffs de been esse, without further Enquiry
thereinto.

To prevent this, Sheriffs for the future may take Indentures of Bailiffs of
Liberties, to execute all Process, as the Statnte 12 Edw. 2. chap. 5. does
direct, and return such as particularly relate to your Majesty's casual
Profits, into the Court of Exchequer, that Officers may know on whom to place
the account thereof; also, that the Boundaries, or extent of Liberties, may be
diligently inquired into, and ascertained by the Verdicts of substantial
Juries, so be made good matter upon Record for the future: For as private Lords
and Parishes yearly surround their Boundaries to prevent encroachments, a multo
fortiori, your Majesty's ought to be enquired into, and ascertained by good
matter upon Record.

9. Abuse, Forfeited Recognizances certified, 100000 l. Forfeited Recognizances
not certified, 100000 l.
That the Recognizances of solvent persons, generally compounded and withdrawn,
amount unto as much or more than such as be estreated; and the Recognizances
which are now estreated, amounting to 100000 l. per annum, would be likewise
compounded or withdrawn, if the poor people were able to satisfy the Officers
demands, for the Clerks of the Peace seldom take less than 16 s. Clarks of the
Assize 3 or 4 l. and Officers of the Exchecquer 7 or 8 l. (whose Fees exceed
not 3 l.) to discharge persons admitted to compound; whereby poor people being
admitted to compound Penalties of 40 l. (due to your Majesty,) for 2 d. (not
being freed from Officers excessive Fees, and the great charge and trouble of
formal Pleadings, Motions, suing out Quietus, and the like) are deterred from
applying to your Majesty's Courts for mercy, and forced underhand to bribe
Under-Sheriffs and Bailiffs, who prey upon their necessities, with respits and
false Returns, until they insensibly become insolvent, and bring themselves and
Families to be maintained at the Parish-charge: Note, These things make Offices
sell at great rates, but the Wise Lord Keeper Bacon terms them the sick State
of the Exchecquer, and cautions Sir John Denham upon admitting him to be a
Baron of the Exchecquer, to provide against them.
Thus Officers acquit your solvent Subjects, and clog your Majesty's Exchecquer
with the Recognizances of the poor people, who are willing to pay what they are
able, but not able to pay so much as the Officers demand; and the Law
consisting but of two parts, viz. Judical and Executive, and most Offenses
being bailable, Criminals are at their own Elections, whether they will stand
Trial, or forfeit their Recognizances; and the Judges being fully employed in
Judicial matters cannot take notice of every thing, transacted by Officers; and
being ignorant of the Executive part, generally take the advice of the
Protho-Notaries, or head Officers, therein; so that the Execution, which is the
life of the Law, depends chiefly upon the skill and honesty of Officers; which
makes rich Offenders, who have money at will, very insolent, and discourage
your peaceable Subjects to prosecute and convict them: And the general
Grievances of your Subjects consisting in Purpressures, common Nusances,
defective Bridges, Causways and common Pounds, Land Mark removed, Hedge
Breakers, Riots, Assaults, common Barretors, Eves droppers, Inn or Alehouses
Lodging persons of ill Fame, Regrators, Forestallers, Bakers or Brewers failing
in Assize of Bread or Bear, False Weights and Measures, Cattle Infected, put
into common Pastures, and the like, cannot be redressed while Recognizances are
withdrawn, and Criminals discharged upon easy Compositions without hearing
what is to be said in your Majesty's behalf. As for example, Mary Hunt and her
Bail (being bound and indebted to your Majesty in the sum of 1400 l. by several
Recognizances, to stand Trial of diverse Crimes wherewith she was charged)
confessed it cost her 400 l. and upwards, to Officers for withdrawing her
Recognizances to hinder the Prosecutors, to expose her by open Trials to
public Justice: And it is a violent presumption that Officers used indirect
practices to gratify her therein, because in disobedience of express Rules of
Court, and in Contempt of the Statutes 51 Hen. 3. 7 Hen. 4. cap. 3. and 2 Hen.
6. cap. 10. (after they had received diverse Fees of the Prosecutor to Estreat
them into the Exchequer) did not Estreat any, save one to try an Indictment in
Michaelmass Term 1682. which they knew would be (as it is) discharged of
course: Two Recognizances (to try Indictments for keeping a public House, and
entertaining Lewd and Debauched persons; after the Fact confessed, to avoid the
Trial) were discharged by a single Judge at's Chamber privately for 3 s. 4 d. a
piece: Another to keep the Peace, being forfeited by her wilful breach thereof,
was particularly ordered to be Estreated after Hunts death: Because the Bail
confessed they had 100 l. a piece in their hands to Indempnifie themselves: Yet
the Bail are since discharged by Rule of Court without paying the Money in
their Hands to your Majesty, or hearing what the Prosecutors had to say:
Whereas in all matters relating to private persons, the adverse parties ever
have a day given to show Cause before any thing be peremptorily ordered: These
practices made Hunt so insolent, that boasting of her prevalency with Officers,
she Spit in the Prosecutors Face; hired persons to Murder her, and threatened to
Burn her House: And the Officers and Bail aggravating her Grievances by
Infamous Misrepresentations and other Affronts, she moved the Court to have the
premises duly examined; but was committed to Prison.

To prevent these Abuses, the Clarks of Assizes and Peace, may enter all
Recognizances in a Book, or Parchment Roll, as soon as they come to their
hands; and not keep them, as now, upon loose Files: that poor people, through
inadvertency forfeiting Recognizances, or incurring other great Penalties, (if
their Case appear, upon Petition and Proof, to deserve mercy) may be discharged
by an Order of Court without more ado; or an Office may be erected to compound
such Forfeitures, in nature of the Alienation-Office. It Is for your Majesty's
honor and profit to give Your subjects (who ought to have mercy shown) a
legal and cheap way to obtain it; because it endeareth them to your Majesty,
and hinders all indirect application to Officers.

10. Abuse, That the Statute 51 Hen. 3. limiteth and appoints all Sheriffs
(except Northumberland, and others, by particular Statutes exempted) to pay
your Majesty's Fines half yearly, viz. at Easter and Michaelmas, and the
Process of the Exchequer for that purpose are issued out after every Hillary
and Trinity Terms; yet Officers generally respite the Under-Sheriffs first
halfyears Payment until Trinity-Vacation, and often longer; and if
High-Sheriffs happen to die, (as Sir Solomon Swaile did, who was High Sheriff
of Yorkshire) your Majesty may long want your Fines, and lose them at last; and
if Under Sheriffs should die before their Accounts be perfected, the
High-Sheriffs, who are the Accomptants in point of Law, would be at a great
loss; Ergo, It Is neither for your Majesty, nor High-Sheriffs Interest, to have
the Accounts so generally respited.

To prevent this, the Statute may be observed by all Sheriffs, excepting the
Sheriffs of Northumberland, or such as are particularly exempted,

11. Abuse, Ecclesiastical Fines, 6000 l. per annum.
That Fines in all Ecclesiastical Courts throughout the Kingdom, may be
modestly computed to be 6000 l. per Annum, and were duly collected and paid
into the Exchequer by particular Receivers thereof, as appears by the
Patent-Rolls and Records down to the late Rebellion: But since your Majesty's
Happy Restoration, only a few Fines upon Excommunications are certified into
the Exchequer, all the rest are Concealed.

To prevent this, the Officers may be subjected to such Orders as are proposed
for the Officers of other Courts.

The Reports and Opinions of your Majesty's Judges, Attorney Generals, and
other able Lawyers, pro and con, Statutes, Presidents, and Resolutions of
former Judges, as follow, plainly show the foregoing Abuses to be true, and may
be Remedyed as Proposed.

Sir Francis North, your Majesty's Sir Francis North reports.
Attorney General, about October 1674. of his own knowledge, Reported, That the
small Fines and Americaments in all Courts, are wholly Neglected; which if
carefully looked after, will be of a considerable Value: And the said Brunskel,
if Your Majesty please to favor him, deserves an Employment therein, for so
Useful a Discovery. And his Lordship declared, That he was glad of the
Opportunity so to Report: Because he had often Moved the Judges to take Care of
them. Yet when elected Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, refused to draw
either Patent or Commission for the said Brunskel, pursuant to his own Report.
And when his Officers claimed some Fines as Fees to Buy Necessaries for the
Judges, and Repair the Courts; It was Referred to Sir Charles Harboard, Sir
Charles Harboard.
who Reported, after a serious Debate with his Lordship and Officers, That all
Fines were Agreed to be Due to Your Majesty: Ergo, Not applicable to any Use
without Your Majesty's express Warrant. Then his Lordship yielded by a second
Opinion under his hand; Sir Francis Norths Opinion.
That it was Needful to Appoint a Person, who, by taking the Officers Accounts,
might Control such as pocket His Majesty's Profits. And Sergeant Maynard
Maynard.
gave his Opinion in private for the said Brunskel, in behalf of Your Majesty;
Yet when he appeared in public, and saw the Judges and Officers against him,
Retracted the same. And Mr. Saunders Mr. Saunders.
ever pleaded for the said Brunskel in behalf of Your Majesty, and maintained
the Green-Wax Fines to be Your Ancient Revenue: And that Your Majesty may
Legally Grant it in Farm, or settle Orders or Rules for the Management thereof
as Proposed; Yet being Chief Justice, alleged, It was one thing to be Judge,
and another to be Counsel. And Sergeant Reymond Reymond.
gave his Opinion for the said Brunskel in behalf of Your Majesty; But being a
Judge, satt mute. Sir William Jones, Sir William Jones.
Your Majesty's Attorney General, ever refused to say or do any thing in Favor
of the said Brunskel: But a Scheam of Abuses and Remedies (which the said
Brunskell gave to some Persons active in the revocation of his Patent, to let
them see what reasonable things he desired and was denied: And how unjustly his
Adversaries sought to ruin his Reputation and Estate, being carried to the
said Sir William Jones by his own Creatures, without discovering the said
Brunskell to be the Author thereof, he reported thereon His reports.
: That many of the Abuses are True, and fit to be Redressed: That all, or the
greatest part thereof may be redressed by the Judges Orders in the respective
Courts; That the discoveror thereof deserves all due Encouragement, for the
service he has already done, and may for the future do, in discovering these
or the like Abuses; Also, the assurance of a liberal Reward: And the Judges
confirmed his Report, by acquainting the Lords Commissioners of your Majesty's
Treasury: That they had made Orders pursuant thereunto: Also the Barons, by
agreeing to make Orders accordingly, as appears by the minute Book in the
Treasury Chamber: Yet effectual Orders are not made: And when the said
Brunskell appeared and Petitioned for his Reward pursuant thereto, being
referred to the said Sir William Jones, and afterward to Mr. Finch the
Solicitor General, they resused to draw either Patent or Commission for him.
Sir Robert Sawyer before and after he was Your Majesty's Attorney General,
pleaded upon several occasions for the said Brunskell in behalf of your
Majesty, Sir Robert Sawyers reports.
and Reported, That great Abuses are practiced by Clarks; and it is fit such
Rules be made, that your Majesty may not be injured: That the Ancient Practice
is best: That the Method as the Starute 11 Hen. 7. cap. 15. directs, ought to
be pursued: That the Orders proposed, seem reasonable in the main: And advised
the Lords Commissioners of Your Treasury, to send them to the Judges to be made
Rules in the respective Courts, which their Lordships did accordingly; and your
Majesty Commanded the Earl of Anglesey to see them made for Your Service.
Whereupon the Judges appointed to meet at his Lordships House: But for some
reasons best known to themselves, They not only declined meeting there, but to
have his Lordship present at the debate thereof in Serjeants-Inn-Hall; where
the Late Lord Chief Justice Pemberton Pemberton.
declared: That your Majesty had no such Revenue, and dismissed the said
Brunskell from all farther Solicitations for Rules: Whereupon the Earl of
Anglesey stated the Abuses, represented by way of Question under his hand, and
delivered them, by your Majesty's Command, to Sir Leoline Jenkins your
Majestyes Principal Secretary, to be referred to the Judges, to Answer under
their Hands, which is not yet done: Yet the said Sir Robert Sawyer Sir Robert
Sawyers retractions.
forgetting his former Reports and Opinions, acquainted your Majesty at the
hearing, that the said Brunskell was impertinently troublesome: And reported
lately, upon the said Brunskells petition to the Lords Commissioners of your
Majesty's Treasury, That the substance of what the said Brunskell insists on,
has been debated over and over, and will never be determined to the said
Brunskells satisfaction; yet warily submits to their Lordships Judgment; For he
knew, that their Lordships were as sensible as himself, that repeating nine
Years Transactions, Stating and Answering all Objections, made the said
Brunskells Case unavoidably long; and for that reason it was not Read: Ergo,
not Debated.

That Fines and Penalties were Originally ordained to quicken the Execution
(which is the life) of the Law, and established to defray the charge which your
Majesty is at with your Courts for Administration of Justice and Equity to Your
Subjects: For that reason it is provided by the Statute 51 Hen. 3. and 7 Hen. 4.
cap. 3. That they shall be duly Recorded, Estreated, Levied, and Accounted
for: The Statute 6 Edw. 1. cap. 14. directs, That the Treasurers and Barons
shall see Amerciaments Levied to your Majesty's use. The Statute of Rutland 10
Edw. 1. provideth, That Sheriffs and Bailiffs shall not withdraw Your Revenues,
by returning Nichills, or the like: And that Your Treasurers and Barons cause
particular Rolls of Estreats to be made and delivered to faithful and
circumspect men, to Enquire thereinto. The Statute 27 Edw. 1. directs, That
once every year a Baron and a Clark shall go round the Countries, to enquire
whether any be concealed or withdrawn: The Statute 18 Edw. 3. enjoyneth the
Judges to do all reasonable things to procure them. By the Statute 6 Hen. 4.
cap. 3. Commissions shall be issued out after every Officers final account,
into the respective Counties where the Officers and Accomptants live, to
enquire of Frauds, that they may be severely punished. And Under-Sheriffs and
Bailiffs by the Statute 1 Hen. 5. cap. 4. shall not be in Office above a year.
The Statute 2 Hen. 6. cap. 10. provideth, That persons shall be appointed in
all Courts faithfully to attend your Majesty's business.

And the Statute 33 Hen. 8. cap. 39. provideth, That the Officers concealing or
withdrawing your Majesty's Fines, shall pay three times the value, and forfeit
their Offices: And it was found by experience, as appears by the said Statute
27 Hen. 8. That Suits were delayed, when Bailiffs were not punished by Fines
and Amerciaments, because the Lords of Liberties to whom your Royal Ancestors
had granted the Return of Writs, had power to remit the same; Therefore the
Statute nulled those Grants, and restored the Fines to the Crown, as the
ancient Estate and Prerogative thereof for administering Justice: and the
Statute 27 Hen. 8. cap. 10. and 13. Eliz. cap. 5. prohibiteth all Contrivances
to deceive your Majesty of any Fines; and all persons (Officers especially) are
punishable for Frauds and Deceits by the Statute 3 Ed. 1. cap. 29. And every
Subject by the Statute 7 Jacobi cap. 6. is obliged by Oath and Duty, at the Age
of 18. to defend the Rights of the Crown. And Great Ministers and Officers not
only to take that Oath, but upon every admission into any Office or Employment,
more particularly Sworn as follows.

Bishops Oaths.
Bishops are particularly to assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences, and Authorities Granted, Belonging, United or Annexed to the
Crown, etc.

Lord Chancellors.
The Lord Chancellor is truly to Counsel your Majesty, and not to know or
suffer the Hurt or Disherison of your Majesty, nor the Rights of the Crown to
be in any stress: And if he cannot hinder it, He is to make it expressly known
to your Majesty, with his true Advice, and Counsel, and to do and purchase
Your Majesty's profits in all things, etc.

Privy Counselors.
Privy Counselors, if they know of any thing attempted, done, or spoken
against your Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown, or Dignity Royal; are to
withstand it to the utmost of their power, and to advertise your Majesty
thereof, and to assist and defend all Jurisdictions, as in the Bishops Oath,
etc.

Treasurers, Chancellors, and Barons Oaths.
The Treasurers, Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, are not to disturb
nor respite Debts where they may be Levied, to take Fee or Robe of none but
your Majesty; and where they understand of any wrong or prejudice done to your
Majesty; they are to use their power and diligence to redress it: And if they
cannot, they are to inform your Majesty, etc.

Judges Oath.
Judges are to Counsel your Majesty in Your needs; and not to Counsel or Assent
to any thing which may turn to your Majesty's hurt or disherison: They are to
do even right to Poor and Rich, and not take privily or apart any gifts, or any
other thing which may turn to their own profits; nor Fees or Robes of any but
your Majesty: They are to do and procure your Majesty's profits in all things
where they may reasonably do it; And upon default in any point, shall be at
your Majesty's will of Body, Lands, and Honor, etc.

Justices of Peace.
Justices of the Peace are truly to cause all Issues, Fines, and Amerciaments
before them, to be entered without concealing or imbezeling any, and truly to
send them into the Exchequer; they shall not Let for gift or other Cause; but
are well and truly to do their Office.

High-Sheriffs.
High-Sheriffs are not to assent to the Concealment of your Majesty's Rights,
or of Your Franchises; and wherever they know of any thing concealed or
withdrawn, they are to cause it to be restored, or certify your Majesty
thereof: They are not to respite your Majesty's debts for any gift: They are
truly to acquit at the Exchequer all those of whom they receive any thing of
your Majesty's debts; and truly to return, and serve all your Majesty's Writs,
and admit none to be their Undersheriffs or Clarks of the last year; and shall
make each of their Bailiffs to take such Oath as they take; and shall not let
their Sheriffwick or any Balywick thereof to Farm.

Lawyers, Officers, and Attorneys.
Lawyers, Officers, and Attorneys are sworn to assist and defend the Crown; To
do no falsehood, nor consent to any to be done to your Majesty's prejudice; But
if they know of any, they are to give notice to the Lord Chief Justice, or his
Brethren, that it may be Reformed; and the Prothonotaries, Clarks of Estreats,
and Philazers are truly and diligently to Record and Extract all Fines, Issues,
and Amerciaments; and to inform the Chief Justice, if they know of any thing
neglected, concealed, or withdrawn.

And the experience of former Ages teaches, by the exemplary punishment of
diverse Judges, by Death, Fines, Imprisonment and Banishment, when they had Fees
as well as their Officers, which increased, or decreased, as Suits were
delayed, and Proceedings multiplied; and took New Years Gifts, and Money for
Offices; they did not put the Laws, in execution against Officers: Therefore
the Statutes 18 and 20 Ed. 3. and 12 R. 2. And other good Laws were made and
provided, still in force, to prevent corruption; Because Justice is to be done
without respect of persons; Et nemo debet esse sapientiorem Legibus. And in the
Earl of Devonshires Case, 4 Jacobi, the Profits of the Crown are resolved to be
Ornamenta Pacis, and Firmamenta Belli; and of so high estimation, that every
body is bound to promote them: Also, resolved in Vaughan's Case, 39 and 40.
Eliz. That a Fine or Amerciament is due to your Majesty upon every Contempt or
Disobedience of Writs or Process: Therefore Judgments were set aside, for
omitting to record persons in misericordia; and the very small Amerciaments
were duly estreated, as appears by Rastall's new Natura Brevium, under the
title of Amerciaments, Beecher's Case in Cooke's Reports; and Original Writs at
this day command pledges to be taken for them: and the Citizens of London
(farming the Green-Wax-Fines of your Majesty in the City by a Derivative Power)
ever took the small Amerciaments: which your Majesty's Officers neglect, who
enjoy diverse Fees and Perquisites out of every Warrant of Attorney, and other
things, exceeding 200. per an. to take care thereof; and if persons were
compelled to find real pledges, as the Law directs, and Amerciaments were truly
estreated, ad finem litis, it would prevent frivolous Suits, and fictitious
Pleadings, to delay Suitors; for Amerciaments have been affeer'd upon litigious
Plaintiffs or Defendants, to 20 l. by Neighbors, who best knew the Parties and
their Offenses, by the Statute 9 Hen. 3. cap. 14. And it is well known, that
Fines inflicted fall not upon High-Sheriffs, as pretended, but upon their
Under-Sheriffs, Bailiffs, or litigious Clients, who must and will rather pay
them, than forfeit the penalties of their Bonds, because all High-Sheriffs ever
take great and good Security, to indempnifie themselves. For that reason the
Statute 7 Edw. 6. cap. 1. provideth, That head Officers in every Court, shall
impose Fines upon, and Amerce Under-Sheriffs or accomptants for not accompting
or returning Process duly at the times appointed: And the Statute 22 and 23.
of your Majesty's Reign, cap. 22. declares Officers guilty of many Abusive and
Sinister practices in withdrawing your Majesty's Fines and Forfeitures. And the
Statute 31 of your Majesty's Reign, cap. 2. declares, That Under-Sheriffs,
Jaylors and Officers use many shifts to increase their Fees, contrary to their
Oaths and Duties, and the known Laws of the Land: That the Statute 23 Hen. 6.
cap. 10. to eschew Extortion, Perjury, and Oppression, prohibiteth Officers to
be Jurymen, as not to be credited.

King Henry the third being informed * Spelmans Glossary.
of Abuses in this Revenue, subjected the Sheriffs to good Orders, and punished
Hubert de Burgh, his Chief Justice, for neglect of this Revenue; Rotl. Paten'55
and 56. Hen. 3.
And when he assigned over his Revenues for payment of his Debts, reserved but
these Branches of his Green-wax-Fines for his own subsistence. Inter Record.
apud Recept. Scaccarii 4 Edw. 1.
King Edward the first allotted his Judges Salaries to be paid thereout, to
make them careful of it: the Parliament esteeming Fines the only means to
expedite Justice, petitioned Richard the second, That the Justices might have
part of all Fines and Penalties, to excite them to inflict and levy them;
whereupon the Statutes 12 Rich. 2. cap. 10. and 14 cap. 11. were made for their
Wages to be paid thereout, still in force, and observed. And it appears by
Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts in Banco Regis, that Judge Ingham was
punished for reducing an Amerciament to a lesser Sum, though in pity to a poor
man, because the Statute 18 Eliz. 3. Statute 4. still in force, prohibits him
and all Judges to do any thing in prejudice to the King. And some Historians
report, That the Clock-House in Westminster was built with the Fine, and the
great Bell hung therein, that the Judges may remember when they hear it Toll,
to observe their Oaths established by that Statute. Queen Elizabeth received
Camden's Britannia
and countenanced oppressed Carmerthen upon his discovery of Abuses in the
Customs, and subjected the Officers to his Methods. Vernon's Book.
Also King James being Informed of abusive practices in withdrawing the
Green-wax-Fines, constituted a Surveyor thereof, and settled Orders to enable
him to perform his Surveyorship, which were hung up in Tables in the
Exchecquer, but are now imbezelled or lost; for Officers love not lasting
Monuments of their Corruptions: And the old Fine Rolls show, that contempts in
Chancery were duly estreated, which are now wholly neglected: Also it
appears by good matter upon Record, that all Your Royal Progenitors have
constituted Special Commissioners to inquire into Officers Misdemeanors: And
that the same were ever reformed upon their Certificate without more ado, yet
to hinder a Reformation.

1. Aligation disproved.
The said Brunskells opponents, stopped a Grant to the said Brunskell, after it
had past the Privy - Seal, with no small trouble and charge to him, upon a
suggestion that it was Empson and Dudleyes Case, who had power to Impose,
Imprison, Levy, Compound, and Discharge. Whereas the said Brunskell never had
or desired any power, but to make Officers Record all Fines and Amerciaments
duly; or charge them, when they withdraw or conceal any.

2. They represented a Grant of the Office of Surveyor, illegal for the said
Brunskell; and denied him a Commission of Inspection, for fear of setting
malicious informations on foot. Whereas (with running the risk of Barratry) he
may turn Informer at any time without a Commission.

3. To hinder Persons of Quality to be Surveyors; The said Brunskells Opponents
represented this Revenue, as an inconsiderable project. Whereas their own
Oaths, Statutes, and Presidents beforementioned, clearly evidence; That Fines
and Penalties were ordained for the Punishment of bad, and Relief of good men;
because ill men will rather obey formidine poenoe, than vertutis amore: Ergo,
No projects.

4. The Right Honorable Earls of Peterburough and Yarmouth, Henry Lord O
Bryen, Sir Francis Compton, Mr. Greenvil, Mr. Fanshaw, and the said Brunskell,
upon the Officers certifying your Majesty's High Treasurer Danby, That the
Green-wax-Fines yielded but 500 l. Comunibus Annis, proposed to Farm the Moiety
thereof, at 250 l. per Annum; excepting thereout all forfeitures of Popish
Recusants and Conventiclers; yet the said Brunskells Opponents hindered them to
be Surveyors or Farmers upon a suggestion; That such Grants were Illegal,
imprudent and impracticable until it appeared; That a Grant of the Office of
Surveyors was then in being to one Mr. Aram, and all the Greenwax-Fines were
then, and are now in Farm throughout the Kingdom of Ireland, and in England,
within the Duchy and Countyes-Palatine of Durham, Lancaster and Cheshire, and
to diverse Cities, Corporations, and Lords of Liberties; where diverse of the
Grantees are empowered, to Impose, Imprison, Levy, compound and discharge; And
your Majesty was graciously pleased, upon the Judges and Lawyers agreeing them
to be Legal, to make this Remark thereon: If Grants with those Powers were
good, allowed and practiced: The Grants without them could not be illegal; and
the Judges and Lawyers agreeing, the Surveyor to be a necessary Officer: Your
Majesty was graciously pleased, to make this further Remark thereon: That it
was more prudent to grant a Moiety of the improvement, than a certain Sallary;
because it obliged the Grantees to promote your Majesty's Profits with their
own: Whereupon the several Letters Patent passed Your Majesty's Great Seal;
Yet the Judges hindered the Patentees to Officiate, by not Subjecting Officers
to a prudent control for your Majesty's Service; until the Grants were revoked
by an Order of Council: It is endless to repeat every passage, and what trouble
and charge the said Brunskell and his Partners were put to with Feeing and
instructing five or six Lawyers at a time, to disprove their Opponents
fictitious Alligations: And how the said Brunskell being denied to be Surveyor,
was no sooner gone into the Country for a little repast, but his Enemies
concluding him to be wearied out, adjudged the Office of Surveyor Legal, and
fit for their own Creatures; useing great endeavors to pass two Patents
thereof, until your Majesty being graciously pleased to stop them, declared the
Grant as legal for the said Earl of Yarmouth and Brunskell as any other; and
how the said Brunskells Opponents delayed him for an Account from Ireland, and
after the Account came, until the said Earl of Yarmouth Petitioned for a
hearing before your Majesty in Council; and upon Sanders arguing and
maintaining the Legality of the Grant desired, Your Majesty was graciously
pleased to constitute the said Brunskell Surveyor, who obtaining your Majesty's
Grant by an Order of Council about April 1681. acquainted the Lords
Commissioners of your Majesty's Treasury, That it required many Deputies to
attend the Great Courts at Westminister Assizes and Sessions, and to go from
Office to Office, tracing Fines and Amerciaments, duly to Account; who will not
act without an assurance from your Majesty or Treasures, how they may be paid:
The said Brunskel therefore petitioned the Lords Commissioners for Orders, or
Rules, to enable him to Officiate as proposed; Or an Allowance for Deputies:
And the said Earl of Yarmouth thinking the Judges or Lords Commissioners to
blame, in not settling Orders, or an Allowance for Deputies; and taking such
Lawyers as say and gainsay to be ill Advocates, and worse Guides to the
Ignorant, Petitioned for a hearing before your Majesty in Council: But the late
Lord Chief Justice Pemberton, who declared, That your Majesty had no such
Revenue ( Et nescit vox missa reverti; and the other Judges, who did not
contradict it, unwilling to hear all the matter of fact, publicly debated, and
proved Quia qui que vult dicit que non vult audiet) represented the said
Brunskels Case to be impertinently long; And for that reason it was not read:
And the said Lord Chief Justice Pemberton, not only moved your Majesty to take
his and the others Judges opinions thereon, which was not rejected, but quibled
upon the said Brunskels ignorance, in jumbling Actions - Popular, and
informations together: whereas Agreived Subjects may sue by Indictment, Bill,
Plaint, or Information: Ergo, An Information is a Popular Action: And now its
Alleged, That it was proved before your Majesty in Council, That the said
Brunskel did not Fee Lawyers and Officers as pretended; whereas the said
Brunskel never heard it mentioned: If he had, he could certainly have produced
the Account to show, how he had equally expended with the Earl of Yarmouth, and
more than any of his Partners, in procuring and passing your Majesty's Grants:
And if it had been usual, he would have had Acquittances for the Fees and
Gratifications which he gave them: However, the Countess of Yarmouth, who best
knows what Fees were given, and whom, can if need be, give your Majesty a
full Account thereof; The ill success of the Farmers of the Law Duty, after
conviction of Attorneys, Officers, and Soliciters, upon chargeable Trials at
Law; and the great Oppositions which the said Brunskel has met with, shows
what encouragement is given to Prosecute and Convict Officers of Frauds and
Concealments for your Majesty's Service: Ergo, The first Reports of your
Majesty's Counsel, Judges, and Officers, Confessions, Statutes, Oaths and
Presidents in the Affirmative, the premises considered, may well out-ballance
all their latter Reports, and Allegations: And influence your Majesty to
believe, That Great Abuses are Practiced, and fit to be Remedied.

As to the Praefines upon Pleas of Land.
The said Brunskell and Mr. Charles Myddelton, obtained your Majesty's gracious
promise to be Commissioners in the Alienation Office, before Mr. Bertne, Sir E.
Turner, or Mr. Courthope addressed themselves to your Majesty; and being
jointly Commissionated or Deputed by the Lords Commissioners of your Majesty's
Treasury with the said Bertue, Sir E. Turner, and Courthope, in order to
improve this branch of your Majesty's Casual Revenue; acquainted their
Lordships, That your Majesty's Duty is Certain ( viz.) 10 l. for every 100 l.
per Annum, according to the improved Annual values, as appears by Rastalls New
Natura Brevium under the Title Deceit, and by Rents and Annuities; and all
Estates have certain values, Qui id certum vocari quod certe reddi potest This
Duty falls under the said Brunskells care, as Surveyor of the Green-wax-Fines
more particularly, as a Commissioner constituted in the Alienation-Office, by
your Majesty's most Gracicious and Special Command.


And Fines and Recoveries being the fund of this Duty, Dock old sleeping
Intails; Bar Feemes Covert, Secure Purchasers and Morgages after five years non
Clame, which no other Conveyance can do. The present Commissioners by
under-rating Estates abate 1200 l. in every 1500 l. of the P^ee and Post Fines
30000 l. per annum.
real Duty, which shows your Majesty's profits in a moderate way of rating,
may be improved to 30000 l. per Annum, and more, if Ejectment to try Titles,
were rated to pay as Formedons used to do.

The Rates or Methods which the present Commissioners observe, appear to be
Arbitrary, and very inconvenient; for they never abate of the full Duty in
Rents and Annuities, or certify the Values otherwise than they are; because
they want a Commission or Authority to abate where the Values are known; yet
they rate other Estates five times lower than they appear to be by the Parties
own Confession: and to Cloak it, certify upon the back of every Writ, that the
Annual Values are affirmed to be as they rate them; whereas Deceit being Malum
in se is dishonorable, seeing veritas non Angulos querit; but more especially
in this Case, because Your subjects may infer from thence, that it is not your
Majesty's pleasure to abate of the full Duty in any Case; and Your subjects in
Wales, Durham, Lancaster, and Cheshire, complain of paying more to Farmers,
than their fellow Subjects pay to your Majesty; and Younger Children, and Poor
People in all other parts of your Kingdom, Complain, That even right is not
done to them (as the Statute 20 Edw. 3. directs) because their Rent, Charges,
Anuities, and whole Estates, pay after the rate of 25 l. per Cent. and great
Estates pay but 5 l. per Cent. at most, and rating great Estates higher or
lower upon different occasions: As for instance, Setlements lower than
Purchases, and Mortgages lower than Setlements, makes your Subjects think the
Duty Arbitrary, who are apt to blame their Attorneys, if their Fines be not
low; because all Your Subjects naturally love to be freed from Duties.
Therefore Attorneys wrangle with your Majesty's Commissioners for an Abatement
to please their Clyents; which being obtained, is rather attributed to the
Commissioners kindness, than you Majesty's Bounty: So your Majesty neither gets
your Duty? nor grateful acknowledgments inlieu thereof: Yet the Commissioners
to excuse themselves, allege their Case to be like the Officers of the
First Fruits, who have established values, and no power to Administer Oaths to
discover any other. Therefore make all Spiritual Persons pay equally and
proportionably thereto. But the Commissioners in the Alienation Office have a
Master in Chancery assigned, who sits in the Office on purpose to Administer
Oaths, to discover the improved Values of Estates, That your Majesty may not be
deceived therein: And it is impossible to take measures by the rates of former
Commissioners; because Estates between one time and another, are clogged with
or disburthened of Encumbrances, and daily improve or impair. It appears by
the old Books, That Lamberd and Fortescue, who were the first Commissioners
upon the erection of this Office, ever Administered an Oath to discover the real
Values of Estates until they found by experience, that Attorneys, and
Solicitors, or their ill principled Clyents got Knights of the Post to
under-swear them; then they omitted the Oath to rate disseretionarily higher
for their Masters service, as they might Lawfully do, because their Master the
Earl of Leicester was absolute Farmer, answerable for nothing but the Rent,
while they rated Estates within their real Annual Values; but the present
Commissioners Case is far different, because the surplusage of the profits (as
well as the Rent) is to be accounted for, and answered to your Majesty; for
your Majesty's Grant to the Lords Commissioners of Your Treasury, is only a
trust for continuing the Office, to free Your subjects from the chargeable
Forms of the Courts: Upon these considerations, Sir Robert Sawyer, and Mr.
Ward, gave these following Opinions.

Sir Robert Sawyers opinion.
Where the certainty appears what your Majesty's Fine is; The Commissioners
cannot abate thereof; They having no such Power by their Commission.

And in case the Method observed by former Commissioners, be found greatly to
your Majesty's prejudice; others more beneficial for your Majesty, may by Law
be prescribed.

I suppose Fines and Recoveries are seldom Levied, but where the necessity of
the Case requires them: Neither do I know how they can be avoided or supplied
by any other sort of conveyance to secure Purchasers, Morgages, etc.

R. Sawyer.

Mr. Wards opinion.
If your Majesty's Duty be certain in it self, I cannot see how the
Commissioners without an Athority, mediately or immediately from your Majesty,
can lessen or abate it.

Every person entrusted in your Majesty's Revenue, is answerable to your*
Majesty for the execution of his Employment; And by Suite in the Attorney
Generals name, being convicted of any Fraud or wilful Breach of his Trust, to
your Majesty's damage, is liable by Law, to make the same good.

E. Ward.

The said Myddelton and Brunskel, not only presented the Lords Commissioners of
your Majesty's Treasury with these Opinions; but further acquainted their
Lordships, That it was impossible to Improve or Manage this Branch of your
Majesty's Revenue well, unless the said Bertue, Sir E. Turner, and Courthope
were under an obligation, restriction or limitation in point of Interest, to be
as industrious as the said Middelton and Brunskel to serve your Majesty.

1. Because they were constituted Commissioners upon a Suggestion, That it was
not to be Improved or Better managed than they had done it: Ergo, An
Improvement or better Management Convicteth them of ignorance, or wilful Breach
of their Oaths and Duties.

2. The present Commission(...) Limitteth three to be a Quorum: Ergo* They may
Rate anddo as they please; But the said Middleton and Brunskell can do nothing
without them.

3. The Custom for any Commissioner alone to rate Writs in or out of the
Office, cannot be avoided; because Persons passing Fines and Recoveries, upon
emergent occasions cannot wait Office-hours, nor until a Quorum can meet, and
while Mortgages are rated lower than Setlements, and Settlements lower than
Purchases, The said Bertue, Sir E. Turner, and Courthorpe, to ingratiate
themselves with great Men, and their Adherents, may under-rate Estates to your
Majesty's prejudice, and hinder an Improvement: and Attorneys to please their
Clyents, will ever go to the Commissioners interested, to rate low; and if
Writs by them rated should be stopped until a further Enquiry be made, it will
give a general disturbance to business, and may be more injurous to Your
Subjects, Levying Fines, and suffering Recoveries upon emergent occasions, then
waiting until a Quorum can meet: Ergo, It Is necessary to reduce the
Commissioners to a certainty, as for instance: Suppose Estates appear to be 100
l. per Annum, they may be limited to rate every 100 l. per Annum, as 30. 40. or
50 l. and less, where Fines and Recoveries be Levied, and suffered of the same
Estates between the same parties within a year or two: And in this manner your
Majesty, by declaring Your pleasure to abate more or less, may make the Duty
more easy and grateful, than the said Bertue, Sir E. Turner, and Courthopes
Methods now render it to your Subjects: And by this means your Majesty may be
freed from the Sallary of a Master in Chancery extraordinary: And when
Attorneys or their Clyants know before hand, what they have to pay, they will
not wrangle with your Commissiners for an abatement, but readily pay as they do
in Rents and Annuities: And if they deceive your Majesty, by misinforming or
concealing the true values from Your Commissioners, It may be discovered upon a
Melius Inquirend': And two or three Exemplarily punished for fraud or deceit,
will set things right: The said Myddelton and Brunkskell frequently petitioned
the Lords Commissioners, to Cancel their present Deputation or Commission, and
by an Order or Instrument in Writing, to give them such Methods as their
Lordships thought fit, or confirm such as the said Myddelton and Brunskell had
proposed for your Majesty's Service, or join them with more equal yoakfellows:
But their Lordships giving no answer thereto, the said Middelton and Brunskell
Petitioned and Proposed to abate 6 l. 10 s. in every 10 l. of your Majesty's
real Duty of Prefine, and to be limited, not to exceed that rate, and to
improve that Branch of your Majesty's Revenue thereby 1000 l. per Annum de
claro to your Majesty, and pay the said Bertue, Sir E. Turner, and Courthope
their Salaries to sit still, or accept their own, and acquiess: Also acquainted
their Lordships, That Fines and Recoveries were seldom or never Levied, or
suffered, before the necessity of the Case required them: Because the Judges,
Attorney General, Officers and Attorneys Fees amount to 6 or 7 l. upon every
Recovery with single Voucher: To 10 or 11 l. upon Double Vouchers: And 15 or 16
l. upon Treble Vouchers: And upon every Fine Levied to 4 or 5 l. whereof they
never abate, though the Estate exceed not 40 l. per Annum, where your Majesty
in pity thereto takes nothing. And your Subjects are at great expenses,
besides these Fees in Traveling to London Assizes, and other places, to
acknowledge them before the Judges, or Special Commissioners: And if Fines and
Recoveries happen to be levied before the necessity of the Case require,
Estates may thereby be put into a posture to be Morgaged, Settled, or Sold: and
Vendees, Mortgagees, or Persons bestowing their Daughters in Marriage, may be
satisfied without a further Fine or Recovery thereof, and then your Majesty is
deceived.

The Farmers in Wales, Durham, Lancaster, and Cheshire (where this Duty has
been Farmed ever since it had its rise and beginning, following the steps of
their predecessors) rate as high for themselves, as the said Middelton and
Brunskel have proposed for your Majesty; and the Farmers must pay their Rent
out of their own Pockets, if they by ill management dwindle the Duty to
nothing, whose interest and experience, the Premises considered, may reasonably
out-ballance the said Bertue, Sir E. Turner, and Courthopes Allegations, who
have certain Sallaries, whether your Majesty's profits be little or much: And
although the Lords Commissioners have not altered the said Middelton, and
Brunskels Commission, nor joined them with better Yoke-fellows; nor confirmed
the Rates or Methods proposed, nor prescribed better; nor enjoined the said
Bertue, Sir E. Turner, or Courthope, in point of interest to improve this
Revenue; Yet have stopped the said Middelton and Brunskels bare Sallaries, to
defray the Lady Plymouth's Pention; who never received any thing for Diet, and
Board-Wages. And the said Bertue, Sir E. Turner, and Courthope, who ever
received Sallaries, besides 100 l. apiece for Diet and Board-Wages, are now
permitted to receive theirs. It Is endless to repeat how Officers misrepresented
the said Brunskel to hinder him to be a Commissioner until the late Master of
the Rolls, Marquess of Winchester, and Mr. Coats, now secondary of the Common
Pleas, with whom the said Brunskel was Educated in the Practice of the Law, not
only gave an experimental Character of him for Integrity and Ability; but were
willing (if need be) to be Security for his faithful performance: And how
Officers, who It is storyed, That Bishop Lattimer, upon King Hen. the 8th.
declaring himself troubled to see his Coffers empty; Replied, That if his
Majesty did but put himself into a good Office, he might soon fill them.
sit Rich and Warm, detry this Duty, as displeasing to some; but never acquaint
your Majesty how grateful it will be for your Majesty to take, and give it to
Your Loyal indigent Soldiers and Servants; or indear Your subjects, (of whom
your Majesty may demand it,) with a General Gift, Grant, or Pardon of all; or
what part thereof your Majesty in Your Royal Wisdom thinks Fit.

The said Brunskel, therefore humbly, and in all Duty, appealeth to your
Majesty, the Premises considered, Whether he, or the said Bertue, Sir E.
Turner, and Courthope, deserve Sallaries and Employments.

As to Heriots and Reliefes.
Sir William Jones, Sir Robert Sawyer, and Sir John Sympson, gave their
Opinions; That Heriots and Releifes are fully saved in the Crown, by the
Statute 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. But now it is alleged, That Tenures as part and
parcel of Manors, pass by your Majesty's Grant of a Customary Manor cum
pertinen'; whereas Heriots and Releifes being Services incident to Tenures, and
Tenures in Gross to the Persons, and disappendant to Land, or Manors, cannot
pass by grant of the Manors or Land cum pertinen': As for instance, There is
no Land in England, in the hands of any Subject, but what is holden of some Lord
or other, by some kind of Service, Cook upon Litleton, Fol. 65. a. And the
Services make Tenures Fol. 92. b. And every Freehold Tenant (except in Frank
Almoigne) is bound to do Fealty to his Lord for the Tenement holden of him,
Cook upon Litleton, Sect. 91. If Lords knew the advantages of Homage and
Fealty, they would not neglect them, Cook upon Litleton, Sect. 94. Also the
Writ de Cessavit says precipe a quod just, etc. reddit B. Tentum, suum quod
de eo (which is de Domino non de Manerio) tenuit per tale Servicium, Et quod
perfat' reverti debet, Eo quod predict' a infaciendo Servic' per biennium
cessavit, etc. Ergo, The Tenures being in Gross to the Person, and disappendant
to the Manor, cannot pass with the Grant of the Manor cum pertinen' in your
Majesty's Case; Because the Services which make the Tenures oblige Your Tenants
upon pain of forfeiting their Estates by Force of the Statute 13 Ed. 1. to be
ever in readiness to defend your Majesty and Kingdom in time of War, and
encourage Tillage in times of Peace, for the preservation thereof, and relief
of the poor: And an Army of such Freehold Tenants may in reason be thought
better Soldiers than Hirelings; saying, Omnia mea mecum porto, who will fight
for (or revolt from) your Majesty, as their Interest leads: It is agreed, That
Tenures and Services are Established by Custom, and Common Law, pro bono
publico: That the Common Law shall be preferred before Acts of Parliament
clashing with it; That if a private Lord Alien a Customary Manor consisting of
Freehold Tenants, the very Tenures Services and Royalties which he has, shall
pass to the Alienee by general words; because it is equal to your Majesty and
Subjects, whether the Alienor, or Alienee have them; that the Act and Deed of a
private person, shall be construed most strongly against him: But when
Customary Manors come into the Crown, by Attainder, Escheat, or otherwise: The
Tenures are thereby changed from the Person of the Lord, to the Person of your
Majesty; so become special Royalties: And Royalties shall not pass out of the
Crown, by the Grant of the Manors, cum pertinen' or general words, Hob. Rep.
233, 234. Plow. Com. 333. b. 334. a. Dyer Fol. 268. Davys Rep. Fol. 56. a. If a
private Lord Alien Land, it shall be holden of the Alienee. If your Majesty
Alien, it shall be holden of Your Self in Capite, Rolls Abridgments, Fol. 517.
Private Lords may, and do frequently Manumit their Tenants: But if your Majesty
Release a Tenant in Capite, to hold by a penny, and not in Capite; That Release
is void; because the Tenures are incident to Your Person and Crown, Rolls
Abridgments, Fol. 513. For that reason the Homage and Fealty of your Majesty's
Tenants do differ from private Lords: For your Majesty's is called Homagium
Ligeum, which bind them by Oath to be Your subjects, of life and member, Cook
upon Litleton Fol. 68. And every thing is expounded most largly and
beneficially for your Majesty: Because the Profits of the Crown are termed,
Ornamenta pacis et firmamenta Belli. And of so High Estimation, that every body
is bound to promote them, Cooks Reports, the Earl of Devonshires Case:
Therefore the Learned Judge Hutton declared, Tenures and Services to be
inseparably annexed and united to the Imperial Crown: And the Learned Lord
Chief Justice Hailes, and others, who had the penning of the Statute, Anno 12
of your Majesty's Reign, saved Rents, Heriots, and Suits of Court incident to
Tenures in Capitee, to be as they were before the Tenures were, thereby turned
or altered into common Soccage: Also creates a Relief as in Soccage Tenure,
and saved the Fealty incident thereto: And the 4th. proviso of the same Statute
discharges Tenants holding by Soccage in Capite of no service, but Ward Value,
and forfeiture of Marriage Livery primer seisin ouster le Main pur fair' Fitz
Chivalier, and purfile Marrier: Ergo, Heriots and Reliefs ought to be in charge
with the Auditors, where your Majesty has not granted them away in Terminis,
as separate and disappendant to your Manors.

As to Offices.
The Law consists but of two parts, viz. Judicial and Executive: And most
Offenses being Baylable, it is at the Criminals Election whether they will stand
Trial, or forfeit their Recognizance: Ergo, If Officers for Bribes or Rewards
withdraw Recognizances, They frustrate the Judicial part. Officers are also
entrusted to see proceedings right and duly Drawn, and Recorded; but if they
by ignorance, corruption, or negligence, draw long and vexatious Bills,
Answers, Orders or Decrees; or Imbezal, or deface Depositions in Equity: Or
draw ill Declarations, or Pleas, or Misenter Special Verdicts or Judgments at
Common Law: It gives great disturbance to Suitors to have the Errors
rectified; and the Non-amendment thereof, in due time gives litigious
Adversaries opportunity upon Writs of Errors, to be very vexatious, and
frequently overthrows all the proceedings thereon: It was found by
experience, when the Judges had diverse Fees, as well as their Officers, which
increased or decreased as Suits were delayed, and proceedings multiplied, and
sold Offices at dear Rates, that they placed men therein for Lucre, without
Merit, and acted or countenanced such things as were contrary to the Laws and
Statutes in force: For which, some Judges were put to Death, diverse Fined and
Suspended; and others were Banished, as appears by Ancient Record and
History: Also, the Attorney and Solicitor General did not then prosecute and
convict the Officers guilty of misdemeanors; because their own practice and
profit, as private Counselors, depended upon the Favor of the Judges, and
indearement of Officers; therefore the Sallaries of the Judges, and Kings
Counsel were enlarged and made certain; For it is Enacted by the Statutes 18 and
20 Edw. 3. That the Judges shall not take Gifts, Fees, Robes or Rewards of
any, but your Majesty; and the Oath of a Judge thereby established, enjoyneth
the observance thereof, because their Sallaries were then made certain, which
have been since further enlarged. It Is also further provided by the Statute 12
Richard 2. That the Judges and great Ministers shall not sell Offices: Also by
the Statute 3 Edw. 1. Cap. 26, 27, and 30. That Officers shall not commit
Extortion, that the Subjects (Cap. 28.) shall not be disturbed in their just
Rights: That Deceit (Cap. 29.) shall not be be practiced: And the proviso, or
saving in the Statute 5 and 6 Edw. 6. ( viz.) That the Judges may do as
formerly: Does not Empower the Judges to Sell, because the aforesaid Statute 12
Rich. 2. prohibiting them, is not thereby repealed: And the present Judges
cannot apply Mittons Case to themselves; for the Office of the County Clark is
adjudged to be in the disposal of the High Sheriff; because the High-Sheriffs
Office is altogether Executive; and the County Clarks being their menial
Servants, or Deputies, cannot Sue for Fees, nor Act any thing, but in the
High-Seriffs Name: So that the High Sheriff being punishable for their Deputies
misfeizance, are forced to take security to indempnifie themselves: But the
Office of a Judge is altogether Ministerial; and the Law does not punish
Judges, if Officers fail in the Execution of their Office; unless they make
themselves parties, privy, and consenting: wherefore they never take security
of Officers to indempnifie themselves; for Officers stand or fall by their own
good or bad behavior; because the Law reposing a Trust in the Judges to punish
Officers Misdemeanors, took away the Officers dependence on them, that the
Judges might not flagg therein: Therefore all Sages of the Law, writing of the
Office of a Judge, agree the observance of the aforesaid Statutes, to be a
material part of the Office and Duty of a Judge; because these Statutes, and
diverse other good Laws and Statutes, are grounded upon the Statute 9 Hen. 3.
cap. 29. Which says, Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, nulli differemus
Justiciam: And the Lord Chief Justice Cook, declares experimentally, (and the
reason is much stronger, since offenses were so generally Bailable) That
Justice cannot be duly administered, if the Statute 12 Rich. 2. Prohibiting the
Judges to sell Offices, be not observed; Because, as the Execution, which is
the life of the Law, depends upon the honesty of Officers, as aforesaid. Its
violenta presumptio, that Knaves, whose Pockets are better lined then Honest
Men's, and Consciences not so strait laced, will ever give most for them; who
seldom stick at any thing, to reimburss and enrich themselves: Yet the Ld.
Keeper and Judges take Fees of Suitors upon diverse proceedings, and not only
Sell Offices at seven or eight Years Value, but wink at their Officers selling
thereof, and take great Sums of Money upon their surrenders, and admissions;
and New-Years-Gifts; and Record Officers admitted Gratis. Whereas Records were
ever esteemed so Sacred, That the Law allows no Plea, or Averment against
them: And the Attorney and Solicitor General seldom or never porsecute populer
Actions, Informations or Pleas of the Crown, unless Your agrieved Subjects Fee
them to do it: Whereas its a Maxim, That your Majesty can do no Wrong; and
Maxims are fundamental points in Law: It does not appear by any matter of
Record, That your Majesty or Royal Ancestors ever dispensed with any Statutes
in force, whereon depended the due Administration of Justice; But it appears,
That Pardons have been frequently Granted upon breach thereof after the Fact
committed, by your Majesty and Royal Progenitors special Grace and Favor.

The Statute 1 Hen. 4. cap. 6. provideth, That such Offices as be not expressly
named in Letters Patent, shall not pass out of the Crown: The E. of Devonshire
had omnia and Singula vaod' Feod' and Regard' eidem Officio Spectan' seu ab
antiquo usitat' vel gavis; and a Privy Seal particularly impowring him to
dispose of old rusty Iron as his Predecessors had ever don, who by a long usage
of 80 years had disposed thereof without interruption: Yet the Judges 4. Jacobi
resolved his usage and prescription void upon a presumption, That it began at
first upon usurpation, because it did not appear, that such things were ever
Annexed as Fees to that Office; Ergo, The usage of Selling inferior Offices
(being not Annexed to the Judges places as Fees to be Sold) cannot be good: For
their own Records declare Officers Secundum Consuetudinem Curiae to be admitted
ex merito gratis: And persons in their own Right cannot Legally Transfer a
greater Estate than they have; Ergo, The Judges durante been placito cannot
convey Inferior Offices to persons durante been se gesserint, unless they
acknowledge themselves to be in nature of Stewards of Coppy-hold Courts, and
then they own the right transferred, and Duties paid upon Admission, to be your
Majesty's as Chief Lord. Yet the Lord Chief Justice North, hindered diverse
persons, that for good Service, had obtained your Majesty's Gracious promise of
the Office of Clark of the Treasury in the Common Pleas to pass their Patents,
suggesting it to be a perquisit incident to his Office: Whereas, particular
Grantees had executed it by sufficient Deputies without intermission above 90
years, and his Lordship then paid 500 l. per annum, as his late Predecessors
had done, to John Lord Berkley the last Patentee, which was an acknowledgment
of your Majesty's Right: And whereas the said Statute 5 and 6 Ed. 6. saves a
Power to all Persons seized in Fee, to Sell Offices: your Majesty being so
seized, jure Coronae, may do it: For as your Majesty constituteth the Spiritual
and Temporal Judges; It argues, that your Majesty may appoint the Inferior
Officers; because, omne majus trahit ad se minus, Its well known, when your
Majesty gives; Your great Ministers Sell Offices; otherwise it costs Your
subjects in Fees and Gratifications, more than the Purchase, as hereafter
proposed will amount to: Its therefore humbly and in all duty proposed:

1. Proposal.
That as the present Officers have paid 7. or 8. years value for their Offices,
they may continue therein; and when Void, they may hereafter, (...)plied with
experienced Clarks, who may Termely pay to your Majesty, in nature of First
Fruits, one Moiety, or quarter part of the profits as they arise, for such
Term of years as your Majesty shall think fit: And as Commissioners are
appointed to dispose of Ecclesiastical Livings, so Commissioners may be
appointed to take care of your Majesty's profits arising thereby, who may be
enjoined under great penalties to bestow Offices accordingly.

2. That the Proposals extend not to any Office, where the Sallaries are paid
by your Majesty, but such only where the perquisites are paid by Suitors, as
incident or appendant thereto by right.

3. That an exact Table of Fees adjusted by the ablest Officers, and Records,
due and belonging to every Office, may be hung up in the respective Offices;
and while Officers behave themselves well, (tho deputed but during pleasure)
they may in no wise be Dis(...)

Reasons or Arguments humbly offered to maintain these Proposals in all Points
of Law, Equity, Prudence, and Practice.
1. The Officers by Buying, have forfeited both Money and Offices, and the
Judges their Right, by Selling or Transferring a greater Estate therein than
they have; the very Records say, That Officers Secundum consuitudinem Curioe,
are admitted gratis; And Records were ever accounted sacred; Ergo, The custom
of Selling or Vitiating sacred Records, (with a Gratis Admittantur) falls
under this Maxim, malus usus abolendus; and it will not only indear the
Officers to be pardoned and continued in, upon their good behavior; but when
their dependence is wholly upon your Majesty, they will have a greater regard
to your Majesty's Business and Profits*

2. This Method (requiring no ready money) will be satisfactory to all Loyal
Subjects, because the Sons of such as were impoverished by the late intestine
Rebellion, will be enabled to obtain Employments, being now incapaciated to
buy, or gratify such as procure them Grants thereof: Furthermore, it will
prevent extortion; for when Officers deposite great sums of money upon
Purchase, or Admission to their Offices, it inclines them to indirect Practices
to re-imburse themselves.

3. Your Majesty's Fines and Amerciaments depend chiefly upon the Executive
part of the Law, and the honesty of the Officers entrusted therein was at a low
Ebb, if your Majesty's Attorney Generals Reports and Experience be not
mistaken; Ergo, It Is prudent to oblige them in point of Interest, to be
careful thereof, because Officers will ever be true to their interest, and
yield perfect obedience to your Majesty, or such as your Majesty thinks fit to
entrust with the placeing or displaceing of them.

4. The Author which writ the Antidotum Britanicum Fol. 202. says, It Is unjust
to deny a Prince that Power, which every Subject has to place and displace, or
retrench his Servants: That nothing contibutes more to the Grandeur and Glory
of a King and Kingdom, than faithful Counselors; who advise the Prince, what
he Ought to do; rather than what he May do: And (as an expedient to keep the
Officers within the Sphere of Integrity and Justice) proposes the Example of
Henry the Great of France; who composed a certain number of Judges (in nature
of Commissioners as proposed) diligently to superintend the Officers, and
receive Information of the People; Whether they have been justly dealt with,
and where not; and accordingly to Reward or Punish.

5. The Great Chamberlain lately challenging a right to dispose of an Inferior
Office as the Judges do; His Lordships usage, upon the hearing and Debate
thereof, before your Majesty in Council, was adjudged void; and Sir William
Jones Attorney, and Mr. Finch Solicitor General, and Mr. Keck of Counsel for
the Patentee, argued in behalf of your Majesty: That your Majesty might
determine the Lord Chancellors or Keepers long usage of disposing of Benefices
of small value: And all usages of that kind, although they were empowered to do
as their Predecessors had ever done, who without interruption, had disposed
thereof; because their usage began not of Right, but barely by permission of
Your Royal Ancestors, to free themselves from the trouble of such small
concerns: And the late Lord Chancellor agreed thereto; and your Majesty was
graciously pleased to make this Remark thereon: That Offices which at first
were not worth any thing, are now become very considerable: And instanced the
Cofferers-Office for one, and declared; That your Majesty altered the usage of
Your Houshould-Servants, stepping into Employments Successively; Because Your
Majesty's happy Restoration was formerly adjudged, to be in nature of a
Conquest; and your Majesty was thereby empowered to do it; And the Case falls
under the same Circumstances: For many Offices, which at first were not worth
any thing, are now become more considerable than the Judges Sallaries. As for
instance, The three Prothonotaries-Offices in the Common Pleas, and the Clarks
of Assizes for Yorkshire. The late Lord Chief Justice Pemberton (as it is
reported) agreed to admit one Mr. Adderley, into one of the
Prothonotaries-Offices for 6000 Guinies; and there be many other considerable
Offices, which may be executed by Deputies, as well as the Custos Brevium,
Chyrographers, or Sir Robert Henleys Office, which plainly shows, when ever
Your Majesty thinks fit to dispose thereof; they will be acceptable rewards to
persons for their good Services; and free Your Revenues from Pentions, to the
great satisfaction of Your Loyal Subjects.

6. That private Persons, who hold Courts of Record in Fee, by a derivative
Power from your Majesty, now Sell Inferior Offices by force of a Proviso, in
the Statute 5 and 6 Edw. 6. and permit not their Stewards or Judges to meddle
with the disposition thereof, who have as great Power within their
Jurisdiction, as the Judges have in the Superior Courts; Amulto fortiori, your
Majesty being Primitive, and seized in Fee, may do it.

A Particular of Offices and Perquisites in Chancery.
Per Annum. ll. Affidavit-Office 300 Bankrupt-Office 100 Clark of the Patents
300 Six Clarks 8000 Usher 300 Clarks of the Crown 500 Clark of the Presentation
200 Subpoena-Office 400 Cursitors 5000 Hanaper-Office 1000 Registers 2000 The
profits of the Seals 6000 Inrolment-Office 306 Softning the Wax 80 Seal-Office
40 Sergeant at Arms 100 The Master in Chancery extraordinary in the
Alienation-Office 80 Entering Clark 120 Clark of Indorsements 80 Receiver 140
Clark of the Statutes 80 Clark of the Appeals 40 Clark of the Leases 100
Petibag 350 Clark upon charitable uses 50 Messenger or Pursuivant 100
Enrollment Clarks of the Kings deeds 40 Two Examiners Offices 2000 Six Clarks
under them 200 Six Clarks in the Rolls Chapel 300 Perquisits for Orders upon
Petit. 300 Moiety of the Fines upon Originals 600 Entering Causes for hearings
800 Twelve Masters in Chancery. 2000 Kings Bench per Annum.
Per Annum. ll. Fees out of Latitats 200 Fees out of Records of Nisi-prius 500
Boxes in Court 300 Prothonotaries Secondary 1500 Coronator and Attorney 600
Clark of the Treasury 500 Proclamator 60 Fines upon Latitats 100 Clark of the
Papers 100 Clark to file Declarations 50 Seal-keeper of the Bills of Middlesex
150 Clark of the Rules 400 Philazers one for each County 200 Clark of the
Errors 100 Crier in the Court 100 Porter bringing Records to be used in Court
10 All the Offices of Clark of Assizes 8000 Also of the Clarks of the Peace
8000 Perquisits for every Record of Nisiprius entered upon Trials, extending to
all Courts, Assizes and Sessions 6000 Fees out of Judgments and Bails, besides
Sir Robert Henleys 700 Common Pleas per Annum.
Per Annum. ll. Clark of the Treasury 500 Custos Brevium 800 Chyrographer 500
Clark of Recognizances before both Chief-Justices 10 Clark of the Supersedeas
40 Clark of the Errors 100 Three Prothonotaries 3000 13 Philazers one with
another 5000 Clark of the Warrants and Estreats of the Courts 300 Exigenters
800 Vtlary-Office 300 King's Silver Clark 200 Clark of Essoyns 80 Jurata-Office
120 Proclamators keepers of the Courts 40 The acknowledgment of Fines 200 Fees
out of Records made up for Trial, and Copies of Records 500 Box-Money 200 Fees
out of Judgments, Bails, besides Protho-noraries 450 Exchequer per Annum.
Per Annum. ll. Doorkeeper of the Office of Receipt 100 All the Auditors 800
Remembr. of the first fruits Office 500 The Tellers Office 1500 Messengers in
Ordinary 100 Bag-bearer 20 Tally-Clarks 200 Remembrancers Offices 2000
Comptroller, Secondary, and several Clarks of the Pipe. 500 Keeper of the
Records 40 The Undertreasurer 500 Marshal 80 Auditor of the Press 200 Clark of
the Errors 10 Faculty-Clarks 20 Four Messengers 160 Clarks of the Office of
Pleas, in whose Office are four Attorneys 300 Clark of the Estreats 200
Foreign Apposer 200 The Chamberlains of the Court, the Crier, and several
other Cryers 200 Admiralty per Annum.
Per Annum. ll. Register 300 Assistance to the chief Officer 100 Ecclesiastical
Courts and Profits and Offices, (first fruits excepted) 12000 The Offices in
all other inferior Courts, and the respective Counties, Ports and
Custom-House, may in reason be valued at 12000

Offices are valued (taking one with another) as Sold, and amount to 109714 l.
per An.

These profits will be in nature of Coppy-hold Estates, where Fines are paid
upon Death, Surrender, and Admission, and the Officers dependence upon (will be
of great use and advantage to) your Majesty.

The Green-Wax Fines by the particular valuation under every Abuse amount to
251000 l. per An. Fines upon pleas of Land 030000 l. per An. Heriots and
Reliefes 045000 l. per An. Sum Total of Green-Wax Fines and Offices. 435714 l.
per An.
Diverse Branches ( viz.) Fines upon Original Writs, Fines or Amerciaments, ad
Finem Litis, Fines upon Pleas of Land, or in real Actions, Heriots and Reliefs,
being mere Duties; Your Subjects naturally love to be freed therefrom: Yet Your
Subjects never forego Tolls, Aulnage, or other Duties which they hold by Grants
from the Crown, and the Commissioners or Farmers of the Customs, Excise and
Chimney-Money, never abate, because the Duty is certain Lawyers, Officers,
Attorneys and Solicitors, never abate of their Fees, but take more, which they
style gratifications so salve it, with a volenti non fit injuria; whereas
Clyents find by experience, that they are under a necessity of Feeing,
Gratifying and Greafing the Wheels; otherwise their business goes heavily up
hill; and private Landlords never suffer their Stewards to abate of (or Tenants
to pay) what Rent they please: Yet the Officers of your Majesty's Courts of
Justice have carved out the subjects ease, and their own profits, with altering
the ancient course of Courts, to the diminution of the ancient and Inhaerent
Rights and Profits of the Crown, without an express Warrant or Commission upon
Record so to do; whereas the Author of the said Book entitled Antidotum
Britannicum page 148 to 156. says, That all Monarchs and States have held for
a Prime and Alphabetical Law; That the public Revenues are sacred and
inaliable; for when Your Royal Supports is exhausted one way or other, It must
be made up by Taxations upon the People, which is very uneasy to them: Ergo,
It Is really necessary for your Majesty to have Your old Profits settled, to be
paid in Statu quo upon the innovated Proceedings or Practice: Or the honor of
letting all Your subjects know, That it is Your pleasure to forgo Your Duties,
and dispense with the alterations: otherwise Officers will still be nibling at
your Majesty's Profits, Et ad quam finem sese jactabit audacia, is uncertain:
And the Judges being fully employed in judicial matters, cannot superintend the
Officers: And Lawyers not being educated in the Practice of Attorneys, are
wholly ignorant of the executive part; so generally take the head Officers
advice therein, who are apt to speak favorably of the bridge they have gone
over; and your Majesty's Pardons, Licenses and Dispensations, being matter of
Record; and the Judges wanting time to search and read, are in a manner
necessitated rather to believe Officers then go and see: However, the said
Brunskell (considering how great Officers decryed our Saviors Testimony) does
bear his Affliction Patiently, because his Conscience in this Case speaks
peaceably to him, Murus Ahaenus esto nil conscire sibi nulla pallescere culpa.

The other Branches of the Green-Wax Fines are penalties to be inflicted upon
tricking Officers and Practicers, or their Litigious Clyents, to silence the
too litigious Pronouns Meum and Tuum in a great measure, by lopping off many
vexatious, cross, and delatory Proceedings: And if Officers for fear of
Punishment forsake their bad practices; The benefit accrewing to, and the
indearment of Your Subjects thereby, may tantamount the profits falling short.

All which is humbly submitted to Your MAJESTY'S Royal Pleasure, etc.
FINIS.

