LASTA EX YPSOYS Or, The Best VVisdome: Propounded to the GENTRY of SUFFOLK, In
A SERMON AT IPSWICH. Prepared for the 9th. of April 1660. the day of Election
of KNIGHTS of the Shire for the aforesaid COUNTY, but Preached the Morning
after.

By BENJAMIN BRVNING, Minister of the Gospel in IPSWICH.

Imprimatur,

EDMUND CALAMY.

London, Printed by D. Maxwell, for W. Weekly of Ipswich, And are to be sold by
John Rothwell, at the Fountain in Goldsmiths Row, in Cheap Side, 1660.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Henry Felton Baronet, and Henry North Esquire;
KNIGHTS of the Shire for the County of SUFFOLK.
Right Worshipful,
THis Sermon lately Preached in your hearing, I now present to your sight and
Patronage; not doubting but it will find a benign eye, where once it met with
such an ear. The appointment, and command of the Magistrates of Ipswich made
it my Duty, as a Servant to that Incorporation, to prepare a Sermon for the
Public Meeting of the County; which was no sooner Preached, but your
Worshipful selves, together with many other Noble and Worshipful Persons, were
pleased to give me a courteous Summons, that you might signify your favor
toward me, and joint desires of reading the Sermon ye had that day heard; how
much I craved your excusing favor, as to Printing, ye can witness, and my
conscience witness, my real heartiness in that request; and so confident was I,
that the Noble Ingenuity of Gentlemen (especially such as know my distempers,
which unfit me for any work, that tie me to a Chair) would pardon the omission
of what is now done, that I had laid by all thoughts of penning this Sermon for
the Press, 'till it almost became too late to take them up: which I had not
done, had not my Sermon been misreported, and made to speak many things which
were never spoken by me in the Pulpit.

My aim was, to follow truth in order to Peace: In this I have the rejoicing,
that the testimony of my Conscience affords; though it has been my
unhappiness, in passing between extremes, to meet with blows on both ears;
possibly too much conciseness, if not abruptness, that I was sometimes forced
upon in preaching, being crowded up into a strait corner of time, might
occasion mistake in some Auditors. So far as this was my fault, or rather my
happiness, I have labored the amendment, and remove of it, by some
amplifications in the Printing; which I have so managed, that the Sermon may
be acknowledged by all that were ingenious hearers, to be the same for main
substance and purpose which they heard. I know not of a word added, that alters
the sense of any thing I delivered, nor do I remember a sentence spoken in the
Pulpit that is here left out.

Such as it is, Honored Sirs, (together with a thankful acknowledgment of the
obligations that your favors and civilities have laid upon me) I humbly offer
it to ye, as Gentlemen most concerned in that meeting of the Country that gave
occasion for the Sermon. If there be any thing in it, that savours of unsound
Doctrine, or ignorant zeal, I pray God show me my mistake; keeping both you,
and others in the mean time from erring with me: But what ever is in it of
Doctrine according to Godliness, and tending to the real furtherance of purity,
and peace; my Prayer shall be, That it may find favor and true acceptance in
your eyes and hearts; so shall ye find favor, and good understanding in the
sight of God and man.

The Wisdom from above, that we hear of by St. James, is the same that is
mentioned by our Savior, as a mother in the Israel of God: Her genuine off
spring are but few, but the children that she has will justify her: She has
been grossly abused by some that have worn her childrens clothes, and this has
brought her into so much contempt with wany in the world, that instead of
abstaining from all appearance of evil, they scorn and abhor the very
appearance of that, which the Apostle terms, the power of godliness, and hate
the garment that is not spotted with some profaneness.

Evagrius tells of one Symiones, who being a man of great Wisdom, miscarried
in this, that to avoid the danger of vainglory, he made it his usual practice
to personate a fool when he came in company; but is there not a generation of
worse contrivers, who behave themselves as if they purposely studied irreligon,
and profaneness, that they may make sure to escape the suspicion of hypocrisy?
whilst in the mean time, with a sufficiency of confidence, they can condemn all
as a brood of hypocrites, that have any thing in them of true Christian zeal,
and are of a right, godly, and strict Conversation.

The Lord give ye, and all other worthy Gentlemen, to quit your selves like men
and Christians, in a faithful and courageous owning of that wisdom that is
truly pure: and among other services that lie upon your hands, to use your best
endeavors to rebuke and frown to death that spirit of profaneness, that, with
too much daring boldness, lifts up his head in the land. Let all the world see
that honorable Birth and Extract, that principles of Loyalty, Legality, and
civil order, are far from being inconsistencies with the most attaineable
heights of heavenly-minded Christianity, of holy zeal for God, and through
reformation. Be lively patterns of it in your own Persons and Families, and
vigorous promoters of it in others. Such Friends and Champions of pure wisdom
will loose nothing by it; for she promotes them that exalt her, and will bring
to honor them that embrace her; to the heads of such she gives an Ornament of
Grace, and will deliver to them a Crown of Glory, Prove. 4.8,9.

Ye have had time enough, worthy Patriots, to consider and lay to heart the
miserable convulsions of your beloved Native Country, the woeful jeopardies we
have been exposed to in all that is dear to us, as Christians, and men. Ye have
now, amongst other Honorable and Worshipful Persons, a large opportunity, by
the miraculous Providence of God, put into your hands for healing the breaches,
and settling the foundations of the Land: and blessed be God, that we can now
say, We have a Parliament that may do us good if they will: Up, and be doing,
and the Lord be with you. The difficulties that are before ye cannot be
inconsiderable; ye have a skein of Silk in hand, to bring to rights, of which I
may truly say, That it has been the work of diverse years past to perplex, and
ruffle it; if any thing be done to purpose, the wisdom that must guide ye must
come from above; lift up your voices for it, that ye may understand
righteousness, and judgment, and equity, yea, every good path.

O let it not be out of your thoughts, that the eyes of God, Angels, and Men,
and of your own consciences are intent upon ye; think often on us your poor
Country men, who are full of expectations, waiting to see what God the Lord
will do for us, by means of your wisdom, faithfulness, and courage; and let me
take the boldness to put you in remembrance, that ye are now the Stewards of
God for us; and that it concerns ye, as ye love your own Souls, so to manage
all your Parliamentary actions, as if ye were assured at the instant of the
Parliaments dissolution to be summoned by the most High, to give an account of
your Stewardship. The Lord give ye a right understanding of the Times, to know
what ought to be done in all concernments of Church and State. If ye know these
things, happy shall ye and the Nation be if ye do them: Take Hezekiah for an
example, 2 Chronicles. 31.21. Who, in every work that he began in the service of the
House of God, and in the Law, and in the Commandments to seek his God, he did
it with all his heart and prospered. That it may be thus with you, it shall be
the Prayer; that it will be thus, it is the hope,

Right Worshipful, Of Your Humbly Devoted to serve Ye in the Service of Christ.
Benjamin Bruning.

ERRATA.
For Judges in Page 45. line 22. read Indies.

A SERMON Preached at IPSVVICH Upon occasion of chosing KNIGHTS of the SHIRE
for SUFFOLK:
Jam. 3.17. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable.


THe Text speaks of a thing that is much spoken of in the world; I would it
were as well known, and as much possessed, and that is right Wisdom. The Cynick
Philosopher walked the Marketplace at noonday, with a Candle in his hand, and
all to seek a wise man; wise men were scarce in the judgment of Philosophers,
who by the rules of Christian wisdom, were far enough from being truly wise:
Tertullian terms them, alicujus sapientiae animalia, a sort of animals wise in
their kind, and whilst they professed themselves wise (says St. Paul,) they
became fools, Romans 1.22.

Our Apostle James in the 13th verse of this 3d Chapt. he makes a search for a
wise man, with another manner of Candle in his hand, and that among Christians,
in a time of bright Gospel daylight: Who is a wise man, and endowed with
knowledge among you? let him show out of a good conversation his works with
meekness of wisdom. Now because true wisdom was so scarce, and its
counterfeit so common, and consequently so hard to convince a man that wants
wisdom, that he is unwise; the Apostle is forced to distinguish between
wisdom, and wisdom; wisdom that is not, and wisdom that is from above; the
wisdom that is not from above is earthly, sensual, and devilish, verse 15th.
good for nothing, but to breed envy, strife, confusion, and every evil work, as
is intimated, verse 16, Oh! how many wise men would there be in the world, were
it not for a But in the 17th verse, concerning another kind of wisdom, But the
wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easily to
be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, without
hypocrisy.

The whole verse you see is a description of true wisdom, by an enumeration of
its properties; I must stop at the two first, first pure, then peaceable,
(...), wisdom from above, that is the thing described. There is a wild
wisdom, as common as the highway, it grows in the hedg-rows of the world;
but this is only to be found in the Garden of the Lord, and it is flos
inversus, a flower of admirable fragrancy, that has its root in heaven, it is
from above.

But what is meant by wisdom from above? it is not needful that I use many
words about it; the strict definition of wisdom, as distinct from prudence,
given by Philosophers, and Schoolmen in their Ethical discourses, it don't
much concern my Text, nor shall I trouble you with it; and for the various
acceptations of wisdom in the Book of God, it might be worth your time to hear
them, had I liberty of time to speak them. In this place it is evident enough,
that we are not to conceive of wisdom, as distinct from prudence, but as
including, yea, mainly intending it. I may term it, A Gift of God that inables
men to a right judgment, and dictates to them such action as is according to
the revealed Will of God: God's revealed Will, or the Scripture, which our
Savior in one of his Quotations calls by the name of Wisdom. (Luke 11.49.
Therefore said the Wisdom of God, that is the Scripture;) this may be termed,
sapientia docens teaching wisdom; but then there is the gift or grace of
wisdom that rules the judgments, and actions of men, according to the rule of
the word, this may be termed sapientia utens, using or practicing wisdom. Now
this wisdom from above, it is first pure, then peaceable; (...), pure,
peaceable; there is the properties of wisdom in the matter of them: (...),
first then; there is the order of them; it is pure, it is peaceble, it is first
pure, then peaceable.

Wisdom from above is pure; the only account I shall give of this, shall be by
some instances of rules, and principles tending to purity, which are the
dictates of wisdom from above, contrary to the rules, and principles of carnal
wisdom.

The first shall be this, Divine insti^ution is the only pure rule of religious
worship; what God commands not in matter of worship, he forbids; and
consequently, all uncommanded worship is impure worship, and the wisdom that
dictates it impure wisdom. As the first Commandment concerns the right object
of worship, so, the second, the right manner of it; which according to known
and received rules for understanding the Commandments, condemns all manner of
corrupt worship, under the express mention of one more notorious kind of it,
namely the worshipping of God before an Idol. The Commandment begins thus, Thou
shall not make to thy self. So much as there is in God's worship of man's
device, and making, so much there is of impurity in it; and as there is no
Commandment, that the appearing wisdom of man is more prone to make bold with
than this; so the God of Heaven has taken care to fence it accordingly against
abuse: Here it is that the Lord represents himself a jealous God, jealousy
says Solomon, is the rage of a man, what is jealousy then in God? and
jealousy you know will not only be stirred by gross uncleanness, but by wanton
dalliances. And because the wisdom of man is so apt to judge its own
contrivances in God's worship a fruit of love to him, the Lord names it a a
hating of him. As much as you make of your right eyes, none of you can be so
tender of them, as God is of his own prescriptions in his worship.

Whilst the Lord in the childhood of his Church, prescribed a numerous
multitude of Ceremonies, for this reason among others (as is thought by
Divines) that they might be the less under temptation to use their own
devisings; during this state of the Church, they that list may easily observe
how severely the Lord held his people to his own prescriptions. Were there then
any mere positive inst^tutions mingled in God's worship, with Gods approbation,
unless such as had divine authority for them, either by an express word, or
clear consequence from it, or extraordinary inspiration, of extraordinary
persons? If once I be convinced that there were, I shall be ready to acknowledge
my present mistake; but sure enough, had a Priest under the law devised so much
as one religious vestment more than God prescribed, he would have had little
thank for it. It Is very observable in some Chapters of the Mosaical law, that
where you have a punctual narration of God's prescriptions in one part of the
Chapter, you shall have a rehearsal in the other part of the Chapter, of all
over again as practiced by Moses and Aaron. Hereby the Lord shows how strictly
he stands upon his Sacred Authority, in prescribing the manner of his own
worship: and this I humbly conceive is the instruction that the Lord would have
us learn from it. Moses his rule was the pattern he saw in the Mount, and not
the mould of his own brain.

And if the distinction of the substantials of worship, and ceremonious
additions to it, would salve the matter; Nadab and Abihu might have come off
better with their strange fire, and the Scribes and Pharisees would not have
deserved so much rebuke, for their religious washing before meat. The sin of
Nadab and Abihu was not that they offered incense to a strange God, nor did
they presume so far as to offer strange incense to the true God, or the right
incense upon a strange Altar; they only offered strange fire before the Lord,
such fire, says the Text, As the Lord commanded them not, Levit. 10. verse 1.
when the Lord gave them fire from Heaven, he did not in so many words forbid
the use of any other fire, that was to be understood by his not commanding it;
nor do we find that they made use of other fire more than once, or that they
intended a common trade of it, and wholly to disuse that which came from
Heaven; but strange fire at a time they used, and behold the event of it, verse
2. There went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them: and what account does
Moses give of this verse 3. This is that the Lord spoke; I will be sanctified
in them that come nigh me, as much as to say, he will have his authority
acknowledged in what he prescribes in his worship. And as for religious washing
before meat, some would have thought that the practice of such a Ceremony upon
the account of humane tradition, might have been overlooked in an age, when so
many legal washings and cleansings were in use by God's appointment; but this
would not excuse it, when the Scribes and Pharisees came to our Savior, Mat.
15. at the beginning, with this cauil, Why do thy Disciples transgress the
tradition of the Elders, in not washing their hands when they eat bread. Our
Saviors reply was, verse 3. Why do you trnsgress the Commandment of God by
your tradition? If any think that these words of Christ have respect only to
what follows concerning the consecrated gift, by which they violated the fifth
Commandment, I must crave leave to dissent from them. If the third verse be not
a reply to the second, then is there no answer at all made to it; and besides
what appears plainly in the surface of the words, the second and third verses
compared together; let me ask, did Christ approve that religious washing of
hands, or not; if he approved it, why did not his Disciples practice it? or why
did he not excuse their omission of it? or if they practiced it, why did he not
do them right, when they were accused for not doing it? It is evident enough
that whilst they objected against Christ's Disciples their tradition; Christ
taxes them for transgressing the Commandments of God by following that
tradition. But what Commandment will some say was it, that was hereby
transgressed? It is most certain, what ever sin is committed, there is a breach
made upon some Commandment of the moral law: now the religious washing before
meat, used by the Scribes and Pharisees; and the strange fire of Nadab, and
Abihu, I can apprehend them no otherwise, than as transgressions of the second
Commandment, where the Lord has said, Thou shall not make to thy self. If any
think I stretch the sense of the Commandment further then God intended it, let
them but consider, that our Lord Jesus in his Sermon upon the Mount, makes the
least degree of anger, without just cause, a breach of the sixth Commandment,
Thou shall not do no murder; and a wanton glance of the eye, a breach of the
seventh, Thou shall not commit adultery: now why a mere institution in the
worship of God, may not be looked upon as a breach of the second, as well an
angry thought, a breach of the sixth, or a wanton look, of the seventh
Commandment, I see no reason. Therefore if any shall say, that God have left
the Christian Church to a greater liberty in prescribing to its self, as to the
manner of God's worship, then he did the Jewish Church; I shall not be induced
to their opinion, unless they can produce a Divine Authority for such a grant
of liberty, or make it appear that the second Commandment is of less force now
than formerly, and antiquated as to some of its morality.

Bellarmine in his dispute about Ceremonies, has such words as these, Omnes
nostrae Ceremoniae indicantur a Deo in genere, God has given a general grant
for all our Ceremonies; and how does he prove it? first says he, the Church is
to see. that all things be done decently, and in order: Secondly, 2. We are
commanded to obey them that are set over us. How zealously have I heard some
urge these Scriptures for Ceremonies of humane device in the Worship of God? I
would they would consider, that in this matter they serve Bellarmine's turn, as
well as theirs: and if we will take up these Scriptures at such a random of
sense, whither is it almost that they may not lead us? If any think I speak
this as a despiser of Church-governmet, they do me wrong; I could wish for an
hours time, to lament the want of it: with all reverence I acknowledge the
Authority of the Church, as far as may be without prejudice to Christ's
Authority. There are circumstances necessary conversant about worship, as
natural or civil means, and helps to it: many such circumstances concerning
time, place, behavior and the like, must be attended to, and are of a nature
far different from mere instituted ceremonies: Now the institutions of Christ
that concern his Worship and Ordinances, are many and weighty; and when the
Church provides that Christ's institutions be observed decently, and orderly
with due respects to due circumstances, this to be sure is a due exercise of
Church Authority: aye, and a great work to see this well done; but that the
Church has power to contrive a decency of worship, by mingling with it
Religious Rites, that Christ never instituted; here I must confess my self
unsatisfied. Salmeron the Jesuit grants, that every rite or ceremony, used as
religious in God's Worship, must have a divine authority for it, or it is
unlawful; but withal affirms that the ceremonies of their Church, are of
divine authority, being appointed by the authority of the Holy Ghost in the
Church. Concerning the latter assertion, all Protestants will fall out with the
Jesuit: let us be but as honest as the Jesuit in the former, and I hope we
are all agreed in the matter of God's Worship. And truly it cannot enter my
thoughts that any Church, or Church Members will fare ever the worse at last,
for keeping close to their Bibles in the Worship of God. That sort of persons
that formerly were called non-conformists, such as had due loyalty to their
Prince, respect to Superiors, and withal kept clear of separation; they are a
sort of persons I shall for ever reverence: and possibly their cause, will be
found as good as theirs, who most despise them, when causes shall be tried in
that Court where the Word of God shall be the rule of Judgment. I have done
with this, though I am sensible I have been too short upon it, it being a
matter so much in controversy; yet I wish I could have been shorter, as I must
be upon the rest.

2. In the second place, take this as another dictate of wisdom from above, in
order to purity. The pure rule of Gods revealed Will, is as much violated by
substraction in matter of worship as by addition, and as much by impure
Doctrine, as by impure Worship. Deutr. 4.2. The Spirit of God does not say,
rather of the two, substract, then add; no, but ye shall not add to the Word
which I Command you, neither shall ye diminish from it. And as inclinations to
false worship is called a spirit of Whordom; so the Apostle bid the Corinthians
to beware of false Doctrine; That he might present them to Christ, as a chaste
Virgin. 2 Cor. 11. at the beginning. Now look upon the carriage of many
persons, you shall find them very angry with the Papists for their seven
Sacraments, and in the mean time, they are for none at all. Some cannot endure
one that uses the cross in Baptism, but can very contentedly bear another
that uses no Baptism. Singing of Service how will they cry out of it? But the
not singing of Psalms, that's so far from being a fault, that it is rather a
piece of Religion with them. Should they hear one plead for Preaching in a
Surplice, they would think him little better then a heathen, and can have no
reserve of charity for him: But let an other cry down all public Preaching and
Ministry; yea possibly if into the bargain, he denies the Deity and
Satisfaction of Christ; yet they think it fit he should have favor, and be
countenanced with Toleration.

Now with such men as these, it is worse to pin a bauble upon the sleeve of
Religion, then to cut off an arm of it; yea it may be then to chop off the head
of it. Where is the wisdom of these Men? Have they any from above? If they
have, let them labor to awaken it, and to use it better.

3. The purest Worship and purest Doctrine, are of no avail to impure
Worshippers and impure Practisers; that is an other dictate of wisdom from
above, as pure.

To them that are defiled, (Says the Appostle) is nothing pure. 1 Tit. 15.
Gods pure institutions, in Isaiah, by means of impure worshipers, were reckoned
upon as vain oblations, as swines blood, as the cutting off a dogs head. There
are many souls now in Hell amongst unclean Devils, that went thither, from
under pure ordinances. Nor is it mere outward purity that will salve the
buisiness. Jam. 4.8. the Apostle telling what must be done in order to drawing
nigh to God; Cleanse your hands ye sinners, (says he) that must be done; but
that is not all, Purify your hearts ye double-minded; that must not be
forgotten. Mere Formalities, and outside sanctities come to no more, then if
men should say in complement, does God call for worship; we will wash our hands
and wait upon it: but let us not think that God will be so put off.

Nor will pure doctrine avail any thing, to an impure Practiser. No real
benefit by the Mystery of Faith, unless it be kept in a pure Conscience. Some
are of this humor, that if they conceit that their practice be good, they
don't much regard what their Opinions be. Others again, if they apprehend that
they are Orthodox in judgment, they think themselve good Christians whatever
their lives be. But wisdom from above will teach us, that a Heterodox
conversation will carry an Orthodox judgment to hell. Judas was once an
Orthodox preacher, and we don't find that ever he turned heretic. If ye know
these things, says Christ, what then, are ye happy? Yes, if ye do them, but
not upon other terms. John 13.17.

4. Pure Religion, in its fullest latitude, and strictest severities, is to be
taken up and embraced, and that for Religions sake. This is an other dictate of
wisdom from above, in order to purity. Such wisdom taught David, to have
respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. And St. James to say, he that
offends in one point. i. e. that lives in the wilful breach and neglect of any
one Commandment, he is guilty of all, James 2.10.

One part of Gods Law comes from above, as well as another, and it would be
strange if wisdom from above should not embrace all; when Religion ends with
the first table, or begins with the second, that man is a fool in his Religion.
When God delivered the Tables of the Law to Moses, did he put one Table into
one hand, and the other into an other hand, and bid him carry them unto the
people, that they might take their choice which of them they would keep? No
such thing, I am sure. Is Christ divided, says the Apostle? And is the Law of
God divided, may I say? The woman that was for the dividing the child, was not
the true mother of it. And they that are for a mangled, divided Law, it is a
sign they never had any thing of Gods Law in their hearts. Oh! how happy were
it, if the blustering zeal of this age, for the tenent of universal redemption,
were turned into a Godly zeal for the practice of universal holiness.

I say a godly zeal; for it it is not a complemental correspondency with all the
parts of Religion that will serve the turn; wisdom for above aims at the
strictest severities of it: what is it to walk as wise, and not as fools, but
to walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15. The life of a Christian should not be as a
sentence in loose Prose, where whole words may be left out, and yet the
sentence current; but as a verse that is spoiled by the ^tting off a Syllable,
or the change of a word of different quantity: Walk circumspectly, the Greek
word is, (...) accurately: There are enough, with whose curious ears nothing
will relish but very acurate preaching; but how few are there so wise, as to be
for acurate walking: They can dub themselves good Christians, and good
Protestants, but what are they by themselves in their retirements? what are
they in their families, upon Lords days, and other days? How do they behave
themselves, when they come amongst persons of profane and loose carriage? To
walk acurately in these and other respects, some will account it the proper
mark of an Hypocrite; but I must tell them, it is rather the mark of an Atheist
to think so. I Too many I am afraid, whilst they think it below a man to be as
bad as the worst, think likewise, that it is beneath a Gentleman to be as good
as the best: They may think into the bargain, that it is beneath such Gentlemen
to go to Heaven.

And what Wisdom from above takes up in Religion, it takes it up for Religions
sake. Psalm. 119.55,56. I have remembered thy name, O Lord, and kept thy law:
this I had because I kept thy precepts. As if the Psalmist had said, I have
kept thy precepts, and I lost nothing by it, but was well rewarded for my
pains, for by keeping them I have learned to keep them better. There are too
many that take up Religion, as an engine of policy, as a block to take horse
at, as a step to preferment, and accordingly they shape it by the mould of the
times they live in, and will change the fashion of it as the times change.
Believe it, there will be a round reckoning for such an abuse of Religion.
Jezabel might have murdered Naboth at a cheaper rate, had she done it without
a fast. Do the Scribes and Pharisees, whilst they devour Widows houses, make
long prayer for a pretense? What do they get by such Prayer? they shall
therefore receive the greater damnation, Mat. 23.14. You may take this for a
truth, to make use of Religion in policy, for worldly advantage sake, is the
way to be damned with a vengeance for religions sake. And this ushers in.

5. A fifth Dictate of Wisdom from above as pure. Godly sincerity, and
plain-hearted integrity is the best policy, Our rejoicing is this (says the
Apostle) the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and Godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world. 2 Corinthians. 1.12. He that walks uprightly, walks
surely, Prove. 10.9. As for Machiavils rules, corcerning the crafty mannagement
of conscience, they that will not be persuaded, but that his wisdom is better
then Paul's, and Solomon's, may make trial of it if they please, till they see
what is to be gotten by it. As for wretched, carnal, treacherous policy, were
there no other wisdom, I should think it a real mercy to be a born-fool. I may
speak the less of this, because God has done so much of late years for the
illustration and proof of it. Such a Politician was certainly a fool twenty
years ago; but he that drives that trade now, he is a mad man as well as a
fool.

That mere worldly policy is good for nothing but to teach men to be necis suae
artifices, to catch themselves in traps of their own making, and to ruin
themselves artificially, there is nothing more evident; we have as much reason
to believe it, as if God had spoken it by an audible voice from Heaven. David
was a King, and Kings must have their lifeguards; what was it that David chose
for his main guard? it was integrity and uprightness, Let integrity and
uprightness preserve me, Psalm. 25.21. We are now in hope of a Parliament; what
violent usages our Parliaments have met with, I need not tell you. The Lord
send us a Parliament of so much wisdom from above, as to say with David, let
integrity and uprightness preserve us. This shall suffice concerning the first
property of wisdom, it is pure. I pass to the second, Wisdom from above, it is
peaceable. Good men are sometimes called by our Savior, Children of Wisdom,
and sometimes Sons of Peace: put both together, and they come to thus much,
Wisdoms children are Sons of Peace.

In handling this, I shall take the same course I did in the former,
propounding several dictates of Wisdom from above in order to Peace.

1. The first shall be this; A bad man may be a lawful Magistrate. That
principle Dominium fundatur in gratia, Dominion is founded in grace; it is well
known whose it is, and what havoc the Holinesses of Rome have made in the
World by means of it. When Bellarmine, and others of the same fraternity cry
out of Lutheran Doctrine, as that that spoils Princes of their just Authority,
and releaseth subjects from due allegiance: they make me think of him, that
when he had robbed a house, made an escape by crying out with the loudest, stop
the Thief, stop the Thief. If any amongst us fancy it a Protestant doctrine,
that dominion is founded in grace; they betray their ignorance of the
controversial writings, that have been between Papists and Protestants, ever
since the Reformation. The more is the pity, that so many have taken it up of
late, whilst they condemn almost all the world besides themselves, as
Antichristian. My Brethren, I am not unsensible what a blessing it is to a
people to have over them a godly Magistracy: this we are to pray for, and in
our places to endeavor, so far as our lawful priviledglyeth in liberty of
choosing, duty to God, and to our Country, to our wives and children, and to our
selves; oblidge us to choose amongst men duly fitted for Government, as good
men as we can. But now to hold that no person can have a civil right to rule
and government, unless he be a godly Person, it is a principle (notwithstanding
the plausible sound of it) hot enough to set all the world on fire. If this be
received as a truth, that Saints as such, and only such, have right to rule
over others; it must needs follow, that all that think themselves to be Saints,
will think withal, that the right is theirs; and consequently so many sects
and factions as there be in the world, so many claims will be laid to Dominion.

And should it come to this, what can reasonably be expected, but confused
Massacres, and spilling of blood? Should any get a superiority by the help of
this principle, if they mean to be quiet in their dominion, they had need make
a law to forbid others to be of their judgment, in that particular; unles
they will promise to be of their humor in every thing else.

But Wisdom from above, as appears by the rule of it, provides better for the
peace of the world. Throughout the old Testament, whilst you meet with too
great a store of ungodly. Kings and Governers, you find not one instance, where
Subjects were freed from allegiance upon that score. The contrary is apparent
enough: what had become of Saul, when he passed by David in the cave, had David
been infected with such a principle, that a bad man can not be a lawfufull
Magistrate. Psalm. 82.1. God judges amongst the Gods. The Gods, that is, the
Magistrates. Some would take it for granted, that these were good men that were
thus called: Mark what follows; immediately, v. 2. How long will ye judge
unjustly, and accept the Persons of the wicked? In the new Testament, let it be
minded, what severe charges the Apostles laid upon Christians for subjection,
and obedience to civil Magistrates; and withal, let it be considered, what
manner of Magistrates were then in the world. 1 Timothy 2. at the beginning, the
Apostle exhorts, that Prayers be made for Kings, and such as be in Authority,
etc. Suppose Kings and Governers be bad, as generally they were, when the
Apostle wrote that Epistle; yet his advice to Christians, is not to take
advantage to chop off their Heads, or banish them their Dominions: No, but to
pray that God would make them better. It Is true, the unlawful and sinful
commands of the most lawful Magistrate must not be done; but then lawful
Governors, must be acknowledged by submission to suffering. Otherwise what
think we of Martyrdom? 2. What think we of some of the primitive Christians,
as Mauritius a noble Captain, who together with a great band of Christian
Soldiers upon the account of Christianity, were put to death by the command of
the Emperor, and suffered it without resistance? According to the principle of
some in our times, these were not so much Martyrs, as fools and cowards.

2. Another Dictate from above, in order to peace is this: Civil Magistracy is
Gods ordinance and appointment, for the Vindication and Guardianship of both
tables of his Law. A full discussion of this, with the several cases that
concern it, would be a long work, and that must not be at this time. Instances
concerning Magistrates in their dealings about Religion for the safeguard and
vindication of it, we have them in the old Testament so clear and plentiful,
that I may the more freely gain a little time by not naming them. If any
object, that Magistrates then were types of Christ in such actions, I see no
reason, why they should be looked upon as types of Christ in matters of
Religion, belonging to the first Table, more then in matters of Justice
belonging to the second Table. And when the Jewish nation had Governors over
them, which employed their Authority for the furtherance of Religion, and laid
restraint upon the promoters of false Worship, and false Doctrine; was it their
privilege and happiness, or was it otherwise? If it be clear that it was their
great privilege, by what logic shall we conclude it a privilege of gospel
times, to be freed from such an exercise of Authority?

Now for the new Testament it must be granted, that it affords no instances
of any Magistrates that used their authority in the behalf of Christian
Religion: and no wonder, for where were there any Christian Magistrates in the
world, before the writings of the new Testament were finished? But what says
the Apostle? 1 Timothy 2.1,2. Let prayers be made for Kings and all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet, and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty. Godliness concerns the first Table, Honesty the second. They are both
mentioned here with respect had to the office of the civil Magistrate. It Is
true, may some say, if any will be godly, the Magistrate is to provide that
they may live peaceably and quietly. But is this all that concerns the
Magistrate, in respect had to godliness? If any be of that mind, I would have
such consider, that godliness and honesty are here coupled together in
reference to the Magistrate. And sure enough, it is not barely the Magistrates
duty to provide that men may live quietly, if they will be honest; but likewise
to make laws about it, and to see to the execution of them; why then is he not
to do the like about godliness, which is the concernment of the first Table?
And that which comes yet closer to my purpose; this care of the Magistrate
about godliness and honesty, is the means by which a People may come to live
peaceably and quietly.

The Grand Scripture that is insisted on, for binding up the Authority of the
Civil Magistrate from laying restraint upon Heretics, is the parable of the
Tares mingled with the good Seed, Mat. 13. from the 24. to the 30th verse. As
far as I can apprehend, the Patrons of unbounded. Toleration are quite beside
our Saviors purpose in the parable, which was to quiet the hearts of real
Christians in the providence of God, laying out their lot and portion in this
world amidst ungodly men: This may give them occasion of much exercise and
trouble, but they must be content with it. And should any in a froward
discontent at this carriage of divine providence, begin to meditate the
extirpation of the wicked of the World, that so the Saints may have it to
themselves in possession, and be the only Lords of it, the scope of the whole
parable will lie full in their way, and particularly the admonition of the
30th. verse. Let both grow together until the Harvest; The reason of which we
have in the verse before, least whilst ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also
the Wheat with them. A reason that has a world of reason in it: for should men
of such spirits and principles as the Germane Anabaptists were of, whom Luther
termed, vesanes sanctos, the mad Saints; should such (I say) ever gain an
opportunity for plucking up (as they pretend) the Tares, sure enough 'twould be
a woeful day for most of the Wheat, that God has in the World. But if the
parable be pleaded, as an Argument against coercive power toward Heretics, in
laying just restraints upon them; I see no reason why the drunkards and the
adulterers plea for liberty and exemption from the Magistrates Power, should
not upon the account of this parable be every whit as good. I pray, give Christ
leave to expound his own parable, and he will tell you, that by the Tares he
intends the children of the wicked one. v. 18. All things that offend, and do
iniquity, v. 41. The Tares and Wheat in this parable are they that shall divide
the whole World at the last day. The Tares are they that shall then be bound up
in bundles and burnt. Now does not this concern drunkards and adulterers as
much as Heretics? Unless then men will deny the power of the Magistrate in the
concernment of the second Table (which is in effect, a beheading of the whole
World, by renouncing all Magistracy) let them be ashamed to urge this parable
against his Authority, in the vindication of the first table.

I speak not this as if I thought that Church Government were swallowed up in
the Civil Magistrate. I am not for a (...). The Church of God by Gods
appointment and ordinance has its Government proper to it, distinct from Civil
Government: And both of them have their work, though different work, about
Religion. And if duly discharged, no great fear but peace will flourish. That
any should commend a full Toleration in Religion upon the account of peace and
peacemaking; it is much such a riddle to me as if one should undertake to keep a
house from burning by putting fire to it. I know unbounded Toleration, sub
nomine libertatis prophetandi under the goodly name of liberty of prophecy,
has been highly commended to the World, as a rare expedient for peace. This
was done by the Remonstrants, a sort of men that created sufficient trouble to
the Church. But they that will read Learned Vedelius, de arcanis Arminianismi,
will find how effectually he deals with Princes and Magistrates to convince
them of the destructiveness of such Toleration, to the Peace of Church and
State wherever it obtains. Odia religionum sunt acerbissima, 'twas ever a
truth, and will be to the worlds end. No hatred to compare with such as is
founded in diversities of Religion. What woeful experience have we had of it, as
the miserable effect of our late Tolerations? We have learned that not libertas
prophetandi according to the Remonstrants, but libertas perditionis according
to St. Austin, is Latin for Toleration.

3. Another Dictate of Wisdom from above in order to Peace is this. What may
be left at liberty without apparent prejudice to purity, peace, and order, that
ought to be so left for peace sake. Rigorous impositions in these cases are
unreasonable severities; and if the forbearing of one another in love, required
in the 4th. to the Ephesians. 2. v. may not take place here, I cannot apprehend to
what purpose that precept is in our Bible. I have already intimated some
circumstances, necessary to be attended to as natural or civil helps to
worship; and it is the duty of the Church, as to take care for the observation
of Christ's Ordinances, so to see this done with a due respect to due
circumstances. It Is not my intention now to unsay what I have said, but to
confirm and clear it. There are circumstances, I say, about Gods Worship which
are commanded in general by God himself, either in Scripture or Nature: but pro
hic and Nunc are left by him undetermined, and committed to humane
determination.

I shall give an instance or two. And first for the circumstance of time (where
by the way, I do not at all intend the Lords day or Christian Sabbath; that I
take to be of another nature) but there are circumstances of time, that are
left to humane determination. Such as are in authority by Gods command, are to
see that his public worship be observed in due season. But whether the public
Assemblies shall be, at eight, or nine, or ten of the Clock, etc. the
determination of this is left to the Wisdom of Authority. And necessary it is,
that some time be determined: for if all be left at liberty, some to take one
hour, others an other, what inevitable confusion would follow upon this? Again;
the Lord has given a general rule for days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving,
but for the determination of these services, to this or that particular day, is
left to the Wisdom of Authority. So for the circumstance of place, when God
requires his public worship, to be sure, it must be in some place; now if
particular places be not determined by man, what order can be expected in Gods
Worship? But now, for such circumstances, as may be left at liberty without
wrong to Gods Worship, and breach of order; I humbly conceive 'twill more then
a little conduce to the peace of the Church, if they be so left.

As for religious Ceremonies, that depend merely upon the arbitrary pleasure,
and institution of man, these are matters of another nature. Let us for this
present suppose them to be mere indifferencies, and thus much was acknowledged
long ago, by the Church of England in the 34th. Article, which begins thus: It
is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly like; for at all times they have been diverse, and changed according to
the diversity of Countries, Times, and men's Manners, etc. The same Article ends
thus. Every particular or national Church has authority to ordain, change, and
abolish ceremonies, or rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority, so
that all things be done to edifying. By this it is evident, that Ceremonies long
ago were looked upon by the Church of England, as mere indifferences that might
be changed or abolished without sin. For governors then, that are thus
persuaded of them, to impose them with rigor upon such as think in conscience
they are sinful, it seems to me a harshness of carriage, ill becoming the
meekness of Wisdom.

But what do you talk of conscience, will some say? It Is an easy matter to
cover a peevish refractory humor with a pretense of conscience. Let them looked
to it (say I,) that incur such a guilt. But for those that are real; put case
that they be mistaken, and that Ceremonies are indifferent things, yet if they
refuse them whilst in conscience they think them sinful, I cannot imagine but
their plea will be much better at Christ's tribunal, then their's who rigorously
impose them, whilst they think them indifferent. If it be pleaded upon
supposition of the indifferency of Ceremonies in themselves, that the
injunctions of authority take away this indifferency, and make the omission of
them to become a sin; according to this principle, there still rests a power in
authority to abolish them; and withal, I hope I may say without presumption,
it concerns authority to be very cautelous how they make injunctions that may
occasion sins, which would not be, were it not for those injunctions; can any
be offended with me for this, that considers, how manifold the precepts and
institutions of Christ are? and how much the world groans under the weight of
that guilt, that is contracted by not observing them?

And as for peace, I cannot imagine that ever the Church got so much by
Ceremonies, as will pay for the peace it has lost by them: I must confess my
self hard to be persuaded, that England would have had so much cause to
complain of division and separation, that have rent and torn the Church into
many pieces, had there not been so much ceremoniousness in former times. Not,
that I justify separation upon this account, as will appear by that that
follows.

4. In the fourth place I take this to be another Dictate of Wisdom in order
to Peace. Separation is not to be made from a Church, upon any other ground,
then that which makes a separation between God and that Church. If any demand
what that is, I answer, either the Apostasy of a Church into gross and right
down Idolatry, or in point of Doctrine, into damnable Heresy; either of these
will cause a separation of God from a Church, and much more both of them.

But by all that I can learn by my Bible, we can be assured of nothing else. I
readily acknowledge, that the Lord may be highly offended with a Church for
other miscarriages. And a wanton dallying with him in matters of a lighter
nature, may provoke him to give up a Church by degrees, 'till at last it falls
into the dreggs of grossest Apostasy. As the City of Rome was not built, so
the Church of Rome did not fall in a day. Let us hear and fear, and not do
presumptuously. But still I know nothing that proves the Lords divorcing from,
and utter forsaking of a Church, 'till it is Apostasy come to such a height, as
I have already mentioned. Now for any person willingly to separate, and refuse
Communion with a Church, so long as God vouchsafes Communion; how this can be
justified, or how it will be answered, I know not?

The Lords words, Isaiah 52.11. (which with a small variation are cited by the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.17.) Come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. It Is not
unknown, how much these words have been abused for the encouragement of of
separation from the public Assemblies of the Church of England. I say, abused;
for who is it, but such as are forlornly void of all christian charity, that
dare say concerning the hundred years past, that the Assemb^ies of the Church
of England have had nothing of the Lords gracious presence with them? That
Ordinances have been empty things, and the public Ministry a mere sound of
words? He that affirms this, bears false witness against thousands of glorified
souls in Heaven, and gracious souls on Earth, who have found to their
everlasting comfort, the presence of God in his Ordinances amongst us. Now
suppose there have been miscarriages in the mannagement of Gods Worship, and
Ordinances; yet if they be not such as drive God away, I see no reason why they
should drive us away. And had the Lord ever intended (which cannot be imagined)
to send any going, whilst he affords his own presence, Come from amongst
them, would have been improper language, in such a case; It must have been, Go
from among them, not, Come. As for touching no unclean thing, I grant it
concerns us nearly in all times, and places; as much as to say, we must beware
of sin; and that not only by forbearing the acting of it, but likewise by
taking heed, that we partake not of other men's sins. But now let us put the
case, that our lot be cast in a Church, that has its corruptions and
miscarriages too much remarkable, whilst it holds to the substantials of true
Doctrine and Worship: Do any think that in this case, a person cannot hold
Communion with such a Church without being accessory to its miscarriages, and
incurring the guilt of it is corruptions? I am clearly of another judgment. And
am confirmed in it by the practice of our Lord and Master, who was a Member of
the Jewish Church, whilst it was corrupt enough in Doctrine, Worship, and
Conversation. It Is true, he was far from owning its corruptions; he lamented
and reproved them, and labored a redress, but still held Communion with it, as
a member of it. And, I hope, none will say that in so doing he became accessory
to the guilt of its corruptions.

And after his ascension; when he was about to write by his Amanuensis St.
John, his Epistles to the seven Churches, he represents himself as walking
amongst the seven Candlesticks. Some of them were sufficiently besmeared, but
yet favored with Christ's presence, and acknowledged for golden Candle sticks.
He sharply reproves some of them for what was amiss, and severely threatens
them, if there were no amendment: But all this while, not the least blame laid
upon any Member of those Churches, for not withdrawing or suspending their
Communion. Revel. 3. We find that the Church of Sardis had dirt enough in it to
defile the Garments of all its Members, except a very few. Thou have a few
names even in Sardis which have not defiled their Garment, v. 4. By this it
appears, that these few were in actual Communion with that Church. Now, did
their Communion, barely confider'd, render them accessory to the defilements of
it? How then could our Savior have truly said of them, that they had not
defiled their Garments?

The like we may observe in St. Paul his dealings with the Church of Corinth;
what sharp rebukes does he give that Church for miscarriages, and that very
notorious both in the matter of Gods Ordinances, and in point of Conversation?
It Is true, he would have every one lament what was amiss, and in his place
endeavor a reformation; but where does he hint the least encouragement to a
separation? does he not on the contrary severely reprove what ever tended to
it? In a word, would any man take it well, to have a Plague-mark clapped upon his
door, because of some uncleanness in his House? This is the usage that Christ
meets withal, when any separate from a Church as Antichristian, upon any
grounds short of such gross Apostasy, as I mentioned in the beginning of this
head.

5. Fifthly, another dictate of wisdom in order to Peace is this. The
interests of parties and private concornments must give place to public
Interest, 2 Timothy 3. At the beginning, the Apostle in giving an account of the
Perilous Times that were to come in the last days he begins with this, men
shall be lovers of themselves. An inordinate, ravenous self-love, it is in the
world an abomination making desolate; it throws firebrands, arrows, and death.
Such lovers of themselves, they must needs be covetous, they will quickly appear
without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, and what not? what the
Apostle says of him that provides not for his Family, may it not fit that sort
of men, that raise their Families by the ruins of the public? They have
denied the Faith, and are worse then Infidels. And the World was ever too full
of such cruel, Hodmandods, that care not though they suck a Commonwealth to
death, so they fill their own shells with juice. Well might one say, That next
to their repentance and reformation, the best that one can wish concerning this
gang of men, is, that God would give them little wit, and less authority. All
that are Sons of Peace may say, Amen to it.

In the natural body, had every Member a distinct appetite, always coveting
and drawing greedily to it self, what a strange confusion and tumult would
there be in the body? It would be no wonder in such a case, to see one foot
spurning, or one hand chopping off another: but one common appetite craving for
the whole body, that so every Member may have its due proportion, this is it
that keeps the members of the body in peace. The Application of this to
Politic bodies is easily made, I shall leave it to you to do it. The Apostle
Paul exhorting to love and unity. Phil. 2.2. Fulfill my joy, that ye be
likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind; and in the
3d. verse, Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory. Now as an
effectual means to further this, mark what follows in the fourth verse: Look
not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others.
Were but this well digested in the Nation, its work were more then three
quarters done, as to the establishment of Peace. It Is base self-interest, and
party interest, that undoeth our Peace.

Where shall we meet a Moses, who being largely proffered, if the Israelitish
Nation were destroyed, to become a great Nation himself, chose rather to be
nothing, then to be made a great Nation upon such terms? Exodus 32.10,11. Where
shall we find a true Mordecai, seeking the wealth of his People? Ester 10.3. A
Nehemiah, that left the pomp and pleasure of the greatest Princes Court then on
Earth, and took a tedious and hazardous journey, that he might seek the welfare
of the children of Israel, Nehemiah 2.10. Where shall we find a Nanianzen, that
would not grutch Jonas-like, to be cast into the Sea, so that all might be calm
in the public? And if the heathen was as good as his words, when he said, Ne
immortalitatem contra Remp. acciperem, I would not be hired with immortality to
wrong the Commonwealth; How rare is it to find amongst Christians a man so
bravely spirited? The Parliament House filled with suuh spirited men, would be
one of the rarest sights that could be seen in the Eeglish Nation: And how
quickly may a self-seeking Parliament lose itsself and the Nation too?

6. Sixthly, Another dictate of Wisdom in order to peace, is this; A malicious
desire of revenge is so much beneath a Christian, that it is the baseness of a
Man. Does any trespass against me? let him look to that; he has the worst
on it: thus much could a heathen say. Vengeance is mine: these are the Lords
words, and alleged by the Appostle as a reason why we should not avenge our
selves, Romans 12.19. Thou can not execute a private revenge without wronging
the Lord infinitely more then it is possible for any creature to wrong thee; for
herein thou invadest one of Gods prerogatives, namely, Vengeance. The Lord
vouches it as his; and in effect thou tellest him to his face, it is thine.

There is a proverb concerning the Lion; That he is not so fierce as men paint
him. But as for this sin of malicious revenge, no tongue can paint it so foul
as it is: I may well term it profundam nequitiam, one of the profoundest depths
of Satan, that can be imagined to be in the heart of man. If we consider it
abstractly in its naked self, we find the very quintessence of sin abounding in
it. Would we take a true measure of the goodness or badness of actions, one of
the surest rules we go by is, to observe how much there is of the Will in the
Action, as closing more entirely and immediately with good or evil for its own
sake. So far as credit and profit, and such like sensual accessaries attending
the practice of holiness and virtue, are influential upon the will to alure it,
so much is the action blended; there is so much the less of pure goodness in it.
But now, when holiness stripped of such accessaries obtains the consent and
embrace of the will for the sake of its naked self, this argues an eminent
sincerity and height of Grace. It holds proportionably in evil habits and
practices; and what is malice, but a mere ulcer or gangreen of a depraved will?
It argues a person so much debauched into a greedy compliance with sin, that he
swallows the bare hook. St. John tells us, 1 John 3.
He that hates his brother is a murderer; and he that murders another merely
for evil wills sake, is worse in the sight of God, then he that does it for
moneys sake. And may it not be for a lamentation, that so cursed a thing should
fill the hearts of so many as it does?

Were ye to deal with some in order to peace and reconciliation, ye would be
ready to imagine that to be true of malice, which Flaccius Illyricus conceited
of Original sin, That it is no accident or quality, but the very essence and
substance of the man. You would find it as easy work to remove a mountain, as
to remove a grudge out of some men's hearts. Instead of being rooted and
grounded in Love, Ephesians. 3.
they are rooted and grounded in Malice; instead of being steadfast and
unmovable in Grace, 1 Cor. 15. ult.
always abounding in the work of the Lord, they are steadfast and unmovable in
wrath, as if they were under an oath to abound always in this work of the
Devil. When Nilus over flows, it leaves a slime, in which some say Crecodiles
breed; a malicious spirit of revenge is the Crecodile that has bred in the
shine of our wars and troubles: the Lord send us well ^id of it. Are there any
that study more how to do an opposite party a mischief, then to further the
public good? Pray God keep such out of the Parliament! Should such a spirit as
this be in the Parliament, 'twould be a hundred times worse then 36 barrels of
gunpowder under it; I hope God will keep them clear of this. Where there is but
the ingenuity of a well-bred Gentleman, I do not much fear it. To wrong the
community for self-advantage sake, it is the spirit of a Wolf rather then a
Christian; but to disturb peace for revenge sake, it is the spirit of a Devil,
rather then a Gentleman. The Lord give the Parliament, Gentry and People of
this Nation a holy spite in their hearts, against the sin of Malice.

7. Seventhly, Another dictate of Wisdom in order to Peace is this, It Is every
man's duty to abide in the duties of his place and station, and the use of just
and lawful means, and therein to wait upon God for events and issues. The
Apostles were once accused for preaching such Doctrine as this, Let us de evil
that good may come, Romans 3.8. But see with what vehemence this is defied of St.
Paul; (...), We (^aith he) be slanderously reported, and some affirm that we
say, Let us do evil that good may come: And mark what follows, whose
damnation is just. Whether this be to be understood of them that raised this
slander, or of them which held and practiced this principle, it is hard to
determine; but take it which way you will, it sufficiently argues the notorious
villainy of such a principle.

Had some in our times, been alive with their principles in David's time, how
would they have laughed at him, for being so tender of Saul's life, when he had
him at an advantage in the Cave? Saul was a bad man, a violent oppressor; and
David had the Kingdom in his eye, and that justly; well, be it so; David will
wait Gods time and way for Saul's remove, and his own settlement: He was in no
such have for a Kingdom, as to sin for it Nor will wisdom from above only
teach us in our persuits of good ends, to keep clear of such means and courses
as are simply unlawful, in all persons and at all times: It teaches not only
to keep clear of blood-guiltiness, by illegal proceedings against the lives of
men that stand in our way; not only to abhor dispensing with Oaths lawfully
taken, and such perfidious dealings, as the honester sort of heathens would
blush to own, but will likewiseteach us, that whilst we transgress the bounds
of our stations, we become deeply guilty, even in such actions as are important
duties, and precious fruits of righteousness in other men; as Uzzah died for
touching the Arc; had he been a Priest or a Levite, all had been well.

The good man in the first Psalm, brings forth fruit, not only good in
general, but his fruit; his, as a man in such a calling and station. In books
and writings the same words that make a learned Treatise, may be made monstrous
nonsense, by false pointing; turning some words into one sentance, which
properly belongs to another. The very Bible, should it be thus abused, might be
made to speak blasphemy. Thus in societies of people, such actions as will make
a rare systeme and composition of Christianity, if rightly pointed and bounded,
according to the rule that God has given for the different stations and
callings of men, there need no more to turn such actions in a destructive
confusion, then merely to misplace and jumble them together, whilst one man
takes upon him the work that properly belong to another. Should a man study to
mischief both himself and another, he could not find a readier way then this;
Prove. 27.8. As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man from his place.
God had provided amongst the Jews, that a bird should not be hurt in her nest,
but wandering she might quickly meet with a mischief. Thus it is with a man, he
is never so safe as in his station and place; and always in danger when out of
it. And St. Paul, 1 These. 4.11. lays a strict charge upon Christians, that
they do their own business; and mark what goes along with this, Study to be
quiet, says the Apostle, and to do your own business.

Put case that men according to their principles and apprehensions of things,
be possessed with thoughts that present affairs may tend to an impure setlement;
do they think that hereupon they may raise tumults, and wage a war without the
call and warrant of a lawful. Authority? The Lord bless my soul from the guilt
of such divinity. Do any disturb peace by unwarrantable ways? let them not
deceive themselves and think (though they propound the most pure ends) that the
order of wisdoms properties in the text, first pure, and then peaceable, will
bear them out. A man that attends the duty of his station, and thus doing
commits the events and issues of things to God; this is the man that behaveth
himself as becomes the Gospel of Christ. There have been too many principles
abetted and practiced, that plainly come to thus much, That a good end
sanctifies all kind of means; The Lord deliver us from the mercy of such
principles! they are fire mingled with blood.

I have done with the properties of wisdom considered in the Matter of them: I
pass now to the Order of these properties.

As wisdom from above is Pure and Peaceable; so it is first Pure, and then
Peaceable: These notes of order are of no light import: the word of God is such
pure gold, that the least filings of it are more worth then both the Indies.
The truth is, a Scripture particle, an and, a wherefore, or therefore, or as in
the text a first and then, may afford more instruction, then a whole library of
other writings. The notes of order used in the text, import two things.

1. That true wisdom in its persuits of Purity and Peace, has a primary
respect to Purity: as much as it desires peace, 'twill rather fall out with
the whole World in discharge of duty, then offend God by the neglect of it.
There is an impure Peaceableness; a courting of the worlds favor by unjust
compliances, and ungodly companionship in sin: wisdom from above will have none
of this. Satan's Kingdom is not divided against it self; a multitude of Devils
were so united in mischief, that they spoke of themselves as if they were but
one: Not our name, but my name is Legion, for we are many, Mark. 5.9. The
wisdom that is Devilish in a sense may be peaceable; but far enough from being,
first Pure, then Peaceable. Solomon tells us of hand joined to hand in ways of
Sin; but wisdom from above will rather choose to have a hand cut off, then to
shake hands upon such terms.

In this sense must Luther be understood, in an Epistle to Erasmus; Inter
caetera dona Christi hoc habes, quod multis displices; amongst other gifts and
favors of God toward you, this is one, that you have the heart to displease
many. I am says Jeremiah, a man of contention to the whole Earth. Jer. 15.10.
He had no doubt the wisdom from above that is peaceable, and yet a man of
contention. The thing was this; he could not be at peace with men, unless he
fell out with God. Jam. 4.4. Know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God? That is, such friendship as justleth out Purity: For a
Minister and his people to live peaceably, is a most defireable blessing to
both: But put case a Minister, to gain favor with the Gentlemen of the place,
and quiet life amongst his neighbors, should be partial in Gods Law, and not
deal plainly with the souls and consciences of his People, 'twere infinitely
better for such a Minister, that he had been born without a tongue in his head,
or brought up to sweep Chimneys, or scrape Trenchers. Wisdom from above will
teach a Minister, Jeremiah like, to be a man of contention to Town and Country,
rather then to be peaceable upon such terms. And should men invested with
authority, and put into places of public trust, to gain the affections of
their neighbors, or the good will of a party, dissemble their consciences in
the neglect of their duty: though this may pass with some for wisdom, 'twill
one day be found such wisdom as never came from above; and if men be not aware
of it, it may carry them thither, from whence it came. And as for that wisdom,
that pleads for a full an unlimitted Toleration in Religion, were it as
peaceable as it pretends to be, yet would it pose me to find, how it can be
first pure, and then peaceable.

2. Secondly, As wisdom from above in its persuits of Purity and Peace, has a
primary respect to Purity, as the best of the two; so, it judges of Purity as
the best means for the obtainment of desirable peace, and persueth it to that
end. And this I take to be another thing intended by these notes of order,
first Pure, then Peaceable. In Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, the Peacemakers
immediately follow the pure in heart. Were not the Gospel of Christ a Gospel of
purity, 'twould not be a Gospel of Peace. That promise, Mich. 4.3. They shall
beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruninghooks, etc.
Hic spectanda est mensura profectus Evangelii, says Calvin upon the place;
it is to be understood in proportion to the progress and effect of the Gospel:
Look in what proportion it obtains upon the hearts, and gets Mastery over the
lusts of men, in the same propotion it will be an effectual means of peace. An
excellent and safe rule for the understanding of this, and the like passages in
the Prophets. The Apostle tells us that the Gospel teaches, That denying of
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. Were but this lesson of the Gospel well learned and
practiced, what a quiet world would this present world be?

That Philosophical opinion, That the whole world is informed and animated by
one universal Physical soul, I apprehend it a mere fancy; but that ordo est
forma mundi, that order in a moral sense is the form and soul of the World,
there is nothing more real. Now what is it that ruffleth the Creation, and puts
all things out of course and order, but sin? what is it but sin, that sets the
world together by the ears? Sin is a mere violence, it had certainly run the
world off its legs long ago, had not the Lord clapped some chains of restraint
upon this mad bedlam. Some would fain make the disorder of the world an
Argument for their Atheism, but it is to me no slender Argument of a Deity and
a Divine Providence, that there is so much order and constancy, in a world that
lies in so much wickedness. 1 John 5.
As for the trouble that falls upon the world, if it be thank-worthy, we may
thank that for it, that the greatest part of the world love most, and that is
sin; were there nothing of holiness for sin to quarrel at, it could not long
agree with it self. Scelera dissident, says Seneca; and lusts are diverse,
says the Apostle; Tit. 3.2.
when ambitious and worldly-designing men enter a confederacy, it is but a
fooling, in order to a falling out. Ungodly, lustful Interests may for a while
travel together very peaceably, but it cannot possibly be long before they
part. And observe it when you will, instead of shaking of hands, you shall find
drawing of Swords at such a parting. Wickedness, says the Prophet, it burns
like a fire, Isa. 9.18. It sets Nations, Cities, Towns and Families on fire.

In this juncture of Time, some fear one thing, and some another; for my part,
I am more afraid of sin, least that should ruin us, then of all the world
beside. Give me leave to describe the true Malignant; He Is the greatest
Malignant this day in England, that is the most notorious God-provoking-sinner
in it; when a people wearied with Wars and Troubles, begin to think of
following Peace, but still without Holiness, they may follow it till their
hearts ache, but are never like to overtake it. Do we bless our selves in unholy
and unjust ways, Deuteronomy. 29.
and say, we shall have Peace? We had as good say, we are resolved we will have
Peace, whether God will or no. It Is the fruit of righteousness, that is sown in
Peace, of them that make Peace. Jam. 3.18. the verse immediately following my
Text. The real purity and power of Religion, so far as it obtains, it
harmonizeth the world, keeping every man in his rank and file, and sweetly
binds him to his good behavior toward God and man. Calvin in one of his
Epistles mentions a Letter that he received from a Prince to this purpose:
That Religion, and men's zeal for it, and forwardness in it, was the main thing
that put Nations and Kingdoms into confusion and disorder. The World affords
too many that are like minded; But the Lord send England Princes and
Parliaments better informed and persuaded concerning Religion. Let all that
love Englands Peace, say, Amen.

I pass now to Application, in which I must be brief; what I have prepared, was
intended for the solemn business of yesterday: I call it solemn, the choosing of
Parliament Men being at any time one of the things of Englands Peace: But if
ever the Nation were concerned in a Parliament, it is like to be in this; if
once it sits, ye may term the time of its Session, the critical day of
England. What the hurts and bruises of the Nation have been, I need not tell
ye: there is humane likelihood enough, as to this Parliament, that the Nation
may either mend by it, or end with it.

What I intended to speak to the Country, in reference to the choice they were
to make, I must omit it, as being now out of date: it remains only, that I
commend my Text, as an excellent Compapanion and Counselor, to such worthy
Gentlemen as are the choice, whether of the County, or of Incorporations, to
sit in Parliament, as the Heads of their Tribes, the Trustees of God and their
Country.

And first of all, Honored Sirs, I cannot but thankfully acknowledge the Lords
Mercies both toward ye and us, that such an opportunity of service is put into
your hands; what would ye and we have given many times over, within this half
year, for such an overture? And I beseech ye, bestow some serious thoughts upon
what is past; think upon the violations of Parliaments, the Catastrophes of
Noble Families, the picks, and perils that the Nation has gone through: and
then tell me, if the Exhortation of the Psalmist, to wisdom from above, be not
seasonable for ye; Be wise and instructed, ye judges of the earth; serve the
Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling; kiss the Son, least he be angry,
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled. Be wise for God, and we
shall hope, if not be confident, that God will honor ye in doing us good by
ye; but shall ye neglect the wisdom that is from above, ye may quickly fall
low enough, and the whole Nation with ye.

For the Lord's sake study, and practice the wisdom that is pure; this will
make your eyes to be, like David's, upon them that are faithful in the Land; one
of the great advantages, that the Devil has made, of politic and juggling
pretenses to godliness, has been to render real godliness, and godly men
odious to the world: The Lord give them repentance, by whom the offense come,
and keep you from the woe of them that take the offense. Remember, it has been
a time of exquisite temptation: the ingenuity of a Gentleman, and much more the
charity of a Christian, may well suggest thoughts, that some that belong to
God, and are dear to him, have been sadly miscarried, in the simplicity of
their hearts by others more crafty then themselves; show all possible kindness
to such, that will consist with Peace and order in Church and State, and I am
confident to say, That the God of heaven will take it kindly at your hands.

Remember what I have told ye concerning Religion, that Magistrates, by the
Ordinance of God, are appointed to the vin^ication and guardian-ship of it. Let
the concernments of it, have the pre-eminence in your aims and actions; every
person among us is made up of soul and body; now though the Law of God, and
Nature, obliges to a care of both, yet the excellency of the Soul requires the
chief care: and what will it advantage a man, if he get the whole world, and
loose his soul? Thus is the public Interest of Nations, that own Christianity,
compounded as it were of soul and body, of religious and civil Interests: A
true public spirit will have an eye at both, but more especially at the
Interest of the Gospel, and Religion; let him go like an Atheist as he is, that
thinks not this, the life and soul of the body politic. We may well say, What
will it advantage us, should we gain the Lordship of both the Judges, and have
the whole world at our command, if we loose the Soul of our Nation, the soul of
our public welfare?

Let it be seen, Honored Patriots, that the precious concernments of Religion,
purity of Doctrine, and purity of worship, are truly precious in your eyes. As
for Government in the Church, I am as far from presuming punctually to
prescribe, as such a presumption would be from becoming me: thus much I say, A
tender regard to such a Government in the Church, as will most conduce to
purity of Doctrine, in the encouragement of a learned and faithful Ministry,
and suppression of Heresy; and to purity of worship, in the prevention of
superstition, I could heartily afford to beg it of every Parliament Man, upon
my bended knees, for the Lord's sake.

And let not second Table purity be left out; do justly, and love mercy, or ye
do nothing. As for particular cases, that may nearly concern the civil state of
the Nation, the mention of them will be fitter for a Parliament, than a Pulpit:
This only I shall say, as ye are entrusted for the whole Nation, so it
behooveth ye, in all good and righteous ways, to take care for the body of it,
from head to foot; how glad a people should we be, to see judgment, that has
sprung up as hemlock, at length to return to righteousness; and where ye find
the vows and oaths of God upon the Nation, let the world see that ye are men
that fear an oath.

In a word, be pure, and no great fear but ye will be peaceable; did I know,
that any of ye would so much as offer to dream of Peace, in contrary ways, and
upon other terms: I should make bold, as a messenger of God to say, What have
ye to do with Peace? and to tell ye, that my God says, there is no Peace to
the wicked. Unless the God of Heaven lays aside his pure nature, or be
shortened in the power of his wrath, what Peace can be expected in impure ways?
I have already hinted concerning sin, that should the Lord leave it to it self,
and not follow it with any other punishment then what is the genuine offspring
and product of it, we should find it as natural for sin to breed disturbance
and trouble, as for a Dunghill to breed Nettles and Vermin: In the times of
our late troubles, whence came the Wars and strifes of the Nation, but from the
lusts of men? whence came the beginning of latter separations, but from former
superstitions? and whence came the zealous inclinations of many to old
superstitions, but from the miserable effects of late separations? and should
God punish us with a Parliament that would cherish these inclinations, what
could be expected, but more separations? and thus one extreme, by a most
unhappy antiperistasis, would beget another in infinitum.

And may I take the boldness to speak freely, I cannot but tell ye, that I find
a great deal of liberty taken by some, to suspect that this is the time in
which we are like to return to our old extremities. I hope better things,
things that accompany moderation, and the peace of the Church. I am not
unsensible, that worthy Gentlemen may meet with tempters and temptations
enough, to court them to a zealous love of Ceremonies, by the plausible mention
of the Fathers, and the ancient Church; so far am I from reflecting
disparagement upon them, that I really account the Histories we have of the
ancient Church, and the Writings of the Fathers, one of the richest treasuries
of the Christian World. And a rare accomplishment it is, not only for a Divine,
but for a Christian Gentleman, to be well studied in them; a great deal of
excellent Instruction they afford not only in matters of Doctrine, and
Conversation, but likewise concerning the prudent management of Church affairs;
witness that rare Tractate of Vedelius; de prudentia veteris Ecclesiae. But to
take them up as a determining rule, in matters of Doctrine or Worship, this is
plainly to set them as a check-mate to the Bible. It is true, the Fathers are
ignorant of us; but could they see us in such an action, and speak to us from
Heaven, they would say as the Angels to John, We are your fellow servants, why
do ye worship us?

And as I think it unreasonable in them, that slight almost every thing in
God's Worship that is not new; so on the other hand I cannot assent to them
that will take up any thing, merely because it is ancient; if truth and error
be compared, I readily grant, that truth is the most ancient: But who can say,
that truth is of one whole days longer standing in the world than error? and
does not St. Paul say of his time, the mystery of iniquity does already work?
Don't we read of several carriages of diverse Churches, even in the Apostles
time, that were far from being apostolical? Had the carriage of the Church of
Corinth, about the Communion, been brought to our knowledge any other way but by
Scripture, and without the rebuke of the Apostle, some, no doubt, would have
thought it a great impiety not to have imitated the practice of a Church so
ancient. Nor is it inconsiderable in this matter, that we have so uncertain and
imperfect notice of the customs and practices of the Church, for the first 300
years after Christ; and especially of the times, that more immediately
succeeded the Apostolical age. As if the Lord foreseeing an abuse, resolved by
such a providence to admonish us, that we cleave the closer to our Bibles.

And for the multitude of Ceremonies that were in St. Austin's time, they that
will please to read his 119 Epistle, may find his thoughts of them, and what
complaint he makes of the burden that lay upon the Church by that means. That
I may not be thought to wrong him, I shall give you some of his words.

Omnia itaque talia, quae neque sanctarum Scripturatum autoritatibus
continentur, nec in consiliis Episcoporum Statuta inveniuntur, nec consuetudine
Universae Ecclesiae roborata sunt; sed diversorum locorum, diversis moribus
innumerabiliter variantur; ita aut vix, aut omnino nunquam inveniri possint
causae, quas, in iis instituendis, homines sequuti sunt: ubi facultas
tribuiter, (...) omni dubitatione resecanda existimo.
All such things as are neither authorized by holy Scripture, nor found to be
the injunctions of the Councils of the Bishops, nor are confirmed by the
custom and practice of the universal Church; but are varied according to the
diverse manners of diverse places, so that the causes of their institution can
scarcely be found out: I am not at all doubtful, but that they are to be
abolished by authority, if there be opportunity for it.

By the Councils of the Bishops, I humbly conceive, the Father intends only
such as were general, and Ecumenical; and not particular Councils, convened
upon the account of some particular Church or Churches. This I collect from
that which follows, concerning the confirmation that he speaks of, by the
custom and practice of the Universal Church, which comprises the whole body of
the Christian Church, in the several ages and places of its being. Now whether
there be any religious Rites thus enjoined for Gods worship by the concurring
votes of Ecumenical Councils, and thus confirmed by the custom and practice
of the Universal Church, but what are likewise warranted by the authority of
the holy Scripture, I leave it to consideration; The Church of England long
since affirmed the negative in a passage before cited out of the 34 Article:
where it is plainly declared, that Traditions and Ceremonies merely
Ecclesiastical, have at all times been diverse, and changed, according to the
diversity of Countries, Times, and Men's manners. Now for ceremonies of this
nature, let but Austins judgment (sine omni dubitatione resecanda existimo)
take place, and the controversy is at an end.

But to follow the Father, who concerning Ceremonies proceeds thus.

Quamvis enim neque hoc inveniri possit, commodo contra fidem sint: ipsam tamen
religionem, quam paucissimis and manifestissimis celebrationum sacramentis
miserecordia Dei esse liberam voluit, servilibus oneribus premunt, ut
tolerabilior sit conditio Judaeor^m, qui etiamfi tempus libertatis non
agnoverint, legalibus tamen sarcinis non humanis praesumptionibus subjiciuntur.
Though it cannot be found how they are contrary to the faith: yet Beligion,
which the mercy of God would have at freedom, with very few and very manifest
religious Rites in the celebrations of it, this they load with such servile
burdens, that the condition of the Jews may be looked upon as more tolerable;
for though the Jews understood not the time of their liberty, yet they are
subjected to such heavy carriages as were of legal appointment, and not to
humane presumptions.

And here by the way, Bellarmines evasion is to no purpose; he would have us
believe, that Austin aims at such Ceremonies as were practiced by private
persons, and especially women, without the warrant of Ecclesiastical Authority.
I marvail what colored Spectacles Bellarmine used, whilst he read Austins
words to such a sense: Is it not plain enough, that the Father speaks of such
Ceremonies as oppressed Religion, and made it subject to humane presumptions?
and does he not plainly compare these burdens, with the heavy carriages that
lay upon the back of the Jewish Church? and were not these public, and not
private Ceremonies?

As for what the Father says concerning very few, and very manifest Religious
Rites or Ceremonies, which God would have used in the Celebrations of Religion;
I freely assent to it: What are the Sacramental elements and actions in Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord, but Sacred Ceremonies? These are Christ's
appointments, and with all reverence to be attended; and concerning these,
there has ever been the harmonious concurrence of general Councils in the true
Christian Church, to provide for their due observation: and the universal
Church in all times and places, has commended them to us by its practice. But
Austin proceeds yet further, in such words as these, Sed Ecclesia Dei inter
multam paleam, multaque zizania, constituta multa tolerat^ and tamen quae sunt
contra fidem, vel bonam vitam, non approbat, nec tacet, nec facit.
The Church of God, among a great deal of chaff and cockle, tolerateth many
constitutions; whilst it approves not of, nor connives at any thing that
overthrows the faith; (...) is contrary to a good life, If Ceremonies that
were ^sed in the Church, in Austins Time, were not the things that he intends
by chafe and cockle, I freely confess myself unable to understand him.

But to say no more in this matter; if there be any mere humane ceremony
contended for upon the account of the authority of any of the Fathers, o^ the
practice of the ancient Church; I humbly conceive, I may without presumption
undertake to produce some other thing every whit as ancient, which I take for
granted, that all of us would be unwilling with; but if any desired to be
further resolved in the truth concerning the authority of the Ancients, let
them read the truly learned tractate of Daille a French Divine, concerning the
right use of the Fathers; you will find that Author a true reverencer of them,
and thoroughly acquainted with their writings: The proper intent of his work is
to prove, that the Authority of the Fathers is not decisive in points of
controverted Doctrine; but if we weigh his Arguments with reflections upon the
matter of worship, we shall find them for the most part not beside the purpose
for which I mentioned him.

But no longer to presume upon your patience; that which has been spoken in
order to the purity of Divine Worship, my aim in it I hope has been at the
Honor of God, and the peace of the Church. England has tried extremes
already, and has felt to some purpose the mischiefs that have attended them:
it is not a politic, but (if I mistake not) a scriptural moderation that has
been pleaded for; I am encouraged to hope that it will find acceptance as a
word in season. The Lord give us a right understanding in all things, and teach
our Senators such Wisdom, as is first pure, then peaceable.

FINIS.

