THE CHARACTER OF CHARLES II. King of England, etc.

THE CHARACTER OF CHARLES II. King of England. With a Short ACCOUNT Of his
being Poisoned.

Written by a Person of Honor.

With an Introduction exhibiting the Different Characters given him by the
several different Parties of Roman Catholics, Churchmen, and Dissenters, etc.

BY ANOTHER HAND.

London Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms-Inn in Warwick-lan, 1696.

Price 6 d.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE following Chacter having been much taken notice of, and many Coppies of it
handed about, it is hoped that the rendering of it public may be very
acceptable. The Prince whose Character it is, was generally beloved by the
People; yet his faults both as a King and a Man, were Universally observed, so
that it can be no surprise to any one to find him both well and ill spoken of;
for his Greatest Enemies will allow that he was endowed with many Princely
Virtues; and the Greatest of his Friends must likewise confess that he had his
Remarkable Vices. It cannot be denied, but that in both those Respects the
different Factions have been guilty of Excess, and have exceeded the Rules of
Modesty, both in applauding and condemning him; for every one speaks of him
according as they were advantaged or endamaged by him; or according as the
Humor or Interest of the Party which they espouse inclines them.

The Roman Catholics, tho they cannot deny his many good offices to them, and
their Church; yet they accusse him of Cowardice and Dissimulation, as having
played fast and loose with them, and were therefore impatient to have his
Brother on his Throne.

The high flown Churchmen did mightily admire him, because he restored them to
their ancient Dignities, and made them Lords paramount to all other Parties: so
that they would neither see any of his faults when he was Alive, nor will they
hear of 'em now he is Dead.

The Cavaliers were some of them very well pleased, and others of 'em as highly
disgusted with his Conduct, according as he answered or disappointed their
Expectations: And it was very observable, that his Cousin Prince Rupert the
Cavalier-General, with many of those who had fought for his Father, did at last
grow dissatisfied with his Administration.

The Tories adored him for advancing the Prerogative, and giving them the
ascendant over the Whiggs, whom they prosecuted for their Lives, Reputations
and Estates.

The Whiggs, tho many of them had a personal esteem for him, were never
contented with his Administration; and Generally entertained this Character of
him, That he gave himself up to all sensual Pleasures without Control: And was
irreconcilable to any who interrupted his Lusts; that he debaucht the Nation
more in its Manners than ever any other King did before him; that he squandred
away the ancient Revenues of the Crown, which were esteemed sacred; and left
such a Debt upon it as was never before heard of. That he prostituted his
Majesty, by being a Pensioner to France: And advanced the Power of that
Monarch, to the endangering of the Liberties of Europe. That he imbroil'd his
own Subjects in Intestine Feuds; and did so vitiate all public Offices, both
Sacred, Civil and Military, with Bribery and Corruption, as it will be hard to
reform them. That he was ungrateful to the Nation for their Loyalty, and the
incredible Sums which they powered upon him. That he lessened the Reputation and
strength of the Kingdom; overturned the Laws, and invaded the Properties of his
Subjects.

The Dissenters again scarcely afford him one good word, but attribute all the
Corruption of our Morals to the ill Conduct of his Reign, and his own bad
Example. They charge him with advancing the Interest of the Church of Rome, and
as having been an open Fautor of Hobbism, Deism and what not. They charge him
also with the greatest Perjuries that ever were heard of, as the breach of
their solemn League and Covenant, and his Delaration from Breda. They complain
of his having weakened the Protestant Interest in the Nation, by setting one
party of Protestants to destroy another; and exposing all Piety and Seriousness
to Ridicule; they upbraid his Memory with his manifold Whoredoms, which has so
much infected the Youth of the Nation, and is attended by such dismal
Consequences. And in short, there is scarcely any Party who speak moderately of
him; but do either exceed in his praise or his dispraise; and therefore there is
reason to conceive that the following Character of him by a person of Honor,
who had the opportunity of knowing him so well, and who is so duly qualified in
all Respects to write it, will be very acceptable.

It is also to be noted that as there is a great difference amongst Men and
Parties, as to their Accounts of this Prince's Life, they are at no less
variance as to the manner of his Death; in which most are agreed that there was
some Fraud, tho they differ exceedingly as to the Means and Instruments. Some
ascribe it to the Intrigues of France, who as they undid the Father by a Wife,
they ruined the Son by a Mistress, and therefore allege that Lewis XIV. being
weary of feeding him with Pensions, and dreading his Natural Parts, if upon any
disgust he should come to unite against France with his Parliaments, he thought
it his Interest to take him off, and make way for a Successor, who, as he made
open profession of his own Religion, would be more pliable to his Dictates.

Then as to the method of effecting it, they say it was thus, that the D. -- es
of P -- th who bewitched him with her Amors, and had not only drained the
substance of his Body, but likewise the substance of his Purse, either of which
being once brought to pass, the Love of a St -- et to her Paramour vanishes, so
that having a mind to Change Gallants, or seeing no more hopes of former
advantages, she gave him such Provocatives as made him act beyond his natural
strength, and threw him into these Apoplectick Fits which carried him off.

There are others who ascribe it to the R. C. Faction, who being angry at his
having so frequently deceived them; and impatient till they came to a Trial of
Skill for establishing their Religion, while Lewis XIV. was in the height of
his Power and Glory, did therefore administer the Fatal Dose, which sent King
Charles II. a going, and brought his Brother to the Throne, under whose
Auspicious Conduct they made no doubt of restoring the Church of Rome to the
full possession of all that she had formerly enjoyed in Britain and Ireland;
and to make an amends to his Soul for the Injury they did his Body, they took
care to have those about him that should perform the last Offices, in making
him an entire Proselyte to the Romish Faith. There are others who say, that all
this was a sham, tho attested by his Brother, and the other unexceptionable
Evidence the Strong-Box; and that all the time which they pretended to spend in
taking care of his Soul was really taken up in Cheating the Nation of their
Money, by Sealing a Lease of the Customs; that so they might be enjoyed by his
Successor after his Death, whereas the Parliament had only settled them upon
himself during Life. This is what is thought fit to be said by way of Preface
to the Character of a Prince, concerning whose Life, Religion and Death there
are so many various sentiments.

It Is true that there are some who would excuse his Brother from having any
accession to his death, there is none who have any reason to doubt that if he
came to an untimely end, it was by the Hands of the Papists, for the high
Church of Englandmen they had no reason to be weary of his Grovernment, nor
ground to expect the like favors from his Brother that they received from him.
As to the State Whiggs or Exclusioners, it was not their Interest neither, for
they had no reason to think that ever they should enter into his Brothers rest
as the late King himself is said to have expressed it to some of that Party, who
attended him upon his Coming to the Throne: Nor were they in a Condition to
have favored Monmouth's Title at the time of King Charles his Death, as
appeared by that unfortunate Gentleman's deplorable fate when he put in so
boldly for his Father's Crown, so that Malice it self cannot fasten it on the
Whiggs as having cut him off to make way for Monmouth.

Then for the Protestant Dissenters, they had no Access to his Court nor person
and were under the least tentation of any Party to wish for his death, seeing
they knew the D. of York to be their Irreconcilable Enemy, and always the
greatest promoter of their persecution, except when the Interest of his own
Party persuaded him to moderation.

There Is no doubt but this Introduction will be as variously censured as there
are Variety of Factions, but seeing every body takes the liberty to think and
speak of the two Princes who are the Subject of these few Sheets, according as
their Interest and Inclination leads them, it is but reasonable that they should
allow others the same privilege with themselves; and if they have better
reasons for the Negative than are here laid down for the Affirmative, they have
the same liberty of making them known to the World, and thus they are left to
the perusal of what follows, which is enough to satisfy them that the Author
is no biggot in the matter, seeing he does as willingly publish the Character
drawn by others, as that which is drawn by himself.

A Short Character OF CHARLES II. King of England.
Setting forth his untimely Death.
I Have pitched on this Character of King Charles the II. not for his being a
King, or my having had the Honor to serve him. The first of these would be too
vulgar a consideration, and the other too particular: but I think it a Theme of
Great Variety, and whatever is wanting in the Writer, may, I hope, be
Recompensed, in the agreeableness of the Subject, which is sometimes enough to
recommend a Picture (though ill drawn) and to make a face one likes oftener looked
on, than the best Piece of Raphael.

To begin then according to Custom with his Religion, which since his death
has made so much noise in the World, I yet dare confidently affirm it to be
only that which is Vulgarly (though unjustly) counted none at all, I mean Deism.
And this uncommon Opinion he owed more to the Liveliness of his parts, and
carelessness of his Temper, than either to reading or much consideration; for
his quickness of Apprehension at first View could discern through the several
Cheats of Pious pretenses, and his natural Laziness confirmed him in an equal
mistrust of them all, for fear he should be troubled with Examining which was
best.

If in his early Travels, and late designs, he seemed a little Biased to one
sort of Religion; The first is only to be imputed to a certain easiness of
Temper, and a Complaisance for that Company he was then forced to keep; and the
last was no more than his being tired (which he soon was in any difficulty)
with those bold oppositions in Parliament, which made him almost throw himself
into the Arms of a Roman Catholic party, so Remarkable of late for their
Loyalty, who embraced him gladly, and lulled him asleep with those Enchanting
Songs of Sovereignty, which the best and wisest of Princes are often unable to
resist.

And tho engaged himself on that side more fully at a time, when it is in vain,
and too late to dissemble, we ought less to wonder at it, than to consider,
that our very Judgments are apt to grow in time as partial as our affections;
And thus by accident only, he became of their Opinion in his weakness, who had
so much endeavored always to contribute to his Power.

He loved ease and quiet, to which his unnecessary Wars, are so far from being
a Contradiction, that they are rather proof of it, since they were made only to
comply with those persons, whose disaffections would have proved more uneasy to
one of his humor, than all that distant noise of Cannon which he would often
listen to, with a great deal of Tranquillity. Besides the great and almost only
pleasure of mind, he appears addicted to, was Shipping and Sea affairs, which
seemed to be so much his Talent both for knowledge, as well as inclination,
that a War of that Kind, was rather an Entertainment, than any Disturbance to
his thoughts.

If he did not go himself at the head of so magnificent a Fleet, it is only to
be imputed to that eagerness of Military Glory, in his Brother, which under the
show of a decent care for preserving the Royal person from danger, engrossed
all that sort of honor to himself, with as much jealousy of any others
interposing in it, as a King of another Temper would have had of his. It Is
certain no Prince was ever more fitted by nature for his Countries interest
than he was, in all his Maritime Inclinations, which might have proved of
sufficient advantage to this Nation, if he had been as careful in depressing
all such improvements in France, as of advancing and encouraging our own; but
it seems he wanted jealousy in all his inclinations; which leads us to consider
him in his Pleasures.

Where he was rather Abandoned than Luxurious, and like our Female Libertines,
apter to be persuaded into Debauches for the satisfaction of others, than to
seek with choice where most to please himself; I am of Opinion also, that in
his latter times there was as much of Laziness, as of Love, in all those hours
he passed among his Mistresses, who after all only served to fill up his
Seraglio, while a bewitching kind of pleasure called Sauntring, and talking
without any constraint, was the true Sultana Queen he Delighted in.

He was surely inclined to justice, for nothing else would have retained him so
fast to the succession of a Brother against a Son he was so fond of. And the
humor of a Party which he so much feared, I am willing also to impute to his
Justice, whatever seems in some measure to contradict the general Opinion of
his Clemency, as his suffering always the Rigor of the Law, to proceed not only
against all Highwaymen, but also several others, in whose Cases the Lawyers,
according to their wonted custom, had used sometimes a great deal of Hardship
and Severity.

His understanding was quick and lively, in little things, and sometimes would
soar high enough in great ones, but unable to keep it up, with any long
attention or application; witty in all sorts of Conversation, and telling a
story so well, that not out of flattery, (but for the pleasure of hearing it)
we used to seem ignorant of what he had repeated to us ten times before, as a
good Comedy will bear the being often seen.

Of a wonderful mixture, losing all his time, and setting his whole heart on
the Fair Sex, yet neither Angry with Rivals, nor in the least Nice as to the
being beloved, and while he sacrificed all things to his Mistresses, he would
use to grudge, and be uneasy at their losing a little of it again at Play,
though never so necessary for their diversion, nor would he Venture 5 l. at
Tennis to those Servants who might obtain as many thousands, either before he
came thither, or as soon as he left of.

Full of Dissimulation, and very adroit at it, yet no man easier to be imposed
on, for his great dexterity was in cozening himself, by gaining a little one
way, while it cost him ten times as much another, and by Caressing those
persons most, who had deluded him the oftnest, and yet the quickest in the
world at Spying such a Ridicule in another.

Easy and good natured to all people in trifles, but in greater affairs severe,
and inflexible, in one weeks absence, quite forgeting those Servants to whose
faces he could hardly deny any thing.

In the midst of all his Remisness so industrious, and indefatigable on some
particular occasions, that no man would either toil longer, or be able to
manage it better.

He was so Liberal as to Ruin his affairs by it, for want in a K. of England
turns things just upside down, and Exposes a Prince to his peoples mercy, it
did yet worse in him, for it forced him also to depend on his great Neighbor
of France, who played the Broker with him sufficiently, in all those times of
Extremity, yet this profuseness of his did not so much proceed from his over
valuing those he favored, as from his undervaluing any sums of Money, which
he did not see though he found his Error in this, but I confess a little of the
latest.

He had so natural an Aversion to all formality, that with as much Wit as most
men ever had, and as Majestic a Mien, yet he could not on premeditation act
the Part of a King for a moment, either at Parliament or Council, either in
Words or Gesture, which carried him into the other Entream, more inconvenient
of the two, of letting all Distinction and Ceremony fall to the Ground, as
useless and foppish.

His Temper both of Body and Mind was Admirable, which made him an easy
generous Lover; A Civil obliging Husband, a Friendly Brother, an Indulgent
Father, and a good natured Master. If he had been as Solicitous about improving
the faculties of his mind, as he was in the Management of his bodily health,
(though alas it is proved unable to make his life long) that had not failed to
have made it Famous.

He was an illustrious Exception, to all the Common Rules of Physiognomy, for
with a most Satur(...)ine harsh sort of Countenance, he was both of a Merry and
Merciful Disposition, and in the last 30. years of his life, as Fortunate as
those of his Fathers had been Dismal and tumultuous. If his Death had some
appearance of being untimely, it may be Partly imputed to his Extreme, healthy
constitution, which made the world as much surprised at his dying before
threescore, as if nothing but an ill accident could have Killed him.

I would not say any thing on so sad a Subject; If I did not think silence it
self in such a Case, would signify too much; And therefore as an Impartial
Writer, I am obliged to Observe, that I am assured, the most (...)ing and most
deserving of all his Physicians did not only believe him, Poisoned, but thought
himself so too, nor long after, for having Declared his Opinion a little too
boldly.

FINIS.

