THE ABSURDITY Of that New devised State-Principle, ( VIZ.)

That in a Monarchy, The Legislative Power is Communicable to the Subject, and
is not radically in Sovereignty in one, but in More.

In a Letter to a Friend.

(...).
Hand Multos regnare bonum est, Rex unius esto.
LONDON, Printed for T. D. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers
Hall, 1681.

SIR,
YOU cannot but remember, that at our last Meeting, there happened betwixt us,
a hot dispute touching Co-ordination, occasioned by your reading the day before
a Tract, not long since exposed to public view, and Entitled, by the Author
thereof, An Account of the Growth of Knavery, etc. In a Letter to a Friend, (In
Answer to Two Pamphlets, the one styled, An Account of the Growth of Popery and
Arbitrary Government in England; The other, A seasonable Argument to persuade
all the Grand Juries in England to Petition for a New Parliament;) in which
said Tract there are some Passages that seem very distastful to your Palate, but
more especially that Sentence (page 44 and 45.) concerning the Legislative
Power thus expressed by our Author.

The Making of Laws (says he) is a peculiar and incommunicable Privilege of
the Supreme Power; And the Office of the Two Houses in this Case, is only
Consultive or Preparative, but the Character of the Power, rests in the Final
Sanction, which is in the King; and effectually the passing of a Bill is but
the Granting of a Request; The Two Houses make the Bill it is true, but the King
makes the Law, and it is the Stamp, and not the Matter that makes it Current.

This piece of Doctrine [say you] is very strong and Heterodox; for it
contradicts, not only your own darling Sentiments, but also the opinion of many
other Persons in this Nation, who hold, That the Legislature resides not in the
King only, but in him, and in the Two Houses of Parliament; so that you, and
those other Persons fancy a Mixture, or Co-ordinacy in the Supremacy it self,
making the English Monarchy a Compound of Three Coordinate Estates.

This same opinion [say you] is founded upon the Authority of the Law Books,
which tell us, That every Statute must be made by the King, Lords and Commons;
And if it appear by the Act. that it is made by Two of them only, it is no
Statute, as appears by 4 H. 7. 18. b. Co. Lit. 139. b. Co. 4. Inst. f. 25. Co.
2. Inst. 157. 158. 334. Bulstrods Reports, Dominus Rex and Alleu, v. Tooley.

These same Authorities I allow as well as you, but then it must be with this
distinction, that the Two House of Parliament, are in a sort Coordinate with
His Majesty Ad aliquid to some Act, or Exercising the Supreme Power, that is to
say, there is an equal Right in the King and the Two Houses of a Negative Voice
in respect of new Laws to be Enacted, or old to be repealed; But if you intend
by Co-ordination (as indeed you do) a Fellowship with the King, in the very
Supremacy it self, you are much beside the Cushion, and truly in the wrong side
of the Hedge too. Because it is repugnant to the nature thereof, and a clear
Contradiction, If it be true as it is, that the King is our only Sovereign,
there can be no such thing, as a Coordinate or Coequal Power; If they be
Copartners in the Sovereignty, in what a fine Condition are we, that must be
obliged to Impossibilities. For we must obey three Masters, Commanding contrary
things. The Two Houses may as well enjoin us to do them Homage, which is, and
ought to be performed only to the King, as to challenge a Corrival Power with
the Sovereignty of Royalty. It Is true, no Law can be imposed on us, without the
consent of the Two Houses, yet this does not make them Coordinate with their
Prince in the very Supremacy of Power it self, but still leaves the Power of
Ordaining Supreamly in him as in the Fountain, though the Efflux or Exercise of
that Power be not solely in his Will, but expects the Consent of his People;
And therefore it is very curiously expressed by the Learned Mr. Hooker, That
Laws do not take their Constraining Force from the Quality of such as devise
them, but from the Power that does give them the strength of Laws: Le Roy le
veult, the King will have it so, is the Interpretative Phrase pronounced at the
King's passing of every Act of Parliament: And it was (says Sir Henry Filmer
in that most excellent discourse called Patriarcha) the Ancient Custom for a
long time, till the days of H. 5. that the Kings, when any Bill was brought
unto them, that had passed Both Houses, to take and pick out what they liked
not, and so much as they chose was Enacted for a Law: but the Custom of the
later Kings has been so Gracious, as to allow always of the entire Bill (and
sometimes with a Tacking too) as it has passed both Houses.

So much (Sir) in general, touching your fancied Corrivality of Power, I come
now to a more close and minute Application, and I argue thus:

If the Two Houses have a Joint and Coequal Authority with their King in
making Laws and the like, it must be one of these two ways, either it must be
Primitively Seated in them, or it belongs to them by derivative participation.

First, the Two Houses of Parliament cannot have this Coordinate Power vested
in them Primitively or Radically; For are not Both Houses Summoned by the
King's Writ? Do they not fit in Parliament by Virtue only of the Authority
Royal? Can either the Lords or Commons or both together Lawfully convene
themselves, appoint the time and place of their own Meeting? Our Books of Law
can tell you (Sir) that the Power of Convocating and keeping of Assemblies of
Subjects; the Power of Calling, Holding and Proroguing of Parliaments is an
Essential Part, and Inseparable Privilege of the English Regality.

All able Jurists and Politicians very well know, that the King is Caput
Principium and Finis Parliamenti, solely made and Created by him, and into him
only can be ultimately resolved; And therefore surely it must be the most
unreasonable thing that ever was in the World, that Subjects Assembled by their
Sovereign's Writ, should have a Co-equality of Power with their Prince, without
whose call they could not meet together, and at whose will and pleasure they
are Dissolved in Law, and bound to betake themselves to their own Habitations:
And return to the Statu quo of Private Persons and Subjects, whereas Supremacy
is a Public and indelible Character of Lawful Authority.

But farther, can the Two Houses of Parliament pretend to be before our First
King in time, can they outvy him in Seniority? Surely, no. Lib. 1. c. 8. number. 2.
As for the Lords, Bracton affirms, that the Earls and Barons were Created by
the King, and assumed to him only for Counsel and Advice; Co. Lib. 7.
which infers undoubtedly, that the Power they are invested withal, Nevic's
Case, Co. 2.
is not by a Contrivement or Reservation (as some Fanatics fancy) at the
supposed Making of the First King, ^^st. 5. 6. Co.
but procceds, Lib. 12.
ex Indalto Regum from the gratuit Concessions of our Princes. Eral of
Shrowsburies Case. Ob.


But it was Objectect by you in our Disecptation as it has been by others
heretofore, that the very Style of Comites and Peers, implies a Co-ordinative
Association with the King in the Government; they are in Parliament His
Comites, His Peers.

I Answer, Sol. Lib. 1. c. 8. Number. 5.
that Mr. Bracton tells us, Rex parem non habet in Regno suo, the King has no
Peer, and offers us another Reason of the Style of Comites, Quia sunt in
Comitatu, without any Relation to Parliament, because they are either in the
Train of the King, of because placed in each County, ad Regendum Populum, and
so assumed to the King to the like end that Moses did his Underofficers, in
Governing his People. They were not only to be Companions as to his Person,
Pares Regni, non Regis
but in respect of his Cares; Pares Curis, solo diademate dispares. They are
the Highest, and in the nature of Privy-Counsellors, but Created by the
Sovereign Prince (the Fountain of Honor) and so not equal unto him, though
exalted above Fellow Subjects. To be short, if this word [Comites] should imply
a Co-ordinative Society, it must needs follow that the Commons must be the
King's Peers too, for they are as much Coordinate with His Majesty as the
other; And so let us set up Three Thrones, One for the King, another for the
Lords, and a Third for the House of Commons.

I would advise you (Sir) to make a Voyage, next long Vacation, into France,
and argue there at the French Court, from the Denomiation of Pares Franciae,
and see what Thanks you shall have for your Logic. Thus much for the Lords, I
must have a touch at the Commons too.

As for the Commons, they surely will not pretend to exceed the Lords in
Antiquity: If what Sir Robert Cotton (that Famous Antiquary) relates, in some
part of his Posthuma Works, be truth; And he has been pleased in this very
manner to express himself.

As this great Court or Council, consisting of the King and Barons, ruled the
great Affairs of State, and Controlled all Inferior Courts; so were there
certain Officers, whose transcendent Power seemed to be set to bound in the
Execution of Princes Wills, as the Steward, Constable and Marshal fixed upon
Families for many Ages. They as Tribunes of the People, or Ephori amongst the
Athenians, grown by an unmannerly Carriage, fearful to Monarchy, fell at the
Feet and Mercy of the King, where the daring Earl of Leicester was slain at
Eveshum. This Chance and the Dear Experience Henry the Third himself had made
at the Parliament at Oxford in the Fortieth year of His Reign, and the Memory
of the many streights his Father was driven unto, especially at Rumney Meade
near Staves, brought this King wisely to begin, what his Success^r fortunately
finished in lessening the Strength and Power of His great Lords. And this
wrought by searching into the Regality, they had Usurped over their peculiar
Sovereigns (whereby they were (as the Book of Saint Alban's terms them) Quot
Domini, Tot Tyranni,) and by weakening that Hand of Power which they carried in
the Parliaments, by Commanding the Service of many Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses to that General Council. Now began the frequent sending of Writs, to
the Commons their Assents, not only used in Money, Charge and Making Laws (for
That the King with the Prelates and Peers, were heretofore the Common Council
of the Realm (and consequently the Commons were no part of the Court of
Parliament in Ages past) may be evidenced by these Authorities; Cambden in his
Britannia says, that in the time of the Saxon Kings, and the ensuing Ages, the
Great and Common Council of the Land, was Praesentia Regis Praelatorum,
Procerumque Collectorum. Seldom tells us out of an Old Cronicle of the Church
of Lichfield, that King Edward by Advice of his Barons revived a Law which had
lain dormant Sixty seven years. And in the same Chronicle it is said, that
William the Conqueror held a Council of his Barons, Anno 4. Regni sui apud
Londinias, the next year Conqueror had a Council of Earls and Barons at
Pivenden Heath to decide the great Controversy between Lanfrank Archbishop of
Canterbury and Odo Earl of Kent. King John in the first year of his Reign,
Summoned h^s Magnates, his Great M^n to a Parliament at Wiston, and the words
of the Roll are Commune Concilium Baronum, the Common Council of my Barons at
Winchester.
before all Ordinances passed by the King and Peers) but their Consent in
Judgments of all natures, whether Civil or Criminal. By what I have here
offered out of Sir Robert Cotton, and elsewhere before in this Discourse; It is
as clear as the Sun at Noon day, That the Two Houses of Parliament are not
Co-aetaneous with the First King, much less before him, and consequently the
Legislature cannot be said to be Originally and Radically seated in the Lords
and Commons.

Secondly, As I have made it appear that the Architectonick Power Paramount of
making Laws in Parliament was never Natively, and formally seated in the Two
Houses, so I come now to prove that the Supreme Legislative Authority was never
vested in them, by way of Emanation, or derivation from the Imperial Crown of
this Nation.

Now if they have derivatively such a power, it must be one of these two ways,
either by way of Donation or Usurpation: Again, if they have it via Donationis,
by way of Grant, they must have it either by way of Division or by way of
Communication: But they cannot challenge it by either of these same ways.

1. The Houses of Parliament may not challenge a Co-ordination in the Supremacy
by way of Division or Partition; For Suprema potestas, is an Entity or being
Indivisible, as it is subordinate to none but God Almighty; so it admits no
Coordinate, Collateral, Coequal or Corrival Power; To make Majestatem in
Maj^state, Regnum in Regno, more than one Sovereign in a Kingdom, is
inconsistent with Supremity; for Supreme admits neither of Equal nor Superior,
and to affirm it, is Contradictio in Adjecto. And therefore you may read, that
Henry de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick for the singular favor that King Henry the
Sixth bare to him, Co. 4. Inst. f. 237.
Crowned him King of Wight: But we could never find (says Cook) and Letters
Patents of this Creation, because (as some hold) the King could not by Law,
Create him a King within his own Kingdom, because there cannot be Two Kings in
one Kingdom, or if such there be, they are but Reguli or Proreges, Kings to
their Subjects, and Subjects to the Supreme King.

So Oedipus King of the Thebans having Issue Two Sons, Polynices and Eteocles,
ordained that after his Decease, his Two Sons should alternative by Course,
Reign in his Kingdom. But what was the event? Fratres de Regni Haereditate
dissidentes singulari certamine Congressi mutuis vulneribus ceciderunt.

Let any Man look upon the Estate of the Roman Empire, when it was divided by
Constantine the Great amongst his Three Sons, Constantinus, Constantius and
Constans; Or upon the Estate of the Western Empire, after the Division made by
Lotharius, Lewis and Charles, Sons of Lodovicus Pius; And he will find most sad
and horrible Confusions ensued on such Partitions. But letting pass Foreign
Conntries, we must not pretermit the miserable Estate within this Kingdom,
under the Heptarchy until all was Reunited under one Severaign; And this is
the Reason that in England, Scotland and Ireland, the Royal Dignity is
descendible to the Eldest Daughter or Sister, Co. 4 Inst. f. 243. and on Lit.
fol. 165. a. For Regnum non eft divisibile: And so was the Descent of Troy.

Praeter te sceptrum Ilione quod gesserat olim Maxima Natarum Priami. 2. As the
Two Houses cannot have a Coordinate Power with the King, by way of Division;
so neither can they challenge to themselves a Co-ordination in the Supremacy it
self by way of Communication; for the Prerogative of Legislation (as many
others) is so naturally intrins^cally inherent in the Supremacy (for where
Majesty is, there must be the Power Legislative,) that it cannot be transferred
or separated from the Crown, or so Communicated to Both Houses, as to denude or
disrobe the King of that Sacred Supreme Right which God has given to him, as
his Vicegerent on Earth.

Ea quae Jurisdictionis sunt and pacis ( says our Bracton) ad nulium pertinent
nisi ad Coronam, 3. K. 1. ^. 50.
and dignitatem Regiam, nec a Corona separari poterunt, cum faciant ipsam
Coronam, Lib. 2. c. 24.

The old Statute of Praerogativa Regis tells us, That our King can grant no
Prerogative to the prejudice of the Crown. And thereupon whatsoever a King of
this Land Grants to his Subjects, or to any other that is essentially in the
Crown of this Kingdom, that is to say, rally annexed to the Person of a Man, as
he is King of England, as that the parting with it, makes him to be no King, or
a less King than he ought to be in Dignity or Royal Power the Grant is void,
the Grant how large soever, It must be understood with this Limitation, Salvo
Jure Corona. And how tender our Former Kings and their Subjects have been of
the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, Pray (Sir) at your good leisure
consult the Statutes of 28. E. 1. c. 2. and 20. 34. E. 3. c. 15 and 17. 5. R.
2. c. 13. 11. R. 2. c. 9. 9. H. 5. c. 1. 28. H. 6. c. 2. and 27. E. 1. c. 5.

With our Municipal Laws do concur Two Famous Jurists, I mean, Gothofrede and
Suarez.

The former returns an Answer to this Quaere, Potestne Princeps Regalia alteri
Cedere?

Potest ( says he) His temperamentis adjectis, ut ne Regalia Jura sua cedat
sine summa necessitate, ac ut ea cedat ex causa necessaria, ut ne ea tota
cedat: Deinde ut quaecunque cedit suopte motu, ac sua sponte sciens, prudensque
cedat, Principatus Jure Excepto: quod etsi nominatim non fuerit exceptum,
tacit tamen exceptum intelligitur (cum adversus omnes Regalia possidentes, in
suo Regno, Jus instituendae Actionis habeat) adeo ut Jus id nullo tempore
possit praescribi.

The latter viz. Suarez says thus, Regnum est veluti quoddam Officium quod
incumbit propriae Personae, Suarez. de Legibus Lib. 2. number. 12.
cui confertur, and non tam est propter ipsam, quam propter eos, qui regendi
sunt, and ideo non potest Rex, vel Regina tale onus a se separare, etiam quoad
usum, vel administrationem, ita ut non maneat apud ipsum suprema potestas, and
Obligatio Regendi; non ergo transferri potest illo modo Administratio Regni in
Regem, Ratione Matrimonii.

The sum of all that I have said as to the point of Communication is this; That
however the prime essential Constitutives of Monarchy, in the exercise of them,
may be intructed by the King to the Subject by way of Delegation to ease his
Burden and to facilitate his Royal Charge, yet in so doing, he does not, he
cannot divest himself of the Sovereign Power, nor of any of those Sacred Rights
and Prerogatives that are naturally and intrinsecally inherent in his Imperial
Crown.

In the last place, as the Two Houses cannot challenge to themselves by way of
Grant (that is to say neither by Division, nor by Communication) a
Co-ordination in the very Supremacy of Power ^^^self (and consequently there
cannot be any such thing as a Coequality of Power in the Legislature;) so
neither can they make forth a good and Lawful Title to themselves, for a
Fellowship in the Legislative Power, via usucapionis, by virtue of any Custom
or Prescription; For no immemorial Custom can hold good, when there be
Authentical Records to the Contrary; And whether there be not such, I will
appeal unto your own good self.

Anciently the Law Enacted began thus, Rex Statuit, the King Ordains, and
before the Laws and Statutes in each Kings Reign from the time of Edward the
First to this day, I find the Title or Introduction thus expressed as follows.

7. E. 1. the Statute of Mortmain, We therefore by Advice of our Prelates,
Earls, Barons and other Subjects, have provided, made and Ordained.

9. E. 2. The Statute of Sheriffs -- Our Lord the King, by the Assent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons and other great Estates, has Ordained and Established.

5. E. 3. Statute de Natis ultra Mare, Our Lord the King by the Assent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons and other Great Men, and all the Commons of the Realm,
has Ordained and Established these things under Written.

3. R. 2. c. 3. -- Our Lord the King, by the Advice, and Common Consent, etc.
has Ordained and Established.

4. E. 4. c. 1. -- Our Lord the King, by the Advice, Assent Request and
Authority aforesaid, has Ordained and Established.

1. R. 3. c. 2. -- Therefore the King will, it be Ordained by the Advice and
Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of this Present
Parliament.

1. H. 7. c. 7. -- The King our Sovereign Lord, by the Advice and Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, at the Supplication of the Commons ordains.

1. H. 8. e. 7. The King our Sovereign, by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons ordains.

1. E. 6. c. 4. -- Wherefore the King our Sovereign Lord, at the humble
Petition and Suit of the Lords and Commons, does Ordain, Declare and Enact, by
the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in
Parliament Assembled.

1. Mar. c. 1. -- Be it therefore Enacted by the Queens our Sovereign Lady,
with the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled.

5. Eliz. c. 5. -- Be it Enacted by the Queen Most Excellent Majesty, with the
Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled.

1. Jac. c. 2. Be it therefore Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by
and with the Assent and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled.

16. Car. 1. c. 1. Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, with the
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament.

12. Car. 2. nunc Regis c. 11. Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent
Majesty, with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and the Commons in this
present Parliament.

Thus (Sir) by the Title or Introduction of our Statutes in each King's Reign
(from King Edward the First, to this very day) it is clearly proved, that the
Two Houses cannot challenge a Coordinate Power with the King in making Laws in
Parliament by Usage, or Prescription, the Legislative Authority being only in
the King, though the use of it be restrained to the Consent of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament; Le Roy fait les Liex avec le Consent du Seigniors, and
Communs, and non pas les Seigniors and Communs avec le Consent du Roy; The King
makes the Laws with the Consent of the Lords and Commons, and not the Lords and
Commons with the Consent of the King: In a word, the Sovereign is the sole
Legislator, it is His Stamp and Royal Will, and that alone which gives Life,
and Being, and Title of Laws to that which was before, but Counsel and Advice;
All marks of Supremacy being still in him, nor is it an Argument of
Communicating his Power, that he restrains himself from exercising some
particular Acts without Consent of Parliament, for it is by virtue of his own
Grant, that such after-Acts shall not be valid. He has not divided his
Legislative faculty, but tied himself from using it, except by the Advice and
Consent of the Peers, and at the Request of the Commons, their Rogation must
precede his Ratification. Wherefore upon what has been said, I may very well
pronounce our Author's words.

That the Making of Laws is a peculiar and incommunicable privilege of the
Supreme Power; And the Office of the Two Houses in this Case is only Consultive
or Preparative, but the Character of the Power, rests in the final Sanction
which is in the King; And effectually the passing of a Bill is but the granting
of a Request; the Two Houses make the Bill it is true, but the King makes the
Law, and it is the Stamp, and not the Matter, that makes it Current.

FINIS.

