A LETTER TO Sir Thomas Osborn, One of His Majesty's PRIVY COUNCIL, Upon the
reading of a BOOK, called, The present Interest of ENGLAND Stated.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, near the
West End, 1672.

A LETTER TO Sir Thomas Osborn, One of His Majesty's PRIVY COUNCIL, Upon the
Reading of a Book, called, The present Interest of ENGLAND stated.
I Have read over the Book you sent me, entitled, The present Interest of
England stated, and shall deliver you impartially my Opinion of the Author's
Judgment. I had done it sooner, could I have believed the giving you so much
trouble would admit of an excuse. But if at any time my sending you these
Papers can be pardonable, it is now, when we are engaged in a War against the
Dutch, since the Argument upon which they are written, is the subject of common
discourse. In the first place, I shall take notice, that this Author treats of
our Domestic Affairs, not only more rationally, but more like a man concerned
for the good of England, than he does of our Interests abroad: For then instead
of examining calmly, how far the friendship of other Countries would at this
present be useful to us, he falls into passionate expressions of kindness for
the Hollanders; as if our principal design in seeking Foreign Alliances, ought
not to be the increase of our wealth and power, but the finding out humors in
another Nation that please us, and the being civil to those with whom we have
been longest acquainted. This is a mistake so general amongst us, that I dare
not find much fault with it, for fear of being censured my self; having
observed in most of our discourses upon things of this nature, that though we
ought to be in earnest only for our selves, yet out of our extraordinary zeal
for some other Country, the debate between us commonly ends in our being ready
to go to cuffs one with another.

I fully agree with him, that it is the interest of the King of England, to
make himself head of the Protestants, and that he should do it, not by being
violent for any one Sect, but by taking generally into his Protection all
Christians whatsoever, that will not submit to the Government of the Church of
Rome. I also approve of his stating the true interest of England to be Trade,
of his observation of some of our customs which are useful to it, of his
Proposals of new Laws to be made for the advance of it, and of the necessity of
having some enlargement given to people in matters of Religion; for whoever
considers the advantage England has by its situation, above the rest of the
whole world, as to matters of Trade, cannot choose but conclude, that all
Traders would desire to live here, if our Laws did not make it uneasy to them.

In a word, I differ from him in none of his Maxims relating to our interest at
home, and therefore he ought to take it the less ill of me, if I can not agree
with him in all his notions concerning our Alliances abroad. Thus far I am of
his opinion, that we ought to keep a good correspondence with Spain, that we
should hinder the ruin of Flanders, and that we are to use our utmost
endeavors to preserve the command of the Baltic Sea from falling absolutely
into the hands, either of the King of Denmark, or the King of Swedeland. I do
also believe, the interest of the Hollanders and ours, as to that point, is the
same; but why therefore we should be so far transported, as not to care what
prejudice they do us in other matters, is a piece of Policy I do not very well
understand, neither do I see the Consequence why even as to that end, the Dutch
must needs be so powerful at Sea, as they are now; for if they were less
considerable in Shipping, it would not be less their Interest to keep the
Dominion of those Seas divided, nor less in their power to effect it, by
joining their Forces with ours. In the beginning of his Book, he rightly states
the Interest of England to be Trade; but when he comes to his Politics, he
recommends to us in the first place, and as the main point of which we ought to
be most careful, that we should be Friends with the Dutch, and study their
Interest, because they are Traders: never considering, that the same Reason
which should make us endeavor the growth of Trade in our own Country* must of
necessity oblige us to do all we can to obstruct it in another; and that the
strength of his Argument in plain English, is no more than this, That because
we love Trade, therefore we ought to love those that take it from us. Had the
Author been a Lover, instead of a Politician, he would have known, that Rivals
are the things in this world, which men commonly do, and ought most to hate. He
goes on and tells us, that it would be of dangerous Consequence to England, if
the French King should gain any Towns in Holland, because then he would ruin
their Trade: How right soever he may be in this Notion, he is mistaken at least
in his Reason, for it were certainly better for us, if no People in the world
traded by Sea, but our selves.

He says, that if the Hollanders and we were joined, we might both together be
very considerable. That cannot be denied; but what Reason have we to believe,
they ever will join with us to our Advantage? except it be that they never have
done so yet, and that it has been their constant Practice to massacre and make
Slaves of our Contrymen in the East Indies, at the same time they amuse us
with fair Promises at home. A Humanity to which they owe more the Greatness of
their Possessions in those Parts, than to any other Virtue, for which the
Author of this Book can justly commend them.

He says, that their being industrious and parsimonious is not a good Reason
why we should dislike them; as if we ought to observe the same Rules between us
and other Nations, which we are bound to keep amongst our selves. The true Aim
of every English man should be the Good and Prosperity of England; for that
Reason Industry and Parsimony are to be wished for in the Inhabitants of
England, because they are Qualities advantageous for us, and useful to our
Trade: but for the same Reason, they ought not by us to be wished for in the
Inhabitants of Holland, because those Qualities in them are prejudicial to
England, and destructive to our Trade. In short, we may love particular men for
what Reasons we please, but the measure of our Love to other Nations ought to
be only their being useful to ours. I do not from hence infer that because of
their Parsimony we ought to do them Injustice, but on the other side, I see no
Reason why we should receive any from them, because they are a niggardly People.

He enters then into a great Admiration of their Morals and Justice, the
contrary of which he would certainly have been convinced of, if he had lain but
one Night in any Inn of their Country. It is true, that almost the whole
Nation being Merchants or Tradesmen, every ones Endeavor to under-sell his
Neighbor, is the Cause why in the Shops things are sold at a pretty cheap
Rate; for this we are but to thank their Necessities, and not their Morals, nor
their Justice.

The Author in one place touches a little upon the Necessity of inviting all
Princes whatsoever into the Triple League. A Maxim much in vogue with some, who
looking very grave, do therefore take it very ill, if for that Reason, you will
not allow them to be infallible. To make appear the Profoundness of which
Notion, it is necessary that I explain a little what the Triple League is:

The Triple League was made between the King of England, the King of Swedeland,
and the States of Holland, when the French King had entered Flanders with a very
powerful Army. The Design of this League was to induce the French to make a
Peace with the Spaniard, upon such terms as should be proposed to them by the
Confederates of the Triple League; and that they might the easier bring this to
pass, they were forced to offer such Conditions as were not altogether for the
King of Spain's Advantage, though such as preserved the greatest part of
Flanders in his Possession.

At the same time the Confederates made Articles amongst themselves to help one
another, in case any of them should be invaded, for having made the Triple
League, either by the French King, the King of Spain, or by any of their Allies.

Upon this followed the Treaty at Aix la Chapelle, where the French and the
Spaniards accepted of the Articles delivered to them by the Confederates of the
Triple League, and the Confederates became their Guaranties or Sureties for the
Performance of those Articles on both sides. This being the State of the
matter, it is very true, we may admit other Princes into the Guaranty of the
Peace, but to say, we should invite them into the Triple League, which enforced
the Peace, is as much as to say, we should desire their Conjunction in order to
the making of a Peace, which had been already concluded several years before;
and that, if you mark it, is such a kind of Figure in Discourse as commonly is
called a Bull.

Besides, we were then forced to agree to several Articles both with the Swedes
and the Dutch, which it would not be for our advantage now to make with the
Emperor or the Princes in Germany: it being no Consequence, that because the
Swedes, the Dutch, and we did mutually engage to assist one another, upon our
own Charge, at a time when we were afraid the French might invade us; that
therefore now when we are in no such danger, we should promise to help any
other State or Prince, except they will pay us very well for it. They might
consider too, if they please, that we are a little nearer Flanders than
Hungary; and that it is not altogether so difficult for us, to transport our
men to the other side of the Water, as it would be to make them march into the
farthest Parts of Germany, as often as it should happen to be invaded by the
Great Turk; and that the Emperor should claim our Assistance, because the Great
Turk is one of the King of France his Allies. Observe I beseech you, the
prettiness of this Politic Gradation, and the Consequence of it, if it were
put in Practice: Because we have thought it fit to defend our Neighbors in
Flanders, we must therefore presently march into the Empire, to defend there
some who are not our Neighbors, nor indeed within the Reach of our Protection.
Now I would very fain know by this Rule of theirs, when our poor Contrymen
should hope to be at Rest? For the same charitable Reason would lead us on as
well to the farthest Parts of Europe, nay of the whole World, if these
Politicians could but catch us once in a good humor. I must confess, if it be
our Ambition to gain the Name of Peacemakers General, without any
Consideration, either of our own Interest or Profit in the case, then this this
were the readiest way to compass that End: but if we will look back into the
Examples of former Ages, we shall find, though many Nations have gone a great
way for Conquest into Foreign Parts, yet that never any before went so far out
of the way to defend their own Country.

There is another Conception of this kind insisted upon by some, as a matter of
very great weight, which is, that now we must not fall out with the Dutch upon
any Provocation, because that would be a Breach of the Triple League. This
(under favor) is an Absurdity yet greater than the former, there being no one
thing you can allege as a Consequence to any other thing whatsoever, that will
not make every whit as sensible a Conclusion as this. For Example, to say, that
you ought not to go to Bed to night, because the King of Spain did not go
yesterday a hunting; or that I must not dine to morrow, because Monsieur de Wit
loves dancing, is not a more incoherent Discourse, than that because we have
promised with the Dutch to save Flanders from the French, therefore what
Injuries soever the Dutch shall offer us, we cannot defend our selves against
them. The Argument, if you mark it, is just thus, that because I agree with
William to save Thomas, therefore I am bound to let William cut my Throat. If
those good men that start these Notions, would instead of instructing others,
but take the Pains sometimes to think themselves, they would find that
Self-Preservation ought to be looked after a little in these kind of Affairs;
And that if the Consequence of the Loss of Flanders did not somewhat concern
us, we should be no more in pain about it, than we were for the Conquest of
Granada.

I shall now take upon me to state the Interest of England, and begin as this
Author does, though I differ with him in the Conclusion.

The undoubted Interest of England is Trade, since it is that only which can
make us either Rich or Safe; for without a powerful Navy, we should be a Prey
to our Neighbors, and without Trade, we could neither have Seamen nor Ships.
From hence it does follow, that we ought not to suffer any other Nations to be
our Equals at Sea, because when they are once our Equals, it is but an even
Lay, whether they or we shall be the Superiors. And it would not be a stranger
thing that the Dutch should come to be so from what they are, now than it is,
that they are arrived to what they are now, from what they were in Queen
Elizabeth's time. I shall add to this one Observation, which in my Opinion is
very clear:

That England has never been so considerable since her time, as it was then,
and yet it is much more so in it self, the Kingdom of Scotland being now joined
to the Crown of England, which it was not before. -- If you enquire into the
reason of this, you will find it to be, because we are not now so absolutely
the Masters at Sea, as we were in those times: for though we have at present
more, and better ships, and a far greater trade than we had then, yet we have
of neither so much a larger proportion, in respect to other Nations, as we had
at that time. -- The Dutch who were then but a company of Fishermen, being now
both in shipping and trade very near our equals, and if you will take their
words for it, our Superiors. And without doubt it is a vain thing for us to
pretend to be a balance between any considerable powers at Land, so long as we
are thus equally balanced at Sea by the Dutch. This it self methinks, should
be sufficient to make us not very well pleased with the change of our
condition; but our case has yet in it a further consideration, that we are by
this means in a perpetual danger of being conquered. For though the Dutch alone
cannot do it, yet by joining with France they may, and it is that which a
considerable party amongst them has been laboring for these many years. To
this it is objected, that it can never be the interest of Holland to join with
France in the conquest of England; but for ought we know they may mistake their
interest, and certainly it is not wisdom in any Nation, to have its safety
depend upon the prudence of another: Besides, it does not appear to me, that it
is not the interest of Holland to have England conquered by them and the
French: For first, they may make such a division of England, as to keep to
themselves the most considerable parts in it for trade, and being Masters of
the French at Sea, they will be sure to make their party good with them in an
Island. In the next place, those parts of England which should fall to be under
the French, would be inconsiderable as to matter of Trade; that, and their
Arbitrary way of Government, being incompatible one with another. And the
reason is plain, for there are few that will put out their money upon this
double adventure, of losing it at Sea, or having it taken from them when it
comes home again. Besides, the nature of the English is so averse to the
Government of France, and our Religion so different from theirs, that if
England should happen thus to be conquered, they would be likelier to close
with the Dutch, than become subject to the French. All the Trading men would
live under the Dutch, and by consequence they would have all the rich Towns,
and it is no difficult matter to determine what influence those Towns would
have over the rest of the whole Nation. For the very same Reasons, if ever
Holland should be in danger of a Conquest, by the Conjunction of the French and
us, the Dutch would rather choose to become Part of our Government, then submit
themselves to the Power of France. Against this I have heard some say, that
because we endeavor to obstruct their Trade, the Dutch will never join with
us: But those Gentlemen do not consider, that upon our Conjunction all such
Endeavors would cease; for it would then be as much our Interest, to promote
their Trade, as the Trade of any other part of England. Another Argument which
I have met with upon the same Subject is, That the fear of us would force the
Dutch to accept of Conditions from the French: But upon a true Examination of
the matter, there will be found in the practice of it this Difficulty, that the
French will not trust to what the Dutch shall promise, without having such a
Power given them in their Country, as may force them to keep their Words; and
the Dutch will hardly trust the French with that Power, lest it should be made
use of to their Prejudice, whether they keep their words or no. In short, the
usual course that all men take, when they are no longer able to defend their
own Government, is to choose what is next best for them. So that the natural
Question, if that should happen, must necessarily be, Whether, considering our
Laws, and the Situation of our Country, the Proffer of a Coalition with
England, would not prove more acceptable, and more advantageous to a Trading
People, than any Terms they can expect from the French. The Sea Towns at least
would fall to be our share: And then, though the French should be Masters of
the rest of the whole States Dominions, we should have no reason to complain of
our part in the Division. Nay, supposing the worst, that we should be so ill
advised, as to let the French take all, and leave us nothing; yet, even in that
Case, the French King would rather make their strength at Sea inconsiderable,
by their being subject to him, than his own more formidable, by his being their
Master. For the Power of Holland depends upon two things, their Parsimony, and
their Liberty.

By their Liberty, they are encouraged to trade, and by their Parsimony, they
are enabled to do it cheaper than any other people. Both which would certainly
be destroyed by the profuseness of the French living, and the Severity of their
Government.

I do not pretend, that all this is as plain, as that two and two make four, it
being impossible to use that certainty of reasoning in things of this nature:
but thus far I dare affirm, that no man can be assured, but that some time or
other the Dutch may take it to be their Interest to join with France in the
Conquest of England; for which Reason, I lay it down as a Maxim, That we must
never give them leave to be our equals at Sea.

In the next place, I think it our interest to preserve Flanders from being
overrun by the French, lest that might prove of a dangerous consequence to us.
But no apprehension of danger, ought to frighten us into a certain ruin; and
therefore at the same time we are securing others by the Triple League, we may
be allowed at least, to take some care of our own safety; for if whilst we
labor to save the Crown of Spain, we suffer the Dutch to rob us of our Trade,
we shall make in my judgment, but a very ill bargain for our selves; and the
world would have just cause to believe, the Dutch are our Masters already in
point of understanding, if they could impose upon us so silly a notion, as that
we should employ our strength to support their Government, and let them use
their Arts to cut off the Sinews of ours.

I told you at first the reason why I send you now these Papers, and if you
find any thing in them with which you cannot agree, I shall be so far from
being angry at your differing from my opinion, that you will do me a favor in
convincing me to be of yours; being very much persuaded, it is better for a man
to be really in the right, than to have it only thought he is so, either by
himself or other people.

My aim in this is, that the Interest of England may be thoroughly searched out;
and I can truly say for my self, I never yet had any Design, but what I
believed was for the Honor, the Greatness, and the Prosperity of this Nation.


