The Unspotted HIGH-COVRT OF JUSTICE Erected, and Discovered, in Three SERMONS,
Preached in LONDON, and other Places.

By THOMAS BAKER Rector of St. Mary the More, in EXON.

Jam. 5.9. Behold the Judge stands before the Door.

Ambros. l. 5. d. Fid. c. 8. Cum cuncta futuri Iudicii momenta nescimus,
semper, tanquam in Excubiis constituti, and in quadam virtutis Specula
collocati, peccandi consuetudinem declinemus; ne nos inter vitia Dies Domini
deprehendat.

Printed for the Author, 1657.

THE EPISTLE To his justly honored friend, Jonathan Prickman, Esquire the
happiness of this life, and a better.
SIR,
THe diet of Ephraim, in the Prophet, cannot but by all, that have tried it, be
interpreted, and entertained, for very spare, and thin, that is nothing else
but (what the Apostle disclaimeth the fighting with) a poor blast of empty
Air. That Ixion is in a very sorry condition, that embraces a cloud of such
vacuity in stead of the Juno of a well-furnished table. Mine entertainment,
Sir, by you, from time to time, has been of another nature, that have still,
every day more and more, abounded in pregnant, testimonies of your real favors
toward me. These poor labors, which, when preached, you were pleased highly
to approve of, shall you but now vouchsafe to look upon, in a dead letter,
where they cannot but lose much of their luster, with a favorable eye, you
shall every day, more then other, lay a strong obligation of a continued
sacrifice of prayer, still to be offered up before the Throne of grace, for all
manner of blessings, both spiritual, and temporal, to be showred down upon you,
and yours, by

Sir, Your most humbly devoted Friend, and Servant, T. B.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader.
FOr, (for the general, upon my late trial of thee, by the three Sermons of
mine, lately published, I find thee to deserve no other compellation; however
some -- Magni nominis umbrae, shadows of great names have winced; and so upon
the result, professed themselves galled, with a passage in the Epistle to the
first, of the Knaves every day turning) be thou Presbyterian, or
Independent, will thou be but pleased to lay aside thy self-interest, the less
reason shall thou have, as Felix, to startle at this theme of Judgment. Be
thou a right, unbiassed, Protestant, Christian* as, with the Creature in the
Apostle, thou will find in the an inclination to a restless groaning, till thou
be delivered from the bondage of corruption: so withal a propension, every
day more and more, to lift up thine head; in a joyful assurance, that the day
of thy Redemption draws nigh. Be thou what thou will, leaving this
following discourse upon the Text for thee to advise with, that thou may so
demean thy self, that the sound of the last Trumpet may not affright thee, is,
and shall be, the assiduous prayer of

Thine in our common Judge, and Savior, T. B.

The first SERMON.
Apoc. 20.12. I saw the dead, small, and great, stand up before God; and the
Books were opened, and then another Book was opened, which was the book of
life, and the Dead were judged out of those things, which were written in the
Books, according to their works.


NOt to look back for Cohaerence as but so far, as the immediately preceding
verses, wherein our divine Evangelist acquainteth us with what he has
discovered, of Gog, and Magog, devoured by fire from Heaven; and their great
Lord, and Master, the Devil cast into a lake, that is for ever to burn with
fire, and brimstone, I shall for the present, content my self with that
Statutum est of the Apostle, Heb. 9.27. for an Introduction, to lead me into
the Text; it is appointed for all men once to die; and after that the
judgment. Death is nothing else but as that adversary in the Gospel, that
delivers us up to the Judge. Or as an alarm, for the awaking of us, to
prepare for a sharp encounter with judgment. And then, since death has, of
late days especially, and that for a long continued Tract of time, been
gallopping upon her pale horse amongst us; not all-arming us only, but beating
up our quarters, yea, bathing her footsteps in our blood; nay, and God only
knows how soon she may be charging us with a fresh Cariere; drereful Heralds
unto us, that it is to probable, that ere long we shall be delivered up to this
Judges Capital sentence; yea that, unless those two powerful Advocates, a
lively faith, and hearty repentance, shall seasonably interpose, must needs
doom us to irreparable destruction, both of body and soul; this sentence of
judgment, in all rational discourse, may not seem strange, or uncouth, unto
us. Nay, may that the Apostles argument, upon his Romans he presses, for their
speedier awaking out of sleep, Romans 13.11. pass for irrefragable, that their
salvation is now nearer then when they first believed; of all hands can it not
but be agreed upon, that a strongerty, for the contemplation of this Judgment,
must needs lieupon us, that have far greater reason to say of our times then
the Apostle of his above sixteen hundred years ago, Cor. 10.11. that we are
they, upon whom the ends of the world are come; then upon any Patriarch, or
Prophet, before, or under, the Law, yea, or Evangelist, or Apostle, since the
death, or Sepulture thereof; that had but a dim sight of this so considerable a
spectacle, by the glimering light of Prophecy, or vision, yea, or Revelation;
as has our divine Evangelist, and Apostle, here. I saw the dead, small, and
great, stand up before God, etc.

The Text then you cannot but see what just reason I shall have to term a
lively Effigies, and Representation, of the great, and general, and unspotted,
High-Court of Justice, that, at the last day, shall be erected in the Heaven of
Heavens; wherein I shall only point out unto your considerations these ensuing
particulars.

the Prisoners to be arraigned, the Judge to pass sentence. the Evidence to be
given in. the Legal proceeding of the Court. the Infallible certainty of all.
The Prisoners, to be arraigned, you may see to be the Dead, small, and great.

The judge, to pass sentence, God.

The Evidence, to be given in, Recorded in Books.

The Legal proceedings of the Court appears clearly in that the dead, without
any the least distinction, or discrimination, are to be judged according to
their works.

And the infallible certainty of all is conspicuously apparent by that our
divine Evangelist, and Apostle, professes that he has been (...); an
eyewitness of all. These the parts, of these plainly, briefly, and orderly.
And first are we to take a view of the Prisoners to be arraigned; which we see,
are the Dead, small, and great. I saw the dead, small, and great, stand up
before God. Not to mention those, that shall, alive, be caught up with those
that are dead, to meet the Lord in the Air. 1 These. 4.17. this mention of
dead, small, and great, has ministered matter of sharp dispute to Divines, of
no mean note in the Church, about the stature of the dead, that shall stand up
in the judgment; whether it shall be of all the same. Not to distract your
thoughts with an endless multiplicity of needless conjectures, we shall look no
further then S. Augustines summary determination of the point, that, at the day
of judgment, we shall not all appear of an equal stature, for that this were,
with Procrustes, to stretch out those of a shorter, and to contract those of a
taller Size; yea indeed, by extending and contracting of dimensions, to take
away the natural property of the bodies. But of that stature shall we all
appear, Qua vel eramus, vel futuri eramus, in juvenili aetate; which, either we
should have attained, had we not been cut of in our infancy; or had attainned,
and continued in, had we not by old age out-grown it. Of that strength, and
vigor, that usually accompanyeth the age of three, or four, and thirty years;
of which age the first Adam is conceived, and concluded to be, when he was
created: the second, when he was crucified. And this conjecture is not
improbably grounded upon that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.13. till we all come to
a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature, or, (as it is in the Margent,)
of the age of Christ. But, shall we compare this place with 19. of this Book
18. where the Angel gives a Commission to the fowls of the Air to eat the
flesh of all men, both bond, and free, both small, and great, we shall easily
be induced to believe, that by those small, and great, shall be intended a
commensuration of men, not by their statures so much as their stations; not so
much by their dimensions as conditions. So that the result shortly shall be,
that Princes as well as Peasants, rich as poor, bond as free, shall all stand up
before this judgment seat. We say, that, as death leaves us, so judgment
finds us; yea indeed, death and judgment deal with us alike impartially. So
that Pallida Mors -- as death visits, all times, the Palaces of the
mightiest Potentates, as well as the cottages of the poorest Mushroms; shufling
both King and Pawn into one bag, as soon as the game of our life is ended: so
shall the summons of judgment equally attach us; Cum suis Plato adducetur
discipulis; and Potentissimi quondam Reges nudo latere palpitabunt; Plato shall
be brought forth, ranged in the same form with his the meanest Scholars, and
those mighty Potentates, whose very names but even now struck terror into the
hearts of all about them, shall now, divested of all their Robes of State, and
titles of Honor, stand naked, and trembling, before this dreadful Tribunal.
Nor can this tidings of judgment seem strange to any, that is not a mere
stranger to reason. Even the Moralist has written a purposed Book, whose sum
is this Problem debated, Quare bonis eveniat male; wherefore the most Religious
Persons, have, not seldom, the worst end of the staff in this life, whose
Positive resolution we find to be, that things are thus ordered by providence,
that the good may be still kept in hope, and the evil in fear, of another life.
Indeed, it, not seldom fares with the righteous, and the Reprobate, in this
case, as with Isaac, and his Brethren. Genesis 25. They have certain gifts given
them, and are sent away; whilst he has the entire Inheritance reserved for
him. The Reprobate here may have certain gifts of the Highest left hand, of
success, of advancement, of wealth, of Honor, in a liberal measure, heaped up
upon them; but then without the least hope, or expectance of any further
testimony of Gods love, or favor, for the future, they are sent away to their
own places; whilst the Righteous, in the mean time, meanly gratified with
present Boons, have an Inheritance reserved for them, even an Inheritance
incorruptible, that fades not away, in the highest Heavens. As with Manasseh,
and Ephraim. Genesis 48. of which, however Manasseh, as the elder, be placed, by
Joseph, at his Fathers Right hand; and Ephraim, as the younger, at his Left:
yet is the case, immediately after, altered by the good old man's deliberate
transposition of his hands; he laying his Right upon Ephraim, his Left upon
Manasseh. The Reprobate here in this life may, by Joseph, which sounds
increasing, by the increase of their wealth, and substance, as Elder brothers,
be set down at the right hand of Honor, and Power; whilst the Righteous, like
the Younger, may be left at the left of neglect, and contempt. But, in the life
to come, the God of Jacob, that leads Joseph, like a Sheep, shall dispose of
them in a far diverse, yea, contrary, posture; placing, as his true, harmless,
and serviceable Sheep, the Righteous at his right hand; but leaving the
Reprobate, as unprofitable Goats, at his left. As with the Teeth, and the Feet;
whereof the former, whilst they are sound, we contentedly allow an eminent
place in the body; and for that we find them of great use, for its health,
carefully, preserve, and serve with all manner of dainties; but, when they
begin to rot, we pluck out, and cast away, as fit for nothing but the Dunghill,
or Fire; the latter, whilst they are sound, we leave not only to their low, and
despicable, site; but expose to all manner, labor, and travail; and employ in
the most vile, and servile offices; which yet if, by any casualty, they shall
come to be ill affected, we carefully, and charily, plaster, and bind up. The
Reprobate here, like the Teeth, may be seated in the most Eminent place of the
body politic; and may appear (certainly for such to appear they desire) very
serviceable for its advantage (though it be all this while indeed but to eat up
Gods people, as if they would eat bread, Psalm. 14.8.) and upon either score,
may not only be heeded tenderly, for point of preservation; but served with all
manner, choice, and rare, provision; but when putrefaction, and rottenness,
shall scorn to seize them, shall be scronfully cast away; as fit for nothing
but the Dunghill of neglect, and contempt, in the memories of men; or the fire
of Hell, in Satan's territories. Whilst the Righteous, like the feet, after
that, for the whole term of their life, they have, not only been left in a
lowly, and base, condition; but exposed unto all manner, labor, and travail,
and anguish; and that both of soul and body; and have been surbated and
bruised, with all manner, Tribulations, and Persecutions, are, at last, with
all manner tender care, bound up in the bundle of life. To say no more, as with
Cattle, kept for several purposes, the one for store, the other for slaughter;
whereof the one feeds in green, and fat, Pastures; the other are kept upon
bare commons. The Reprobate here may have, the seeming happiness at least of
feeding in the green, and pleasant, Pastures of all manner of plenty, and
prosperity; but then in conclusion find they themselves designed for the
slaughterhouse of Hell. Whilst the Righteous in the mean time, that are fain
to content themselves with no better feeding, then the bare commons ofl
poverty, and all kind of misery, are yet reserved, as choice store, to remain,
yea, Reign, with him, for evermore. So that then, whilst the Righteous, even
when they are most anxiously groaning under the heaviest pressure of their
afflctions, shall have no reason to despair of an happy change of cheer; and
therefore, in a passionate hastiness of Spirit, to cry out, as David sometimes,
Psalm. 31.24. We are cast out of the sight of thine Eyes; or as Sion. Isa. 49 4,
The Lord has forsaken, and forgotten us: So neither shall the Reprobate, in
the highest Flux of their brain-intoxicating happiness, have reason to promise
themselves a perpetual, and unchangeable, continuance thereof, as the same
David, in his wanton estate. Psalm. 30.6. I shall never be removed; much less,
as those Rulers, courage themselves in mischief, and say, as it is Isa. 28.15.
We have made a Covenant with Death, and with Hell we are at an agreement; when
that overflowing scourge, shall pass through, it shall not come nigh us, we
have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves. Say ye to
the Righteous (is the Lords own close of that (...), sweet-sowr word of his)
that it shall be well with him; for he shall eat the fruit of his doings; but
woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the reward of his hand shall
be given him. Isa. 2.10, 11. As it is the same Lords gracious declaration of
himself to his Church; In a little wrath hid I my face from thee, for a moment;
but with everlasting kindness will I have Mercy upon thee. Isa. 54.8. So is it
his, no less just then dreadful, doom upon Babylon, the Churches Maule; that,
as much as she has glorified her self, and fared deliciously, so much torment,
and sorrow, shall be given her, the 18. of this Book and the 7th. As there is a
fearful woe thundered out against those, that laugh for the present. Luke 6.25.
So is there a cheerful Benedictus carolled out unto those, that mourn here; for
that hereafter they shall be comforted, Mat. 5.4. The rich glutton has first
his good things, and Lazarus evil; and therefore is there a time by either to
be expected for their turning of Tables, their change of conditions; when the
one must be comforted, and the other Tormented. Luke 16.25. It is a just thing
with God (says the Apostle, enforcing this change with an argument, we See)
drawn from his Justice) to render Tribulation unto them that trouble you, 2
These. 1.6. whilst the Righteous (will we hear the Psalmists) shall rejoice to
see the vengeance. Psalm. 5.9. Tribulation shall be the just Recompense of
those, that have troubled the Righteous, whilst a principal part of the joy of
the Righteous shall be the sight of just vengeance to be executed upon those,
that have troubled them. So that a man shall say (will he, nill he, shall be
driven to confess) that the Righteous shall not finally go unrewarded, verily
there is a reward for the Righteous; nor shall the wicked for ever escape
unpunished; doubtless there is a God, that judges the earth.

Which fitly brings me to the consideration of the second particular, the
Judge, that is to pass sentence, God. I saw the Dead, small, and great, stand
up before God.

Three things there are (as one has well observed) which the Lord has
reserved, as peculiar to himself. The knowledge of things to come; It is not
for you to know the times, and seasons (says our Savior to his inquisitive
Disciples) which the Father has put in his own Power. Acts 1.7. The revenge of
injuries; Vengeance is mine (is the Lords own word) and I will repay it. Deuteronomy.
32.35. And the judgment of secrets; judge nothing before the time, until the
Lord come; Who shall bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make
manifest the counsels of the heart. 1 Cor. 4.5. The School yet, for the more
precise pointing out the Person of this Judge unto us; distinguishes of a
threefold manner of Judgment. First, there is Iudicium Approbationis; a
judgment of suffrage, or Approbation. And in this sense shall the Saints act
the parts of Judges. Know ye not (says the Apostle) that the Saints shall
judge the world? 1. Cor. 2.6. Secondly, there is Iudicium Principalis
Autoritatis; a Judgment of supreme Authority. And this way of Judgment is
peculiar to the Divine Essence. Wherein yet Opera Trinitatis is ad Extra sunt
Indivisa (says the same School) every subsistence in the Trinity may justly
challenge an equal interest. God shall bring every work to judgment, says the
Preacher. Eccles. 12.14. For which cause I find the day of this Judgment, by
St. Peter, 2 Epist. 3.12. signally styled Gods day; looking for (says he) and
hastening unto, the Day of God. Thirdly, there is Iudicium Promulgationis; a
Judgment of passing sentence. And with this power is the second Person in the
Trinity exclusively invested; and that merely in regard of his Humane Nature.
The Father (is his own word) has given the Son power to execute judgments,
because he is the son of man. John 5.27. And this, whether it be for the making
of the equity of his proceedings in this Judgment the more, conspicuous (upon
which ground, I meet with Divines, that will needs make that word of the Lord.
Joel 3.2. matter of an undeniable conclusion, that the seat of this Judgment
shall be Perpendicularly erected over the valley of Iehosaphat near Jerusalem;
for that being the center of the earth, as by Geographere is unanimously agreed
on, thither, from all parts of the worlds circumference, may the lines of all
Nations most commodiously be drawn, to take the fairer, and fuller view of the
justice of these his proceedings) or whether (as we use to help a lame Leg
with a Crutch) it be for the more eminent Exaltation of this Judge in the
condition of his Humane Nature; wherein (...), says the Apostle, Phil. 2.8. he
made himself of no reputation, or (as the word more properly imports) he
emptied himself, and made him nothing, becoming obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross (the eminent reason given by him for our bowing at the Name
of Jesus rather then any other name of his) I forbear for the present to
determine. Certainly, as the Pillar of the cloud, that gave light in the
Israelitish, was darkness in the Egyptian Camp. Exodus 14.20. when the sight of
this Judge, in the visible shape of his Humanity, shall dart out beams of
unspeakable comfort into the souls of his Elect, when they shall now see him
set upon the Throne of Glorious Majesty, whom they have heretofore followed
through much Tribulaon, and Misery; when (what the people sometimes
passionately petitioned. Exodus 20.19.) they shall hear not God so much as a
man, like unto themselves, speaking unto them in judgment; and so (as the
Apostle in another case, 2 Cor. 4. 7.) shall have the Heavenly treasure of the
final discharge, and acquittance, from the guilt of all their sins brought unto
them in an earthen (though now glorified) vessel; what darkness, and blackness,
of horror (think we) shall seize the souls of the wicked, when they shall see
him, whom they have pierced? as it is in the 1. of this Book 7. when (as St.
Hierom) cerves manus Iudaee, quas fixeras? The Jew shall see the Head, he has
wounded? And the Roman the side, he has gored? Nay, if Joseph's brethren were,
not a little, affrighted, and afflicted, at his presence, when he told them
that he was Joseph, whom they had sold into Egypt, Genesis 45. how shall even the
best of us, sinful souls, appear stricken with astonishment, when we shall hear
this our Brother, but now judge, semblably upbraiding us; I am Jesus, your
Savior, whom, from time to time, you have sold for the vile price of sin? And
so, upon the result, shall desire the murtherous Barabbas of your sinful
concupiscence to be given you? and vote his delivery up, a second time, to be
crucified? when the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, shall, in an awful reverence,
hide their heads, when the Heavens shall be rolled up, like a Scroule; and the
Elements melt with heat; how shall the faces of sinners be abased, and
confounded: The dreadful sound of the Trumpet, that shall cleave the Rocks,
startle the dead out of their Graves, yea, shake the very Powers of Heaven, how
shall it thunderstrike the guilty conscience? O Angustia, (says holy Anselme;)
Hic erunt Accusantia Peccata, etc. O the anguish of spirit, we shall, in that
day, be surprised with? on the one side we shall hear our sins accusing us; on
the other Justice threatening us; under Hell gaping for us; above an angry Judge
writing bitter things against us; within the conscience galling; without the
world burning. Quando latere erit impossible, as that Father goes on; when a
Latitat shall be impossible, and yet an Appearance intolerable? our God shall
come, and shall not keep silence (says the Royal Prophet) there shall go
before him a consuming fire; and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round
about him. Psalm. 50.3. Et, sitalis terror futurus sit advenientis, says
Eusebius Emissenus upon the words; and if to the eye the appearance of his
person shall be so horrid, how hideously (think we) will the sound of his
sentence ring in the ear? Certainly, Horror ubique animos, and plurima Nostris
Imago; Tribulation, and Anguish, must needs be, on that Day in great extremity,
upon those souls, that shall then appear with any of their unrepented sins
about them, when we shall all both small, and great, come to stand up before
God. But here, (me thinks) I hear, as some, with the Saints under the Altar,
in the 12. of this Book 10. crying out, How long Lord, holy; and true, do
thou not judge, and avenge, our blood on those, that dwell on the earth. So
others, as those in St. Peter, in the 2. of his Epistle, 3.4. scoffing; where
is the promise of his coming? For all things continue as they were, from the
beginning of the Creation. All, as the Disciples, Matthew 24.3. busily
enquiring; Quando is it haec erunt? When shall these things be. Learn a Parable
of the Fig Tree, you know, is our Savior just answer to this their curious
Quare, Verse 32. of the above-praised Chapter. And now, from time to time, we
have seen no withered Fig Tree putting forth many a Prognostic Leaf, how
insensible shall we proclaim our selves, if the sight of such a spectacle shall
not induce us, without the least Haesitation, to conclude, that this summer,
this scorching summer is very near at hand? what the least abatement, even
amongst our new self-canonizing Saints, of excess, of wantonness, of pride, of
sacrilege, of perjury, of all manner vanities, nay an abominable grouth of al
these, do we find even now, that Leves undae, (as S. Greg. speaks) those
lesser waves of our long continued, unnatural, self-wasting, Jars, still
tossing, and turmoiling us; nay, of the abomination of desolation, still
laving, and wasling away, all the Religious endowments of our holy Places; yea,
and now standing with as great confidence in them, as if he were of Gods own
placing; as if their errand, were expressly to tell us, that it cannot be long,
ere the Lord in a dreadful tempest, of Fire (as in Noah's days sometimes of
water) arise, to judge the earth; of which signs our Savior himself in the
above-praised, Mat. 24? what palpable symbols of Antichrist unmasked does our
daily experience present us withal, in the well-nigh universal exaltation, we
sadly see, against all that is called God; and in that late starting up of not
a few withal deceivableness of unrighteousnes; of which the Apostle 2 These. 2?
what swarms of Apostats, from the faith; giving heed to the seducing spirits of
false Prophets; speaking lies in Hypocrisy; even such, as would make the
blackest Fiends of Hell to blush; forbidding to marry; at least the regular
way, by the Priests tying that sacred knot; and substituting (I know not what)
profane, exotic, hand, to act in the place thereof; of which the same Apostle,
1 Timothy 4? what herds, and troops of covetous, proud, boasters, blasphemers,
truce breakers, false accusers, despisers of those that are good, Traitors,
heady, high-minded; having a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof;
Creepers into houses; leading captive silly women laden with sins, and led away
with diverse lusts; of which the same Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. what mockers, even
mockers of God; sometimes by Mock-fasts, in order, or disorder rather, to the
smiting with the fist of wickedness? and setting Naboth on high, for the
effusion of his Innocent blood; and the seizure of his poor vineyard? and Mock
thanksgivings sometimes, for deliverance from Poetic dangers, which God, in
his good time, may, in justice make real? Nay, as in our Chronicles we read of
the Scotch, that having invaded our Borders, and having observed a great
mortality in our English camp; and, upon a cessation of Arms, enquiring of our
Country men the reason; and told that it came by Gods grace, they daily prayed
to be delivered from that foul disease, and fra Gods grace; what thanksgivings
have been made for a deliverance from Gods choicest blessings, the best
established Government, and ordered Religion, the world ever heard of; of which
St. Jude the 18. of his Epistle; what storms of persecution against the true
Professors of Christ's name, by a war upon them; and a victory over them, of
which our Divine Evangelist in the 11. of this Book and 7. Some of the Rabbis
I meet with (of whose fancies I shall have to just reason to say, what St.
Augustine sometimes of the School-mens arguments, Dum lucent subtilitate,
franguntur vanitate; that, while they shine with subtlety, they appear
shattered through their vanity) that, upon those words of St. Peter 2 Peter
3.8. One day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years sa one
day; have dogmatically concluded, that as the world was created in six days,
and then followed the Sabbath: so was the world to continue for six thousands
years. Whereof two thousand before the Law; two thousand under the Law; two
thousand, six hundred fifty six, since the Law, being fully elapsed; as soon as
the remainder of three hundred, forty, four, four shall be run out, the Day of
Judgment shall immediately auspicate the worlds rest; whose solemnity yet
(wherein will we hear our Cock-brained Millenaries? our Savior shall reign in
all manner glorious Pomp, and State, upon earth) shall continue for a thousand
years; no otherwise, then the first Sabbath was a Day of equal length with any
other of the Days of the Creation. And now, were it proper to fly out into
Tropological excursions, how present, and easy, were it for me to give you an
account of signs, not so much immediately preceding, as actually accompanying,
this Days Advent: as our Sun turned into Blood: our Moon not giving her Light;
our Stars fallen from Heaven; and shut up in black Abysses of obscurity. But this
judge himself seems advisedly to labor the stay of our bold adventures, for
the fathoming of this depth, by whatever, whether Literal, or Metaphorical,
signs. Of that Day, and Hour, knows no man; no not the Angels in Heaven; nay,
not the Son man himself* Mark 13.32. Non novit i. e. non notificavit, says
Damascene; he is said not to know it, for that he is not pleased to make it
known. A gloss yet, should we smoothly swallow, the light of this knowledge we
might, upon the same ground, as justly deny the Father as him; for that the one
is no more pleased to make it known then the other. Much better therefore St.
Gregory; in Humanitate novit, non ex Humanitate; In his Divinity as God, though
made man, in no wise may he be charged with the guilt of any ignorance; but in
his Humanity, in the mean time, as mere man, justly may he disavow all such
manner of knowledge And shall we then, poor worms, and no men, be curiously
inquisitive; nay, positively Definitive, where the Son of man himself is
deliberately content to be ignorant? The Prophet Isaiah 6. his Prophecy. And
the 2. sees God on his Throne; and the Seraphins above it, with two wings
covering his Face, and his Feet with two. His face with two (says St. Hierome)
thereby shutting up from our Eyes the secrets of his Predestination from the
beginning; and his Feet with two, thereby concealing the certain time of his
coming to Judgment at the last day. And then, as the Egyptian in Plutarch to
him, that would needs be prying into his covered Basket; Gum vides velatam,
quid inquiris in rem absconditam? Since we find the precise time of this
Judges coming deliberately shut up in secrecy from us, how can we, without the
gross forfeiture of (I say not all Christian only, but even Natural,) modesty,
adventure upon a bold enquiry thereinto? much more a Positive Definition
thereof? And, as Antigonus sometimes to his son Demetrius, demanding of him
when the Camp should move; Number te solum metuis? Art thou afraid, that thou only
shall not hear the sound of the Trumpet? how can we, without even a profession
of steely forheads, be prying into this recluse Mystery, whereof the sound of
the last Trumpet is the only certain signal to be expected? And of the
designation of the certain time of this Days advent from the search, much more
discovery, of any mortal Eye St. Augustine seems to give a pregnant reason;
Latet Dies ultimus, ut omnes Dies observemus; no certain notice have we given
us of the time of this last days coming, to caution us to expect, and prepare
for, its coming every Day. And the contemplation of this Days so near, and
uncertain, approach, the son of Sirach, before we enterprise any thing, would
still have us to propose to the Eyes of our Mind, as the best Line, and
Square, whereby to regulate the whole course of our lives. Whatsoever (says
he) thou take in hand, remember thine end, this thy last end; and thou shall
never do amiss. Eccles. 7.36. For, as a Ship is best guided by the Stern: so is
the course of our life best ordered by having a continual recourse unto this
our last end. And, as he shoots best that still eyeth the Mark; so that man,
in semblance, best levelleth the Shafts of all his actions, that has the mark
of this his last end still in his eye. And then, as is the old Philosophy Rule;
Primum in intention, Vltimum in Executione; Since this last end of ours is the
last thing to put in Execution, how can we but conclude it highly reasonable,
and seasonable, that it precede, and go before, every act of ours in intention,
and consideration? O! that Men were therefore so wise (says Moses) as still to
remember this their last End. Deuteronomy. 32.19. And, with St. Hierom, to be so
sagely fanciful as still to conceive they heard the sound of this last Trumpet
still ringing in their ears. The serious recognition whereof could not but make
the most Heathenish Felix to tremble; when (as Bias sometimes on Shipboard,
that there was but an Inch between him and Death) we shall come duly to
consider, that there may not be a Days; yea, perhaps not an Hours, nay,
possibly not a Moments distance, between my present Speaking, your Hearing, and
this Judges Appearing to Judge the World! Job, in that his excellent
description of a War-horse, amongst many other eminent properties of his,
reckons this for one most highly remarkable, that he does Procul odorari
Bellum; Smell the Battle afar off, in the 39th. of his Book and 25th. And what
just reason then that we be sentenced for worse then Horse, or Mule, that have
no understanding, shall we not with the Nostrils (I know not whether to say of
Faith, or Fear) sent that bloody day (we know not how near at hand) wherein he,
whom by our sins, from time to time, we have been still provoking, every day
more and more, to become our Adversary, shall yet come to sit in judgment upon
us? And shall not therefore send out our Ambassadors, Preces, and Lachrymas,
Cordis Legatos, says St. Cyprian; our Prayers, and our Tears, the Ambassadors
of our souls, for the making of our Peace, and Atonement, with him, whilst he
is yet upon the way, and may still be at some distance from us? Certainly, with
Habakkuk in the 2. of his Prophsie 1. It shall stand us in hand, at all Essays,
to stand upon our watchtower; and see what we shall answer him, when he shall
come to reprove us for these our, whatever, Enormities; and (as himself
speaks Psalm. 50.21.) shall set in order ( Sicut solet in Bello acies, says
St Chrysostom. as we use to set an Army in Battle-aray against an enemy) before
us what things we have done. I have sometimes heard of an harsh answer, that an
hard-hearted chuffe made a poor man, when he begged an Alms of him; that, if
the day of judgment were at hand, he would not give him a Penny. To whom the
poor man makes no other reply but this; that, did he but believe that that day
were at hand, he would give him a Penny. Doubtless, the most flinty-hearted
amongst us would be far from shutting up the Bowels of his compassion against
his distressed Brother; much less would he (what is the worlds present guise,
for the general) trample upon him, and tirannize over him; nor would any of us
ruffle in Pride, revel in excess, dally in wantonness, roar in Blasphemy, mask
under the visour of Hypocrisy, (as more then a good many of us familiarly) do,
did we but duly contemplate with our selves, that this great day of Judgment
may be at hand; nay, did we but entertain a certain persuasion that there will
be a day of Judgment. And therefore those Arms, wherewith Gideon furnished his
Soldiers, for their encounter with the Midianites; Every one an empty Pitcher,
a burning Lamp, and a Trumpet in his hand, Iud. 7.16. will be proper for us
still to have in a readiness in our thoughts, for our encounter with the
Hellish Midianites; an empty Pitcher; even the apprehension of the brittle
Pitchers of our bodies, empty of strength, and life; of a burning Lamp; a Lamp,
still lighted by a stream of Fire, and Brimstone, in the Infernal Tophet; and a
Trumpet, which (we know not how soon) shall rouse us out of our Graves, to try
our strength and Integrity, before this Judgment seat. Without all
peradventure it is, that the Midians, or Jerichoes (term them which you please)
shall never be able to stand, or hold out, shall they, at all essays, be
surrounded with the due recognition of this Trumpets sound, as a Signal for the
opening of the Books. Which might fitly bring me to the view of the third
particular, I commended to your observations, the evidence to be given in,
which (we see here) is recorded in Books. But I fear, that I have already
exceeded the limits both of my time, and your patience. Leaving therefore what
remains for some other Days Essay, beseech we the Almighty to grant that the
words, we have this day heard with our outward Ears, may, through his grace, be
so inwardly graffed in our hearts, that they may bring forth in us, etc.

The Second SERMON, Apoc. 20.12. I saw the dead, small, and great, etc.

Mat 24.44. Be ye also ready; for in such an Hour, as you think not, the son of
man comes.

Abbas Elias. Ego tres stimeo; una est, quando egressura est Anima de Corpore;
aliam, quando occursurus sum Deo; tertiam, quando adversum me proferenda est
sententia.

Apoc. 20.12. and the latter part of the Verse.
ANd the Books were opened; and then another Book was opened, which was the
Book of life; and the Dead were judged out of those things, which were written
in the Books, according to their works. The whole Verse, when I first undertook
it, I termed (and that perhaps not unfitly) a lively Effigies, and
Representation, of the Great, and General, and Unspotted, High-Court of
Justice; that at the last day, shall be erected in the Heaven of Heavens.
Wherein having given you a summary view, as of the Prisoners to be arraigned,
the Dead, Small, and Great; and the Judge to pass sentence, God; we are now,
according to our proposed Method, to heed the Evidence to be given in; the
equal proceedings of the Court; and the Infallible certainty of all. And first
the Evidence to be given in, offers it self to our considerations; which (we
see) is Recorded in Books. And the Books were opened.

What cannot be denied of any, what ever, Judge, of this supreme Judge of
Heaven, and Earth, must needs Ex abundanti be granted, and confessed, that he
is Lex loquens, a speaking Law; yea, Quicquid libet licet, as that gross
Parasite sometimes to the King of Persia; so exact a Rule of Law is his will,
that to question the equity of what ever he wills were Crimen laesae
Majestatis; no other then an height of Rebellion. And then Books, for the
information of the understanding, and so guidance of the will, of this Judge,
may justly seem superfluous. But he, that is the Fountain of Justice, and would
therefore, by his own Exemplary practice, prescribe a course of unerring
Justice unto all, that under him, will needs lay claim to any Judiciary Power,
as in the first piece, of justice, he did upon our first Parents, though taking
them (...), in the very Act, he does not presently, without further enquiry,
pass sentence upon them; but first calls man to the Bar; Adam, where art
thou? Where man appearing, he apposeth him with a question, which yet has the
nature of a smart charge; Have thou eaten of the Tree, whereof I commanded thee
that thou should not eat? Yea, and then (what Nicodemus now boldly alleges
in the behalf of his Mr. John 7.51. whom in the preceding verse, for fear, he
sought In tenebris; by Night) with patience he hears what this guilty Person
can say for himself, before he gives him his Doom: so here, for the making up
the exact complement of his Justice, in the last Judgment, that the most
clamorous Delinquent may have no just cause of exception against his just way
of proceeding, he passes sentence (not as many a Brainsick Enthusiast
preaches without Book, but) out of Books; and these known Books of Law; and
those opened. And the Books were opened.

For the number of these Books, I know no Penman of holy Writ so proper, and
present, to acquaint you as this our signally Divine Evangelist, and Apostle,
St John, who here gives us an intimation of three at least; which he here
professes, and that by Revelation, to have seen; And I saw the Books opened;
and then another Book was opened, which was the Book of life. For their Titles,
if you please to take them amassed into one great volume, you may style them
all collectively by the name of Gods Doom-day Book. If in several pieces, you
may, not unfitly, style the first Secundum quem; the second Ex quo; the third
In quo; the first his Statute-Book; the second his Day-Book; the third his Book
of Records. And every of these Books shall we see opened, when we come all,
both Small, and Great, to stand up before this Righteous judge of the whole
Earth. I saw the Dead, Small, and Great, stand up before God.

The first of these, his Statute-Book, is made of three Tomes; in the first
whereof is written the Law of Nature; in the second the Law from Sinai; in the
third the Law from Sion. For the first of these, the Law of Nature, we shall
content us with Melancthons definition thereof, that it is a knowledge of
certain principles, and of conclusions, thence naturally deduced, agreeable to
the Eternal Rule of truth, directing him to live well, and to worship his
Creator. The very Orator can say of this Law, that it is Non scripta, sed
Nata; quam non Didicimus, Legimus, Accepimus; Verum ex Natura Arripuimus,
Hausimus, Expressimus; that it is not a written, but an inbred, Law; and such
as we have, not learned, or read, or by Tradition received; but such as we have
derived, and drawn, and sucked, out of the very Entrails of Nature. Easy it
were, by a particular Induction, to evince, that, not only the most eminent
Divinity-Maximes, as that Tithes are to be paid, as may clearly appear in the
History of Melchizedeck, and Abraham Genesis 14. that some Places are, above
other, sanctified by Gods special Presence, as the Place of Jacobs repose, in
his journey to Haran, where God appears to him, Genesis 28. that some Persons
are, more then others, dedicate to his service; as the Firstborn of every
Family, Exodus 13. of which, by the way, you shall do well specially to take
notice, that they were every one (...), Cohen; Princes and Priests in one
Person; but that every particular Precept of the Moral Law, has from the
beginning been, and still is, by this Laws mere instinct, imprinted, and
engraven, in the hearts of those, that are mere strangers to the Israel of God,
and Aliens from the Covenant of promise. St. Paul's word, Romans 2.14. you may
safely take for the whole sum; the Gentiles (says he) having no Law ( i. e.
no Law written, as the Jews, in Tables of stone) do yet, by nature the things
contained in the Law; and so are a Law unto themselves. And the Maxume
therefore Verse 12. he premiseth, cannot but be entertained for irrefragable;
As many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law. So that even
of such as these just reason shall we have to say in this case, what the same
Apostle of the same Gentiles, clearly convinced of a Godhead, by those things,
that are seen from the creation of the world. Romans 16. that they are (...);
without all manner of Excuse. For the second, the Law from Sinai, you know by
whom, and how, it was given, By Moses, yet God still dictating; with lightning
and Thunder; and (as is this judgment to be auspicated) with the sound of the
Trumpet; yea, and this seconded with a curse, far more dreadful then either
Lightning-flash, or Thunderclap; Cursed is every one, that continues not in
all things, that are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. Gal. 3.10.
Nay, to make sure, that this Curse want not its proper matter of sin to work
upon, Lex subintravit, ut abundaret delictum; the Law was given, that sin might
abound. Romans 5.20. Not that the Law is sin (as the Apostle glosseth himself, in
the 7. of the same Epistle and 8th.) but sin, taking occasion by the
Commandment (is his own ingenuous confession of himself) wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence. So that then, such an occasion of, and Incentive unto,
sin is the Law, Sicut fraenum equo indomito, says Paraeus upon the words; as
is a Bridle of a young Horses fierceness; which, whilst we use as an Instrument
for the taming him, by accident, it makes him the more untamed. Sic ego
Torrentem, qua nil obstabat eunti; or as a Bank, or Rock, to a Torrent; which,
whilst they strive to Bound, they enrage the more; and so occasion it to bear,
and break down, all before it, with the greater violence. Nitimur in vetitum,
to long for things forbidden is the current (we know) our desires all naturally
run; which is the reason (says the Orator) why Solon would by no means be
drawn to hear of a Law to be enacted against Parricide; veritus ne, si legem de
eo tulisset, magis incitaret Homines quam reprimeret, fearing (says he) lest
such a Law might rather spur men on unto, then restrain them from, so
unnatural, and horrid an act. So that then, so little advantage (God wot) is
this Law likely to afford us at our last standing up before this High-Court of
Justice, when we are at such a natural Antipathy against it, that, the more it
labors to reclaim us, the more we recoil, and rebel, against it, that, for
any ground of comfort, we can herein meet with, too just reason shall we have,
as the Disciples to our Common-Master, in the Gospel, Luke 18.26. to cry out;
Domine, quis Salvus erit? Lord, who can be saved? Especially, seeing that (as
St. Peter sometimes to the Jews. Acts 15.10.) we cannot but be tenderly
sensible, that this Law puts such an heavy Yoke upon our Necks, as neither
we, nor our Fathers, are able to bear.

For the last, the Law from Sion, the Law of faith (as Romans 3.27. it is styled)
as it is so far from being Contra-distinct to either of the former Laws; but
has in it rather the sum, and substance, and Pith, of either, as has the
Intellective of the vegetative, and sensitive souls; so is Christ the main
scope of all; they all looking toward him, as did the Cherubins toward the
Mercy-seat. Exodus 37.9. In either of the former he discovered himself but as
through the Lattice, as it is, Cant. 2.9. In this latter he does, not only
present him clearly to our views; but so graciously, and affectionately, offer
him to our embraces, that we have now the happy opportunity, and advantage, of
laying such fast hold of him, as not to let him go, as it is Cant. 3.4. The
former, either of them, holds us to Hard-meat, as we say; making us a proffer
of Heaven indeed, but upon very unfeisable, yea, indeed impossible, conditions,
Fac hoc, and vives, as our Savior to the Lawyer, Luke 10.28. Do this, and thou
shall live. The latter tendereth us a Bargain, in our apprehension at least,
much easier to compass; Creed, and Salvus eris; as Paul, and Silas, to the
Jailer, Acts 16.31. and now little question to be made, but that, as the Jew of
the Almighty, Romans 2.5. there is more then a good many amongst us will be
present to make our Boast of this Law; that, having the advantage, both of Jew,
and Gentile, in times past, to turn over a new Leaf, from the Law of Nature,
the Law from Sinai, unto this Law of Sion, the Law of Faith, we shall not need
to distrust, but that we shall be sped of an happy Acquital, and Discharge,
when we come to stand up before this dreadful Tribunal. Our Pulpits now, for a
long time, have resounded with no other Doctrine, but those revived Relics of
an old Heretical Maxim, that we shall need to act nothing our selves, in order
to the accomplishment of the great work of our Salvation; a bare, naked, Faith,
apprehending the free grace of Christ, shall be of Energy, and Efficacy,
sufficient to save us. St. Augustins Caution, in the mean time, for the Law of
Nature, cannot but seem very Poinante; Adolet, non abolet, Naturam Gratia; this
Law from Sion, this Law of Faith, does not disanul, but Corroborate, and
confirm, and actuate, Natures Law. And, for the Law from Sinai, however Christ,
by being made a Curse for us, has taken away the Curse thereof. Gal. 3.13.
yet, as that was our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto him, Gal. 3.24. so is he
our Exemplary Guide, to lead us to the fulfilling thereof. I came, not to
destroy, but to fulfill, the Law. Mat. 5.17. And this may you see to be the
Apostles clear Determination, after his most Solicitous Debate of the Point.
Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law of God through Faith? God forbid!
rather we establish the Law. The drift of this Law is far from broaching, or
countenancing, any Doctrine of such a Liberty of conscience, as, with the Saints
of the new Calendar, is no better then Licentiousness, that Sanctification, and
Obedience, is no less, the scope of this then either of the former Laws. And
therefore St. Peter's Caveat, in the 2. of his 1. Epistle, to his scattered
strangers you may see to be, that they use not their Liberty for a Cloak of
Malitiousness, or wickedness (for the word (...) in the Original equally
imports both) but that by well-doing they put to silence the Ignorance of
Foolish Men. And St. James his peremptory conclusion it is, in the 1. of his
Epistle and 25. whosoever looks into the perfect Law of Liberty (this Law of
Faith is a Law of Liberty indeed; but such an one, as is far from taking off
the Yoke of Obedience from our Necks; and therefore immediately may you see to
follow) and continues therein; being, not a forgetful Hearer, but a Doer of
the work, that Man only shall be Blessed in his Deed. Indeed it cannot be
denied, but that Christ bears a great part of this Yoke for us; that which
may justly cause him to mind us, that that part of the Yoke, he has left for
us to bear, Is easy. Mat. 11.30. Howbeit (...) there are (as the Apostle
seasonably Itemeth his Colossians, in the first of that Epistle 24.) as
after-sufferings; so After-doings, of his likewise to go thorough with; in the
weak Endeavors, and Evidences, of which poor Patience, and Performance, shall
we at last (notwithstanding all this our Book-learning) prove defective, or
faulty; so that if, either our cheerfulness in suffering, after his example; or
promptness in Acting, according to his commands, shall not prove such, as shall
become this our Prime Book, his glorious Gospel; too just reason shall we at
last find for our Concluding, and complaining, as the Preacher Eccles. 12.12.
There is no end of making, and setting before us, many Books; and, with Nero,
when he was sometimes to Sign a sentence of Death (the mildest Speech, that
ever fell from so Bloody a Monster) in extreme Anguish of Spirit, wish, utinam
nescirem Literas! O! that I had never known Letter in a Book! I can but turn
over the Books in haste. The second, that shall be opened is Gods Day-book;
which yet has two Tomes, that serve to the making it up; whereof the one is
that of our own Conscience; the other of Gods Remembrance.

For the first of these, Annals and Diaries I find thus distinguished by
Tacitus, that the former is a Register of the greater, the latter of the less,
matters of State. In this Diary, or Day-book, you shall be sure to meet with a
Rhapsody of all sorts of matters, both greater, and less, together; not the
works of your Hands only, and the words of your Mouths; but even of the most
secret, and recluse, thoughts of your Hearts. No sooner is there any Evil
acted, or Spoken, or but conceived, by us, but that Inimici viri Domestici
ejus; our conscience, which is our Household Enemy, is ready (accordingly as
Job sometimes wished, in the 31. of his Book and 35.) to write a Book. So that,
for whatever sin of ours, whether Manual, or Vocal, or but Mental, our
Conscience will still be present to put in Execution, what the Lord sometimes
gave in charge to his Prophet. Esaias 30.8. to note it in a Book. And, however a
Malefactor here may have just reason to interpret his being put to his Book,
for a special Act of Mercy (whence the old word amongst us of a man's being
saved by his Book) this Book-trial of all, we shall, in conclusion, find to be
the most Severe; for that this Great Judge himself shall, at the time of our
Arraignment, without any just censure of Entrenchment, or Usurpation, assume
the Ordinaries Place; and will then, without the least Extention of any favor
to be looked for, clearly, and heartily, publish, and proclaim, in the Audience
of the whole Earth, whatsoever he shall find written In Libro Aperto; in this
Book, when it comes to be opened.

The first way of writing, I ever read of, was in Stone; and the first Writer
God himself; who writes the Law in two Stony Tables, with his own Hand. Exodus
30.18. Conscience is not Ignorant of this way of writing; but, after the
example of God himself (whose vicegerent she is) writes (as is Iudahs sin
written. Ier. 17.1.) with a Pen of Iron, with the Point of a Diamond, the
Characters of our several misdeeds, in the Stony Tables of our Hearts. Whose
Thoughts therefore (as the Apostle Romans 2.5.) shall, at the last Day, either
Accuse, or Excuse, us. After this, another way of writing, in Barks of Trees,
was found out; whence our Books, amongst the Latins, still retain their Names,
Libri, Barks, or Books. Nor is Conscience unacquainted with this way of writing
neither. A Book, a Register-Book, she keeps of all our Enormities, and
Impieties; whereof every Page shall appear filled with the sad Items of our
Blasphemies, our Perjuries, our Debaucheries, our Dalliances, our Oppressions,
our Extortions, our Murders. So that every one of us, by way of an heavy
Position, shall have too just reason to bespeak our Consciences for all these,
as does David the Lord, by way of an anxious question, for his Members. Psalm.
139.15. In thy Book are all these things written. The Egyptians, after this,
found out another way of writing, by Hieroglyphics, strange, and uncouth
Characters; and these impressed in Paper; then made of Reeds, as now amongst us
of Rags. And the Destruction of these Reeds the Prophet Isaiah seems to
bewail, as a dreadful part of Gods doom upon Egypt, in the 19. of his Prophecy
and 7. The Paper-reeds (says he) by the Brooks, shall wither, and be no more.
And, at this time of the standing up of the Dead, Small, and Great, before this
Righteous Judge of the whole Earth, as we shall see the sign of the Son of Man.
Mat. 24.30. which (even by the Confession of the most Reformed Divines) shall
be the Sign of the Cross; which shall then (as a Glorious standard before a
victorious General) in a Triumphant manner be carried before him: so shall we
likewise, in this Book of Conscience, see many other signs, and Hieroglyphics,
too. And then, where shall the bribing Gehaze hide his Head, when he shall see
the Hieroglyphick of two Talents of Silver, of which he has cheated some
Credulous Naaman? where the Extorting Ahab, at the sight of the Hieroglyphick
of a Vineyard? Where the Blood-thirsty Herod, and Assassine Pilate, at the
sight of the Hieroglyphics of Thousands of Innocents, they have most unjustly
Imprisoned, Condemned, and Butchered? Where the wanton, at the now sad sight of
his lustful Mistresses, with whom he has formerly taken his fill of lawless
Love? Where the Riotous, at the sight of the full-crowned Cups, wherewith he
has, every day, been intoxicating his Frantic Brains? no less dreadfully then
undeniably, indenting their several Guilts? Nor yet has Humane Invention
stayed here; but has devised a latter way of writing, with the Juice of
Limons; whose Characters are in no wise to be read, until you bring them to the
Fire, but then may they easily, and distinctly, be read by every Eye. The
Conscience writes no way more like then this. Here the Letters, wherein she
sets down our Lapses, are ofttimes so mysterious, and obscure, that they are no
way obvious to any Man's, scarce to our own Eyes. Nay (as we say that there is
none so blind, as he that will not see) who sees not how prone we are
deliberately to hood-winck our selves, for the shutting of our sins clean out
of the reach of our eyesight? Lest (as the People in the Prophet Esaias 6.10.)
seeing with our Eyes, and hearing with our Ears, and understanding with our
Hearts, we might be converted, and God should heal us? But, when these shall
come to be brought to that Fire of Judgment, which shall Burn up the whole
World, with the works thereof, then shall they appear in such just, and full,
Dimensions, that the clear sight of them shall strike us with Horror, and
Astonishment. Conscience then, that, as her Master, will search Jerusalem with
Lights, Zephan. 1.12. shall, by the Light of this Fire, search into the most
secret, and recluse, corners of our Hearts; and expose our most secret sins,
not to our own private only, but to the whole worlds public view; and will
then round every one of us in the ear, for every particular sin of ours, as did
Nathan sometimes David for his Adultery, 1 Samuel 12.12. Thou did it secretly;
but I will do it openly, and before the Sun. And yet is not Humane Invention,
in this Case, come to its Hercules Pillars; a way of writing by Characters, and
Ciphers, is, of late, grown very ordinary, and familiar, with us. And let it be
our subtlest Study to write our sins in never so abstruse, and dark, an Impress
of this nature; yet will Conscience be sure to make her self Mistress of the
Key; and so, unciphering whatsoever we have written, will be publishing the
Contents to the whole world. And then, though as an Atome in the Air is not to
be seen, as long as the Sun withdraws himself; but Myriads innumerable, as
soon as he opens: our sins, that, all our life long perhaps (having wilfully
resolved to walk in Darkness, and the Shadow of Death) have no more appeared
unto us then Atoms in a Cloudy Day, will then too palpably discover themselves
at the appearance of this Sun of Righteousness; and at our Common standing up,
both Small, and Great, before this Judgment Seat.

But be it that Conscience may be so wrought upon, as to embesil, or Cancel,
whatever Handwriting, in this Tome of hers, she may have against us; yet is
there in this Book another Tome of Gods Remembrance; wherein whatever Evidence
may be recorded, we may in no wise hope that it shall be so slubbered, or
suppressed, but that it will too surely be produced. Our Apostles passage, to
this purpose, is very Pregnant, and Pithy, in the 3. of his 1. Epistle. If our
Hearts condem us not, then have we Confidence toward God; but God however is
greater then our Conscience, and sees all things. It is a received Maxim
amongst us of Aged men, that there is no Faculty in them decays so soon as
their Memory. It is otherwise with the Ancient of Days (for so find we this
Judge Dan. 9.7. expressly styled) his Memory no more then his Days. Psalm.
102.27. are at any time failing him. He has his Book of undecaying
Remembrance, as for those that fear his Name, Mal. 3.16. so for those that
transgress any of his Laws; out of which (as the good Householder out of his
Treasury, Mat. 13.54.) he will still be readily drawing out an heavy charge,
both of our Old, and New, sins against us. Nay, whereas Memoria est
Praeteritorum; our Memory has nothing, naturally, for its object, but things
past, whatever we have Acted, or are Acting, at any time, throughout the whole
course of our Lives, is still present to his Remembrance. I Remember all their
wickedness (is the Lords own word of his People) now their own doings have
beset them, they are before my Face. And now, when these two Tomes, of our own
Conscience, and Gods Remembrance, shall make up a Day-book, like that in the
Prophet Zach. 5.2. a Flying Book; whose wings shall carry it from one End of
the Heaven to the other, that every Man may run, and read, the Contents
thereof; a Great Book (and (...), as it is in the Proverb; a Great Evil, in
being so Great a Book) of twenty Cubits long, and ten Broad; whereof every Page
shall be filled up with the black Catalogue of our deep Carowsings, our wanton
Dalliances, our horrid Oppressions, our Sacrilegious Transactions, our damned
Dissimulations, how shall it appear unto us like that Roll of Ezechiels Book,
in the 2. of his Prophecy and 10. written within* and without, with
Lamentation, and Mourning, and woe. If some, upon but a Private perusal of
their yet, perhaps secret, sins, which their Consciences, in their Solitary
Retiredness, have called to their Remembrance, have, most desperately, made
their own Hands their own Executioners; then how insupportably (think we) shall
the Burden of our Anguish lie upon us, when God, out of the Book of his
Remembrance, shall be publishing a particular List of all our Errors, and
Enormities, in the Audience of the whole World? And shall therefore be upon the
point of his just Tasting us (as Babylon, in the 16. of this Book and 19.) with
the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness of his wrath? This Book, my Beloved, is
not yet Opened. And then, as we hope to escape the fierceness of this wrath, at
this Day, when both Small, and Great, of us shall stand before this
Iudgement-Seat, Prevention, we say, is the Heart of Policy; if we Judge our
selves, the Apostle warranteth us, that we shall not be Judged, 1 Cor. 11.31.
no such way shall we find for the Prevention of that heavy vengeance, which,
in that Day, will otherwise too surely overtake us, as to take a Private, and
Early, Revenge upon our selves; making us our own Accusers, Judges,
Executioners; Putting in Execution the severe Sentence of unfeigned Repentance,
and Mortification, for all our sins; that so these sins of ours may be blotted
out, when the time of refreshing shall come from his gracious Presence* And,
for whatever time, in this valley of Tears, we may have remaining, our wisdom
shall be to improve our utmost care and Study, for the writing of whatsoever we
shall Enrol in this Book with the fair hand of Integrity, and Innocence. No
soul, for the present, can conceive the comfort, that our Hearts, in that Day,
shall be sensible of, if, at the Bar of this Judicatory, we shall be able
fearlesly to justify our Handwriting; as, upon the Bench, did Pilate sometimes
his; Quod Scripsi, Scripsi; what I have written, I have written.

And yet have we not thoroughly Surveyed this Judges Library. There is yet his
Book of Records remaining; of which we shall only take a Cursory view, and so
Claudite jam Rivos; shut up for the present.

And another Book was opened, which was the Book of life.

What the Preacher sometimes of Making, Eccles. 12.12. no less just reason
shall we have to say of Reading; There is no end of Reading many Books.
Multitudo Librorum destruit Animum, says the Orator; A Multitude of Books
does rather puzle, and perplex, then furnish, and enrich, the understanding,
and Memory. Nay, it fares with the Readers of Books as with some Travailers of
Countries, which they only Cursorily run through; a superficial account may
they give of their Names, and Sites; but, unless they Stay, and Sojourn, in
them for some time, little use, or Fruit, will there appear of all their
Travails. Nay, of the reading of any Books, but those we have here now before
us, and, God knows, how soon we shall see opened, whether History, or
Philosophy, or Philology, much more of Romances, of Pasquils, of Play-books, or
whatever other Pamphlets, what St. Augustine sometimes of works, that are not
grounded upon Faith in Christ, that it is Cursus celerrimus preter viam; a
pretty kind of Course, for the passing away of time; but still besides the
way. Nay, the most Studious, and Solicitous, reading of all such as these
(unless, as our Divine Apostle sometimes, it be for the unbending the Bows of
our Minds, and loosing their strings, for a time, that may the more vigorously,
and cheerfully, return to them) we shall in Conclusion, find to be but as that
Bread of deceit, in the wiseman. Pro. 20.17. such, as shall fill the Mouth,
yea, the Stomach, with nothing but Gravel; and so shall leave a Man in an
imminently perishing Condition. So that then, when we have proved our selves
Helluones Librorum; such exquisite Cormoants of all these kinds of Books, as to
appear to have sucked out, and swallowed down, all their Marrow, and
Quintessence; yea so, as to be able to make our Discourses Centoes of them
perhaps yet at last, when we have thoroughly examined our selves, too just
cause may we find for the bemoaning, and bewailing, us, as does the Prophet
himself in another Case, Isaiah 49.4. I have labored in vain; I have spent my
strength for naught. Yea, when all these shall appear to be no other but as
small Straws, and Sticks, and Sand, gathered up by a whirle-winde, making a
strange show, and Noise, for a time, but immediately vanishing into nothing, of
those other shall we have only reason to say, in comparison of these, what
David sometimes of Goliahs Sword, 1 Samuel 21.9. There is none like unto them;
for that these only we shall find to prove unto us as Eliahs fiery Chariot, 1
Kings 2.11. the only present means to convey us to Heaven; and therefore only
of true use indeed, for the making up of a Christian Library. Two of these,
Gods Statute-book, and his Day-book; his Statute-book, made of three Tomes; in
the first whereof is the Law of Nature; in the second the Law from Sinai; in
the third the Law from Sion; his Day-book of two; whereof the one is that of
our own Conscience; the other of Gods Remembrance; we have already taken a
Summary view of, the third his Book of Records, we are now, as far as will
consist with the dull Edge of our Mortal Eysight, at least with the practice of
our Christian Modesty, to look into. And then another Book was opened, which
was the Book of life. And this Book (as Zanchy. L. 5. c. 2. Q. 3. de Not. Dei
has will observed) is of a twofold nature. The one is that, wherein the Church
registreth those for the Sons of God, that, by an outward Profession of their
Faith, whether in their own Persons, or their Delegate Godfathers, and
Godmothers, are received into her bosom; notwithstanding that many of them
afterward appear, upon Trial, to be Impostours, and Hypocrites. And of this
Book is it, that St. Augustine interprets those passages of Holy Writ, that seem
to import an Apostaticall falling away of some, after Grace received. It is
impossible (says the Author to the Hebrews) for those, that were once
Enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly gifts, and been made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, if they shall fall away, to renew them again to Repentance,
Heb. 6.6. upon which words the same Father has well observed, that there are
more then a good many Temporizers, that assume unto themselves the Shapes of
true Believers; that seem to have received the Grace of the Holy Ghost, but
have nothing less then so. And from this Grace it is not possible only, but
ordinary, to fall away. Which Grace yet, in the mean time, is no more true
Grace, then a Falling-Star is a true Star of the Firmament. They went out from
us (says our Apostle) because they were never of us, in the 1. of this Epistle
cap. 2. v. 19. Let them be wiped out of the Book of the living (is the Kingly
Prophets dreadful Execration against the Blood-thirsty Enemies of his son, and
Savior, Psalm. 69.29.) and not be written amongst the Righteous, i. e. (says
the above praised Father) since they are Formal Hypocrites, Personating true
Professors, unmask, O Lord, their Hypocrisy; and make them appear in their
genuine Shapes; that so (whatever counterfeit Shows, and Semblances, they have
hitherto made) as their Names were never written in the Calendar of Saints in
the Church-Triumphant, raze them out likewise of the List of the
Church-Militant Saints. The other Book of life is that certain, and immutable,
Foreknowledge of God, whereby, from all Eternity he has, and, beyond all Tract
of time, will, acknowledge those for his, whom he has Predestined to the
Adoption of Sons, and ordained to be Heirs of Everlasting Life; The one of
these is as a Cornfield, overspread with Tares as well as Wheat. The other as
the time of Harvest, to make a separation between them. The one of them is as a
Mass of Gold and Dross blended together; the other as a Fire, to distinguish,
and divide, them asunder. The Letter of the former may scarce be of a visible
impression; the Character of the latter is indeleble. Be our names never so
fairly written in the former, they may yet afterward be obliterated; but once
Recorded in the latter, they can never possibly be Blotted out. I cannot stand
here at large to exagitate the Malepert Humors, as of those Chymick Spirits,
that will needs be preproperously drawing the Elixir, and Quintessence, of a
Church out of a Church, whereinto none shall be received but Saints of their
own Canonization ( Qui vult ante egressos Angelos, etc. says St. Greg. They
that will be separating the Reprobate from amongst the Righteous, before it
shall please the Lord to send forth his Angels to that purpose, he neither
understands the Scriptures, nor his own Bounds, or Limits) so neither of
those Find, or rather Make-faults, that will needs be Quarrelling with the
Paper of this Book, as if it were not able to bear Ink; certainly not to
preserve the Letters of those Names fair, that are therein Registered. Exegi
Monumentum AEre perennius. No Monument of Brass so Retentive as the Paper; no
Characters therein engraven so Lasting as the Letters of this Book. Which
therefore, that they be not Blurred, or Sullyed, by any bold, or profane,
Hand, that may prematurely offer at the opening of this Book, are to be kept
close, and Shut up, until the Day of our Common standing up, both Small, and
Great, before God. And yet this Book, which this Great Judge has designed, not
to be locked up within his Archives only; but there laid up, and that clasped,
yea Sealed, yea and that with no less then seven Seals, in the 5. of this Book
and 1. for the Concealment of the Contents from the discovery of the most
Curious, piercing, and Searching, Eye, there want not yet uncommissioned
Inquisitors, that will, not only be breaking open, but will be therein
Impudently Enrolling, and Cancelling, what Names they please. In the 12. of
Daniel, where the Prophet hears of a Time, and Times, and half a Time, for
which the wonders, foretold him, shall ^ast, he presently grows Inquisitive,
O my Lord (says he) what shall be the end of these things? But the Answer, he
receives, is no less Sharp then Short; Go thy way, Daniel; for the words are
closed, and Sealed up, until the time of the End. When we hear of a Book,
wherein this Great Judge of Heaven and Earth has Registered the Names of his
chosen ones, we presently, with the Prophet, have an Itch in our Fingers, for
the searching of the Records. Yea, and not only so; but a restless pain in our
Tongues (They stretch forth their Mouth unto the Heavens, says the Kingly
Prophet, and their Tongue walks through the Earth, Psalm. 73.9.) until we have
published, and proclaimed; yea, not seldom, fained, and fabled, the Contents.
We Saints of the last Edition, and our own Canonization, have our Names only
written in this Book; and have therefore exclusively Title, not for the future
only to Heaven; but to Earth for the present. Whereas all the men of the World
besides are left out as Reprobates; and so divested of all manner of Interest,
whether in Temporal, or Eternal, Inheritance. Which distinction yet, either for
Number, or Names, of Persons much more, may in no wise be expected shall come
to any Man's Cognizance, until the Dead, Small, and Great, Arising to stand up
before God, this Book, with the others, come to be Opened. Certainly, this Book
is yet so fast shut up, and Sealed, until the last Day, that, whoever he be,
that shall arrogate to himself a Faculty of the Knowledge of the Contents; and
in the mean time, much more assume a Power of publishing the Names therein
recorded, of such an one, and that with modesty shall I have reason to say,
that he speaks without Book. And now then, how well will it become us in this
Case (...); to bewise unto Sobriety? Mollia sunt Parvis Prata terenda Rotis; to
be wary how we adventure upon the Plowing up of Deep Lands with slight, and
slender, Carriages? Certainly, it will be wisdom, as Charity, enough in every
one of us to look to one. There is none so lawful, none so useful, a Scrutiny,
as, leaving others to Stand, or Fall, to their own Master, to make a diligent
enquiry, every one of us, for our Particular Names, whether they be Enrolled in
this Book, or no. And in this Scrutiny, this Enquiry, in no wise can we better
satisfy our selves then (I say not by breaking open the Seals of this Book,
but) by looking into the other books; whereof each we are to look upon but as
an Index to this. See we that our Conversations be (as far as Humane Frailty
shall enable us with a Capacity) composed unto the Dictates of the Law of
Nature, the Law from Sinai, the Law from Sion; being such, in one word (as in
the word of the Apostle, Phil. 1.27.) may become the chief of these Books, the
Glorious Gospel of Christ. See we, every one, that in the Book of our
Conscience, and the Book of Gods Remembrance, the Blots of all our sins
whatsoever may as in a Table Book, appear written, Spunged out by the precious
waters of unfeigned Repentance, be now henceforth be all over written with the
fair Characters of Righteousness, and Holiness. And then shall we not need to
distrust, but that we shall appear clear, when we shall come to be Judged out
of those things, which shall appear written in these Books, according to our
works.

Which might fitly bring me to the survey of the two last remaining
Particulars, the Equal Proceedings of the Court; and the Infallible certainty
of all; but for that their but Cursory view would take up more time then, for
the present can be well afforded, leaving them for a competent Argument, which
may well take up our next Days entire Perusal, beseech we the Almighty, in the
mean time to grant, that the words, we have, this Day, heard with our outward
Ears, etc.

The Third SERMON, Apoc. 20.12, I saw the dead, small, and great, etc.

John 5.27. And shall come forth; those, that have done Good, to the
Resurrection of Life; and those, that have done Evil, to the Resurrection of
Damnation.


Justine Martyr. Quemadmodum omnibus Corporibus, a Deo procreatis, hoc insitum
est, ut Vmbram habeant: sic Deum quoque, qui Iustitia praeditus est, tum iis,
qui virtutem sibi colendam proposuernut; tum iis, qui vitium amplexari
maluerint, pro cujusque Merito, Praemia, Poenasque, tribuere consentaneum est.

Apoc. 20.12. I saw the Dead, Small, and Great, stand up before God; and the
Books were opened; and then another Book was opened, which was the Book of
Life; and the Dead were Judged out of those things, which were written in the
Books, according to their works.


A Sight have you had, as of the Prisoners to be Arraigned, the Dead, Small,
and Great; of the Judge, to pass sentence; which though, for the Judgment of
Principal Authority, it shall be every Person in the Trinity; for which cause
we find this Day Signally styled Gods Day, 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking for (says he)
and hastening unto, the Day of God: yet for the Judgment of Promulging, and
Pronouncing of sentence, it shall be the second Person in that Trinity, and
that in regard of his Humane Nature. The Father (says our Apost.) has given
Power to the Son to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of Man. John.
5.27. So of the Evidence to be given in, Recorded in Books; and those three
principals; whereof the first is Gods Statute-Book, made up of three Tomes; in
the first whereof is written the Law of Nature, in the second the Law from
Sinai, in the third the Law from Sion; the second his Day-book, made up of two,
whereof the first is of that our own Conscience, the second of Gods
Remembrance; the last his Book of Records; and that you have seen to be of a
twofold nature; the one that, wherein the Church Registreth those for the Sons
of God, that, by an outward Confession of their Faith, are received into her
Bosom; notwithstanding that not a few of them prove afterward Impostours, and
Hypocrites; the other that of his Eternal Foreknowledge, whereby from all
Eternity he has, and beyond all Tract of time will, acknowledge those for his,
whom he has Predestined to the Adoption of Sons, and Ordained to be Heirs of
Eternal Life. The Equal Proceedings of the Court, and the Infallible certainty
of all, remain only for the present, to be discussed. And first are we to
examine the equal Proceedings of the Court; whose impartial Judge shall
Examine, the whole World, upon the works, whether Good, or Evil, they have
done. And the Dead were Judged out of those things, which were written in the
Books, according to their works.

It is the Lords own word to his People Isa. 55.8. My ways are not as your
ways. And this difference of ways, between him and them, the same Lord, no
less justly then precisely, may you hear Contesting with them, in point of
Equity, Ezech. 18.29. Are not my ways Equal (says he) and yours Unequal?
Betwixt Heaven and Earth there is not so great a Distance, as there is
Difference between God and more then a good many Men in the exercise of
Judiciary Power. The Law, which the Civilians say, is Sanctio Iusta, Iubens
Honesta, Prohibensque Contraria; a Just Constitution, commanding things that
are Honest, and Forbidding the Contrary, is, in the Court of Heaven, reputed
the only straight Rule, whereunto the subjects of that court are to conform
their works, and ways; and for their Deviation, and Declination, from its
Rectitude are only punishable. For which cause our Evangelists description of
sin is, that it is the Transgression of the Law, in the 1. of his Epistle the
3. Chapter and 4. V. And therefore that word of that other Apostle, just reason
that it obtain with us the Credit of an Oracle, Romans 4.15. where there is no
Law, there is no Transgression. So that then that word of that other Apostle
yet. 2. Pet. 1.19. for the word of Prophecy, our parts it shall be to
conceive, directed unto every one of us for the Law; that we shall do well to
take heed thereunto, as unto a Light, that shines in a Dark Place. No
otherwise then you may observe some careful Mariner, for the better guidance of
his Ship in a Dark Night, to heed a Light, which from some Eminent watch-towr,
may discover it self. The Conduct of which Light therefore, whose Beams every
one of us may clearly discern (as the Pilot his Light from the Tower) darting
out from Heaven upon him, for the better steering him a course, through the
surges of this world, shall he not heed, no marvel, if, Straying from the right
Path of Justice, he wander in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death. The
Proceedings of too too many a Man, that assumeth unto himself a Power to
Execute Justice, not seldom, runs a clean contrary Bias to this. They say
as those in the Wiseman. Wisd. 2.11. Our will is the Law of Justice. And
therefore take unto themselves a liberty of Proscribing, Imprisoning,
Condemning, yea, and Executing too, whom they please; though guiltless of the
Transgression of any Law. Nor shall the Law be the Rule, whereby to examine the
work of supposed Dilinquents; but their causeles fears and Jealousies, shall
make Delinquents whomsoever they shall please. Whilst themselves, in the mean
time notwithstanding that they are dipped in as deep a Dye of villainy as the
blackest Fiends of Hell, must yet have Precedence of all the Apostles, nay, the
Virgin Mary her self, in Saintship (as long as did Saul with an Image, in stead
of David, 1 Samuel 19.13.) they can impose upon the purblinde World with empty
Shadows, and semblances, in stead of the true, and real, Body of Religion; and
(what AEschines sometimes objected to Demosthenes) (...)) can New-dip
Extortion, Oppression, Perjury, Tyranny, Sacrilege, Murder, yea very
Atheism, with the fair, and specious Names of Reformation. Beloved! As this
Great Judge is far from being so Sophistical, as to impose upon us with a
Fallacy of Non causa pro Causa; and so not so Rigid as to Condemn us without
the least transgression of any of his Laws: so neither may we conceive him to
be so Facile, and Easy, as that he shall be wone to accept of a bare Show, and
Profession, of Saint-Ship for a perfect observation of this Law of his. That
Rule of this great Judge. By their Fruits you shall know them, Mat. 7.16.
holds as true for all manner false Pretenders as Prophets. They are the
Fruits of good works only, and not the Leaves, or Blossoms, of vain
Ostentation, or Profession, that shall Acquit, or condemn, us at the last Day.
And the Dead* were Judged out of those things, which were written in the Books,
according to their works.

But how? The Dead to be Judged according to their works? Durus est hic Sermo;
this is an hard saying; and who may abide it? What hope of Salvation then shall
the most Righteous have to entertain? Yea, and then (as is St. Peter's
passionate Quaere in the 1. of his Epistle Chapter 4.18.) Where shall the
Ungodly, and the Sinners appear? So that then well may David, Holy David,
deprecate this manner of Trial before God. Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into
Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no Man living be
Justified. He, that has found no stedfastness in his Servants, but has
charged his very Angels with Folly, how much more then Man, which dwells in
an House of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust. Alas! As the Priest in the
old law was to make an atonement for the Holy offerings of the People, that
they might be accepted. Exodus 28.38. never may the best of our Services,
without some Atonement, and Expiation, hope to be sped of Acceptance at his
Hands, in whose Eyes the Stars are not clear, Job 25.5. but is of Purer Eyes
then to behold any Iniquity, Hab. 1.13. And then, if, in our best Dresses, we
may not hope to appear Acceptable, in our worst how Abominable must we needs
appear in his sight? And therefore St. Aug. word to the Lord cannot but be
concluded to be very pregnant; Vae etiam laudabili vitae Hominum, si, remota
Misericordia, discutias eam, Woe to our most laudable course of Life (says he)
if thou, O Lord, without the Spectacle of Mercy, shall be pleased to look upon
it. Nay, this way of work-trial the whole Stream of the Divine Penmen seems,
every where, to cross; setting up Grace, and Faith, not in competition only
with, but in a direct opposition unto works, in the work of our Salvation; and
so in this Day of Trial we conclude (says St. Paul Dogmatically) that a Man is
justified by Faith, without the works of the Law, Romans 2.28. There is a
Remnant, according to the Election of Grace (says the same Apostle in the 11.
of the same Epistle 5. and 6.) and, if by Grace, then is it no more of works;
otherwise Grace is no more Grace. And if by Grace, and Faith, we are to look
for Justification, then how is it that according to our works we shall be
Judged? It will not be so difficult a Task perhaps, upon a full discussion of
the whole matter, to reconcile this so much seemingly jarring Triumvirate, as
at first sight may appear. Grace is the first, yea, Principal, Impulsive, cause
of our Justification. Being Justified freely by his Grace, says the same
Apostle. Romans 3.24. faith the instrumental, for the laying hold of this grace
in Christ. The righteousness of God (says the same Apostle in the 22. of the
same Chapter) by the Faith of Jesus, is upon all them that Believe. Good works
are, for the present, to every one of us, as, at this last Day, they shall be,
in the Presence of the whole world* Sole, but sufficient, Evidence, that we by
Faith apprehend this unspeakable Grace, and Mercy, in Christ. And therefore the
same Apostle may you observe to be so far from opposing of either of these to
other, that, Ephesians. 2.8. you may see him Coupling Grace and Faith; By Grace
(says he) are you saved, through Faith, Nay, 1 Timothy 1.14. both Grace, and
Faith, and good works, together. The Grace of our Lord was exceeding Abundant
with Faith, and Love (the sourse of all Good works) in Christ Jesus. The lively
Emblem, and Representation, of all three may you clearly discover in the Eye of
a Man. The Light (we know) is the only Object, this Eye contemplateth. And the
Eye the sole Organ, for the Contemplation of this Light. And yet little comfort
shall there be found by any Man in this object of Light; nor will this Organ of
the Eye be of any use, if, by any means, it shall be divorced from the other
Members of the Body. To the Eye Light cannot be more welcome then is the Grace,
and Mercy, of God, that brings Salvation, to the soul. You are kept (says
St. Peter) by the Power of God, unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. Salvation the
clearest Evidence, as of the Mercy, so Power, of God. And Faith the only means
for the sealing up unto us this Evidence. And yet, shall Faith, though of this
Intuitive, and Obsignative, Efficacy (as the Eye from the other Members) be
divided, and separated, from all other Gifts, and Graces, of the soul, as
Humility, Meekness, Temperance, Patience, it shall appear no better then Dead,
For Faith, without works, is Dead alone. Iam. 2.17. Briefly, by the Grace of
God I am what I am (you know) is our Apostles word of himself, 1 Cor. 15.10.
whatever we may have in us, whether of the Seeds of Faith, or the Fruits of
good works, may in no wise, be Pimarily ascribed to any cause but the Grace of
God. So that then, for that, both for the best Plerophory of our Faith, we
shall have too just reason to cry out, as that Father of the Daemoniaque, Mark
9.24. Lord, I Believe; help mine unbelief; and, for our choicest works, for
that they are so far from holding any the least conformity unto the Rule of
Gods Law. sadly to bemoan our selves before him, as does the Royal Prophet,
Psalm. 130.3. If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who may
abide it? Nay, for that we cannot conceive the least hope of Salvation by our
best works, without borrowing much out of the inexhaustible Treasury, not of
Gods gracious Interpretation only, but his Imputation of his Son. Merits unto
us ( Christ was made sin for us, says our Apostle, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.) who sees not how more then suffient
ground there will be for our saying one to another, what Zorobabel sometimes of
the stone of the great Mountain, Zach. 4.7. Grace unto it, Grace unto it? And
for those two, Faith, and Good-works, thus genuinely, and equally, springing
from the same Root, the grace of God, far be it from us from becoming such
Boutifeaus, and Incendiaries, as to blow, and kindle, the Coals of any Division
between them, which, without the least prejudice, or disgust, nay, without the
extreme prejudice of the destruction of our souls, cannot be set, or kept, at
the least distance. Indeed, without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb.
11.6. And yet never shall Faith be able to please God without the Observation
of his Commandments. It is Faith, that apprehends the Merits of Christ.
Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Romans 5.1. And yet Opera mea testantur de me, as our Savior sometimes of
himself, John 5.36. They are good works, that must justify our Faith for true,
and sincere. Faith, as the Kings Daughter, Psalm. 45.14. cannot but appear
gracious, and amiable, in her Heavenly Fathers Eyes: yet may she not be brought
into his Presence, until she appear in her Raiment of Needle Work; and the
Virgins of all other spiritual Graces, for the keeping her Company. V. 15. and
16. Faith, like one part of a pair of Compasses, must still center in the free
grace of God through Christ. But then must Love, like the other, be moving
about the Circumference of the relief of our distressed Brethrens necessities.
So that then, for our Faith, however possibly we may conceive of it, as our
Apostle sometimes of his Faith of Miracles, Heb. 11.33, 34. that it is of force
to subdue Kingdoms, stop the Mouths of Lions, quench the violence of Fire; yet
may we not fancy that it shall be able to open the Gates of the Kingdom of
Heaven, as long as we are so far destitute of such good-works, which may become
Newness of Life, as that we have any thing of Abomination, or defilement, about
us, for the keeping us out; the last v. of the last Chap. of this Book. And
therefore, however, for the work of our Justification, God may say unto us, as
to the two Blind-men, Matthew. 9.29. According to your Faith be it unto you: yet
if now upon this foundation of our whatever Faith we shall be so far from
building up the Gold, or Silver, Superstruction of Pious, and Religious, works,
as that we shall lay on nothing but the Hay, and Stubble, of all manner of
vanities, yea, Impieties, and Enormities, so far shall such a Faith be from
saving us, that most woeful must our condition needs appear, when we shall all
come to stand up before God; to receive our sentence, either of Acquital, or
condemnation, according to our works. Every Man's works shall be made manifest
(says Saint Paul) for the Fire shall try every man's works, of what sort it is.
1 Cor. 3.13. where by Fire (will we hear St. Augustine, and diverse others of
the Ancients) We are to understand, either the Fire of all manner of
Temptations, and Tribulations, and Persecutions; which, as Fire, are to try,
and prove, sound Doctrine; and reduce to nothing the Hay, and Stubble, of Humane
Invention. When the Lord shall wash away the filth of the Daughter of Sion by
the Spirit of judgment, and Fire, says the Prophet. Isa. 4.4. or the Fire of
the Holy Ghost; He shall Baptize (says the Baptist) with the Holy Ghost, and
with Fire. Matthew. 3.11. or our Saviors appearance at this Day of Judgment;
either for the brightness of his Presence; Who is the true Light, that
lightneth every one that comes into the world; John 1.9. or for his
consumptive quality, that (as is the same Psalmists Prediction. Mat. 3.^2.) is
to burn up the Chafe with unquenchable Fire. So that then, find we in our
selves some ability, for the bearing of Tribulations; and Persecutions? Some
eminent graces of Gods Spirit? Some Light of Illumination of our
understandings, for the discerning of those things that are Excellent? Some
consumption of the Hay, and Stubble, of all manner of Corruptions within us?
Upon these, and no other Terms, just reason shall we have to conclude, that we
are truly justified by Faith in the free Grace of Christ; and so shall be
counted worthy to stand before this Son of Man, as himself speaks, Luke
21.36. Let then the Light of our Faith so shine before Men, that they, seeing
our goods works, may thereby be induced, yea enforced, to glorify our Father,
which is in Heaven. Let not our Lean Profession of Faith devour, and swallow
up, the Fat of all manner of good works amongst us. But let the Pomegranats of
all manner of Fruits of Gods Spirit every where appear in the Coat of our
Christianity, as well as the Bells of our loud Profession of Faith. Let Faith,
which comes by hearing, be as Mary, conversant about one thing, the Hearing
of the word; whilst the other as Martha, is careful for many things, the
entertaining of Christ in all his needy Members. Let Faith sing the Plain-song;
and Good-works the descant, for the making up of a Melodious Harmony in the
Ears of the Highest. Let Faith, and good works, in every of us, prove as Rachel
and Leah* fruitful for the building up of the House of our Christian
Profession. That so being Justified by Faith, and having good works for the
Justifying of this Faith of ours, in the End of our Days, we may receive the
End of our Hopes, the Salvation of our Souls, when this great God of Heaven,
and Earth* shall judge the Dead, Small, and Great, out of those things, that
are written in the Books, according to their works.

And thus far shall it serve to have examined the equal Proceedings of the
Court; which clearly appears in that the Dead, Small, and Great, shall,
without any further distinction, or discrimination, be thus (as you see)
Judged. I shall only give you a short glimpse of the infallible certainty of
all; that which is irrefragably evident in that our Divine Evangelist
professes himself to have been (...); an Eyewitness of all. I saw the Dead,
Small, and Great, stand up before God.

The Poets word it is, Segnius irritant Animos -- The objects of Hearing make
not so sudden an impression upon the Ear as those of seeing do upon the Eye.
And the reason hereof, given by the Philosopher, cannot but be concluded to be
very pregnant; for that those things, we see (says he) come to the Eye (...);
in a direct Line; but the things, we Hear, to the Ear, (...); oblickly; and (as
we say) on every side. Had our Apostle, by Hearsay only, by Tradition from
others; acquainted us with the Dead, Small, and Great, standing up in this
wise, before God (and yet this same Evangelist of our Ears conceives but even
such a Relation to be Edged with Authority sufficient; ( what we have heard,
says he, declare we to you, in the 1. of his 1. Epistle and 5.) the less
strange might it seem did we appear to distrust the Relation; not only for that
our Age to palpably abounds with Lies much more then Truth; but for that much
more the greatest part of us, that have led the Lives of Infidels, would gladly
cry down this Christian Truth, rather for a Fabled Romancee then a Divine
Oracle. -- Sed cum certissimus Index.
Eplicuit presens oculus, quem Fabula nescit.


But now, what the greatest Sceptick can, in the least measure question the
Truth of this Report, which so Authentic an Author as this our Evangelist
reports himself to have seen, and this by so unquestioned away as this of
Revelation? I saw, and that with mine own Eyes, and that by so unerring
Evidence as Revelation, the Dead, Small, and Great, stand up before God.

Indeed, I am not Ignorant that there are Revelations, that may to justly be
stooped to draw in the same Yoke with Dreams. Hearken not to your Prophets (is
the Lords own word to the King of Sidon, of Tire, of Moab, and Ammon) nor to
your Diviners, nor Dreamers. Ier. 27.9. Every, even the meanest of us, has,
for a long time (as the Corinthians of old, in the 1. of those Epistles 14. and
26.) has a Revelation, an Interpretation, of his own. Of every of which
therefore far greater reason shall we have to Quaere, then those Philosophers
sometimes of our Apostle, Acts 17.18. what will this Babbler say? But, when we
meet with a Testificemur quod vidimus, as from this our Evangelist, John 3.11.
we Testify that which we have seen; and that no Prophecy of Scripture is of
Private Interpretation; but Holy Men of God spoke still, as they were moved by
God, 2 Pet. 1.20. that Sceptick must needs be concluded to be above measure
Skeptical, that shall distrust the Credit of such a Relation. I saw the Dead,
Small, and Great, stand up before God.

Let it then be the careful Provision, and Circumspection, of every one of us,
that his dreadful sight of the Dead, Small, and Great, standing up before a
most impartial Judge; and of the Books, made up of three volumns; in the first
whereof is written the Law of Nature, in the second the Law from Sinai; in the
third the Law from Sion; the second ^is Day-book, of two; whereof the first is
that of our own Conscience, the second of his Remembrance; the third his Book
of Records, and this of a twofold Nature; the one wherein the Church Registreth
those for his Sons, that, by an outward Profession of their Faith, are received
into her Bosom; notwithstanding that many of them afterward prove gross
Impostours, and Hypocrites; the other that immutable Foreknowledge, whereby,
from Eternity he has, and beyond all Tract of Time, will, acknowledge those
for his, whom he has Predestined to the Adoption of Sons, and ordained to be
Heirs of Everlasting Life; let this spectacle I say (what the Lord sometimes to
his People of the Book of the Law, Joshua 1.8.) depart never out of our Mouths;
but meditate we therein, Day and Night. And let it be the Hing of the same Care
of ours to consider that we shall be saved, or condemned, not by the Leaves, or
Blossoms, of fair Shows, or Semblances, but by the Fruits of Goodworks* And
then, having labored, as much as in us lies, to conform us to his Example,
that is the Resurrection, and the Life, when he, which is this Life of ours,
shall appear, just reason shall we have to become confident, that we shall also
appear with him in Glory; with the Luster of which Appearance, in thy good
time, O Lord, irradiate every one us; for thy Mercies sake, etc.

FINIS.

