THE Divine Being And its ATTRIBUTES Philosophically Demonstrated from the Holy
Scriptures, AND Original Nature of Things. According to the PRINCIPLES of F. M.
B. of HELMONT.

Written in Low Dutch by Paulus Buchius Dr. of Physic, and Translated into
English by Philanglus.

LICENSED September. 25.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers Hall.
1693.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
Who is a Lover of Truth.
IT is a known Maxim amongst the impartial and men of Sense, that we are to
retain that which seems most probable, till we find an opportunity of coming
better and more easily to the Truth. But this is also on the other side a
fundamental Truth among the intelligent, that when any one has found a clearer
and better way of drawing nearer to Truth, that he must forsake his former, and
embrace the latter way. Yea and more then that, the Duty of a Generous man
requires that he never stand still, or lie down at rest upon his knowledge, but
that he be incessantly searching still after Truth that he may more and more
draw nigh unto it, and therefore our Savior says, Matthew. 7.7. Seek and ye
shall find. Even our own Nature teaches us, that when we are not continually
seeking, but resting upon that which we have once learned, we go backward even
in that which we know; For seeing man is continually changeable in all things,
and can never stand still, as to his understanding, he must be going forwards,
or he will go backwards. If then he does not increase in knowledge, his
knowledge will decrease, and he will be as one in a sleep, so that he will not
have that sagacity of understanding, that he formerly had. Verily nothing can
be more evident to a man than this: For he that thinks that he knows any thing
perfectly, and so will seek no further, he shall find in process of time,
either that what he knew before, shall not be so clear to him as formerly, yea
that he shall even have forgot in whole, or in part, or else, that if he often
rehearses that which he has learned as a Lesson, will no longer be as a Truth
to him: but only a remembrance of that which once he knew as a Truth: For when
any one finds a Truth, he cannot but be glad and rejoice at it, yea and as often
as that Truth presents it self to him as truth, and not barely as something
that he calls to mind, so that he thereby learns other Truths, he will be so
touched and affected therewith in his Inward-man, that the joy that he has by
reason of it, shall be of more esteem with him than all Earthly Treasures: But
if he esteems what he has learned for truth, so as to conceit himself to know
all things that are knowable, and so seeks no further, he shall be sensible of
no more joy and gladness in him, by reason thereof, but will through a constant
custom, declare it to others, while he is not at all affected with it himself
in his inward-man, for the outward gestures are attained by custom to keep
themselves in the Reputation and good opinion of the People.

If then it be the duty of an honest man, and a lover of the Truth, never to
stand still and rely upon his knowledge, but constantly to go forward more and
more in the same, yea not only to keep on in his old way, but if he has found a
better, to quit his former way, then will no man, I hope be so unreasonable as
to blame that in me which is praiseworthy in others, viz. That having once
found a better way to attain unto the Truth, that I do quit my former thoughts
both in Divinity and Philosophy, which then did seem probable unto me. Yea, I
can truly say, that nothing is more dear to me, than so to know the truth,
that all things may be comprehended under one and the same truth, and not that
diverse things have diverse Principles, from whence they are derived. And
therefore, he that can give me occasion to find the Truth, and that so that it
every way, and in all its parts agrees with it self, or so hangs together that
one part does not contradict the other, him I will follow, and forsake my wrong
Opinions; Nor is this to be called Levity or Changeableness; but any one that
has a conscience, must needs be convinced, that I seek after truth if perhaps I
may find it.

I know full well, that this is not to speak after the mode of the times, for
he is counted a brave man that has a good memory, and can talk just as his
Master has taught him, and that looks upon it as a piece of Sanctity not to
depart one Tittle from it: yea the corruption of Manners is such, that men look
at nothing but Money, Honor, Mastership, and to despise one another, to make
themselves great, etc.

But to be short, I will communicate unto the sober Reader, some of my Remarks,
that he may thence see what has moved me by all manner of ways to pursure the
Truth.

There Is nothing more common nor more Notorious in these days, than to
distinguish between Theology and Philosophy and to affirm the one to be built
upon quite other Grounds than the other; This way of Talk always seemed strange
to me, and so much the more, because upon my enquiry into the Original both of
Theology and Philosophy, I found them both to flow from one and the same
Spring, to wit, from the Divine Being whence I learned, that God being the
Author both of his Holy Word and of Reason, and all Natural things, these two,
Gods Word, and Reason, could neither contradict each other, nor be separated
from one another, and consequently, that either the modern Theology, or
Philosophy was false, or both of them were wrong.

And when I came to consider the Common Theology, I found it divided into very
many Sects, and that each Sect thought not only his opinion to be the best, but
that the want of Charity was so great, that each Sect judged and condemned and
vomited forth Curses against the other. And in short, that Sect no which the
Civil Magistrate stands affected, is there accounted to have the Truth and
oppresses the other, so that he that has the longest Sword among them, has not
only the greatest right on his side, but has most Truth, and therefore the
Weapons of (this kind of) Religion are no longer powerful through God, but
Carnal.

But it is not only thus, as to Divinity, and the Sects one to another in
General; But good God! what self-Love, ambition and Mastership over one another
do not those of the same Sect seek after? They use fraudulent Tricks, allege
false Citations out of other men's Books, to render them suspected: And if any
man does but a little depart from the Ecclesiastic Laws of the Sect in which
he is, he must forsooth be Excommunicated, he has once signed them, and
therefore must blindly follow them, though made only by men, and although he finds
it otherwise in the Holy Scriptures: These and diverse other things are
sufficient Proofs, that those times are not yet fulfilled of which Jeremy
speaks Chapter 31. V. 33.34. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write
it in their Hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People: And
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his Brother,
saying, know the Lord, etc.

But when we shall once arrive at those blessed days, then shall that cumber of
Councils, Synods, and Assemblies be at an end, and vanish, and Christ alone
shall Rule by his Spirit: and Lording it over Christ's flock, and force upon.
Conscience, and such like Trash shall no more be mentioned among us; but on the
Contrary, Love shall increase, and spiritual things be familiar, and commonly
known unto us.

Now as to the Mondern Philosophy, I have experienced it to be only conversant
about things visible and palpable to teach nothing at all of that which is
essential, or of the Nature and Origin of things. For when at any time we
endeavored to reduce it to use, thereby to dissect and know natural things and
to attain the knowledge of Man and his Diseases (for Medicine belongs to
Philosophy, and the knowledge of Nature and Philosophy, if true, includes the
knowledge of Medicine) I always found it void of Truth, and that it could not
give me the knowledge of Distempers, nor the Causes of them: which Experience
made me see that the Modern corpuscular Philosophy is nothing else but a heap
of Words.

I leave in the mean while others to think and speak what they please, to the
contrary, but of this I am assured, that it neither does nor can give any man
Wisdom, either in things Divine or Natural: But makes man so altogether
Corporeal, that he knows nothing of the Spiritual; and I would fain see any man
that thinks otherwise of it, to give some evidence to the contrary, and to show
how it is possible, that Bodies should operate without their Life or Spirit,
and how they can every way be applied to man and his Operations, and so long as
no man does this, (as it is impossible upon their Principles to do it) I deem
them ignorant of those Principles that give occasion for the explaining and
understanding of things both Divine and Natural from one and the same ground.

These above mentioned difficulties caused me then to look about, for
otherways, and to enquire if there were no mediums to be found, that might give
occasion to discover the consonancy betwixt things Divine and Natural: Along
time had I enquired with uncertainty enough after it, yea, so far I was come as
to esteem all things in Philosophy uncertain: But then I found the Truth of
that saying, that when we are at the greatest loss in our selves, then the
means of our Deliverance are nearest at hand; when I began to be acquainted,
and to have familiar Conversation with the Right Honorable the Baron F. M. Van
Helmont, etc. a Gentleman whose worth I am not capable of describing, and to
whom it would be a lessening (for me so very far below his Honorable state and
Dignity) to attempt to sound forth his praise, the Emperor and Roman Empire
having done it already, not by Word of Mouth, but by Writing: Only this I shall
say, that he has been to me an Example, not only in Doctrine but also in life,
and whose actions I have found to agree with his Words, a thing that in these
times can with truth be said of few.

This Gentleman then brought often forth things both in Theology and
Philosophy, which I had never before heard, yea, which seemed very strange unto
me, and that so much the more, because I heard it by piece meals, now one
piece, and then another, which I knew not how to join together. But as all
knowledge and Wisdom in its first beginning seems difficult, and wonderful,
because we have been prepossest with other Principles: Therefore I began to
think whether the cause of my blindness, and inability to understand, proceeded
not rather from the prejudices I had sucked in, than from what his Honor said.
And so resolving with my self neither to approve nor contradict his sentiments,
but to examine them, whether there were no contradiction in them, or whether
they could all be derived from one Principle. Wherefore I began to note some
things upon Paper, it is true and I must confess it, that the things seemed
mighty intricate and troublesome to me to apprehend at the first, but when I
found but any thing that gave me any occasion to understand things, I stuck at
no pains, so that it did not discourage, nor was it tedious to me at all, to
employ a whole Years time, to comprehend the thoughts of this Gentleman, upon
Man and his Diseases, and so deduce them to Writing that one thing necessarily
followed upon the other.

While I had then this entercours with his Honor concerning natural things, it
often times happened, that Scriptural Truths, and Theologick did occur, which
were altogether as strange to me, and quite out of the common Road, as the
Philosophic.

But because I have now found that his Honors Thoughts both in Theology and
Philosophy do hang very well together, and are Truth, I judge it no less my
duty, the rather because Theology is a thing that concerns every one, and in
which no man ought to rely upon the saying of another, but every one ought to
be a Theologue for himself, and to search after Divine Wisdom, I say I
therefore judged it no less my Duty to examine whether his Honors thoughts in
Theology, could be derived from the same Principle of Philosophy; whereunto I
found no readier way, than first, to lay aside all Prejudices, and in the fear
of God to examine what manner of Being and Operation the Divine Being and its
Operation must needs be, if we will so unite the Attributes of God, so that the
one does not run counter to the other, and that nothing should follow upon the
one Attribute, which would contradict the other, and this Harmony I found in
his thoughts, and I thank God that opened my Eyes to see it. And I must
confesss, that I then found that this Gentleman's thoughts did not contradict
the Attributes of God so united, but were a Consequent thereof; For which
reason I follow Divinity by this thread, to see what truth will thereby be
discovered: This I can at present say, at least, that I have now found the
Great Wisdom of the Creator about the first Man; Yea I have with full assurance
learned what it is that reconciles the sinner to God again, who must needs be
that Reconciler, and on what ways the sinner obtains Communion and Fellowship
with that Reconciler: I now affirm, Knowing and being assured by the Grace of
God, that Theology and Philosophy is one and the same thing: But what? Verily
not that which stands in the many fictions, inventions, and Speculations of
empty heads, or in much disputing, but which is given unto man by the same
Spirit, that enlightens his Eyes to Learn Divine things: And this I have found
to be Truth what is said 1 Cor. 12. That it is one and the same Spirit which
imparts unto man the Gift of Healing, Faith, and many Tongues, etc. Let the
world exclaim against me as they will, render me as odious as they can, and
call me all to naught as they please, I will cleave to the Holy Scripture
alone, without the Glosses of men, or their Commentaries, therein lies both the
true Theology and Philosophy; and therefore O Truth-loving Reader! Seek thou
the Truth in Gods Word alone, come by experience to find and know what the
Operation of the Spirits is, and then thou will not possibly doubt of the Truth
of it.

This one thing only I shall here add, that if it please God to afford me
health, I shall hereafter Treat of The Fall of Man, and how he must be restored.

Farewell Reader, and read with moderation, that thou may reap profit thereby.

Amsterdam 23. March 1693. P. B. Med. Doct.

There will be suddenly published a Treatise out of the Low Dutch of F. M. of
Helmont touching Man and his Diseases, drawn from sound Reason and certain
Experience, to which this following Tract in several places refers.

OF THE Divine Being And its ATTRIBUTES.
. 1. HE that has at any time Contemplated the Divine Being, how it is, and how
many Perfections or Properties it does possess, must needs confess that it is
impossible for him to comprehend the Being of God with all the Attributes
thereof, because being but a Creature, he must needs have infinitely less
Knowledge and Perfections than the Creator, because he understands not the Work
of Creation, nor has the least Power to Sustain his own Being, much less to
Ceate other things, without himself.

. 2. For if it were possible for any Creature to comprehend God and all his
Attributes, that Creature must needs have many more Perfections, than the
Creator, because what comprehends another thing, is greater then that which it
comprehends; and therefore, if any Creature could in its understanding
comprehend God, that Creature would have a larger understanding than God
himself, which is impossible; because that which Creates a thing, is more
perfect than the thing it Creates, which would be as if one said, that a part
is greater than the whole, and a Point greater than the Circumference, which
includes it.

. 3. But though no Creature comprehends all the properties of the Divine Being,
yet hence follows not, that we do not know, or cannot know that God is; for
that many, yea all things, that we meet with, we do know by their Operations,
do exist, though we know them not with all their properties; and therefore, though
no man can comprehend God with all his perfections, yet he can comprehend that
there is, and must needs be a Being, that Created him, if he does but examine
himself, and compare his Creaturely Power with the Power of the Creator.

. 4. It is most certain, and beyond all Contradiction, that he, that will try
his own Forces, and Examine what is in his own power, shall find, that he
cannot produce the least thing out of another thing, unless it be included in
it. Yea he shall find, that he cannot keep his own Body in that State, that he
desires it should remain in, but that it shall, whether he will or no, dye, and
return to Dust, Worms and such like.

. 5. This Impotency teaches him, not only that he cannot preserve his Body in
the same state, but also that it must needs have been formed in time, and has
not been for ever; For that where there is a perpetual duration, there cannot
be any limitation of time, and therefore it is altogether impossible, that
that, which had no beginning, can have an end, or cease to continue in that
state, or frame in which it has always been.

. 6. Whence then follows, that Man seeing his deficiency, and being conscious
thereof, must needs acknowledge, that he cannot have been produced by a Being
that is unable to sustain it self, because then it would be much less able to
give Being to any thing without its self; But that he was made by a Being, that
is sustained by no other, because this would imply the very same defect, to
wit, that it would be unable to sustain others, if it wanted power to sustain
it self.

. 7. And for as much as the Creator must needs have that Perfection, that he
does sustain himself, it necessarily follows, that the Creator himself was not
Created, but has always been: Because that he that sustains himself at present,
must either have been formerly produced by some other, and by him have been
sustained till this present time, and have now received that Power not only of
sustaining himself, but others also; or he must always have had that Power of
sustaining himself and others, as well as he has it at this present.

As to the first, It is most certain, that to say, that the Creature can have
been at first created by some other, and have obtained the Power of sustaining
not only himself, but others; is nothing else, but a parcel of words, which
being well examined, includes a contradiction. For whoever is Created by
another, must necessarily be dependant of him that created him; because nothing
can subsist out of, or without its Principle or Origin: For that every Effect
ceases, when that Cause that sustains it in its state, ceases: To say then,
that though the Creator were created by another, yet he might himself have
received the Faculty not only of sustaining himself, but also of Creating
others, would be just as if one should say, that a Building can keep standing
without its Foundation.

Besides, if we should admit this Absurdity, that a Creature could possess the
Power of upholding it self, and Creating others, he must have received this
Power either at his Creation from the very first beginning, or some time after,
or he must have acquired it of himself: For a fourth is unconceivable. If he
should have received it together with his first Existence from him that Created
him, then he cannot be considered as a Creator; but only as a means, or medium,
by which the Creator did exercise his Power, because he has not this Power of
himself, but receives it, from another: And therefore it is a mistake to say,
that he has received the Power of upholding himself, and Creating others, and
an abuse of words; for that it can signify nothing else, but that God created
him and daily upholds him: And so the second position falls, viz. that he
should have received this Power some time after. As to the third, it would be
considered, whether it be possible, that any thing can give it self more power,
than it has received; or to speak yet plainer, than its Nature and Properties
do imply. Verily this is so absurd and impossible, that it cannot be conceived
by any Man of common sense: Because Universal Experience teaches us the
contrary.

It follows then, that no Creature can possess the faculty of Upholding it
self, or of giving Being to other things.

.8. Therefore this only remains, That he, that at his present can uphold
himself, must needs have had that Power from all Eternity: For it is
impossible, that he that once upholds himself, should not always have upheld
himself; Because the sustaining of himself includes independency of all others;
Now he that depends upon no other, cannot possibly have been Created by any
other, or by himself: of another not, because to be Created infers a
dependency, as we have just now showed, which therefore is a Contradiction to
this Proposition, in which we speak of a Being that can uphold it self. It
implys also a contradiction to Create himself. Because Creation includes a
beginning of an own-outworking (as shall be proved. 27.) If then any one should
Create himself, he must have had an outworking, before he had been created,
that is, before he could Work. Which implies a contradiction, because to Create
himself, is to produce something, before one has power so to do: So that this
Difficulty vanishes of it self. Yea necessarily implies, That, that Being, that
upholds it self, is uncreated, and has always maintained it self in that state.

. 9. For as much then as a Man learns from his own insufficiency, that there
must needs be a Being, that brought him forth, and upholds him, which
necessarily infers' that that Being is uncreated and independent, as already is
proved, he can further infer from hence, (though but imperfectly, by reason of
his shortness of understanding) what Perfections are necessarily required in
this uncreated Being.

. 10. Having thus learned from the Nature of our own Being, that that Being,
which creates us, is, and always was, it self uncreated, we do justly conclude
further, that it is also Unchangeable: for if it were changeable in the least,
with respect to its Being, it were absolutely impossible that it should have
been always uncreated: because to be uncreated and independent cannot subsist
with the least mutability: because to be uncreated does necessarily imply a
Being, that can neither be better nor worse, but which always works the same
thing; because it depends upon no other, (according to.8.) and consequently
cannot be changed by any other.

This being cannot change it self, but it must be either with respect to its
thoughts, operations, or Being.

With respect to its thoughts or works, it cannot change it self, because a
mutation of thought or operation, implies a beginning of something Essential,
which it, till then had not thought, or had not till then done, and made an end
of that which it did before Work or do. And in as much as it is natural to, or
the property of a thinking Being to think, it follows that there cannot be the
least change of thought, without a change of something essential, which cannot
happen in this uncreated Being, because it would then be defective, and
imperfect, which is inconsistent with the upholding of it self, as shall be
proved. 11. as also with its Omnipresence, and Omniscience, of which we shall
speak. 14.15.

True it is, that it may here be Objected, That though a man changes in his
thoughts, and actions, that that makes no change in his Being.

But this is a false Objection: for seeing our Thoughts, and Works, proceed not,
but from our Life; and that we bring not forth any thing, but as caused
thereby, it follows that no change can happen in our thoughts, neither for the
better, nor the worse, except our Life or Being do first change so to work.

With respect to his Being, this uncreated Being cannot change himself, because
then he must either become better or worse: For the worse he cannot change
himself, because it is natural to all things, to keep themselves in a good State
so long as they can possibly: Nor can he better himself, because then he must
have that power of himself, or have received it of some others. Of another can
he not have received it, because he upholds himself, (according to. 8.) And it
cannot make it self better; because that which upholds it self, and is
uncreated, must needs have had that perfection from all Eternity, which it is
pretended, that it has obtained in process of time. From all which then it
follows, that this uncreated Being is also unchangeable.

. 11. For as much then as this Being is Unchangeable both in its Thoughts,
Works and Being, it is impossible to conceive wherein it should be liable to
the least Imperfection; for being uncreated and upholding it self, according
to. 6. and 7. it cannot have the least imperfection, because that which upholds
it self must needs have all Perfections, because in that part wherein it should
be imperfect, it would not be able to uphold it self; because every thing that
is liable to the least defect, shows that it upholds not it self; for if it
could uphold it self, and yet was in any wise deficient, it would in stead of
being so deficicient, render it self Perfect, and abide in that state of
Perfection.

And for as much as. 10. it is proved, that this uncreated Being is
unchangeable, it necessarily follows, that it enjoys all perfections, because
that which cannot be increased nor diminished, without increasing, and
diminishing its Being, must needs possess all things that can possibly be
given: now that which perfectly enjoys all things, and admits not of the least
deficiency must in every respect be Perfect.

. 12. For as much then as this being is absolutely Perfect, it necessarily
follows, that it is also Indivisible or Incorporeal, because all things that
are Corporeal, and consequently divisible, show themselves to be mutable, as it
is natural to all Bodies to change their Figures and forms, and because it is
proved. 10. that God is not in the Jest mutable, it follows thence, that the
least corporeity, or divisibility cannot be essential to him.

. 13. From this Immutability and Indivisibility follows, that no time can be
conceived in this perfect Being. Because time, being nothing else but a certain
Limit, which Men conceive in themselves, of the duration of things that occur
unto them, to wit, when they began, how long they shall continue, and when they
shall pass away; for as much then as God is uncreated and unchangeable, he
cannot be limited by any time, in which he sold have obtained his being, or
how long he has been in that state, because to be uncreated, and unchangeable,
implys no time, but perpetual duration according to. 7.

. 14. Seeing then there is no time in God, it necessarily follows that all
things are present to him, that is, that nothing does now appear, or come forth
to View, that has not been always, with God. For if any thing were new to God,
God could not be always present to all things, or all things would not be
always and without ceasing present to God; but would begin to be present to
him; and seeing there is no time in God (according to. 13.) nothing can be said
in the least to begin to be present to God, which has not always been present
to him.

But it will be here said: That God is always present; that is, that God is
always present to all created Beings, when created, but that he cannot be said
to be present to things before they are Created.

This Objection indeed to our humane understanding, and according to our
apprehension of things, as present to us, seems to include a truth; but because
we our selves are never present, but always under mutation, and that all things
that occur unto us, do also continually change (as is proved in the
Observations of Baron Van Helmont upon Man, and his Diseases. 39.40, 41, 42.)
therefore Gods being present cannot be considered in the same manner, or
measured with our manner of being present to things, because he is
unchangeable, we continually changing.

Besides when we say, concerning any Creature, that it is present, we mean
nothing else, but that we hear or see it, etc. in this or that place; But on
this wise can nothing be said to be present to God, because, he being
incorporeal, according to. 12. cannot be externally seen nor included in any
place. But must be so present, that nothing can be or subsist out of him;
seeing then, that nothing can subsist out of God (as shall be proved. 16.) and
that God is in all respects unchangeable (according to. 10.) God must needs be
present to all things on that wise; that is, he must have all things in him:
For if God, began then first to be present to all things, when they were
created, or first began to be, then should God necessarily be now present to
some things, to which he was not present in former times. Which would be
something new to God; and because every new thing infers a Change, whether in
thought or deed, and that God is in every respect, unchangeable (according to.
10.) it is impossible that God should not be always present to all things.

But it will be here again said, that presence is a consequence of the
Creation, and that therefore this has relation only to the Creation, and not
with respect to the Attributes that flow from the Being of God it self.

But this exception is utterly false: for if it flows from the nature of Gods
Being, that he be unchangeable, and perfect, then it follows also from his
Being, that he cannot with respect to his Works or Being, be extended or
enlarged: Now, that which cannot be extended nor enlarged, cannot be said to be
present to more things at this time, then in time past: at one time then
another. For if it was not present but in the Creation, and the Creation be
(according to the common opinion) something, that before was nothing, then this
Being must be more extended now, than formerly, because there being nothing
before the Creation, (according to the common Hypothesis) this being could not
be operative in that, which was not; and God being more present with respect to
the Creation, must needs be now more extended with respect to his Being or
Works than he was before the Creation, which is directly contrary to. 10. where
the contrary is proved: So that this exception, that Gods presence is a
consequence of the Creation falls to the ground.

Again they which do consider Gods being present, but as a consequence of the
Creation, cannot conceive God to be present any other way, then man is said to
be present to things; although they seem to say the Contrary. Now the difference
betwixt Gods being present and Man's being so, and wherein it consists, has been
showed in the precedent Objection.

But in opposition to these our thoughts concerning Gods Presence, there will
be another difficulty advanced, viz. How it is conceivable, that all things
should have been in God, as they are before their Creation. And that this being
to us utterly unconceivable, seems therefore to be false.

For my part I freely confess, that it is unconceivable to Men, after what
manner or how these things were in God before the Creation: buth though my
understanding cannot conceive it, it follows not that therefore it is false:
for if nothing else be true but what I can comprehend, it would follow that all
the Attributes of God are not in him, yea that God is not, because God is
incomprehensible: Which consequence yet is absurd, as is proved. 2.3. even so
is it unreasonable to infer such consequences from our comprehension with
respect to Gods presence.

Moreover if we truly understand, what Creating is, (as shall be showed. 27.)
this difficulty would fall of it self. To show then in some sort the
possibility of all things having been always present to God: Let us consider,
that all our words, thoughts and deeds, are not a mere nothing, but spiritual
beings (as is proved in the Consideration of B. Van Helmonts Observation upon
man etc. 19.44, 45, 76, 86, 91, 93, etc.) And that they often times are seen by
others, before they are acted in the body; as for example it is sufficiently
known, and especially to such as have it by experience, that the apparition of
one that is yet alive will be represented to another, and that the very same
noise or din, which afterward will be heard at the death of the Person, is
heard before his departure: These things now, which are so heard or seen, and
of which we have a clear evidence, as when we speak with the Persons
themselves, cannot be mere nothings, because no man can hear or see a mere
nothing: but these are something essential (as is proved in the Considerations
of B Van Helmont;) I query then what greater impossibility there is in this,
that all things are always present to God, than it is that men should sometimes
perceive things beforehand, that come not to pass till sometime after, there is
no difference here, but in point of time, to wit, that God has been always
present to all things, which men many times have perceived, seen, and heard but
some small time, before they were wrought out: So that this plainly evinces
that all natural things do already really exist, before they were wrought out,
though we kmow not how.

And because we do here give a Key, by which we may understand the possibility
of Apparitions, we must as we go, take notice of two mistakes, conerning
Prophesies, and Apparitions. First of those that look upon Prophesies, and
Apparitions as Fables, because they cannot conceive how things can be seen or
known before they come to pass, not knowing that all things are always
essentially, although not visible. Secondly of those that receive Prophesies, and
Apparitions for truth in opposition to the former, although they cannot give the
least reason for it, yea if they do not acknowledge that all things do
essentially exist, before they be corporeally wrought out, will be forced to
assent to the opinion of the former, as not having any thing to oppose against
it, because setting this Truth aside, that all things have always been
essentially in God, there is not the least proof to be given of the truth of
Prophesies and Apparitions.

. 15. And because all things are continually present to God, this most perfect
Being must also needs be Omniscient, that is, God knows when and at what time
all things, that are hid shall be revealed; because, being the Original of all
things (as shall be proved. 17.) and having all things present with him
(according to. 14.) he knows, when this or that thing shall (in the order that
he has established in all things) be bodily wrought forth, that is, when it
shall bodily appear, or be acted in the Body, (for of such things as are to be
done in the body, it is, that we now (speak,)

Yea it is altogether impossible, that any man can have any the least Notion or
Idea of the signification of Omniscience if he does not presuppose, that all
things are always present to God: and to speak yet plainer, it is impossible
that God can be Ominiscient if all things be not present to him: For I pray,
what is it to know a thing, but to comprehend it? And we must needs have the
Idea or being of what we do comprehend; and hence it is, that he that has no
Idea or Image of a thing, does not truly apprehend it: For as much then as the
knowledge of a thing consists in the having and Idea thereof, and that the
Ideas are Spiritual Beings, (as is proved in the Considerations of B. Van
Helmont upon Man, etc.. 44.45.) it follows, because God has in him the Ideas
(or that which is essential) of all things, which are always present to him,
that he must needs be also Omniscient.

But it will be said, that knowledge in God, is not so as it is in man, because
God has all knowledge from himself, and comprehends all things, so as they
shall be when they shall begin to appear in the Creation, whereas, on the
contrary, Men must receive their Ideas from without, from the things
themselves, which do give forth their Ideas or Images In us; and therefore the
Omniscience of God cannot be likened to the knowledge of Man.

But this Objection says nothing against what we have advanced: For we say not
that the knowledge of God is to be likened to the knowledge of Man; but that
Gods knowledge, is knowledge, and that all knowledge infers an Idea of the
thing known, or which we comprehend. As for Example, no man can know what a
Tree, or Beast, or such like is, unless he has the Idea or Image of that thing
in him.

The difference then betwixt Gods knowledge and our knowledge consists herein,
that we cannot frame any Idea of any thing, but what the things themselves,
gives forth, so that the knowledge of the Creatures is stirred up in us, and
hence it is, that no man can form in himself and Idea or Image of anything,
that he has never seen. But it is not thus with the knowledge of God, but the
quite contrary, to wit, That God stands in need of nothing to acquire the
knowledge thereof, because he being the Original of all things (as shall be
proved in the next.) and wanting nothing, but on the contrary, enjoying all
Perfections according to. 11. produces all things, and is the Author of them:
So that the difference betwixt Gods and Man's knowledge, is this, that men are
passive, that is, they cannot know, nor work any Idea of any thing unto
themselves but must receive it from without: whereas on the contrary, the most
perfect Being is active, that is, it wants no knowledge from without, but knows
all things from or of himself.

So that hence it may be easily enough understood, that we do not liken the
knowledge of God unto Man's knowledge, but do assert an infinite distance
betwixt the one and the other.

But this is not the main Business, that we properly aim at here, to wit, what
Gods knowledge is, and how men come by the knowledge they have: But the
question here is, what is knowledge. And we have showed, that all knowledge or
comprehension, if it be true knowledge, includes in it an Idea or figure of the
thing, which we comprehend, or else it is no knowledge of the thing as it is:
but only that such a thing is, as by Example we know indeed that God is, but we
know not what manner of being he is, that is, we have no Idea in us of his
Being as is proved. 2.3.

But here we speak not properly of such a thing, as of which we can have no
Idea, but of things which fall under perception and Comprehension. For we treat
here of the Being of God, which is greater than all Created things, and
therefore his Omniscience must needs comprehend the knowledge or comprehension
of all things, so as things shall be created. And therefore we are only to
consider here that knowledge, which contains only the Idea or being of the
thing known: which knowledge must needs be in the most perfect being, viz. that
it has in it self the Ideas of all things so as they shall be created, or else
God could not be Omniscient, that is, he could not comprehend all things, are
not a mere nothing (as has been showed already) nor cannot be nothing; Because
in God there cannot be nothing, but must all be actually and essentially
according to his perfection; whence then follows beyond all contradictions that
God had all things essentially in him before the Creation, and that he can in
no wise be Omniscient, but by having the Ideas, (or that which is essential) of
all things in him, and consequently that all things did not then first obtain
their Beings, in their Creation, but were all before the Creation essentially
in God.

. 16. This most perfect Being then, being thus Omniscient, that all things are
present to him, it must needs be the Original of all Created things; because he
that has all things present, that is, he that comprehends all things, is
greater than the things that are present to him, that is, that are comprehended
in or by him. Now these things that are always present to God, do show their
deficiency and want of power to keep themselves always in the same condition,
because they continually change: Now for as much as they do not uphold
themselves, they cannot possibly be the cause of their own Being; because he
that is the cause of his own Being, must needs have the Power of having been
always the cause of his own being, and consequently he must be able to preserve
himself in the same state. Now for as much as no Creature has the power of
Conserving it self in the same frame, it follows, that some other must be the
cause of its being; and he that is the cause of its being cannot be like unto
him, that is, he cannot be as he is, a Creature, because no Creature has the
least power of producing any thing, nor yet so much as of Conserving it self
for one Moment (as in. 4.5, 6.) so that the Original or Cause of the Creatures
can be no Creature, but must be that being, which is from all Eternity, which
subsists of it self, and to whom all things are present.

. 17. Seeing then that God is thus Omniscient, that all things ae continually
present with him, and so present that they are dependent of him, and that he is
the Cause or Original of all things, it necessarily follows that this perfect
Being, has also this Power, that he can so produce all things, that what he
produces shall be able to accomplish the end, to which their maker has
appointed them. Because he, of whom all things are dependant, and who is the
sole Cause of all things, cannot be so hindered by any thing, that what he has
produced should not effect that which is according to his aim and will: which
power of producing all things is truly enough said to be Omnipotent: Not that
the word Omnipotent does signify a power to do all things both good and evil;
in no wise: For seeing there is no defect in God, it cannot be that the most
perfect Being should produce or work out any thing that should not have all the
parts requisite to its appointed outworking; but if his work should be so
defectively produced, it would be evil with respect to God, who is the
Work-master, or the Maker thereof, but this cannot in any wise be in a perfect
Being.

. 18. And as this Being is so Powerful, that it produces all things with those
Faculties, that render them capable of Effecting that, whereunto they are
ordained and appointed, so it is also, not only Good in or with respect to its
self (which Goodness, in that respect, is nothing else but its own Perfection
(of which we have spoken. 11.) but it must needs also be good in the highest
degree, with respect to the Creatures; because all the Good which is required
to their Well-being, they must receive from him, as not being able to subsist
out of him.

. 19. And this Perfection in the Divine Being, being demonstrated in. 11. it
follows that it cannot be without Operation, because if it were not Operative,
it would if self want that which is common to every Creature; for there is no
Creature, how mean soever it be, that is without its Operation: Now if the most
perfect Being should want that which is even Natural to all the Creatures, it
would in that respect be more deficient then the Creatures themselves, nor
would possibly have all those Perfections that are necessary to a perfect Being.

. 20. Again this being is not only operative, but it must needs have been
always on Continually Operative, because if it be not always Operative, there
would then be a cessation in this being, either from all Operation, or but in
part. Whether now we say, that this Cessation be total or but partial, it
asserts a change, and that infers a defect or imperfection, as is more at large
proved in. 10. And seeing, according to. 10. and 11. God is neither Mutable in
his Being nor in his Working, but is in every respect present, it follows, that
God must always have been Operative or Working.

. 21. And seeing the Immutability of this Being is proved. 10. and its
Perfection in. 11, it follows, that it is not only always Operative, but also
that it must always Operate or work the same thing: That is, that God does not
only never cease to work, but also, that he does not change his Working;
because if God did not always work the same thing, it must be either that he
might make his Work better or worse: But this Being makes its work neither
better nor worse: Because whatsoever it works, must be agreeable with its own
Attributes; seeing therefore that it is unchangeably perfect according to. 10.
and 11. it must necessarily have also that Perfection that it works always
wifely and with understanding, yea with such understanding, that there can be
neither too much nor too little in its Works, and consequently that it
produces its Works neither better nor worse, or else there would be a defect
in the Nature of this Being, and consequently it would neither be immutable nor
perfect, the contrary of which has been proved.

And because there is no time in God, that is, because his Being cannot be
limited by any time (according to. 13.) but that it is perpetual, therefore,
the Attributes that flow from his Divine Being, cannot be temporal, or subject
to time. Because we can no sooner speak of a Being, but we must needs include
all the essential Attributes thereof; for if you take from a Being its
Attributes, it is no more the same thing that it was before, and seeing in. 18.
it is proved that Operation, or to Work is natural to the Divine Being, it
follows, that because God is every way unchangeable, that his Working must also
be so, and that it can never cease to be the same.

Moreover, if God did not always work the same thing, but did work something
new, the essential of which was not before, then God could not be present to
all things, because that which did but now begin first to be, or to receive
Being, cannot be said to be present before its being; And for as much as it is
proved. 14. that all things are present with God, God cannot at this time work
out or produce any other Beings, but those, which were continually present to
him; and consequently, because all things are always present to God, God must
needs always work the same and no new thing.

And seeing Gods Omnisiciency does include, that he has the essential of all
things in him, according to. 15. therefore God cannot work any new thing, that
is, which is essentially so, and which God is not always working, because if
God did work out or produce any thing that is new, he could not be said to be
Omniscient, of which we have spoke more at large. 15.

From all which if follows, that God must needs be always working the same
thing.

If any one will here allege, that it does not follow that the Divine-Being
does always word the same thing; because this Being does all things freely and
without constraint, and consequently can either cease from his former Work, or
begin a new Work, be shall find, that he makes the will of God to contradict
his immutability, which cannot consist with the nature of the most perfect
Being.

But because this Objection arises from ignorance of the Nature of the free
will of God, therefore we shall make answer to it, when we come to Treat of the
Freedom of the Will of God, to wit, in the next 22..

It will again perhaps be said, though that God always Works the same thing, with
respect to his own Being, that is, that he can never change his own Perfection,
yet it follows not from hence, that God does always work the same thing, as to
his works which he has made; As for Example, before the World was Created Good
produced not any thing, that was not his own Being, but was Operative in
himself, i. e. All-suficient: For we can conceive or think upon the most
perfect being, though we think not upon his Creatures; so that if flows not from
the nature of his Being, that he must needs always Create.

As to this distinction betwixt Gods Working with respect to the Working, which
is in God, and his Working with respect to the Works that he makes, though it
seems to say something, yet in the ground it says nothing: For when we say that
God always works the same thing with respect to his Being; does not that
necessarily imply, that God does always work the same thing, and always does
that which follows from his perfect Being, if therefore it follows from the
nature of this Being, that he can Create, and that he is withal unchangeable,
both with respect to his Being, and to his Working, (according to. 10.) can any
thing else follow from hence (without destroying the essential immutability of
God) but that God always Creates? It is so impossible to separate these two
from each other, that if we will assert, that God does not always work the same
thing, we shall in very deed deny the immutability of God, which in Words we do
confess.

Besides, when we distinguish betwixt Gods Working with respect to his own
Being, and the Works which he makes, and do thence conclude, that God can work
in himself without bringing forth any thing, but his own Being; we must
consider, whence we have this distinction.

This is certain, that we are conscious to our selves, that we can think upon a
thing, without presently executing what we think; yea, that we can according to
our own Will, do or omit diverse things, without considering whether it be
regular or no. This forbearing to put in Execution what we have once thought,
proceeds not so much from our own Will or Choice, many times, as from a want of
Power to do it; for the Nature of all men is such, that as soon as they have
considered that a thing is good or profitable to them, they do immediately wish
and desire to put it in Execution, and because they do many times want power so
to do, or that long time is thereunto required, they do forbear to accomplish
their Designs; or else, if they wanted not for power, they would immediately put
them in Execution.

If any man shall pretend that a Man sometimes considers of things, that he can
immediately do, and yet forbears, the Question is, whether those things be good
or evil. If Good, the omission of them is a neglect and a defect in him;
because it is always necessary that he should do good, that is, that which the
order of things does require (for Evil is that which is contrary to the
appointed Order) and for him to forbear it, is wrong. We must not feign then
(from our own deficiency) such things in God, as are inconsistent with his
Perfection, and are a clear Proof of a defect in our selves. So I leave it to
every man to consider whether such a distinction can possibly be admitted in
the Working of God, without the diminution of his Perfection.

And when it is said, that God was all-sufficient and Operative in himself
before the Creation of the World, if we consider the thing aright, we shall
find, that they that use this manner of Speech, do neither say any thing that
is intelligible to others, nor in any wise do understand themselves what they
say. For when they say that God works in himself, or is all-sufficient; do
they not signify thereby, that God stands in need of nothing, neither wants
any thing from any one, but is independent of any Creature. I take this to be
the proper sense of these words, which those that use this manner of Speech
would signify thereby. But tho'this be the true meaning of these Words, yet it
is nothing to the purpose in this case: For I pray observe, to what Question
this Answer is given, to wit: When any one asks, what did God do before he
Created the Worlds? The common answer is, God wrought in himself, or God was
all-sufficient. Verily an answer for Children, but not for Men of Sense; for
this is not the Question, whether God had the same perfections before the
Creation as after: Neither do we here speak of the Being of God, but of his
Works, so that it is just as if the one inquired after the East, and the other
directed him to the West. Again if we sift this Answer a little more narrowly,
we shall find a lessening of Gods Perfections: for to say that God was
all-sufficient, or wrought in himself before the Creation, is as if they would
signify that since the Creation God was not so. For what else can it signify in
this place? Or if this be not their meaning, but that they also assert God to
be always unchangeable, it is not to the purpose, and they show thereby that
they are not able to answer that Question: What God did before the Creation?
they ought to say, that God either Created something or nothing: If they say,
that God Created nothing before this World, they ought to prove, that that
follows from the Nature of God himself; as on the contrary they ought to
require of us, that we should prove our assertion: that God is always a
Creator, and Creating from the nature of that Divine Being.

But against this position, that God is always Working the same thing, and
therefore, is always Creating, there is one shift more, viz. That we can
conceive the most perfect Being, without conceiving that God is always
Creating, Ergo, it flows not from the Nature of God that he is always Creating.

First, we must here consider, that Man cannot at once conceive all Gods
Prefections, for reasons rendered in. 2. So that it is no wonder, that we
speaking of the Being of God, do not think upon his continual Creating, just as
when a man is treating of the Wisdom of God, he then thinks not upon his
Ominipotency, etc.

But if by the Word conceive they do not mean to think upon such an Attribute
of God, but that they cannot see from the Attributes of God, that he must needs
be always Creating and Working the same thing, they have not narrowly enough
considered, what is necessarily required in the most perfect Being, and we pray
them seriously to weigh what we have said,. 8.19, 20. concerning Gods Working,
in which the Work of Creating is included. Furthermore, if any one says, that
he can contemplate the Being of God, although he does not conceive in that
thought, that God is always Creating, I ask such an one whether he can know
that there is a God, but by and from the Creation? If yea, then he himself must
not be a Creature; if not, because, being himself a Creature, and thence
learning to know God, how can he think upon God, without conceiving, that he is
always Creating? Seeing his own Being teaches him that God Creates, and that God
never wants the power that he has, but remains the same unchangeable in every
respect. No Creature can then think a right of God without conceiving him, as
always creating.

. 22. But albeit God be always working the same thing, yet what he does, he
does freely, or without Constraint; that is, it flows from the Nature it self
of the Divine Being so to do continually; nor is he thereunto constrained by
any other; else he could not be said to be Omnipotent according to. 17.) if he
had not such a Free or unconstrained Will. Again it is necessary, or must needs
be, that the Divine Being has a Free Will, because this Being upholding it self
(according to. 8.) is dependant of no other, and consequently no body has power
to constrain this Being in any thing.

But because many do not know that we must so consider the particular
Attributes of God, that the one does not contradict the other, but being joined
together do all agree in one; therefore there are many idle and needless
Questions brought concerning the Free Will of God, which are generally
propounded: viz. Whether God can Will contradictory things? Whether God could
have Created this World otherwise than he has? and such like Trifles, which are
not once worth the thinking upon, but however to answer them all at once.

We must consider, What Free Will is in God, and what it cannot possibly be.
The Free Will in God then is nothing else, but that God Wills that all things
should be so produced, that each Creature be endued with such Attributes,
Properties or Faculties, as are requisite to such a Creature, that it may
perform that which God aims at thereby, in short: Gods Free Will differs
nothing from his Almightiness, and is only a different Name to the same
Attributes, as may be seen. 17. compared with this. 22.

For as much then as it flows from the Nature of the most perfect Being, that
he should produce all things in the manner which is most agreeable to his
Wisdom, that is, that they should neither have too much nor too little, it is
impossible from the nature of God himself, that he should do contradictory
things, or that he could Create the World otherwise. Yea such Questions,
whether God could do otherwise, signisies that those that ask them, do conceive
in themselves something better, or do imagine that they could have produced the
World in a better way than it is now Created, which they must prove (yet so,
that it could not at all contradict any of the Attributes of God) or else their
Question is vain and Fruitless, and they say they know not what.

But this wrong apprehension of the Free Will of God, to wit, this conceit that
God could Will otherwise then he now Wills, have men borrowed from their own
Nature, viz. Because they find in themselves a liberty to will this or that,
they thence conclude, that the Will in God must also be thus free, and for this
very Reason many do assert an indifferency of Will in God; just as if God could
be as man, indifferent to do or to forbear a thing; never considering that this
indifferency of will in themselves is but an effect of Ignorance, and want of
Experience, for which cause it is that they know not what to do, nor what to
forbear. As for an Example, A man that is convinced, that to do this or that
thing is certainly good, will not do the contrary, no nor yet neglect to do
that, if he will give way to reason, and love the good.

But many times not knowing which is best, he balances in himself, and
sometimes inclines to this, sometimes to that. So that this Free Will or
Indifferency of Will in man, is but the effect of Ignorance. This being so, it
is impossible that God should have any such Free Will or Indifferency in him of
doing or forbearing a thing; because God being perfect and Omniscient, cannot
be ignorant of the least thing, but knows all things; and must produce all in
the best manner, whence then follows, that God knowing all things cannot stand
in any indifferency to do or to forbear a thing, because then God would not
know all things after the most perfect manner, if he could will or incline to
do a thing or not to do it. Yea to assert such a Freedom or Indifferency of
Will in God, is utterly inconsistent with the Attributes of God, and is
sufficient to set the Attributes of God at odds one with the other, as every
one can easily perceive from what has been here said, if he will but examine it
well.

. 23. For as much then, as it follows from the very nature of the most perfect
Being, that it is always working the same thing, we must consider, what is
meant by Gods Working? Among the Works of God are to be understood the
continual Creating and upholding of all Beings.

. 24. By the continual upholding of the Beings we understand, that all things
which are always present with God (according to. 14. do continually receive
power from God, to persist in their State; For albeit they had no beginning,
nor shall ever cease to be present to God, yet they have not that Perfection
that they can uphold themselves: All Creatures, and none so much as our own
beings, do teach us this, which shows that we are desicient and full of wants,
and cannot uphold our selves in the least, as is proved. 4.5. For as much then,
as we cannot uphold our selves now, it follows, that our Being could not uphold
it self before its Creation, because that which could once uphold it self, can
never be deprived of that power, as is showed. 7. and would therefore be
unchangeable according to. 10. For as much then as we find in our selves a
continual change, and that we cannot uphold our selves, it follows, that all
things which are always present to the Divine Being, as well as our own Being,
are continually upheld by God, and cannot subsist of themselves.

And although it flows from Gods Omnipresence and Ominiscience, that nothing of
the things that are, has had either beginning or end, but have always been,
according to. 20. yet hence follows not at all, that those Beings, that are in
God, and that are Created, are therefore the Divine being it self.

For in the first place, it is not only necessary sary that the most perfect
Being should be Infinite, but also, that it should not be produced by another,
nor upheld, but by it self alone. Yea, that it should be unchangeable and such
like. And on the contrary, albeit the Beings or Creatures have neither
beginning nor end, yet they are not therefore unchangeable, nor able to uphold
themselves, because their endlesness or Infinity flows not from their own
Being, but from the Being of God, which, because it is always working and
unchangeable, must needs continually (that is, without beginning or end) be
present to all things as upholding them, etc. So that albeit all Beings are
without beginning, yet they are not therefore the Divine Being, but do differ
infinitely from the same, and the perfections thereof: as for Example, Whereas
God is always of and from himself, without depending upon any other, they are
always depending upon God, and not of themselves; whereas God is the Original
of all things, they are but an Outworking, and so cannot produce the least
thing: Whereas God is unchangcable, they are in perpetual Mutation: Whereas God
is Perfect, they are deficient, etc.

Nor is it in the least inconsistent with the nature of Man, to conceive two
Infinites, albeit they infinitely differ in their Perfections: For seeing we
know that God is the most perfect being, in whom is no Variableness at all, it
follows from hence also that there cannot be the least change in his knowledge,
or working, as is showed. 10. And seeing there can be no change, neither in the
knowledge, nor in the working of God, we may from hence learn the Possibility
of Gods Works, being infinite or without end or beginning, while yet they are
every way short of the Perfection of God, as has been showed.

. 25. And to show that even they themselves, that do deny that all beings are
without beginning or end, do establish the same thing, although in Words they
deny it; Let us but once see what they mean by the word Infinite: They say then
that Infinite signifies, First, that which has neither beginning nor end; but
that in that respect God is only to be infinite. Seconly by Infinite they
understand somewhat that has a beginning but no end, and thus they make man
Infinite or endless.

But who taught them, that the Word Infinite has so different Significantions?
whence do they infer this? or with what certainty can they prove this various
acceptance of the word Infinite, or endless? methinks I see how this
distinction was first hatched: to wit, because they were not able to make a
right distinction betwixt Gods infiniteness, and that of the Creature; and that
if they should assert the Creatures to be without all beginning, they would
differ nothing from the being of God; just as if all that had no beginning must
needs be God himself (the contrary of which has been proved. 22.) Wherefore to
cover their Ignorance, and to have something to answer to their Adversaries,
they invented this Distinction upon the Word Infinite, viz. that it betokens
more things than one. A Being without beginning or end, as the Being of God,
and a being with beginning but without end, as that of the Creatures: And that
distinction was judged most necessary, that so the being of God might not be
injured, nor diminisht in its honor on the one side, nor the Creature on the
other side exalted too high by ascribing any thing to it, that did not belong
to it, which notwithstanding does not at all follow from what we say, for though
the Creature be also without beginning, yet it differs infinitely from the
Divine Being, as may be seen. 24.

But to show how well these men do defend the honor of God, by giving this
different signification to the word Infinite, it will be needful to examine,
what consequences must needs follows (with respect of the Being of God) from
that saying, that the Creatures have indeed a beginning but no end; Thus, if
the Creature first receives its Being, in its Creation, if follows certainly,
that God is not infinite in his working; that is, that God does not always work
the same thing, but has a beginning with respect to his Working, and so God is
not infinite in his Working, which is a Contradiction to God and his Working,
which are unchangeable according to. 10. as also to. 21. where it is proved,
that God is always working the same thing.

Besides this would infer time or something temporal in God and so all things
would not be always present to God (the contrary of which is proved ^. 13.14.)
if Gods working had a beginning, and there must be in God a time, or beginning
of working it; which is inconsistent with the continual presence of God.

It also contradicts Gods Omniscience, that the being of the Creatures should
begin in time, because all knowledge includes an Idea of the thing conceived.
If then the being of things were first brought forth in time, then God could
not always have had an Idea of all his Works, because that Idea is the Being of
the things, as is proved. 15. and so God, according to their Hypothesis, could
not be Omniscient or Alknowing.

From all which then it follows, that it Contradicts the Perfection of God, to
say that the Being of the Creatures had a beinning.

Besides when they say, that there are things that have a beginning but no end,
the question is, whether this be intelligible or no? And whether they can show
us any one thing in Nature, that had beginning, which has not also an end?
Verily, as to the Creatures so far as they are visible and tangible, they have
not only a beginning, but also an end, as experience teaches us, in all the
Creatures, to wit, that their bodies do change as to their Forms, and do not
remain as they were at first formed: Yea there is nothing they can assign, that
has had a beginning, which shall not also have an end; that is, that what they
call a beginning, has not also its end.

But he that should conclude from these Words of mine, either ignorantly or
maliciously, that therefore Man, because he has a beginning, shall also have an
end, and consequently that there shall nothing remain of, nor for Man after
this Life, would wrest my words and make them say, the quite contrary of what I
intend: For my aim in this is only to show, that that, which has no end, can
also not have had any beginning, and that what is essential of man, viz. his
Spirit, having no end, can also have had no beginning, and consequently that he
is infinite. or without all end.

But some Body will perhaps say, that he can conceive something, that has had a
beginning, but which shall have no end, and consequently that it is not
impossible nor contrary to nature: as for Example, we can conceive an infinite
number, and an infinite Line, and these have a beginning, but no end.

But this Objection duly considered, will not only fall, but even on the
contrary serve for a proof, that that which has a beginning, has also an end:
For Example, suppose any one conceive a number of Hundreds or Millions of
Thousands, he can always add something to it; so that the number that any one
conceives, has always an end, because he can always augment it, and add more
numbers to it. In like manner suppose any man draws a Line from a point; that
Line cannot be endless, because he can always in his thoughts add unto the
length. So that no man can imagine an endless line, but on the contrary, that
as it had a beginning, so it shall also have an end.

If any man yet says, that he can conceive a Line, that can be extended in
infinitum, he says but the same thing over again in the same words, or all that
he would say, is, that he can conceive a line, the end of which he knows not;
for he that says, that he can conceive a Line, that may be in finitely
extended, must have an Idea of it, or comprehend it in himself. Now this is
most certain, that no man can frame in himself an Idea of Infinity; and
consequently, that he cannot conceive a Line infinitely extended, and if he
understands by a Line that can be infinitely extended only, a Line of whose end
he is ignorant, it follows not at all, that therefore this line is infinite, but
only that he knows not, where the end of it is, and therefore this Objection
totally evanishes.

. 26. But it will be said perhaps, you assert, that all Beings are endless,
that is, That they have always been in God without beginning, and yet you say,
that they were produced by God; Now all that is brought forth, presupposes a
beginning, therefore this your saying implies a contradiction.

It is true, that the word produce is generally used, for to cause something to
come forth, which was not before; but if we consider it aright, we shall
naturally find, that the word produce cannot signify to cause a thing now to
come to view, which was not before in Being; for with respect to God, we have
proved. 14. that all things must needs have been essentially in God without
beginning; and if they understand it with respect to the Creatures, they the
Creatures cannot produce any thing new, which has not essentially been before.
So that according to the common use, the word Produce, cannot signify any thing
else, but this, that these things that before were invisible, and not knowable,
do now become visible and discernable.

But to give them full measure, suppose that the Word Produce did necessarily
presuppose a beginning of that which is produced, who shall furnish me with a
Word that signifies God to be the Author of all things, and yet that the Beings
of all things have been in God, without all beginning? for that is my meaning
by the word Produce, as every one can perceive by the Circumstances, in this
case, we want Words, to express it well by, because our understanding only
conceives that, of which we can have an Idea in our Selves, and so far we can
find Words, that signify the propertys of things; but because our understanding
can frame no Idea of any thing that is infinite, therefore also do we want
words, truly to define that, of which we have no true Notion: And therefore can
we only trace that, which necessarily flows from the Being of God, and describe
it defectively, according to our deficient understanding; But he that will
consider it, and examine it well, will find that what we say is true and will
understand more of it, than he shall be able to express.

But it will yet be said, that that, which has no beginning, cannot be said to
be produced, but must be or subsist of it self.

But this is no necessary consequence that because a thing has no beginning,
that it must therefore exist of it self; for not to have beginning, and to
exist of it self, do not necessarily infer each other; but that a thing exists
of it self necessarily infers indeed, that that thing has no beginning,
according to. 8. but not so, that what has no beginning does therefore exist of
it self, as is proved. 24.

. 27. And when by. 22. it is proved, that all Beings, which are in God, are
continually upheld of God, it follows then, not only that this continual
upholding, but also the Creating or Work of Creation is to be numbered among the
Works of God, because it is beyond the power of any Creature to Create,
according to. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.

But to know what is properly the Work of Creation, we must examine what the
word to Create does betoken. It is manifest from. 24. that what is essential in
all things was in God without beginning, so that by word Create cannot be
understood, that God should bring forth new Beings, which were not in God
without beginning; nor can the Word Create signify to produce something out of
nothing: because to bring forth something out of nothing, presupposes
something, the essential of which should not have been in God before the
Creation, but the contrary of this is proved. 23.24. Besides to say, that
something is produced of nothing, would infer, that the cause of the thing
produced was a mere Nothing. For to say, that the Creation was produced out of
Nothing. viz. that there was no Matter before the Creation, out of which the
World was produced or brought forth, infers not that the World was from
nothing. Because the World may be produced out of the Spiritual and invisible,
and not out of a palpable Matter: Besides, it is a known Truth, that the
beginning of all things is the Cause thereof; and seeing they that say, that the
World was Created out of nothing, do assert God to be the Cause or Creator of
the World, therefore do they also thereby contradict themselves, to with, in
that they allow a Cause and Beginning of the Creation, and yet deny it to have
a beginning (of which also see the Observations of B. Van Helmont Concerning
Man, etc.. 5.6.

Whence therefore follows, that the word Create betokens the bringing forth, or
production of something, out of the invisible into open view to be seen and
perceived.

And this is the Language of the Holy Scripture, For Heb. 11.3. it is said: We
understand by faith, that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, so that
things which are seen, were not made of things that do appear. But its better
rendered thus: so that the things which are seen, were made of the things which
are not seen: which things that are not seen says Peter, 2 Peter 3.5. are the
Waters, where he says, that the Heavens were of old, and the Earth subsisting
and standing out of the waters and in the Water: to wit out of the Heavenly,
Celestial Waters: For these are invisible: so that the Waters here below must
needs have had their rise from the invisible Waters above. Of which is largely
Treated in the Considerations of B. Van Helmont upon Man, etc. 7.8. etc. and
20. wherefore the Beings of all things, which lay hid in that Spiritual Water,
became through the Spirit Visible in the Creation, viz. in their Out-working.
For the word Create does not only signify the production of the Visible out of
the Invisible, but also, the putting of the Beings or Spirits into their proper
states, or the imparting of such qualities, or such capacity unto them, as
gives them a power to work of themselves. As for Example, what is Essential or
Spiritual, as Trees and Plants brings forth Herbs, Trees, Fruits, etc. The life
of Man forms his body, and works out many things to his advantage and use,
etc. So that Creation properly consists herein, that these Beings or Spirits
which before lay hid, do now become visible, and perceptible in their
outworking, by means of that capacity or quality, which they receive, of using
the Watery Being to their Advantage of Forming, and changing it, (according as
it is given to every Spirit or Being to Work) under which watery Being the
Earth also belongs, because the Earth, etc. was produced out of the Waters (as
is showed in the Observations of Bar. Van Helmont upon Man, etc.. 7.)

Moreover, the Holy Scripture does plainly inform us, that the word Create does
also include this Signification, viz. that the Essentiality or the Spirit of
each Creature should work out, according to its properties, the Earthly, where
it is said, in the heginning of the Book of the Creation, that the Earth should
bring forth the Herbs, and what was to be its out-working? that it should yield
Seed; in like manner the working of the Fruit Tree is after his kind to give
Fruit, and that in those Fruits should be Seed, viz. to propogate its like: It
is also thus said, of the Fishes, and Fowls, that their outworking should be
Fruitfulness, and Multiplication; the Fishes to fill the waters in the Sea, and
the Fowls to multiply in the Earth, etc. And of Man, who is Lord over all the
Creatures, it is said, that his outworking was, to be fruitful, and multiply to
fill the Earth, and to subdue it, that is, that it should not rule over him,
but he have Dominion over it, and bring it into Subjection to him. To have
Dominion over the Fishes of the Sea, and over the Fowls of the Air, and over
the Cattle, and over every creeping thing.

. 28. But it will be said perhaps, that that place of Hebrews 11.3. where it is
said: Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were by the Word of God, so
that things that are seen, were not made of things which do appear. Or so, That
things that are seen, were made of things which do not appear; is not so to be
understood as we have said in the former. because that manner of speaking of
the Greeks (...), does not signify that the World was brought forth or produced
from invisible things, but that the World was produced of such things as had no
Being before, and consequently that this place does not mean, that the World
was Created of invisible things, which were in Being before the Creation.

But in answer to this Objection, we must in the first place observe, that
neither this, nor any other such like manner of Speaking, does any where in the
Holy Scripture (that I know of) signify, that the World was made of nothing,
but the quite contrary; So that to say, that this manner of Speech infers, that
their Opinion is but their mere say so, and void of all proof. Besides if they
will Interpret these Words (...) of things that were not in Being, they must
allow, that in other Places where the same Expression is found, must also
signify: not to exist, and yet the contrary is most evident from Matt. 6.18.
Where it is said: (...), That thou appear not to men to Fast; When our Savior
says here: That they should not appear as Fasting, does he teach them that
they should not Fast? Surely no, and that yet according to those men's
Interpretation of (...) that must needs be the meaning. He himself declares,
what he means by (...) to wit, (...), that they should fast in secret. So also
(...) supposes things that do Exist, but (...) in secret, or hid from our eyes.
And if we will compare that manner of speaking that does signify the same thing
and is every where used in the Holy Scripture in the same sense one with
another, we shall find that these Men's Explication of Hebrews 11.3. is in no
wise true, who will needs have (...) to signify things that do not exist: For
from this very place it is plain, that there is an Antithesis introduced
betwixt (...), the things that are seen, and (...) the things that are not
seen, or which do not appear; these are, I say, opposed to each other: So that
(...) has an oppposite Sense to (...). And therefore the Dutch Translators have
Translated it by the same word, to wit, things that are seen, and that are not
seen: And thus (...) Signifies the same with (...). Now it is most certain that
(...) things which are not seen or Invisible things, does no where in the Holy
Scripture signify things that do not Exist, but on the contrary, things that do
Exist, but that are invisible, as for Example, 2 Cor. 4.18. it is said, while
we look not at (...) the things which are seen, (...), but at the things which
are not seen: for (...) the things which are seen (...) are temporal or
changeable, (...) but the things which are not seen (...) eternal or
unchangeable.

Now if (...) which is Synonymous to (...), betokens things that do not exist,
would it not be a fine piece of Comfort, think ye, for the Apostle to exhort
the Faithful to look to the invisible things, that is, to things which are not
in Being at all? And should he yet say of those things that are not at all,
that they are Eternal or Unchangeable? This is a Contradiction with a witness.
For to be Eternal or Unchangeable, presupposes their Being, whereas by these
Men's Comment (...) should signify, things that are not; from all which then it
clearly follows, that (...) and (...) cannot signify things that are not in
Being, but on the contrary, things that are in Being, but which are Invisible.

As for the other Objections, that they make from the Holy Scripture to prove
that the World was made of nothing, those places will be found, either not to
speak at all of the Creation, or if they do, not in the least to prove that the
World is Created of Nothing. As for Example, some allege Romans 4.17. to prove
that the World was made of nothing, where it is said: Who quickneth the dead
and calls those things that be not, as though they were. The word in Greek are,
(...); which properly is: calling the things which are not, as things that are,
and is not: That God calls the things that are not, as if they (to wit, the
things that are not) were: and so he speaks here of two sorts of things, of
things that are, and of things that are not, and these he sets in opposition to
each other, as in the issue shall appear.

And when we join diverse places together, where(...), things that are not,
occur, we shall find that this manner of speaking does not intimate things that
are not in Being, but things that are not present, or which are not in esteem,
as is most evident from 1 Cor. 1.28. where we find the same manner of Speech,
to wit, (...), God has Chosen things that are not, to bring to naught things
that are. In this place (...) things that are not cannot signify things that
exist not; Because the whole Reasoning of the Apostle shows that he aims at the
quite contrary: For the intent of the Apostle is to exhort the Corinthians not
to make Sects, and Divisions, supposing Wisdom to consist in a fine quaint
Gingle of Words, as may be seen verse 10. compared with verse 17. But that the
true Wisdom is simple and plain, not gaudy, and therefore seems foolishness to
the Wise ones of the Word v. 15. But these wise Men are, says he, become Vain,
and on the contrary, the Wisdom of God, which the wise Men of the World judged
foolishness, is Salvation to them that believe. v. 19.20, 21. But in this
wisdom of the World, both Jews and Greeks went astray, but to them that were
called, both Jews and Greeks, was given the Wisdom of God, v. 24. and these
called ones, are not wise Men according to the Flesh, but were esteemed as
foolish and weak, v. 25.26, 27. Yet these Base and Despised ones it was that
God chose to confound and bring to naught the wise ones: yea the base and these
which are not, that is them which have neither the Wisdom, Honor nor Riches,
of the World, (as may be seen from v. 26.) has God chosen, and on the
contrary, the wise Men of the World, Which are, that is, who are esteemed Wise,
Noble, Mighty, etc. he brings to naught. From which concatenation is as plain
as the Sun, that the Apostle in this place does not mean the things which are
not in Being, but such things as are despised by the World: For the Apostle
speaks here of two sorts, which are both in Being, to wit, the wise Men of the
World, and the foolish of the World, and of these he says, that they are
chosen, and the other confounded, and brought to naught. From hence then the
Apostle concludes, v. 29.30, 31. and shows that no flesh that is neither
Worldly wise, which are, nor foolish, which are not, may boast, but in God
alone, and not in the World. And if we will thus Examine the Argument of the
Apostle, Romans 4. we shall find that the words (...) have the like signification
as in 1 Cor. 1. For as the Apostle had there said, that both Greeks and Jews
without distinction were called of God, viz. Those of them that sought not
after the Wisdom of the World; the scope of the Apostles is to show Romans 4.
that the Gentiles as well as the Jews are justified by Faith, and not by the
Works of the Law, or carnal Wisdom, as may be seen Chap. 3.28, 29, 30, 31.
whereupon the Apostle then Chap. 4.1. proves by a Question, that they, viz. the
Jews were not justified by their Works, nor have any more privilege thereby
than the Gentiles; the reason is, because their Father Abraham, obtained
nothing after the flesh, to wit, by which he acquired his own Salvation, and
that Abraham ganied nothing after the Flesh, the Apostle shows from the 2. to
the 9. verses. For if Abraham be justified by works says he, then is God
obliged to reward him, and then is Abraham's righteousness not of Grace: But
this, O ye Jews! is most certain, according to the Testimony of Holy Writ, that
Abraham is justified by Faith and not by Works, and that those only do obtain
Salvation, to whom God gives it of Grace, and not according to their own
Merits; wherefore ye Jews by being the Children of Abraham after the Flesh,
have no Prerogative above the Gentiles that you can be justified by the works
of the Law. And to show you, that the Works of the Law can give you no more
Salvation then the Gentiles, let us see when it was that God justified Abraham,
viz. before he received the Law of Circumcision, or after? v. 9. God pronounced
him happy before his Circumcision, that is, while he was yet a Gentile. v. 10.
And the Law of Circumcision was unto him but a Sign that he was justified by
Faith, while he was yet a Gentile, v. 11. Wherefore ye Jews go astray from the
way, and your boasting is vain, that ye are Circumcised, and the Gentiles
Uncircumcised, and that ye can attain unto Salvation by that; for your Father
Abraham was not justified by Circumcision, but before it, and consequently
although the Gentiles be Uncircumcised, they are not therefore a whit below you,
but as well Children of Abraham as you, if they walk in Father Abraham's Faith;
because they being Uncircumcised believe as he being Uncircumcised believed.
For the promise that he should in his Seed possess the World, was not given him
by the Law of Works, or of Circumcision, but by Faith, and therefore all that
Believe are Children of Abraham. v. 11.12, 13. Let us moreover see, whether ye
Jews have any more Prerogative then the Gentiles, from the Nature of the Law it
self, to obtain thereby Salvation. But if you be Heirs by the Law of Works, you
have then no need of Faith, and you know that you cannot fulfill the Law
perfectly; but that you do transgress it, and consequently cannot thereby
receive any reward, but punishment and wrath; and the Gentiles are not
punishable, because the Law was not given to them; so that the Law is your
Burden, and not that you should thereby be justified, and so your Boasting in
the works of the Law in vain because the Law cannot give Salvation, and
therefore both Jews and Gentiles must receive Salvation of Grace; and thus all
Believers are Children of the believing Abraham, as the Argument runs, v.
14.15, 16.

But it may be said: How can the Gentiles possibly become the Children of
Abraham?

The Apostle Answers this Objection, v. 17. and shows, that that God that set
Abraham for a Father of many Nations, is able even to cause the dead to live;
and how does he this? thus, Only by calling the things which are not, as the
things which are; that is, he commands; and it is as easy to God, to raise the
dead, which are not as the things which are: that is, to show his Grace to the
Gentiles, which are dead in Sins and Trespasses, and no Children of Abraham, as
it is for him to call or show his Grace to them which are, to wit, which are
the Childred of Abraham after the Flesh: For it is very easy to understand
from the Context and Thread of the Apostles reasoning, that the Apostle here
opposes the Jews to the Gentiles, and calls the Jews them which are, to wit,
the People of God, or Abraham's Children; and the Gentiles them which are not,
i. e. which were neither the People of God, nor the Children of Abraham; but
dead in Sins and Trespasses; so that this place is Synonymous to that of 1 Cor.
1. (as may be seen by the abovesaid) and consequently that (...) is here use of
the Jews, and (...) of the Gentiles. Just as 1 Cor. 1. (...) the things which
are, is meant of the wise Men of the World, and (...) of the base and despised.

Besides the Learned Vigerus, in his Book de Idiotismis Graecae Linguae does
very well observe, page 256. that (...) signifies to be forgotten, despised,
dead, etc. Now, what is dead cannot be said, not to be at all, because that
which is not, cannot have been living; or have been any thing in former time.
From all which then it appears very plainly, and beyond all contradiction, that
there is not the least proof in Romans 4.17. that the world was made of nothing.

. 29. But to return to the former Matter, we must not only consider, what the
word Create betokens, but also what belongs to the Work of Creation.

. 30. For as much then as this most perfect Being cannot admit of the least
defect, because it is unchangeably perfect, it follows necessarily, that this
Being is perfectly wise, and consequently works all things orderly and wisely,
that is, that in the Work of Creation, there is neither too little nor too
much: but just so much as is necessarily required to that work, that is, that
in every thing there is an appointed number and measure, and each has his own
life, by which it can effect the work whereunto it is appointed: For if God
should make any work defective, it would be produced disorderly, irregularly,
and unwisely, and consequently God would want that perfect wisdom, of making a
thing that is perfect in its Kind: And for much as this can in no wise be
admitted to be in the most perfect Being, according to. 10.11. there cannot be
in any of the works of God any thing either superfluous of defective.

. 31. But albeit God is always doing the same thing, according to. 21. yet it
does not hence follow, that God cannot have Created more than one World, but
that God does continually Create, that is, that he never ceases Creating of
Worlds. Because the Word Creation includes all that belongs thereunto; as for
Example, to the Creation of the World do belong all those things, which have
already wrought out what is Visible, which are at present working Visibly, or
which shall hereafter so work, because the one is a Creature of this World, as
well as the other: in short, The Creation consists in all those things which do
operate together, and are inseparably united to each other, as one only
Creature. Thus the whole World, with all that therein is, stands in such a
Cooperation, as daily experience does sufficiently teach us.

. 32. And for as much as all that has ever had, or ever shall have an
out-working, in included in the Creation, It must needs be, that those things
which in process of time did first begin to come to view, were yet Created in
the first of the Creation, and were not then first Created, when they first did
appear.

For if they began then to be Created, when they became first Visible, it would
follow, that this World is yet daily in Creating, that is, that there are daily
new things added to it, which were not included in the Creation, i. e. when God
brought forth this Visible or Tangible World. Now if there be daily new things
Created in this World, which were not in it when it was Produced, it is certain
That those things that are now Created, either belong to this World, or they do
not. If the Beings that now are Created, belong not unto this World, they have
no fellowship, nor cooperation with this World, and so concern not us, Because
we only treat here of those Beings, which belong to this World. And if they do
appertain to this world, then this world was made inperfectly or defectuously
by God, that is, there was a defect in the work of God, when he brought forth
this World, which afterward was amended from time to time, by supplying of
that Original defect, which is contrary to. 21. where it is proved, that it is
imposible that there should be any defect in Gods Works.

It would also be inconsistent with the wisdom of God, (of which see. 30.)
which admits not of the least imperfection, or defect in his work; because
Wisdom requires that nothing be omitted that is necessary to a thing. As for
Example, a wise and prudent Architect or Master Builder, will bring into his
Building all things that he judges necessary thereunto; and if one of these be
found wanting, when the Building is finishing, it will be no Argument of
Wisdom, but of folly in the Builder, that he did not, while he was building,
introduce all things, which he judged necessary thereunto. If then this neglect
be an effect of Ignorance in Man, how can such a thing then ever come to pass
in the most wise Being to Create a World that should want something, which was
afterward necessary or fit to be Created? this is so directly contrary to the
wisdom and perfection of God, that he should produce a work which is not every
way perfect that a more abusurd thing cannot well be imagined contrary to the
wisdom of God then to say: that there were fewer Beings Created in this World
at first then to this world did belong.

Now what reason can any man allege, why God should not Create that which
belongs to this world at once? Did God want Power at the Creation, any more
than now? surely no, For God is Almighty; according to. 17. Did God not then as
well as now, know what was needful to this world? Verily yes, as is
sufficiently proved. 15. To what purpose then do these men say, that God yet
daily Creates things in this world.

If it be said, that the things that are now daily Created, do appertain to
this world, then it is certain that they are a part of this world: If they be a
part of it, then they are not now first Created, but were at first Created
altogether with the world in its first production: For considering the world as
one entire Piece of Wormanship, it cannot be said to be Created unless all the
parts thereof together with it be Created: As for Example: this is a constant
Truth, that the whole consists in its parts, and that all the parts do make out
the whole, and that if but one of the Parts be wanting, the whole is defective,
or it is no more the whole: So also this World consisting of all its parts, and
all the parts thereof making up the world, the world cannot to this day be said
to be Created, because there are (according to this Hypothesis) daily new parts
thereof Created, but then there would at the Creation have only been some parts
of the world Created, and consequently the world would then not have been a
whole or complete world at the time of its Creation, but only a piece of a
world.

It Is also contrary to the Holy Scripture, that there should still daily be
things Created in this World, For Genesis 1.31. it is expressly said, And God saw
all that he had made, and behold it was very Good; that is, it was in a State
fit to obtain that which God aimed at thereby: Now this is certain, that
nothing can be good, with respect to God, but that which has all the
qualifications requisite thereunto: Now if all those Beings which are requisite
to the Work of this Creation were not then in Being, then what God aimed at in
the Creation could not be effected or accomplished by it, because the Creation
would then have been defective, and those Parts which were to cooperate in the
Creation, would have been wanting therein: and so according to these Men's
Hypothesis, it cannot be said, that all that God made was very good. Again it
is said Genesis 2.1. Thus the Heavens and the Earth were finished and all the Host
of them. When it is here said that they were Finished or Perfected, (that is)
they were so brought to an end and accomplished, that there was nothing now a
wanting, (for this is the proper sense of the Word (...) Kalah to be perfect)
even all the Host of the Heavens and the Earth, that is all the Beings that to
this world do appertain: for here it is not said [an] or one Host of them, but
all the Hosts of them were finished. How can it then be said that there are
daily new Beings Created in this world? This is not only to set Divine
Attributes at odds, but also openly to contradict the Holy Scripture. And to
discover further the absurdity of this Hypothesis, to wit, that new Beings are
daily Created in this World; we must here consider, what is said in Genesis 2.2.
Now when it is said, That on the seventh day God ended his work, which he had
made; No man is so blind, but he sees, that by the word [Work] here, is meant
the work of the Creation, when it is then said here, that the work of this
Creation is Finished or Perfected, and that God rested from the Work of the
Creation, that is, that God added nothing more unto this world; For what else
can resting signify here, seeing God is never weary, yea is continually working,
according to. 20. is it not then most true, that there are no new Beings every
day Created, but that they were all Created together in the Creation at once?

But it will be possibly said, when God Created the World, he did indeed Create
all those sorts of Beings that were necessary, to it, so that he now Creates no
new sorts of Beings, but such sorts as were at first Created in the Creation.

A fine Invention indeed! and which is pretty subtle, that they may seem to
answer something. But let us see of what force it is. To these that say that
all the Species of Beings that now are in the World, were indeed at the
Creation, but that God now still Creates of the same Species daily, as were
then Created; to them I say, and ask, whether God does not cause them of those
sorts or Species, which they say, he now Creates, to be produced out of those
which were in Being at the Creation? Daily experience teaches us this, that no
Creature is produced, but by generation of its like; or from such things as are
fit to bring forth; as for Example, out of the Earth, Plants, Trees, and Flesh
we see Insects come forth, so that the essential of those Insects was before
hid in that, which brought them forth; for it is impossible, and contrary to
the whole frame of Nature, that any thing can be born of any other thing, if
the Birth were not hid in the Producer: seeing then that all things that are now
Born, do come forth of those things that were in the Creation, it is most
certain, that the Essences of all things, that do now appear, or that ever
shall appear, were at once Created together with the World, and are not now
first Created; Because the Creation is a work immediately produced by God, and
Generation is nothing else but the Creatures bringing forth of that which for a
time was hid in them. And since that nothing is now produced in this World but
by Generation, it cannot be said, that God does yet daily Create things in this
World. They, that would prove, that God does daily Create Beings, that were not
at the Creation of the World, must prove, that they ever found any Creature
that was not produced either out of the Earth, or Water or such like, which is
impossible; because the whole course of Nature shows the contrary.

Therefore, those that say that God does yet every day Create things in this
World, they confound the Work of Generation with that of Creation, and do
mistake the one for the other. Once more, if God did still Create Beings in
this World, that were not at once Created in the Creation, why should God have
blessed them? Genesis 1. with the blessing of Fertility and Multiplication? That
is, of Generation with their like? That Blessing would verily not have been
true, because according to them, God does still daily Create the beings of
things, and so Generation would have no place; the contrary of which yet is
daily seen; to wit, that the Creatures do Generate their like, and not that
they are Created: And when it is said, Genesis 2.3. And God blessed the 7th. day
and Sanctified it; Because that in it he rested from all his Work, God had
Created and made. What sense can there be (if we still assert, that God does
yet daily Create in this World) of these words: Because that in it God rested,
that is because he ceased from the work of Creation on the 7th. day, therefore
he blessed and sanctified it? Were then the other following days not also
Blessed and Sanctified? Verily there is no reason, why we should not esteem
them equal with the Seventh Day; nor does the Scripture exclude them: If then
this Blessing extends it self to all the other following days, then God does
not yet daily Create in this World: because there would then be a contradiction
in the Reason; why God blessed the 7th. day; under which are included the
following days, to wit, because he rested from Creating upon the 7th. day; but
if God should still Create after the 7th. day, to what purpose then should this
Blessing and Sanctification be? Or if they say, that the 7th. day is Holyer
than the rest; because God did then rest from the Work of Creating: I then ask
these men, whether it be their Opinion, that God never Creates in this World
upon the 7th. day? As also, whether God does not as well rest upon the other
days, when he has Created a new Being in this World? For we find by
Experience, that all men are not Born upon one and the same day, but that upon
all the seven days men are Born in this World, and consequently (according to
the Modern common Opinion) that God Creates Spirits upon all days without
distinction: what reason can there then be, if God Creates upon the Fourth and
Fifth day a Spirit, etc. and then cease, why should he not bless the Fourth
or Fifth days as well as the Seventh day, seeing that he rests on it, as well
as on the Seventh day? But to pass by all further disputes, the sense of these
Words cannot without contradiction signify any thing else, but that God ceasing
upon the seventh day from the work of Creation, or resting from it; blessed
that day, to wit, appointed the Creatures from that time forward to Multiply,
and so sanctified it, that is, set it apart from the time of Creation, as not
appertaining thereunto; and to what purpose, I pray did God bless and Sanctify
that day? As the Dutch Bible has it, it was to perfect, or thoroughly to finish
all: to wit, that the Creatures might now begin to Work, but that which God had
given them in the Creation to work forth, viz. That they should be Fruitful and
Multiply, etc. seeing then that God has sanctified, or set apart the Seventh
day, from the days of the Creation (for the word (...) Kadash properly signifys
nothing else, but to set a thing so apart, that it belongs no more to that
whereunto it did at first appertain) it must needs follow, that God Creates no
more in this world, or else that would be no reason, why God should have
Sanctified the 7th. day more then any other day.

Furthermore the work Create, is not any where in the Holy Scripture, that I
know of, used concerning things that are produced by Generation, nor is it the
modern way of Speech, to say, this day a man is Created, but born.

But some will perhaps ask: If God Created all things that belong to this
World, in the beginning of the Creation, why were not all things that to this
World belong, made visible at first in the Creation; as for Example: wherefore
did not God produce so many Men, Beasts, Trees, etc. at the beginning of the
Creation, as were appertaining to this World?

In answer, that true it is, that if we do only look at the power of God, we
might be apt to think, that all the Creatures might have been made visible at
the beginning of the Creation at once, but seeing we cannot consider the
Almightiness of God without his other Attributes, these must be so considered,
that they do agree in one; Now nothing is more certain, than that there is, in
the Almightiness, Freewill, etc. of God a Wisdom according to. 22. and 30. that
is to say, that God does nothing but in Order and not confusedly: and seeing we
find every day by all Creatures, how wisely, exactly, and Orderly all things do
proceed, the one out of the other in their Seasons, that all things should not
be brought forth at once, and at the same time, but in process of time. And
consequently the Answer to that Question; Why did not God make all things
visible in the Creation? is this, to wit, That God according to his own Wisdom,
and the Order which he keeps in all things, has so Created all things in this
World, that the one Creature being hid in the other, each is in its appointed
Season to come forth out of the other, and not altogether at once.

But it will perhaps be yet further said, in opposition to this Doctrine, that
all things were indeed Created in the beginning of the Creation, and that now
there are no more new Beings Created in this World, That the Bodies are indeed
generated by the Parents, but that God Creates the Spirit, and consequently,
that it does not follow, that God Created all that which to this World belongs
in the beginning of its Creation.

But because this Objection is of great consequence, and properly belongs to
the birth of Man, therefore we will answer it in that place, where we treat of
the Soul.

. 33. For as much then as we have already proved more than sufficiently, that
all those things, which do at any time appear in this World, were in the
beginning at the Creation; It is likewise certain, that every Creature has
received a particular own or proper working, or capacity to Work out those
things, which the Creator has appointed it to work out: For if the Creature had
no own working, that is, if God had not communicated to his Creature a capacity
or power to work out something of its self, what wisdom would there be in the
Creation, and what profit would it be to the Creature to be created? Verily
none at all; because then the Creature would be nothing else, but a mere
Instrument that can Work nothing, except the Workman does perpetually move it,
and then no Creature could be said to do any thing, but only God the Creator
might be said to work, and not the Creature; Now if this were so, there would
be no Wisdom in the Creation, because all the Creatures being void of all
capacity of acting of themselves, and all that they do, being nothing else but
Gods working, the Creatures could be of no use, or service at all, and as mere
nothings, and God would only be said to show unto himself after how many sorts
of ways he could work: just as one, that playing with Puppets, shows unto
himself, how many sorts of motions he can make with them, while the Images or
Puppets themselves have nothing at all of it, but he alone that moves them to
and fro; which manner of doing is no way consistent with the Wisdom of God,
being a mere Puppit Play of Children that would be of no use or service, but
God only playing with himself; a conceit most dishonorable to the Wisdom and
Goodness of God.

But besides the Holy Scripture does most evidently show, that God produced the
Creature, to that very end, that it might have an own out-working; for Genesis
1.6. it is said, that the firmament of Heavens was made, to make a division
betwixt the Waters which are above, and the waters which are beneath. and V.
11. That the Earth was made to bring forth Grass, the Herb, Trees, etc. and V.
14. The Lights to divide the day from the Night; for Signs and for Seasons, and
for Days and Years, etc. V. 20. The Waters to bring forth Fish. V. 21. The
Fishes, the Fowls to be fruitful and to Multiply, and so forth to the end of
the Chapter, as has been showed already. 27.

Moreover if a Man will but examine himself, he shall find that he has his own
Working, because he has the Power of doing, or forbearing of many things, in so
much as he is Master of that, which he has a mind to do, or not to do: But when
he is once become a Slave to that which once he could have done, or could have
forborne is under a necessity of following the Operation of that thing to which
he is obedient: As for Example, a Man that is subject to Drunkenness, as long
as that desire or lust rules over him he loves it; whreas on the contrary,
another that is not addicted to Drinking, can do it, or forbear it, as he
pleases, and in this his good liking, or Free Will it is, that the own-working
of Me consists.

And it is most necessary, that man be Created with a Free Will, because else he
would not be able to work any thing out, but only to obey that which should be
acted in him just as a Watch, which is moved by the Laws of Mechanism; which is
most inconsistant with the Divine Wisdom, that a man (as we have just now said)
should have no own-working or free will, that is, so far forth as to be able
thereby to direct those Powers which God has Created in him, as he pleases;
but not that his free will should extend it self to things out of his Power.

And because God is a just and Merciful God, who punishes the Sinner for his
Sins, and on the Contrary gives his Grace, or shows Mercy to him, that does
well, the Creature must needs have an own Working: or else wherefore or how
should God either punish, or show Mercy to his Creature: Verily the Creature
would be blameless, and incapable either of punishment or of Mercy, because it
would be but as an Instrument which is moved by another, and so neither the
Justice nor the Mercy of God could have any place in the Creature.

Nor would man stand either in fear of Punishment, or hopes of reward, if he
had no own-working, because he could never be conscious to himself of having
done either Good or evil; because he should not be the cause of either, but
would only have followed the will of his Master: And then Man would not have
any Conscience of any thing he does, (the contrary whereof every man finds in
himself) because, to be conscious to our selves of a thing is, to know that one
has been the Author of it, and done it voluntarily.

From all which then follows, that the Creatures have received from God in
their Creation a capacity of working of themselves.

. 34. But it will be said again, seeing that God is (according to. 16.) the
Author of all things, it follows that God must be the Author of all the Works
which the Creature does, and therefore that the Creature can have no
own-working nor free will.

As to this Objection, if duly weighed, we shall find, that it affects not our
proof; for we say: that God must needs have communicated to the Creature in its
Creation, the power which it has of working of it self, from whence then
evidently follows, that we do establish it for a certain truth, that God is so
the Author of the Creature, and all his works, that if he withdraws this
capacity of working from the Creature, the Creature can work no more, but this
is nothing to the Matter in hand. But the Question here is properly: Whether
the Creature so long as it is by God preserved in its State, has not an
Own-working? Or to speak plainer: Whether God who is the Author of the
Creature, has not given unto the Creature a Power of Working something out of
it self, by virtue of that capacity which God has given him in the Creation?
As for Example, God is the Author of all our Working, but yet he has given man
the capacity, that he can direct that Working power, which he has according to
his own good liking, and this direction is the proper work of Man: And so far
forth as man does thus manage it, God is not said to do it: but man: so that as
to this management, it is an own-working of man, and it proceeds from that
capacity and free will, that God gave him in the Creation.

But if we did mean by own-working, that the Creature could do any thing that
did not proceed from that ability which God has given the Creature, but which
should proceed from something else, foreign to that principle, which God has
placed in the Creature; then their conclusion would be right just against us:
to wit, that the Creature cannot have any own-working, because God is the
Original of all things. But because we affirm that that own-working o^ the
Creature proceeds from God, as the cause and Author of all things, therefore in
this respect, the Objection cannot destroy our Position.

But some will perhaps say, If the Creature man has no own-working from
himself, which does not flow from that Ability which God has placed in him,
then i^ will follow, that truly and properly man does not sin, but that sin
proceeds from that capacity which God has given the Creature and that if it
does not proceed from tha^ capacity, then the work of sinning is man own-work,
which proceeds not from the Author of his Being.

But this Objection arises from want of knowing what the own-working of man,
and what Sin properly is, and wherein they do consist. It is already said, that
all working of the Creatures does proceed from that capacity, which God has
placed in the Creature, and consequently that God is the Original of all our
Working: But albeit all our works have their Original from God, yet God has
given Man that ability in the Creation, that he can direct those Works
according to his own goodliking, or as he thinks best; that is in short, God
gave man in his Creation free will (as is already showed) according to which he
can do or forbear things; and this freewill is properly tha capacity which man
received from God in the Creation, and when man does any thing according to his
Free Will, that is called Mans-work. It is indeed true that the working so far
as it is essential, (and all our Works are so) has its Original from God, but
the direction of that Working comes from Man himself, and is so far forth
called an own-working of Man; as for example, as to the action (or working) of
going, speaking, etc. God is the Author of it, but so far as Man directs his
Steps, Speech, etc. either to good or evil, so far is it an own-working of Man;
and because the evil properly consists in the direction of the Works, or
action, and not in the Work or action it self, it does not at all follow, that
sin must have its Original from God, because God is the Original of all the
works of Man, for that the direction of the working depends upon the Free Will
of man, but not the working it self. So that it neither follows, that man must
needs have such an own-working, as takes its Original from himself, and not
from God; nor on the contrary, that God, because he is the Original of all
working, must needs also be the cause and Author of Sin; because working
considered in it self, is good: but man having a Free Will, directs it to evil,
and so as to that direction it is (in that respect) said to be evil and an
own-working or act of man: and so in this Objection the working, and the
direction of the working are confounded together, which yet, as has been said,
are distinct.

Besides, when it is said, that the Work of Sin is an own-work of Man, here
again, the Sin and the working are confounded, taking the working and the sin
to be the same thing, because they are not able to distinguish the sin from the
working.

But to understand this distinctly, we must examine what Sin properly is, and
wherein it does consist: Sin then consists properly herein, that man directs
the Working, which he has to something else than that to which it ought to be
used. So that the Sin lies not in the working, in the Act, Action, Work, or
Deed it self, but in the direction that man has over the Working: as for
Example, a Carpenter is about to use an Ax to cleave a piece of Wood, so to do
is good and well, because it tends to the good of Man; but if he uses the Ax to
kill a Man, that is evil. Now that is certain that the using of the Ax is as
well a working in the one, as in the other case, and as to these two workings,
considered in themselves, the one is no more evil than the other, because they
are so far, of one and the same nature: But if we consider the directions of
those two Workings, we shall find them to differ very much from each other; to
wit, that the one is profitable and the other mischievous; whence then we may
clearly see, that sin is no working but a wrong direction of the working; and
that Sin lies in that wrong direction, we shall very plainly observe from the
names, that Sin bears in the Holy Scripture, as in Hebrew it is called (...)
which is a departing from the true way, or evil direction, as appears from
Prove. 19.2. He that hastes with his feet sins; that is, he that directs his
Feet wrong sins. So also in Greek (...) signifies a departure from the right
way, which consists in the wrong direction that men observe.

. 35. Seeing then that man has an ownworking-power or Facutly to direct his
doings, according to his own good liking, it is most necessary, that the most
perfect Being should reward a man according to the works which he has done:
For if a man did not receive Reward according to his Works, what advantage or
profit would a Man have of his doings? Verily none at all, and so it would be
all one what he did, which yet would be most contrary to the Nature of Man: For
nothing is more natural to him, than to expect a reward according to his Deeds.
And for this cause it is, that he is presently conscious to himself of the Good
or Evil that he does, which consciousness would be in vain if there were no
reward for him to be expected.

It would in like manner be most contrary to the nature of the Divine Being,
not to reward Man according to his Works, because man could then not do amiss
in any thing he should do, whether he did things contrary to God, or agreeable
to Gods Perfection, because where there is no reward, there is no misdeed or
transgression, (for these are things that do necessarily infer each other) and
where there is no Transgression, there can be no Law or Obligation to do the
contrary, and consequently what ever a Man did, would be good, whether contrary
to, or agreeable with Gods Perfections: Because he would then have no Law
either for the doing or forbearing of it. Now it is most certain, that it is
natural to a reasonable worldly Prince, to punish his Subjects according to
their demerits when they transgress against him, and on the contrary, to reward
them that do well. How much more then must this be natural to the most perfect
Being, to punish those that Transgress against him, and on the contrary to
reward them that do well. Yea if God did not punish them that Transgress
against him, He should never obtain his end in making them, that is, that they
should work out the good unto which they were Created, but they would more and
more deviate from the Good; unto which good they must be brought back, by means
of Punishment. For otherwise God cannot be Glorified by them; and consequently
because God will be glorified by Man, he must bring him back again when he is
become evil, into that state in which he can glorify God; Now this amendment
cannot be effected but by means of punishment, and death, by which the
Creatures do come into a better condition; As is proved in the Observations of
Bar. Van He^mont upon Man, etc.. 32.

Yea it would be confusion in God, to esteem two things so directly contrary to
each other, as alike good and worthy, and to reward the one just as the other,
which confusion can have no place in God, because God is a God of Order,
according to. 30.

Wherefore it must needs be, that God is not only good, but also just, that is,
that he rewards every one according to his works.

. 36. Now for as much as Gods Justice includes the rewarding of every one
according to his Works, it follows, that God does reward or punish all them
which have done the same things after the same manner; for Justice being
nothing else but a reward or punishment proportioned to the work, therefore not
the Person but the Deed is considered, and because the Deed is still the same,
and cannot be said to be better or worse in it self, whoever it be that does
it, hence follows necessarily that God cannot reward or punish one man more
then another, when they have done one and the same thing, because it would be
partial, and consequently an imperfection, which is contrary to. 11. As for
Example, If a Judge having two Criminals before him, that had committed the
same Crime, should punish one with death, and clear the other, that would be no
Justice, but the highest injustice, unequal, and unreasonable, because Justice
requires, that the same things, or things of the same nature, should be
rewarded or punished in the same wise.

But some will say, The Justice of this world indeed requires the same
punishment of the same Crimes, but God who is the Author of Man, has that power
according to his free and unlimited Will, that he can punish the one, and let
the other go free, although they have both committed the same Sins.

But seeing it is unreasonable in man, to punish the one and to let go the
other, how much more unreasonable then would it be in the most Perfect Being,
who is Reason it self, to do a thing so much against all Reason and Equity, as
to let the one go free and to punish the other? supposing them equally guilty.

Besides, if we should affirm this to be a Prerogative of the Free Will of God,
that he can punish the one, and let the other go free, we should set up a
Free Will in God, that is unjust. Which would be as much as to say, that God is
both reasonable and unreasonable; whereas the Free Will in God, is nothing else
but Gods doing all things wisely, and reasonably according to the Order by
himself established; and therefore they that devise such a Free Will in God, do
invent to themselves a God according to their own fancies: Concerning Gods
Free Will, and how we are to consider it, we have spoken at large already in.
22.

CHAP. II. Of Man, as Considered in the state of Innocence, and Vprightness; as
also of the parts of which he consist.
The Introduction.
NOthing can more heartily affect a pious Soul, than to consider what a Sinner
is, in order to his coming back again to the state of Rectitude, in which he
was before he gave himself up to his flesh, and to the evil Lust thereof, by
which his understanding, which was perfectly enlightened by the Rays of the
Divine Light, became wholly darkened, yea darkness it self: Verily no man, which
ever felt the least Glimps of that Divine Light in himself, cannot lament any
thing more than his corrupted Nature, and that he cannot by reason of his
darkness, search out the hidden Wisdom of God, but very lamely, and therefore
will daily and continually sigh, and from his most inward parts, call upon his
God, that he may receive an enlightened understanding, that Christ the Son of
Righteousness may be formed in him, that so the Image of God, aceording to
which he was Created, may be restored in him, and his Soul and Body be stirred
up to repentance.

And as the Wisdom of God has not in vain made known to Man the first State in
which he was brought forth by his Creator, as also his Fall, but has most
expressly showed the Sinner, what Glory man had in the State of rectitude, and
how it is darkened by Sin: So it is, in my judgment, a matter of great
consequence for one that loves God, first to examine what parts do necessarily
belong unto a truly Godly and Perfect Man, before he examines how he can please
God: for he that does not know what is required to be a Believer, will seek he
knows not what; Just as a Traveller, who traveling toward a place, if he
neither knows the way to it, nor the place, nor where it lies, nor inquires
after it, will always be uncertain whither he shall come at last.

Wherefore we shall follow the Order which God observes in the Creation, and
enquire 1. What Man did enjoy while he was upright, and as he was Created by
God. 2. What Men lost by Sin. 3. How what he lost is to be recovered Again.


. 37. Seeing then, that Man is so fallen from his first State, that by reason of
his darkened understanding, he does not so much as know of what parts a Perfect
Man consists, there is no other way to come to know the Parts of a Perfect Man
but one of these two, either that God should reveal it to Man immediately by his
Spirit, or that God should teach him it by means of the Holy Scripture.
Therefore, he that will by his Natural understanding go about to understand
what properly belongs to a perfect man, shall never know nor comprehend it;
because he wants that part of man which properly makes a perfect Man.

. 38. He that shall read the Holy Scriptures with attention, will find that
they speak of three Beings in Man: to wit, of the Image or Spirit of God; of
the Soul, and of the Body. Thus is Man described in the Creation, Genesis 1.26,
27. God Created man in his own Image, so that man had in him the Images of God,
and Genesis 2.7. it is said, That man was formed of the dust of the Earth, and
that the Breath of Life was breathed into his Nostrils, and that he became a
living Soul. So that the perfect man consists in the Image of God, in a Soul,
and in a Body; which three distinct Beings the Apostle does also mention, 1
These. 5.23. The very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your
whole Spirit, Soul and Body be preserved blameless, etc.

. 39. They then who have at any time tasted of the goodness of God, who have
felt the true light, and are renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that
Created them, Col. 3.10. such I say, will acknowledge, that the perfect man
consists not only in Soul and Body, but also in Spirit, because they feel in
themselves a Spirit of Wisdom, which makes known unto them in their most inward
parts, the Divine Mysteries and Virtues, not by Ratiocination but by manner of
Influence and Manifestation, or instruction, yea they shall on the contrary
perceive, that if they attempt to measure the Workds of God by their natural
Reason, that they are at a loss in themselves, and do not understand any thing
at all of the Spiritual, for which cause they do by their Prayers and
Supplications continually desire to be enlightened, making no esteem or account
of their humane Wisdom.

They then who have felt the Operation of the Spirit, are certain, and do know,
that man, if he be one of Gods Darlings, consists not only of Soul and Body,
but also of the Spirit or Image of God: wherefore it is not said in vain by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural Man, (...), that is properly the Soullish or
Animal Man, to wit, he who is destitute of the Image of God, or who has not the
Spirit, receives not the things of God, because they are spiritually
discerned: And therefore it is, that the Apostle also distinguishes, Chap.
15.44. between a natural properly a Soullish Body and a Spiritual Body, the one
whereof is governed by the Soul, and the other by the Spirit. And James 3.15.
The Wisdom which is from above, that is, which is Spiritual, is opposed to that
which is Earthly and Natural, or Sensual, (but the word is here again Soullish
and Devilish) in Jude again verse. 19. The Natural or Sensual, (but the word is
again the Soullish) are opposed to those that have the Spirit. And therefore
Peter says, Having purified your Souls by the Spirit. 1 Pet. 1.22.

From all which places it appears very plainly, that the perfect or true Man
does not only consist of Soul and Body, but also of the Spirit.

And for as much as the ungodly, and Sinners do enjoy the two former, Viz.
Body, and Soul, as well as the Faithful, and Believers, and yet do not
understand those things, which are of the Spirit, it follows that they must
needs want that by which Spiritual things are alone to be discerned, now that
which discerns Spiritual things, is the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15.

. 40. It is true, that often times the perfect man is in the Holy Scripture
described by two Beings, to wit, the Spirit, and the Flesh, as this Apostle
speaks at large, Romans 8. of them that walk after the spirit, and not after the
Flesh, and describes the regenerate as those which walk after the spirit, and
mortify the Flesh, and the Ungodly, as walking after the flesh, and as not
having the Spirit. And Gal. 5.7. he says, that he has the flesh and the
Spirit, and that these two do War against each other, for the flesh (says he)
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other, by reason of which conflict, which the Apostle
felt in himself, he complained Rom 7. that after the inward Man, that is, after
the Law of his mind, or after the Spirit, he delights in the Law of God, but
that the Law in his Members, that is to say, the Flesh warreth against the Law
of God. And there are many other such like places in the Holy Scripture, which
do oppose the Flesh to the Spirit: but in these and the like places, the scope
is not so much to teach us how many parts there are in a perfect Man, as to
show us that Man, who is not yet perfectly born again, has a Warfare against
his Flesh, that is, against his unregenerate part.

But no man can be so foolish as to think, that when it is here said, that the
Flesh lusts against the Spirit, that we must thereby understand only the
Flesh or Body, but that under the Term Flesh, is to be understood that part of
Man, that is called the Soul, which desires and thinkerh, and lusts, and it
is notorious, that this is usual in the Holy Scripture, by the word Flesh, also
to understand the Soul from hence, because, when the Holy Scripture opposes the
new birth unto Sin, it uses the Terms Spirit and Flesh, as was just now showed.
But it does not only oppose the Spirit to the Flesh, but also the Spirit to the
Soul; or to the Soullish part, as we but just now showed in 1 Cor. 2. James 3.
etc. From whence then it evidently appears, that the fleshly part is included
in the Soullish part, and that by the fleshly part is meant the Soullish part.
And that the Soul has fellowship with the Body, and does continually cooperate
with it, we will show in the next Chapter, where we shall particularly Treat of
the Soul.

. 41. But here some body will perhaps say, that the Holy Scriptures makes
mention of more than three parts of Man: as of the Spirit, of the Mind, of the
Heart, the Soul and the Body; The Hebrews call the three parts of man chiefly
by the names of (...) Ruach, the Spirit, (...) Nephesh, the Soul (...)
Neshamah, the Breath, (...) Adamah, that out of which the Body is made: As to
the Neshamah this is properly no part of Man, but it is that from whence the
Soul proceeded (as shall be showed in that Chapter, where we shall expressly
treat of the Soul) for which cause Neshamah is sometimes used for Nephesh the
Soul, as is to be seen in Isaiah 57.16. In the New Testament we meet with three
Parts of Man, more especially under these Denominations (...) Pneuma, the
Spirit, (...) Psychce the Soul, (...) Phreen the Understanding, (...) Nous the
Mind, (...) Kardia the Heart, (...) Sarx the Flesh. But what part is to be
understood by these Terms we must learn from the Circumstances of the places
themselves, where we meet with them, as for Example, the Understanding belongs
to the Soul, which is common to all Men; for whether a Man has a good or bad
understanding, however it ceases not to be the understanding: in like manner
the Soul is meant by the heart, because the Heart is the Seat of the Soul, and
therefore our Savior says Mat. 15.18, 19. Those things that proceed out of
the mouth, come forth from the heart, they defile, for out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, etc. So that for the most part (I say not always) for sometimes
the heart is also used for the Spirit as well as for the Soul, because it is
the receptacle and habitation of both) but for the most part, I say, by the
Understanding, and the Heart, is meant the Soul.

CHAP. III. Of the Image of God, or the Spirit.
. 42. Seeing it is easy to be understood from the precedent Chapter, that a
perfect Man consists in these three, to wit, Spirit, Soul and Body, we are here
especially to consider, what the Spirit, or the Image of God is, and the
properties thereof, as also, the necessity of the Sinners being restored to his
former State.

. 43. Every body knows, that when an Image, Picture, or likeness of a Man is
made, that it must resemble him after whom it is made, because if it have no
resemblance of him whom it represents, it could not be called his Image,
Picture or likeness.

. 44. Seeing then that Man is made after Gods Image, man must needs bear the
Image or Likeness of God.

. 45. Now this Image which Man has of God, cannot be or consist in the outward
Shape of his Body, but in his Spirit, because God is a Spirit, and has no
bodily or outward shape, form or figure at all, as is showed already. 12.

. 46. But because we Sinners have lost it, and so cannot, as Adam, know what
manner of Being the Being of God is, by contemplating the Image of God which
was in him, it is needful that we first enquire at the Holy Scriptures, how the
Divine Being is there described, that so from the Divine Being we may learn
what the Image or Likeness of God must needs be.

. 47. The Holy Scripture then describes the Being of God not only to be a
Spirit, but also shows, what manner of Spirit it is, to wit, that God is a
Light, and Fire, Micah 7.8. The Lord shall be a Light unto me. And 1 John 1.5.
it is in express words said, that God is a Light in whom there is no Darkness
at all, to wit, in opposition to the Created Spirits or Lights, which do
consist not only of a Fiery, but also of a Spiritual-watry Substance, as shall
be showed in the Chapter of the Life, or of the Soul. And Deuteronomy. 4.24. Hebrews
12.29. The Lord your God is a consuming Fire, and many times when God appeared
to his People, it was in a Fire or Light.

. 48. We shall as we go along, discover our Thoughts, why God is said sometimes
to be a Light, and sometimes to be a Fire, and leave them to the further
consideration of the Reader.

We shall every where find, that where God is said to be a Fire, he is
represented as a Judge executing Punishment, and on the contrary, that he is
called a Light, where he displays his Grace, Favor and Mercy, by which Grace
man is saved: And thus God can be both a Light and a Fire; a Light to them
which purify their Hearts, and that have put on the new Man; and so are capable
of enjoying of Gods presence by virtue of the Spiritual Fellowship which they
have with their God: Whereas on the Contrary, he is a Fire to those which have
not mortifyed the old Man, or their flesh, so that their impurity, to wit,
their Carnal corruption cannot stand before the pure, and clean Divine Fire.
But that we may show this yet more plainly even in Nature it self; we must
consider that one and the same Fire is to some Subjects, and in some respects a
consuming Fire, and to others not so, nor able to do the least damage to them;
as is most manifest in the imperfect Metals, which are consumed in the Fire,
whereas on the contrary the perfect Metals, as Gold and Silver, are not in the
least to be consumed by fire, so that the fire, with respect to Gold and
Silver, is properly no fire, to wit, no fire that consumes them or burns them,
as it does burn the imperfect and impure Metals.

. 49. Therefore from the Description which the Holy Scriptures give us of the
Being of God, it is evident that it is a Light and a Fire.

. 50 Seeing then the Being of God is a Light, and that man is Created after the
Image of God, it must needs follow that this Image in man is also a Light; for
(as is said. 45.) because the Divine being is a Spirit, which has no outward
shape or form, the Image must needs also be a Spirit, and such a Spirit as
bears resemblance to that which it represents, to wit it must be a Light as God
is a Light.

. 51. Now that the Image of God, or Spirit of the mind (as its called Ephesians. 4.)
consists in an inward Light, the Holy Scripture teaches us, for he that puts
on the new Man, which is Created after God, and who is renewed in knowledge
after the Image of him that Created him, Col. 2.10. is said Ephesians. 5.8. To be
Light in the Lord, ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are ye Light, Col. 1.12.
which has made us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. And that inheritance, says the Apostle, is the Light and this Light
says the Psalmist Ps. 97.11. is sown) for the Righteous, and Ps. 112.4. unto
the upright there arises Light in the Darkness. And thus are the Faithful said
to be Children of the Light, 1 These. 1.5.

. 52. But that it may yet further appear, that the Image of God is Light, which
Image or Light they receive, who do mortify their flesh with the Lusts thereof,
it will be needful to enquire into the properties or Nature of the Image of
God, and of that Light, which is given to the Faithful, that so it may farther
appear from the consonant properties thereof, that the Image of God is a Light,
and even that very same Light, which the Faithful do receive.

. 53. When God had Created man after his Image, it is written Genesis 1.26. And
let them have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowls of the
Air, and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every creeping
thing that creeps upon the Earth. From whence it is evident, that the Image
of God makes men meet to Rule over the whole Earth: And thus also it is said of
the Faithful Ps. 25.13. That his seed shall inherit the Earth, and Psalm. 37.11.
The meek shall inherit the Earth; which is again repeated Mat. 5.5. Now what is
it, to possess the Earth? but to be Lord and Master of it, as it is the Right
of an Heir to be. And Mark 9.23. Our Savior says: If thou can believe all
things are possible to him that believes: and what he meant by all things, our
Savior shows at large Mark 16.17, 18. And these Signs shall follow them that
believe, in my name shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new
Tongues; they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it
shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover.
And Luke 10.20. The Spirit are subject to you; and such other places, which do
evidently show us, that the faithful that have received the Light have the same
Power as Man had before he lost the Image of God.

. 54. And as Man that was Created after the Image of God, had Power to fill the
earth, and to subdue it, Genesis 1.28. So those that have received the Spirit or
Light, are said to mortify and subdue their Flesh, that is the Earthly part,
and to make it Spiritual. Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man is Crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed. But it is more properly
rendered: weakened or impeded in its working. And Romans 8.11, 12, 13. But if the
Spirit of him that raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in you. Therefore Brethren, we are
Debtors not to the flesh, to live after the flesh: for if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die, but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the
Body ye shall live. And Gal. 5.24. And they that are Christ's have Crucified the
flesh with the Lusts. And this is treated of at Large Ephesians. 4. Col. 3. etc.

. 55. Now before man had sinned, while the Image of God yet shined in his
inward parts, how great Wisdom and Knowledge in all things did attend him
continually? It must needs have at least been such, that he did not only see
through the external Objects, the frame of things, but also must have had
knowledge of their most inward state, to wit, of the Spirit, or Life of every
thing, because he understood how to give Names to all things according to their
Natures, Genesis 2.19. And when the Lord God had formed out of the Ground every
Beast of the field, and every Foul of the Air, he brought them unto Adam to
see what he would call them, and whatsoever Adam called every living Creature,
that was the name thereof.

Now he that knows the nature of any thing, he has knowledge of its inward
spiritual Being, of its qualifications and outworking; on the same manner it is
also said concerning the Light and Spirit, which the Faithful do receive and
enjoy, to wit, that he gives them wisdom to discern Spirits, and all Spiritual
Gifts; and therefore the Apostle calls it Ephesians. 1.17, 18. The Spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation in the knowledge of him, enlightening the eyes of the
understanding. And this Spirit of Wisdom is by Solomon very gloriously
described in the Proverbs throughout, and the Fruits thereof, in the 2d.
Chapter he shows what Profit they reap, that incline their Ears unto Wisdom,
and that apply their hearts unto understanding; to wit, that they do thereby
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, etc. The
Apostle also 1 Cor. 12, describes this Light or Spirit to be that which gives
the word of Wisdom, the word of Knowledge, the gifts of Healing, the Working of
Miracles, Prophesies, the discerning of Spirits, many Tongues, and such like.

. 56. Which consonant properties do therefore plainly show, that the Spirit of
the Light, which the Faithful do receive from God, is that very same Image of
God which he first man lost by Sin: For 1. As the first man had by the Image of
God Dominion over all things, so do the Faithful by the Spirit or Light, Rule
over all things. 2. As the first Man had Power by the Image of God to subdue
the Earth, so do the Faithful by the Spririt subdue their flesh, and the Lusts
thereof. 3. And so are the Faithful inwardly enlightened by the Spirit, that
they have the discerning of Spirits, and do know hidden things, just as Adam
had by the Image of God, a knowledge of the Spirits, and of all Creatures.


. 57. Thus far then have we showed, that the Image of God consists in an inward
Light, and that this Light is the same, with which the Faithful are enlightened:
Yet permit us here, Reader, who may read this more out of curiosity, then
out of any love to truth, further to enquire who and what manner of thing this
Image of God is, that a man that loves God, and seeks to live in Christ, may go
on in this way more and more to search out the hidden Wisdom of God, which he
does so abundantly make known in the Holy Scriptures to them that seek him.

. 58. The Holy Scripture does not only say, that the Image of God does consist
in a Light, but it does also teach us, who it is that is the Image of God. The
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.4. Lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who
is the Image of God, etc. And Col. 1.15. Who is the Image of the invisible God.
So that hence it is manifest, that Christ is the Image of God: and as we have
already showed, that the Image of God is a Light, so it is also said of Christ
John 1.9. That he is the true Light that enlightneth every man that comes into
the World. And Chap. 8.12. Then spoke Jesus unto them, saying, I am the Light
of the world, he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of Life.

. 59. And because Christ is the Image of God that enlightens every man,
therefore it is said, that the Spirit of Christ is in the Faithful. Gal. 4.6.
And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his (Gods) Son into
your hearts. And Ephesians. 3.16.17. That he would grant you to be strengthened with
might, by his Spirit in the Inner-Man: that Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith. And Romans 8.29. He that has the Spirit of Christ is conformed to the
Image of his Son. So that from these places, and many more (which every one can
observe in the reading of the Holy Scripture) it is manifest, that the Image of
God in man, is the Spirit of Christ, which Spirit because it proceeds from
Christ, who is the Image of God, is that Image of God which Man possesses.

Now how Christ can be said to be the Head, and the Faithful his Members, which
are all guided by the same Spirit, every true seeker can understand in himself,
when he considers that Christ is the Image of God, who gives his Spirit to all
the Faithful, by which they are all Members of one Body, which is Ruled by the
Spirit of Chirst.

In like manner may easily be drawn from this Spring, how Man can be said to be
Gods Offspring, and that we live and move, and have our Being in God. But
every one that has the Spirit of Christ, will best understand in his Inner-Man,
how that Spirit gives him Communion with God.

. 60. And seeing Christ is the Image of God, who gives his Spirit to Man, that
he may be a perfect Right Man, it is necessary that we do hence show the
necessity of the satisfaction of Christ, to reconcile fallen Man to God again.

. 61. Reason teaches us, that nothing can attain to its former perfection,
except it recovers again that which it formerly possessed, to wit, that which
was the cause of its perfection. Yea this is evident in all Machines, and
Mechanic Instruments; all which clearly shows us, that when they come to want
that which once they had for the performing of the Work, to which they were
framed, that either that Work does cease, or is not performed so perfectly as
before.

. 62. If then we do well consider this universal Truth, and bring it over, or
apply in unto Man, it is certain, that seeing Man was Created so upright, that
he had that capacity of being united to his God, the Sinner must receive the
same capacity, that he may be united with his God again.

. 63. Yea it is impossible that he should receive any other thing instead of
it, but that very thing which he lost, because if he should receive any other
thing instead of it, he would want that which is required to a perfect Man, and
would receive something which he had not in the Creation, and so the best part
that Man had received from God in the Creation would consequently be useless.

Besides, when it is said that God Created Man upright, Eccles. 7.29. there
must have been in man all that was necessary for the attaining of Gods end;
that the Sinner then may perform what God intended by him, he must receive
again that which God gave him in his Creation to that end: Even not any thing
better, nor any other thing can he receive, because God at first made all
things after the most perfect manner in the Creation, according to. 30. So that
in is impossible that the Sinner can receive any thing better, or any other
thing from God, but that very thing which he received of God in the Creation;
because, if he should receive any other thing, that thing could not be better,
but worse, and so he would not be able to fulfill what God aimed at by him,
because God Created man, after the most perfect manner.

From all which in then follows, that the Sinner cannot be made perfect in
another way, but by receiving again that very Image of God which he lost by Sin.

. 64. Now that the Salvation of the Sinner consists in the recovering of this
Image of God, the Holy Scripture does so abundantly testify, that there is
nothing held forth unto us more in the Holy Scripture, than that our Salvation
does consist in the receiving of the Spirit and Image of God again, as is
manifest from the places by us already cited,. 51.53, 54, 55. and of which Ephesians.
4. and Colos. 3. etc. do treat.

. 65. But now although we have discovered that the Sinner cannot attain unto
Salvation, unless he receive again the Image of God, yet this difficulty still
remains in the case, to find out, how and by what means the sinner can recover
this Image of God again?

. 66. It is then an universal truth in Nature, that nothing can be meliorated
nor united with another thing, so as to bring forth fruit thereby, except there
be a previous suffering, dying or mortification. (To wit, such a suffering,
death or mortification as tends to melioration, not such a death as tends to
putrefaction, for there are these two sorts of Death, as for Example, the Seed
passes through a death, in order to the bringing forth of Fruit, and sometimes
it dies so, that it remains in putrefaction, out of which no new Seed but Worms
are generated.) Now that such a dying or mortification must go before the Union
is manifest in Trees, whose Twigs or Buds when they are Ingrafted, or
Inoculated, they dye as it were, and wither, before they can unite with the
Tree, in like manner can no Seed unite with the Earth, so as to bring forth
Fruit, unless it first dies, and therefore it is, that our Savior says with
respect to the profit which was to accrue unto sinners by his Death, John
12.24. Except a grain of Wheat fall into the ground and dye, it abides alone,
that is, it cannot then be united with the Earth to Multiply; but if it dye it
brings forth much fruit, and 1 Cor. 15.36. That which thou sowest is not
quickened except it dye.

. 67. Now to bring this Universal truth home unto fallen Man, (how he fell, we
shall show hereafter) we shall find that the Scripture does expressly teach us,
that no man canattain to the Image of God again, so as to bring forth Fruits of
Righteousness, but by a dying as our Savior testifies John 12.24. under the
similitude of a grain of Wheat, not only applying this unto himself, that he
must dye, in order to acquire unto himself a Church or People, but he also
applys the same to them which will be his his Followers. For Verse 25.26. Our
Savior says, He that loves his life shall loose it, that is, he that fears to
follow me for fear of Death, he shall dye without bringing forth Fruit: and he
that hates his life in this World, shall keep it unto life Eternal: that is,
he that fears not death, but will cheerfully deliver up himself unto death for
my name sake, he shall by his death bring forth Fruit, which shall not change,
but abide for ever. And therefore Christ adds: if any man will serve me let him
follow me; that is, let him give himself cheerfully up unto the death, as I do
now give my self up unto it. And very expressly says the Apostle, Col. 3.3.
Concerning the Faithful; ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
And V. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon Earth, etc. Now because
suffering and Death must go before Glorification, the Apostle says, Act.
14.22. that we must enter into the Kingdom of God through much tribulation.
Moreover if we consider the manners of Speech used by the Apostles, concerning
the manner, how the Sinner recovers the Image or Spirit of God again, how
emphatically do they represent unto us, that no sinner can attain unto any
fellowship with the Spirit, except a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God; that is, if a Man be not born of Water, and of the Spirit, as
our Savior there further declares Verse. 5. Now this is certain that no body
can be born again, except he first die (how this Regeneration is to be
understood, we shall show hereafter in its proper place) and Titus 3.5. he has
saved us by ^he washing of Regeneration, and renewing of ^he holy Ghost, which
is 1 Peter. 1.3. called (...) being born again through the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead. Now this is certain, that if we be born again by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, we must first have been dead; wherefore from
all this it is manifest that no man can recover the Image of God again, but
through suffering and death.

. 68. But now for as much as no Sinner has any the least power to give unto
himself Salvation, according to the Testimony of the Holy Scripture, an that
every one finds in his own experience that he is nncapable of coferring upon
himself any perfection, it follows, that that Being which restores him, must be
more perfect than the Sinner himself, and yet such as can unite, and have
fellowship with man.

It must be more Perfect than the Sinner, because if he had no greater
Perfections than he, he could not impart unto the Sinner that which he himself
should want.

It must also be such, as can be united, and have fellowship with man, because
that which cannot be united, or have fellowship with another thing, cannot make
the thing better, or change its state for the better, because all Melioration
does require the most close union; that is, a Spiritual union with the life of
that thing which is changed, for the Life being the worker of all our Actions,
and the former of its own body (as is proved in the Observations of Bar. Van
Helmont concerning Man,. 34, 35, 36, 37.) it is necessary, that this Union be
with the life it self, that so the life may come to change its former working.

. 69. Moreover, This Being that should thus change the sinner, must not only be
perfecter than he, but it must also be so perfect, that it can give perfection
unto other Beings. Or else it would be of no use to the Sinner; as for Example,
It is manifest, that Gold has more perfection in it than Iron has, but Gold
cannot therefore communicate its perfection to the Iron, while it self remains
mere natural Gold, because it has no more perfection that it self stands in
need of to be Gold: in like manner we say of all Creatures or Created Beings,
none excepted, that although they had more perfection than the Sinner, yet they
cannot communicate their perfection to the Sinner, because they possess no more
perfection than just belongs to their own Beings.

Besides, Seeing Man is the head Work, or most excellent piece of all the
Creatures upon Earth, as is already proved: it is impossible that any Creature
can give him any perfection: from whence necessarily follows, that no Creature
can restore him to his primitive Perfection and integrity.

. 70. Stand here still with me. O thou truth loving Reader! and contemplate
what manner of Being that must needs be then, which according to the order of
Nature in all things) must restore the Sinner to his pristine state?

. 71. In the 68.. we have proved, the Sinner must be restored by a more perfect
Being than himself, and not only so, but that it must have power to impart of
its perfection unto the Creature; but this is impossible for any Creature to
do, according to. 69. yea this being must not only be so perfect, but it must
be such as must have fellowship with, and be united unto Man according to. 68.

. 72. All which being well considered, every one must needs confess that none
other is ca^able^o restore man, but his Creator alone. Because the Creator has
not only more Perfection than man, but can also confer it upon his Creatures;
which is evident from hence: Even because he gave unto all the Creatures their
Perfection in the Creation; nor can we conceive any thing in the whole Frame of
Nature, that can have greater Fellowship and Union with Man than his Creator?
because the Creature depends upon the Creator, and the Creator does continually
uphold his Creatures.

. 73. Thus far then it follows, beyond all Contradiction, that the sinner
cannot be restored, but by his Creator; But seeing (according to. 61.) that
nothing can come to its former perfection, unless it recovers that which was
the cause of its perfection; yea, that it is impossible, that the sinner can by
any thing else recover his primitive perfection, but by that very thing alone
with he lost, as is proved. 63. and his pristine or Primitive Perfection having
consisted in the Spirit or Image of God, according to. 63.64. and seeing the
sinner cannot be restored to his former Estate, but by his Creator, according
to. 71.72. and that he cannot receive any thing else but the image of God,
which can bring him thereunto, according to. 63.64. it necessarily follows,
that the Creator must himself be that Image of God, which man stands in need of

. 74. Now it is manifest to every one that reads the Holy Scriptures, that
Christ is said to be the Creator of Heaven and Earth, as may be seen Col. 1.16.
By him were all things Created, etc. Seeing then, that the Holy Scripture shows
us, that Christ is he which Created us, then he must also needs be that Image
of God, which Man had in the state of his uprightness and integrity; and that
Christ is that Image of God, we have already proved at large. 58.59.

. 75. From all these then it is manifest that none can restore us to our first
perfection but Christ alone, who was the Image of God in us, which became
darkened in us through Sin. But for as much as. 66.67. it is proved, that
nothing can be united to another thing, but through suffering, and death, it is
of great consequence now to show: how and on what manner sinners may, and by no
other means can be united to God.

. 76. Now to search out it what manner sinners must be united to the Image of
God, it is not only enough, that we know that Christ is our Creator, and the
Image of God, which alone is able to restore the sinner into his Perfect State,
but we must also well mind this truth, in order to a further discovery of the
Union betwixt the Sinner and the Image of God, viz That nothing can unite
except the things which are to be united, do meet, to wit, the uniter, and that
which is united. So that we must here consider, what manner of thing that must
be, which is to be united with Christ, who is the Image of God (that sinners
may thereby be restored unto the state of Integrity again, to wit, to have
fellowship again with God) from whom it had separated, and estranged it self by
sin.

. 77. It is manifest from. 73. that sinners cannot be again restored unto their
former state of Integrity, except they obtain that which they lost, now we do
further say on the other side, that that which was lost, cannot be reunited
unto man again, except the nature of man can and do receive it. For if it were
some thing, that were either too mean or too Glorious for man to receive, then
it could not be united unto man, but unto some thing else; and therefore it was
that Christ could not be united unto any thing else but unto the nature of man,
that he might restore man's nature into its former state: For had Christ been
united with any thing else, but the nature of Man, he could not thereby have
restored man; but only that with which he had been united, and consequently his
Union with any other thing would have been of no advantage to the sinner at
all, nor could have united him with the Image of God: but this is that, which
we are now to prove according to. 75.

. 78. Now although it be clear from. 76. That Christ was to take upon him the
Nature of Man, that he might restore unto sinners the Image of God, yet is that
not enough, that Christ should only have taken upon him the Nature of Man, but
it was also most necessary, that Christ should take upon him the nature of such
a man, as of whom all mankind does depend, and from whom all men did come, or
are descended. Because the Nature of all things teaches us, that the whole race
of any thing cannot be Meliorated, except the Source or Root be amended, from
whence the whole Race, or all the Branches are descended; as for example, when
a whole Tree does not bear good Fruit, it is necessary that the whole Tree be
amended by Transplantation, and cutting off the Branches and Pruning the Roots,
and not one or more of the Branches only; Because the Tree bears the Branches,
and the Branches not the Tree; Wherefore, although some of the Branches should be
cut off, and Grafted upon another Tree, those Branches which are so cut off,
and re-engrafted, would in themselves be amended, but not the whole Tree from
which they were cut off.

To make this plain, there is no better way, than for us to make a Trial from
our own Selves: As for Example, When the whole Man is sick, and out of Order,
so that the Distemper proceeds from the Life it self, and not from the
unsoundness of any one of the Parts or Members, the Query is, Whether any one
can be so foolish as to endeavor to restore his whole Being unto Health, by
cutting off an Arm or a Leg, or by applying Remedies to them? Verily no, but he
will endeavor to remove the Cause by such Means, as the Life can receive, or
as can be communicated unto it, because the Life is the Former of our Body, (as
I have proved in the Considerations of B. Van Helmont concerning Man, in.
34.35, 36, 37, 38.)

Now to apply this to the Case in hand, I say then, that if Christ had not
taken upon him that particular Humanity or the nature of that Man, from which
all men are descended, he could not have restored unto all men the Image of God
again, but only unto that particular Manhood alone, unto which he was united,
and yet, that all men must recover the Image of God again, we shall show
hereafter. Just as a Branch which is Ingrafted upon another Tree, is thereby
indeed amended, but not the whole Tree from whence it was cut off. It is a
thing contrary to Nature, that all the parts of any thing should be bettered
any where, save in their Original or Source; Yea this is contrary to every
(even the very least) thing in Nature. For as much then as this is an universal
truth in Nature, therefore it must also needs be a truth in the bettering of
Mankind; because Mankind stands united, and subjected to the same natural
Order, as all other things, and without which Order man cannot produce any
thing. Therefore, that Christ might reunite Sinners to himself, he was to take
upon him that individual Humanity or Manhood, of which all men are descended.

And if we diligently examine the Argumentation which the Apostle holds Romans 5.
We shall find that the Apostle signifies, that Christ did take upon him such a
Manhood, or humane nature, as by which all men could be saved; such as was that
of Adam, by whom all Men became Sinners. For the Apostle shows not only Verse.
10. that being reconciled, we are saved by the Life of Christ. But also Verse.
11. that we joy in God, to wit, that we are assured that God is our Father, who
will communicate unto us of his Glory, and the cause of this our Joying is,
that we have received the Atonement by Christ.

But some will perhaps ask here: how or on what wise could Christ reconcile us.

This Question the Apostle answers in V. 12. saying, Wherefore, (that is, on
this wise,) as by one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, and so
death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned, that is to say, just as by
one man sin came into the World, so on the very same manner is the Atonement
made by one man, to wit, by Jesus Christ; and that as by sin, death, so by the
Atonement, Life is received; and as death is so passed upon all men, so is the
righteousness of Jesus come upon all men unto Justification of life. And as
death is passed upon all men, because they all sinned In Adam: For (...) cannot
here signify [for that] as in our English, but in whom, as in the States Dutch
Bible, nor can it have any relation to any other, but to that one Man, Adam,
(especially if you add unto it V. 18.19.) So there is the very same reason of
the Atonement of Christ. For Christ has made the Atonement for all men, because
they are all justified in Christ. Now this is plain, seeing the Apostle draws
here a Parallel betwixt Adam and Christ, that that Parallel must hold so far as
he makes it to go. Let us then see how far this Parallel which he makes betwixt
Christ and Adam v. 12 must go.

It is certain, according to this saying of the Apostle, That sin entered into
the World by Adam, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, because
they all sinned in Adam; that the true reason here rendered, why all Men are
Sinners; is, because they all sinned in Adam: Now if they did all sin in Adam,
they must all have been in Adam, and must all have depended upon him, as upon
their Head, and Beginning, or else they could not all have sinned in Adam. Just
thus must this Parallel hold also in Christ: Righteousness is obtained through
Christ, and this Righteousness comes upon all because they are justified in
Christ. Now this must be as true in Christ as it was in Adam; to wit, that
seeing all men depended upon and were hid in Adam, and therefore did sin with
him, so also must all men be dependent in Christ, as on their Head, that is,
they must depend on his humane Nature, or manhood, as well as on that of Adam,
if they are to be all justified in him: For seeing, as. 76. nothing can be
united to another, except the Unitor, and the thing united do meet in one; and
seeing man cannot be restored to his former state, except the image of God takes
Manhood upon him According to. 77. it must needs follow, that if the Image of
God, to wit, Christ takes upon him such a Manhood, as whereby all men are
justified; that that Manhood must be that of the first Man, of whom all men are
descended, and have received their life, because that otherwise all men could
not be partakers of righteousness by the Manhood of Christ, and for as much as
all men descended of Adam, and so do depend upon him, as upon their beginning,
from whom they are Born, so Christ could not justify all men in him, except he
took upon him Adams Mandhood, of which all men are dependent.

And for further confirmation of what we say from that which the Apostle says,
to wit, That Christ must needs have taken upon him the Manhood of Adam: in the
first place we must consider, that the Apostle in the 14. V. says: That Adam
was a Figure or Type of Christ, and consequently Christ must be a man, or must
take upon him a Manhood, as the Apostle affirms V. 15. where he calls Jesus
Christ a Man. 2d. As death reigned over all men by one, to wit, by Adam, so
life reigns over all Men by one, to wit, by Jesus Christ, V. 17. Therefore the
Antitype must also agree in this respect, according to the saying of the
Apostle, that is, Christ must be the Head of all men, as well as Adam was; and
that the Apostle proves very strenuously V. 18.19. Because that as by the one
transgression of Adam all men are made sinners, so also by the one
righteousness of Christ all men receive life. If then all men do receive life
by the one righteousness of Christ, then Christ must be the head of all men, as
well as Adam was; and all men must descend from him, as well as from Adam;
because else Christ's righteousness could not come upon all men, which yet the
Apostle does most expressly affirm, V. 18. whence then does undoubtedly follow,
that seeing Adam is the Head of all Mankind, and seeing Christ has done the same
thing that Adam did, to wit, in the Antithesis, that the Man Jesus Christ must
needs also have been the Head of all Mankind: And for as much as none but Adam
can be the Head of all Mankind, it must needs follow that Christ must have
taken upon him Adams Mandhood, that he might justify all men by his own
Righteousness.

Objection I. But in Answer to this Consequence which we draw from Romans 5. That
Christ cannot have taken upon him other Manhood but that of Adam, if all Men be
so justified in Christ, as they all sinned in Adam, it will be said that that
manner of Speech, that all men are justified in Christ; is not to be taken for
all, and every man, one by one, but for all those which are Born of Christ to
wit, for the Faithful: For the Apostle makes here an Antithesis betwixt Adam
and Christ, and betwixt those which are born of Adam, and those which are born
of Christ; so that those which are born of Christ; are not born of him after
the flesh, as those which are born of Adam are, but after the Spirit, and
consequently, that it does not necessarily follow, that Christ must needs have
taken upon him the Manhood of Adam, because they that are born of Christ, are
not born after the Flesh but after the Spirit.

Answer, For Answer to this Objection it is to be observed, First, That the
Apostle does not say, that as all that are born of Adam, are become sinful by
Adams Fall; so all that are born after a Spiritual manner of Christ, are
justified in him, but he says without any Limitation at all, That as by Adams
Fall all men are become Sinners, just so by Christ's Righteousness are all men
justified: So that he here opposes these two Effects or Out-workings, to wit,
The Transgression and the Free Gift of Grace, each to other, and shows that as
the one has made all Men Sinner, so the other has made all men Righteous: Now
where the Apostle makes no distinction as well with respect to the
Righteousness of Christ, as with respect to the Fall of Adam, by what Justice
can we then limit the word ALL, and that in one and the self same Argument,
without offering Violence to, and wresting the Words.

Secondly, It is manifest that Christ as Mediator, was Man, if then those which
are said to be born of Christ, are only born of him Spiritually, to what
purpose did Christ take the Manhood upon him? Verily Christ needed not to have
taken Manhood upon him to effect such a Spiritual Birth, as they that make this
exception do understand by this Birth, as is already showed more at large in
the fourth Objection.

Thirdly, The Apostle does not here oppose the Spiritual Birth of Christ, to
the Fleshly Birth of Adam: For Christ is not here opposed unto Adam, with
respect to his Spiritual Being, but with respect to his Manhood: For the
Apostle says, V. 15. The Man Jesus Christ, and 1 Cor. 15.21. For since by Man
came Death, so by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead, by man I say, so
that Adams Manhood is here opposed to the Manhood of Christ: and as all Men
Fell in the Man Adam, so must all Men also be justified by the Man Christ, and
consequently all men must as well be born of Christ as of Adam, and that in the
same manner, because they are all justified in Christ after the same manner,
according to the Apostles Doctrine: As all men Fell in Adam, so in Christ are
all men restored again: Wherefore this exception cannot be admitted here, to
wit, that Christ Regenerates all those whom he justifies only after a Spiritual
manner, and not as those that are born of Adam: seeing then all men can have
none else but Adam for their first Father; and yet that Christ justifies all
men in that manner, viz. by his own Righteousness, it necessarily follows, that
the Man Jesus Christ, could not thus justify all men by his own Righteousness,
except he had taken upon him the Manhood of Adam, for the reasons rendered in
the former. 78.

Fourthly, I would willingly understand of these men, which say that all that
are justified are generated by Christ only after a Spiritual Manner, what they
mean by that manner of Speech? Do they thereby mean that the body proceeds from
a spiritual beginning (as we have showed in. 27. as also in the Considerations
of B. Van Helmont concerning Man. 93.94) continually formed by his Life, which
is a Spirit, (as we have showed in the aforesaid Considerations. 13.34, 35, 36,
37.) so that the Body must be obedient to the direction of its Life, then I
willingly grant them, that the Faithful are born of Christ after such a
spiritual manner. But then they must withal grant me, seeing the bodily proceeds
from the Spiritual (as we have just now showed) that there must needs be a
fellowship betwixt the Spiritual and the Bodily, that is, that they do both
come from one and the same beginning Originally and consequently, that the
Spiritual must always contain in it that from whence the bodily does proceed,
or else there could be no fellowship betwixt these two; If then there be
somewhat in the spiritual which can also become corporeal, then this manner of
Speaking, concerning a spiritual birth, signisies nothing else but this, that
that, out of which the Body is formed, is Born of Christ as well as the Life or
Spirit of Man; and then man is born of Christ as well as to his Body as to his
Spirit: And then this spiritual Birth will not at all differ in this sense from
the Birth out of Adam, because those which are born out of Adam, are also
generated out of the spiritual (Now that all Births are first spiritual, that
is, that they do proceed from a spiritual beginning I have proved in the
Considerations of B. Van Helmont concerning Man. 93.94.) But because Men now a
days are Carnal, and unacquainted with that which is spiritual, they are
utterly ignorant, that all things must needs have come from a Spiritual
beginning.

Fifthly, Suppose yet that we granted them the Point, to wit, that those which
are justified in Christ are born of Christ only after a spiritual manner: Does
this spiritual birth relate to the Soul alone, or to the Body also? That is, to
the whole Man? Seeing the Apostle says, that the Man and not the Soul alone) is
justified; Now if the Bodily as well as the Spiritual must be justified, has
not Christ then generated the Bodily as well as the Spiritual? Verily yes, or
else the whole man could not be justified and consequently, if the Bodily be
justified as well as the Soullish p^rt then it is absurd to say, that Christ
has generated the Righteous only after the Spirit, seeing that if he
justifies the whole Man, he must have generated him after the whole Man, that
is, as well after the Body as after the Soul. Wherefore those that make this
exception: that Christ has generated men after a Spiritual Manner, in
Opposition to the Generating* of or from Adam must either contradict themselves
or confess that they speak they know not what.

Objection II. But it will be again replied here; that all men were hid or lay
dormant in Adam, when they sinned in him, but that all men were not so in
Christ, because that there were many thousands alive in the Body subsisting of
themselves, and consequently that Christ's Righteousness did not pass over unto
all men, so as Adams sin did.

Answer. As to this Objection, to wit: That all men were not so hid in Christ
as in Adam, I grant it, because Adam was the first Man of this World, and when
he sinned had not begotten any Children; whereas on the contrary, at the time
of the Incarnation of Christ, there were many thousands upon the Earth, and
consequently did subsist of themselves: But hence it does not necessarily
follow, that therefore the Righteousness of Christ could not pass unto all men,
as the sin of Adam did. But only this would necessarily follow thence: that
because many men did live in the time of Christ, but when Adam sinned, that
there were none out of him and Eve, alive in the Body, that therefore at that
time, when Christ wrought that Righteousness, all men were not hid in him just
after the same Manner as they were hid in Adam, out of whom all men were
afterward to be generated. But this Consequence contradicts not our Position:
Yea, though it seems to say something, yet in very deed it says nothing. For when
they say that all men were not hid in Christ, as they were hid in Adam; I
desire to know what they mean here by the Word hid? Do they mean that all men
were so hid in Adam as things are shut up in a Hutch? Then I readily confess
that all men were not so in Christ: And if this be their meaning of the Word
hid here; then I say, that it is impossible that all men should be made Sinners
by Adams sin, because there would then be no more fellowship betwixt Adam and
his Successors then there is betwixt the Chest and the things that are therein
locked up: But if by the Word hid, they mean nothing else here (as it cannot
here signify any thing else) but that all men bein derived from Adam as from
their Stem or Root, are Partakers of his Life, just as the Tree and all its
Fruit were hid in the Seed, that is, that the Life of the Tree and its Fruit
was in the Life of the Seed, and so that they have fellowship with each other,
with respect to their Spiritual Being, which is the Former and Maker of the
Body, (as is proved in the Considerations concerning Man,. 13.34, 35, 36, 37.)
then it will be very easy for us to prove, that the righteousness of Christ
could pass over unto all men in the same manner as the Sin of Adam did to all
his posterity, that is to say: If Christ did take upon him the Manhood of Adam,
which is here the Question; For seeing that all men are descended of Adam, and
so are a part of him, as belonging to him, because they do partake of his Life
(just as all that which is brought forth in this world, remains always apart of
this World, it seems to subsist of it self) it is certain, that they always
remain a part of Adam, and have fellowship with him, although they seem to
subsist of themselves, because the Life which they have received from Adam,
which life being once taken away, they could subsist no longer, because their
life is rooted in Adams Life: This being so (as it is no otherwise throughout
the whole frame of Nature) that the Producer, and the Produced are in a
continual fellowship, because the one partakes of the life of the other) I say,
that seeing Christ did take upon him the Manhood of Adam, and so obtained
Righteousness for Adam, he also obtained Righteousness for all Adams Posterity,
as they being the Parts of Adam, although they do not yet all actually feel it,
yea though the greatest part of them depart from Christ, and lie sunk and drowned
in all manner of ungodliness.

Objection III. But it will again be alleged here: that all men do now subsist
of themselves, and consequently, that men are not therefore saved; because
Christ has taken upon him Adams Manhood.

Answer, This Objection consists more in Words that signify nothing, than in
truth. For what do they mean by all men's subsisting now of themselves? Is this
their meaning, that all men are now brought forth without Generation? Or that
being begotten and brought forth by their Parents, they are arrived to those
Years, and to that growth, that they know how to govern, and to uphold
themselves? This last will doubtless be the meaning of these Words, and not the
first, because there is no man born into this World but by generation, which
being so, it is for ever true, that though men can Rule and Govern themselves,
and in that sense do subsist of themselves, that nevertheless every man has
his beginning of being a man, from his Parents, and so does continually remain
a part of his Parents, with respect to his bodily Being, for if that life which
he received from his Parents should fail, his Body would Perish; and so Adam
being the Stem or Root from whence all men are descended, and which
consequently do retain in them continually a part of Adam; it is very easy to
understand, that when Adam receives again the Image of God, that his Posterity
are thereby put into a capacity of receiving the Image of God again, by virtue
of their Fellowship with Adam.

Besides, when they say, that it is not needful, that Christ should take upon
him the Manhood of Adam, that he might restore unto all men the enjoyment of
the Image of God, because there were thousands of men subsisting of themselves
at the time of Christ's Incarnation. I answer, That if thousands do subsist of
themselves, then Christ could not satisfy for them, because he could not then
have had any Fellowship with them, and therefore could not by his Death have
reconciled the World to God: But that he must have taken upon him the Manhood
of so many men, as he should have reconciled unto God, and so have suffered and
dyed as often as there are men upon the Earth, because nothing can be bettered,
except the restorer and the restored be united according to. 76.

Objection IV. But here again this Evasion will be made use of, Viz. That
Christ could obtain Salvation for so many men, because he is the Son of God,
who is so mighty, that he could by his Spirit bring many Children to Salvation,
and consequently, that it was not needful that he should take upon him Adams
Manhood as the Root from whence all mankind is descended, that he might thereby
unite all mankind to God again.

Answer, To this evasion I answer, That it is indeed true, that Christ is so
mighty, that being the Creator of man he could restore men again to the state
of Integrity by his Spirit, and this we have our selves proved. 68.69, etc. But
that is not the Question here, who it is that alone can restore man; but we are
here enquiring on what manner, and by what means or way Christ could restore
Sinners as may be seen from. 76. Now the Means to reunite sinners to the Image
of God again, I say, is that Christ should take upon him manhood, as is proved.
77. therefore we are here only to consider: whether this means, that is,
whether that Manhood, which Christ did take upon him, be a fit means, whereby
all men could be united again to the Image of God or no? Therefore this
exception has here no place, and this our answer might very well suffice.

But to discuss this Shift a little more narrowly, I say, that if Christ has
imparted Salvation unto all Mankind only in virtue of his Spiritual, and Divine
being, then he needed not to have become man and to have suffered death, and
that Christ's becoming man would then have been utterly needless and of no
advantage unto sinners, because Christ had that his Divine power, before he
became man, and did not receive it by his becoming man.

But if they will say, that Christ, as he Savior was to become man (as we our
selves have proved the necessity thereof. 76.77.) I ask such, what Advantage
Christ's becoming man has effected? And whether Christ, by becoming man, could
reconcile all men, if he had not taken upon him the Manhood of Adam as the Stem
or Root of all Mankind? the contrary of which we have just now showed.

Objection V. But against this Position: that Christ must needs have taken upon
him Adams Manhood, to reunite all men to the the Image of God again; this
Objection will still be made, Viz. That if Christ had taken upon him Adams
Manhood, and so had united Adam again with the Image of God, he should at the
same time have also united all men with the Image of God; because they are the
Parts of Adam, as we our selves have affirmed in answer to the former
Objection, and yet we see nothing less than that all Men are one with the Image
of God, but daily experience shows us the contrary, and consequently that it
seems to no purpose, that Christ should have taken upon him the Manhood of Adam
more than that of any other Man.

Answer, But this Objection discovers more the Objectors ignorance of the Order
of Nature, than any real Contradiction; for Example, is it not evident from
Experience, that the Fruit of a Woman with Child is a part of her? Verily yes,
because she does some times change the form thereof in the Womb; wherefore her
life has the direction over the Life of her Fruit, while it is in the Womb; But
when she has brought forth her Chi^d, then she has no longer power to change
her Child according to her passion; but then the Child stands upon its own
bottom; and its own life must preserve it so as that it has then received an
own out-working, But although Children, and Aged People have an out working, yet
they do not therefore cease to be a part of their Parents; and consequently do
always retain an Union with them, although they do also stand upon their own
bottom (for these two things must be well minded here, to wit, that they have
their Corporeal Being of their Parents, and so far are a part of them, as Adam
said of Eve, She is Bone of my Bones, etc. and yet that they also have their
own out-working) because they are always in Union with their Parents, and yet
have a power to Work of their own, according to. 27. Yet they cannot come into
that state of their Parents, although they do partake of their bodily Being,
unless their own out-working do incline to come into the same state, in which
their Parents are: As for Example, when the Apostle says 1 Cor. 7.14. The
Unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the Wife, and the Unbelieving Wife is
Sanctified by the Husband: Does he here signify, that when the Unbelievers are
Sanctified by their believing Husbands or Wives, that they do thereby become
Believers, or does he only signify thereby, that when two are become one
Flesh, and so do enjoy each others Spirit through love, the Unbeliever becomes
Sanctified through that Spiritual Fellowship, which they have one with another;
that is, That the Unbeliever receives by the Spirit of the Believer who is his
Co-partner, a Capacity or meet occasion of becoming a Believer, if he does also
cooperate thereunto, but not else? In like manner when the Apostle says, in
the same Verse, That the Children are Holy which are born of a Believing Father
or Mother; does he mean that the Children do thereby become Believers? surely
no, for that would contradict all Sense and Experience: For do we not see, that
the Faithful Abraham had an unbelieving Ishmael as well as a believing Isaac,
and that Isaac had as well an Esau as a Jacob? But the Apostle signifies
thereby, that there is in them a Seed, Beginning or Principle of coming to the
Faith, but yet that Principle or Seed never brings forth Fruit, if they
themselves do not join unto it, and cooperate with it; just thus it is now with
Adam and his Posterity; that Participation, which they have of Adam, gives unto
all Men by virtue of that Union, which they have with Adam, that they are so
far Copartners of the Divine Image, in so much and as far as they are a part
of Adam, and so have the seed or Principle, that the Image of God can Work in
them, but because as they have their own out-working, (for which reason also
Faith unto Salvation is required of every one) so they do not feel the Working
of the Image of God in them, till their own out-working, and desire inclines
thereunto, viz. That the Image of God may Rule in them instead of their own
Carnal Drivings, Lusts, and Self Wisdom, which do (as long as they bear Rule in
them) hinder the Spirit of Christ from bringing forth Fruits in them, although
their Origin, to wit, Adam be actually and effectually reunited unto the Image
of God again.

Objection VI. But it will here again be Objected: That Christ, as to his
humane Nature or Manhood was without Sin, but that Adam was sinful, and that
therefore, if Christ had taken upon him Adams Manhood he could not have been
without Sin, but would therein have also partaken of Adams Nature.

Answer, True it is, that Adam was a Sinner, but that it is also true, that
Christ took not Adams Manhood on him till after Adams death, viz. About four
thousand years after his Creation, so that Adam suffered and dyed before Christ
was united unto Adams Manhood. Now because nothing can become better, but by
Suffering and dying according to. 66.67. And seeing Adam did Suffer and dye, it
does not necessarily follow, that because Christ took upon him Adams Manhood,
that therefore he must take upon him also his Sin, and so would not be without
sin the more, because Christ was born neither according to the Will of the
Flesh, nor according to the Will of Man, and consequently had not the principle
of Sin in him.

. 79. Seeing then that Christ did take upon him the Manhood of Adam that so he
might thereby redeem Sinners from their sins, It was also necessary that Christ
should suffer that for Sinners, by which they were to beamended. Now this
amendment was to be through death, as it is said Genesis 2.17. Dying thou shall
dye, and Romans 5.12. By Sin ^ame Death. Now though death be the punishment, and
consequent of Sin, yet does this Punishment tend to the bettering of the
Sinner: For no punishment, if duly administered, can aim at any thing, but the
bettering of the Transgressor, and the bringing of him off from his former
ways. Verily no Father will Punish his Child, nor any equal Judge a
Transgressor, but with intent to Frighten him from his Wickedness, and to make
him the better for it. If then a Worldly Judge does by Punishment, aim at the
reclaiming of Transgressors from their evil ways, how much more then shall the
most perfect Being which is Righteousness it self, by punishing sinners design
their amendment, and the making them to desist from their Unrighteousness.
(...) Punishment then only in Order to the Conversion of the sinner from his
sin, and ^hereby to reunite him to the Image of God? And is Christ the only one
that ^n relieve Sinners? according to. 73.^4. And did he to that very end take
Man^ood upon him? according to. 77. and ^articularly that very Manhood from
^hence all Mankind are descended? according to. 78. that so by his becoming
man, all men might be delivered from sin, and reunited to the Image of God
again? then must Christ needs have undergone that by which the Evil must be
amended, and the sinner again be made one with the^ Image of God, unto which
there is no coming but through Death, according to. 66.67. Wherefore seeing that
Christ is the Savior, or the only one that can free us from sin, he could do
it by no other means, or in no other way, nor deliver us from the yoke and
bondage of Sin, but by suffering Death.

If now the Pious Reader well weighs what we have in this Chapter showed
concerning the Image of God, where in it consists, of what use and advantage it
is unto man, who this Image o^ God is, viz. Christ, and that this Imag^ of God
alone is he, who alone can free the sinner from Sin, and that in Orde^ to it,
he was to take upon him the Nature of Man and to suffer Death, w^ cannot in the
least doubt, but that h^ will be fully satisfied and Believe, no^ from
Tradition, but from Knowledge and Assurance, that Christ alone, an^ none other
but he, is the only Savior and that out of him there is no Salvation to be
Obtained; as also, that so long as a Man has not recovered the Image of God, so
long darkness bears Rule in him.

CHAP. IV. Of the Soul or Life of Man.
. 80. AS Man in the state wherein he was Created by God, had in him the Divine
Image, so God also bestowed upon him a Soul or Life, which differs from the
Image of God, and cannot be taken for one and the same Essence. For if we
consider the Properties of the Spirit, or Divine Image, and what excellent
Prerogatives and Advantages it affords Man, as has been showed. 53, 54, 55,
and 56. and on the other hand reflect how few at this day are possessed of the
Image of God, though they have a Soul or Life; we shall not need any other
Argument besides that of daily Experience to convince us, that the Spirit or
Image of God differs from the Soul or Life of Man, according to what has been
declared. 39.

. 81. In order therefore to our being informed what the Soul of Man is, it will
be necessary to enquire into the Properties of it.

Now the Properties of the Soul are, that it Reasons or Discourses,
Understands, Wills is self-Conscious, and as long as it is joined to the
Body does uphold and continually guide and govern the same, according to its
Will, and the like. That these are the properties of the Soul every one finds
in himself, and is conscious of it, if he be considerative and reflects upon
his own Actions. For as to Bodies they can neither Discourse nor move
themselves as is visible in dead Cankasses: So that these forementioned
Qualities are no Properties of the Body, but of the Soul; because when the Soul
Operates no longer in the Body, these Properties cease also.

. 82. In Order therefore to make some Discovery of the Nature of the Soul from
these its Properties; it will be necessary that we consider every one of them
apart, that so from these we may be able to infer or conclude what kind of
Essence that is from whence they flow: For as a Tree is known by his Fruit, so
may other things be known by their Effects.

In the first Place then, The Property of the Soul is that She Discourses and
Understands, that is, that the things that are present with her, or represented
to her from without, are considered or weighed by her, whether they be Good or
Evil, to her Profit or Loss, and such like. Moreover, those things whereof the
Soul Reasons or Discourses, must be either thoroughly known to her, or in
part, for of things she is altogether ignorant of, she cannot Discourse at all.
And if the things she Discourses about, be either thoroughly, or in Part known
by her, then has she also a Comprehension or Understanding of them, and what
she does Comprehend she has also an Image or Idea of, as has been showed. 15.
Now this Image or Comprehension, and the Souls considering and Pondering of the
same, takes up no Room at all in her; because a man comprehends many thousands
of things without increasing the bulk of his Body, notwithstanding that the
things he comprehends be much greater than it. Whence it is evident, that
Reasoning, and Understanding take up no space, how great or ample soever the
thing may be that is comprehended or understood. But on the contrary that the
Understanding can comprehend great things as well as little, and consequently
that she is neither great nor little: Now that which is neither great nor
small, and yet comprehends things great and small, cannot be Corporeal but
Spiritual, forasmuch as all Bodies are either great or small. What has been
said here of Reasoning or Understanding, the same may be said of the other
Properties; For to be self conscious, is to reflect and be convinced that we
have done or omitted these or the the other things. Now this Conviction is not
any thing that is Bodily, but a Spiritual Being, because there can be no
Conviction without a Comprehension or Understanding of the Matter we are
convinced of: So likewise that Property of the Soul, whereby she supports or
upholds the Body as well as guides and directs it, is not Bodily but Spiritual.
For this Upholding consists in preserving of the Body in its Pristine Form and
State, which Action of Preservation, cannot be Corporeal, because it includes a
Superintendence or Direction whereby Nourishment and Support is given to every
Member according to their different state and requiring. And this direction is
the Beginning and Principal thing in the upholding or Support of the Body. For
though many Bodies should be joined together all manner of ways, yet will they
never be able to support or uphold one another, so that the Direction whereby
our Food is prepared, and transmuted in such a manner, that our Body is fed and
maintained by it, is not any thing that is Corporeal but Spiritual. Of which
Direction or Superintendence we have treated at large in our Observations
concerning Man,. 34.35, 36, 37, 38, 39. And as this Direction which
Superintends the Nourishment and Support of the Body is Spiritual, so likewise
is the Guiding and Governing of the Body Spiritual also, for as much as it
proceeds from the Will, and is immediately effected or executed in the Body at
the same instant that the Soul or Life wills and thinks it. Which is an evident
Argument that this Rule or Governance must needs be Spiritual and not
Corporeal, for as much as not the least moment of time Intervenes between the
Intent or Command of the Will, and its Execution, which could never be if the
Efficiency or Operation of the Will were Corporeal. But of this Direction of
the Body see the foresaid Observations concerning Man. 91.

. 83. Seeing therefore that the Properties of the Soul are not Corporeal but
Spiritual, it follows that the Soul or Life, is a Spirit and no Body, because
all her Properties are Spiritual. Now that the Life is a Spirit, I have
demonstrated in the foresaid Observations.. 34.35, 36, 37.

. 84. The Soul or Life therefore being a Spirit cannot die, or be changed, as
Bodies are: For when we say that Bodies are changed this imports an Increase or
Decrease of those parts that before were united: And to Die implies nothing
else but this, that the Bodies are no longer maintained in the form and
condition they were in before, but are Subject to alteration. So that all Dying
includes a Change or alteration, (of which see the Considerations concerning
Man,. 32.) Now certain it is that whatsoever changes its form or appearance,
does include Divisibility, whereby the parts that before were united, are now
separated from one another, and whatsoever is subject to Divisibility, must be
a Body, because Divisibility is the Property of Bodies which consist of many
Parts. And forasmuch as according to. 83. the Soul is a Spirit, therefore
neither can the Soul die or be divided, or ever change its Essence.

If any one Object here, that she sometimes changes her operations, and by
this means grows either better or worse, and that this change is a kind of
Dying; this we are very willing to grant, as long as by this Word, Change, or
Dying, is not meant or understood that the Essence of the Soul dies, in like
manner as Bodies do; but only this, that the Soul being Conscious of her evil
Deeds, repents of, and suffers for them, and by this means becomes changed in
her Operations, or manner of Acting All this we readily grant, as having
plainly asserted the same concerning all Lives, viz. That they are meliorated
by Suffering,. 66. and in the Considerations about Man,. 32. in these Words, Or
that the Life for a time cease from its Operation of bringing forth Fruit, by
which cessation of her Activity, she either changes her Operation, or brings
forth better Fruit then before, etc. But such a change or dying as this with
regard to the Soul, does not in the least import that her Essence is changed or
divided as that of Bodies is, when their Forms are changed.

. 85. And for as much as the Soul, with respect to her Essence, is Unchangeable
and Immortal, so neither can she be Annihilated, because no Annihilation can be
without dying, seeing that every thing as long as it lives has its Essence, and
consequently is not Annihilated, or reduced to nothing. And for as much as the
Soul Lives continually according to. 84. consequently it cannot be Annihilated:
For seeing that all things are ever present to God as in. 14. it follows that
the Soul cannot be Annihilated, because the Annihilation of a thing, is that
whereby it cease to be, or is the reducing of a thing to nothing: If
therefore the Essence of the Soul could be Annihilated, then all beings could
not be continually present to God; but more Essences would be present to him at
one time then at another, which is repugnant to the Divine Attributes,
according to. 14, 15. For as much therefore, as all Beings are perpetually
present to God, if follows, that the Soul or Life cannot be Annihilated.

Moreover, seeing that all Beings are in God without beginning, and consequently
have neither beginning nor ending, as has been demonstrated. 24.25, 26.
therefore it follows that the Soul has no end.

And when we consider that the Essentiality of Bodies cannot be Annihilated,
though their form be changed, because they were not produced out of nothing,
according to. 27. and in the Observations concerning Man. 32. how much less can
the Soul which is not subject to Mutation, as Bodies are, being a Spirit) be
obnoxious to Annihilation? Especially if we consisider that she is the Framer
of the Body, as in the foresaid Observations in. 37 38. has been showed. For
my part, I confess that it is altogether inconceivable to me, how any thing
that is Essential should loose its Being and become nothing; and they that
Imagine such a thing do not know what Annihilation imports; only they conceive,
that the Soul dies liek a Body, that is separated into its parts (the contrary
whereof has been made out 84.) and this is that they call Annihilation. For as
to that which Annihilation properly imports, thereof they can frame no image or
apprehension, for otherwise they would have an apprehension of nothing: For
Annihilation signifies the turning of a thing to nothing.

But some perhaps will say, true it is that the Being of a Soul is not
Annihilated; but that the Soul when the Body dies returns to the Universal
Spirit, But first we are to consider what is meant by the Universal Spirit, for
if thereby they understood the Divine Essence, as if Souls were a part thereof:
this is impossible for the Reason alleged. 4. and more especially because the
Soul is mutable as to its Thoughts, Will and Works; whereas the Divine Essence
is unchangeable in all these, as is showed. 24.

If by the Universal Spirit they understand the Essence of the World, neither
is that possible, because this supposed, Spirits would be Divisible; which
cannot be, as has been showed. 83.84. because the Soul is a Spirit, and
therefore not subject to partibility.

86. For as much then, as it follows from the Attributes of God, that the Soul
cannot be Annihilated, because she has been without beginning in God, we may
by the same consequence conclude, that she is not Created out of nothing: For
to Create a thing out of Nothing imports, that the thing Created did receive
the first beginning of its Being in that Creation, but this cannot be, because
all Souls have been without beginning in God, and therefore before the
Creation, as may be seen. 24.25, 27. Where the Creation is treated of, and
where it is showed what Creation does import or signify, and what not.

. 87. Seeing therefore that Souls are without beginning, we are to understand
and take Notice, That all the Souls that belong to the World, were in the
Creation at once, and altogether Created God: That is, Souls were put in such a
state or condition in the Creation, that they might subdue what is Tangible,
and Visible, and have Dominion over it; for that the word to Create, can in no
wise signify the production of a thing out of nothing, has been abundantly
showed in. 27.

Now that all Beings appertaining to this world must have been Created at once
in the Creation is a consequence deducible from the Divine Wisdom, as hat been
showed. 30.31. and have also demonstrated the same at large from the Nature of
the Creation,. 32. And for as much as the Soul belongs to man, and Man is a
part of the World, therefore it necessarily follows, that all Souls were
Created by God at once in the Creation.

. 88. But to evidence the Impossibility of Gods Creating new Souls every day,
we will enquire a little what Absurdities do inevitably follow upon this
Position, that God Creates the Soul in the Body at the instant of Generation.

First therefore, if God daily Creates Souls, I would demand of those who grant
according to the Holy Scriptures, that we all sinned in Adam, how according to
their supposal of Gods daily Creating Souls, there can be any Truth, or so much
as any possibility in this Assertion. For is it not certain that man consists
not only of a Body, but also of a Soul? And is it not of equal Truth, that the
Soul is much more worthy, and excellent than the Body, seeing that she is
immortal and does govern the Body, pursuant to her Will and Thoughts?. 81.82,
84. Seeing therefore the Man consists, not only of a Body, but also of a Soul,
and that the Soul is much more excellent than the Body, and the same which
thinks, desires, or lusts, and that lust or Concupiscence is the first Rise of
Sin. The Query is therefore, if so be all Men have sinned in Adam, and are
partakers with him in his sin; whether I say, if this be so, all Souls must not
of necessity have been in Adam, for as much as they are the most Excellent, and
by many degrees the most valuable Parts of Man, and the Governors of the Body?

If any one say, that it is not necessary that all Souls should have been in
Adam, at that time that he Sinned; for that God has imputed the sin of Adam to
his posterity, because they all as to their Bodies descended from him. But I
would demand of those what Reasonableness or Equity there would be in this, if
God, in Creating Souls, should make them sinful; for the souls of Adams
Posterity could not sin, nor consent to his sin, because according to their
Opinion they were not yet Created; and therefore cannot be now Created sinful,
by an imaginary Imputation of Adams sin. Neither do those who Preach these
devised Fables, ever consider how repugnant the same is to the Essence of God.
For what will become of the Divine Justice, if God punishes men for a sin
which was committed some thousands of Years before ever they were Created, and
consequently could not be guilty of, or accessory to the same? That this is
absolutely inconsistent with Gods Justice, see. 35.

But perhhaps it will be said that Souls are therefore Created sinful by God,
because they are to be joined to asinful Body, descended from Adam. But let
these show me the least shadow or appearance of Reason there is in this
Consequence, viz. That God Creates Souls sinful, because the Bodies to which
they are to be joined are so. For my part, I boldly assert, that no man will
ever be able to give me any Reason coherent in all its parts, and consistent
with the Divive Wisdom, why the Chiefest part of Man should be made sinful,
because the Inferior and servile part is so. But suppose we should grant them
this their absurd Position, viz. That Souls because of the Sinful Bodies to
which they must be joined, have sin imputed to them by God, and are therefore
Created sinful; yet I further demand of them, what reason there is, why the
Souls when they are first Created, at the instant of Generation, are thrust
into sinful Bodies? Or what Communion or Felloship they can have with such
sinful Bodies? Seeing that they never committed any sin? Will they say that God
would have it so? Then it must follow from hence, that as soon as God has
Created a sinless Soul, his Will and Pleasure is immediately to send it into a
sinful Body. But what Reasonableness or Equity would there be in this, that God
should punish a Soul and make it sinful by Imputation, before ever it had
committed any sin, and this merely for the sinful Bodies sake in which she is
to dwell? Moreover when they say that God does not bestow this Perfection upon
Souls in their Creation, because of the imputation of Adams Sin? Do not they
hereby intimate, that God does not Create Souls perfect. viz. So as Adams Soul
was Created, for this must be their meaning, when they say that God now Creates
Souls perverse (for imperfect is the same as perverse,) but why then do they
tell us upon other occasions, that whatsoever God Creates is very good, and
that God is not the Author of sin? For these things are contradictory to one
another, and by this means the Divine Attributes are made to oppose and clash
against one another.

In the second place, when they assert, that the Souls are then first Created
when their Bodies are Generated by their Parents; what shadow of Wisdom or
Reason is there in this, that whereas the Souls are Created at once, and all
alike, that one Soul should be thrust into a Beggars Body, or into some other
more miserable Circumstantiated Lodging, and another advanced to a Royal State
and Dignity by means of the Body to which it is preferred; that one should be
Born of Good, and another of Bad Parents, when yet in worthiness they are all
of them equal, and all of them alike pure and sin^ess? Will they say that God
does this according to his Free Will, and that he may and can thus differrently
dispose of Souls at his good pleasure? But indeed we shall find the quite
contrary when we ^ome to examine this matter, and that God neither will nor can
do any such thing, as has been showed. 22 and 36.

Thirdly, If it be so that the Soul is Created when the Body is begotten, then
it will follow, that when the Act of Generation is performed in Whoredom, or
Adultery, that God must Create a Soul for the Body so Generated, and so the
Creation of the Soul will depend on the Generation of Men, because the Soul
according to them, is never Created but at the Generation of the Body.

Fourthly, Seeing that the Body is Generated by the Parents, and consequently
must have been in Being before it was Generated; for as much as the least Body
is not now produced, the Essentiality whereof was not in the Creation, no
reason can be alleged, why God should not as well have Created the Souls of
Men in the beginning, as that which is corporeal.

But then it will be asked, where were then all those Souls that were Created
together in the Creation, seeing they had not yet any Bodies of their own? To
which I answer, that they were all in Adam as in their first Parent from hom
they afterward came forth. But this will b^ thought very strange, that so many
thousands of Souls should be in one Man Ye^ is not this at all impossible, for
how many thousand Images of men and other thing have we within us that we have
seen. Now all these Images that we have received from abroad are likewise
Spiritual Beings (as has been showed in the Observations about Man. 44.45) and
yet they take up no space in us. Wherefore as a man may have Millions of
spiritual Beings or Images in him, in like manner he is capable also of having
many thousands of Souls in him, because they also are Spiritual Beings, and
therefore take up no Room in him, all which Souls by Means of Generation, are
as it were wrought out from him, or brought forth to outward Manifestation in
distinct Bodies and times. And to make this more clear by an Example, we see
that a Tree brings forth its Fruit every Year, which it could not do, if the
Life and Essence of those Fruits had not been in the Tree before their
Production: so that this Life lies so long hid in the Tree, then till,
according to the Order of Nature, the time of bringing for Fruit be come.

. 89. And for as much as from. 87. it is evident that Souls were Created
altogether by God in the Creation, this likewise overthrows that Position,
which asserts That the Souls of Men are Generated by the Parents, viz. After
the same manner as the Body is: For as in Generation some part of the Corporeal
Substance goes away from the Parents, so if they were Generators of the Soul,
as well as of the Body, they would loose some part of their Souls in the Act of
Generation, which is impossible, for that the Soul being a Spirit, according
to. 83.84 must consequently be indivisible.

90. Seeing therefore, that the Soul or Life does uphold and form its own Body,
as has been showed. 82. and has existed together with it in the Creation 87.
and consequently proceeds from one and the same beginning with it, it follows,
That the Soul must consist of the same Principles, whence the Body takes its
Original. For if the Soul did not consist of the very same Principles whence
the Essence of the Body does proceed, she could never have any Communion or
Fellowship with the Body, because two things of a different Original can never
unite or Cooperate, except it be by means of a third that partakes of both
their Essences.

Moreover, for as much as Souls were in the Creation, as well as Bodies, and
that whatsoever was in the Creation, did proceed from one only, it follows that
the Soul must consist of the same Principles whence the Body took its Original.
Now Bodies consist of two things, Viz. Fire and Water, and this Fire and Water
are Spiritual Beings in their beginning or Principles whence they proceed, as
has been showed at large in the Observations concerning Man, from 7. to 21.
And therefore we conclude that the Soul consists of a Spiritual, Fiery, and
Watery Essence.

And that the Soul consists of these two, we may be further informed from
hence, that the Soul in Scripture is also called (...) Breath, as is showed.
47. and Genesis 2.7. it is said that God Breathed into his (Adams) nostris the
Breath of Life, whereby is intimated that the Life or Soul does enjoy, and make
use of Breath or Air, for the upholding, and support of its Actions or
Operations, as every one in himself does experience, that without taking of
Breath or Respiration, his Soul or life cannot maintain or preserve the Body;
as is showed at large in the Consider ations concerning Man 62.63, 64, and 68.
If so be therefore, that the Soul it self, is sometimes called Breath, and does
enjoy, or make use of Breath or Air, for the preserving of her Body,
consequently the Soul must partake with the Air, and proceed from the same
beginning as it does. Now it is certain that the Air consists of a Fiery and
Watery Essence, as in the said Considerations 65. has been showed.

But against this it will be objected that if the Soul Consists of the same
Principles, whence the Body Originally came forth, then it is not impossible
but that the Soul may become Corporeal. To which Objection I answer, First,
that it is no necessary consequence, because the Soul and Body proceed from the
same Principles, that therefore the Soul may become Bodily: As will appear from
this Example, Gold and Iron proceed from the same Principles, but yet we cannot
conclude from hence, that Gold can be changed into Iron; because Gold is
advanced to that degree of Perfection, that it always abides Gold, to which
Iron has not yet attained, and therefore is subject to Rust, and turns to
earth again. But the Perfection of Gold appears in this, that it endures the
Fire without loss or diminution, which Iron does not, but is burnt and consumed
by it. Yet on the other hand it is true also (that is, Reason teaches us, and
it must be true in Nature, though we cannot give an ocular Demonstration of it)
that seeing Iron consists of the same Principles as Gold does, it can also
arive, through manifold dying, and suffering, to the same degree of Perfection
which Gold has. And the same may be said concerning the Soul and that which is
Bodily, that though they both proceed from the same Principles, yet does it not
follow therefore, that the Soul can become Corporeal, because she is arrived to
that perfection which renders her indivisible and unchangeable in her Essence.
Though it be a true Consequence that the Body forasmuch as it consists of the
same Principles as the Soul does, that it may arrive to that degree of
Perfection as to become Spiritual.

In the second place, if so be the Soul or Life could become Corporeal, then
might all things in time come to be dead, and without any Operation at all;
which can never be, because God has brought forth all things in Order, so that
all things must be wrought out, that is, brought forth to manifestation
according to due Order, (which cannot be done without activity) and not always
continue dead and deprived of all Efficiency.

Thirdly, if the Life of every thing could become Bodily, then the Creatures
might bring forth young of a different kind from themselves, viz. Sheep might
bring forth Birds, and Men Sheep, etc. For there is no difference in Bodies but
what they derive from their Life, which according to its peculiar Efficiency
and Property does form its own Body. Besi^es, if the Life of every Creature
could become Corporeal, then all of them would have the same Flesh and Form,
forasmuch as they partake of the same Nourishment; but nature teaches us the
contrary, viz. That each kind has its own Form and Flesh, whence it is evident
that each kind does unchangeably retain its own Life, as has been showed in
the Observations concerning Man,. 33.

But some will object, if the Soul of Man consists of the same Principles,
whence the Life of other Creatures is derived, what Perfection then has man
more then they? to which I answer, that though all lives proceed from the same
Principles, yet do they differ in their Efficiency and Perfection: for all
Creatures have not the same understanding and Wisdom: And what Creature has
more Wisdom then Man, who can rule all Creatures? Besides Man has this
Prerogative also above all Creatures, who is made according to the Image of
God, of which see Chapter 2d. and the Observations concerning Man,. 46.47. etc.

. 91. Seeing therefore that the Soul consists of the same Principles with the
Body, whence may be understood, that the Soul can work on the Body, so from the
same head we may gather, how the Soul my become Sinful: as shall be showed when
we come to treat of the Fall of Man.

Only thus much I shall say here by the by, that it will be impossible for any
Man ever to make out, how the ^oul is become sinful, save only by this way: And
because men know little of the Nature, and Essence of things, therefore it is
that they torment and vex themselves with that old and long bandied Question,
how or by what means the Soul is become sinful.

92. But some Perhaps will Query, Seeing that the Soul is become sinful, by what
means can she be delivered from sin? To which we answer, that the Soul may be
meliorated, by recovering of the Image of God as has been showed at large.
61.62, 63. etc. The means whereby we may attain to this Melioration, and
recover the Image of God, shall be showed in the sequel.

. 93. And because many things are to be considered in order to the full
Elucidation of the State and condition of Souls, and whither they pass after
Death, we will put off the handling this Question to that part wherein we
intend to treat of the Restitution of a Sinner.

CHAP. V. Of the Body and the Principles whereof it does consist, together with
the State of Adam before the Fall.
. 94. WE have showed the necessity of the Souls consisting of the same
Principles whence the Body is produced; as on the other hand it is as true that
Bodies proceed from the same principles whereof the Soul consists: and that the
Body has its own proper Life, over and above its being governed by the Soul or
its Principal Spirit. For when the Soul or Life does cease from its former
Operations, and that the Body thereupon dies, yet we shall find that these dead
Bodies afterward turn to Worms, etc. Yea experience teaches us that sometimes
the Hair and Nails of a Dead Body do grow, which proves that the Body has its
own Life besides the Soul or general Life, which upholds the Body in its form
or Essence, as long as she continues in her former Working or Efficiency.

. 95. But some will ask why since the Body has its own life, man does
notwithstanding stand in need of a Soul or Life. For answer to this, I desire
the Enquirer to consider, that man's Body being fed by the Creatures, he enjoys
and partakes of the Life of them, which Life of the Creatures, if it were not
transmuted in man, so as to comply with the Operation or Efficiency of Man it
could never be of use for the support or preservation of Man. To the end
therefore, that the Creatures and their Life might be for the sustenance of the
Bodies of Men, it was necessary that man should have his own life, and that the
said Life should be Master, and dispose of the Life of the Creatures, according
to its pleasure, as a General Governs and Commands his whole Army. Wherefore it
is absolutely necessary that man should have a Soul or Life, that may
superintend, Rule and Govern all the Lives and Spirits that are in his Body. Of
the Soul or Central Spirit has been Treated in the Observations concerning
Man.. 33.51.

. 96. These Principles now, whereof the Body, and all Creatures whether
Corporeal or Spiritual do consist, can be no more than two, that is, neither
three nor four, for nothing is produced in the whole Universe, but from two
different Natures, as we find in Fishes, Birds, Beasts, and Men, viz. That all
Generation is performed by Male and Female, without any intervening third
Principle different from the Male and Female Essence. So likewise neither
Trees, nor any other Vegetables bring forth Fruit, but from the Union of these
two Principles. For though the Sun, Water, Earth, Dung, etc. may be applied to
Plants and Trees; yet will the Sun, the Water, Earth and Dung, be found to
consist only of these two Principles, if they be resolved into their Parts. So
that these will never constitute a third Principle, Essentially differing from
the two former.

. 97. These two Principles whereof all Creatures consist, are Fire and Water:
And that all Animals and Vegetables consist of a Fiery Essence, experience
teaches us, in that they can be burnt. For the Fire that we make to warm our
selves by (which is the Fire of the Creatures, mentioned in our Considerations
concerning Man,. 14.) must continually be maintained with Wood, etc. or else it
would cease to burn: Wherefore that which is laid upon the Fire for Fuel, must
have a Fire in it, which is capable of being excited. Yea, it would be
altogether impossible to make any thing burn if it had not a Fiery Essence in
it. That the Creatures have a Fire in them has been showed in the Observations
concerning Man,. 9. etc.

. 98. And as all Creatures have a Fire in them, so their Bodily Principle is
Water, for the last thing into which Bodies can be resolved is Water: And the
Water, viz. the Heavenly and Spiritual cannot be reduced to another Essence,
that is, into a Principle out of which the said Spiritual Water was produced at
first, but continues always Water: so that the Water is a Principle from whence
all Bodies derive their Original. Now that all Bodies proceed from water is
very evident from this Experiment: A very credible Person, and good Friend has
told me, that he had met with a certain Water, which being distilled with a
gentle Heat did always produce Sand, which was left at the bottom of the Glass,
and this notwithstanding that it had before been Filtred through Paper. So that
Nature teaches us, that Sand has its Original from Water.

Besides it is well known that Sand and and stones are of the same Nature, and
of kin to one another. For experience teaches us, that many Fishes that have
their Original from Water, do make Stones, as Oysters, Cockles and other
Shel-Fish, whose Shells are Stone, as appears in this, that like Limestone,
they may be burnt into Lime. Neither do these Shells grow outwardly or
Circumferentially upon them, but from within, for it is observed that as the
Fish increases, so the Shell increases also. We find also in Cockle Shells
that are spotted, that they increase and grow bigger, according as the Cockles
themselves do: Which is an evident demonstration, that the Shells of Fishes
receive their increase or growth from within, viz. from the Life of the Fishes
to which they belong. Seeing therefore that Fishes consist of Water, and are
nourished therewith, their Shells must derive their Original from the same
Water, and consequently this assure us, that Stones are the product of Water.

Nature also holds forth the same thing to us, for there is a Mountain in
Switzerland, which gives forth Water from each side of it, the one whereof
makes Stone, and the other wastes and consumes it. The same is also further
confirmed by another Operation of Nature, for it has been found that in some
Mountains there is found a Water dropping from Stones, which in its dropping
down is turned into Stone, whereof see further in the Observations concerning
Man,, 18.19.

And that all Bodies derive their Original from the Water I have also showed.
27. and in my Observations, etc.. 7.8.18. etc.

. 99. Seeing that. 27. it has been said that all Essences of things are
spiritual, and the product of that which is spiritual, it follows that Fire and
Water, being the two Principles whereof all Creatures consist, they must be
spiritual Beings also.

. 100. To demonstrate therefore that Fire is a spiritual Being, let us first
Observe that Fireis the Life of the Creatures. For experience teaches that
when any breathing Creature dies it turns cold, and is deprived of the heat and
warmth it had when yet alive: Which may convince us, that seeing the Life, as
long as it continues in its Operation does warm Man, or any other Animal, and
sometimes cast him into extreme heat, it must therefore be a Fiery Being.

Moreover, Experience teaches us, that things that are dead or mortified, as
dead or rotten Wood, etc. does not afford so much Fire, or does not burn so
well, as Wood that is yet sound and alive; which is an Argument that the Life
of Wood is a Fiery Essence.

Thirdly, Man experienceth in himself that the warmer he is (provided the
Warmth be regular and natural) the more lively and cheerful he is also, and on
the contrary, the colder he is, the less fit he is to do any thing. Yea, there
is nothing more notorious than that a Man that dies of a lingering Disease,
grows still Colder and Colder, for proportionably as the Activity or
Operativenes of his Life decreaseth, so the cold increases, which most clearly
demonstrates to us, that the Life is a Fire. The same thing is also made out in
our Observations concerning Man,. 11.12. etc.

. 101. Seeing therefore, that the Fiery Essence is the Life of the Creatures,
and that the Life has neither Limitation nor Extension, consequently the Fiery
Essence must be a Spirit, and this we have made out. 82.83. and in our
Observations concerning Man,. 13.34, 35, 36, 37. to which I refer my Reader.

. 102. And like as the Fire is a Spirit, so is likewise the Watery Essence,
which is the other Principle whereof all Creatures consist; according to. 98. a
Spiritual Essence. For though the lower Waters be visible, and Tangible, yet is
their Original spiritual, because the Waters partake with the Air, and are one
and the same Nature, and the Air does partake and is in Union with an Essence
that is so spiritual that it cannot be shut out any where, but pierces through
all Bodies, which spiritual Essence is by the Philosophers called Ether, or
Materia Subtilis, which is always in conjunction with the Air. If therefore
the Air have in it such a spiritual Essence, it must also have Communion with
the same, and therefore must be partaker of the Nature of that spiritual
Essence. And as the Air is partaker of the Nature of the Ether, so likewise
the Air Communicates with the Inferior Waters, and this Communication teaches
us that the Inferior Waters derive their Original from the same spiritual
Principle as the upper Waters do.

And for as much as the Images which Man sends forth from himself, are
Spiritual Beings (as has been showed in my Observations concerning Man,.
44.45.) and no Images can be made of Bodies, it follows that the Bodies from
whence Images do proceed, must have a spiritual Original or Principle and this
Principle of Bodies is the Water, according to. 98. from all which it is
evident that the Aqueous Essence must be spiritual.

The Birth of Man also teaches us the same thing; for seeing that every Humane
birth must first be spiritual, before it can be corporeal; as has been showed
in my Observations Concerning Man. 93.94. And that the Body is formed of the
Female or Lunar watery Essence, as in the foresaid Observations,. 95. has been
showed: wherefore it follows that the Water in its Original or Principle must
be spiritual.

Moreover it is a Fundamental Truth, that nothing can be ultimately resolved
into any other matter, except that whereof it does consist: When therefore the
Scripture tells us, that that which is Bodily, must be made spiritual, does not
this plainly imply, that Bodies proceed from a spiritual Principle?

If any one should say, that when the Scripture speaks of the Body, being made
spiritual, it does not intend thereby, that our Bodies should be so
spiritualized as to become invisible, and to penetrate other Bodies: We dare
tell such a one to his face, that he does not know what it is to be spiritual,
nor what the Scripture does signify by that word. Now that the Body may become
spiritual, as to be invisible, and to penetrate other Bodies, we may learn from
our Savior, whose Body, after his Resurrection was so spiritual, that when the
Disciples had shut the Doors upon them for fear of the Jews, he notwithstanding
entered, and stood in the midst of them, Ioh. 20.19, 26. Which is not specified
in Scripture to no purpose, but to teach us that our Bodies must be made
spiritual, even as Christ had made his such. Not that we are to understand
here, that Christ by virtue of his Divine Nature made his Body thus spiritual,
for this has no place here; nor must we have recourse to the Divine
Omnipotence: for if there were not a Principle of spiritualization, or being
made spiritual in all Bodies, God himself would never make Bodies spiritual.
Our Savior therefore was willing to teach us by his spiritual Body, that we as
being his Members and followers, shall obtain such a spiritual Body, as soon as
we are perfectly and wholly dead: And therefore the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor.
15.42, 43, 44. That it (the Body) is sown in Corruption, it is raised in
Incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in Glory: it is sown in
Weakness, it is raised in Power; A Natural (properly Soulish) Body is sown, but
it is raised a Spiritual Body. And V. 53. For this Corruption must put on
Incorruption; and this Mortal must put on Immortality. Which ways of Expression
do plainly intimate to us, that that which is bodily must become spiritual; and
if it can be made spiritual, then consequently its Principle must be a
spiritual Being. That the Water is a spiritual Essence I have showed in my
Observations concerning Man, 20.

But forasmuch as it has been showed. 97.98. That all Creatures consist of a
Fiery and Watery Essence, and that these Essences are spiritual, according to.
100.101, 102. It follows that the Essentiality of Bodies cannot be Annihilated:
Because the Essentiality from whence Bodies Originally do proceed, has been in
God without beginning. Of which see more. 24.25, and 85.

. 104. Seeing therefore tha the Creatures have their Original from these two
spiritual Essences, the next thing we are to enquire into is, What difference
there is betwixt the Fiery and Watery Essence.

It has been showed. 100. that Fire is the Life of all Creatures; that is,
that which supports and upholds them in their Efficiency or Activity: To the
end therefore that we nay know wherein the Watery Essence differs from the
Fiery, it will be necessary for us to enquire a little into the nature of the
Watery Essence.

It is known by Experience, that the Fire and Water are two Essences, that
stand opposite to each other; that is, the Fire Warms, and the Water Cools, so
that the Water has a contrary Operation or Efficiency to Fire; for as the
Fiery essence quickens, so the Watery kills, or is the Cause of Death. And thus
much daily Experience teaches us; for when Cold, which partakes of the nature
of the Watery Essence, gets the Dominion, and bears sway, then Death follows.

Moreover, that the Watery Essence inclines to Rest, and Death, in opposition to
the Vivifying Fiery Essence, may be hence discernible; because the Watery
cooling and Refrigerating Essence has Dominion in the Night, as the Fiery in
the Day: This being the Order which God has established in the World, viz.
That the Sun which is a Fiery Being, should Rule or have Dominion over the Day,
and the Moon over the Night. Genesis 1.16. And for as much as the Moon is
Refrigerative or Cooling like the Water, and has Dominion over the Water, as
has been showed in our Observations concerning Man,. 25. Consequently it must
be of the nature of Water. Seeing therefore that the Moon is of the Watery
Essence, and has Dominion over the Night, and that the Night causes Rest and
Sleep, as has been showed in the aforesaid Observations,. 26. and that Sleep
is Death in a less degree, as has been showed in our Observations,. 32. from
all this I say, it follows, that the Watery Essence must be Operative of sleep
and death.

From what has been said we may also understand the contrary Observation of
the Water, to that of the Fiery Essence: For as Heat and Cold, Life and Death
are opposite to one another; so likewise is Light and Darkness: Now it is
evident that Light proceeds from the Fiery Essence, and therefore by
consequence, the Watery Essence must excite Darkness, because Fire and Water are
contrary to each other, and therefore we must conclude that the contrary
Effects of Light and Darkness are the Product of their opposite Essences.

. 105. Now that the Watery Essence includes Darkness in it self, the Moon will
inform us, which being a Watery Essence, Rules or bears Dominion by Night, over
the Darkness, and therefore must partake of Darkness: For where there is a
Dominion, there must also ^e a Union or Communication with that which is Ruled,
and where there is a Union, there must be also a Participation of the same
Nature.

Furthermore it is evident from the Creation that the Watery Essence does
partake of the Darkness; for Genesis 1.1, 2. It is said, that in the beginning God
Created the Heaven and Earth: Where Moses intimates to us, through or by whom
Created the World, viz. in or through the Beginning, (...) in the Principle or
Beginning as it is said John 1.1. And this (...) is the same with (...), the
Word, viz. Jesus Christ, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and John in the same
place expressly tells us. And that Moses, Genesis 1.1. intimates to us, by whom God
Created the Word, is evident from hence, because when God Created the World,
there was not yet any Beginning of time. Besides, what Wisdom can there
otherwise be found in these Words, when it is said that in the beginning God
Created Heaven and Earth, if by the Beginning be meant only the beginning of
time, which can signify no more than this, that when God Created the World, he
did Create it. For all Men know, that every thing must have a Beginning of
Being that thing which it is, when it is first produced; this is self evident,
neither can it be said of any thing, after that it is Created, that it shall
yet be Created. So that there would be not only no Wisdom in these Words of
Moses, but not so much as any passable Sense, should we take them in the
meaning, according to which most men now a days do apprehend them.

But what is more, the Words will not so much as contain a Truth, if by [in the
Beginning] we understand the Beginning of time; for time is nothing else but a
Limitation, we conceive in our thoughts, either according to the Course of the
Sun, or the motion of any other thing from one place to another. Now where
there is a Limitation or Measuring, there must of necessity be some Created
thing, by or according to which the said Measuring is performed: so that it is
evident there could be no time, till after the Creation of the world, And not
before it. When therefore it is said that God Created the Heaven and the Earth
in the Beginning, viz. of time; then time must have been before the World was;
because when God Created (if we may express our selves so) there was yet no
Beginning of the World; but after that God had Created the World, then first it
was that the World began to Exist, and consequently Time also; for as much as
Time is nothing else but a Limitation taken from Creatures, and therefore a
thing that is consequential, and posterior to the things that are Created, as
has been just now showed. So that it would be altogether repugnant to the
Nature of the Creation, if by the [Beginning] should should be understood the
beginning of time. Moreover, that by these Words in the Beginning is to be
understood Jesus Christ; is a thing confirmed by many Authors, and particularly
by Leigh in his Critica Sacra under the Word(...)

After that Moses therefore, Genesis 1.1. had showed by whom the World was
Created, he next tells us, V. 2d. how or in what condition the Earth was when
God had Created it, viz. Empty and void, whereby is intimated, that all the
Essences that were to come forth from the Earth, and belonged to the same, lay
hid and concealed in the Earthly Essence, but were not yet fit to Operate, or
bring forth Fruit, as appears from hence; because V. 8. on the Third day, the
Waters were first divided from the Earth, and then it was that the Earth
brought forth her Fruit. V. 11. And the reason why the Earth was Empty and
Void, and could not yet bring forth Fruit, was because Darkness was upon the
the face of the Deep: That is, the Fire or Light was yet hid in the Water or
Darkness and therefore the Light could not as yet be Operative, and bring forth
Fruits. And after that Moses had showed, how all beings were hid in the
Creation, and that in such a manner as that they could not yet orderly exert
their Efficiency, which they began first to do in the days following; he
proceeds next to tell us, from what, and in what manner the Creation was
performed, or carried on, and that in these words, and the Spirit of God moved
upon the Waters: Whence it is evident, that all Beings were produced out of the
Water, according to. 98. and that by the Spirit. Now the first thing that was
brought forth from the Waters was the Light, which was hid in Darkness, or in
the Watery Essence. For V. 4. it is said, that God separated the Light from the
Darkness: So that the Light was already, viz. before its Manifestation, but hid
in the Darkness: For as much as all things were brought forth from out of the
Water, by the Spirit, and the Light is said to come out of the Darkness; and
therefore we may infer from hence, that the Darkness and the Water are to be
taken for one and the same Essence; as Moses seems plainly enough to intimate
with these words; and the Darkness he called Night, V. 5. For experience
teaches us, that Night or Darkness is the cause of Cold and Water. Wherefore
we are to learn hence, that Darkness Communicates with the Watery Essence. And
when it is said V. 16. And the lesser Light (the Moon) to rule the Night, this
informs us that the Moon is of the Nature of the Night or Darkness; and this in
true, for experience teaches us, that the Moon Rules over the Water and gives
forth moisture, as the Night or Darkness also does. All which Observations put
together, do in my judgment make it very evident, that the Darkness is one and
the same with the Watery Essence.

And for a further proof that the Watery Essence is the Darkness, we will here
compare some Expressions of the Holy Scripture together, and see what
understanding the same will afford us, with relation to this Matter. Man, as
long as he lives and cleaves to sin, is said to be in Darkness, John 3.19. Romans
2.19. etc. and this Darkness is the Essence of Bodies, as we are taught, Romans
13.12. Let us cast off the works of Darkness. Which Works of Darkness the
Apostle enumerates, V. 13. viz. Rioting, Drunkenness, Chambering, and
Wantonness, Strife and Envying. In order to the prevention of these, he
advises us, V. 14. not to make provision for the Flesh, for the gratifying of
its Lusts. Whence it is obvious to understand and that Flesh and Darkness have
Communion together. This is that which the Apostle shows at large, Ephesians. 14. and
5. Chapter, where he declares that the unfruitful Works of Darkness are the old
Man, that is, the unsubdued state of the flesh. And therefore, as the Darkness
is not good; so the Apostle Romans 7.18. tells us of the Flesh, that no good
dwells in it, with many other places to the same purpose. From all which it is
evident, that that which is Fleshly and Corporeal, is one with the Darkness,
because that which is bodily contains the Darkness in it self. Now it has been
showed. 27. and 97. That that which is bodily consists of the Watery Essence, or
has its Original from it: And seeing that the Bodily part is called Darkness,
and that it consists of Water, it follows that the Darkness and Watery Essence
must needs partake with each other, and be one.

. 106. And like as the Fiery Essence is a Spirit, so also is the Water a
Spiritual Being, according to. 102. and therefore the Watery Essence has its
Efficiency or Activity as well as Fiery, as has been showed. 104. And that all
Fiery Spirits or Lives, have not all of them one and the same Efficiency is
evident from what we read of the good Angels, which in Heb. 1.7. are called
Flames of Fire: Some of them also are called Cherubims, others Seraphims, that
is Fiery Spirits, etc. The Apostle also Col. 1.16. makes a more particular
distinction between them, calling them Thrones, Dominions, Principalities,
Powers, And Ephesians. 1.20.21. And set him (Christ) at his own right hand in the
Heavenly places, far above all Principality, Power, Might, and Dominion, and
every name that is named. If any one should say that there are only different
Denominations given to Spirits, and that notwithstanding they may all of them
be of one and the same Efficiency, I would demand of such a one, of what use
then it is to give them these different Denominations: for if the Apostle
designed only to express one and the same thing, by all these Names, then it is
no better then a vain Repetition of so many words. Besides it is well known
that Names are given to distinguish things from one another, and to express the
Property, Use, and Operation of the Subject to which such a Name is given. When
therefore the Holy Scripture makes a difference betwixt Spirits, and Spirits,
by giving them diverse Names, ought not we to conclude that these different
Denominations signify the various Properties and Operations of Spirits, as
well as the Names of visible, and Tangible Substances, do express their
Properties and Operations. To what purpose therefore is it to make this
Childish evasion here concerning Spirits, in a matter which is a Received Truth
in all other natural things, viz. That names are given to things to distinguish
them in their Operations from one another. But these are the Fruits of our
Modern Carnality, we will know of nothing but what is bodily, because we are
altogether ignorant of what is Spiritual. But that the Angels have their
different Operations is evident from the Revelations, where we find a
description of several Angels, and their different Operations.

Neither do the Angels only differ thus, but continual Experience also teaches
us, that the Lives or fiery Spirits of the Creatures do differ from one another
in their Operations; for all Lives do not bring forth the same kind of Bodies,
but as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5. All Flesh is not the same Flesh, etc. and
why so, but because the Lives which form the Flesh and Body (as may be seen in
the Observations concerning Man 37.38.39) have not all of them the same
Efficiency.

. 107. And as all Fiery Spirits or Lives have not the same Efficiency, so
neither are the watery, dark, or refrigerating Essences of one operation, as
has been showed in the said Observation,. 28 and 33.

The Holy Scripture also Informs us, that the Watery Essence consists of many
different Spirits, for since according to. 105. the Watery Essence, and the
Darkness are one, and the Scripture asserts the Darkness to be an Essence, and
not a mere nothing, seeing that it has its own proper Operations, as appears
Romans 13.12. Let us cast off the Works of Darkness; and Ephesians. 5.11. Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness. Which proves that Darkness is
a Being, because it has its peculilar Operations, and what these works of
Darkness are, has been showed. 105. Neither has the Darkness only an
Efficiency of its own but consists also of many Spirits, which have their
Government, and Governors, as will be evident by comparing the following
Places; Luke 22. 53. our Savior says, This is the Power of Darkness, viz.
That whereby the Seed of the Serpent should bruise his heel. And this Power of
Darkness our Savoiour calls, John 12.31. and 14.30. the Prince of this World:
which Prince Ephesians. 2.2. is called the Prince of the Power of the Air, the
Prince of the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience. And V.
3. tells us, that the operations of this Spirit are the Lusts of the Flesh.
Whence it appears that this Spirit has Communion with the Spirit of Darkness.
Moreover, the Apostle Attributes to the Flesh, viz. To the Spirit of Darkness
which Rules the Flesh, a Will, and Thoughts: And therefore when the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, he thereby intimates
to us, that it is not our outward Flesh and Blood that puts this force upon us,
but the Spirit that Rules this Flesh, and therefore he immediately Subjoins, But
against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of
this World, against Spiritual wickedness in high Places. And these Spirits of
Darkness the Apostle calls Acts 26.18. Darkness and the Power of Satan, etc.

. 108. From all which we conclude, that seeing that all Bodily things are the
Product of the Watery Essence,. 97. and that the Watery or Dark Essence has its
Spirits. 107. and the Watery is opposite to the Fiery Essence,. 104. and that
Man consists of the these two Essences. 90.96. etc. that consequently he must
have in him Spirits of Darkness, as well as Spirits of Light: which deserves
well to be noted by us, for as much as hereafter it will make way for our
understanding the Style, or manner of Expression used in Holy Scripture.

. 109. But it may be Queried here, seeing that Man consists of these two
Spiritual Essences, and that they are opposite to each other, how then can
there be any Union between them, so as to Cooperate toward, and bring forth
one Birth? This Difficulty will be easily removed, if first we consider what
Unity is: Know we therefore, that two Bodies, though they differ in their Nature,
may notwithstanding be united together, and Cooperate in Unity, viz. when the
one of them is made subject to the other, and in all respects complies with its
Operations, so as that the one be Passive, and the other Active. And if such a
Unity as we have now described were not between the Fiery and Watery Essence,
nothing in the World could be able to subsist or operate any thing. And
therefore our Savior says, Math 6. 24. No man can serve two Masters, for
either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one
and despise the other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon: That is, the one or the
other of them must have Dominion, but cannot both bear sway at once. And to the
same purpose the Apostle tells us 2 Cor. 6.14. that unbelief cannot have the
Dominion in Conjunction with Faith, what Communion has Light with Darkness? As
if he should say it is not possible, that both these should bear sway together,
for being contrary to each other, the one must bear Rule over the other, before
that they can be united.

Now that there is a Union between these two in Nature, we find by experience,
because as long as the fiery Life of each Creature does perform its ordinary
working, the Creature cannot in any of the Members of its Body suffer any
putrefaction or Mortification: but as soon as the Life of a Creature is either
overruled by another, or cease from its wonted Operation, then the Watery
Essence gets the Dominion, and causes Death and Corruption in the said Bodies
turning them to Worms, etc.

But some Perhaps will object that I have said. 90. That no two things of a
different Original can be united; and how then these two, viz. Light and
Darkness can be united, seeing they are contrary to one another? To which I
answer, first, that it is a Fundamental Truth, that two things of a different
Original cannot be united; but this is not the case here, for we do not say
that Light and Darkness have a different Original, but only that they have a
contrary working: Yea quite contrarily we do assert, that though Light and
Darkness be contrary to each other in operation, yet that they are of one
Original, and therefore can be united together. Now that the Light and
Darkness, or the Fiery and Watery Essence have one Original, we may know by
this, because the Light comes out of the Darkness, and because Darkness may be
made Light, and Light Darkness. This we are taught Genesis 1.2 where there was
nothing but Darkness, and V. 3. The Light was first brought forth, viz. out of
the Darkness, for V. 4. God Separates the Light from the Darkness; To which the
Apostle Alleging, says 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the Light to shine out
of Darkness. Forasmuch therefore, as the Light proceeds from the Darkness, and
can lie hid in the same, consequently they must partake with one another, and
be allied together or derived from one Original: For otherwise the Light could
never be turned to Darkness, as Matt. 6.23. If then the Light that is in thee
be Darknese. And Luke 11.35. Take heed therefore, that the Light which is in
thee be not Darkness. And on the contrary, neither would the Darkness ever
become Light, which yet is positively asserted Ephesians. 5.8. For ye were sometimes
Darkness but now are ye Light: Neither would a Darkened Understanding ever be
capable of being enlightened, which yet is asserted Ephesians. 3.18.

Both these Objections are also answered in my Observations concerning Man
31.32. And therefore I shall no further enlarge upon them here.

. 110. We shall only by the way take notice here, that if any one from the
Existence of thief two contrary Principles, whereof all Creatures subsist,
shall conclude, that there must be two Gods, one Good and the other Evil, it
will be a sign that he has not considered that the Light may be made Darkness,
and the Darkness Light, as is showed in. 109. And consequently that these two
Principles do not suppose two Gods, but one only, because they are allied
together, and consequently proceed both of them from one God. For if these
Principles were not brought forth by one God, but the Effects of two several
Deities, then it would be true, that these Principles proceeding from two
different Causes, could not have any Communion or be united with one another:
But seeing these Principles are United, this shows that they proceed from one
God.

. 111. Hitherto we have showed that all Creatures consist of these two
Spiritual Essences, and that these two different Beings consist of many
Spirits: But because our Aim is to show, how, or in what state Man was Created
by God, we are to enquire what kind of Body it was that God Created for Adam.

. 112. We have showed in the 2d. and 3d. Chapters, that Man had in himself the
Divine Light, viz. The Image of God, which did Illuminate his Soul and Body.
Neither had he only the Image of God in him, but he had also a Soul given him,
of which we have Treated Chap. 4th. And besides these two, God formed Man a
Body out of (...) Adamah, Genesis 2.7. which does not merely signify Earth, or
Red Earth, (as now a days is supposed) but the Blood of the Earth. For why do
our Modern Interpreters say that (...) signifies Red Earth, but because (...)
Signifies Blood, and Blood is Red. But what wisdom is there coucht in this,
that Adams Body was formed out of Red Earth? For my part I know not what they
can make of this. But we shall find a fund of Wisdom in this word, if we
Translate it the Blood of the Earth. For (...) Blood, signifies the Life, or
the Spiritual part of the Body, as is evident from those places of Scripture
that expressly tell us that Blood signifies the Life, or Soul, Genesis 9.4. But
Flesh with its Soul (that is) its Blood, etc. and Deuteronomy. 12.23. Be sure that
thou eat not the Blood, for the Blood is the Soul. Whence we are taught, that
Adams Body being formed of (...) it did consist of the Spiritual and Soulish
part of the Earth, as before has been showed, that the Corporeal is brought
forth from that which is Spiritual.

. 113. But it is not sufficient for us to know of what the Humane Body was
formed; but we must further enquire why God gave Man a Body.

. 114. In order therefore to our knowing why God has given Adam a Body, we
must first of all enquire why Man was Created by God? To which commonly is
answered, that Man was Created to Glorify God, and to publish his Virtues and
Praise, with other such like, which expressions do contain a Truth, if we
understand what is required to the Glorifying of God. But that we may not from
these Expressions conceive any Humane thoughts of God, as if he were delighted,
as Men are with hearing himself praised: Let us enquire into the Bottom of what
these words import; and that by putting this Query, whether a man when he
Glorifies God, be not operative? To which the answer must be affirmative,
because the least Action or Thought is an Operation: If therefore the
Glorifying of God be a working; the next thing we are to enquire is, wherein
this Working consists: This Operation of Glorifying God, and Magnifying of his
name, does not consist in this, that God thereby receives more Prefection, or a
greater degree of Worthiness, and that from his Creature, for as much as God is
every way perfect, yea that Being from whom and through whom all things are
brought forth, and are still daily maintained; so that God can have no more
perfection or worthiness now, than he has ever had: for as much as to that
which is perfect in all respects, nothing more can be added. What then is this
Work or Operation of Man, whereby he Glorifies God, and wherein does it
Consist? Man's Glorifying of God consists in this, that he performs that which
God has Commanded him, which Command is expressed, Genesis 1.28. And God said unto
them be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have
Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Heaven, and over
every living thing that creeps upon the Earth. So that we see God commands
Man to be fruitful, and this Fruitfulness consists in Multiplying, which
Expressions are Repeated V. 22. Man was also commanded to Replenish or fill the
Earth, that is he should exalt the Earth to that perfection, to which it was to
be brought, and advanced, viz. to be made Spiritual and Glorious. And that this
is the sense of these words, appears from hence, that man has an Earthly Body,
which is maintained from the Earth, for Man continually Eats and is nourished
with that which is Earthly, which Earthly Body and Food has been given him to
the end he might make it Heavenly and Spiritual, as is abundantly showed, 1
Cor. 15. and V. 54. it is said, that the Sinners Mortal Body shall be made
Immortal, and incorruptible, etc. Yea the whole Duty of Man toward his God
Consists in this, that he make the Earthly, or Dark and Watery Essence (whereof
his Body Originally consists, according to. 98.) Light and Glorious, and by
this means approach near to the Divine, and unchangeable Light, and attain to
Communion with the same. And to the end he might thus fill the Earth, that is,
make it Spiritual, God also Commanded Adam to subdue the Earth: whereby is not
meant that man should have the Earth under his Feet, go upon it, or Till and
Cultivate it, for this Nature sufficiently teaches us, neither was there any
need of a Command to enforce it: but hereby is intimated to us, that it is the
great duty of Man to have the Earthly and Dark Essence whereof his Body does
Consist, under his power and Command; so as that the said Dark Essence might
not bear Rule over the Fiery, but on the contrary, that his Glorious and
Illuminated Spirit, should Rule over the Dark or Watery Essence whereof his Body
does consist, and over the Spirits that are in it, (of which see. 107.) and the
word (...)signifies to have Dominion over, to Conquer, to bring into Subjection
and Obedience. And when we put such a Sense as this upon these Words, Replenish
the Earth and Subdue it, we shall find them to hold forth Wisdom and
Understanding, and such as does excellently agree and comport with the Nature
of Man, seeing that he consists of these two different Essences, viz. The Fiery
and the Watery. Neither is there any thing, throughout the whole Current of
Scripture, more pressed upon, than to mortify his Flesh, to Subdue it, and
Glorify it through the Spirit, as has been showed. 39.40, 105, 107. So that
the same thing which was Commanded to Adam, Genesis 1.28. the Sinner must now
obtain through much suffering, and manifold Deaths.

. 115. Seeing therefore, that it is the great duty, and Work of Man, pursuant to
Gods Command, to Subdue that which is Earthly and Bodily, and to make it
Spiritual, it was of absolute necessity that he should be partaker of the
Earthly, in order to his Glorifying of it. And for this Reason Man had an
Earthly Body bestowed upon him, to the end he should make that Body which is
fed and maintained from the Earth Spiritual and illuminate its Darkness.

Moreover, God gave to Man Dominion over the Fishes of the Sea, and over the
Fowl of Heaven, and over every living thing that creeps upon the Earth. And
this was necessary because man was appointed to fill or replenish the Earth,
and to Subdue it. In the word Earth being also comprehended whatsoever consists
of the Earth or Water, because the Earth has its Original from the Water; to
the end therefore that Man might have Dominion over all these Creatures, it was
necessary for him to have some Communion with them, that is to be partaker of
their Natures, to the end that Ruling over them, he might in, and through the
Glorification of his own Body Glorify them also, and make them Spiritual. And
this could have been done in and through Adam, because he being the Head of the
Earth, did Govern all things by his Spirit, and therefore was partaker of all
Living Creatures, that so they might not be exempted from his Dominion. And
that Adam was thus Partaker of all Living things appears from this, that Man to
this day does Partake of the Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, because he enjoys the same
for his Food and Nourishment. Moreover, which is well to be minded, he was also
to have Dominion over every Creeping thing, viz. Worms and other Infects, which
Worms were not without him, for the Body consists of Worms, as appears, because
when it dies it turns to Worms, and Worms are the first Life of all Creatures,
because all things that die turn to Worms.

. 116. And to the end we may more clearly Dissect the Condition and Qualities
of Adam, we are well to consider, that Adam before the Fall, did not consist,
nor exist as we Sinners now do; for we are part and Members of Adam, which were
in Adam, (as is hinted. 78.) we therefore being the Members of Adam, cannot
have the same Perfection which Adam had, who was the whole, that is, who had
all Men in himself: And in this respect the Apostle says very well 1 Cor. 12.
That we all are one Body, yet so as that we are Members of that Body, now the
Members have not one and the same, or an alike powerful Operaton, neither are
all of the same worth and dignity; nor has every Member separately the same
worthiness with the whole Body. Whence we understand that none of Adams
Posterity can have the Excellency which Adam has, because Adam is the Head and
Body, whereof all Men are only the Members, and every Member Separately has
only the Perfection of being such a Member, and not of being the whole Body.

Neither is Adam only to be considered as the Head of all Mankind, and by
consequence, far more excellent than any of his Posterity, but such also was
the Prerogative of Adam, that the had the whole Earth and all Creatures in
himself, that is, that he Ruled over them all, and this could not be, except
that his Spirit had dwelt in all things, and Governed them. And that all
Creatures were in Adam, that is, that the whole Earth, and all living Creatures
were upheld and Governed by his Spirit, in the same manner as the Central
Spirit of Man, upholds and Governs his whole Body; we learn from hence, because
when Adam had sinned, the whole Earth was cursed for his sake, Genesis 3.17. Now
if so be the whole Earth and all that is in it, had not been a part of Adam,
what consequence, or connection could there be in this, that upon Adams sinning
the whole Earth should be declared sinful? Moreover we Read Romans 8.19, 20, 21,
22. That the Creature, as with a stretched forth head waits for the
Manifestation of the Sons of God: For the Creature was made subject to Vanity,
not willingly, but by or through him who has subjected the same, in hope that
the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption,
into the Glorious Libery of the Sons of God. For we know that the whole
Creation groaneth and is in travel together until now. When the Apostle here
says, that the whole Creation, that is, the whole Earth is made subject to
Vanity or Corruption, by him who has subject it, viz. to Vanity, can this
possibly be understood of any one but of Adam? No surely, for God had Commanded
Adam that the should Subdue the Earth, or subject it, but not to Vanity, but by
Glorifying the same, as has been said. 114. tho he did the contrary. If
therefore Adam, being the Head and Governor of the whole Earth, has made the
whole Creation, viz. the Earth subject to Vanity, is not then this our
Assertion true and steadfast, that the whole Earth and all that is in it, is a
part of Adam. Yea the Apostle says as much in plain words, by calling Men, the
Earth, and whatsoever is in the same one whole Creation, or Creature; thereby
expressly showing, that the whole Earth is not any thing separate from Adam, but
belongs to him, and makes up one Creature with him.

. 117. But although God, according to. 115. Created Man to Replenish the Earth,
and to subdue it, yet withal God so Created man, that he could do the same of
his Free Will without compulsion, as was showed. 33.34. and sad experience
sufficiently convinces, that Adam could transgress this Command of God. But of
this we shall Treat hereafter, when we come to speak of Man's Fall, and by what
and how it happened.

A PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR of the APPENDIX, To the READER.
I Heartily Wish that all Persons to whom it shall happen to have, and Read the
small foregoing Treatise of Dr. Paulus Buchius, would please to receive the
same with as kind and good Intentions as the Aged Author of this Appendix
Presents it to them: He having taken the pains to cause it to be Translated out
of the Dutch Manuscript into English; It was the Request of his Friends (after
that they had read the said Translation) that he would be willing to add
thereunto an Appendix, which should yet more Illustrate the Doctrine of the
Revolution of Humane Souls: To which desire of theirs he yielded, and (as you
here see) he has caused it to be done in haste, which therefore falls short of
that clearness of Style which his Friend who first wrote in Dutch the foregoing
Book could have given it, to have made it more intelligible then it is at
present: Also for that very reason he cannot at present satisfy the Desires of
some that he would Write a Commentary on the first four Chapters of Genesis
which perhaps he may do hereafter.

Farewell. F. M. Van Helmont.

AN APPENDIX OF Several Questions with their Answers Concerning the Hypothesis
of the Revolution of Humane Souls.
Quest. 1. THe Hypothesis being this, viz. That every individual of Mankind
must several times die and be Born again, in Order to the working out of their
Salvation here in this Word: It is Queried first, Whether any Books of this
Author treating of such a Revolution of Humane Souls have been Printed and
Published in diverse Languages, and in different Countries?

Answer. 1. Yes, Diverse Books of this Authors Treating of such a Revolution of
Humane Souls have been Printed in different Languages, and that in several
Countries.

Quest. 2. What do some of the Learned judge concerning this Hypothesis?

Answ. 2. They are somewhat reserved and shy, openly to declare their Thoughts
concerning this Matter; because it seems as yet to be very novel, and but
little known to the most: But when reminded they may then remember, that both
the Books which Treat thereof, as also many clear Texts of Holy Scripture,
evincing the same, are not unknown to them: and then they must own, that it is
impossible to understand many places of the Holy Scripture without this
Hypothesis.

Quest. 3. What does the unlearned say of it?

Answ. Some of the Unlearned, having little or no judgment of their own, and
being prepossessed with a prejudice from others, do suppose it to be a vain
Opinion, which the Jews received from the Heathen.

Quest. 4. What is the reason that not any of the Learned have endeavored to
confute (as yet) these Books, nor manifestly to prove that there can be no such
Revolution of Humane Souls?

Answ. Because when some write great Books it may, for the most part, be
concluded, that they endeavor rather to drown a Doctrine, then to find out a
Truth: So that it is not to be wondered at, that the Learned hitherto (for any
thing I know) have not written against it, nor demonstrated (in short) that the
return of Souls is impossible: in as much as it is impossible for them to
perform this, as it is for them to demonstrate that the propagation of Mankind
depends not on any precedent Generation, it having continued immortal from Adam.

Quest. 5. What is the reason why this Doctrine has, for these many Ages, been
as it were, lost amongst men in Europe?

Answ. The Reason why this Doctrine has been so much hid is, because Men are
become for the most part Corporeal and Carnal, so that they cannot see nor
apprehend any thing, but what is suitable to, and (as we may say) tastes of
this present Body of Flesh and Blood, though that also continually is changing,
and remains not constantly the same.

Quest. 6. Whence did the wise Heathens derive their knowledge in some part of
this Doctrine?

Answ. The wise Heathens as Socrates, etc. have by continual Searching, been
able to find out this Truth in part; forasmuch as the Mysteries of Holy
Scripture were not made known to them, they could not arrive at the full
Discovery thereof, but as it is manifest in Nature: But the wise Jews have
drawn it fully from that Sacred Fountain.

Quest. 7. How comes it to pass that the Jews of old, better understood this
Doctrine (as appears by their Writings concerning the same) then modern Jews,
and the wise Heathens?

Answ. The Jews being at that time Gods peculiar chosen People, were
consequently to abound more with Love then the Heathens did; wherefore also a
clearer knowledge of this Doctrine was imparted to them, which the Modern Jews
have much lost: In as much as the knowledge of this Truth, and true Love go
hand in hand together, and are inseparable.

Quest. 8. What then is true Love

Answ. Love is a perfect Emanation, or beaming forth of the Life, and is
Spiritual, without which no perfect work can be wrought or brought forth either
in Naturals or Supernaturals.

Quest. 9. What is the chiefest, most perfect, and wise Efficiency, energy, or
out-working of the true Love? and how may we have experience of the same, in
our selves, and in the Creation?

Answ. The true Spiritual, loving emanation of the Life every one, especially
the Married Person, may rightly and fully have the experience of in himself, if
so be he Generates his Child in true Love, and this is the beginning of the
first Efficiency of love. The second is that wherewith the Child when it is
Born is continually regarded and beheld, and wisely looked after and Educated,
the Parent still preserving and continuing the same love for his Child in
himself, without prodigally lavishing out the same. So that they who thus give
out prudently their Love, they will find by experience, that when their
Children come to Discretion, and understanding, that this inward, reserved,
quiet, and prudent Working-love, will increase in the Parents, and descend to
the Children, and from them reflect back in true Obedience to the Parent.
Moreover this reflection of the Childrens love to the Parents, cannot but
produce a fresh increase of love in the Parents which prolongs the Life of
Children, according to Deuteronomy. 5.16. Honor thy Father and thy Mother as the Lord
thy God has commanded thee, that thy Life may be long in the Land which the
Lord thy God gives thee. Whence it appears, that the true Efficiency of Love,
must be an Emanation of Life, because it can prolong the Lives of Children.

The same may also be experienced in a contrary Efficiency of the Life, viz. In
a hatred mixed with fear, or in a Faith mixed with doubt, as may easily and
plainly be found in such as are young Persons, coupled with old Wives or
Husbands, and are desirous of their Deaths. For at the very same time, that
they earnestly desire to be rid of them, they continually have secretly lurking
in their minds and incessant belief or persuasion (which is an efficient power
of the Life) that they will not dye: whereby the hated is prolonged to a very
old Age. For at the very same time, that the young one earnestly desires the
death of the old one, the life of the young one works a Faith, or Belief, which
preserves the old one alive: So that it is by their doubting, that their own
proper love, life and faith, do all cooperate together. These and such like
emanations of love and hatred, many have experienced, and have been sensible
of, but never could conceive what should be the Reason thereof; which indeed
was this, viz. because from their youth they have been filled with other
Carnal, Corporeal, and contrary desires and notions.

Quest. 10. Can it be made out plainly, and in the consequent Effect thereof,
even to the outward Senses, that the life of Man can destroy another life or
body, either wholly or in part; and immediately form another new one, in all its
parts which has no similitude with the former?

Answ. Yes this cannot be denied, because experience and Observation has, and
does evince it by manifold Instances, whereof we will here insert one Narration
relating to the change of an entire part of another Body. The Example is this:
A certain Woman being with Child, and near her time, in searching for something
amongst old Rags, happened unexpectedly to touch with her Thumb, the dried
foot of a Hare, which unknown to her lay amongst those Rags; which so
affrightned her, that she immediately (or soon after) fell into labor, and was
delivered of a Child, whose Thumb of its right Hand was changed into a Hares
Foot perfect in all its parts, as having all about it hair, and divided into
Claws with sharp Nails at the end of them, etc.

Quest. 11. How can it be proved, and made out, that persons deceased, dead and
gone, do come to be born again, and to appear in this world, so as to be
plainly discerned by their outward shape, and features?

Answ. This is, and may be very evidently perceived in some places, as great
Cities of Trade, where Persons of several Nations, (happen to be joined
together in Marriage, as for example, in Flanders, whither are transported old
swarthy Portugal Merchants, who Marry with Young clear, white Flemish Women:
And then it is frequently observed, that these swarthy Men get many fair and
clear Daughters, by their Wives (for by the way observe, that the reason why
they get rather Daughters then Sons, is because old Men do commonly bear
greater love to young Women, then young Women do to old Men) Now when these
white Flemish Women's Daughters are grown up, and Married to white Flemish men,
and are gotten with Child by them, then will the Neighbor Citizens know by
experience, and cry that the old Portugeese Grandfather will then appear or be
born again in that Child: and accordingly, it generally happens that that Child
in all its parts resembles the swarthy Portugees its Grandfather. This is
also often seen in a wise Father, who begets a foolish Son, and that Foolish
Son begets a wise Son afterward, so as the wisdom of he Grandfather comes to
appear in the Grandson: the same may be observed as to all other parts both of
body and mind, betwixt such Relations. Moreover, the like is also sometime
experienced by very old persons, that have lived to see four Generations
descended from them; how that the Grand and great Grandfathers have appeared
in their Offspring, even to the third and fourth Generation. So that from
hence, we may in part understand what is said in Deuteronomy. 5.8, 9, 10. Where God
strengthens his Commandment with this Reason: For I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God, visiting the sins of the Parents unto the third and fourth
Generation, etc.

Quest. 12. Whether the first Sin comittedted by Adam and Eve, whereby they
subjected themselves to the fleshly body, be Infinite?

Answ. No, Their Sin could not be infinite, because their understanding was but
finite.

Quest. 13. Is there then any number or Measure to be assigned, whereby the
Fall of Adam and Eve (wherein they became Bodily and Carnal) can be cleared and
understood?

Answ. Yes there is, and the same is the Number, Four: for each of them
consisted of two Beigns, viz. Male and Female, as all and every one fo Mankind
does: every Man has the Male nature as predominant in him, and besides that he
has the Female Nature also: So is it likewise with the Woman who has the
Female Nature predominant in her, and likewise the Male Nature in her too. And
accordingly the Lord says, Genesis 1.27. That he had Created Adam and Eve, Male
and Female, viz. In each person, so that altogether make up the Number Four.
And therefore their Children and all their Posterity were to consist of Four
Essences, as being their Offspring: And therefore, for this Reason they could
not sin beyond that Number: whence it is said Exodus 20.5. also Chapter 34.7.
Visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, and upon the Childrens
Children, unto the third, and to the fourth Generation, etc.

Quest. 14. How long a term of time therefore was necessary for Adam and Eve
to repent of, and to suffer for their Sins, and to attain to a restitution and
a recovery?

Answ. Both of them together require four Thousand Years: because (as was said)
they consisted of four Essences; and accordingly the Psalmist says in Psalm.
90.3, 4. etc. Thou turnest man to destruction, and say, return ye Children
of men, for a thousand years are but as yesterday, etc. Which place of the
Psalms is also cited by St. Peter in 2 Peter chapter 3. v. 8. One day is with the
Lord as a thousand Years, and a thousand years as one day, etc.

Quest. 15. From whence may we begin the Computation of the Thousand Years of
the life of these four Essences?

Answ. From the perfect number [Ten] beyound which we cannot Number; also all
men must consist of the Number [Ten,] thu considered, viz. his four Essences
are (as abovesaid) two Male, and two Female, and the Subdivision of the two
Male is into five out-working Powers, an five likewise of the Female, which
make 10. to which also does correspond the two Lobes of the Brain, the right as
being the Male, working-out Images, or Ideas; and the left receiving them, and
then when thus completed, and born (as it were) are they sent into the little
Brain, which is the Root of all the Nerves of Motion; and thence through the
Nerves are conveyed to the Right hand, which may be accounted the Male Hand,
which has five Fingers, and also the like to the left or Female Hand, to Work
out; all which, together make ten, and if we add to the former this other
further Consideration, viz. That the same may be said of the two Feet, whose
ten Toes added to the Hands ten Fingers make up twenty, which (hereafter) is
proved to be the complete Working out of a Man, he then becoming Ripe to bear
Fruits, or to beget, and bring forth Children; so as his Feet correspond to the
Roots, and his Hands to the Branches. And therefore has no more then ten
Fingers wherewith to effect and Work out their ten Properties, or Powers; as it
appears in a Woman big with Child, who upon some Fright, or put into any other
Passion, does there form on that very part of her Child's Body, some strange
live Impression of some external thing, by an effective application of her own
hand, upon that very part of her own Body. And forasmuch as man consists of
ten Powers, or Faculties, therefore also ten Commandments have been given to
him to observe: according to that in Eccles. ch 12. v. 13. Let us hear the
Conclusion of the Matter: Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the
whole Man. This very Text of Holy Scripture, the Jews do make to be the Summary
or chief Head of their whole Talmud.

Quest. 16. How may this be further explained?

Answ. Thus, viz. Children must remain in the Womb of their Mothers, for to
attain or get, by the influence or Government of the Moon over the Monthly
Courses, a perfect Body, in the space of ten Lunary Months, which consists of
40 Weeks. And seeing that Man is made of the ten Lunary Operations, That is the
reason, why, when a Man does Govern himself perversely, and to his utmost
power, does tie himself too much to his own Will and Fancy, he becomes Lunatic
or Mad, and is then wholly under the Governing Rule of the Moon.

Quest. 17. If the Term of Man's life was appointed to be a thousand Years, how
then comes it to pass, that Adam lived but 930. Years?

Answ. The reason was because of his Fall or Sin: And it became manifested in
Cain, why Adam finished not his thousand Years, Seventy of them being wanting:
which number Seventy consists of ten times seven, which was that vengeance that
should be taken on any one that should kill Cain.

Quest. 18. Why had Adam by his wife two Sons at one Birth, neither more nor
less, as Genesis 4.1, 2. does show?

Answ. The reason seems to be this: because Adam had been in two different
States, Conditions, or Beings, before that he knew Eve: The one was antecedent
to his Fall; the other was after it. For which reason she was to conceive
Twins, he knowing of her but once as appears by the Text, whereof in the order
of Nature, the eldest must be born last, and the first Born last conceived:
which is confirmed and made plain in that of Genesis 38. v. 27, 28, 29, 30. Both
in the Words, and Action of Tamars Midwife, and the red Thread used by her, as
it is there mentioned at large.

Quest. 19. Why was Adam 130 Years of Age when he knew his Wife a second time,
and she brought forth Seth, as it is in Genesis 4.25. and Chapter 5. v. 3.

Answ. May not this be supposed to be the Reason? Because this was the full
time of Cains being Sevenfold avenged by Lamech, who had slain him, so that
then he was not longer the keeper of his Brother Abel: when Lamech with great
earnestness declared to his Wives, The Revolution of Humane Souls; saying, (
Genesis 4. v. 23.) Hear my Voice ye Wives of Lamech, for I have slain a man to
wounding, and a Young man, by Sodomy, (if the place in the Original be truly
Interpreted.) Also this Number of 7. may be taken in the manner as were the 20
Years in which the Young men were appointed to serve in the Temple, as it is in
Chron. 23. v. 24, 27. to the end. Also in the manner of those who were to go
out to War, as in Number. Chapter 1. v. 3, 18, 20, 22, 24. etc. To which if we allow
to add about one Year and a half, after they were married for the bringing
forth of Children, we shall find that the Number of 6 times 21 Years and a
half, will make 129 Years: and then, if we further allow one year more to Adam,
who was Created a perfect man, and who had therefore no need to stay till he
was twenty Years of Age, before he begat Children. Adams Years will be found to
amount to 130. in which Cain was 7 times avenged, that is, he passed through 7
such Lives, each containing 21 Years. And as the 130 Years of Adam, make up the
time of Cains Vengeance: So the Number of Lamechs Vengeance, viz. 77 times 21
of Years will have for their Product the time from Adam to the Flood, viz.
1656. with a small allowance of half a Year only.

Quest. 20. Must not all men, as to their peculiar individualities, receives
and keep their whole and perfect Essence, and a continual descending flux of
Generation from Adam and Eve, as being parts of them?

Answ. Yes, for otherwise, could those parts be taken away, lost and
Annihilated, there would be remaing not so much as one single Man.

Quest. 21. Whether in the first Man Adam, were all men Created and
comprehended in an infinite Number?

Answ. No, This could not be so, for many reasons which might be given; but let
this one serve, viz. Because had it been so, then the World could never have
come to an end in its out-working: and Adam would have been an unchangeable
Being, which could never have died.

Quest. 22. Whether all those men, whom we find are born with one or more
defects, either in Body, Mind, or Both were so Created at first in Adam?

Answ. No, this cannot be admitted: because, if it were so Men could not be the
cause of their own defects, but the Creator should have been the cause of them;
which to suppose, is altogether absurd and impossible: Because he is all good,
Wise, and just, and could not be the cause of these the Defects of men, viz. To
make them to be Fools, Blind, Deaf, Sickly, Lame, Criples, Churlish, Cruel and
ill natured, to be Monsters, and Abortives, etc. which have a true and right
beginning, but are never brought to perfection.

Quest. 23. Whether all men who were Created in Adam had not given them to have
knowledge and free will, viz. To do that which is good, and to forbear that
which is Evil?

Answ. This also cannot be denied by any rational man, for many Reason needless
to be recounted here.

Quest. 24. Whether Adam and his posterity were not to live and abide so long
till they had, by Generation propagated and produced all those who were Created
in him; being as many as were necessary to the completing of this World?

Answ. Neither can this reasonably be denied by any one, who rightly
comprehends the Hypothesis here laid down.

Quest. 25. After that this perfect number of Mankind had been fully
accomplished in being all born and brought forth, and that the generality of
them was fallen into wickedness; whether hereupon it was not necessary that
their days should be shortened, and reduced to 120 Years, as it is in Genesis 6.3.
to the end, that their wickedness, by this means might be shortened also: For in
case they should have lived many hundred Years (as before this accurtation)
then their wickedness would have increased to that degree, that the
predestined, or appointed time of the Worlds duration could not have allowed
room for sufficient Revolutions or Regenerations, wherein men might come to
suffer for their evil deeds; which the Scripture tells us, (Romans 6. v. 2.7. and
1 Pet. 1.17. and Rev. 14.13. and chapter 20.13.) must follow them, and have the
same measure meeted out to them which they have measured to others, Mat. 7.2.
Mark. 4.24. Luke. 6.38. Rev. 13.10.) to the end, that having at last, through
manifold sufferings and dyings, altogether subjected, and spiritualized their
Bodies, Elohim might attain his designed end and purpose?

Ans. No sound and understanding Theologue can or will disallow of the
affirmative to this Question.

Quest. 26. What is the reason of the Law expressed in Deuteronomy. 23.2. A Bastard
shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, even to his tenth
Generation, etc. For by a Bastard here, is properly to be understood, a Child
born in Adultery, of a married Wife. Now, as in this case, the uniting, or
Marriage-band of the aforesaid Number of [Ten] is broken, (as appears in a
foregoing Question) whether (I say) accordingly this Bastard, (who formerly
also must have been an Adulterer) and whose works must follow him; and the same
measure must be meeted to him again, which he has measured to another, as the
above cited Scriptures tell us) must not die, and be born again ten times in
order to his obtaining to the perfect number, viz. From one to ten: which he
had lost by his Adultery; and may not this be illustrated by this following
Simile, viz. Suppose that a good Gardner, having in his Garden many wild Olive
Trees, and amongst the rest, should be one planted, and ingrafted at several
times, with ten of its own Scions, every one being the product of a former
Ingrafting, he having ingrafted them, still higher and higher, in hopes that
from his tenth perfect or full grown Scion, he should have sufficient wherewith
to ingraft all his other wild Olive Trees, and by this means obtain many good
Fruits from them (every Ingrafting being a death (nothing being bettered but by
loosing its former life, which is a Death) by which they become gradually
better, and better,) now should this Gardner take a journey, and at his return,
find this Tree either stolen or removed or cut down which he had Ingrafted ten
times before, and another wild Olive Tree planted in its stead; would not this
good Gardener, in all probability take the same coursewith this new, strange
and changed wild Olive Tree, by endeavoring to Graft it likewise ten several
times in order to its Melioration, as he did to the former?

Answ. Surely Yes.

I have observed and found in one of the greater sort of Figgs, about 666
several Seeds. Now if any person, would take into consideration one of the said
Seeds, he would find that naturally it consists of three parts. Also he will
find, that the first is the Body, which is the outward visible, and mortal
part; wherein there lies hidden, two immortal and Spiritual principles or
Beings, which former and produced the first part, viz. the Body, by drawing
nourishment from the Earth. The Second part is the Watery, Female, Spiritual,
and immortal substance, out of which is produced the first mortal part, viz.
the Body. The third part is a Fiery, Powerful, Male, Spiritual, and immortal
Being, which is the chief Work-master of his Body, and that out of the second
Female waterish Principle. It is not easily to be denied, that the two
Spiritual parts of the above-written Seeds. Should not contain hidden in their
inward essential and spiritual parts, a perfect Fig Tree, with Figgs and
Seeds, to be brought forth in due time, when sown, then they will manifest
Trees, Fruits, and Seeds: and so in sew Years would bring forth and multiply an
incomprehensible number of Trees, which neither this World, nor others besides
would be able to contain them.

But the All-wise Creator, who made this World, has so perfectly Created and
ordered it, that there is neither too much nor too little in it: So that none
of the smallest Creatures can vanish to nothing, not one excepted; by reason
that all the parts are necessary to make up a whole.

So that it was necessary that the Creator should Create so many Seeds, Figgs,
and Trees as the Earth should have need to bring forth for this whole World,
and no more: it not being (as some think) that some parts can go to nothing,
when they are burned or corrupted. Now because some are too corporeally and
fleshly darkened in their minds and understandings, they cannot discern that
the Spiritual part abovesaid cannot be lost, nor die: because the Spiritual
part is the former, and maintainer of the Bodies. Should any one read this, and
also seriously take into his consideration what stands in Genesis 3.22. And Adam
called his wifes name Eve, ( or Chavah) because she was the Mother of all
living: He would readily grant that it would be impossible that any man could
have his Being and not have it from her, or not to be a partaker of hers.

Now let it be remarked that all that is abovesaid, does by a natural Analogy
describe also how Man, together with all other Animal Creatures and Beings are
produced, propagated, and Multiplied, our Savior himself using a Similitude of
this sort for this very purpose in Mat. 12.24.

Certain QVERIES, to be yet added.
I. WHether if Adam and Eve had not transgressed and fallen, would there have
been need of a Temple, or Worship therein; they then worshipping God, according
to that in 4. John v. 23.24. in Spirit and in Truth? and consequently were not
they therefore (as Christ said of himself, Mat. 12.6, etc.) greater then the
Temple?

II. Whether if Adam had not fallen, would not Eve have conceived Spiritually,
as the Blessed Virgin did, viz. By the power of the Holy Ghost?

III. Whether, seeing that a Temple was commanded to be Built, did it not
represent the Whole Man, viz. The Holy of Holies, representing the inward
Spiritual Man, which is the Temple wherein God appears to Man, for to assist
and help him for his Good?

IV. Whether if the Temple did represent Man, ought it not therefore to be
built according to the Measures of Man, whom it did represent?

V. Whether if the Temple was 46 years in building, does not that number of
time, signify the number which is proper to the make or essential Being of Man,
which requires 10 Lunar Months, or forty Weeks, to abide in the Womb for the
formation of his Body, which is made out of the humidity that is governed by
the Moon?

VI. Whether the 6 years may not correspond to the 6 days of the Creation.

VII. Whether when our Lord Christ was tempted in the Wilderness, as in Mat.
4.1, 2. and fasted 40 days and nights, did he not in that fasting consume the
flesh of the Old Man, and Spiritualize it? and after it is said in V. 2. he
hungered, that is, to bring back Humane Nature into its true state and
Restoration, in and by himself?

VIII. Whether in case it be found true, that after 4000 Years from the
Creation (according to the computation of the Holy Writ it self, and also of
natural Reason) the Fall of Adam and Eve was then to be wrought out and ended;
must not consequently this be the fullness of time, wherein the Messiah was to
come and appear?

IX. Whether, if Adam (as abovesaid) had not fallen, he would have Spiritually
conceived; must it not of necessity follow, that the Messiah being to come in
the place of Adam, must be likewise Spiritually conceived of a Virgin?

X. Whether, if Christ, who was to become the Messiah, and was therefore to be
united to Adam; and Adam was to be restored and perfected through Death and
Sufferings; does it not hence follow, that Christ also ought to suffer Death,
to obtain a Glorious Redemption, and Resurrection for us?

XI. Whether as Christ was born under the Law, must he not be subjected to the
Law? and accordingly did he not perfectly fulfill the Law, as in Mat. 5.18. and
Luke 16.17.

XII. Whether therefore was it not necessary that all the Righteous Duties
which the Law commands, should be performed, and completed by him and
moreover, that he should do, teach, and command us, to love our Enemies; to be
poor in Spirit, and submit to Death: whereby to obtain Life, and many other
such like Virtues?

XIII. Whether he was not therefore to give them the Power (as in John 2.19,
20, 21, 22.) to esteem and use him as a Sinner; and to hang him on the Cross,
and Moses did the Serpent in the Wilderness, (as in John 3.14.) Seeing that all
Created Bodies are made out of Worms, or creeping things, of which the Serpent
is to be reckoned the chiefest. Which Serpent was in Eve (as was all Beings in
the World, as she was the Mother of all Living, as it is said in Genesis 3.20.)
and deceived her.

XIV. Whether the Messiah (as being the Seed of the Woman) has not broken the
head of the Serpent; having through death, finished Redemption, as he himself
testified on the Cross, as in John 19.30.

XV. Whether considering Christ did outwardly, and visibly appear in the Flesh
was it not necessary the outward and visible Ear should hear a Voice from
Heaven signifying the same as in Luke 9. from 30 to 35.

XVI. Whether if we rightly consider what our Savior says, Mat. 10.5.6. Mark.
6.7, 8. Luke 9.1, 2, 3. Luke 10.1.2.3.4.5.6. Acts 13.46. Where the sends forth
and commanded his twelve Disciples not to go in the way of the Gentiles,
neither into any City of the Samaritans, but rather to the lost Sheep of the
House of Israel, and to Preach, saying The Kingdom of God is at hand, we may
not find Cause to suppose that he came to prepare the Kingdom for the Jews, he
having before sent his Disciples to prepare them for the Kingdom, especially
considering Acts 1.6. The Disciples asking if he would then restore the Kingdom
to Israel, and his Answer, that after they had received the Holy Ghost they
should go not only where he had before sent them but likewise to those Places
then forbidden, which if this Supposition be rejected, what Wisdom or Coherence
should there be in these Texts.

Seeing Christ himself gives us the Parable of the ten Virgins Mat. 25.1. etc.
whereof five were Wise, and five Foolish: may we not suppose them to be the
Jews and Gentiles, and the five wise to represent the Jews they being those
holy Bodies that arose out of the Graves, Mat. 27, 25. and went into the Holy
City with those who were to arise and ascend with him to whom the Kingdom of
Heaven was near: The foolish representing the Gentiles, who were to buy Oil,
their time being not yet come wherein they were to enter, and therefore our
Savior bids them watch against his second coming at the end of the World at
which time they were to enter.

XVII. Whether when the Messiah died, he signifying the Temple, was it not
necessary that the Vail of the Temple should be Rent from the top to the
bottom, as in Mat. 27.51. etc. And all separation now to be taken away between
God and Man; between man and man also, as in Gal. 3.28. and Col. 3.11.

XVIII. Whether was it not necessary, that after 3 days, he should arise again
from the Dead; and that the Graves should be opened, and many holy Bodies
should arise with him out of the Grave, as in Mat. 27. 52, 33 to show forth the
Virtue and Power with which he was endued, to draw all men after him, (as in
John 12.32.) they being the first fruits, (as in 1 Cor. 15.20, 21, 22. 23. and
in 1 James 18. and Rome. 14.4) that had finised their Revolution?

XIX. Whether Holy Writ in Acts 1.3. Signifying that Christ continued 40 days,
Walking on the Earth, before he ascended, as in Acts 1.9. may we not conclude,
that it is signified to us, that in 40 Years, the whole Temple should be
destroyed? he having in forty days finished the Work he came to do, as in
John 17.4. Forty being the fourt out-workings of Male and Female, Wherein all
do complete the final fulfilling of their own Revolutions? which I wish to all
men as well as to my own self.

Here follows An Exact from the last Words of the Philosopher Socrates,
concerning The Immortality of SOULS.
WHen Socrates had thus spoken, Cebes began and said, All is right what thou
have spoken, O Socrates: But as for the Soul; Men are generally very apt to
disbelieve that Souls after their departure, do exist any where, but think that
at the same time that a Man Dies, his Soul perishes, and that it is no sooner
let loose from the Body, but it is annihilated, and like a Wind or Smoke,
vanishes, and disappears. But if it be so that the Soul Exists some where
gathered up into her self, and delivered from those Evils and Mischiefs thou
have mentioned, then may we have a great and good hope, O Socrates, that all
you have discourst is true. Yet perhaps there will be need of strong persuasion
and Belief, to make people think, that the Soul after its departure does still
exist, and has some power and understanding.

Soc. True O Cebes. But what think thou if we should discourse a little
about it, whether it be propable that it is so, or not, Cebes? That would be
very acceptable to me, and I should with great satisfaction hear your Opinion
concerning these Matters.

Soc. I trust no body hearing us discoursing of these things, will report of us
that we spend the time in vain and unprofitable talk. If you think good
therefore, and it may not be thought improper for us to search into this
Matter; let us first of all enquire and consider, whether the Soul of the
deceased do exist after this life or not.

There is an Old Proverb now comes into my mind, which says, That Souls as
they go from hence thither, so they also come hither from thence, and return
from the Dead. If this now be true that the Living proceed or come out of the
Dead, then our Souls must have been something formerly there; for had they been
nothing, they could never have returned thence, and this is a sufficient token
that it is so, if we can prove that the Living proceed from no where else than
from the Dead. But if this cannot be proved, we must produce some other
Argument. Ceb. Very right.

Soc. We may trace this, not only in Man, but if we desire to understand it
more clearly in Animals also, and Plants, and in a Word, in every thing that is
born or generated; wheether all things be not Generated in such a manner, as
that one contrary always proceeds from the other. For instance, that which is
Beautiful is contrary to that which is Ugly or (deformed) that which is Just to
that which is Unjust. Let us therefore consider whether every thing that has a
contrary, does not of necessity proceed from nothing else but from that its
contrary? As when a thing grows greater, it of necessity grows greater out of
that which is less. Ceb. That is very true.

Soc. In like manner, if any thing grows less is it not out of something that
before was greater?

Ceb. Certainly so.

Soc. That which is weaker does it not become so, out of that which was
stronger.

Ceb. Yes Surely.

Soc. Also when any thing grows worse, is it not out of something that was
better; if just is not out of unjust? Ceb. Plainly.

Soc. Wherefore it appears that it happens thus to all thing, Viz. That one
contrary still proceeds from the other.

Ceb. It does so.

Soc. Again is there not also some such like thing, between both these contrary
Beings, by means whereof the one is Born or proceeds from the other? As betwixt
Great and Little there is increase and decrease, and of the one we say, that it
increases, and of the other, that it decreaseth. Ceb. It is so.

Soc. And is not the case the same in Dividing and joining, or mingling, and
when any thing grows cold or warm? Yet so, as that every thing comes forth from
its contrary, and that there happens a birth out of one contrary into the
other, out of this into that, and again out of that into this? Ceb. There does
so.

Soc. Now then is there no contrary that answers to the word to Live, as to the
word to watch, or be awake, belongs that of Sleeping, as the contrary to being
awake.

Ceb. Ay certainly.

Soc. What is then the contrary or opposite of to Live? Ceb. Why to Dye or to be
Dead.

So. Do not these therefore proceed from each other, seeing that they are
contrary or opposite to one another. And seeing these be two things, are there
not two Births between them both? Ceb. I conceive so.

Soc. Now from these Primitive Words do proceed Derivative, and Analogous
Denominations: I shall give you the Explication of one of these, and do you
give me the same of the other. I say then, that to sleep, and to be awake are
contrary to one another, and that out of waking comes sleeping, and again out
of sleeping, waking, and that between both these, to slumber, and awake; are
set as intervening Births. Are you satisfied or not. Ceb. You have fully
satisfied me. Soc. Do you the same then of Life and Death. Do not thou say
that these are contrary? Ceb. Ay verily. Soc. and that the one is born out of
the other? Ceb. Even so.

Soc. What grows or proceeds then from the Living? Ceb. The Dying, or that
which is Dead. Soc. And that out of that which is Dead? Ceb. Thence of
necessity the Living must proceed.

Soc. Well then, the Living proceed from the Dead. Ceb. That is evident. Soc.
And if so, our departed Souls are some where. Ceb. It should seem so.

Soc. And is not one of these Births manifest, viz. Dying? Ceb. it is so.

Soc. What shall we say then of the other contrary, shall Nature be lame (or
defective) in this point only, or must we grant something that is contrary to
being Dead? Ceb. Surely we must.

Soc. And pray what is that? Ceb. To become alive again. Soc. If this be so,
there must of necessity be a return from the Dead, to life again. Ceb. There
must so. See, It appears then from this Argument (or Reason) that the Living
proceed from the Dead, as well as the Dead come of the Living. And if this be
true, we may with sufficient ground Conjecture from hence, that the Souls of
the Deceased must of necessity be somewhere, from whence they return. Ceb. It
appears plainly to me, O Socrates, that this must follow from what has been
above grantetd.

Soc. Consider, dear Cebes, that what we have before granted, was not without
good ground, for except the one did continually follow upon the neck of the
other, and so went round, as in a Circle; but that all things did in a straight
line tend to their contraries, without returning thence again, then must all
things finally terminate in one form and quality, and Generation must cease.

Ceb. What do you say Socrates?

Soc. What I say is somewhat difficult to be understood; as for instance, if
one should say that men fall asleep, but never wake again out of that sleep,
then all things would come to that (one contrary) so that what is storied of
Endymcon, would be no longer a ridiculous Fable, and that he never appeared
afterward: seeing that all must at last in like manner fall asleep, and
continue so.

And if all things should be mingled together, and never more be divided or
separated, that of Anaxagoras would sometime or other suddenly befall us, who
held that all things should once be hurled into confusion. In like manner, Dear
Cebes, if this be the case, that whatsoever has received life must dye, and
what is once dead continues so, without ever returning to life again, then of
necessity it must at last come to this, that all things be dead, and that no
living thing be left: for if any thing proceeds out of any thing that is
living, and that living thing Dies, what then shall hinder, but that all must
be swallowed up by Death at last? Ceb. Nothing verily, for your words, O
Socrates, seem very true.

Soc. And such indeed they appear likewise to me O Cebes; neither do we pretend
this as being mistaken, but it is in very deed so, as Springing up from a
Resuscitation, that out of the Dead come the Living, and that deceased Souls do
still exist, and that it goes well with the Good and ill with the Wicked.

Socrates proceeded in his Discourse concerning the Immortality of the Soul,
and declared how that all Sciences we learn outwardly from others, lay hid
before in the inmost ground of Man, and by means of outward Objects and
Applications, were only excited (or awakened) in us, and brought to our
memories.

FINIS.

