GEORGH BUCHANANI Scoti* Poetae, Historici Eximij Vera Effigies, Ex Archetypo,
quod in Musaeo D: Thomae Povey, adservatur expressa.


THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.

Written in Latin, By George Buchanan.

Faithfully Rendered into ENGLISH.

I have carefully and diligently perused this Translation of BVCHANAN's
History; and, finding it to be faithfully and exactly done, have therefore
allowed it to be Printed.

August. 13 th, 1689. I. FRASER.



LONDON: Printed by Edw. Jones, for Awnsham Churchil, at the Black Swan in
Ave-Mary-Lane, near Paternoster Row. 1690.

TO THE READER.
IT IS sufficient Commendation of the ensuing History, That it was Written by
Mr. George Buchanan; Who was no less the Glory of the Age wherein he Lived,
than of his Country. Being a Person both of that Elevation and Justness of
Thought, and of that Neatness and Elegancy of Expression, that among all the
Ancient, as well as the Modern Writers, few do equal, and none do exceed him.
And as he knew in Reference to Persons and Things, What to say, and What not to
say, so he was of that Courage and Integrity, to conceal nothing that ought to
be delivered, but has used the same Freedom in Transmitting down the Lives of
Princes to Posterity, that they allowed themselves in leading them. And if ever
any Book deserved the Character of answering the Title, this does, being truly
a History, and not a Romance, wherein the Author represents Things as they
were; Commending without Flattery, and Censuring without Satyr.

GEORGE BUCHANAN's EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO JAMES the Sixth, King of the SCOTS.
AT my Return, after Four and Twenty Years absence from my Country, I desired
nothing more than to review my Papers, that were dispersed, and many ways
injured by the Iniquity of the Times: For I found, that the over-Officiousness
of my Friends, to precipitate the Publication of what was yet unfit to see the
Light, and that excessive Liberty which Transcribers take to Censure the Works
of other Men, had altered many Things, and corrupted others, according to their
several Humors. But whilst I was endeavoring to remedy these Disorders, the
sudden and unexpected Solicitations of my Friends broke my Measures; all of
them, as if they had Conspired together, Exhorting me to lay aside Things of
less Weight, that rather delight the Ear than instruct the Mind, and apply my
self to Write the History of our Nation, as a Subject not only suitable to my
Age, and sufficient to Answer the Expectation of my Country Men; but deserving
great Commendation, and most fit to preserve ones Memory to succeeding Ages.
Amongst other Reasons, which I omit, they added, That though Britain be the
most Famous Island in the World, and every part of its History contain most
Remarkable Things; yet, scarce one was to be found in any Age, who durst
attempt so great a Work, or had acquitted himself, as the Subject deserved.
Neither was it the least Inducement to this Undertaking, that I hoped my pains
herein would not be unfitting for, nor unacceptable to, you. For it seemed to
me Absurd and Shameful, That You, who in this Your tender Age, have Read the
Histories of all Nations, and retain very many of them in Your Memory, should
only be a Stranger at Home. Besides, an incurable Distemper having made me
unfit to discharge, in Person, the Care of Your Instruction, committed to me, I
thought that sort of Writing, which tends to the Information of the Mind, would
best supply the want of my Attendance, and resolved to send You Faithful
Counselors from History, that you might make use of their Advice in Your
Deliberations, and imitate their Virtue in Your Actions. For there are amongst
Your Ancestors, Men Excellent in every Respect, of whom Posterity will never be
ashamed; and, to omit others, You will hardly find in History, any one Worthy
to be compared with our David. And if the Divine Goodness was so Liberal to
him, in those most wretched and wicked Times, we may with Reason hope, That You
may be (as the Royal Prophet says) A Pattern of all those Excellencies, which
Mothers desire in their Children, when they give them their best Wishes; and
that this Government, which seems to be hurried on to Ruin and Destruction, may
be supported, 'till the time shall come, when all Sublunary Things having
finished the Course appointed them by Gods Eternal Decree, shall arrive at
their designed Period.

Edinburgh, Aug. 30.
The LIFE of George Buchanan, Written by Himself, Two Years before His Death.
GEORGE BUCHANAN was Born in Lennox-Shire, (commonly called the Sheriffdom of
Dumbarton) in Scotland, Situate near the River, or Water of Blane, in the Year
of Our Lord One Thousand Five Hundred and Six, about the First Day of February*
in a Country Town within that Shire; of a Family rather Ancient than Rich. His
Father died of the Stone, in the Flower of his Age; whilst his Grandfather was
yet alive, who being a Spend-Thrift, their Family which was but low before, was
now reduced to almost the extremity of Want. Yet such was the frugal care of
his Mother, Agnes Heriot, that she brought up Five Sons and Three Daughters, to
Men's and Women's Estate. Of the Five Sons, George was One. His Uncle, James
Heriot, perceiving his promising Ingenuity in their own Country Schools, took
him from thence, and sent him to Paris. There he applied himself to his
Studies, and especially to Poetry, either having a Natural Genius that way; or
else, out of Necessity, (because 'twas the only Method of Study, propounded to
him, in his Youth.) Before he had been there Two Years, his Uncle Died, and he
himself fell dangerously Sick, and being in want beside, he was forced to
return into his own Country. After his return to Scotland, he spent almost an
year in taking care of his Health; then he went into the French Army of
Auxilliaries, newly arrived in Scotland, on purpose to obtain some Skill in the
Art Military. But that Expedition proving Fruitless, the Army retreated in a
very sharp and snowy Winter, so that he again relapsed into a Disease, which
confined him all that Winter to his Bed. Early in the Spring he was sent to St.
Andrews, to hear the Lectures of John Major, who, though very old, Read Logic,
or rather Sophistry, in that University. The Summer after, he accompanied him
into France, and there he fell into the Troubles of the Lutheran Sect, which
then began to increase: He struggled with the Difficulties of Providence,
almost Two Years, and at last was admitted into the Barbaran College, where he
was Grammar Professor, almost Three Years. During that time, Gilbert Kennedy,
Earl of Cassils, one of the young Scottish Nobles, being in that Country, was
much taken with his Ingenuity and Acquaintance, so that he entertained him for
Five Years, and brought him back with him into Scotland.

Afterward having a Mind to return to Paris to his old Studies, he was
detained by the King, and made Tutor to James his Natural Son. In the mean
time, an Elegy made by him, at leisure times, came into the Hands of the
Franciscans, wherein he Writes, That he was solicited in a Dream by St.
Francis, to join himself to his Order. In that Poem, there were one or two
Passages that reflected on them very sorely, which those Ghostly Fathers,
notwithstanding their Profession of Meekness and Humility, took more heinously,
than Men (having obtained such a Vogue for Piety among the vulgar) ought to
have done, upon so small an occasion of Offense. But finding no just Ground for
their immoderate Wrath and Fury, they had recourse to the common Crime of those
Days, which they objected to those they wished ill to, viz. The Cause of
Religion. Thus, whilst they indulged their Malice and Disgust, they made him,
who was not well affected to them before, a greater Enemy to their
Liceniousness, and rendered him more inclineable to the Lutheran Cause. In the
mean time, the King, with Magdalen his Wife, came from France, not without the
resentment of the Priesthood, who were afraid, that the Royal Lady, having been
bred up under her Aunt, the Queen of Navar, should attempt some Innovation in
Religion: But this fear soon vanished upon her Death, which followed shortly
after.

A while after, there arose some suspicions at Court against some of the
Nobility, who were thought to have conspired against the King, and, in that
matter, the King was persuaded, the Franciscans were somewhat concerned; so
that he Commanded Buchanan, who at that time was at Court, (tho he were
ignorant of the Disgusts, betwixt Him and that Order) to write a Satyr against
them. He was loath to offend either of them, and therefore, tho he made a Poem,
yet it was but short, and such as might admit of a doubtful Interpretation,
wherein he satisfied neither Party; not the King, who would have had a tart and
biting Invective; nor the Fathers, neither, who looked on it as a capital
Offense, to have any thing said of them, but what was Honorable. So that
receiving a Second Command to write more pungently against them, he began that
Miscellany, which now bears the Title of the Franciscan, and gave it to the
King. But shortly after, being made acquainted by his Friends at Court, that
Cardinal Beton sought his Life, and had offered the King a Sum of Money, as a
price for his Head, he escaped out of prison and fled for England. But there
also things were at such an uncertainty, that the very same Day, and almost
with one and the same Fire, the Men of Both Factions, ( Protestants and
Papists) were burnt together, Henry the Eighth, in his old Age, being more
intent on his own Security, than the Purity or Reformation of Religion. This
uncertainty of Affairs in England, seconded by his ancient Acquaintance with
the French, and the innate courtesy of that Nation, drew him again into France.

As soon as he came to Paris, he found Cardinal Beton his utter Enemy,
Ambassador there, so that to withdraw himself from his Fury, at the Invitation
of Andrew Goveanus he went to Bourdeaux. There he presided, and Taught Three
Years in the Schools, which were erected at the Public Cost; At that time he
wrote Four Tragedies, which were afterward occasionally Published; But that
which he wrote first, called the Baptist, was Printed last; and then the Medea
of Euripides. He wrote them in compliance with the Custom of the School, which
was to have a Play wrote once a Year, that so by acting of them, he might, as
much as he could calll back the French Youth from Allegories, with which they
then were overmuch delighted, to the Imitation of the Ancients. This Affair
succeeding, even almost beyond his Hope, he took more pains in compiling the
other Two Tragedies, called Iephthe and Alcestis, because, he thought, they
would fall under a severer scrutiny of the Learned. And yet, during this time,
he was not wholly free from Trouble, being harassed between the Menaces of the
Cardinal on the One side, and of the Franciscans on the Other. For the Cardinal
had wrote Letters to the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, to apprehend him; but,
providentially, those Letters were delivered to some of Buchanan's Friends.
However, the death of the King of Scots, and the Pestilence, which then reigned
over all Aquitain, dispelled that Fear.

In the interim, an Express came to Goveanus from the King of Portugal,
requiring him to come into that Kingdom, and to bring with him some Men,
Learned, both in the Greek and Latin Tongues, that they might Read the Liberal
Arts, and especially, the Principles of the Aristotelian Philosophy in those
Schools, which were then a Building, with a great deal of Cost and Expense.
Buchanan, being addressed to, easily assented to go for one. For, whereas he
saw that all Europe, besides, was either actually in Foreign or Domestique
Wars, or else suddenly likely so to be, that one Corner of the World, was, in
his Opinion, likeliest to be free from Tumults and Combustions: And besides,
his Companions in that Journey were such, that they seemed rather his
Acquaintance and Familiar Friends, than Strangers or Aliens to him. For many of
them had been his Intimates for several Years, and are well known to the World
by their Learned Works, as Nicolaus Gruchius, Gulielmus Garentaens, Iacobus
Tevius, and Elias Vinetus. Upon which account, he did not only join himself to
their Society, but also persuaded a Brother of his, called Patrick to be one of
so Illustrious a Society. And the Truth is, the matter succeeded excellently
well at the beginning, but the death of Andrew Goveanus, (which happened, as it
were, in the midst of our Race, and was mature enough for himself, but very
prejudicial to us) put a stop to its happy Progress. For, after his Decease,
all our Enemies, endeavored at first to ensnare us by Treachery, and soon
after, ran violently upon us, as it were with open Mouth; and their Agents and
Instruments being great Enemies to the Accused, they laid hold of Three of
them, and haled them to Prison; whence, after a long and nasty durance, they
were brought forth to their Answers; and, after many bitter Taunts, were
remanded to Prison again: and yet no Accuser did appear in Court against them.
As for Buchanan, they insulted most bitterly over him, as being a Stranger, and
knowing also, that he had very few Friends in that Country, who would either
rejoice in his Prosperity, sympathize with his Grief, or Revenge the Wrongs
offered to him. The Crimes laid to his Charge, was the Poem he wrote against
the Franciscans, which he himself before he went from France had deposited in
the hands of the King of Portugal, neither did his Accusers perfectly know what
it was: For he had given but one Copy of it to the King of Scots, by whose
Command he wrote it. They further objected, His eating of Flesh in Lent, tho
there be not a Man in all Spain, but uses the same Liberty: Besides, he had
given shrewd Girds against Monks, which yet none but Monks could well except
against.

Moreover, they took it much amiss, that, in a certain Familiar Discourse with
some young Portugal Gentlemn, upon mention made of the Eucharist, he should
affirm; That, in his Judgment Austin was more inclinable to the Party Condemned
by the Roman Church, in that Controversy. There were also other Witnesses
produced against him, (as, some years after, it came to his Knowledge) viz.
John Tolpin, a Norman, and John Ferrerius of Sub-Alpine Liguria; their
Testimony was, That they had heard from diverse Creditable Persons, That
Buchanan was not Orthodox, as to the Roman Faith and Religion.

But to return to the matter, after the Inquisitors had wearied both themselves
and him, for almost an year and a half; at last, that they might not seem to
have causelessly vexed a Man, of some Name and Note in the World, they shut him
up in a Monastery for some Months; there to be more exactly Disciplined and
Instructed by the Monks, who (to give them their due) were Men, otherwise, not
uncivil, or bad, though Ignorant of all Religion.

'Twas principally at this time, that he rendered most of David's Psalms, into
several sorts of Latin Meter. At last, he was set at Liberty, and suing for a
Pass, and Accommodations from the King, to return into France, he was desired
by him, to stay where he was, and he had a small parcel of Money bestowed upon
him for his daily Expense, till some better Provision might be made for his
Subsistence. But he, being tired out with delay, as being put off, to no
certain time, nor on any sure Grounds of hope, having got the opportunity of
Passage, in a Ship then Riding in the Bay of Lisbon, was wafted over into
England. He made no long abode in England, though fair offers were made him
there; for he saw that all things were in an Hurry and Combustion, under a very
young King, the Nobles at Variance one with another, and the Minds of the
Commons yet in a Ferment, upon the account of their Civil Combustions.
Whereupon he returned into France, about the time that the Siege of Metz was
raised. There he was, in a manner, compelled by his Friends, to Write a Poem
concerning that Siege; which he did, though somewhat unwillingly; because he
was loath to interfere with several of his Acquaintance, and especially with
Mellinus Sangelasius, who had composed a Learned and Elegant Poem, on that
Subject. From thence he was called over into Italy, by Charles de Cosse of
Brescia, who then managed matters with prosperous Success, in the Gallic and
Ligustic Countries about the Po: He abode with him and his Son Timoleon,
sometimes in Italy, and sometimes in France, the space of Five Years, till the
year of Christ One Thousand Five Hunderd and Sixty, the most part of which time
he spent in the Study of the Holy Scriptures, that so he might be able to make
a more exact Judgment of the Controversies in Religion, which in those days did
Exercise the greatest part of Men. It Is true, those disputes were somewhat
silenced in Scotland, when that Kingdom was freed from the Tyranny of the
Guises of France; so he returned thither, and entered himself into the Church
of Scotland.

Some of his Writings, in former times, being, as it were, Redeemed from a
Shipwreck, were Collected and Published by him: The rest of them, which are yet
in the Hands of his Friends, he commits to the disposal of Providence. At
present, being in the Seventy Fourth Year of his Age, he is in Attendance on
the Education of James the Sixth King of Scotland, to whom he was appointed
Tutor, in the Year One Thousand Five Hundred Sixty Five, where, being broken
with the Infirmities of old Age, he longs for the desired Haven of his Rest.

He departed this Life at Edinburgh, on the 28 th day of September, in the Year
of our Salvation One Thousand Five Hundred Eighty Two.

The Names of the KINGS of SCOTLAND.
I. FErgus I. page 95. II. Feritharis, p. 97. III. Mainus, p. 98. IV.
Dornadilla, Ibid. V. Nothatus, p. 98. VI. Reutherus, p. 99. VII. Reutha, p.
101. VIII. Thereus, Ibid. IX. Josina, Ibid. X. Finnanus, p. 102. XI. Durstus,
Ibid. XII. Evenus, p. 103. XIII. Gillus, ( Base Born) p. 104. XIV. Evenus II.
p. 105. XV. Ederus, p. 106. XVI. Evenus III. p. 107. XVII. Metallanus, Ibid.
XVIII. Caratacus, Ibid. XIX. Corbred I. p. 108. XX. Dardanus, Ibid. XXI.
Corbred II. Surnamed* Galdus, p. 109. XXII. Luctacus, p. 111. XXIII. Mogaldus,
p. 112. XXIV. Conarus, p. 113. XXV. Ethodius I. p. 116. XXVI. Satrael, p. 117.
XXVII. Donald I. Ibid. XXVIII. Ethodius II. p. 119. XXIX. Athirco, Ibid. XXX.
Nathalocus, p. 120. XXXI. ^indochus, p. 121. XXXII. Donald II. p. 122. XXXIII.
Donald III. p. 123. XXXIV. Crathilinthus, Ibid. XXXV. Fincormachus, p. 125.
XXXVI. Romachus, Ibid. XXXVII. Augusianus, p. 126. XXXVIII. Fethelmacus, p.
127. XXXIX. Eugenius I. Ibid. XL. Fergus II. p. 133. XLI. Eugenius II. p. 138.
XLII. Dongardus, p. 144. XLIII. Constantin I. p. 145. XLIV. Congallus I. p.
147. XLV. Goranus, p. 148. XLVI. Eugenius III. p. 154. XLVII. Congallus II. p.
155. XLVIII. Kinnatellus Ibid. XLIX. Aidanus, Ibid. L. Kenneth I. p. 158. LI.
Eugenius IV. Ibid. LII. Ferchard I. Ibid. LIII. Donald IV. p. 159. LIVE.
Ferchard II. p. 160. LV. Maldvinus, Ibid. LVI. Eugenius V. p. 161* LVII.
Eugenius VI. Ibid. LVIII. Amberkelethus, p. 162. LIX. Eugenius VII. Ibid. LX.
Mordacus, Ibid. LXI. Et^nus, p. 163. LXII. Eugenius VIII. Ibid. LXIII. Fergus
III. Ibid. LXIV. Solvathius, p. 164. LXV. Achaius, Ibid. LXVI. Congal^us III.
Ibid. LXVII. Dongal^us, Ibid. LXVIII. Alpinus, Ibid. LXIX. Kenneth II. p. 167.
LXX. Donald V. p. 172. LXXI. Constantin II. p. 174. LXXII. Ethus, p. 175.
LXXIII. Gregory, Ibid. LXXIV. Donald VI. p. 78. LXXV. Constantine III. p. 179.
LXXVI. Malcolm I. p. 18^. LXVII. Judulfus, Ibid. LXXVIII. Duffus, p. 182.
LXXIX. Culenus, p. 184. LXXX. Kenneth III. p. 187. LXXXI. Constantine IV.
Surnamed, The Bald. p. 196. LXXXII. Grimus, p. 19^. LXXXIII. Malcolm II. p.
200. LXXXIV. Donald VII. p. 207. LXXXV. Macbeth, p. 211. LXXXVI. Malcolm III.
p. 224. LXXXVII. Donald Banus VIII. p. 220. LXXXVIII. Duncan, Ibid. LXXXIX.
Edgar, p. 221. XC. Alexander I. Surnamed, Acer, Ibid. XCI. David I. p. 222.
XCII. Malcolm IV. p. 227. XCIII. William, p. 231. XCIV. Alexander II. p. 237.
XCV. Alexander III. p. 240. XCVI. John Baliol, p. 250. XCVII. Robert Bruce, p.
261. XCVIII. David II. p. 282. XCIX. Edward Baliol, p. 286. C. Robert II. p.
306. CI. Robert III. p. 223. CII. James I, p. 338. CIII. James II. p. 359. CIV.
James III. p. 396. CV. James IV. ( p. 1.) CVI. James V. ( p. 73.) CVII. Henry
Stuart, ( p. 28.) and Mary Stuart, ( p. 175.) CVIII. James VI. ( p. 214.)
THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK I.
WHen I first determined to Write the Famous Achievements of our Ancestors,
and, after I had purged them from the mixture of vain Fables, to vindicate them
from oblivion; I thought it conducive to my purpose, to repeat from the very
beginning, The Authors design.
(as much as so long a distance of Time; and first the scarcity, then the loss,
of Learned Monuments, would permit,) What the situation of the Countries were;
What was the nature of the Soil and Air; What were the ancient Names and
Manners, More Islands than one anciently called Britanny.

The situation of Britanny. Albion and Ireland two of the biggest of them.


and Who were the first Inhabitants, of the Islands, called of old, Britanny;
which are extended between Spain and Germany, in a long Tract of Land toward
France. Albion and Ireland, Two of them, do far exceed the rest in Bigness, and
therefore of these Two I shall speak first; afterward, as convenience serves,
I will explain the site and the Names of the rest.

The first, for bigness, is Albion, That now alone retains the Name of Britain,
which was heretofore common to them all. Albion.
Concerning its breadth and length, other Writers do, in effect, agree with
Caesar, namely, Its length and breadth.
that the length of it from North to South is 800 miles; and the breadth, where
it is widest, which is (as some think) where it looks toward France; or, (as
others say) from the point of St. David's in South Wales, to Yarmouth in
Norfolk, almost 200 miles; From thence it narrows by degrees, till we come to
the borders of Scotland. The Romans, who, as yet, knew not the furthest parts
thereof, believed the Island to be Triangular, but when they proceeded a little
further, It was accounted Triangular by the Romans.
they found, that beyond Adrian's Wall, it extended it self broader by degrees,
and ran out far toward the North-East. This in brief, concerning its bigness.

The Climate of Britain is more temperate than That of France, as Caesar
affirms, but the Climate of I^eland i^ milder than them both. The Air thereof
is seldom clear, but commonly darkened with thick Mists, The Air.
the Winters are mild enough, rather Rainy than Snowy. The Soil brings forth
Corn plentifully, The Soil.
and, besides Corn, it produces all sorts of Metals. It is also very fruitful
in Breeds of Cattle. They, who inhabit the extreme parts of the Islands, which
are more infested with cold, The Food of some of its Inhabitants, in old time.
do eat Bread made of Oatmeal; and, for Drink, they use a Wine or Strong Liquor
made of Corn steeped into Malt: Some do boil Whey, and keep it in Hogsheads
under Ground for some months, which is counted, by many of them, not only an
wholesome, but a very pleasant, Drink. There was no Controversy concerning the
Name of Britain amongst the Ancients, except that the Greeks called it
Brettania, the Latins, Britannia. Other Nations have their Appellation of it,
some one, some 'tother, at their pleasure. But of late some Men have started
up, not so much desirous of Truth as of Contention, who hoped to make
themselves Famous by Carping at other Eminent Persons; for they imagined, that
they must needs obtain a great opinion of Learning amongst the Vulgar, who
dared to enter the Lists against, and to Combat with, all Antiquity; And
though the Dispute were of a thing of no great consequence, yet, because it
concerned the very name of their Country, they thought it worth contending for,
with all their might, as if all the Ancient Glory of the whole Nation had lain
at stake. They say, Its ancient Names, Three, (according to some) Prudania,
Prytaneia, and Britannia.
that three ancient Names of the Island have their several Assertors, viz.
Prudania, Prytaneia, and Britannia. Lud contends with might and main for
Prudania; Thomas Eliot, a British Knight, for Prytaneia, but very modestly;
almost all other Nations do retain the Name of Britain.

Lud, to maintain his Assertion for Prudania, uses the Authority of a certain
old Paper-Fragment, (...) or L^^yd, and (...), Two W^ite^s (...) British
Antiqui^ie^, in Hen. 8. and Queen Eliz. Reigns.
which rust, mouldiness, and length of time (and nothing else,) have almost
made Sacred, with him. Though he counts that proof firm enough of it self, yet he
strengthens it by Etymology; by the Songs of the Bards; by the custom of the
Country-Speech; and by the venerable rust of Antiquity. But, in the first
place, I ask him; Whence came that Fragment, on which he lays the stress and
weight of his Cause? Prudania. Lud or (...) Authority disall^wed of, and why.
When was it writ? Who was the Author of it? Or, what says it, that makes for
his Assertion? Concerning the Name, the Time, the Author, all these (may he
perhaps allege,) are uncertain, which proves, (he thinks) the Antiquity
thereof. An Excellent Proof, indeed! where the Certainty, Credit and Authority
of the Testimony does depend on Ignorance, Meanness, and Obscurity; And that
which is assumed to explain the matter in controversy, has more intricacy and
weakness in it, than the Cause, which it is brought to maintain* Who then gives
Testimony in this case? I know not, (says he.) What then does he pretend to in
lieu of a Testimony? I know not that neither, (replies (...)) but this I have
heard, that, in that Fragment, it is called Prudania. But, prithee, tell me,
what is that Prudania? Is it a Mountain, or a River? A Village, or a Town? A
Man, or a Woman? Here I am posed too, (says he;) but, I conjecture, that
Britain is signified by that Name. Go too, then, let Prudania signify Britain.
Yet what does this thy Fragment make for thee? I would ask this Question of
thee* Whether it affirms Prudania to be the true Name of the Island, or else
does not rather upbraid their Ignorance, who ascribe that false Name to it?
Here too I am Nonplust, (says Lud*) but this I am certain of, that here is the
sound of a British word, and the force of the British Language does appear,
even in the very (...) thereof. For Prudania is, as it were, Prud^ania, which
is in British Excellent Beauty, from P^^d, signifying Beauty, and Came, White:
The asperity of the Word being somewhat mollified. But for that reason, it
should be called Prudcamia, not Prudania, which Word the Bards do pronounce
Pruda, in their Country Speech. ^
I shall not here speak, how trivial, deceitful, and oftentimes ridiculous,
this Enquiry after the Original of Words is. I pass by Varro, and other Learned
Men, (...) Words.
who have been often derided upon this account: I omit also the whole Cratylus
of Plato, wherein he is guilty of the same fault. I will only affirm this,
that, before equal Judges, a Man may more easily prove, that the Word Cambr^ is
derived from Canis and Brutum, a Dog and a Brute, than you shall persuade me,
that Prudania comes from Prudcamia. For by this means you may derive Quidlibet
^ Quolibet, as you please. And indeed, Lud himself shows, what little
confidence he puts in his own proofs, when he calls in the Bards to his Aid, a
race of Men, I grant indeed, very ancient, ^
but yet Antiquity affirms, they committed nothing to Writing. But of these I
shall speak more elsewhere.

Let us now come to the last refuge of Lud: Caesar, says he, who first
mentioned the Name of this Island in Latin, called it Britain, whose Steps
almost all Latin Writers having trod in, did not change the said Name. Here Lud
begins with a Notorious mistake; That Caesar was the first of the Latins, who
called it by the Name of Britain; for, before ever Caesar was born, Lucretius
(...) Aristotle (...) the Name o^ Britain.
Lucretius makes mention of Britain; and Aristotle, amongst the Greeks, long
before him; and Propertius, not long after Caesar, when he says Cogor and in
Tabula pictos ediscere Mundos, Prope^^^^^.

I am compelled in a M^p,
To learn the pictured World's Shape,
shows thereby, that, in his Age, the Description of the World in Maps, was
wont to be fastened to the Walls of Men's Houses: I would ask your self, Sir, do
you indeed think, that Caesar, ^
who was so well-skilled in all sorts of Learning, did never see the
Description of the World? Or, can you be persuaded, that the Island of Britain
alone, the greatest in the whole World, then so famous both in the Latin and
Greek Monuments, was omitted in those Maps? Or, do you believe, that Caesar,
who was so inquisitive to know the Affairs of Britain, as, What Men did Inhabit
that Country, then, and before his time; What Animals and Plants did grow, or
were bred, therein; What were the Laws and Customs of the Country, do you, I
say, believe, that he, who had been so solicitous about those things, would
have neglected to set down the Name of the whole Island? Or, that he, who, with
so great Faithfulness and Diligence, gave right Names to the Cities of the
Gauls, would deprive the Britains of their Ancient Glory? Upon the whole, I see
no reason at all, why Lud should think, that the old Name of the Island was
Prudania, (for he values himself much on the account of this Title,) unless
Words do also contract Antiquity from the rust of a Worm-eaten Paper. This is
all I have to say against Lud, at present, who by homebred Witnesses, and by
his own Dreams together, has thought fit to oppose himself against the current
verdict of all the Learned Men, that now are, or ever have been, in the World.

E^iot's Authority disallowed.
As for Sir Thomas Eliot, my task will be easier with him; he, being induced not
only by probable conjectures, but also by some, not obscure, Authors, thinks,
that the Island was sometimes called Prytaneia. Prytaneia.
He judged it not improbable, that an Island abounding with plenty of all
things, not only for the Necessities, but even the very Ornaments, of Life,
should be so called. In this case, if we should weigh the reason of Names,
Sicily might be rather called Prytaneia, and some other Islands also, which
are, as more Fruitful, so far less in compass, than Britain. Besides, in those
Authors, by whose Testimony the Name Prytaneia is confirmed, it easily appears,
that the Orthography is vitiated. Stephanus.
As for Stephanus, there is the highest inconstancy in him. In the Word Albion,
he says, that That is the Island of Brettain, following Martian therein, as he
alleges. In the Words Invernia and Inverna, it is writ Praetanica. Elsewhere,
says he, in the Ocean are the Brettish Islands, whose Inhabitants are called,
Brettains. Martian and Ptolomy.
But Martian and Ptolomy, in these Words, make P the first Letter; if any one
compare the places, without doubt, he will find, that the Writing is corrupted,
and that Stephanus himself was of opinion, that Brettania ought to be writ by B
the first Letter, and two tt's. Eliot, I believe, was not ignorant of this, and
therefore, being content to advise his Reader, as much as he thought fit, what
things Men, greedy of Praise, will scrape together for the Ostentation of their
Learning, he leaves the matter in dispute entirely to his Judgment. But* Lud,
that you may know his disposition more fully, of the Three Names of this large
Island, approves That most, which has the fewest Assertors, viz. Prudania;
next to that, he commends Pry^aneia. But he rejects Britannia, which Name was
now famous thr^^gh all Nations, and celebrated both in Greek and Latin
Monumen^^, (as Pliny affirms,) as corrupted by Julius Caesar, and that a long
time after, whom he falsely affirms, (as has been said) to have first
mentioned the Name of Britannia in Latin, and that he drew others with him into
the same Error. But I can prove the Antiquity of the Word Britannia, by many
clear and ample Testimonies, i^ that were the matter in dispute; and that it
was not corrupted by Cae^ar, but delivered down to us, pure from Hand to Hand,
by our Ancestors, save that the Ancients were wont to write it with a double T.
T. (Brittania;) And therefore it was, as I suppose, that Lucretius made the
first syllable of the word Bretain long in Verse; but now the Latins leave out
one T, which is still retained in the word Britto. The Greeks, who write
Brittania, come nearest to the Pronunciation of the Country-Speech, which the
Britains themselves, and all their Neighbors, do yet retain. For the
Neighboring Gauls call all British Women Brettae; and Bretter, with them, is
to speak British; and a Promontory in Aquitania is commonly called
Cape-Bretton; and both sorts of Scots, (i. e.) both the Albians, and the
Hibernians, do so speak; only with this difference, that they who do delight in
the German Dialect, do sometimes use the Transposition of Letters, and
pronounce Berton for Breton. But Dyonysius Af^r in that Verse.

(...). Where, mentioning the Bretanes to inhabit near the cold Surges of the
Ocean, in putting away one T, in the word (...), he has used a Poetical
Liberty, (as he has also done in the word (...) for (...),) by eliding the
Letter. Here the consent of so many Nations, almost from the very beginning,
both among themselves, and with the Ancients, both Greeks and Latins, shall be
of greater account with me, than all the Hodgepodge Trash of Lud, raked by him
out of the Dunghill, on purpose to be ridiculed, and preserved only for
ignominy; and, though they have a confident Patron, to urge them to give in a
false Testimony against Antiquity, yet they have not yet dared, to appear, as
it were, in open Court. Let him show, if he can, what Author ever wrote
Prudania, before Aristotle: Let him turn and wind himself, as he please, he
will never be able to do it; seeing, some Ages after Aristotle, it is certain,
That the Bards committed nothing to Writing. Away then with that (shall I say?
Bards committed nothing to Writing.
) vainglorious, or not rather witless, Boast of Antiquity, of which no
Argument, no Footstep, no nor the least Print of any, can be found.

Amidst this disagreement of Opinions, and the diverse manners and customs of
Speech; Lud thinks it most advisable, always to look to Antiquity, and the
Country-manner of Speech, as a Pole Star, and, by That, to direct the whole
course of his Language: For my part, I would not much dissent from him, if
that, which was in ancient use, and therefore thought certain, might be always
observed and kept. Ancient words cannot always be observed, and Why?
But there are several Reasons why that cannot be done.

First, Because, in every Language, it is very difficult to find out the it is
hard to find the Origin of old Words.
Original Words; and therefore it is more advisable, in this case, to follow
the Custom of the Learned, than by a vain and ridiculous Labor, always to
search after Originals, as after the Which was unknown to the Ancients, but
later Inquiries have found it out.
Fountain of Nilus, especially, since the Original of Words depends not on the
Judgment of the Wiser sort, but on the pleasure of the Vulgar, who, for the
most part, are rude and incult, and therefore anxiously to inquire after their
Judgments, is a piece of needless Curiosity; and, if you should find out what
they mean, it would not be worth your Labor. For, as in the Generation of all
other Things, which either grow naturally of themselves, or else are invented
by Men for the use of Life; the First Embryo's are very imperfect, and come
forth less acceptable, not only for Use, but even for Sight; yet afterward, by
Culture, they wax gentle, and are made amiable by due Treatment: '^is so in
Language, which, taking its first Rise from Men rude and impolite, came forth
harsh, rugged, and uncouth; then, by use, it gradually puts off its natural
Horror and Unpleasantness, becoming more gentle and sweeter to the Ear, and
more easily insinuating into the mind of Man. And therefore, in this case, (if
in any case at all) I think something is to be indulged to the Custom of Men
more polite than others; and that such a pleasure, which is neither uncomely
nor ungraceful, as far as it is not hurtful to Men's Manners, is not to be
despised. But if any one be born under such an ill Constellation, that he
rather affects the Language of Cato and Ennius, than of Cicero and Terence; and
when Corn is found out, yet had rather feed on Mast still, my Vote is, Much
good may it do him. But this our present dispute is not concerning the Purity
and Elegancy of the Latin Tongue, for it nothing affects It, to know, how the
Britains did heretofore sound forth their Letters or Words: My whole endeavor
is, to show, how the Latins pronounced the British, not how the British
pronounced the Latin, Tongue. For my part, I had rather be ignorant of the
doting Fables of the old Britains, than to forget that little of the Latin
Tongue, which I imbibed, when I was a Youth. And there is no other cause, why I
take it less in disdain, that the old i. e. The Language of the Highlanders.
Scottish Language does by degrees decay, than that, thereby, I joyfully
perceive those barbarous Sounds, by little and little, to vanish away, and, in
their place, the sweetness of Latin Words to succeed: And in this
Transmigration of Languages, if one must needs yield to another, Good-now, of
the Two, let us pass from Rusticity and Barbarism, to Culture and Humanity;
and, by our Choice and Judgment, let us put off that uncouthness which accrued
to us by the Infelicity of our Birth. And if our Pains and Industry can avail
any thing in this case, let us bestow them all this way, viz. To polish, as
much as we can, the Greek and Latin Tongues, which the better part of the World
has publicly received; and, if there be any Soloecisms or Flaws sticking
thereto, from the Contagion of Barbarous Languages, let us do what we can to
purge them away.

Besides, this over-anxious diligence about Foreign Names, especicially in
transferring them into another Language, can never be kept, neither is it
expedient that it should: For what Language has not these Letters and Sounds,
which cannot fully be expressed by the Characters of another Tongue? What
Nation, besides the German, can pronounce the Letter The Letter W. hard to be
pronounced, but by those that Germanize.
W? Who can give that sound to the Letters D. G. P. T. X. and Z. in Latin,
which the Spaniards, the Britains, and part of the Scots, do?

Because of this absurdity of Sound, as I suppose, it is, that Pliny.
Pliny, reckoning up the Cities of Spain, denies, that some of them can be well
pronounced in the Latin Tongue: Some he calls Ignoble, and of Barbarous
Appellation; Others, he says, cannot be so much as named without grating the
Ear. What, I beseech you, would Lud do in this case, if he were to write the
History of Britain in Latin? With all his rust of Barbarism, I believe, he
would scarce know how to pronouce the Genuine Names of the Brittons. For seeing
he vexes himself so much how he should write Lud, either Lhuyd, or Llud, or
else bare Ludd, neither of which can be writ, pronounced, or heard amongst
Latinists without regret. If he retains the true Sound, he will make not a
Latin, but a Semi-Barbarous Oration. But if he bend Foreign Words to the sound
of the Latin, he will commit as great a Trespass, as Caesar is said to have
done in the Word Britannus. What then shall we do, to please so captious and so
morose a Person, as Llud? Shall we call the Island Prudania, rather than
Britannia? Lud himself, who is so severe a Censor of others, will not exact
this of us: He will permit it to be called Prudania, from Pruda. But if any one
dare to pronounce and call it Britannia, or Brettannia, he will lay about him,
and accuse him presently of violating Sacred Antiquity, of corrupting and
contaminating the Ancient and Sincere Language; and, from a Robust and
Masculine sound, of turning it into an Effeminate and soft Pronunciation. What
shall we do in this case? Is it lawful for us to change or cleanse any Word
from the uncouthness of its ancient Deformity? Or, if we may not change, yet,
pray, may we not polish some rough Words, and incline them a little from their
incult Barbarity, that they may become more acceptable to Men's Ears? As we see
our Ancestors have done in the Words M^rini, M^rem^r^^a, Arm^rici.
Morini, Moremarusa, and Armorici; so that if we cannot make those Words
Latin-Denizons, yet at least, we may imitate the Garb and Similitude of the
Latin, in them. But, I see, Lud will not allow us that Liberty. He calls us
back to the August Antiquity of the Prudany's, and forbids us to divert in the
least from Bards and Sanachys. But the Ancient Greeks and Latins were never so
straitlaced: For, after that the rigor of their Ancient Speech began a little
to remit, there was none amongst them, who had rather pronounce Famul and
Volup, than the Words which were substituted in their rooms; and they used a
very great Liberty in Translating Latin Words from Greek, and Greek from Latin.
Whoever blamed the Latins, for turning Polydences into Pollux, Heracleis into
Hercules, Asclepios into Aesculapius? Or, who has reproved the Greeks, for
calling Catulus, Catlus; and Remus, Romus? Nay, What did the Greeks do, in
Translating Barbarous Words into their own Language? Did they ever make any
scruple to turn Al, a Punick Termination, into As, in the end of Words? If a
Man pronounce Annibas for Annibal, must he (forsooth) presently tread under
foot the Majesty of all History? Must he be said to corrupt the Truth, or to do
a Notorious Injury to the Punick Language? See, how the desire of Humanity and
Culture, which was amongst the Ancient Saxons, and the Danes, who passed over
later into Britain, does differ from this Immanity, and affected Slovenliness,
of Lud! They, being rude and ignorant of all Learning, when they came to Men
barbarous, and of a stammering Speech, were so far from suffering themselves to
be infected with their Soloecisms; that, on the contrary, when they had once
tasted of the sweetness of the Latin Tongue, they pared off much of the
roughness which they had brought upon it: They so smoothed some harsh Words, as
to make them less offensive to the Ear, Oxonia and Roffa, for Oxonfordia and
Raufchestria; i. e. O^f^rd and Rochester.
such as are Oxonia and Roffa, for Oxonfordia and Raufchestria, and many
others, Lud himself not contradicting. And he allows himself the same Liberty
in many other Words, though he be so severe an Exactor in this one Word
Britannia. But now, he does pertinaciously contend against the Ancient Custom
of all Nations, for a new, obscure, and uncertain Word. Sure it is, that the
Royal Name of Lud, of a Danish Original, and kept as a Palladium to this very
Day, may not be buried in Oblivion. To prevent which, Lud manages a Contest
against the consent of the Multitude, the Antiquity of Time, and even against
Truth it self.

There is yet also another Observation in the Word The Word Britannia has
diverse Acceptations.
Britannia, That Foreign Writers make it the Name of the whole Island; but the
Britains and English, who have wrote the British History, sometimes agree with
Foreign Writers, in their Appellation of it; and sometimes they call only that
part of the Island Britain, which was a Roman Province; and that variously too,
as the event of War changed the Borders; sometimes they made the Wall of The
Walls of Adrian and Severus.
Adrian, sometimes That of Severus, to be the Limits to their Empire: The rest,
which were without those Walls, they sometimes termed Barbarous, Bid.
sometimes Outlandish, People. Bid, in the beginning of his first Book, writes
thus: Wherefore the Picts, coming into Britain, began to Inhabit the North Part
of the Island; for the Britans Inhabited the South. He says also, Chap. 34.
Aidan was King of the Scots, who Inhabit Britain. And Lib. 4. Chap. 4. writing
of the return of Colman out of England into Scotland, he says, In the mean time
Colman, who was of Scotland, leaving Britain: And elsewhere, Then they began
for many Days, to come from the Country of Scotland into Britain. And farther,
Oswald was slain near the Wall that the Romans had built, from Sea to Sea, to
defend Britain, and to repel the Assaults of the Barbarians. Claudian.
The same Form of Speech is found in the same Author, Lib. 2. Chap. 9. Claudian
does not seem to be ignorant of this manner of Speech, peculiar to the
Britains, when he writes, That the Roman Legion, which curbed the Fierce Scot,
lay between the Britains; i. e. opposite to the Scots, that it might cover the
Britains from their Fury, in the farthest part of England, and Borders of
Scotland. William of Malmsbury and Geoffry of Monmouth.
William of Malmsbury, and Geoffry of Monmouth, none of the obscurest Writers
of British Affairs, do often use this kind of Speech, in whom a Man may easily
take Notice, that That only is called Britain, which is contained within the
Wall of Severus. Though this matter be so clear to them, than no Man can be
ignorant of it, yet it has produced great mistakes amongst the Writers of the
next Age, what some have affirmed in their Works, i. e. That Alured, Athelstan,
and some other of the Saxon Kings, did sometimes Reign over the whole Island,
when yet, it is clear, they never passed beyond the Wall of Severus. For when
they Read, That they held the Empire of all Britain, they presently thought,
that the whole Island was possessed by them.

Neither is the Observation much unlike, in the use of those Names Britannus
and Britto; Britannus and Britto.
for all the old Greek and Latin Writers ca^l the whole Island Britannia, and
all its Inhabitants Britains, without any distinction. The first, that I know,
of the Romans, who called them Brittons, was Martial, in that Verse, B^itton,
first (...) by Marti^l.
Quam veteres bracchae Brittonis pauperis. Slop-Breeche^, or Galagaskin^.

-- The old Trouses of Britton poor.


The Vulgar commonly call the Inhabitants of the Gallick Peninsule, Brittons,
though Gregory Bishop of Tour^.
Turonensis always calls it Britain, Brittons in France.
and its Inhabitants Britains. The Romans do constantly call their Provincials
Britains, though their Provincials themselves like the Name of Brittons well
enough. Both Names have one Original, viz. Britannia: and, as they both flow
from one Root, so they both signify one and the same thing. And that the
Verses of Auson. Epigr. 109. etc.
Ausonius the Poet do plainly show.

This Epigram was made by the Poet against one Si^vius, Surnamed Bonus, or
Little-Britain in France, (...) whom he had a (...) (and, it seems, against the
whole Nation of the Britains for his sake.) He takes an occasion to (...) him
from the Ambiguity of his Surname Bonus* which signifies also good in Latin,
and (by the Figure Antiphrasis) evil, as here sometimes it is taken. This
Author makes it a D^decastich, whereas later Interpreters have divided it into
Six Distich^, (but all of one Subject) according to the Poets mind, expressed
in the First of them. They are not here quoted for the Sarcasms contained
therein, (and therefore are not over-curiously Translated,) but only to show,
that, in this Poets time, (who lived under Gratian the Emperor, about Anno
Christi 390. Britto and Britannus were Terms Synonymus.
Silvius ille bonus, qui carmina nostra lacessit:
Nostra magis meruit disticha Britto bonus.
It Is Silvius Bonus, whom my Disticks blame;
But Britto Bonus were his Prop'rer Name.
Silvius hic bonus est. Quis Silvius? Iste Britannus.
Aut Britto hic non est Silvius, aut mal^s est.
Silvius is good. What Silvius? The Britain.
Silvius no Britton is, or a bad one.
Silvius esse Bonus Britto, ferturque Britannus,
Quis credat civem degenerass^ lonum?
Silvius Bonus, a Britan or Britton,
How he degen'rates from good Denizon.
Nemo bonus Britto est. Si simplex Silvius esse
Incipiat, simplex desinet esse bonus.
No Britton's good: If Silvius 'gin to be
Simple, simple and good do not agree.
Silvius hic bonus est: Sed Britto est Silvius idem.
Simplicior res est dicere, Britto malus.
Silvius is Bonus: Yet a Britton still.
It Is plainer Phrase to say, the Britton's ill.
Silvi, Britto Bonus, quamvis homo non bonus esse
Ferris, nec se quit jungere The Printed Books read Britto and homo, which is
scarce sense; and therefore Vinecus has amended it, Britto bono; and so I have
Englished this last Distich.
Britto bono.
O Silvius, bonny Britton, but bad Man;
Britton and good, together join, who can?
They who contend, that the Britains were a Colony of the Gauls, do say, that
Hercules begat a Son on Celto, a Gallick Virgin, called Britannus, from whom
the Nation of the Britains had their Original. Pliny places this Nation near
to the A People of Gallia-Belgica, lying betwixt the River Lie and the S^^me,
in West-Flanders, (as some write,) not far from Bollogne, Ypre, and St. Omers.
Their chief City was called Teroven, now but a small Village.
Morini, the Inhabitants of Artois.
Atrebates, and the Inhabitants about Bollogne, or betwixt Bollogne and Calais.
Gessor^aci. Neither are there wanting some Greek Grammarians to confirm it; as
Suidas, and he who wrote the Book called Etymologi^um Magnum. C. I^lius Caesar,
and C. Cornelius Tacitus, seem to have been of the same Opinion; and so do
other Latin Writers also, not unlearned, yet not so famous as those two.
Besides, the Religion, Speech, Institutions and Manners of some Nations,
inhabiting near the Gallick Sea, do evince the same thing; out of which the
Britains seem to me to have been exhausted by Transmigrations; and the Morini
by little and little to have been quite extinguished. The Word Morinus seems to
draw its Etymology from More, in old Celtick, is the Sea.
More, which, in the old Gallick Tongue, signifies the Sea. Venta, called in
old Latin, Venta Belgarum, (because Inhabited by the Gallo-Belgae) i. e.
Winchester; and Inhabitants of Essex, as Lud; or rather of Suff^lk, Norfolk,
Cambridge, and Huntington, as Camden and Leland.
Icenum derived from Calais, a^ some; but Witsand, ^by the Plandrians called
Isten, and Esse^,) a Port betwixt Calais and Bollogn^, in which some Footsteps
of the word Iconi do appear, as others.
Icium, these Names make it very probable, that their Colonies Transported with
them into a Foreign Soil their own Country Terms in the place of a Surname; and
at their very entrance, meeting with the Britains, whom they acknowledged to be
their Offspring, they brought them home, and did, as it were, entertain them
at their own Houses. For Morinus amongst the old Gauls, signifies Near the Sea.
Marinus: And Moremarusa, Mare Mortuum: Though Gorropius has almost stolen from
us those two last Names, whilst he is studious to extol his People of Dowar, as
some, of Brabant and Bosleduc, as others; and of Namur, as diverse say.
Advatic^ beyond measure. Neither can the People of Little-Britain in France,
to the West of Normandy.
Aremorici, or Armorici, deny that they are of our Stock; for we have ample and
clear Testimonies, both old and new, as Pledges thereof. Because Ar, or Are, is
an old Gallick Preposition, which signifies At, or Upon; as if we should say,
At or Upon the Sea; i. e. Maritime. And Moremarusa is derived from More, i. e.
Mare, the Sea, the last Syllable being long, after the manner of a Greek
Participle. As for Aremorica, or Armorica, (he which shall not know them at
first hearing, is wholly ignorant of the old Gallick Tongue) they also signify
Maritime, and so Strabo Interprets them, who in Greek always renders them
Dwellers near the Sea.
Ap^ceanita Caesar writes thus of the Armori^ks, Lib. 5. That great F^^ces of
the Gauls, out of the Cities called Armoricae, were gathered together to oppose
him. The Dead Sea.
And Lib. 7. Out of all the Cities near the Ocean, which, according to their
Custom, are called Armoricae. And Lib. 8. And the other Cities situate in the
extreme parts of France, near the Sea, called Armoricae. As often as Caesar
makes mention of these Cities, he always adds, Which are so called; but he so
adds it, that it rather seems an Epithet, or Surname of a place, than its
proper Name. Neither is That found to be the Name of a City in any other
Authentic Writer; yet that Word is spread far and near in that Coast, viz.
from Spain to the Rhene: And amongst all Writers, I find Pliny alone to seem
not to understand the force of the Word; for he thinks, that all Gascoigne, or
Guienne, of which Bourdeaux is the chief City.
Aquitain was sometimes so called. But enough of it at present, more may be
said of the Gallick Tongue hereafter.

The most Ancient Name of the Island is thought to be Albion; or, as Aristotle,
or rather Theophrastus, in the Book Entitled, De Mundo, writes it Albion, o^
Albium, the Ancient Name of this Isl^nd.
Albium. But that Name is rather taken out of Books, than used in common
Speech, unless amongst the old Scots, who, as yet, call themselves Albinick,
and their Country Albin. Many think, that the Name was imposed on it, because
the White Rocks did first appear to them, as they Sailed from France. But it
seems to be very absurd to me, to fetch the Original of a British Name from the
Latins, there being then so rare a Commerce between Barbarous Nations. Others
are of Opinion, That the Name was imposed by Albion, the Fabulous Son of
Neptune,
Albion the Son of Neptune, whom they feign to have been sometimes King of
Britain: A bold Fiction, and having no ground from Antiquity to support it; yet
some are not ashamed to name the Kingdom so, upon so weak a Foundation as That
of a near Appellation. For I see no other Foundation in History, which might
occasion this Fable. Amongst the Greeks, it is true, Diodorus Siculus and Strabo
have made mention of Albion and As also B^rgion.
Bergion; of the Latins, Cato, Hyginus, and Mela, from whom we may gather, That
Albion and Bergion, the Sons of Neptune, being Liguria was anciently a Country
lying betwixt the Po in Italy, and the Rhos^^ in France.
Ligurians, infested the Highways with Robberies, which lead from the Country
of the A People living in the Skirts of the Alps.
Albicans into Italy. These Men, when Hercules, after he had Conquered G^ryon,
was returning out of Spain, sought to Rob him of his Prey, and maintained so
sharp a Fight with him, that he, being almost desperate, (as old Story says,)
was forced to implore the Aid of Jupiter, who sent down a shower of Stones, to
relieve his Son; and that the Field of Stones remained to Posterity as a
Testimony of that Fight. I will not deny, but that both the Island, and the
Robber too, took its Name from Album signifies High, as well as White.
Album. But this I say, That Album was a common Name amongst many Nations, and
that it signified, with them, not only Color, but Height too. And Festus
Pompeius affirms, that what the Latins call Alba, the Sabins call Alpa, from
whence the Alps had their Name, because they are white with continual Snow. For
my part, as I assent concerning the one, that Album and Alpum were Synonymous
amongst the Ancients, and I have the Authority not of Festus only, but of
Strabo also, to support my Opinion; so I also judge, the Alps were so called,
rather from their Height, than their Whiteness. My Reasons are, First, Because
Alba is the Name of many Cities in Italy, France and Spain, which are all
situate on Hills, or near them: And besides, because Strabo acknowledges, that
those Names, Alba, Alpa, Alpia, Albionia, Albici, without any difference, are
derived from the same Root, in the Signification of Height; and therefore he
shows, That they are most used, where the Alps begin to grow high. Hence, in
Liguria, there is Albinga, under the C^^^eses.
Albingaunum, and Ventimiglid, belonging also to the Republic of Genoua.
Albium Inti^elium; and among the A People made up of Gauls and Illyrians,
whose Possessions reached down to the Adriatic Sea, near Istria.
Iapodes, there is an high Hill, where the Alps do end. There are other Places,
which may seem to be named from their height. In Italy there is the River
Til^^r.
Albula, rising in the Mountains of Etruria, and the Waters called Albulae
flowing down from the Tiburtine Mountains. In Gallia Narbonensis there are the
Albici, a Mountainous People. In Germany there is the River Elbe.
Albis, arising from the Mountains of Bohemia. In Asia, the River Cohan.
Albanus flows down from Mount Cauc^sus, and the Albanians dwell about the same
Mountain. By which Instances, it will appear to be a Truth, That Album is not a
Word of one, but many Nations, and in all the Places which I have named, their
height does not render them always, or unchangeably, White; yea, some Months
they are not White at all. The Names of the Ligurian Giants do also confirm
this Conjecture, Albion and Bergion, both of them, as I judge, being named from
their Talness. What the Ancients thought of the Word Album, I have said enough.
That the Germans call Berg, in the German Language signifies High.
High, Berg, is known to all: And there is a place in Pliny that shows, it was
anciently used in the same sense amongst the Gauls, in his Third Book, which I
am of Opinion must be thus read; Whence Cato affirms, the Bergomates, a People
of Bergamo in Italy, now under the Venetian.
Bergomates to have had their Original, they discover themselves by their Names
to be situated more highly, than happily; Therefore Albion and Bergion, Men, it
seems, far taller than their Neighbors, in confidence of their Strength, did
commit Robberies in those Coasts of Liguria, whom Hercules, traveling that
way, subdued by force of Arms. But none of the Ancients ever affirmed, That
they Reigned in Britain, and the then State of the Gallick Affairs makes it
very improbable, that it should be so; and it is likely, that the State of
Britain was not much more quiet; in which Land, the Great Albion left a Famous
Kingdom, that he might play the Robber at Home. But I, though I do not much
differ from their Opinion, who assert, That Albion was so called from Album, so
I think, the occasion of the Name was not from the Color, but from the Height,
of the Mountains: They, who imposed that Britain, why called Albion.
Name, were, I believe, something inclined thereunto by comparing England with
Ireland, there being but a Narrow Sea between Them: For they seeing one Shore
to be altogether Mountainous, and the other depressed, level, and spread into
Campaign or open Fields, they called the first Albion, from its height: But
whether they gave any Name to the second, from its low Situation, the Length of
Time, and the Negligence of the Inhabitants in Recording Ancient Affairs, has
made uncertain. Besides, this also adds Strength to my Opinion, That the Name
of the Island, derived from Album, whether Albion, or Albium, as yet
pertinaciously remains in The Name Albion is still retained in part of Scotland.
Scotland, as in its Native Soil; neither could it ever be extirpated there,
notwithstanding so many Mutations of Inhabitants, Kingdoms, Languages, and the
Vicissitude of other things. These things seem true, or at least probable, to
me; yet if any Man can inform me better, I will easily be of his Opinion.

Hitherto of the Ancient Names of the Island: The next thing, is, To explain
the The Situation of the several Counties ^n Albion, described by English
Writers.
Situation of the Countries. The English Writers have plainly and clearly
enough described their own several Counties: But Hector Boethius blamed.
Hector Boethius, in his Description of Scotland, has delivered some things not
so true, and he has drawn others into Mistakes, whilst he was over-credulous
of those, to whom he committed the Inquiry after Matters, and so Published
their Opinions, rather than the Truth. But I shall briefly touch at those
things which I am assured of, and those which seem obscure and less true, I
will correct as well as I can.

England, how divided.
England, as far as concerns our present purpose, is most conveniently divided
by Four Rivers, Two running into the Irish Sea viz. Dee and Severne; and Two
into the German Sea, i. e. Thames and Humber. Between Dee and Severne lies
Wales, being distinguished into Now only into two, viz. North and South Wales;
for Pembroke-Shi^e, with part of its adjacent Counties, heretofore called
West-Wal^s, is now counted part of South Wales.
Three several Regions. Between Severne and Thames, lies all that part of
England, which is opposite to France. The Countries interjacent between Thames
and Humber, make the Third Part; and the Countries reaching from Humber and
Dee, to Scotland, make up the Fourth.

But The Situation of Scotland, and the several Counties thereof.
Scotland is divided from England, first, by the River Tweed; then, by the high
Mountain Cheviot; and where the Mountain fails, then by a Wall or Trench newly
made, and afterward by the Rivers Eske and Solway. Within those Bounds, from
the Scottish Sea to the Irish, the Counties lies in this Order. First, Merch.
M^rch, in which the English do now possess Berwick, situate on the left side
of the Tweed. On the East it is bounded with the Firth of Forth. On the South,
with England. On the West, on both sides the River Tweed, lies Tiviotdale* or
Tividale.
Tiviotdale, taking its Name from the River Tiviot: It is divided from England
by the Cheviot-Hills. After this, lie three Counties not very great, Lyddisdail.
Liddisdail, Eusedail.
Eusedail, and Eskdail.
Eskdail, being so called of three Rivers, which have a near Appellation, viz.
Lidal, Eve, and Eske. The last is Annandale.
Annandale, taking its Name from the River Annand, which divides it almost in
the middle, and, near to Solway, runs into the Irish Sea.

Now to return again to Forth, or the Scottish Sea.
Forth, on the East it is bounded by Lothian. Cockburnes Path, and
Lamormoore-Hills do divide it from Merch. Then, bending a little to the West,
it touches Lauderdale and Twedale.
Lauderdale and Twedale; the one so called from the Town Lauder; the other from
the River Tweed, dividing it in the middle. Liddisdale, Nithisdale, and
Clidesdale.
Liddisdale, Nithisdale, and Clidesdale, do border on Twedale on the South and
West. The River Nith gives Name to Nithsdale, running through it into the Irish
Sea. Lothian, whence so called.
Lothian was so named from Lothus, King of the Picts. On the North-East it is
bounded with the Forth, or Scottish Sea, and it looks toward Clidesdale on the
South-West. This Country does far excel all the rest, in the Civility of its
Inhabitants, and in plenty of all things for the use of Life. It is Watered
with five Rivers, ^ine, both the Eskes, (which before they fall into the Sea,
join in one Chanel,) Leith and Almond. These Rivers, arising partly from the
Lamormoore-Hills, and partly from Pentland-Hills, disgorge themselves into the
Firth of Forth. Lothian contains these Towns, Dunbar, Hadington, Dalkeith,
Edinburgh in Lothian.
Edinburgh, Leith, and Linlithgoe. More to the West, lies Clidsdale divided.
Clidsdale on both sides the River Clid, which, by Reason of its length, is
divided into two Prefectures or Sheriffwicks. In the uppermost of them there is
an Hill, not very high, yet out of it, Rivers run into three diverse Seas, Tweed
into the Scottish, Annand into the Irish, and Clyd into the Deucaledonian-Seas.
The most eminent Cities in it, are Lanerick and Glasgo. Kyle.
Kyle on the South-west is adjoining to it; Beyond Kyle is Galloway. Galloway.
It is separated from Nithsdale by the River Clyd, bending almost wholly to the
South, and by its Shore that remaining part of Scotland is also covered.

It is all more fruitful in Cattle, than Corn; it has these Rivers running
into the Irish Sea, Ure or Ore, Dee, Kenn, Cree, and Luss; it has scarce any
great Mountains, but only some small Hills, in it; between which, the Water,
stagnant in the Valleys, makes abundance of Lakes, by which, in the first
Showers, after the Autumnal Aequinox, the Rivers are increased, which bring
down an incredible quantity of Eeles, Abundance of Eels taken.
which the Inhabitants take in Weels made of Osier Twigs, and, salting them,
get no small Profit thereby. Mul of Galloway.
The Boundary of that side is the Mul of Galloway, under which, in the mouth of
the River Lus, is a Bay, which Ptolomy calls Now Glenluce.
Rerigonius. The Bay commonly called Loch-Rian, and, by Ptolomy, Vidogara,
flows into it on the other side from the Firth of Clyd. The Land running
betwixt those Bays, the Inhabitants do call Rinns, Rinns. of Galloway. Nonantum.
(i. e.) the edge of Galloway: They also call Nonantum, the Mul, (i. e.) the
Beak, or Jaw. But the whole Country is called Galloway (for Gallovid, in old
Scottish, signifies a Gaul.)

Carrick.
Below Loch-Rian, on the Back side of Galloway, there lies Carrick-Bailiery,
gently declining to the Firth of Clyd. Two Rivers pass through it, Stinsiar and
Girvan, both of them having many pleasant Villages on their Banks. Between the
Rivers, there are some small Hills, fruitful for Pasture, and not unfit for
Corn: It Is all not only self-sufficient with Land and Sea-Commodities, but it
also supplies its Neighbors with many Necessaries. The River Down separates it
from Kyle, Kyle.
which arises from a Lake of the same Name, wherein is an Island, with a small
Castle. Kyle follows next, bordering upon Galloway on the South, and on the
North East, on Clydsdale; on the West it is separated from Cuningham by the
River Irwyn: The River Air divides it in the middle. Near it is situated Air,
Air.
a Town well traded; the Country in general abounds more with valiant Men, than
with Corn or Cattle; for the Soil is poor and sandy, and that sharpens the
Industry of the Inhabitants; and their Parsimony confirms the Strength both of
their Bodies and Minds. Cuningham.
After Air, Cuningham runs on to the North, and does, as it were, justle out
and streighten the Clyd, and brings it into the compass but of a moderate
River. The Name of the Country is Danish, and, in that Language, signifies the
King's House, which is an Argument, Renfrew.
That the Danes did sometimes possess it. Next is Renfrew, situate at the
Eastern Coast thereof, so called from a little Town, wherein they were wont to
celebrate their Conventions, it is commonly called the Barony of Renfrew. Two
Rivers, both of them called Carth, White Carth. and Black Carth. Clydsdale.
divide it in the midst. After the Barony of Renfrew, Clydsdale is stretched
out on both sides of the River Clyd, and, in regard of its largeness, is
divided into many Jurisdictions. It pours out many famous Rivers; on the left
hand, Even and Duglass, which run into Clyd; and on the right, another River
called Even, which divides Lothian from Sterlingshire. These two Currents take
the common Appellation of Rivers, instead of a proper Name, as, in Wales, the
River called Avon does, in a diverse Dialect. The River Ev^n or Avon separates
the County of Sterling on the South, Sterling.
from Lothian; on the East, the Firth of Forth, unti^ at last, being lesned, it
is reduced to the just magnitude of a River, and admits a passable Bridge near
Sterling. There is but one memorable River which divides this Country, called
Carron-Water, Carron-water.
near which there are some ancient Monuments. On the left hand of Carron, there
are two small Hills or Barrows, made of Earth by Man's hand, (as the thing it
self shows) commonly called Duni pacis, Duni pacis, Emblems of Pe^^e.
(i. e.) Emblems of Reconciliation. But about two Miles lower, on the same
River, there is a round Edifice made without any Lime, but so formed with sharp
Stones, that part of the upper Stone is, as it were, Mortassed into the lower,
so that the whole Work, mutually conjoined, sustains it self with the weight of
the Stones, from top to bottom, growing narrower and narrower by Degrees. The
top of it is open: The common People have several Fancies, according to their
diverse Humors, A strange Edifice.
concerning the Use and Author of this Structure. For my part, I once
conjectured, That it was a Temple of the God Terminus, which, they say, was
wont to be built round and open at top; And the Duni pacis near adjoining
seemed somewhat to strengthen my Conjecture, as if a Peace had been made there,
of which these Hills are a Monument, because there the Romans terminated the
Bounds of their Jurisdiction and Empire; neither could any thing have altered
my Opinion, unless I had been informed by creditable persons, That, in a
certain Island, there are many Edifices in other respects like the Structure
which I have spoken of, but that they are greater, and not so compact. There
are also two Chapels in Ross of the like shape. These things made me suspend my
Opinion, and to judge that these were Monuments or Trophies of some famous
Deeds, placed, as it were, at the fag-end of the World, that they might be
preserved from the Injury and Fury of Enemies. But whether these were Trophies,
or (as some think) Sepulchers of famous Men, I believe they were Monuments
consecrated to be perpetuated to Posterity, but built by rude and unskilful
Workmen, after the similitude of the Temple erected at Carron. On the right
side of Carron, the Ground is generally plain and level, only* there is a
little Hill in it, almost in the mid-space between the Duni pacis and the
Temple or Chapel; and therein, at the bending of the Angle, the Footsteps of an
ancient City do yet appear. But the Foundation of the Walls, and the
description of the Streets, partly by reason of Countrymens Plowing up the
Ground, and partly, by plucking out the square Stones to build some Rich Men's
Houses thereabouts, are quite blended and confused. English Bid expressly calls
this place Guidi, Guidi.
and places it in the very Angle of the Wall of Severus. Besides him, many
famous Roman Writers make mention of this Wall; yea, several footsteps thereof
do yet appear, and many Stones are dug out, with Inscriptions containing a
Gratulation of Safety and Victory, received by the Centurions and Tribunes of
the Romans, or else some Funeral Epitaphs are engraven therein. And seeing the
Wall of Severus is seldom less distant than 100 Miles from Adrian's Wall,
Adrian's Wall built before Severus's.
(as the Remains of both do show) which was built by him before; English
Writers betray their great Ignorance, either in not understanding the Latins,
who have delivered these things down to us; or else their Carelessness, who have
wrote that so confusedly, which is so plainly recorded: However it be, the
thing is worthy, if not of a sharp Reprehension, yet of a light Admonition, at
least; especially, since by the Monuments lately spoken of, and by Bede's
English History too, it plainly appears, That there was sometimes the Boundary
betwixt the Britains and the Scots. Maldon not in Scotland, but in Essex.
But those who fancy Maldon to be situate here, are the same Men, who affirm,
That the Chapel or Structure we spoke of, was the Temple of Claudius Caesar;
but they are hugely mistaken in both, seeing Maldon, a Colony of the Romans, is
above 300 Miles distant from that place, if we may believe Ptolomy, and the
Itinerary of Antoninus. Cornelius Tacitus does plainly confute this their
mistake, as in all his other Narrations, so especially, when he says, that the
Romans having lost Maldon, fled to the Temple of Claudius Caesar for safety.
But that Structure, whether it were a Chapel or Temple of Terminus, or else a
Monument of some other thing, having no Doors, nor sign of any, and being open
also at top, for the casting in of Stones, can scarce contain, much less
shelter, Ten Soldiers. Moreover, about 40 Years after the Expedition of Julius
Caesar into Britain, Julius Agricola.
Julius Agricola was the first of the Roman Generals who penetrated with his
Army into those parts; Besides, Adrian also, 50 Years after Agricola, settled
the Bounds of the Roman Province, Adrian's Wall, where?
between the Rivers Tine and Eske, by making a Wall, of which, diverse Footsteps
in many places do yet remain. But Septimius Severus, about the Year of our Lord
210, entering into Britain, Severus's Wall, now Grames Dike, where?
built a Wall 100 Miles beyond the Limits made by Adrian, from the Firth of
Clyd to the Conflux of Forth and Avon, of which, many clear and evident Tokens
yet remain. Besides, we never read in ancient Writings, that the chief Seat of
the Picts was at Maldon, Abernethy, once the Royal Sent of the Picts, then St.
Andrews.
but at Abernethy; there was their Royal, and also Episcopal, Seat, which was
afterward translated to St. Andrews. And if it be demanded, what moved the
Romans to draw a Colony thither, and how they maintained it in a Soil so
barren, and (at that time) woody, uncultivated, and obnoxious to the daily
injuries of the fiercest of their Enemies; I suppose, they will answer, (for I
see not what else they can say, thereto) that it was supplied from the Sea, for
then Ships came up to the very Gates of the City, tho against the stream of
Carron-Water. If that were true, then the Grounds lying on both sides the
Forth, must needs be overwhelmed with the inundations of the Ocean, and must
therefore be barren, which alone, in that Tract, ought to have born Corn. But
this is yet a more difficult Question; That seeing the Seawater did run on
both sides the Forth, why the Romans did not there make their Boundary-Wall,
rather than unnecessarily carry it many Miles further?

Lennox.
Beyond the County of Sterling lies Lennox, divided from the Barony of Renfrew
by Clyd, and from the County of Glasgow by the River Kelvin; from the County of
Sterling by Mountains, and from the Stewarty of Menteath by the Forth; Menteath.
at length it is terminated in the Mountain Grampius, or Grantsbain, at the
foot of which, through an hollow Valley, Loch-Lomund spreads it self,
Loch-Lomund.
which is 24 Miles long, and 8 broad; it contains above 24 Islands; besides a
multitude of other Fishes, it has some of a peculiar kind, very pleasant to
eat, they call them Pollacks. At length, Pollacks, an unusual Fish.
breaking out toward the South, it pours out the River Levin, giving Name to
the whole Country, and near the Castle of Dumbarton, and a Town of the same
Name, falls into Clyd. The furthermost Hills of Mount Grampius, do heighten the
extreme parts of Lennox, Mount Grampius. Loch-Ger. Loch-Long.
being divided by a small Bay of the Sea, called Loch-Ger, from its shortness.
Beyond that, there is a Bay much larger, called Loch-Long, from the River Long,
falling into it; That is the Boundary between Lennox and Cowel. Cowel it self,
Argyle and Knapdale are divided into many parts, Cowel. Argyle. Knapdale.
by reason of several narrow Bays of the Sea running down into them, from the
Firth of Clyd: There is one Bay, or Loch, more eminent than the rest, among,
them called Loch-Finn, Loch-Finn.
obtaining its Name from the River Finn, which it receives into it; it is above
60 Miles in length. There is also in Knapdale a Loch called Loch-Awe, Loch-Awe.
in which there is a small Island, and a Castle, that is fortified. The River
Awe, or Owe, issues out from that Loch, which is the only River in that
Country, that empties it self into the Deucaledonian Sea.

Beyond Knapdale, to the South-West, there runs out Cantyre; i. e. Cantyre.
The Head of the Country; it stands over against Ireland, from which it is
divided but by a Narrow Sea: It is not so Broad, as it is Long; and it is
joined to Knapdale by so Narrow an Isthmus, or Neck of Land, that it is scarce
a Mile over; A Narrow Neck of Land joins Cantyre to Knapdale. Birlings a small
sort of Se^-Vessels.
and that space too is nothing but Sand, so plain and level, that sometimes
Seamen, to make their Voyages shorter, do hale their small Vessels, called
Birlings, over it, from one side of Loch-Tarbet to the other.

Lorn touches Knapdale, it borders immediately on Argyle, and reaches as far as
the Country of Abyr, commonly called Loch-Abyr: It is a plain Country, and not
unfruitful; Lorn or Laern.
where the Mountain Granzeben, or the Grampian-Hills, run from Aberdeen in the
North, to Dunbarton in the West.
Grampius is lowest, and more passable, that Country is called Braid-Albin.
Braid-Albin, which is as much as to say, The highest part of Scotland; and
where the loftiest Pic, or Top, of all is, that is called Drum-Albin.
Drum-Albin, i. e. The Back of Scotland, and not without cause; for from that
Back, there run down Rivers into both Seas, some into the North or German,
others into the South or Deucaledonian Sea. For from Loch-Earn.
Loch-Earn it pours out the River Earn, toward the South-East, which falls
into the River Tay, about three Miles below Perth. From this River, the Country
called in Highland, or old Scots, Language, Strath-Earn.
Strath-Earn, takes it Name, being situate on both sides of its Banks. For the
Highlanders use to call a Country, lying at the fall of Rivers, Strat, wha^.
Strat. Between the Mountains of this Country and the Forth, lies the Stewarty
of Menteath.
Menteath, taking its Name from the River Teath, which runs through the middle
of it. Next to Menteath stand the Mountains called Ocel-Hills.
Ocel-Hills, a great part of which, as also of the Country lying at the Foot of
them, is reckoned within the Stewarty of Strath-Earn; but the rest of the
Country, even unto the Forth* Man's Ambition has divided into several
Stewarties, as the Stewarty of Clacman, Culross, and Kinross, Stewarties.
Clacman, of Clacman, Culross, and Kinross, Stewarties.
Culross, and of Clacman, Culross, and Kinross, Stewarties.
Kinross. From these Stewarties and the Ocel-Hills, all the Country lying
between the Forth and the Tay, grows narrow like a Wedge, Eastward even to the
Sea; and it is all called by one Name Fife.
Fife, a Country self-sufficient with all necessaries for the use of Life: It
is broadest where Loch-Leven, and the River It arises out of Loch-Leven, and
falls into the Forth at the Town of Leven.
Leven, running through it, do divide it; and from thence it narrows on each
side, till you come to the Town of Or Creal, on the East point of Fife.
Cara^l* it sends forth but one remarkable River, and that is called Leven. Its
whole shore is stored with abundance of Towns, of which the most remarkable,
for the Study of the Arts is St. Andrews heretofore called Fanum Reguli, an
University.
St. Andrews, which the Highlanders call Fanum Reguli: More to the Inland,
almost in the middle of the County, lies Cowper, the Shire-Town of Fife
Cowper, the Shire or Assize Town, whither the rest of the Inhabitants of Fife
do come for the Administration of Justice. Where it touches Strath-Earn stands
the Town of Abernethy, anciently the Royal Seat of of the Picts.
Abernethy, the Ancient Royal Seat of the Picts. Here the River Earn falls into
the Tay.

As for the Tay, the greatest River in Scotland.
Tay it self, that breaks out from Loch-Tay Twenty four Miles long.
Loch-Tay, which is in Braid-Albin; (a Loch Twenty Four Miles long) it is
without question the greatest River in Scotland; for winding about toward the
Grampian-Hills, it touches upon Athol.
Athol a fruitful Country, situate in the very Woody Passages of Mount
Grampius. That part thereof, which is extended into a Plain, at the Foot of the
Mountain, is called the Blare of Athol.
Blare of Athol, which Word signifies a Soil devoid of Trees.

Below Athol, on the Right side of the River Tay, stands the Town of Caledonia,
i. e. Dunkel, or Dunkelden, Why so called?
Caledonia, which yet retains its Ancient Name, though vulgarly called
Dunkelden, (i. e.) an Hill full of Hasel-Trees. For those Trees, growing thick
in such unmanured places, and shadowing the Country, like a Wood, gave Name
both to the Town, and also to the People thereabouts. For the Caledons, or
Caledonians, heretofore one of the famousest Nations amongst the Britains, made
up one part of the Kingdom of the Picts, as we may be informed by Ammianus
Marcellinus divides the Picts into Caledons and Vecturions.
Ammianus Marcellinus, who divides the Picts into Two Tribes; i. e. The
Caledones and the Vecturiones, though at this Day there is hardly any Footstep
left of either of those Two Names.

Twelve Miles below Dunkelden, on the same Right Hand Bank of the Tay, stands
Perth on the South of Tay, called St. Iohnston's, from St. John the Evangelist,
its Patron.
Perth, otherwise called St. Iohnstons. And on the Left-Bank of the Tay, below
Athol, toward the East, stands Gowry-land is the farthest East-point of
Perthshire; the Plain thereof is called the Carss of Gowry, and the Hilly part
the Brae of Gowry.
Gowry, a County abounding with rich Cornfieldsd.

Below Gowry, between the Tay and the Esk, is extended Angus, called also
Aeneia, Horestia, and Forestia.
Angus, or, as the Highlanders call it, Aeneia; some call it Horestia, or,
according to the English Dialect, Forestia. In it there are these two Cities,
Wherein there was an Abbey near the Water Ila.
Cowper, and that which Boethius, to gratify his Countrymen, ambitiously calls
The Gift of God.
Deidonum, but, I think, the old Name thereof was Dundee called Taodunum, and
why?
Taodunum, i. e. Dundee, from Dune, i. e. an Hill situated by the River Tay;
for at the Foot of that Hill the Town is built.

Fourteen Miles beyond the Tay, in a direct Line along the Shore, we meet with
the Town of It stands near the Sea, on a little Brook in Angus, called Br^th^ck.
Aberbrothock, sometimes called Abrinca. Then follows the Promontory, called
Redhead, or Reedhead.
Red-Head, which shows it self at a very great distance. The River South-Esk
runs through the middle of Angus; and the North-Esk divides it from the Mearns.
The Called the Sheriffdom of Mearns, lying betwixt Dye and North-Esk.
Mearns is, for the most part, a plain and level Country, till it touches
Mount Grampius, beyond the little Town of Fordun, and Dunotter, a Castle
belonging to the Earls of Marshal: Then it grows lower and lower, declining
toward the Sea. Beyond Mearn, toward the North, is the River Or Dee.
Die, commonly called Diemouth; and about a Mile beyond it, is the River It
arises in Strathdon, the Hilly part of Mar^, and falls into the German Sea, at
old Aberdene.
Don. Upon the one, there stands Aberdene, standing on the Don; and Aberdee,
standing on the Dee, or Dye, now both called Old and New Aberdene.
Aberdone, a Town famous for Salmon-Fishing; and upon the other, stands
Aberdene, standing on the Don; and Aberdee, standing on the Dee, or Dye, now
both called Old and New Aberdene.
Aberdee, (for so it is called in old Records) where the Bishops-See is, and
also a Flourishing University: But now adays both Towns are distinguished only
by the Names of Old and New Aberdene, standing on the Don; and Aberdee,
standing on the Dee, or Dye, now both called Old and New Aberdene.
Aberdene.

From this narrow Front, between those two Rivers, begins Mar, has the German
Ocean on the East; Dee, on the South; Badenach, on the West; and Bam^^shire, on
the North.
Mar, which growing wider and wider by degrees, extends it self 60 Miles in
length, even unto Badenach. Or Baden^ck, a continued Ridge of Hills.
Badenach is all full of Hills and Mountains, which sends forth Rivers into
both Seas.

Called Loch-Abyr, from a little Loch lying in the midst of a shaking Bog, over
against Enver-Loc^ie, or, as some call it, Inner-lochie.
Abyr borders upon Badenach, it declines gently toward the Deucaledonian Sea;
a Country (for a Scottish one) very much abounding with all Land and
Sea-Commodities: As it is fruitful in Corn and Pasture, so it is also very
pleasant by reason of its shadowy Groves, and the delightful Fountains, Brooks
and Rivulets, which glide along through it. As for the Multitude of Fish,
hardly any County in Scotland can compare therewith: For, besides the plenty of
Fresh Water Fish, which so many Rivers do afford, the Sea also contributes its
Dole of Salt Water ones; piercing, in a long Chanel, through the level part of
the Country, and there being somewhat curbed and pent in by the higher boundary
of the Land, for some space, at length it diffuses and spreads it self abroad
again, representing the form of a Mere, or rather Loch. Hence it is called Abyr;
i. e. in our Country Language, A Road for Ships: They give also the same Name
to the Country thereabouts; those that affect to speak after the English mode
call both, i. e. That Bay of the Sea, and the Country too, Loch-Abyr, but
mistakingly and without ground. These three Counties The three Counties of
Loch-Abyr, Badenach, and Mar, comprehend the Breadth of Scotland betwixt both
Seas.
Abyr, Badenach and Mar, do take up all the breadth of Scotland between the two
Seas, the Deucaledonian and the German.

On the North, next to Mar, stands Buchan abounds with Salmon.
Buchan, divided from it by the River Don; it stretches out it self farthest
of any County in Scotland, into the German Sea: It Is Rich in Pasture, and in a
good breed of Sheep; and is able to maintain it self with all Conveniences for
the support of Life. The Rivers in it abound with Salmon; and yet (which is
strange) there is one of its Rivers, called The Water of Ratra, in Buchan, has
no Salmon in it.
Ratra, that has not a Salmon in it. On the Shore of Ratra, there is a strange
kind of An unusual Cave, turning Water into Stone.
Cave, the Nature whereof I cannot pass over in silence. The Water therein
drops down from a natural Vault or Arch, and is turned into Pyramids of Stone,
insomuch that if Men did not cleanse it ever and anon, the whole space, to the
very Roof, would be quickly petrified and filled up. The Stone thus concreted
is of a middle Nature, between Stone and Ice; for it is friable, and never
arrives at the hardness and solidity of Marble. When I was at The like Cave at
Toulouse in Languedoc^:
Toulouse, about the Year of our Lord 1544. I was informed by creditable
Persons, that there was a Cave in the Neighboring Pyrenaean Hills, altogether
like This in Scotland.

Beyond Buchan to the North, lie two small Counties, South of Bamss on the
Seacoast.
Boin and E^^y, lying on the South of the Spey.
A^^y, which reach to the River Spey, that separates them from Murray. As for
the River Or Spey, it waters Badenach and S^r^th-Spey, and falls into the
German Ocean near G^rm^ch.
Spey, That has its rise in the ridge of Hills in Badenach, of which I have
made mention before; and not far from the Fountain thereof, is a Loch-L^uch.
Loch, which sends forth a River called Lochty, or rather Lo^chty.
Lochtee, which roles it self into the West-Sea. At the Mouth thereof (as they
say) there was once a Noble Town, called Or, Env^r-Lochty, standing on the
West Side of the Mouth of the River Lochty, in Loch-Abyr.
Inner-Locht^e, borrowing its Name from the Loch aforesaid. The Truth is, if
you consider the Nature of the Neighboring Soil, and the convenience of
Transporting and Carriadge by Sea, it is a place very fit for a Mart-Town: And
our Ancient Kings, tempted and invited by those conveniences, made their abode
there for some Ages, in the Castle of A Castle on an high Rock in Lorn, of old
the Habitation of the Scotch Kings.
Evonia, which some do falsely persuade themselves to be Evonia is not
Dunstafnage.
Dunstafnage; For the Rubbish and Ruins of that Castle are yet to be seen in
Lorn. There are some small Counties, lying betwixt Buchan and the West-Sea, but
having scarce any thing remarkable in them, I shall not waste time to describe
them.

Beyond the Spey, even unto the River Ness, there follows Mu^r^y-Land, some
call it M^^r^eff land, from More, the Sea, and Rie^^, ^ent
Murray, heretofore (as it is thought) called Varar. Between those two Rivers,
(the Spey and the Ness) the German Ocean does (as it were) drive the Land
backward to the West, and so, with a vast Bay, does abridge the largeness
thereof. This whole Country (for the higness of it) abounds with Corn and
Pasturage; but as for Pleasantness, and the profit arising from Fruit-bearing
Trees, it bears away the Bell from all the other Countries in Scotland. It has
two Eminent Towns in it, Elgin and Inverness: A Chief Town in Murr^y, within
four Miles of the Sea.
Elgin stands on the River L^ssie, and as yet retains its Ancient Name. O^
Enverness, on the South Side of the Ness, where it falls into Murray Firth.
Innerness is situate by the River Ness, which issues out of It is a narrow and
deep Loch, arising near the West-Sea, in Glendulphin; the Water thereof never
freezeth, perhaps because encompassed with high Rocks and Mountains, which keep
off the severity of the cold Air.
Loch-Ness, a Loch 24 Miles long; the Water thereof is almost always warm, and
all the year long it is never so Cold as to Freeze; yea, in the sharpest Winter
that is, if Flakes of Ice are conveyed into it, they will quickly be thawed by
the warmth of its Waters.

Beyond Loch-Ness toward the West, there are only Where Scotland is narrowest;
i. e. but 8 Miles broad between Loch and Loch, or Sea and Sea.
eight Miles of Continent, interjacent* so small a Portion of Ground hinders
the Conjunction of the two Seas, and consequently the making of the rest of
Scotland an Island; for all that space of Land, which lies betwixt that narrow
Neck and the Deucaledonian Sea, is cut off from the rest by several Bays of the
Sea, breaking into it.

That part of the Country, which lies beyond Loch-N^s^, and those narrow
Streights, or Neck of Land, beforementioned, is wont to be divided into four
Provinces or Shires, viz. Ross, Strath-Navern, Sutherland, and Caithness; [
(...) by the mist^ke of the (...); for the whole of it is mentioned by and by,
in its prop^r pl^ce.
Navern, or, as commonly called, Strath-Navern, taking its Name from the River
Navern] Beyond the Mouth of Ness, where it disembogues it self into the German
Sea, lies R^^s is a Shire that extends it self, cross ways* from the Eas^, to
the Wes^, Sea, which no County in Scotland does, besides.
Ross, which runs out into the Sea with very high Promontories, as the Name it
self shows, for Ross, in the Scottish Dialect, signifies a Promontory. This
Province has more of Length, than Breadth, in it, for it reaches from the
German, quite home to the Caledonian, Sea: Where it is Mountainous, it is barren
and untilled; but the Plains thereof scarce yield to any part of Scotland for
Fruitfulness. It has also many pleasant Valleys in it, which are Watered with
Rivers, full of Fish, together with several Lochs, well-stored with Fish. But
the greatest of them all is Loch-Loubrun. From the Deucaledonian Sea, the Shore
grows somewhat narrower, and turns back toward the North-East: From the
opposite Shore, the German Sea, making its way between the Clefts of high
Rocks, within Land, expands it self into a spacious Bay, which affords a safe
Harbor, and Road, for Ships, against all Storms; for the Passage into it is
not dangerous, and when you are once entered, even the greatest Ships, that are,
may be secure from all Injury of Wind and Weather.

At the farthest point of Ross, toward the North, lies Navern, or (...).
Navern, so called from the River It a^ise (...) Sutherland, and running s^rait
North, frames Loch-Navern, and falls into the Deucaledonian Sea at Inver-Na^a,
or Inn^^-Navern, as some call it, West of Vervedrum, or Strath^-Ho^d.
Navern, which the Vulgar, following the Propriety of their Country Speech,
call It a^ise (...) Sutherland, and running s^rait North, frames Loch-Navern,
and falls into the Deucaledonian Sea at Inver-Na^a, or Inn^^-Navern, as some
call it, West of Vervedrum, or Strath^-Ho^d.
Strath-Navern. Ross bounds it on the South; The Deucaledonian Sea washes it,
West and North; And on the East it reaches to Caithness.

A Name given it by the P^cts, as some think: It has Assin-Shire also to the
West of it.
Sutherland is so interjected between the three last mentioned Provinces, that
it borders on them All, and, in some Quarter or other, touches them all: For on
the West of it lies Strath-Navern; On the South and East, Ross; And on the
North, Caithness. The Inhabitants thereof, according to the Nature of the Soil,
are more given to Pasturage than Tillage. I know no remarkable thing in it,
save only that it has some Mountains of White Marble in Sutherland.
Mountains of White Marble, (a rare Miracle, in so cold a Country) which yet
are of little or no use to the Inhabitants, because That luxuriant Humor,
which affects Curiosity, has not yet reached to this Place.

Caithness, the most Northern Shire in Scotland.
Caithness is the last Province of Scotland, toward the North, in which Coast
Strath-Navern also meets It. These Two Counties do contract the Breadth of
Scotland into a narrow Front. In that Front, there are Three high Promontories:
The highest of them all is in Strath-Navern, which Ptolomy calls Farrow-Head,
is the farthest North-West point of Scotland, lying in the small
Edar-da-cheules.
Orca, or Tarvedrum, now Farrow-Head, is the farthest North-West point of
Scotland, lying in the small Edar-da-cheules.
Farrow-Head; The other Two are in Caithness, but not so high as the former; i.
e. Vervedrum, now called Because Strathy-Head is, by some, reckoned to be in
Strath-Navern, not in Caithness, therefore they make Hoia to be the Hill of Hoy
in Caithness, which has a Fountain at Top, and, at its Bottom, bubbles forth a
River, that runs to the Town of Wick in Caithness, the usual Port for Ships to
and from the Orcades.
Hoia, i. e. Strathy-Head; and Betubium, (Dunsbey-Head) falsely called by Hector
Boethius, Dume; some call it Duncans-Bei, from which word, some Letters being
subtracted, the word Duns-Bei seems to be derived. At the Foot of the Hill
there is a small Bay, which little Vessels, coming from the Orcades, use as an
Haven or Port. For a Bay of the Sea is there called Bei. And this Creek, or
Bay, being called by the Neighboring Inhabitants the Bei of Duncan, or Donach;
from both those words conjoined, the Country Language has formed or Dungisby.
Dunis-Bei.

In this Tract, Ptolomy places the The Cornavii in Caithness in Scotland, and
in Cornwall in England, too.
Cornavii, (or Caithness-men) some Footsteps of which Name do yet remain, for
they commonly call the Castle of the Earls of Caithness, Now Castle Sinclare.
Gernico; for those whom Ptolomy, and other Foreiners call Cornavii, the
Britains call Kernici. And seeing he places the Cornavii, not in this Tract
only, but even in a far distant part of the Island, viz. Cornwall in England*
they who retain the old British Speech, do yet call the same persons, Kernici:
And, perhaps, it is no absurd conjecture, to imagine, that the Cornovalli are so
called for Kernicovalli, Who?
Kernicovalli, (i. e.) the Kernic-Gauls, yea, in the very midst of the Island,
some footsteps, tho obscure ones, of the Name seem to have remained. Forbid
writes, that the beginning of the Wall of Severus was not far distant from the
Monastery of Kebercurnig.
Kebercurnig; whereas there is now no sign of a Monastery in those parts; but
there remains not far from thence, the halfe-ruined Castle of the Duglasses,
called Abrecorn, or Abercorn.
Abrecorn: Whether both of those words, or only one of them, be corrupted from
Kernicus, I leave to the Reader to judge.

It remains now, that I speak something concerning the Islands of Scotland,
(which Part of the British History is involved with abundance of mistakes.) But
omitting the Ancients, who have delivered nothing certain on this Subject, I
shall only insist on what the Writers of our times have, more truly and
plainly, acquainted us with. Of all the Islands, which do, as it were, begirt
Scotland, they make three The Islands of Scotland divided into three ranks,
with their several Names. viz. 1st. Western, 2. Orcades, or Orkny, 3 Schetland,
Isles.

Classes or Ranks, The Western, the Orcades, and the Zealandish, or Shetland,
Islands.

Those are called the Western-Isles, called Hebrides, Aemodae, and Aebudae.
Western Isles, which lve between Scotland and Ireland, on the West of
Scotland, in the Deucaledonian Sea, and do reach almost to the Isles of Orkney,
or Orcades. They, who have written of the British Affairs, either now, or in
the Age before us, call them Hebrides, a new Name, of which there are no
Footsteps, or any Original, in Ancient Writers. For, in that Tract of the Sea,
some Authors place the Aebudae, or Aemodae, but with such inconstancy amongst
themselves, that they scarce ever agree in their Number, Situation, or Names.
Strabo (to begin with the most Ancient) may be the better excused, because he
followed uncertain Report, That part of the World being not fully discovered,
in his time. These Number according to Mela, Capella, Ptolomy, Solinus, and
Pliny.
Mela reckons the Aemodae to be Seven, Martianus Capella makes the Acmodae to
be as many; Ptolomy and Solinus count the Aebudae, Five; Pliny numbers the
Acmodae to be Seven; and the Aebudae Thirty. I, for my part, think it fit to
retain the Names most used by the Ancients, and therefore I call all the
Western Isles The Name Aebudae, most approved by this Author.
Aebudae; and I purpose to describe the Site, Nature, and Commodities of every
one of them, as out of Later, so out of Surer, Authors.

In performing this Task, I will principally follow Donald Monro, sometime Dean
of Murray, Traveled over the Islands of Scotland, and described them.
Donald Monro, a Pious and Diligent Person, who himself Traveled over all
those Islands, and viewed them Ocularly. They lie dispersed in the
Deucaledonian Sea, being above Three hundred and odd, in number. The Kings of
Scotland were Masters of them, time out of mind, until Donald, the Brother of
Malcolm the Third, yielded up the possession of them to the Kings of Norway;
that, by his Aid, he might forcibly seize upon the Crown of Scotland, to which
he had no Right. The Danes and Norwegians enjoyed them about One hundred and
sixty years, until, being overcome in a great Battle, they were outed of them
by Alexander the 3d. King of Scotland, drove the Danes and Normans out of these
Islands, after they had possessed them about 160 years.
Alexander the Third, King of Scotland. These Islanders, either confiding in
their strength, or else egged on and induced by Sedition, have some time
endeavored to vindicate their Liberty, and to set up Kings of their own; For
of late, John of the Family of the Donalds, as well as others before him,
usurped the Name of King. The Disposition, Customs, etc. of their Inhabitants.
In their Diet, Habit, and the whole Administration of their Domestic Affairs,
they use the Ancient Parsimony. Hunting and Fishing afford them Food. They boil
their Flesh in Water poured either into the Paunch, or into the Skin, of the
Beasts, they kill; and in Hunting they sometime eat raw Flesh, when the Blood
is squeezed out. The Broth of boiled Flesh-meat is their Drink. They sometimes
drink Whey very greedily in their Feasts, after it has been kept, in proper
Vessels, for some years. That kind of Drink they call Blandium, an old Drink
made of Whey, cla^^fied with Herbs.
Blandium: But for the most part of them, they drink Water. They make their
Bread of Oats and Barley, (for they have no other Grain growing in those
parts,) which is not unpleasant to the Taste; and, by frequent use, they are
very expert at making and moulding of it. In the Morning they eat a little of
it, and so go a Hunting; or, if they have any other work to do, they are
content with that light Breakfast, and Fast till the Evening. They use
party-colored Garments, and especially stripped Plads. Of all Colors they love
the Purple and the Blew, most. Their Ancestors wear Party-colored Plads,
variously striped, which custom some of them do still retain. But, nowadays,
many of them wear their Apparel of a dark brown color, almost like Heath, that
so, lying in the Heath-bushes, they might not, in the daytime, be discovered
by their Clothes. Being rather loosly happ'd, than closely covered, with this
sort of Blanketing, they endure the fiercest weather, even in the open Air, and
sometime they sleep in them, tho covered all over with Snow. In their Houses,
they also lie on the Ground, only they lay under them Fern or Heath, which they
place with their roots downward, and their brush upwards, so prettily, that
their Beds are almost as soft as a Featherbed, but far more wholesome. For Heath,
it^ Nature.
Heath being endued with a Natural power of exiccation, does exhaust
superfluous Humors, and restores vigor to the Nerves, after it has freed them
from such noxious Guests; so that they, who lie down in the Evening weary and
faint, in the Morning rise up nimble and spritely. They are all of them very
regardless of their Bed-Ticks and Coverlets; yea, they affect an uncouth
slovinglyness therein; for, if any occasion, or necessity, cause them to Travel
into other parts; when they go to Bed, they throw the Bed and Blankets of their
Hosts on the ground, and wrap themselves up in their own Garments, so betaking
themselves to their Rest; the Reason they give, is, lest such barbarous
effeminateness (for so they call it) should taint and corrupt their Native and
inbred hardiness. In War, they cover their Bodies with Iron Helmets and a Coat
of Mail, made of Iron Rings, reaching almost down to their Anckles. Their
Weapons are Bows and Arrows, for the most part hooked, the Iron barbs standing
out on both sides, which cannot be drawn out of the Body, they pierce, unless
the Orifice of the wound be made very wide: Some of them Fight with broad
Swords, and Poleaxes. Instead of a Trumpet, they use a Bag-Pipe. They are much
given to Music, but on Instruments, of a peculiar kind, called Clarsbachs; of
which, some have Strings made of Brass-Wire; others, of Guts, which they strike
either with their long Nails or with a Quill. Their only ambition is, to deck
their Fiddles with very much Silver and Jewels. The meaner sort, instead of
Jewels, use Crystal. They sing Songs, not unelegant, containing commonly the
Elogies of Valiant Men; and their Bards ordinarily handle no other Argument.
Their Language is some what like the old Gawlish.

These Islands of Scotland, which use the Ancient Tongue; and are called the
Western or Aebudae Isles are thus usually reckoned. The first of them is Isle
of Man called Mana, Eubonia, Mevania, Manim.
Ma^a, by some falsely called Mona, but by the ancient Eubonia; Paulus Orosius
calls it Mevania, or rather Menavia; for in the old Language, it is called
Manim. The last Age called the Town in it Sodora in Man, once the Bishop of the
Island^ See.
Sodora, in which the Bishop of the Islands had his See. It is a Province
almost equally distant from Ireland, from Galloway in Scotland, and from
Cumberland in England: It is Twenty four Miles long and Eight broad.

The next Isle arising in the Firth of Clyde is Ailze,
Alsa, or Ailze, an high and precipitous Rock, excepting only one plain passage
into it. It is uninhabited almost all the year, but only at certain Seasons, a
great number of Skiffs and Busses flock thither to Fish for Cod and Whiting. It
abounds with Conies and Sea-Fowl, but especially with abounds with Soland G^ese.
Soland-Geese. It is almost equally distant from Carrick on the South-East;
from Ireland, on the South-West; and from Cantyre on the North-West: The Isle
Or, Arran.
of Arran is situate Twenty four Miles from Ailze, inclining toward the North,
it is Twenty four Miles long and Sixteen broad; it is full of high Craggy
Mountains, so that only the Seacoasts thereof are inhabited; where it is
lowest, the Sea breaks into it, and makes a great Bay, the entrance whereof is
shut in by the Island Molas, i. e. Lamlach.
Lamlach or Lamlash. So that by reason of the height of the Mountains, which
break the force of the Wind, it is, within, a very safe Harbor for Shipping;
and there is such plentiful Fishing in those Waters, which are perpetually
Calm, that if the Inhabitants catch more than what will serve them for one day,
they throw them again into the Sea, as into a safe Trunk or a Fish Pond, to be
thence taken out at their pleasure.

Not far from Arr^n lies a small Island called Flada Flada.
or Fladda, which is full of Rabbets. Boot Isle.
Boot Isle, being Eight Mile long and Four broad, is situate more inwardly in
the Firth of Clyde, and is Eight Miles distant from Arran, aforesaid, on the
North-East. On the North-West, it is distant from Argyle about half a Mile; on
the East, from Cuningham, Six Miles. It Is all in a manner Low-Land, and so,
very convenient for Corn and Pasturage. It has but one Town in it, bearing the
Name of the Island; and in it an old Castle Named Rothsey Castle.
Rothsey. It has also another Castle at the Bay, called in the Country
Language, Cames, or Keames Castle.
Keames Castle. On the South-West thereof, is the low Island Mernoch.
Mernoch, for the bigness thereof fruitful enough, and well Cultivated, it is a
Mile long and half a Mile broad. More inward in the Firth of Clyde, are the two
Cumbras, Two.
Cumbras, the greater and the lesser, at a small distance one from another; the
greater abounding with Corn; the lesser with Fallow-Deer.

From the Promontory of Cantyre, a little more than a Mile, lies Avona, now
Sanda.
Sanda, called Portuosa, i. e. fit for a Port, it got that Name from being a
Road for Ships; for when the Danes possessed those Islands, their Fleets
directed their Course thither for Shelter. From the same Promontory to the
South-West, over against the Irish shore stands Rahglin near Ireland.
Rahglin; as also Four Miles from Cantyre, is a small Island called Cara.
Cara; and not far there from Gaga.
Gaga, Six Miles long, and a Mile and a half broad.

The Island of Iura, a large Island, formerly called Dera, and why?
Iura is distant Twelve Miles from Gaga, being in length Twenty four Miles:
It Is Maritime parts are inhabited well enough; but, being Woody inwardly, it
abounds with several Sorts of Deer. Some think it was anciently called Dera,
which in the Gothish Language signifies a Stag. Two Miles distant from Iura,
lies Scarba.
Scarba, in length from East to West four Miles, in breadth, one; it is
Inhabited but in few places. The Tide is so violent between It and Iura, that
there is no passage neither with Sails nor Oars, but at certain Seasons only.

After This, there are many Islands of Many lesser Island^, (...) their Name^.
less note, spread up and down, as B^llach or Genisteria, Gewrasdil, Lunga,
both the Fiola's or Findlass's; also the three Garvillans, distinguished by
their respective Garvillan Vsk^a, Garvillan More, and Garvillan ^eg.
Sirnames; then Culbrenin, Dunconnel, Luparia, Belhac, Whoker, Gavin, Luing,
Seil, and Suin, these Three last named are fruitful enough in Corn and Cattle,
and are under the Jurisdiction of the Earls of Argyle. The next to these is
Slata, or Sleach.
Sleach, so called, because out of a Rock therein, Tyles, named Slats, are cut
and extracted. Then follow Naosg, Easdale, Schanni, and the Isle called Tyan.
Tyan, from an Herb, which is prejudicial to Fruits, not unlike Guild or
Loose-strife, but that it is of a more dilute Color; then Vridich and the Rye
Island. Then Dow, i. e. the black Island; and the Island Eglish, or of the
Church and Triarach; after these follow the Islands, Ard or High, Ishol, Green,
Heath, as also Tree, Goat, Coney-Isles, and that which is called the Island of
the Otiost and Eris-bach; as also Once the Bishop of Argyle's (...).
Lismore, in which, heretofore, there was the Bishop of Argyle's See; it is
eight Miles in length, two in breadth, in it there are found Metals, besides the
Commodities common to other Isles. Then succeed Ovilia, and Siuna, Ilan na
Port, and Geirach, as also Falda, the Isle of Cloich, Gramry; the Islands More,
Ardiescara, Musadil, and Bernera heretofore called the Holy Sanctuary, the
Noble Yew-Isle, Molochasgar and Drinacha, which is all covered over with
Thorns, Elder, and the Ruins of great Houses, then another Isle Drin^ch, which
is full of Wood; also Ramsay and K^rrera.

The greatest Island of the Western ones, next to Iura, is Yla, a large Island.
Yla, which is Twenty four Miles long, and Sixteen broad; it is extended from
South to North; and is very fruitful in Cattle, Corn, Deer, and Lead, there is
a River of fresh Water in it, called Avonlaggan.
Avonlaggan, as also a Bay of Salt Water, in which are sundry Islands; besides,
it has a Lough of fresh Water, in which there is an Island called Finlagan,
once the Seat of the Prince of the Islands.
Finlagan, which heretofore was the chief of all the Islands, in which the
Prince of the Islanders, assuming the Name of King, was wont to dwell. Near to
that but lesser, is the Island called Ilan na-Covihaslop, called also the
Island of Council, and why?
Ilan na-Covihaslop, called also the Island of Council, for there was a Court
in it, wherein Fourteen of the chief Men did daily sit for the Administration
of Justice, and Determining matters of Controversy, whose great Equity and
Moderation procured Peace, both Foreign and Domestic; and as a concomitant of
Peace, the affluence of all things. Many small Islands between Ila, and Iura,
with their Names.
Between Ila and Iura there is seated a small Island called Rock Isle, taking
its Name from an heap of Stones therein; moreover on the South side of Ila, lie
these Islands, Chourna, Maalmori, Osrim, Bridi, Corshera, the Island Ishol,
Immersi, Bethick, Texa, Gearach, Naosg, Rinard, Cana, Tarskeir, Achnar, the
Isle More, the Island resembling the Figure of a Man, the Island Iean, and
Stachabadda; at the West corner of Yla stands Oversa, there also the Sea is
very raging, not passable for Ships but at certain Hours. The Island Channard,
and toward the North-West are situate Vsabrast, and Tanast, Naomph, and the
Island Banni; Eight Miles from Yla, more toward the North, lies Oversa, next to
it Porcaria, and half a Mile from Oversa, lies Collonsa.

Beyond Collonsa to the North lies Mull, Mull a, large Island.
twelve Miles distant from Yla. This Island is Twenty four Miles in length, and
as many in breadth; it is Craggy, yet not wholly devoid of Corn. It has many
Woods in it, and great Herds of Deer, and a Port safe enough for Ships; over
against Icolumkill it has two large Rivers full of Salmon, besides other
lesser Rivers, not without Fish; it has also two Loughs, in each of which are
several Islands, and Castles in them all. The Sea, breaking into it in diverse
places, makes four Bays, all abounding with Herrings. On the South-West is
seated Calaman.
Calaman, or the Island of Doves; on the North-East stands Erra.
Erra, both these Islands are Commodious for Cattle, Corn, and Fishing.

The Island of Icolumkill.
Icolumkill is distant from them two Miles; it is Two Miles long, and above a
Mile broad, fruitful in all things, which that Climate can produce, and famed
for as many ancient Monuments, as could be well expected in such a Country; but
it was made yet more famous by the severe Discipline and Holiness of St.
Columbus. It was beautified with two Monasteries, one of Monks the other of
Nuns; with one Curia, a Parish Church.
Curia, or (as they call it,) a Parish Church, and with many Chapels, some of
them built by the Magnificence of the Kings of Scotland; and others by the
Petty Kings of the Islands; in the old Monastery of Columbus, his Monastery.
St. Columbus, the Bishops of the Islanders placed their See; their ancient
Mansion House, which was before in the Isle of Man, being taken by the English.
There remains as yet, among the ancient Ruins, a Churchyard or Burying place,
common to all the Noble Families which dwelt in the Western Islands. Three
Tombs or C^meterys for the Kings of Three several Nations.
There are three Tombs in it more eminent than the rest, at a small distance
one from another, having little Shrines looking toward the East, built over
them. In the West part of each of them there is a Stone with an Inscription,
declaring whose Tombs they are, the middlemost of them has this Inscription;
The Tombs of the Kings of Scotland, for it is reported that Forty four of the
Scottish Kings were there buried: In the Right Hand one, there is this Title
Carved, The Tombs of the Kings of Ireland, for Four Kings of Ireland are said
to be interred there; that on the Left side is inscribed, The Tombs of the
Kings of Norway, for Report says, That Eight Kings of that Nation were inhum'd
there. In the rest of the Coemetery, the Eminent Families of the Islands have
each their Tombs apart. There are Six Islands adjacent to it, small indeed, yet
not unfruitful, which have been given by ancient Kings, and by the Princes of
the Islanders, to the Nunnery of St. Columb.

The Island Soa.
Soa, though it has convenient Pasturage for Sheep, yet its greatest Revenue
is from the Sitting and Hatching of Sea-Fowl, and especially from their Eggs.
The next to that, is Nuns Island.
Nuns-Island. Then Rudana; after that Reringa, after which follows Skanny.
Skanny* distant half a Mile from Mull; it has one Parish in it, but the
Parishioners live mostly in Mull: The Shore abounds with Coneys. A Mile from
Skanny, stands Eorsa. All these are under the Jurisdiction of the Monks of St.
Columbus his Monastery.

Two Miles from Eorsa.
Eorsa, stands Vlva.
Vlva, which is five Miles long, and, for its bigness, fruitful in Corn and
Pasturage. It has an Haven very commodious for Galleys, Long-Boats, or
Berlins. On its South Side lies Colvansa.
Colvansa, the Soil thereof is fruitful, and it has a Wood of Hasel in it.
Almost three hundred paces from it, is situate Gomedra.
Gomedra, two Miles long, and a Mile broad, running out from South to North.
Four Miles from Gomedra, on the South, stands Stafa.
Stafa, both of these two last-named Isles having many good Havens in them.
Four Miles from hence, toward the North-West, are the two Carniburghs, Two.
Carniburghs, the greater and the lesser, so Fortified round about with the
Precipices of Rocks, and a most rapid Current, besides; that, their Natural
Strength being assisted by Art, they are impregnable. A Mile from these, is an
Island whose Soil is almost all black, as being concreted out of old rotten
Wood and Moss mixed together. They dry the Turff of it for Fuel, and therefore
it is called Black, or Turff Island.
Turff-Island, for so they there call that sort of Earth, which the English
call Moss. Then succeeds Lunga.
Lunga, two Miles in length, and Baca half less than It. Baca.


From thence toward the West, about Six Miles distance, Terriss.
stands Tirriss, in length Eight Miles, in breadth Three, of all these Islands,
most abounding with all things necessary to maintain Life; for in it is plenty
of Cattle and Corn, they also get much by Fishing and the breed of Sea-Fowl.
There is in it a Lake or Lough of fresh Water, and an old Castle, as also an
Haven, not unsafe for Galleys and Long-Boats. Two Miles from hence stands Gun
Isle*
Gunn Isle, and at an equal distance from Gun, Coll.
Coll, Twelve Miles long, two broad, a very fruitful Isle. Not far from thence
is Calfa.
Calfa, which is almost all covered with Wood. After that, two Charn More, and
Charn Beg.
Islands follow, Charn More, and Charn Beg.
Sirnam'd Green, the greater and the lesser. And as many lie, of the same Glass
More and Glass Beg.
Sirnames, over against the Promontory of Mull. From it, at no great distance
there lie two Islands, Surnamed Glassae, i. e. Sky blew; then Ardan Rider.
Ardan Rider, i. e. the high Island of the Horseman: Next Luparia, or the
Island of Wolves; after this, is the Island More.
Island More; from the Island Coll, toward the South, there is extended from
East to West, Rum.
Rum, Sixteen Miles long, Six broad, and because it is inhabited but in few
places, the Sea-Fowl do almost every where lay their Eggs up and down in the
Fields; so that in the Spring one may take up as many of them, as he pleases.
In the high Rocks of Rum, the Soland Geese, spoken of before, are taken in
great abundance. Four Miles from thence to the South-East is the Island Naich.
Naich, or of Horses, and half a Mile from thence is Muick, full of Falcons,
etc.
Muick* for its bigness, abounding with all necessaries. Falcons build their
Nests therein; and it has also a Port convenient enough for Shipping. Not far
from it are Cana, and Egg Isle, small, yet fruitful, Islands; the later
abounding with Soland Geese.

Then there is Soavreti^l.
Soavretil, fitter for Hunting than any other Commodities of Life. Thence from
North to South is extended Sky, the biggest Isle about Scotland.
Sky, the greatest of all the Islands about Scotland, as being in length Forty
Two Miles; in breadth sometimes Eight, sometimes Twelve; in many places it is
full of Mountains, which abound with Woods, and those Woods are full of
Pastures. The Campaign is also fruitful of Corn and Cattle; and, besides other
Cattle, there are in it a great Breed of Mares. It has five great Rivers in
it, all very full of Salmon; besides many lesser ones, not void of Salmon,
neither. The Sea penetrating on every side into the Land, makes many Bays of
Salt Water therein; of which Three are most eminent, besides Thirteen others,
all full of Herrings. It has also a Lough of Fresh Water in it, and five
Castles. This Island, in the old Scotch Dialect, was called Skianacha, the old
name for Sky. (...)
Skianacha, i. e. Winged, because the Promontories, between which the Sea made
its Influx, did stretch out themselves, as so many Wings; but use has
obtained, that it is now called Sky, i. e. a Wing.

About Sky there lie scattered some smaller Islands, as Oransa.
Oransa, full of Corn, and Cattle; and Na gunner.
Na gunner, having plenty of Woods, and Conies; as also Paba.
Paba, infamous for Robberies, where Thieves, lurking in the Woods, do way-lay
Travelers as they pass. Then comes Scalpa.
Scalpa, situated Eight Miles from it to the North-West, besides other
Commodities, it has great Herds of Deer in its Woods. Between the Mouth of
Lech-Carron and Raarsa, lies Crouling.
Crouling, a Port safe for Ships. And from Scalpa
Scalpa, two Miles toward the North, lies Raarsa.
Raarsa, seven Miles long, and two broad, it has Woods of Beech-Trees in it,
and many Deer in them. Half a Mile from it, is Rona.
Rona, which is quite covered over with Woods, and Heath. It has a Port in its
inmost Bay, noted for Pyracy, as being very commodious to surprise
Sea-Passengers. And in the Mouth of the Bay, (which, from its shallowness, is
called Gerloch.
Gerloch) there is an Island of the same Name. From Rona, six Miles toward the
North, lies Fladda.
Fladda. Two Miles from Fladda, is Tr^nta.
Tr^nta, and on the South side of Sky, Oransa.
Oransa: A Mile from thence lie little V^^a More*
Buia, then great and V^^a B^g.
Buia; and after them Five small Islands of no note; after them follows Several
small Islands.
Ishol, fruitful in Corn; and near it is Ovia, then Askerma, and Linadel; and
Eighty Miles from Sky to the North-West lie, Linga, Gigamena, Bernera, Megala,
Paba, Flada, Scarpa Vervecum, i. e. of Weathers, Sandrera, and Watersa.
Watersa, which, besides other great conveniences, has a Haven capable of
holding many, and those very great, Ships; whither at certain seasons of the
year, a great company of Fishermen flock together, from the Countries round
about. These Nine last Islands are under the Government of the Bishop of the
Islands. Two Miles distant from Watersa, lies Barra.
Barra, Seven Miles in length, extending it self from the South-West, to the
North-East, not unfruitful in Corn, but most noted for Cod and Whiting Fishing:
A Bay of the Sea makes an influx into it, at a narrow Mouth; but within, it is
broader and also round. It has one Island in it, and therein a strong Fort or
Castle. In the North part of Barra, there arises an Hill full of Grass from
top to bottom; on the top of it A strange Spring, carrying down shapeless Fish
into the Sea.
rises a Spring of fresh Water* which flowing down in a Rivulet, carries with
it into the neighboring Sea, some small Animals, as yet shapeless; which, in
some sort, though obscurely, do represent those Shellfish we commonly call
Cockles, or Periwinkles.
Cockles. This part of the shore, to which the Borderers retire, they call the
Great Sands; because, when the Sea Ebbs, the Sand is uncovered for a Mile and
more; there they dig up great Shellfish, and the People there about believe it
to be as a Seminary of those shapeless Fish, which the forenamed drill carries
down from its Fountain, and that they are either produced there, or, at least,
grow bigger in the Sea.

Between Barra and Vyist, lie these Diverse small Islands.
small Islands following, Orbansa, Ovia or Eoy, Hakerset, Garulinga, Flada,
Buiia the greater, and Buiia the less, Haia, Heldisay, Gega, Linga, Fara, Fuda,
Heath Island. From these, toward the North, lies Vyist a great Island.
Vyist, Thirty Miles long, and Six broad. The Tide flowing into this Island in
two places, represents the appearance of Three Islands, but when it Ebbs, it
again coalesces into One: In it are many Lakes of fresh Water, the biggest of
which is Three Miles long. The Sea, wearing away the Land, has made it self a
passage into this Lough; neither can it be excluded by the Inhabitants, no not
by a Jitty or Bank of Sixty Foot high, but that it insinuates it self between
the Stones, not well compacted together, and there often leaves some small
Seafish behind. There is a A strange sort of Fish.
Fish taken in it, in other respects like a Salmon, save that his Belly is
white, and his Back black, and he is without Scales like to Salmon. Moreover,
there are in it abundance of Loughs of fresh Water. It has Caves in it covered
with Heath, which are lurking places for Robbers. There are Five
Parish-Churches in it for the performance of Holy Duties.

Eight Miles from thence, toward the East, lies Helscher Vetularum.
Helscher Vetularum, so called, as I suppose, because it belongs to the Nuns of
the Island of Icolumkill. A little further toward the North, appears
Havelschyer.
Havelschyer, to which at certain seasons of the year, many Sea-Calves, [or
Seals] do resort, and are there taken. About Sixty Miles beyond that, to the
North-West, stands Hirta.
Hirta, very fruitful in Corn, Cattle, and especially in Sheep, which are here
fatter than in any other of the Islands. The Inhabitants are ignorant of all
Arts, and especially of Religion. After the Summer solstice, the Lord of the
Island sends thither his Proctor or Steward, to gather up his Rent or Tribute,
and, with him, he sends a Priest to Baptize all the Children, which were born
the year before; but if the Priest come not, then every Man A Custom of
Baptizing once a Year.
baptizeth his own Children; they pay to their Lord a certain number of
Sea-Calves and of Muttons, dried in the Sun, and also of Sea-Fowl. The whole
Island does not exceed a Mile in length, and it is almost of equal breadth,
neither can any part of it be seen from any neighboring Island, besides Three
Mountains which are on the Shore, and these cannot be discerned neither, but
from the highest places of other Islands. In those Mountains there are Large
fair Sheep in Hirta.
Sheep exceeding beautiful, but by reason of the Violence and Rapidness of the
Sea-Current, and Tide, they can scarce become at, by any Body.

But to return to Vyist; on the North Promontory thereof, there is situate the
Isle Valay.
Valay, a Mile broad and two Mile long. Between that Promontory and the Isle
Harrick, these Islands are interjacent, Soa and several small Islands.
small indeed, but not unfruitful, viz. Soa, Stromoy, Pabaia, Bernera, Erisay,
Keligera, Saga the less, Saga the greater, Hermodra, Scarvay, Gria, Linga,
Gillan, Hea, Hoia, Ferelaia, Soa the lesser, Soa the greater, Isa, Senna the
less, Senna the great, Tarransa, Slegana, T^ema, and, above Harick, Scarpa; and
due West, there are Seven Islands, at Fifty Miles distance above Lewis, which
some call Flavanae, in which are wild Sheep.
Flavanae, others the Sacred, or Sanctuary, Islands, they arise up into Grassy
Mountains, but are void of all human Culture; neither are there in them any
four-footed Beasts, but only wild Sheep, which the Hunters catch, but eat them
not when they have done. For they esteem the Fat more palatable than the Flesh;
for the Flesh is so unpleasant, that no Man will eat it, unless enforced by
extremity of Hunger.

Furthermore, almost in the same Tract, nearer to the North, lie Garvillan, and
other little Islands.
Garvellan, i. e. the Craggy Island, Lamba, Flada, and Kellasa, the two
Berneraes, the great and the small, Kirta, Buiia the little, Buiia the great,
Vexa, Pabaia, and Sigrama the great, or Cunicularia so called from its plenty
of Conies, Sigrama the less, and the Island of Pygmees.
Island of Pygmies; in this last there is a Chapel, where the bordering People
do believe, that Pygmies were heretofore buried; for many Strangers, digging
deep into the Earth, have found, and yet do find, little and round Heads, and
the small Bones of other parts of human Bodies, nothing derogating from the
ancient Reports concerning Pygmies.

Lewis, etc.
In that Shore of the Island Lewis, which looks toward the South-East, Two Bays
of the Sea do break into the Land, one of which they call the South, the other
the North, Lough; both of them do yield abundance of Fish, to those which take
pains to catch them, and that during the whole year. From the same shore of
Lewis, more to the South, stands Fable Isle, then Adams Isle, then the Isle of
Lambs, as also, Huilin, Viccoil, Havera, Laxa, Erin, the Isle of ^columkill,
Toray, I^^ert, Scalpa, Flad^, and Shevy. At the East side of this Island there
is a subterraneous A Vault able to shelter Ships in a Storm.
passage, Arched at Top, longer than a Man can shoot an Arrow into: Under which
Vault, small Ships use to shelter themselves, making to it, by Sails or Oars,
to avoid the Violence of the Tide, which rages at the Neighboring Promontory,
with a huge Noise, to the extreme Terror and Danger of the Mariners. More to
the East, lies an Island which they call Schan-Castle.
Schan Castle, a place naturally fortified, abounding with Corn and Fish, and
also affording sufficient Provision to the Inhabitants by Eggs of Sea-Fowl,
which there make their Nests.

At the Shore, where Loch-Brien or Broom.
Loch-Brien, or Broom, opens to the Land, lies the Isle En.
En, which is almost all covered with Woods, and good for nothing but to
harbor Thieves in, to rob Passengers. More to the North is the Island
Gruinorta, or (...).
Gruinorta, being also full of Woods possessed by Robbers and Pirates. And
looking toward the same Coast, is an Island, named the Island of Cleirach or
(...) Isle.
Cleirach, which, beside Pasturage, abounds with the Eggs of Sea-Fowl. Next to
that, is Afulla, and then Harary, etc.
Harary, the Greater; then Harary, the Less; and, nigh it, the Island of
Horses, or Na^stich; and near that again, the Isle Merta^ka. These Eight
Islands are situate before the Mouth of the Bay, which is vulgarly called
Lough-Broom, or Brian. At some distance from these Islands, which lie before
Lough-Broom, Harrick and Lewis run toward the North; They are Sixty Miles in
length, Harray, or Harrick, and Lewis are but one Island, of which Harray is
the South part.
and Sixteen in breadth: These make but one Island, for they are not
distinguished by the Arms of the Sea, that slow into it, but by the Meers of
the Land, and the Possessions of their several Lairds: But that part, which is
exposed to the South, is wont to be called Harray. In it there was a Monastery
called Roadilla Monastery.
Roadilla, built by Maccloyd, of Harray. The Soil is fruitful of Corn, but it
yields its increase rather by digging, than plowing: The Pastures in it are
very fit for Sheep, especially one very high Mountain, which is green with
Grass, even to the very Top. Donald Monro, a Learned and Pious Man, relates,
That, when he was there, Wild Sheep in Harray b^t no Foxes no^ Wolves.
he saw Sheep (for that kind of Cattle) very old, wandering up and down without
any certain Owner: And the Number of them is increased from hence, that neither
Fox, Wolf, or Serpent, was ever seen there; though betwixt This part and Lewis,
great Woods are interjacent, which breed many Stags, but low ones, and not
big-bodied at all. In this part of the Island, is a River very full of Salmon.
In the North part lies Lewis is the North part of the Island.
Lewis, inhabited enough toward the Shore. It has four Parish-Churches in it,
one Fort, seven great Rivers, and twelve lesser ones, all of them, according to
their bigness, full of Salmons; in many places the Sea penetrates into the
Land, and there diffuses it self into Bays, all abounding with plenty of
Herrings. There is also great plenty of Sheep, which wander freely amongst the
Thickets, and Heath-Bushes: The Inhabitants drive them into a narrow place,
like a Sheepfold, and there, every Year, they sheer them, after the ancient
custom. The Champion part of the Country abounds with Heath-Bushes, in which
the Earth is black at top, occasioned by Moss, and the Coalition of Rotten
Wood, gathered together for many Ages, even a Foot thick. This upper Crust,
being cut into long and slender Turffs, and dried in the Sun, serves for
Firing, in stead of Wood: The next Year after, the naked Ground, being Dunged
with Sea-Weed, is sown with Barley. In this Island there is commonly so great a
quantity of Whales taken in abundance about the Island Lewis.
Whales taken, that sometimes (as the old Inhabitants relate) Twenty seven,
some very great, some smaller, fall to the share of the Priests for their
Tithes. There is also a great Cave in this Island, in which, when the Tide is
out, the Water is yet two Fathom deep; but when the Tide is in, it is above four
Fathom. There Multitudes of People, of both Sexes, and of all Ages, sitting on
the Rocks, with Hooks and Lines, do promiscuously catch all sorts of Fish, in
great abundance.

There is a small Island, about Sixty Miles from Lewis, to the North-East, of a
low and plain Soil, and well inhabited, its Name is Rona, with the Condition of
its Inhabitants.
Rona, the Inhabitants thereof are rude Persons, void almost of all Religion.
The Lord of it assigns a certain number of Families to Inhabit and Till it,
and he allows them a sufficiency of great and small Cattle, whereby they may
live well, and pay their Tribute, too; that which is above their own provision,
they send every year to Lewis, to their Landlord, who lives there; they
commonly pay him, in the Name of a Tribute or Rent, a great quantity of
Barly-Meal, sewed up in the Skins of Sheep, (for that kind of Grain grows
plentifully amongst them,) Muttons and Sea-Fowl dried in the Sun, as much as
remains, as a Surplusage of their yearly Provision; and if the multitude of
Heads does abound, they send also the Supernumerary Persons to their
Landlords. So that these, in my Judgment, are the only Persons in the whole
World, who want nothing, but have all things to Satiety. And besides, being
ignorant of Luxury and Covetousness, they enjoy that Innocence and Tranquillity
of Mind, which others take great pains to obtain, from the Precepts and
Institutions of Wise Men. And this they have from their Ignorance of Vices,
neither does any thing seem to be wanting to their great Happiness, but that
they do not understand the excellency of their Condition. There is in this
Island, a Chapel, dedicated to St. Ronanus, Ronanus, his strange Spade.
wherein (as old Men say,) there is a Spade always left, wherewith if any one
Dye, there is always a place marked out, and prepared for his Grave; moreover in
this Island, besides other Fishery, many Whales are also taken.

Sixteen Mile from thence, toward the West, lies the Island Suilkyr.
Suilkyr; a Mile long, which brings forth no Grass, no not so much as Heath,
only it has black Rocks, some of which are covered with black Moss. Sea-Fowl
do commodiously lay their Eggs, and hatch them there. Before the young are
fledged enough to fly away, the neighbor Islanders sail thither from Lewis,
and they allow themselves Eight days time, more or less, to cull or gather them
up, until they load their Or Berlins.
Skiffs with their Flesh dried in the Sun, and also with their Feathers. In
this Island also, there is a rare kind of Bird unknown in other parts, called A
rare Bird, called Colca.
Colca, it is little less than a Goose, she comes every year thither, and there
Hatches and Feeds her young, till they can shift for themselves. About that
time, her Feathers fall off of their own accord, and so leaves her Naked, then
she betakes her self to the Sea again, and is never seen more, till the next
Spring. This also is singular in them, that their Feathers have no Qu^lls, or
Stalks, but do cover their Bodies with a gentle Down, wherein there is no
Hardness at all.

Next follow the The Orcades.
Orcades, lying scattered in the North of Scotland, partly in the
Deucaledonian, and partly in the German Seas. Concerning the Name of them,
Writers, both Ancient and Modern, do well enough agree; but the reason of the
Name, no Man (that I know) has explained. Neither does it appear, who first
possessed them: All say, that they were of a German Original, but from what
Nation of Germany, they say not: If we may form a conjecture from their Speech,
both heretofore and now, they use the Goths, a People o^ Sarma^^a Europaea,
thence transplanted into Germany near the River Oder in Sil^sia.
Gottish Language. Some think, they were Picts, induced by this Argument, that
the Sea, dividing them from Caithness, is called the Pentland Or Picts and Sea.
Sea, or Firth. They judge also, that the Picts themselves were of the Race of
the Saxons, grounding their Opinion chiefly on the Verses of Claudian, in his
seventh Panegyric, which run thus: -- Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule,
Scotorum Tumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.


Englished thus: The Orcades were moist with Saxon's Gore;
The Blood of Picts, there spilt, warmed Thule's Shore;
For Tombs of Scots Icy Iern wept sore.


But their error may easily be refuted, partly out of Bid the Anglo-Saxon,
who, affirming, that the Britains sang the The Britains praised God in Five
Tongues.
Praises of God in five several Languages, reckons the Pictish to be one; but
if the Picts had then spoke the Saxon Language, he would not have distinguished
it from the Saxon; (which then the English used, without corruption;) And
partly also, out of those very Verses of Claudian, where he expressly declares;
That the Picts were a different People from the Saxons; For, he says, that the
Orcades were the Country of the Saxons; and Thule, of the Picts; but whatsoever
their Original were, in this our Age, they use a Language different both from
Scotch and English, but very near the Gothish. In their daily conversation, the
common People do as yet retain much of their Ancient Parsimony, and therefore
they are very sound in mind, and healthy in Body. The Inhabitants of the
Orcades, Parsimonious and long lived.
Few of them dye of Diseases, but almost all of them, of old Age; and their
Ignorance of Delights and Pleasures contributes more to the maintaining of
their health, than the Skill and Diligence of Physicians does, to others. The
same Parsimony makes much, both for the elegancy of their Beauties, and the
talness of their Stature. They have but a small increase of Corn, except only
of Oats, and Barley. Out of which they extract both Bread and Drink too. Of
Animals, which Herd together, they have Sheep, Kine, and diverse Goats, so that
they have abundance of Milk, Butter, and Cheese among them; They have also an
innumerable company of Sea-Fowl, of which, and of Fishes, their Diet does, for
the most part, consist. There is No venomous Creatture in the Orcades, nor any
Tree.
no venomous Creature there, no, nor any one Deformed to look upon. They have
little Horses, in show contemptible, but strong enough, for all uses, even
beyond belief. They have never a Tree growing, no, nor Shrub, neither, besides
Heath; which happens, not so much for the fault of the Soil, or Air, as of the
Laziness of the Inhabitants, as does easily appear by the roots of Trees,
which, in many Places, are there dug out of the Earth. As often as Foreigners
import any Wine thither, they drink it greedily, even to excess. They have an
Ancient Cup, or Goblet among them, which, to (procure the greater Authority to
their Carousings) they say, did belong to Magnus his Bouncing Cup, or Wassail
Bowl.
St. Magnus, who first instructed them in the Principles of the Christian
Religion. It so far exceeds the bigness of other Drinking-bowls, that it may
seem to have been a relick of the Feast of the Lapithae. They try an Experiment
upon their A strange Test for a Bishop.
Bishops, at their first coming to them, therewith; He that can drink up a
whole One, at one Draught, (which seldom happens) they count him a very Nonsuch
of a Man; and do look upon it as an happy Omen and Presage, that the Crop of
the following Years will be superabundant. From which practice of theirs, a Man
may easily conjecture, that their Parsimony which I spoke of, proceeds not so
much from Reason and Choice, as from Penury and Want; and the same necessity
which produced it at first, did perpetuate, and transmit, it to their
posterity; Till, the Neighbor-Nations being corrupted by prevailing Luxury,
their Ancient Discipline was, by degrees, weakened and impaired, and They also
gave up themselves to charming Pleasures and Delights; and being thus inclined
to Luxury, they were hurried on thereto, by their commerce with Pirates, who,
not daring to land on the Continent, because it was full of Inhabitants, took
in fresh Water at these Islands, and there, either changed their Wine, and
other Merthandize, for the Provisions of the Country; or else, sold them to the
Islanders, at a low price; And, the Islanders, being few in number; and unarmed
too, and dispersed also in the tempestuous Sea, that they could not convene to
assist one another, being conscious of their own weakness, either did receive,
or, at least, did not reject Security, brought home to their doors, especially,
it being mixed with Gain and Pleasure, to boot, which are the usual Companions
thereof. But this pollution of Manners did infect the Great ones mostly, and
the Priests. Among the Vulgar, many footsteps of their former Moderation do yet
remain. The Sea very Tempestuous about the Orc^des, and the reason, why?
The Sea is there very raging and tempestuous, which is caused, not only by the
violence of Winds, and the position of the Heavenly Constellations; But also by
the meetings of contrary Tides, raised up, and flowing in from the West Ocean,
and making such a conflict between the Streights of the Land, that the Surges,
occasioned thereby, sometime meeting, opposite one to another, and being all
impetuously whirled together, cannot be passed, neither by Oars nor Sails; If
any Mariners dare come too near, one of these Three mischiefs befalls them. They
are either driven back, with a forcible violence, into the Sea; or else, by the
rapidness of the foaming Waves, they are dashed upon Shelves and Rocks; Or,
lastly, are swallowed up by the rolling Vortices of the insucking Waters. There
are only two Seasons, wherein these Streights are passable; either, when, upon
the Falling back of the Tides, the conflict of Waters ceasing, the Sea is
thereby calmed; or, else when it comes in a full Chanel, to the height of its
increase at Spring-Tides, That force languishing, on both sides, which raised
and made the Waters Tempestuous and Stormy; The Ocean, as it were, founding a
Retreat to its Storms, and thereupon, the Mountainous Surges thereof do retire
(that I may so speak) into their own proper Caverns and Recesses.

Authors do not agree, concerning the number of the Orcades.
Moreover, Authors do not agree concerning the number of the Orcades; Pliny
reckons them to be Forty; others, about Thirty; But Orosius comes nearest the
Truth, he makes them Thirty Three, of which, Thirteen are inhabited; the rest,
not; but left to feed Cattle. For many of them are low, and so narrow in
compass, that if they should be Tilled, they would scarce maintain above one
person or two. Some of them show like bare Rocks, or else, such as are covered
but with squalid Moss.

The biggest Isle of the Orcades, is called by many of the Ancients Pomona, or
the Mainland, the greatest Island of the Orcades.
Pomona; At this day they call it the Main Land, because it exceeds the rest so
much in bigness; for it is Thirty mile long; It is well inhabited, for it has
in it Twelve Parish Churches, and one Town, besides; which, the Danes, who were
long Masters of the Orcades, called Cracoviaca; we Scotchmen, call it, by a
corrupt name, Danes long Masters of the Orcades.
Kirkwall the chiefe^t Town in Mainland.
Kirkwall. In this Town there are two Castles of a reasonable bigness, standing
near together, one belonging to the King, the other to the Bishop. And between
them is a Church magnificent enough, for those places; Between the Church, and
the Castles, there are frequent Buildings on both sides, which the Inhabitants
call Two Cities, one the Kings, the other the Bishops. The whole Isle runs out
into Promontories, between which the Bays of the Sea making an influx, do
afford safe Anchoring for Ships, and here and there, a good Port. In Six
several Places of this Island, there are Metals White and black Lead in
Mainland.
i. e. White and Black Lead, so good, that there are not better in all Britain.
This Island is about Twenty four Mile distant from Caithness. The Pictish Sea,
called Pentland Firth divides Mainland from Caithness.
Pentland Firth, running between them; of whose Nature we have spoken before.

In that narrow Sea, there are many scattered Islands, of which Stromoy.
Strom-oy, not unfruitful for the bigness of it, is distant from Caithness but
a Mile, but they do not reckon that amongst the Orcades, because of its
propinquity to the British shore; and also because the Earls of Caithness have
always been Lords of it. Sailing from hence toward the North, we meet with
South Ranalds-Oy, the first Isle of the Orcades.
South Ranalds, or Ranals-Oy, the first of the Orcades, which is Sixteen Mile
from Dungsby-head, Skiffs and small Ships pass over in Two Hours from it, to
this Island, the Tide being with them, though there be no Wind, such is the
Violence of this Current. This Island is Four Miles in length, and it has a
convenient Port, Surnamed St. Margarets hope. From it, a little toward the
East, are two small Islands, uninhabited, and left for Cattle to Pasture in.
They call them in their Country Speech, Holme, what?
the Holmes, that is, Grassy Plains situate by Waters. To the North, is the
Island Burra, and two Holmes between That and Mainland. From Bura, etc.
Burra toward the West, there lie Three Islands in order, Scuna, Flata, and
Fara; and beyond them, Hoia, and Valis or Waes-Isle, which some make Two,
others but One Island, because about both the Equinocts (at which times, the
Sea does most Tempestuously foam and rage) the Tide falling back, and the Lands
being bared, they cohere and are joined together by a narrow neck of Land, and
so make One Island; but upon the return of the Tide, and the renewed
inter^acency of the Sea, they again represent the form of Two. In this Island
are the highest Mountains of all the Orcades. Hoia, and Waes-Isle.
Hoia and Waes Isle are extended Ten Miles in length, and from Ranalsa, they
are distant Eight Miles; from Duncansby or Dungisby, in Caithness, above Twenty
Mile. On the North is the Island Granisa.
Granisa, situate in a very narrow Arm of the Sea. For Hoia is distant from the
nearest Promontory, which is That of Pomona, or Mainland only two Mile. These
are the Islands situate in the very Streights, between Mainland and Caithness.
The West side of Mainland looks to the open Sea, no Islands or Rocks appearing
therein: From its East Promontory it a little runs out into the Sea; Coupins-Oy.
Coupins-Oy, almost covers it on the North. Nearer the shore is Siapins-Oy.
Siapins-Oy, something inclining to the East, situate over against Kirk-wall,
two Miles distant. it self being Six Mile long. On the West part of Mainland,
lies Rows-Oy.
Rows-Oy, Six Miles in length. From thence toward the East stands Eglis-Oy, or
Eglisa, where St. Magnus was buried.
Eglisa, or Eglis-Oy, where Fame reports, that St. Magnus was buried. From
hence to the Southward, lie Wyer-Oy, Gress-Oy, and Wester-Oy, etc. Fair Isle in
the mid way between the Orcades, and Schetland.
Wyer-Oy, and Gress-Oy, and not far from thence Wester-Oy, which is Eighty
Miles distant from Schetland. Papa, and Stronza, are also Eighty Miles distant
from Schetland. Almost in the middle of the passage between them, lies Many
outlandish Fishermen resort to Fair Isle.
Fara, or Fair Isle, which is conspicuous and visible both from the Orcades,
and from Schetland too; for it arises into Three very high Promontories,
begirt with lofty Rocks, every way inaccessible, save that toward the North
East, it being a little lower, affords an Harbor safe enough for small Ships.
The Inhabitants thereof are very Poor; for the Fishermen, which Sail that way
every year, coming to Fish from England, Holland, and other Countries near the
Sea, do plunder and carry away, what they please.

The next after It, is the greatest Island of Schetland Isles, the greatest of
them called Mainland, as well as the greatest of the Orcades.
the Schetlandish, and therefore the Inhabitants call it the Continent or
Mainland, it is Sixty Miles in length, and in some places Sixteen in breadth, it
spreads it self into many small Promontories: Two of them I shall Name, the one
long, but narrow, running to the North; the other broader running to the
South-East. The Maritime parts of it are, for the most part, inhabited; but to
the inward parts no Animal comes but Fowl. Some few years since, the
Inhabitants endeavored to form Plantations, further then their Ancestors had
done, but the success did not answer. Their wealth is from the Sea, for it lies
convenient for Fishing on every side.

Ten Mile further toward the North, is the Isle Zeal, Yell.
or Yell, above Twenty Mile long, and Eight broad; so uncouth a place, that no
Creature can live therein, unless he be born there. A Merchant of Breme is
reported to dwell in this Island, who does import all sorts of Foreign Wares
(which the Inhabitants have need of) in great abundance. Between this Island
and Mainland, lie these small Islands, L^nga, Orna, Bigga, The Names of some
^^all Sc^etland (...).
Sancterry. About Nine Mile beyond it, to the North, stands Vuist, extended
above Twenty Mile in length, and Six in breadth. It Is of a plain and level Soil,
otherwise it is not unsightly to the Eye, Vuist, or Vust Isle.
but that it is surrounded with a very raging Sea. Between it and Yell, Via,
Vra, Linga, are interjected. Beyond it toward the West, are the two Skerrys and
Burra; on the East is Balta, Honnega, Fotlara, or Pheodor-oy, Seven Mile long,
distant Seven Mile from Vuist, and Eight from Yell, it is over against the
Streights which divide Vuist from Yell. Then many Petty Islands lie on the
East Side of the Mainland, as Mecla, the Three Eastern Skirrys, Chualsa, or
Diverse other small Islands.
Whals-Oy, Nostvada, Brasa, and Musa; the West side is begirt with the Western
Skirrys, Rotti, Papa the less, Vemendru, Papa the greater, Vallu, Trons Isle,
Burra, Hara the greater, Hara the less, and amongst them almost as many Holmes,
or Plain Islands, for Pasturage only are interspersed.

The The Schetlanders manner of Life and Trade.
Schetlanders live after the same manner, as the Islanders of the Orcades do,
save that as to their Household Provision, they are a little more hardy. Their
Apparel is after the German Fashion, which according to their Abilities is not
uncomely. Their incomes arise from a sort of Cloth, which they make very thick,
and sell to the Norwegians, as also from Oil, expressed out of the inwards of
Fishes; from Butter, and from Fishing: They Fish in small Vessels of two Oars,
which they buy of the Norwegians. Part of the Fish which they catch, they Salt,
and part they dry in the Wind. Out of those being sold, they raise up a Sum of
Money to pay their Tribute, and to provide Houses, wherein they may dwell, and
Household Stuff, so that a great part of their livelihood arises from thence.
They who study neatness in their Household Utensils, have some Silver Vessels
also. They use Measures, Numbers and Weights, after the German Fashion. Their
Language is also German, Their Language.
or almost the ancient Gothish. They know not what it is to be Drunk, only every
Month they invite one another, and on those days they are Their Innocent Mirth,
and Longaevity.
innocently Merry and Jocund, without those Brawls and other Vices, which are
occasioned by Drunkenness, for they persuade themselves that this custom
contributes much for the maintaining of Mutual Friendship. The firmness of
their Health appeared in one Named One Lawrence, a Schetlander, Married at an
Hundred years of Age, and lived above an Hundred and Forty.
Lawrence in our Age, who, after he was an Hundred years old, Married a Wife.
And when he was an Hundred and Forty, he used to Fish with his Skiff even in a
very rough and Raging Sea, he died but lately, not by the force of any grievous
Disease, but only by the Infirmities and Languishment of old Age.

The Second BOOK.
WHEN I endeavored to retreive the Memory of British Affairs, for above Two
Thousand years past, many Impediments did offer themselves in Bar to my design;
amongst which This was the chiefest, That there were for a long time no
Monuments of Learning in those Countries, whence the knowledge of our Original
was to be fetched; and when Letters came, though but late, into play, they were
nipp'd almost in the very Bud; for I may safely affirm, That all the Nations
which hitherto have seated themselves in Britain, have passed thither from
France, Spain and Germany. The French first of all received the The Origin of
Letters.
Characters of Letters from the Marsellian Greeks, by which they used to make
up their Accounts, and to send Letters one to another. The Figures of the
Letters, were Greek; but the Langauge was Gallick. But their Laws and the Rites
of their Religion, they did not commit to Writing, no not in Julius Caesar's
time; and much less did they Record their Noble Exploits, which yet, it is very
probable, were very considerably Great; and those things which were either
acted, or suffered, or else undergone in Italy, Germany, Thrace, Macedonia,
Graecia, and Asia, had been buried likewise in the same Oblivion, (so that
Posterity would never have come to the knowledge of them,) if Foreign Writers
had not Recorded and Transmitted them down to us. I confess, in Spain, the
Greeks had the use of Letters; and before them, the Phaenicians, who inhabited
the shore of the Mediterranean Sea: But of the Barbarians, only the Turdetani,
a People dwelling in part of Portugal, and in Algarbia, and Medina Sidonia.
Turdetani (as Strabo writes,) had any knowledge of them. But as for any
Ancient Writer, there was yet none that I know of. For Varro, Pliny, and if
there were any other Latin Authors, who touched any thing, by the by,
concerning the first Inhabitants of Spain, they confirm their Opinions therein,
rather by bare Conjectures, than the solid Testimony of Writers: In that part
of Britain which Caesar.
Caesar visited, there were no ancient Records at all; and among the more
Inland Inhabitants, which were more Barbarous, they were much less to be
expected. So that when he asked them, concerning the Origin of their Nation,
and the oldest Inhabitants thereof, as he writes, they returned him no certain
answer at all.

After Caesar, Cornelius Tacitus.
Tacitus, an Author both Faithful and Diligent, when the Roman Navy had coursed
about Britain, and had discovered all the inmost Roads and Recesses thereof;
yet he found out nothing of certainty, that he could commit to Posterity.
Moreover Gildas lived 400 years after Tacitus.
Gildas, who lived above Four Hundred years after Tacitus, does affirm, that
what he writes was not from any Monuments of Antiquity, of which he could find
none at all, but from Transmarine Report. As for Germany received Letters last
of all.
Germany, That Country was furnished with Learning last of all; but seeing, she
had nothing to produce out of old Records, which could be avouched for Truth,
according to her wonted Ingenuity in other Cases, she Coined no Fictions of her
own, to obtrude on the World. So then, they, who affirm, that they deduce the
Original of the Britans from old Annals, must first tell us, Who transmitted
down those Annals to us? As also, Where they have been concealed so long? And
how they came down uncorrupted to us, after so many Ages? In this case, some
fly to the Bards and Sanachies a sort of Chanters, inferior to Bards, called
by the Dynnywossals (or Gentlemen) of the Highlands, Sanachies, contracted from
Seneciones.
Sanachies, as the Preservers of Ancient Records, but very ridiculously, which
will be more clearly understood, if I explain what kind of Men these were, to
whom they would have credit to be given, in matters so Momentous, and those so
obscure too, and so remote from our Memory. First Strabo, Ammianus Marcellinus
and Lu^an, desscribe, who the B^rds we^e.
Strabo, and Ammianus do clearly enough express, what the Bards were, both
before, and also in their Times. But Strabo, Ammianus Marcellinus and Lu^an,
desscribe, who the B^rds we^e.
Lucan does it very plainly and succinctly, as to our present purpose, in these
Verses, Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas,
Laudibus in longum, Vat^s, diffunditis aevum,
Plurima s^curi fud^stis carmina, Bardi.


Englished thus: Ye Bards, such Valiant Souls, as fall in War,
Perpetuate with Rhimes, and Praises rare.


But the very Oldest of them were altogether ignorant of Letters, neither did
they leave any Records of Ancient Matters behind them.

The other were Bardlings or Sanachies, (as they call them,) which were
maintained by the chief of the Ancient Clans, and by some Wealthy Men besides,
one a piece, on purpose to Chant out (by Heart,) the Memories of their Patrons,
and the Achievements of their Ancestors, from their first Rise. But these too,
having no Learning at all, let any Man judge, what credit is to be given to
them, all whose hopes and subsistence did depend on Soothing and Flattering of
others. Besides, though what they deliver were most true, yet it would not much
advance the Writer of an History: Lastly, let us consider, how often the
Writers of such Famous Deeds as are past, are found in manifest Mistakes, how
often they themselves do Waver, Doubt, Fluctuate, and are at a loss, and how
vastly some of them do differ from others, and not a few contradict themselves.
If such Lapses are incident even to those, who seek after Truth, with great
Labor and Study, what can we hope for, from such other Persons, who being
without Learning (by which they who casually mistake, may be better informed,
and those who mistake on purpose, may be confronted,) do trust their Memory,
alone? I might allege, that the Memory is often times impaired by Disuse; it is
weakened by Age; or wholly lost by some Diseases. Besides, if they have a desire
to please their Patrons, (as it often comes to pass,) or, on the contrary, if
they have a mind to cross them; or, if the Passions of Anger, Hatred, or Envy
do intervene, (which pervert the Judgment,) Who can affirm any thing for Truth,
upon such Men's Authorities? Or, Who would take the pains to refute it, though
it were False? Or, Who would deliver down for certain, what he received from
such uncertain Authors? Wherefore, in so great a silence of old Great
uncertainties amongst the ancient Writers of British Affairs, and the Reasons
why?
Writers, (concerning matters of Antiquity,) who were all so hugely ignorant,
even of things acted in their own times, there being nothing assuredly true and
sincere, I count it more modest, to be silent in what one knows not, than by
devising Falsehoods to betray ones own Ignorance, and to slight and despise the
better Judgments of other Men.

It follows then, that there was so great a scarcity of Writers amongst all the
Nations of the Britains, that, before the coming in of the Romans thither, all
things were buried in the profound Darkness of Silence, in so much, that we can
get no Information of what was Acted, even by the Romans themselves, otherwise
than from Greek and Latin Monuments: And as for those things, which preceded
their coming, we may believe rather their Conjectures, than our own Fictions.
For what our Writers have delivered, every one concerning the Original of his
own Sept or Nation, is so absurd, that I should have counted my time lost to go
about to refel it, unless there were some who delighted in such Fables, as if
they were as true as Gospel, and so prided themselves with the Ornaments of
other Men's Feathers.

Moreover, the disagreement of later Writers makes a great accession to the
difficulty of this Task, for they deliver such Repugnancies, that a Man cannot
well tell, whom to follow; yea, there is such an absurdity amongst them, that
all of them seem most deservedly fit to be rejected. Neither do I so much
wonder at the Silence of the Ancients, in a matter so obscure, or the
Dissonancy of later Writers in feigning Falsehoods; as at the agreeing impudence
of some few: For they write of those times, in which all things were dubious
and uncertain, with so much positiveness and confidence, as if their design
were rather to court the Readers Ear, than to respect the Faithness of their
Narrations.

For in those first times, seeing the use of Tillage was not common, neither
among the Britains, nor many other Nations; but all their Wealth consisted in
Cattle, Men had no regard to their substance, which was very small, because
they were either expelled from their Habitations by such as were more powerful
than themselves; or, they themselves did drive out the weaker ones; or else,
they sought out better Pasture for their Cattle in Wild and Desert places: Upon
one or other of these Grounds, they easily changed, their Dwellings, and the
Places, they removed to, with new Masters soon got new Names. Besides, the
Ambition of the wealthier sort added much to the difficulty, who, to perpetuate
their Memory to Posterity, called Countries, Provinces and Towns by their own
Names. Almost all the Cities in Several Countries have changed their Names.
Spain, had two Names. The Names of the Inhabitants in It, and also the Names
of the Cities and Countries therein, received frequent alterations. Not to
speak of Egypt, Greece, and other remote Countries.

Saepius and nomen posuit Saturnia tellus.
Fair Italy (says Fame,)
Full often has changed her Name^
Add hereunto, that those Nations, who live in the same Country, have not
always the same Names. That which the Latins call Spain has several Names.
Hispania; The Greeks, Iberia; The Poets, Hesperia; St. Paul in his Epistle,
Theodoret and Sozomen in Their History, call Spania (i. e.) Spain. The Name of
the Greeks, so celebrated by the Latins, and all Nations of Europe, is more
obscure than the Greeks themselves. The Hebrews and Arabians keep their Old
Words, almost in all Nations, which were not so much as heard of by other
People. Scot, and English are the common Names of the British Nations, which,
at this day, are almost unknown to the Or Highlanders.
Ancient Scots, and Britains; for they call the one Albines, the other Saxons.
And therefore it is no wonder, if, in so great an uncertainty of Human Affairs,
as to the Names of Men and Places; Writers, who were born at several times, far
distant one from another, and having different Languages, and Manners too, do
not always agree amongst themselves. Though these things have occasioned
difficulties great enough, in searching out the first Original of Nations, yet
some of the Moderns too, being acted by a Principle of Ambition, have involved
all things in more thick and palpable darkness. For, whilst every one would
fetch the Original of his Nation, as high as he could; and so endeavor to
enoble it by devised Fables, by this immoderate License of coining Fictions,
What do they but obscure* That, which they ought to Illustrate? And, if at any
time they speak Truth, yet, by their frequent and ridiculous Untruths, at other
times, they detract from their own Credit; And are so far from obtaining that
Esteem, which they hoped for, that, by reason of their Falsehoods, they are
laughed at, even by those, whom they endeavored to cajole into an Assent.

To make this plain, I will first begin, as with the Ancientest Nation, so,
from the most notorious and impudent Falsehood. They who compiled a The Fabulous
Origin of the Britains.
New History of the Ancient Britains, having interpolated the Fable of the
Danaides, proceed further to feign, That one Diocletian, a supposed King of
Syria, and Labana his Wife, with their 33 Daughters.
Diocletian, King of Syria begat 33 Daughters on his Wife Labana; who killing
their Husbands on their Wedding night, their Father crowded them all together
into one Ship, without any Master or Pilot; who, arriving in Britain, then but
a Desert, did not only live solitarily in that cold Country; and not very full
of Fruits growing of their own accord, neither; but also, by the Compression of
Cacodaemons (forsooth) they brought forth Giants, whose Race continued till the
arrival of Brutus. They say, the Island was called Albion from Albine.
Albine, and that Brutus, and his Knight Errant Adventures.
Brutus was the Nephews Son of Aeneas, the Trojan, and the Son of Aeneas
Sylvius. This Brutus having accidentally killed his Father with a Dart, it was
looked upon as a lamentable and piteous Fact, by all Men; yet, because it was
not done on purpose, the punishment of Death was remitted, and Banishment
either enjoined, or voluntarily undertaken, by him. Brutus, a Parricide.
This Parricide having consulted the Oracle of Diana, and having run various
hazards through so many Lands and Seas, after 10 years arrived in Britain, with
a great number of Followers; and by many Combats having conquered the terrible
Giants in Albion, he gained the Empire of the whole Island. Brutus his Three
Sons.
He had three Sons, (as they proceed to Fable) Locrinus, Albanactus, and
Camber; between whom the Island was divided; Albanactus ruled over the Albans,
afterward called Scots; Camber over the Cambrians, (i. e.) the Welsh; They did
both Govern their several Precincts (as Viceroys) yet so, as that Locrinus had
supreme Dominion, who, being Ruler of the rest of the Britans, gave the Name of
An old Name for England.
Loegria to his part. Later Writers, that they might also propagate this
Fabulous Empire as much as they could, do make this Addition to it, That
Vendelina succeeded her Father Locrinus; Madanus, Vendelina.
Vendelina; Menpricius, Madanus; and Ebrancus, Menpricius, which later, of
Twenty Wives begat as many Sons; of which, Nineteen passed into Germany* and by
force of Arms conquered that Country, being assisted by the Forces of their
Kinsman, Alba Sylvius* and from those Brothers the Country was called Germany,
whence so called, according to old Story.
Germany. These are the things, which, the Brittons, and after them, some of
the English, have delivered concerning the first Inhabitants of Britain.

Here I cannot but stand amazed at their design, who might easily, and without
any reflection at all, have imitated the Athenians, Arcadians, and other famous
Nations, and have called themselve, Born in the same Country* where they live.
Indigenae, seeing it would have been no disgrace to them to own that Origin,
which the Noblest and wisest City in the whole World counted her Glory;
especially, since that Opinion could not be refuted out of Ancient Writers; and
had no mean Assertors, besides; yet, that they had rather forge Ancestors to
themselves, from the Refuse of all Nations, whom the very Series of the
Narration itself did make suspected, even to the unskilful Vulgar; and also
none of the Ancients, no, not by the meanest suspicion, did confirm. Besides,
if that had not pleased them, seeing it was free for them, (as some of the
Poets have Writ) to have assumed Honorable Ancestors to themselves, out of any
old Books; I wonder in my heart, what was in their Minds, to make choice of
such, of whom all their posterity might justly be ashamed. For what great folly
is it, to think nothing Illustrious, or Magnificent but what is Profligat and
Flagitious, or, at least, but a size below it; yet some there are, that value
themselves, among the ignorant, upon the score of such Trifles; as for Johannes
Annius.
John Annius, a Man (I grant) not unlearned, I think, he may be pardoned,
seeing Poets claim a Liberty to celebrate the Original of Families, and
Nations, with the mixture of Figments, but it is not equal to allow the ^ame
Privilege to those who undertake, professedly, to write an History.

To begin then farthest off: What is more abhorrent from all belief, than that
a few The Story of the 33 Sisters confu^ed.
Girls, without the help of Men to manage their Vessel, should come from
Syria, through so many Seas (which Voyage, even now adays, (when Men have
attained, by Use and Custom, more skill in Navigation,) is yet hazardous, (tho
with a brave and well-furnished Navy,) to the fag end, as it were, of the
World, and into a desolate Island too; and there to live without Corn or Fruits
of Trees; Yea, that such Ladies of a Royal Stock should not only barely
maintain their Lives, in so cold a Climate, destitute of all things; But also
should bring forth Giants; and that their Copulations, or Marriages, might not
seem unsuitable to their State, that they were got with Child (would you think
it?) by Cacodaemons. As for that Diocletian, pray, at what time, and in what
part of Syria, did he Reign? How comes it to pass, that Authors make no mention
of him, especially since the Affairs of no Nation are more diligently
transmitted to Posterity, than those of the Syrians are? How came he to be
called The Fable of Diocletian confuted.
Diocletian? Certainly that Name took its rise a Thousand Years after him,
amongst the Barbarians, and being Originally Greek, is declined after the Latin
form.

The next Accession of Nobility, (forsooth) is Brutus his Story refelled.
Brutus, the Parricide, that he so might not, in that respect, be inferior to
Br^tus and Romulus compared.
Romulus. This Brutus, whatsoever he were, whom the Brittons make the Author of
their Name and Nation, with what Forces, with what Commerce of Language, could
he penetrate so far into Britain? Especially in Those Times, wherein the Roman
Arms, even in the most flourishing State of their Commonwealth, having
conquered almost all the World besides, could scarce come: For it is needless
to mention, how, before Rome was built, the Affairs of Italy were at a very low
ebb; and how the Inhabitants thereof were averse from all Peregrination and
Travel. Neither need I enquire, Whether he came by Land, or Sea? The Alps, till
that time, were pervious only to Hercules; and the Gauls, by reason of their
connatural Fierceness, were as yet unacquainted with converse of Foreigners. As
for Sea-Voyages, The Carthaginians and the Greeks inhabiting Marseilles, scarce
dared to venture into the Ocean, but very late, and when things were well
settled at Home; And, even then, their Voyages were rather for Discovery, than
Conquest; much less can we believe, that Alban-Shepherds, a wildish sort of
people, would undertake so bold an attempt. Besides, all Men, who are not
ignorant of Latin, do know, that the Name of The Name of the True Brutus, when
it began, and how?
Brutus began to be celebrated under Tarquinius Superbus, almost Five Hundred
Years after that Commentitious Brutus; when Lucius Iunius, a Nobleman, putting
off his Native Grandeur, descended below himself, on purpose, to avoid the
Cruelty of their Kings; And, on pretense of being Foolish, he took that new
Surname to himself, and transmitted it to his Posterity. But the Monk, who was
the Forger and Deviser of this Fable of Brutus, seemed to see the absurdity of
the Invention, himself; yet, he thought to stop all Men's Mouths with the
pretense of Religion (forsooth) in in the Case, and would have every Body
think, that they obeyed the Oracle of Diana. Herein, I will not be nice in
inquiry, why this Oracle of Diana was unknown to Posterity, when the Oracles of
Faunus the Third King of the Aborigines, to whom Saturn (by whom he was
entertained) caused a Grove and Cave to be dedicated, whence Oracles were given
forth, (according to old Story.)
Faunus, Cumaea, so called from Cuma in the Gulf of Naples.
of Sybilla, and the Little Pieces of Oak-Wood-Lotteries, marked with Letters
or Words, almost like Dice, which when they were thrown, the Priest gave his
Response according to the Letter which was uppermost, at Praeneste, now
Palestrina, in Italy.
Praenestine Vaticinations, or Lots, were then in so great Credit.

I will only ask, In what Language did Diana answer? If they say, In Latin; I
demand, How Brutus could understand a Language, which arose Nine Hundred Years
after his time? For, seeing Horace, a very Learned Man, does ingenuously
confess, That he did not understand the Salii were Twelve Priests, instituted
by Numa Pompilius, in Honor of Hercules, or, as some say, of Mars. And the
Carmen Saliare, which they sang, was composed by the same Numa, in an obsolete
and almost unintelligible Language or Style.
Saliar Rythmes, which were made in the Reign of Numa Pompilius, How could that
Brutus, who died so many Years, before the Priests called Salii were Twelve
Priests, instituted by Numa Pompilius, in Honor of Hercules, or, as some say,
of Mars. And the Carmen Saliare, which they sang, was composed by the same
Numa, in an obsolete and almost unintelligible Language or Style.
Salii were instituted, understand Verses, made long after Horace his time, as
the Tenor of their Composure does show? Besides, how could the Posterity of
Brutus, so totally forget the Latin Tongue, that not the least Footsteps of it
remained amongst them? And whence got They that Language which they now use?
Or, if it be granted, that their (supposed) Gods, as well as their Men, then
spoke British in Italy, yet surely it was not the Tongue the Britains now make
use of; For That is so patched up of the Languages of the Neighbour-Nations,
that several Countries may know and own their own Words therein. But if they
say, That those Ancient Latins spoke British, how could that Monk understand so
old a Word, which was given forth 2000 Years before? But why do I prosecute
these things, so particularly, seeing it appears by many other Arguments also,
that the same Monk did forge this whole Story, and begat such a Brutus, (in his
own Brain) as never was in Nature, and also devised the Oracle of Diana, too. I
shall add the Verses themselves, that the Vanity of such cunning Sophisters may
more easily be discovered.

Brutus's supposed Address to the Oracle, with Diana's Answer thereunto.
Brutus's Address to the Oracle.

Diva, potens nemorum, Terror Sylvestribus apris,
Cui licet anfractus ire per aetherios,
Infernasque domos: Terrestria Iura resolve*
Et dic, quas terras nos habitare velis.
Dic certam sedem, qua te veneremur in avum,
Qua tibi Virgineis Templa dicabo choris.
Englished thus: Goddess of Groves, and Wild-Boars chase,
Who do the Etherial Mansions trace,
And Pluto's too; Resolve this Doubt,
Tell me, what Country to find out,
Where I may fix, and Temples raise,
For Virgin-Chores to sing thy praise.


The Oracles Answer.

Diana answers in Verses of the same kind, (so that they must needs be made by
one and the same Poet) not perplexed and ambiguous ones; or, such as may be
interpreted diverse ways, but clear and perspicuous ones, wherein she promises
That which she could never give, viz. The Empire of the whole World.

Brute, sub Occasum Solis trans Gallica regna,
Insula in Oceano est, undique cincta mari.
Insula in Oceano est, habitata Gigantibus Olim,
Nunc deserta quidem, Gentibus apta Tuis.
Hanc pete, namque tibi Seeds erit illa perennis,
Haec fiet natis altera Troja tuis;
H^c de prole tua Reges nascentur, and illis
Totius Terrae subaitus Orbis erit.
Rendered thus: Toward the West, beyond Gauls Kingdom's Bound,
An Isle there is, which the Ocean does Surround;
An Island once inhabited by Giants fell,
Now desolate, where thy Comrades may dwell;
Go thither, Brutus, there is a lasting place,
Another Troy for Thee, and for thy Race;
Kings of Thy Stock shall there the Scepter sway,
Whom the subdued World shall Obey.


I suppose, by these Verses, compared with the Histories, the whole Forgery
will be discovered, and that plainly enough. For, besides the vain promises on
both sides, the Rythms say, That the Island was not then inhabited but
desolate, but that it was inhabited before; But where (I pray,) then were those
Portentous Figments of Gogmagog and Tentagol, and other frightful Names of Men,
invented for Terror, (shall I say,) or for Laughter, rather? What will become
of those doughty Combats of Corineus, and others, the Companions of Brutus,
against not the Earth-born, but Hell-born, Giants? Thus far concerning Brutus,
and his Oracle.

Though these be so great Fictions, yet Posterity is so little ashamed of them,
that, but a few years ago no mean Writer amongst them, has impudently feigned,
That the Trojans spoke the British Language. Homer.
Homer and Dionysius Halicarnasseus.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, do easily refel the vanity of this shameless
Opinion. For the one gives Greek Names to all the Trojans; the other in a long
and serious Disputation, does contend, that the Trojans were Originally Greeks?
I pass by this consideration, that when Brute arrived in England with no great
Train, how within the space of Twenty years he could establish Three Kingdoms;
and how, they, who, all of them put together a^ first, could scarce make up the
number of one mean Colony, should in so short a time People an Island the
biggest in the whole World, and furnish it not only with Villages and Cities,
but set up in it Three large Kingdoms also; yea, who a while after, it seems,
grew so numerous, that Britain could not contain them, but they were forced to
Transport themselves into the large Country of Germany; where, overcoming the
Inhabitants, they compelled them to assume their own Name, which was not a
British, but a Latin one; and so from those Nineteen Brothers, (forsooth,)
(which indeed were not properly own Brothers, as we say, for almost each of
them had a several Mother,) that the Country should be called Germany. I have
related this Fable, as absurd as it is, not to take the pains to refute it, but
to leave it to the Germans themselves for Sport and Ridicule.

This in General concerning the Fables of the Brittons. But the intent of those
who devised them, seems not very obscure to me, for that Monstrous Fiction of
Devils lying with Virgins, seems to tend hereto; viz. That they might either
prove an Alliance between their Brutus, and two of the greatest Neighboring
Nations; or else, that they might vye with them in the Nobleness of their
Original. For the Gauls affirmed, (as Caesar has it) that they were descended
from Father Pluto; and so did the Germans, according to Tacitus. The cause of
devising this Figment, concerning Brutus, seems to be alike. For seeing the
Buthrotii, Inhabitants of Buthrotum, (new Butrinto) a small Village in Epirus
on the Sea coast not far from the Isle Corfu, once a large Roman Colony.
Buthrotii in Epirus, other People in Sicily; The Romans, Campanians, and
Sulmonenses in Italy; The Arverni, Inhabitants of Auvergne in the Dukedom of
Burgundy, their chief City is Clermont.
Arv^rni, Burgundians.
Hedui, People of the Franch Country.
Sequani, and last of all the Francs, Originally a People of Franconia in
Germany, who in the declining of the Roman Empire, conquered Gallia, and called
it Frankinland, now France; they were composed of so many warlike Tribes, that
the Turks do call all the Western Christians Francs to this very day.
Francs in Gaul, did celebrate, I know not what, Trojans as their Founders. The
Writers of British Affairs, also thought it very conducive to the advancement
of the Nobility of their Nation, if they derived its Original too, from the
very Archives of Antiquity, and especially from the Trojans, either because of
the famousness of that City, which was praised by almost all Nations; or else,
by reason of its Alliance with so many Nations, which are said to have started
up, as it were, out of the same common Shipwreck of that one Town. Neither did
they think themselves guilty of any effrontery in the Falsehood, if they did
somewhat participate of the (feigned) Nobility, which upon the same account was
common to so many Nations, besides themselves. Hence arose, as I judge, the
Fiction of Brutus, and other Fables of an older date, as impudently devised, as
foolishly received; it will, perhaps, be enough to show the vanity of all those
things, to put the Reader in mind, that they were unknown to Ancient Writers;
that when Learning flourished, they dared not peep abroad, that they were
coined in its decay, recorded by unlearned Flatterers, and entertained by
ignorant, and too credulous, Persons, who did not understand the Fraud of such
Cheaters. For such is the disposition of those Impostors, who do not seek the
public good by a true History, but some private advantage by Flattery, that
when they seem highly to Praise, the^ they most of all deride and jeer. For
what do they else, who, pretending to advance the Nobility of a People, for its
greater splendour do fetch it from the Skum and Riffraff of Nature? And yet,
credulous, (shall I say,) or not rather sottish Persons, do Pride themselves
with a pretended Eminency of an Original, which none of their Neighbors will
envy them for.

They also who have wrote of Old Scottish Writers blamed.
Scottish Affairs, have delivered down to us a more Creditable and Noble Origin,
as they think, but no less Fabulous than That of the Britains. For they have
adopted Ancestors to us, not from the Trojan Fugitives, but from those Greek
Hero's, whose Posterity Conquered Troy. For, seeing in those Ancient times, two
Nations of the Greeks were most of all celebrated, the Doors, and Jones, who?
Doors and the Doors, and Jones, who?
Jones, and the Princes of the Doors were the Argivi; and of the Jones, the
Athenians. The Scots make one The Scots fabulous Original from one Gathelus a
Grecian and Scota his Wife.
Gathelus to be the chief Founder of their Nation, but whether he were the Son
of Argus, or of Cecrops, that they leave in doubt; and that they may not be
inferior on this account, to the eminency of the Romans, they added to him a
strong Band of Robbers, with which he going into Egypt, performed gallant
Exploits, and after the departure (would you think it) of Moses, was made
General of the Kings Forces in that Land. And that afterward, with his Wife
Scota, the Daughter of the King of Egypt, he sailed about the whole shore of
Europe, adjacent to the Mediterranean Sea, and having passed through so many
Countries, which were desolate in that Age, or else, inhabited but by few, and
in few places, as Greece, Italy, France, (not to mention the numerous Islands
of the Mediterranean Sea,) some will have him to Land at the River Now E^r^, a
^amo^^ River in Spain, rising in the Mountains of Ast^r^^, and disinboguing it
self into the Mediterranean, in Catal^n^a.
Iberus, but leaving that Country which he could not keep, they draw him on
further to Gallaecia the Country about Comp^stella in Spain.
Galaecia, a Country much more Barren. Some Land him at the Mouth of the River
Durius, o^ D^^ro, Du^^o in Spanish, arising in old Cast^, and after a course of
14^ Spanish Leagues falls into the Atlantic Ocean, below Port a Port.
Durius, being the first of all Men, as I suppose, who adventured into the
Ocean with a Navy of Ships; and that there he built a brave Town, which is now
called from his Name Portus Gatheli, or Port a Port, whence the whole Country,
which from Lusus and Lusa, the Children of Bacchus, was a long time called
Lusitania and Portuga^, the Original of those Names.
Lusitania, began to be called Lusitania and Portuga^, the Original of those
Names.
Portugal, and afterward being forced to pass into Gallaecia, he there built
Brigantia, now called Compostella; also that Braga in Portugal was built by
him, at the Mouth of the River Munda.

These are the things which the Scots have fabulously wrote concerning the
Original of their Nation. In feigning of which, how uncircumspect they were, we
may gather from hence, that they did not give a Greek Name, to that Grecian
Gathelus, who was indeed unknown to the Greek Writers; that they allotted a
Latin Name, from an Haven or Port, to the City built by him rather than a Greek
one, especially in those times, when Italy it self was known to few of the
Greeks; that they doubt whether he were the Son of Argus, or of Cecrops; seeing
Argus lived almost an Hundred years before Cecrops. That he, who had arrived at
such a Figure by his Prudence, even amongst the most ingenious Persons of the
World, as to enjoy the Second place to the King, and to be put in Moses, the
Fugitiv's, room; and besides, being a stranger, to be honored with the
Marriage of the Kings Daughter; that he, I say, leaving the fruitfullest Region
in the World, and passing by the Lands of both Continents, both to the Right
and Left, and also so many Islands all fruitful in Corn, and some of them also
famous for the Temperature of the Air, as Crete, Sicily, Corsica, Sardinia,
(which, at that time, were rather seized than cultivated, and inhabited by a
wild sort of People,) should break out into the very Ocean, the very Name
whereof was formidable, especially since Men had then but small skill in Marine
Affairs; or, that he built the City of Port-Gathelus, or Port a Port, at the
River Duero, the Name of which City was never heard of till the Sarazens
obtained the Dominion of Portugal; also, that he built Braga, at the Mouth of
the River Munda, seeing there is so many Miles distance between Braga and
Munda; Two Rivers also being interjected betwixt them, viz. Duero and Vouga, or
Vaca; and Braga it self is not altogether a Maritime place: Moreover, I may
well ask, how Gathelus a Grecian, born of a Noble Family; and besides, eminent
for famous Deeds, seeing he was of a most ambitious Nation, in commending his
Name to Posterity, and being conveyed with a great Train into the extreme
parts of the World, and as then matters stood, almost rude and barbarous,
having built Towns, did not impose his own, no not so much as a Greek, Name on
them. For the Name of Portugal, or, (as some will have it,) the Port of Gathel,
being unknown to so many Ancient Writers, who have professedly undertook to
describe the Names of Countries, and Places, began to be celebrated but about
Four Hundred years ago. And the silence of all the Greeks and Latins,
concerning the coming of Gathelus into Spain, makes it much suspected,
especially since the Ancients make notable and frequent mention of the
Phaenicians, Persians, Carthaginians, Iberians, Gauls, and of the Companions of
Hercules and Bacchus, who came into that Country. But our Fablers, (as I judge)
never read the Monuments of the Ancients; if they had, seeing it was free for
them to assume an Author and Founder of their Nation and Nobility, out of any
of the Famous Grecians, they would never have picked up an Ignobler Person, for
their Founder; passing by Hercules and Bacchus, who were Famous amongst all
Nations, and whom they might have culled out, as well as any other, for the
Original of their Race.

These are the things which our Writers have delivered, concerning the Rise of
our Nation, which, if I have prosecuted more largely, than was necessary, it is
to be imputed to them, who pertinaciously defended them, as a Palladium,
properly the Image of Pallas in Troy, which as long as they kept in her Temple,
Troy could not be taken, (as the T^ojans thought,) but when Vlyss^s stole it
away then they were soon destroyed by the Greeks.
Palladium dropped down from Heaven. He that considers That, will, no doubt, by
reason of the obstinacy of my Adversaries, be more favorable to me. Concerning
the other Nations, which came later into these Islands, and fixed their
Habitations there, Picts, Saxons, Danes, Normans, because their History does
not contain any Monstrous absurdity, I shall speak of them hereafter, in a
fitter place.

But these two Nations (which I have mentioned,) seem to me to have deduced
their Original from the Gauls, and I will give you the reasons of my Judgment
therein, when I have first premised a few things, concerning the Ancient
Customs of the Gauls; all Gaul though it be fruitful in Corn, yet it is said to
be, and indeed is, more fruitful in Men; so that, as Strabo relates, there
were 300000 of the The Ancient Gauls in Caesar's time, divided from the
Belg^^^s, by the River S^^n; and from the Aq^itanians, by the Garron, from whom
the old Grecians called, the North-West part of E^rop^, Ce^to-S^^thia.
Celiae, only, who were able to bear Arms, though they inhabited but a third
part of France, therefore though they lived in a fruitful Country, yet being
overburthened by their own multitudes, it is probable, that for the lessening of
them, they were permitted to use From which no Issue could ensue.
Masculine Venery. Yet neither when by this Expedient, there seemed not
provision enough made against the penury of their Soil, the company of Heads
being as yet numerous and burdensome, sometimes by public Edicts, and
sometimes by private Persuasions, they sent forth many Colonies into all the
neighboring Countries, that their Multitudes at home might be exhausted.

To begin with Colonies of Gauls sent into Spain.
Spain, They sent their Colonies so thick thither, that Ephorus, as Strabo
relates, extends the length of Gaul even to the Gades or Cadiz, and indeed all
that side of Spain toward the North, by the Names of the People and Nations
inhabiting them, has long witnessed a French Original. The first we meet with,
are, the Celtiberi.

-- Profugique a gente Vetusta
Gallorum, Celtae, miscentes nomen Iberis,
The wandering Celts in Spain their Seats did fix;
And there their Names with the Iberi mix.
These did propagate their bounds so far, that, though they inhabited a Craggy
Country, and besides not over fruitful, yet Ma^cus Marcellus exacted from them
Six Hundred Talents, as a Tribute. Moreover, from the Celtae and Celtiber^,
whence?
Celtae, or Celt^beri, the Celtici derive their Original, dwelling by the River
Anas, by Ptolomy Surnamed Celtici Boetici.
Boetici; and also other Celtici Lustanici.
Celts in Portugal, near to the River Anas, and if we may believe Pomponius
Mela, a Spaniard, the Celts do inhabit from the Mouth of the River Duero, unto
the Promontory, which they call Celticum or Ne^ium Pr^m^ntorium.
Nerium, i. e. Capo (...) Terrae, but distinguished by their Sirnames, viz. the
Groni^, Presamarci, Tamarici, Nerii, and the rest of the Gallaeci, whose Name
shows their Original to be Gauls.

On the other side, there passed out of France into Italy, the People of
Piemont.
Ligurians, the People about Br^xia and Verona.
Libii, The Salassii; of P^emo^^ also.
the Salassii, Insubres of Gall^a-Transpadana about Millan.
the Insubres, Of Main, or rather Normandy.
the Cenomani, the Bo^^ People of Acqu^tain.
Boii, and the Senones were a Warlike People of Gaul inhabiting the Country now
called Le Sennois.
Senones, and, if we may believe some Ancient Writers, the Venetians
themselves. I need not relate how large Dominions these Nations had in Italy,
seeing all who are but a little versed in History, cannot be ignorant thereof,
neither will I be too scrupulous in inquiring what Troops of Gauls made their
Seats in Thrace, or, leaving it, having subdued Macedonia and Greece, passed
into Bithinia, where they erected the Kingdom of Galatia.
Gallo-Graecia in Asia, seeing that matter does not much concern our purpose.

My discourse then hastens to Germany, and concerning the Colonies of Gauls
sent into Germany.
Gaulish Colonies therein, we have most Authentic Evidences, C. Julius Caesar,
and C. Cornelius Tacitus; the first of them in his Commentaries of the Gallick
War, writes, that at one time the Gauls were esteemed more Valiant than the
Germans. And therefore that the A Colony from Languedock in France, to the
Neecar in Germany, and the Country about that River.
Tectosages possessed the most fruitful part of Germany about the Hercynian
Forest; and the Bohemians, as the other affirms, do declare by their Names,
that their Founders were the Aquitanians in Gaul.
Boii. And sometimes the Swissers.
Helvetians possessed the nearer places between the Rivers Main and Rhene, also
the Decumates People of Wirtenburg.
Decumates beyond the Rhene, were of Gallick Original, and the Gothini, on the
River Oder.
Gothini near the Danow, whom Claudian calls Gothunni: Arrianus in the Life of
Alexander calls them Getini; and Flavius Vopiscus, in the Life of Probus
Gautunni. But Claudian reckons even the Gothunni amongst the The Getes were a
People of Dacia about Moldavia.
Getae; and Stephanus is of Opinion, that the Getes are called Getini, by
Ammianus, so that perhaps the Getes themselves may acknowledge a Gallick
Original, seeing it is certain, that many Gallick Nations passed over into
Thrace, and there resided in that Circuit thereof, which the Getes are said to
have possessed; Tacitus also writes, that in his time, the Gothini used the
Gallick Language; besides, the Danes.
Cimbri, as Philemon says, and (if we believe Tacitus) the Prussians or
Livonians.
Aest^ones, dwelling by the Swedish Sea, where they gather Amber, did speak
British, which Language was then the same with the Gall^ck, or not much
different from it. There are many Footsteps of Gallick Colonies, through all
Germany, which I would willingly recite, but that, what I have already alleged
is enough for my purpose; viz. To show how widely France did extend her
Colonies, round about Britain.

What then shall we say of Colonies of Gauls, sent into Britain.
Britain it self; which did equal those Nations neither in greatness, strength,
nor skill in Military Affairs? What did she, that was so near to the Valiantest
of the Gauls, and not inferior to the neighbor Nations, either in the
mildness of the Air, or the fruitfulness of the Soil; did she, I say, entertain
no Foreign Colonies? Yes, many, as Caesar and Tacitus affirm, and, as I hold,
all her (...) Inhabitants came from thence. For it is manifest, that Three
Nations anciently inhabited Britain; the Britons, Picts, and Scots.
three Nations did anciently possess the whole Island, the Brittons, Picts, and
Scots, of which I will speak hereafter.

To begin then with the Brittons, whose Dominion was of largest extent in
Albium: The first, that I know, who has discovered any certainty concerning
them, was C. Julius Caesar. He thinks, that the inmost Inhabitants were
Indigenous, i. e. born in the same Country.
Indigenae, because, after diligent enquiry, he could find nothing of their
first coming thither; neither had they any Monuments of Learning, whence he
might be informed. He says, that the Maritime parts of the Island were
possessed by the In Caesar's time, Belgium was accounted part of France.
Belgae, whom hopes of Prey had allured thither, and the fruitfulness of the
Soil, and mildness of the Air, had detained there. He thinks this a sufficient
argument to confirm his Opinion, that many did retain the Names of the Cities,
whence they came, and that their Buildings were like those of the Gauls.

Cornelius Tacitus, a grave Author, adds; that their Manners are not unlike,
and that they are equally bold in running into Dangers, and as fearful how to
get out of them; that there were great Factions and Sidings among them Both.
And lastly, that Britain, in his time, was in the same State as Gaul was,
before the coming of the Romans. Pomponius Mela adds further, That the Brittons
used to Fight on Horseback in Chariots and Coaches, being harnessed in French
Armor. Add hereto, that Bid, who lived before all those, who have wrote such
Fabulous things of the Origin of the Britons, and is of greater Authority than
them all, affirms; That the first Inhabitants of the Island came out of the
Tract of Britany in France.
Armorica. Some Grammatists of the Greeks, differ much from the above mentioned
Authors, for they say, that the Brittons received their Names from Britannus,
the Son of Celto. They assuredly agree in this, that they would derive their
Original from the Gauls; of the later Authors, Robertus Robertus Caenalis.
Caenalis, and Pomponius Laetus.
Pomponius Laetus, in the Life of Dioclesian, (an Author not to be despised) do
subscribe to this Opinion; both of them, as I suppose, being convinced by the
Power of Truth. Yet, Both seem to me to mistake in this point, that they deduce
them from the Peninsula of the Brittons, which is now called Britany to the
River Loir, especially since the Maritime Colonies of Britain, as Caesar
observes, do testify by their very Names, whence their V^z. From the Belgians.
Transportation was.

It follows, that we speak of the Gallick Colonies, sent into Colonies of Gauls
sent into Ireland.
Ireland; I showed before, that all the North side of Spain was possessed by
Gallick Colonies. And there are many reasons assignable, why they might pass
out of Spain into Ireland, for either the easy passage might be a great
inducement; or else, the Spaniards, might be expelled out of their Habitations
by the excessive Power and Domination of the Persians, Phaenicians, and
Graecians, who, having overcome the Spaniards, rendered them Weak and Obnoxious
to their Oppression and Violence. Moreover, there were Causes amongst the
Spaniards themselves, for they being a People cemented and made up of many
Nations, and not well agreeing among themselves, the desire of Liberty, and the
avoiding of Servitude, in the midst of Civil Wars and new Tumults, arising
amongst a People that was greedy of War, might make them willing to depart: He
that weighs these causes of Transmigration, will not wonder, if many of them
did prefer a mean condition abroad, conjoined with Liberty, before a Domestic
and bitter Servitude, and when they were once arrived there, the State of Spain
growing daily more and more Turbulent, made them willing there to abide; for
sometimes the Carthaginians, and sometimes the Romans, did exercise all the
Miseries of Servility upon the Conquered Spaniards, and so compelled them to
avoid those Evils, by a flight into Ireland, there being no other neighbor
Nation into which, either in their Prosperity they might so well transport
their over-abounding Multitudes; or else wherein, in adversity they might find
a shelter against their Calamities. Besides, the Clemency of the Air did retain
them there, for, as Caesar says, the Air of Britain is more temperate than That
of France. And Ireland exceeds Both in goodness of Soil, and also in an equal
Temperature of the Air and Climate. Besides, Men born and educated in a barren
Soil, and given to Laziness besides, as all Spaniards are, being transported
almost into the richest Pastures of all Europe, no marvail, if they willingly
withdrew themselves from homebred Tumults, into the bosom of a Peace beyond
Sea. Notwithstanding all that I have said, yet I would not refuse the Opinion
of any Nation concerning their Ancestors, provided it were supported by
probable Conjectures, and ancient Testimony.

For Tacitus, upon sure Conjectures, as he thinks, does affirm, that the West
side of Britain or Albium, was inhabited by the Posterity of the Spaniards. But
it is not probable, that the Spaniards should leave Ireland behind them, being
a Country nearer and of a milder Air and Soil, and first Land in Albium, but
rather that they first arrived in Ireland, and from thence emitted their
Colonies into Britain. And that the same thing happened to the Scots, all their
Annals do testify; and Bid, Lib. 1. does affirm. For all the Inhabitants of
Inhabitants of Ireland, anciently called Scots.
Ireland were first of all called Scots, as Orosius shows; and our Annals
relate, that the Scots passed more than once out of Ireland into Albium: First
of all, Fergusius, the Son of Ferchard, being their Captain; and after some
Ages, being expelled from their Habitations they returned into Ireland; and
again, under their General Reutharus, they returned into Britain. And
afterward in the Reign of Fergusius the Second, great aid of Irish-Scots were
sent, who had their Quarters assigned in Gallaway. And Claudian in his time
shows, That Auxiliaries were transmitted thence against the Romans; for he
says, -- Totam cum Scotus Iernam
Movit, and insesto spumavit Sanguine Tethys.
The Scot all Ireland did excite,
To cross the Seas, against Rome to Fight.


And in another place, Scotorum tumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
Whole heaps of Scots cold Ireland did lament.


But in the beginning, when both People, i. e. the Inhabitants of Ireland and
their Colonies sent into Albium, were called Scots, that there might be some
distinguishment betwixt them, Irish-Scots and Albin-Scots.
some Scots were called Irish-Scots, others Albin-Scots; and by degrees, their
Sirnames came to be their Names, so that the ancient Name of Scots was almost
forgotten, and not to be retrieved from common Speech, but only from Books and
Annals. As for the Name of Picts, I judge it not their Ancient and Country
Name, but occasionally given them by the Romans, because their Bodies were
indented, as it were, with Scars, which the Verses of Claudian do show, Ille
leves Mauros, nec falso nomine Pictos,
Claudian.
Edomuit, Scotumque vago mucrone secutus,
Fregit Hyperboreas remis audacibus undas.
He nimble Moors, and painted Picts did tame,
With far-stretch'd Sword the Scots he overcame,
And with bold Oars the Northern Seas did Furrow.


And elsewhere, Venit and extremis Legio praetenta Britannis,
Quae Scoto dat froena truci, ferroque notatas
Perlegit exanimes, Picto moriente, figuras.
The Legion came, the outmost Britains Guard,
Which the fierce Scot did curb with Bridle hard;
And Read the Marks in the Skins of dying Picts,
Insculp'd with Iron.


H^rodian.
Herodian also makes mention of the same Nation, but concealing its Name, and
says plainly, That they did paint their Bodies; but he does not affirm, That
they did it with Iron; Neither (says he) are they acquainted with the use of
Apparel, but they surround their Belly and their Neck with Iron, as thinking
that Metal to be an Ornament and sign of Riches; as the other Barbarians do,
Gold. And moreover, they mark their Bodies with sundry Pictures, and with
Animals of all shapes, and therefore they will put on no Garments, lest they
should hide their Paint. With what Name they call themselves, the thing is so
ancient, that it is hard to determine. It Is certain, their Neighbour-Nations do
not agree concerning their Name; for the Brittons call them Pictiades, Picti,
and Peachti, old Names for Pic^s.
Pictiades; The English, Pichti; The old Scots, Peachti. And besides, the Names
of some places, which were heretofore under the Jurisdiction of the Picts, but
are now possessed by the Scots, seem to have a different Appellation from them
all. For the Hills called Pentland-Hills in Lothian.
Pentland-Hills, and the Pentland-Firth, the Firth between Ca^^hness and O^kny.
Pentland-Bay, or Firth, seems to be derived from Penthus, not from Pictus.
But, I verily believe, those Names were imposed, in aftertimes, either by the
English, or else by the Scots, who used the English Tongue; for the Ancient
Scots did neither understand nor use them. As for the Name of Picts, whether
the Romans Translated a Barbarous Word into a Latin one of a near sound; or,
whether the Barbarians applied a Latin Word, every one to his own Country Tone
and Declension, it is all a case to me. Well then, being agreed of the Name, and
it being confessed by all Writers, That they came from the Eastern Parts into
Britain; from Scythia, say some; from Germany, say others; it remains, that
tracing their Footsteps by Conjectures, we come as near the Truth as we can.
Neither do I perceive any surer Foundation of my Disquisition, than by painting
their Bodies; so did the A^ii, a People o^ Poland, but formerly accounted part
of Germany.
Arii in Germany, and the People of Eu^op^a Sarmatia and Scythia, now under the
Moscovite.
Agathrrsi, but it was only, that they might appear more terrible to the Enemy
in War, and they did it only with the Juice of Herbs. But seeing the Picts
marked their Skins with Iron, and stigmatized them with the Pictures of diverse
Animals: The better way will be to inquire, What Nations, either in Scythia,
Germany, or the Neighbor-Countries, did use that Custom of painting their
Bodies, not for Terror, but Ornament. And, First, we meet with the Geloni,
Inhabitants of Scythia Europea upon the River Boristhenes.
Geloni, according to Virgil, of whom Claudian speaks in his first Book against
Ruffinus; Membraque qui ferro gaudet pinxisse Gelonus.
The Geloni love to Print
Their Limbs with Iron Instrument.


We meet also with the People of (...).
Getae in Thrace, mentioned by the same Poet; Crinigeri sedere patres, pellita
Getarum
Curia, quas plagis decorat numerosa cicatrix.
Skin-wearing Getes consult, with Hair unshorn,
Whose marked Bodies numerous Scars adorn.


Therefore, seeing the Geloni, as Virgil writes, are Neighbors to the Getes,
and either the People of Sarmatia Europaea, so called because compounded of
Goths and Huns, whence Claudian calls them Mixti Gothunni.
Gothunni, or Getini, according to Arr^anus, are numbered amongst the Getes;
and seeing the Gothunni, as Tacitus says, speak the Gallick Language; what
hinders, but that we may believe the Picts had their Original from thence?

But, from whatsoever Province of Germany they came, I think it very probable,
that they were of the ancient Colonies of the Gauls, who seated themselves
either on the The Baltic, or rather the Bothnick Sea or Gulf.
Swedish Sea* or on the The River Danulius, arising in the Alps, and running
through Germany, Hungary, etc. at last discharges it self by six Mouths into
the Euxin Sea.
Danow. For the Men of a Gallick Descent, being counted Foreigners by the
Germans, (as indeed they were) I judge their Name was used in a way of
reproach, so that one word, i. e. Walsch has several Acceptations.
Walsch, (with them) signifies a Gaul, a Stranger, and a Barbarian, too. So
that it is very credible, That the Ancestors of the Picts, either being
expelled by their Neighbors, or driven up and down by Tempests, were easily
reconciled to the Scots; yea, were befriended and aided (as it is reported) by
them, as a People allied to Them, almost of the sam^ Language with them, and
their Religious Customs not unlike. So that, it might easily come to pass, that
thereupon they might mix their Blood, and, by Marriages, make a Coalition, as
it were, into one Nation. For otherwise, I do not see, how the Scots, which
then possessed Ireland, being a fierce and rough-hewn People, should so easily
enter into an Affinity and complete Friendship with Strangers, who were
necessitous and destitute of all things, which they never saw before, and with
whom they had no Commerce, in point of Laws, Religion, or Language.

But here the Authority of Bid, the Anglo-Saxon, does somewhat obstruct my
passage, who is the only Writer, that I know of, that affirms, That the Picts
used a different Language from the Scots; For, speaking of Britain, he says,
That It did search after, and profess the Knowledge of the highest Truth, and
the sublimest Science in five Languages, the English, British, Scottish,
Pictish, and Latin. But, I suppose, Bid calls five Dialects of one and the
same Tongue, Five Tongues, as we see the Greeks do, in the like case: And as
Caesar does, in the beginning of his Commentaries of the Gall^ck War. For he
says, That Three parts of Gaul did use different Languages and Customs. But
Strabo, though he grants that the Aquitans, i e. the Gu^enno^ in France.
Aquitans used a different Language from the other Gauls; yet, he affirms, That
all the rest of the Gauls used the same Language, but with a little Variation.
The The British and the Scots anciently used one Language, but a different way
of pronuncia^ion.
Scots also do not differ from the Britains in their whole Language, but in
Dialect rather, as I shall show hereafter; seeing their Speech, at present,
does so far agree, that it seems of old to have been the same, for they differ
less than some Gallick Provinces do, which yet are all said to speak Gaulish.
And therefore other Writers give not the least suspicion of a different
Language; and They, as long as Both Kingdoms were distinct, as if they had been
People of one Nation, did always contract Marriages one with another; and as
they were mixed in the beginning, so afterward they carried themselves as
Neighbors, and oftentimes as Friends, until the Destruction of the Picts.

Neither did the remainder of them, (who, when their Military Race was extinct,
yet must needs be many) in any degree, corrupt the Scottish Tongue: Nor indeed
are there any Footsteps of a Foreign Language in the Places and Habitations
which they left. For all the Countries of the Picts, and many particular Places
therein too, do yet retain Scottish Appellations, except a very few, who, upon
the Saxon-Tongu's prevailing over our Country-Language, had German Names
imposed upon them.

Neither is This to be omitted, That, before the coming of the Saxons into
Britain, none of the British Nations used Interpreters to understand one
another. Wherefore, seeing the Scottish, English* and German Writers do
unanimously accord, That the Original of the Picts had their Origin from
Germany.
Picts was from Germany; and it is also manifest, That the Gothunni, or Getini,
were Colonies of the Gauls, whose Language they spoke; and that the Aestii
spoke British, by the Swedish, or Baltic Sea: Whence may we rather fetch the
Descent of the Picts? Or, They being expelled from their Native Habitations,
Whither should they go but to their own Kindred? Or, Where were they likely to
obtain Marriage-Unions, but amongst a People of Affinity with them, in Blood,
Language and Manners?

But if any one deny, That the Picts were descended from the Gothunni, or
People of Prussia and L^vonia.
Aestii, or Getae, being induced to that Persuasion by the great distance of
those Countries from Britain; Let him but consider, How many, and How great
Migrations of People were made, even in all parts of the World, in those Times,
wherein the coming of the Picts into Britain is recorded to have been, and also
for many Ages after; and then he may easily grant, that such things might not
only be done, but be done with great facility, too. The Gauls did then possess
a great part of Spain, Italy, Germany, and Britain, by their Colonies; They
proceeded so far as Palus Maeotis, and the Cimmerian Bosphorus, by their
Depredations; and after they had wasted Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece, they
fixed their Seats in Asia.

The Danes.
Cimbri, People of Swisserland.
Ambrones, and People of Germany, near the Baltic Sea.
Teutones, having wasted Gaul, pierced into Italy: The Geloni, whom Virgil
places in Thrace, are, by other Writers, said to dwell near to the Of V^logna
in Moscovy, which was then called Scythia, or Sarmatia Europaea.
Agathyrsi, in Scythia.

The Goth^, for a great while, an obscure Nation, yet, in a short time, like a
Flood, overran Europe, Asia, and Africa. And therefore, seeing, for many Ages
after, Those, who were Grandees, and more powerful than others, challenged to
themselves the Seats of their Inferiors; the Weak, being obnoxious to the
Injuries of the Strong, left their Country, which they could not keep; so that,
its no great Wonder amongst the Wise, if Men, having long conflicted with
adverse Fortune, and being tossed up and down by many Peregrinations; having,
besides, no certain Habitation, did, at length, betake themselves to remote, or
far distant, Countries.

Besides, we see, That the Roman Writers do place Two Ancient Nations within
those Limits, which did bound the Kingdoms of the Scots and Picts, the Mayatae.
Mayatae and A^tacottae.
A^tacottae. Of these, (I suppose) the A Nation of the Picts, that lived North
of (...) Wall in (...) and the Me^ss.
Mayatae, whom Dion alone, of all the Authors that I know, does mention, were
of the Picts Race, seeing he places them in the Countries nearest to the ( t)
Caledonian Sea; and it is certain, that the Picts did inhabit those Provinces.
As for the One of the (...) of the Picts, living near the S^^ts on the East
Sea, betwixt Twee^ and T^^e in (...) mixed People of Picts and S^o^^, that
inhabited the (...) man (...).
Attacottae, it appears out of Marcellinus, That they were the Progeny of
those, who, sometimes being excluded by A^rian's Wall, afterward enlarging
their Dominions unto the Wall of Severus, were comprehended within the Roman
Province, because I find in a Book of the Romans concerning Camp Discipline
through their Provinces, that, among the Foreign Auxiliaries, there were some
Troops of the Attacottae, as well as of the Britains: Which makes me hesitate,
Whether of the Two to admire in Lud, his Boldness, or his Stupidity; His
Boldness, who affirms, That the Attacottae were Scots, but without any certain
Author, or probable Conjecture; His Stupidity, that, in the very place of
Marcellinus, cited by him, he sees not, that the Scots are plainly
distinguished from the Attacottae. For Marcellinus says, The Picts, Saxons,
Scots, and Attacottae, vexed the Britains, with perpetual Miseries. Of the same
Stupidity is he guilty, when he affirms, That the Caledonii were of the Nation
of the Britains; whereas, it is plain, they were Picts, which Lud himself does
clearly demonstrate by a Testimony out of a Panegyric, dedicated to
Constantius, which he produces against himself. For, says the Author of that
Oration, The Woods of the Caledones and of other Picts; That Testimony (such
was his Folly) he produces for himself, not observing, (such was his Stupidity)
that it makes against him. If we look to the Word it self, it is Scottish, for
Calden in Scotch is that Tree called the Hasel, whence, I judge, came the Name
of the Caledonian Woods, and the Town of the Caledonians, situate by the River
Tay, which is yet called Or Dunk^^den in Perthshire.
Dancalden, i. e. the Hasel-Hill-Town. And if I dared to indulge my self so
much Liberty, as to disagree from all the Books of Ptolemy, for the
Deucaledonian, I would write the Duncaledonian, Sea; and for the Dicaledones in
Marcellinus, Duncaledones.
Duncaledones: Both the Sea and the Nation being Surnamed from the Town,
Duncalden. What I have written may satisfy any favorable Reader, yet I shall
add other Testimonies, which The Sameness of Religion, Language, Names of
Places, are Characters of one and the same Nation
C. Plinius thinks to be manifest Signs of the Originals of Nations, viz.
Religion, Language, and Names of Towns.

First of all, it is manifest, That the Bond of Religion, and the Identity of
Sentiment as to the (supposed) Gods, has been always held the strictest tie of
Obligation, and Alliance, amongst Nations. Now the Britains and the Gauls
maintained the same Divine Worship, they had the same Priests, The Britains and
Gauls of one Religion.
the Druydes, amongst them, who were in no Nation, else; whose Superstition had
so besotted the Minds of both Nations, that many have doubted, which of the two
(first) learned that sort of Philosophy, one from the other. Tacitus also says,
that they had the same Sacred Rites and Superstitious Observations. And that
Tomb erected nea^ (...) on the (...).
New Carthage, called M^rcurius Teutates, as Livy writes, does show, that the
Spaniards, the greatest part of whom drew their Original from the Gauls, were
not free from those Rites. Also, the same kind of Priests or Sacrists, called
by both of them Bards were the He^^lds, Poets, and M^si^ians of the Ancient
Gaul^ and Britains.
Bards, were in great Honor, both amongst the Gauls and Britains. Their
Function and Name does yet remain among all th^se N^^ions, which use the old
British Tongue: and so much Honor is given to them, in many places, that their
Persons are accounted Sacred, and their Houses, Sanctuaries: Yea, in the height
of their Enmities, when they manage the cruellest Wars one against another, and
use their Victories, as severely; yet these B^rds p^s^'d (...) b^tween the
A^mies of (...) greeting Nations.
Bards and their retinue have free liberty to pass and repass, at their
pleasure. The Nobles, when they come to them, receive them honorably, and
dismiss them with Gifts. They make Canto's not unelegant, which, Rhapsodists
((...)) Rehea^^e^, or I^terp^e^e^ (...) Verses by piecemeal.
Rhapsodists recite, either to the better sort, or else to the vulgar, who are
very desirous to hear them; and sometimes they sing them to Musical Tunes and
Instruments. Many of their Ancient Customs yet remain; yea, there is almost
nothing changed of them in Ireland, but only in Ceremonies and Rites of
Religion. This for the present concerning their Religion. It remains now, that
we speak concerning their Ancient Language, and the Names of the Towns, and of
their People. But these Parts, tho several, (for the most part*) shall yet be
promiscuously handled by me; because that many times one depends upon another,
as its foundation; especially, sithence a proper Name, either by its
Origination or Declination, does assert, or indicate, the Country whence a Man
comes: Yet, tho these things are intwisted, and do mutually confirm one
another, for the Reader's Instruction, I will sometime handle them, severally,
as much as I can.

First of all, Tacitus in the Life of his Father-in-law, Agricola, Tacitus
does affirm, That the Gaulish Tongue did not much differ from the British;
whence I gather, that they were sometimes the same; but, by little and little,
either by Commerce with Foreign Nations; or, by the Importation of new
Commodities, unknown before to the Natives; or, by the Invention of new Arts;
or, by the frequent change of the Form of Garments, Arms, and other Furniture;
A Speech, or Language, that was very flexible of itself, might be much altered,
sometimes augmented, sometimes adulterated, many new words being found out, and
many old ones corrupted. Let a Man but think with himself, how much the
Inconstancy and Humourousness of the Vulgar does assume to it self, in this
particular; and how ready Men are, and always were, to loath present things,
and to study Innovations; he will find the judgment of the best of Poets, and
the only Censor, in these Cases, to be most true, Vt Sylvae foliis pronos
mutantur in annos, Horat. de ^ree Poetica.

Prima cadunt, it a verborum vetus interit aetas*
Et, juvenum ritu, florent modo nata vigentque.
As withered Leaves fall off from Trees,
And new supply their pla^es;
So Languages decay and cease,
New Speech brings in new Grace's.


And a little after, Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor, vocabula, si volet usus,
Quem penes arbitrium est, and jus and norma loquendi.
Many Words shall fall,
Which now we highly prize:
And Words, which now have fallen,
Shall hereafter Rise;
Use, or Custom, Rules this thing,
And governs Language, as a King.


It Is true, he spoke this of the Latin Tongue, which, by the great care of the
Romans, was kept uncorrupted, and which all the Nations contained within the
large bounds of their Empire, did diligently Learn. And therefore it is no
wonder, if a Language, (even before Colonies were sent into all parts, out of
Gaul,) which already had different Dialects at home; and also, was afterward
corrupted by the mixture of diverse Nations, being in it self too barbarous at
first, and almost neglected by those themselves that used it; and after it
again re-enter'd, from a Foreign Soil, into Britain, which was then divided
into Kingdoms, for the most part, obnoxious to Strangers; it is no wonder, I
say, if, upon all these prejudices it was not always consistent with it self.
For at first, the The Celts were a numerous People Inhabiting principally about
Lions, from whom one part of France was called Gallia Celtica.
Celtae, and the Inhabitants of Belgium (now the Low Countries or the
Netherlands) in Caesar's time, counted a third part of France, by the Name of
Gallia Belgica.
Belgae did use a different Dialect, as Strabo thinks. Afterward, when the
Celtae sent abroad great Colonies into Spain, as the Names of Celtiberi and
Celtici do declare. And the Belgae made their descent into the Maritime parts
of Britain, as may be collected from the Names of Winchester.
Venta Belgarum, of the Inhabitants of Berkshire, so called from the Atrebates
of Gallia Belgica, who transported themselves thither.
Atrebates, and Living in Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge and Huntingtonshire,
transplanted from the Iceni in Belgium.
Iceni, it must needs follow, that on the one side the Spaniards, and on the
other the Romans, the English, the Danes, and the Normans, must bring in many
strange Words with them, and so corrupt the Country Speech. Yea, I rather judge
it more worthy of Admiration, that the Languages of neighboring Nations,
having been adulterated by the coming in of so many strange People, and in
great part changed by the Speech of neighbor Counties, that yet, so long time
after, the Britains should not differ in their whole Language, but only in
certain Idioms and Dialects only: For, if any one of them, though of another
Nations, do hear a Man speak British; yet he may acknowledge the sound of his
own Language, and may understand many Words, though he do not comprehend his
whole Discourse. Neither ought it to seem strange to us, if the same Words do
not signify the same things in all Nations, if we consider, what alterations
Commerce with neighboring Countries does daily make in the Speech of all
Nations; and, how much change is made by daily Conversation with Foreigners;
how many new Words are coined to express things, newly invented; how many are
imported with Wares and Traffic, even from the furthest parts of the World;
how many old obsolete Words are difus'd; how many are lengthned by the addition
of Letters or Syllables; and how many are shortened by contrary Decurtations;
and some also new pargeted (as it were) by mutation or transposition of
Letters. I will not inquire, in how short a time, and how much, the The Jones
were a Colony of the Greeks, which Inhabited I^nia, on the Med^terranean Sea in
Asia.
Ionick Speech did degenerate from the The Attick Dialect was used in and about
Athens, and was the smoothest and purest Greek.
Attick, and how much the other Greeks differed from them both. Let us but
observe the Speech of the noblest Nations in Europe, how soon did the French,
Italick, and Latin Tongues, all derived from the same Root, degenerate from the
purity of the Latin; yet in the mean time, they differ no less amongst
themselves, than the old Scottish and the British Tongues do. Yea, if we look
over all the Provinces of France, (I mean those who are judged to speak true
Gallick or French) what a great difference shall we find between the
Inhabitants of Containing the Provinces of Savoy, Province and Languedock.
Gallia Narbonensis, and the Formerly inhabiting the Kingdom of Navar, but now
the Country called Gascoign.
Gascoigners? And how vastly the Inhabiting Limosin, Pericord, and Auvergn.
Limosins, the Inhabiting Limosin, Pericord, and Auvergn.
Perigordins, and the Inhabiting Limosin, Pericord, and Auvergn.
Auvergnians, though neighbors to both, yet differ from both, in their Speech?
And how much the rest of the Provinces of France do differ, even from all of
them? And, to come nearer home; the English Laws of William the Norman,
established Five Hundred years ago, and wrote in French* yet now no French Man
can understand them, without an Interpreter. Nay, if those old Men, who have
lived long in the World, can remember, that many Words are grown obsolete,
which were in use when they were Children; and what Words unheard of by our
Ancestors, have succeeded in their places; they will not at all wonder, that
the same Original Language, in length of time, should be changed, and seem
wholly different from it self; especially amongst Nations far remote, and also
often warring one against another. On the other side, when I see that concord
(lasting so many Ages rather than years,) in the British Language, and that
even amongst Nations, either very distant one from another, or else maintaining
mutual Animosities against one another; such a concord, as is hardly to be
found amongst many Tribes and People of the Gauls, who yet have long lived
under the same Kings and Laws: I say, when I ponder within my self, such an
agreement in Speech, which as yet preserves its ancient Affinity of Words, and
no obscure marks of its Original; I am easily induced to believe; that, before
the coming in of the Saxons, all the Britains used a Language, not much
different from each other; and it is probable, that the Nations, adjoining to
the Gallick shore, used the Belgic Tongue, from whose limits a good part of
the Britans, bordering on France, had made a Transmigration, as Caesar informs
us. But the Irish, and the Colonies sent from them, being derived from the
Celtae, Inhabitants of Spain, it is probable, they spoke the Celtick Tongue. I
suppose, that these Nations returning, as it were, from a long Pilgrimage, and
possessing themselves of the neighbour-Seats, and almost coalescing into one
People, did confound the Idioms of their several Tongues respectively; so that,
it was neither wholly Belgic, nor wholly Celtick, nor yet wholly unlike to
either of them: Such a mixture we may observe in those Nations, which are
thought to speak the German Tongue, and yet have much declined from the ancient
Phrase thereof: I mean, the Danes, the Maritime Saxons, those of Fre^sland,
those of Flanders, and the English; amongst all which, it is easy to find some
Letters, Sounds, and Inflections, which are proper to the Germans only, and not
common to any other Nation; besides, I suppose, that a surer symptom of the
Affinity of a Language may be gathered from this Sound of Letters; from the
familiar way of each Nation in pronouncing certain Letters; and from the
judgment of the Ear thereupon; and also, from the Composition and Declension of
Words, than from the signification of single or particular Words. Examples
hereof we find in the German Letter W, in the composition of the Words
More-Marusa and Armoricus, of which, I have spoken before: And in the
Declension of those Words, which amongst the Gauls, end in Ac, of which there
is a vast number, which Form amongst the Scots is Hypocoristical i. e.
diminutive, as Thingling from Thing.
Hypocoristical, i. e. Diminutive, and so it was amongst the ancient Gauls.
From Drix, which, amongst the Scots, signifies a Briar, is derived Drissac, i.
e. a Briarling, or little Briar bush. And from Brix, which signifies a Rupture
or Cleft, Brixac, which now the French pronounce A well fortified Town in
Alsatia, built on an Hill, and a strong pass on the Rhene.
Brisac. For what the Scots pronounce Brix, that the French call Bresche, even
to this very day, there being no difference at all in the signification of the
Words: The Cause of the different Writing, is, that the ancient Scots, and all
the Spaniards to this very day, do use the Letter X for double SS. And
therefore the old Gauls, from Brix, have called a Town of the People of Le-Main
in France.
Caenomani, Now Bressia.
Brixia; and again, from Brixia, Brixiacum, now commonly Brisac. After the like
Form, Aureliacum, i. e. A Town of Au^^gn in France.
Orilhach, is derived from Aurelia, i. e. Orleans; and, from In Portugal.
Evora, which is called Cerealis or Ebora, Sirnam'd by the Spaniards,
Foelicitas Iulia, Eboracum, i. e. York, is derived; as the Brigantes have
declined it, (who had their Origin from the Spaniards) retaining in the
Declension thereof, the propriety of the French Tongue. Furthermore, besides
those things which I have mentioned, all that Coast of Britain, which is
extended to the South-West, retains the sure and manifest Footsteps of a
Gallick Speech and Original, according to the clear testimony even of
Foreigners themselves. First, in that Coast, there is Cornuvallia, i. e.
Cornwall, as many call it, but by the Ancients 'twas called Cornavia, and, by
the Vulgar, Kernico; even as in Scotland, the Cornavii in Scotland, and England
too; in the one, the Ca^thness-Men; In the other, the Cornish-Men are so called.
Cornavii, placed by Ptolemy in the most Northern District of that Country, are
commonly called Kernicks; so that Etymology o^ Cornwall.
Cornuvallia is derived from Kernick and Valli, as if you should say
Kernico-Galli, i. e. Cornish Gauls. Moreover, Vallia, i. e. Wales, another
Peninsula in the same side, does avouch its Ancestors both in Name and Speech.
They who come near in Language to the Sound of the German Tongue, pronounce it
by W, a Letter proper to the Germans only; which the rest of their neighbors,
who use the old Tone, can by no means pronounce: Yea, if you should Torture
them to make them pronounce it aright, yet, the Cornish, the Irish, or
Highland-Scots could never do it. But the French, who call it Vallia, do always
prefix G before it; and not in that Word alone, but they have many others also,
which begin with G; for they, who, by reason of the Propinquity of the
Countries do Germanize, do call the French Tongue The French Tongue by some
called Walla.
Walla; and besides, in a multitude of other Words, they use this change of
Letters: On the other side, that Country which the English call Wales and
North Wales; the French call The French pronounce Gales and North-Gales, for
Wales and North Wales.
Gales and North-Gales, as yet pertinaciously insisting on the footsteps of
their ancient Tongue.

But Pol^dore V^rgi^, mistaken.
Polydore Virgil pleases himself with a new fancy; which, he thinks, he was
the first inventer of; whereas no Man, though but meanly skilled in the German
Tongue, is ignorant, that the Word Walsch signifies a Stranger or Foreigner;
and, that therefore the Valli were called Foreigners by them; but he reckons,
as we say, without his Host: For, if that Name were derived from Strangership,
I think it would agree better to the Angles, or English, as an adventitious
People, rather than to Those; whom, by reason of their Antiquity, many of the
ancients have thought to be Indigenous: Or, if that name were imposed upon them
by the English, they might with better reason have given it to the Scots and
Picts, than to the Britains, because with the former they had less acquaintance
and very rare Commerce: And if the English called them Valli in reproach, would
the Brittons, (think we) who, for so many Ages, were the deadly Enemies of the
English, and now made more obnoxious to them by this affront, own that Name?
Which they do not unwillingly, calling themselves in their own Tongue O^
Cumbri, (...) their King Camber, as some.
Cumbri. Besides, the Word Walsh, does not primarily signify a Stranger or
Barbarian; but, in its first and proper acceptance, a Gaul. And therefore, in
my Judgment, the Word Vallia is changed by the English from Gallia, they
agreeing with other Neighbor Nations in the Name, but observing the propriety
of the German Tongue in pronouncing the first Letter by W, viz. Wallia. The
Ancient Inhabitants of that Peninsula were called The Inhabitants of
South Wales.
Silures, as appears out of Pliny, which Name in some part of Wales was long
retained, even in succeeding Ages. But Leland.
Leland, a Britain by Birth, and a Man very diligent in discovering the
Monuments of his own Country, does affirm, That some part of Wales was sometime
called Ross, which Word in Scotland, signifies a Peninsule. But the Neighbor
Nations seem in Speaking, to have used a Name or Word, which held forth the
Original of the Nation, rather than One that demonstrated the site and form of
the Country. The same has happened in the Name Scots; For whereas they call
themselves Albini, a Name derived from Albium: Yet, their Neighbors call them
Scoti, by which Name their Original is declared to be from the Irish, or
Hibernians.

On the same side and Western Shore, follows Gallovidia, i. e. Galway, which
word ('it is evident) both with Scots and Welsh, signifies a Gaul, as being made
up of Gallus and Wallus, part imposed by the one, and part by the other.
Galloway, whence derived.
For the Valli or Welsh call it Wallowithia. This Country yet uses for the
most part its ancient Language. These three Nations comprehend all that Tract
and side of Britanny, which bends toward Ireland; and they as yet retain, no
mean indications, but rather deeply imprinted Marks of their Gallick Speech and
Affinity; of which, the chief is, that the Ancient S^^ts, i. e the Highlanders
divide the Nations, inhabiting Britain into Two, the first Gael, the second,
Galle or Ga^d, i. e. Gallae^i and Gal^i.
Ancient Scots did divide all the Nations, inhabiting Britain, into two Sorts,
the one they call Gael, the other Galle or Gald, i. e. according to my
Interpretation, Gallaeci and Galli. Moreover the Gallaecians do please
themselves with that Title, Gael, and they call their Language (as I said
before) Gallaecian, and do glory in it, as the more refined and elegant,
undervaluing the Galli as Barbarians, in respect of themselves: And though
originally the Scots called the Britains, i. e. the most Ancient Inhabitants of
the Island, Galli; yet custom of speaking has by degrees obtained, that they
called all the Nations, which afterward fixed their Seats in Britain by that
Name, which they used rather as a Contumelious, than a National, one. For the
Word Galle or Gald signifies That amongst them, which Barbarian does amongst
the Greeks and Latins; and Walsch among the Germans.

Now at last we are come to this point, i. e. That we are to demonstrate the
Community of Speech, and thereupon an ancient Another Argument of Affinity
between the Gauls and Britains, from the Names of Towns, Rivers, etc.
Affinity between the Gauls and the Britains, from the Names of Towns, Rivers,
Countries, and such other Evidences. A Ticklish Subject, and to be warily
handled; for I have formerly proved, that a public Speech or Language may be
altered for many Causes; for though it be not changed altogether, and at once,
yet it is in a perpetual Flux, and does easily follow the inconstancy of the
alterers, by reason of a certain Flexibility, which it has in its own Nature.
The Truth whereof does appear chiefly in those Ranks of things, which are
subject not only to the Alterations of Time, but are also obnoxious to every
Man's Pleasure or Arbitrament; such as are all particular things invented for
the daily use of Man's Life, whose Names either grow obsolete, or are made new
and refined, for very light and trivial Causes. But the Case is far different
in those things, which are time-proof, and so, after a sort, are Perpetual or
Eternal. As the Heavens, the Sea, the Earth, Fire, Mountains, Countries,
Rivers; and also in those, which, by their Diuturnity, as far as the infirmity
of Nature will permit, do in some sort imitate those perpetual and uncorrupted
Bodies; such are Towns, which are built as if they were to be Sempiternal. So
that a Man cannot easily give Names to, or change the old of, Nations and
Cities, for they were not rashly imposed at the beginning, but in a manner by
general and deep advice and consent by their Founders, whom Antiquity did
greatly Reverence, ascribing Divine Honor to them; and, as much as they could,
making them Immortal. And therefore, these Names are deservedly continued, and
receive no alteration without a mighty Perturbation of the whole Economy of
things, so that if the rest of a Language be changed, yet these are
pertinaciously retained, and are never supplanted by other Names, but as it
were, with unwillingness and regret. And the cause of their imposing at first,
contributes much to their continuance. For those, who, in their Peregrinations,
either were forced from their old Seats; or, of their own accord, sought new;
when they had lost their own Country, yet retained the Name thereof, and were
willing to enjoy a Sound most pleasing to their Ears; and by this umbrage of a
Name, such as it was, the want of their Native Soil, was somewhat alleviated
and addule'd softened unto them, so that thereupon they judged themselves not
altogether Exiles, or Travelers, far from Home. And besides, there were not
wanting some Persons, who, being superstitiously inclined, did conceive an
Holier and more August Representation in their Minds, than could be seen in
Walls and Houses, and did sweetly hug that Image and delightful Pledge of their
own former Country, with a love, more than Native. And therefore, a surer
Argument of Affinity is taken from This sort of Words, than from Those, which,
on Trivial Causes, (and often on none at all) are given to, or taken away from,
ordinary and changeable Things. For though it may casually happen, that the
same Word may be used in diverse Countries, yet it is not credible, that so many
Nations, living so far asunder, should fortuitously agree in the frequent
imposing of the same Name.

In the next place, Those Names succeed, which are derived from, or compounded
of, the former Primitives. For, oft-times, the Derivative Words show the
Affinity of a Language more than their Primitives.
Similitude of Declination and Composition does more certainly declare the
Affinity of a Language, than the very Primitive words thereof do; for these
are, many times, casually given: But the Other, being declined after one
certain Mode and Form, are directed by one fixed Example, which the Greeks call
(...). And therefore this certain and perpetual manner of Nominal Affinity, (as
Varro speaks) does, after a sort, lead us to an Affinity of Stock, and old
Communion of Language. Moreover, there is a certain Observation to be made in
all Primogenious Words, from whence we may know, which are foreinly introduced,
and which are Patriots. For, as the Words Philosophia, Geometria, and
Dialectica, though often used by Latin Writers, yet have scarce any Latin Word of
kin to them, or derived from them, from whence they may seem to draw their
Original; so, on the other side, the Words Paradisus and Gaza, are used by the
Greeks; and yet it appears by this, That they are Inquiline or Foreign, because
they cannot show any Original, nor any Progeny, derived from them, in the Genuin
Greek Tongue.

The same Observation may be also made in other Tongues, which will help us to
judge, what Words are Domestic, and what are Adventitious, or Foreign. Let it
suffice to have spoken thus much in General. Let us now propound Examples,
concerning every Particular part; Where, First, we meet with those Words, which
end in Bria, Briga and Brica. Strabo, in his Seventh Book, with whose Opinion
Stephanus concurs, says, That Bria signifies a City; to confirm their Opinion,
they produce these Names, derived therefrom, Or Brutobrica, a City of Thrace,
on the Coast of the Aegaean Sea, now called, by the Greeks, Aenos, or (...)*
and by the Turks, Ygnos.
Pultobria, A^ Ancient Town in Spain.
Brutobria, A City of Bulgaria, situate on the ^uxien Sea.
Mesembria, and Selivre, a City of Thrace, situate upon the Propontu, 15 Miles
West from Constantinople.
Selimbria. But the place by them called Brutobria, by others is named
Brutobrica; and the places, which Ptolemy makes to end in Briga, Pliny closes
with Brica; so that, it is probable, Bria, Briga and Brica are synonymous, all
signifying a City or (...)* with words compounded of them.
That Bria, Briga and Brica, signify the same thing. But that they all have
their Original from Gaul, appears by this, That the Gauls are reported,
anciently, to have sent forth Colonies into Thrace and Spain, and not They into
Gaul; and therefore, amongst proper Classick Authors, we usually read the Words
following.

Braga in Port^gal.
Abobrica in Pliny, in the Circuit of Braga. Amalo-brica in the Itinerary of
the Emperor Antoninus. Arrabida.
Arabrica, Pliny, in the Bracarens^an Circuit also. Castanheira in Portugal.
Arabrica another, Ptolemy, in Lusitania, or Portugal. Arcos.
Arcobrica, Ptolemy, amongst the Celtiberians, i. e. New-Castillians. Azvaga in
Portugal.
Arcobrica another, Ptolemy, amongst the Lusitanian-Celticks. Alcasor near
Saragossa in Spain; which being at f^^st called Salduba, from the Salt Pits
there, was afterward rebuilt by Caesar Augustus, and called Caesarea Augusta,
some Footsteps of which Name do yet remain in the word Saragossa.
Arcobrica a Third, in the * Caesar-Augustan-Province. Atzburgh.
Artobrica, Ptolemy, in the People of Bavaria and Suab^^ in Germany, so called
from the Rivers V^ndis (Werd) and L^^us (Leck,) near which they lived.
Vindilici's Country. Villar del Pedroso.
Augustobrica, Pliny, and Ptolemy, in Portugal. Puente del Arcobispo.
Augustobrica another, Ptolemy, in the People of Extremadura in Spain.
Vecton's Country. Ardea ol Muro.
Augustobrica a Third, Ptolemy, in the Part of old Cas^^le in Spain.
Pelendon's Country. Axabrica, Pliny, of the Lusitanicks. Boppart, in the
Bishopric of T^eves, or T^^ers.
Bodobrica, in the Itinerary of Antoninus, and in the Book of the Knowledge of
the Roman Empire, in High-Germany. Broughton in Hampshire, as Cumden: Quaere,
Whether not Stockbridge, which though a mean place now, yet was formerly a
noted Town, as appears by its sending Burgesses to Parliament at this Day: It
is yet a considerable Pass, between Winchester and Salisbury.
Brige, in the Itinerary of Antoninus, in Britany. Brige, in Strabo, a Town by
the Which divide France from Italy, or rather Piem^nt from Dauphine.
Cottian Alps. Bruto-brica, in Strabo, between the Inhabitants of Extremadura,
or Andalusia, in the Kingdom of Corduba, in Spain.
Turduli and the River Guadalquivar, a famous River in Spain.
Boetis. Barcelos, a Town now of Portugal, formerly of Spain, near the River
Celand, Inhabited heretofore by the Celerini.
Caeliobrica, Ptolemy, of the Celerini, i. e. People in Portugal. Caesarobrica,
Pliny, in Portugal, also. Catobrica, of the People of Hispania Boetica.
Turduli, in the Itinerary of the Emperor Antoninus. Corimbrica, Pliny, in
Portugal, if I mistake not, corruptly for Conimbrica, of which mention is made
in the Itinerary of Antoninus, which City, as yet, keeps it ancient Name, by
the River Munda, in Portugal. Cotteobria, Ptolemy, in the In Extra-medura, in
Spain.
Vecton's Country. Deobrica, Ptolemy, among the Vecton's, also. Miranda de Ebro.
Deobrica, another, Ptolemy, of the B^scamers.
Autrigones. Deobricula, Ptolemy, of the People of Burgos in Spain.
Morbogi. Dessobrica, not far distant from Lagos in Portugal.
Lacobrica, in the Itinerary of Antoninus. Bermeo, as some; Bilbao, in Spain,
as others.
Flavio-Brica, Pliny, at the Port Bermeo, as some; Bilbao, in Spain, as others.
Amanus. Ptolemy, in the Autrigons, calls it Magnus, but I know not whether
Magnus, ought to be writ in Pliny, or no. Alanguera in Portugal.
Serabrica in the Province of Santaren, in that Kingdom.
Scalabitan Province, which Pliny writes Ierabrica. Fuente d'Ivero, as some; or
else Braganza, as others, say.
Iuliobrica, in Pliny, and in the Itinerary of Antoninus, of the Cantabrians,
or Biscainers, heretofore called Brigantia. Lagos.
Lacobrica, in the Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Leon in Spain.
Vaccaeans Country, in Pliny, Ptolemy, and Festus Pompeius. Lacobrica, at the
Cape of St. Vincent, in Portugal.
Sacred Promontory, in Mela. Langroi^a.
Lancobrica, of the Dwelling by the River Anas in Portugal.
Lusitanick Celts, Ptolemy. La^sanne.
Latobrigi, near to the Svitzers, Caesar. Mon^briga.
Medubrica, Surnamed Plumbaria, by Pliny, in Portugal; this, if I mistake not,
is called Mundobrica, in the Itinerary of Antoninus. Sant^ago de Lacem.
Merobrica, Surnamed Celtica, in Portugal; Pliny, and Ptolemy. Ma^abriga.
Mirobrica, in the Country of the Inhabiting the Country of La Mancha, in
New-Castile.
Oretani. Villa de Capilla.
Mirobrica, another in Es^^remed^ra.
Beturia, or, in the Country of the Inhabiting part of Alg^b^a and Mea^na (...).
Turditani Boetici, Pliny, and Ptolemy. Va^ de N^bro.
Nemetobrica, in the Country of the Lusitanick Celts, Ptolemy. Valera
Nertobrica, in the Turduli's Country of Boetica, Ptolemy. Almun^a.
Nertobrica, another, in the Spaniards, lying beyond the River ^^erus in
Arragon and Castile.
Celtiberians Country, Ptolemy, which, in the Itinerary of Antoninus, is called
Nitobrica. Segorve, as Clasius thinks.
Segobrica, in the Celtiberians Country, Pliny, but Ptolemy counts it the Head
City of Celtiberia. Talega, or Tal^ga, in Portugal.
Talabrica, in Lusitania, Pliny and Ptolemy. Alcantara.
Turobrica in the Celts Country of Boetica, Pliny. Braganza, as some; or rather
B^g^a de Regoa.
Tuntobrica amongst the The Gallicians living near Braga, in Portugal.
Bracarean Gallaeci, Ptolemy. Vertobrica, Surnamed Concordia Iulia, Pliny, in
the Celt-Beticks Country. Volobrica, of the Inhabitants in and about Spire, in
High Germany.
Nemetes, Ptolomy.
Very many Names of Towns, and Nations, seem to belong to this Class, in all
the Provinces, into which the Gauls distributed Colonies; For, as Burgundus and
Burgundio seem to be derived from Burgo; so does Brigantes from Briga. The
Nominative Case of this word, in Stephanus, is Brigas, whence we decline
Brigantes; as we do Gigantes, from Gigas. The Brigantes, according to Strabo,
are situate by the Cottian Alps; and, in the same Tract, is the Village, or
Town Brige. And the Dwelling in and about ^rianzon.
Brigiani, in the Trophy of Augustus, are reckoned amongst the Alpin Nations.
Bregentz.
Brigantium, is an Alpine Town; and the Brigantii, are in the Country of the Or
Bavarians.
Vindelici, according to Strabo; and Brigantia, in the Itinerary of Antoninus;
And the Mountain Monti de Brianza.
Briga, (Ptolemy) is near the Fountains of the Rohsne and the Danow. Also
Brigantium in Rhaetia, (Ptolemy) is the same Town, I suppose, which in the Book
of the Knowledge of the Provinces of the People of Rome, is called Brecantia,
and the Bodensee, or Lake of Constance.
Brigantine Lake. And in Ireland, are the Inhabitants of Galway, Waterford and
Tipperary.
Brigantes, Ptolemy: The Brigantes also are in Albium, Ptolemy, Tacitus, and
Seneca. And the Town Brige, or Brage, and Isobrigantium, in the Itinerary of
Antoninus. And the Town Brianzon.
Brigantium, in Orosius, by the Capo de Fin^ terrae; or Nerium, in Ga^icia.
Celtick Promontory, and Flaviobrigantium, or Besanzon, in Ptolemy, in the
Almeria.
Great Port: And a later Brigantia, i. e. Braganza, now in the Kingdom of
Portugal.

There is also another Class or Rank of Words, which do either begin in Words
compounded of Dunum
Dunum, or end therewith, which is a Gallick Word, as appears by those Heaps of
Sand of the Morini, as yet called Duni, or the Downs; and those other Heaps of
Sand in the Sea over against them in the English Shore, which retain the same
Name of Downs. Yea, Plutarch, (I mean, He, who wrote the Book of Rivers) in
declaring the Original of Lugdunum, i. e. Lions, acknowledges Dunum to be a
Gallick Word. And indeed in expressing the Names of Villages and Towns, there
is scarce any one Word or Termination, more frequent than That, amongst the
Nations, who yet preserve the old Gallick Tongue almost entire; I mean, the
Brittons in Or Lugdunensis, the Country about L^ons in France.
Gallia Celtica; and the Highlanders, or Islanders.
Ancient Scots in Ireland and Albium; and the Valli or Welsh; the Kernicovalli,
or Cornish, in England; for there is none of those Nations, which do not
challenge that Word or Termination for their own; only here is the difference,
That the old Gauls did end their Compound Words with Dunum, but the Scots
ordinarily place it in the beginning of Words; of this sort, there are found,

In France.
Autun in Burgundy.
Augustodunum of the Aedui or Burgundians.

Chasteaudun.
Castellodunum, of the Carnotensian Province, i. e. of Chartres.

Melun.
Melodunum, by the River Sequana, or Sein.

Lions.
Lugdunum, at the Confluence of the Rivers Arar and Rhosne.

Augustodunum, another Autun, of the Arverni, or Anvergneois and Clermontians,
Ptolemy.

St. Bertrand de Comminges.
Lugdunum, of the Conveni, or Comingeois, near the River Garon; Ptolemy.

Noyon.
Novidunum, in the Or, Alsatians.
Tribocci's Country, Ptolemy.

Cad^nac.
Vxellodunum, in Caesar.

Lodun or London.
Iuliodunum in the Pictons Country, i. e. Poictiers.

Isodunum, and Dun^e Roy.
Regiodunum, of the Bituriges, i. e. Inhabitants of Berry.

Laodunum or Laudunum in the County of Rhemes.

Tours.
Caesarodunum, (Ptolomy) of the Turones, i. e. Tourenois.

Rodez.
Segodunum, of the Or, Rovergu^^^s.
Ruthenians, Ptolemy.

Some take it for Chasteau London.
Velannodunum, (or St. Flour) in Caesar.

In Spain.
Sela.
Caladunum, Ptolomy, of the Bracari, or Braganzians.

Campredon in Catalonia.
Sebendunum, Ptolemy.

In Britain.
Almondbury in Yorkshire, as Cambden; but West Chester, as some others.
Camulodunum, of the The old Inhabitants of Yorkshire, Lancashire, Durham,
Westmerland and Cumberland.
Brigantes Country, Ptolemy.

Maldon in Essex.
Camulodunum, a Roman Colony, Tacitus.

Dorchester, called also Durnium, and Durnovaria, from the River Vare, gliding
by it, which arises at a Town some few Miles distant, called Evarsholt, i. e.
the head of Vare, and passing by Dorchester, runs into an Arm of the Sea, at
Varbam, i. e. a Town on the Vare, now Warham.
Dunum, a Town of the Durotriges, or Dorsetshire Men. Ptolemy.

Maridunum, i. e. Carmarthen, of the Old Inhabitants of Pembroke, Cardigan, and
Carmarthen-Shires, formerly called West-Wales.
Demetae, Ptolemy, and the Itinerary of Antoninus.

Rigodunum, of the Brigantes, Ptolemy, i. e. Ribchester in Lancashire.

Cambodunum, in the Itinerary of Antoninus, i. e. R^ines near Almonbury in
Yorkshire.

Margidunum, in the same Itinerary, i. e. Marg^doverton in Leicestershire, near
Belvoir Castle; or, as some, Leic^st^r it self.

Sorviodunum, or Sorbiodunum, in the same Itinerary; i. e. Old Sarum in
Wiltshire.

Segodunum, i. e. Seton in Northumberland; and Axelodunum, i. e. Hexam, in
Northumberland also, in the Book of the Notitia Roman^ Imperii, or Knowledge of
the Roman Empire, etc.

Later Towns in England.
Venantodunum, i. e. Huntingdon.

Dunelmum, i. e. Durham.

In Scotland.
Duncaledon, called also Caledonia, i. e. Dunkelden.

Deidunum, i. e. Dundee, or rather Taodunum, by the River Tay.

Edinodunum, which Word the Ancient Scots do yet retain, but they who
Germanize, had rather call it Edinburgh.

Dunum, a Town in Ireland, called Down.

Noviodunum or New Down, i. e. Dunmoore Castle in Coval.

Brittannodunum, i. e. Dumbritton or Dumbarton, at the Confluence of the Clyde
and Levin.

And at this day there are abundance of Names, of Castles, Villages and Hills
derived therefrom.

In Germany, these Names are read in Ptolemy.
Lugdunum, i. e. Leyden; Segodunum, i. e. Nurinburgh; Tarodunum, i. e.
Friburgh; Robodunum, i. e. Brin; Carrodunum, i. e. Crainburgh.

In the Alps Country.
Yverdon.
Ebrodunum and Sedan.
Sedunum.

In the Vindelici or Bavarians Country, in Which Anciently comprehended
Austria, Stiria, Carniola, etc.
Rhaetia, the Grisons Country, and Noricum.
Ba^ryon.
Cambodunum, Korburgh.
Corrodunum, Linez, or, as some, Gasten^al.
Gesodunum, Iudenburgh, as some; Idenaw, as others* but Windisch Matray, as
Sanson.
Idunum and Neumarck.
Noviodunum; and in the Book of knowledge of the Roman Empire, Partenkirck.
Parrodunum.

In Sarmatia and Dacia, according to Ptolemy.
K^rburgh.
Corrodunum, Semendria, or Zinderin.
Singindunum, by the Danow; Noviodunum at the Mouth of the Danow; also another
Neupurgh.
Noviodunum.

And there are, in the same Provinces, not a few words declined from Words
declined from Dur.
Dur, which among the old Gauls and Brittons signifies Water, and as yet
retains the same signification amongst some, as there are

In France.
Durocotti in the Rhemish Circuit, Ptolemy; we read them also called Durocorti;
Moreover, Caesar makes mention of Metz.
Divodurum, of the Inhabitants of P^is Messin.
Mediomatrices. Tacitus, Divodurum, near Paris; in the Itinerary of Antoninus,
Wyck te Duersteden.
Batavodurum amongst the Batavi, Ptolemy, Tacitus. Briare.
Breviodurum in the Itinerary of the Emperor Antoninus. Constance.
Gannodurum in Ptolemy near the Rhine. Laufenburgh.
Gannodurum in the Helvetians Country, Ptolemy. Martenach.
Octodurum, or Octodorus, amongst the People of Gallia Narbenensis near the
Rhosne.
Veragri, Caesar.

In Rhaetia, the Vindelicis's Country, and Noricum.
Psullendorff, as some, but Beyerne Castle, as Cluverius.
Bragodurum, Korburgh.
Carrodurum, Olmu^z.
Ebodurum, C^stenitz.
Gannodurum, and Octodurum, Ptolemy. Venaxamodurum and Instat.
Bododurum, in the Book of the Knowledge of the Provinces.

In Spain.
Octodurum, and Fermosello.
Ocellodurum, Ptolemy: The River Duero.
Durius flowing into the Ocean, and Guadalaviar, near Valentia.
Duria into the Mediterranean Sea, and, in Ireland, the River Ledung in the
West of Ireland.
Dur; Ptolemy.

In Britain.
Inhabitants of Redborn in Hertfordshire.
Durocobrivae, Of Rochester in Kent.
Duroprovae, Of Leneham in Kent.
Durolenum, Of Canterbury.
Durovernum, Godmanchester by Huntington.
Durolipont, Dorsetshire Men.
Durotriges, Cirencester in Gloucestershire.
Durocornovium, Laiton in Ess^x.
Durolitum, Dorchester in Dorsetshire.
Duronovaria, Lutterworth, or, as some, Longborough in Liecestersh.
Lactodurum.

Perhaps the two Alpine Rivers, Doria the Greater and the Less (the one running
into the Po, by the Vald' Osta.
Salassians Country; the other, by the Piemonteis) do belong to the same
Original; And also Issoir.
Issidorus, and Auxerre
Altissidorus, Cities of France, so called (as I judge) from their situation
near Rivers. To which Dureta may be referred, which word, in Spanish, signifies
a Wooden Throne, as Suetonius writes, in the Life of Augustus; The like may be
said of Domnacus, the proper Name of a Man in Caesar, which seems to be
corrupted from Dunacus; For Dunach may signify Dunan, and Dunensis both; as
Romach does, Romanus* Dunacus, or rather Dunachus, is yet used for the proper
Name of a Man, which, those who are ignorant of both Tongues, the Latin and the
British, do render (but amiss) sometimes Duncan, sometimes Donat.

Names of Places ending in Magus.
The word Magus, also in all the Provinces, in which the Public use of the
Gallick Tongue obtained, is very frequent in expressing the Names of Cities;
which shows that it was of a Gallick Original. But of the Derivatives from it,
we may rather guess, than affirm for certain, that they were wont to signify a
House, City, or such like Building. We read in the Book of Knowledge of the
Empire of the People of Rome, the Prefect of the Badajox, a City in Spain,
where once the Romans had a Colony; It Is also called Pax Augusta.
Pacensian Levies, in Garrison at Magi; and also in the same Book, the Tribune
of the second Cohort placed at Magni; We read also of Magni in the Itinerary of
Antoninus, I dare not positively assert, whether it be one Town, or many. But I
incline, of the Two, rather to think, that they were sundry Towns.

Towns ending in Magus are These, Noviomagus, is a Proper Name for so many
places, that it is hard to distinguish Them severally in English, for it
signifies Odenheim, Newenburgh, N^mmegen, Spire, Solac, Bourg, etc.
Noviomagus, in Ptolemy, amongst the Xunt^gners, in France.
Santons; Noviomagus of the Inhabitants at Lisieux, a Town in Normandy, and the
Country there about called Le-Lieuvin.
Lexovi; Noviomagus of the Nivernois.
Vadecassii; Noviomagus, of the About Spire.
Nemetes; Noviomagus of the Tricassini; Living at St. Paul de trois Chasteaux,
a City in Daulphin.
Noviomagus of the Living in and about Berry.
Bituriges; Angiers.
Iuliomagus of the L'Anjouans.
Andegavi; Roven.
Rotomagus of the Venclocassi; Beauvois.
Caesaromagus of the Beauvoisins.
Bellovaci; Rotomagus of the Tournois.
Nervii; Worms.
Borbetomagus of the Vangiones in High Germany; Vindomagus of the Living in
Armagnac.
Volci Arecomici. Also in the Itinerary of Antoninus, Argenton.
Argentomagus; and in High Germany, Noviomagus. In the Book of the Knowledge of
the Roman Empire; Noviomagus of Belgica Secunda; in Rhaetia, Memmingen.
Drusomagus, Ptolemy. In Britain, in the Itinerary of Antoninus, Chelmesford.
Caesa^omagus; Thetford.
Sitomagus; Wood-Cote near Croydon.
Noviomagus of the Inhabitants of Surry, as Leland; of Sussex, as Camden.
Regni; People about Sterling, or, as some, of Murray in Scotland.
Vacomagi; Ashwel in Hertford-shire, as some, or Dunstable in Bedford-shire, as
others.
Magiovinium; Vicomagi, part of the Picts Country. Ptolemy.

There are also other Names of Places, common to many of these Nations, but not
so frequently used, nor so much dispersed as the former; such as are Hibernia,
i. e. Ireland has several Names.
Ireland, amongst the Romans, the Name of an Island, called by Pomponius Mela,
Ptolemy and Iuvenal, Iuverna; by Strabo, Claudian, and the Inhabitants thereof,
Ierna. That which some call the Nerian Promontory, Strabo calls Ierne; Iernus,
or Iern, a River of Gallaecia, Mela calls it Ierna; Camden thinks it to be the
River Ma^re in Munster, in the County of Desmond, but, why not Loch-Earn, in
the County of Fermanagh.
Iernus, is also a River of Ireland: In Ptolemy, it is reckoned a River of Earn
arising out of Loch-Earn.
Scotland, falling into Tay. Another of the same Name glides through Murray;
the Country adjacent to both is called Strath-Earn.
Ierna.

We read of the City Millain:
Mediolanum, in Ptolemy; as one Xantoign.
Insubrum, of the Santones; another of the D'Eureux.
Aulerci Eburaici; another by the Loir, i. e. Menu; a fourth by Sequana, or the
Sein, (now as I think) named Meulan, or Melun; another in High Germany, called
Duesburgh, or Asburgh.
Alciburgum; another by the Metelew.
Danow; another in Lancaster as Lud; Lanvellin in Mongomery-shire, as Camden;
others, Midland.
Britain, of which mention is made in the Itinerary of Antoninus.

Also Marcolica, a Town in Spain; Malck, on the River Shanon.
Macolica, in Ireland; Vaga, a River in Portugal; and Wye.
another of Wales in England. R^o d' Aves.
Avo, in Mela, Avus, in Ptolemy, a River of Galaecia, as yet retains its Name.
In Argyle, there is also a River of the same Awe.
Name, flowing out of the Lough Awe. The Promontorium Sacrum, one is in Cabo de
S. Vincem.
Spain, another in Ban, in the County of Wexford.
Ireland. Spurnhead in Yorkshire.
Ocellum is a Promontory in Britain; Fermosel.
Ocellum is also in Gallaecia, in the Luce^sian District; Ocel-Hills.
Ocelli are Mountains in Scotland; Esilles or Exilles.
Ocellum is the last Town of Gallia Togata, Caesar mentions Lest^thiel in
Cornwall.
Vxellum, a Town in Britain, perhaps for Ocellum; for Martianus, in explaining
the Ancient Names of the Cities of Gallia, says, that the Word is variously
writ, Ocellum, Oscela, and Oscellium; hence perhaps comes Cadenac in France.
Vxellodunum, which is also sometimes writ Vxellodurum. So there is Or, Tambre.
Tamar, a River of Gallaecia, Ptolemy; Tamaris, in Mela; Tamarici, a People of
Gallaecia; the River Tamarus, Pliny; and Tamerton, by the River Tamar in
Cornwall.
Tamara, a Town in Britain*

Or, Ars.
Sars, a River of Gallaecia, Ptolemy; Sarck or Sars in Annandale.
Sarcus in Scotland, Mela.

Evora.
Ebora, a Town of Portugal, called L^b^ralitas Iulia, in Pliny and Ptolemy; S.
Lucar de Barameda.
Ebura; that which is Cerealis in Boetica, in Pliny is Ebora; Ptolemy mentions
Of d' Eureux.
Dee or Die.
Aulerci Eburaici in Gallia Celtica; and also Eboracum, i. e. York, of the
British Brigantes.

Deva, now Dee, a River of England; and three in Scotland, so called, one in
Galway, another in Angus, the third divides Merne from Mar.

The Cornish.
Cornavii in England, are in the farthest part of the West, in Ca^^hness-Men.
Scotland, they are the farthest North. Both of them are now called Kernici;
there seems also to have been a third sort of Kernici in Scotland, at the Mouth
of the River Avennus, or Even, which is the boundary between the Coasts of
Lothian and Sterling. Forbid makes the Monastery of Abercorn to be at the end
of Severus his Wall, where now the Ruins of the Castle of Abercorn do appear.
Aven is often read, a River both of England and Scotland. Aven in Scottish, and
Avon in Welsh, signifies a River.

Of the Three Three Nations (besides the Brittons,) anciently inhabited this
Isle.
Nations which first inhabited this Island, after the coming of Caesar, the
Britains were Subject to the Emperors of Rome successively, little less than
Five Hundred years; but the Scots and Picts were under the subjection of their
own Kings. At length, when all the Neighboring Nations did conspire for the
Destruction of the Romans, they recalled their Armies from their most remote
Provinces, to maintain their Empire at home. And by this means, the Britains,
being destitute of Foreign Aid, were miserably vexed by the Scots and Picts;
insomuch, that they craved Aid of the Saxons invited in by the Brittons,
Saxons, which then infested the Seas with a Pyratical Navy. But that project
cost them dear. For the Saxons having repelled the Picts and Scots, being
tempted by the fertility of the Country, and the weakness of the Inhabitants,
aspired to make themselves Masters of the Island. But after various Successes
in War, seeing they could not arrive at what they aimed at by Force, they
resolved to accost the Britains by Fraud. Their Stratagem was this. There being
a Conference or Treaty, agreed upon at a set Day and Place, between the Nobles
of both Parties; The Saxons having a sign given them by Hengist their Captain,
slew all the Where, by Stratagem, they and their General treacherously Murder
the English Nobility.
British Nobility, and drove the common People into Rugged and Mountainous
Places; so that they themselves possessed all the Champain, and divided the
fruitfulest part of the Island between them, into Seven Kingdoms. This was the
State of Affairs in Britain, about the year of Christ 464. And whereas three
German Nations did originally undertake Expeditions into Britain, the other
two, by degrees, passed into the Name of Englishmen. But the Peace made with
the Brittons, nor with the English amongst themselves, was never faithfully
observed; About the year of our Lord 317, Danes invade and Conquer Eng^and,
under Swain.
the Danes, being powerful at Sea, did first molest England with pyratical
Incursions, but being Valiantly repulsed, about Thirty three years after they
came with greater Forces, and made a descent into the Country with a Land Army.
At the first conflict they were Victors, but afterward they contended with the
English, with various Successes, till in the year 1012. Swain, having wholly
subdued the Britains, by their public Consent, obtained the Kingdom, which yet
remained but a few years in his Family. For the Saxons having again Created
Kings of their own Nation, about Twenty four years after, were overcome by
William the Norman Conquers the Dan^s, and is Crowned King of England.
William the Norman, most of their Nobility being Slain, and their Lands
divided among the Normans, by which means the common People were kept in a
miserable Slavery, till Henry the Sevenths time, who, easing part of their
burden, made the condition of the Commonalty a little more Tolerable. But those
which are in favor with the King, or would seem to be truly Illustrious and
Noble, derive their whole Sept from the Normans.

These are the discoveries which I have been able to make, out of ancient
Writings, and other, no obscure, Indications, concerning the Original, Customs,
and Language of the Three Ancientest Nations in Britain; all which do induce me
to believe, that the old Britains, and the other Inhabitants of Britain, were
derived from the Gauls, and did originally use the Gallick Speech; of which
many Footsteps do manifestly appear, both in France and Britain. Neither ought
it to seem strange, if, in a Language which admits of a change each moment of
our Life, many things receive different Names in diverse places, especially in a
such a Longinquity of time; ye^, we may rather admire, that the same
Foundations of a Language, (that I may so speak,) and the same manner of
Declension and Derivation, does yet continue amongst a People, so far remote
one from another, and so seldom agreeing together in converse of Life; yea, often
being at mortal fewds one with another.

Concerning the other Three other Nations came into B^itai^.
Three Nations, the Angles, Danes, and Normans, we need make no solicitous
Inquiry; seeing the Times and Causes of their coming are known almost to all.
But I have entered upon this task, that I might restore Us to our Ancestors, and
our Ancestors to Us; if I have performed this well, I have no reason to Repent
of a little Labor, though spent in none of the greatest concerns; if not, yet,
they who concur not with me in Opinion, cannot (I believe) disallow or blame my
Good Will. And The Authors Ingenuity.
I am so far from grudging or taking it ill, to have what I have Written
refuted, that if any Man can discover greater certainty, and reduce me from my
mistake, I shall return him great* Thanks for his Pains.

I had resolved to put an end to this disquisition, concerning the Original of
the Nations of Britain, if Lud f^rther c^nfuted.
Lud had not called me back, even against my Will, who maintains, That the
Scots and the Picts came but lately into Albium. Though I might, without any
Offense, pass by the empty vanity of the Man, joined with his Ignorance; yet,
lest the Faction of Unlearned ones, should too much Pride themselves with such
a Patron, I thought fit, in a few Words, to convince the obstinacy of the Man,
and that principally from those Arguments and Witnesses, which he himself
produces against us.

First, I will speak concerning his manner of Reasoning, and afterward of the
Matter it self.

Julius Caesar, (says he,) and Cornelius Tacitus, Writers of so great
diligence; as also Suetonius, Herodian, and other Romans, who have wrote of
British Affairs, have, in no part of their Works, made mention of Scots or
Picts, and therefore doubtless, they had no Seats in Britain, in that Age. Will thou accept of this condition, Lud, that what Nation no Ancient Writer has
mentioned, never any such Nation was? If you embrace this Motion, see how many
Nations you will exclude from their Beings in one or two lines? How great a
Table of Proscriptions will you make? Yea, What great Persons will you
proscribe, Brutus, Albanactus, and Camber? What Nations will you wholly
eradicate, the Loegri, the Cambri, the Albani, according to thy Postulatum, who
art a Tyrant in History, and Grammar both, as declining Albanus from
Albanactus. But if that Condition proffered, do not please.

-- Quia tu Gallinae Filius albae,
Nos viles pulli, nati infaelicibus ovis.
Because you are the Favorite of Fate,
But we are condemned to a low base State.
I will propound another to you, and such an one too, as you ought not, and (I
think) dare not, refuse. There is a certain kind of probation out of Fragments,
out of which, if you a little harden your Forehead, you may prove any thing. I
am the more inclined to make use of this way of Proof, because you seem to love
it most of all, as proving (forsooth) out of a Fragment, known (I believe) to
thy self alone, that an innumerable Multitude of the Cimbri went forth to
destroy the Roman Empire; I will therefore show you out of a Fragment, that the
Scots and Picts were in Britain before Vespasian's Reign, which you deny. In
that Book to which you have given the Title of Fragmentum Britannicae
Descriptionis, i. e. A Fragment of the Description of Britain; I think,
especially for this Reason, because you thought your self to have sufficiently
proved, out of one of the two Fragments, that the Island was rather to be
called Pritania, than Britannia; and out of the other, that you had disgorged
such a multitude of Cimbri, as were enough to Conquer all Britain: For this
cause, you thought that your Fragment would get credit enough on that single
account. In that Book, you write* that the Name of Scots and Picts, together
with the Franks and English, or Angles, were well known to the Roman World, and
as a Witness of this Opinion, (a meet one indeed,) he produced Mamertinus.
Mamertinus in the Panegyric dedicated to Maximinianus, which witness, if I
understand him a right, makes against Lud. For Mamertinus, speaking of the
first coming of Julius Caesar into Britain, has these Words; Moreover the
Nation, as yet rude and dwelling in Britain, accustomed to none but the Arms of
the Picts and the Hiberns, or Irish, their half naked Enemies, did easily yield
to the Arms and Ensigns of the Romans. See, I pray, what Lud would infer out of
this Testimony; First, that the Brittons alone did then inhabit the Island.
Next, that the People there Named Hiberni or Irish, were afterward called
Scots; but the Author of the Panegyric does assert neither of the two. For he
affirms, that before the coming in of Caesar, the Britons waged War against the
Scots and Picts, of the British Soil, i. e. Enemies dwelling in the British
Soil, so that Soli Britanni, is the Genitive not Nominative Case; the other, he
falsely assumes to himself; for I think, I have sufficiently demonstrated out of
Paulus Orosius a Spaniard, and Bid an English Man, that all the Inhabitants of
All the Inhabitants o^ I^^land anciently called Scots.
Ireland were anciently called Scots, and then at length, when they sent
Colonies into Albium, the Name of Scots was almost extinguished at home, and
began to grow famous abroad: In another place, he contends, that the Caledonii
were called Britons, grounding his assertion on no other Argument, than that he
finds they were called Britains, which is a Name common to all who inhabit the
same Island. But I have showed before, out of the place of the Panegyric,
quoted by him, that the Caledonians were Picts, Marcellinus divides the Picts
into Dicaledones, and Vecturiones. See p. 18.
Marcellinus affirms the same thing, who says, that there are two sorts of
Picts, the Dicaledones, or, (as I think it ought to be writ,) the Duncalecones,
and the Vecturiones. But the Caledonii or Caledones dwelt in Britain before the
Reign of Vespasian, neither were they unknown to the Romans, as Lucan plainly
shows, who died in Nero's time.

Aut vaga cum Tethys Rutupinaque littora fervent,
Vnda Caledonios fallit turbata Britannnos.
When raging Seas on Sandwich shores do beat,
The troubled Waves do British Caledons cheat.
But why do I trouble my self to procure Foreign Testimonies, seeing we have a
clear and nicking one at home, I mean Bid, the Writer of the Ecclesiastical
History of England, for he takes notice of the Order, and almost of the very
Moments, of time, wherein Foreign Nations passed over into Britain. These are
his Words in his First Book. First of all, the Island was inhabited by
Brittons, whence it has its Name, who from the Armorick Tract, as it is
reported, being wafted over into Britain, possessed the South-parts thereof,
and having seized upon the greatest part of the Island, beginning from the
South, it happened that the Nation of the Picts, coming (as it is reported) out of
Scythia, and entering into the Ocean, with long Ships, or Galleys, but not many,
by stress of Wind and Weather, were driven beyond all the bounds of Britany
into Ireland; and a little after, Wherefore the Picts coming into Britain,
begun to seat themselves in the North parts of the Island: The Southern being
possessed by the Brittons: And at length, after a few lines interposed, he
adds, In process of time, Britany after the Brittons and the Picts, took in a
third Nation of the Scots, as part of the Picts. Then, after many passages, he
subjoins; But the same Britanny was ^^accessible and unknown to the Romans,
until the time of C. Julius Caesar. Whosoever thou art, who read these
passages* observe, I pray, Whence, at What time, and in What order, this
Autho^, much more ancient and grave than Lud, does affi^m, that these Nations
entered Britain, to wit, that the Brittons, from the Armorick Tract entered
first, but the time not certain. That the Picts, out of Scythia, came next into
those parts of Britain, which were yet void of Inhabitants, and that not long
after the entrance of the Brittons, who were not as yet increased into such a
multitude, as to be able to inhabit the whole Island. What then becomes of the
Scots? When came they into Britain? In process of time, says he, viz. The Picts
granting them the uninhabited Seats in their Districts, they came last to the
former two. So the Brittons, as Bede affirms, came into this Island out of
Armorica in France, and, not long after, the Picts out of Scythia; both of them
seized on the vacant and uninhabited places, at last, the Island being divided
betwixt them, the Scots entered not by force, but were admitted into the
Portion, and Lot of the Picts, and that long before Britain was known to the
Romans. Here, How will you deal with Lud? Who produces Gildas and B^de, as
witnesses to his Fables, viz. That the Scots and the Picts did first of all fix
their Habitations in Britain, in the Reign of the Roman Emperor Honorius, in
the year of Christ ^20, of which two, Gildas makes nothing for him; and Bid
does evidently convince him of Falsehood. But let the Reader believe neither Lud
nor M^, but his own Eyes; and let him diligently weigh the Places of each
Writer; but (says he) Dion calls the Caledonians, Britanni; I grant he does so,
so does Lucan, and also Martial, in that Verse, Quinte Caledonios Ovidi visure
Britannos;
The Caledonians, which in Britain* be,
Quintus Ovidius is about to see.


But none of them therefore, deny them to be Picts; yet they have good reason
to call them Britains: For, as the whole Island is called Britanny, so all its
Inhabitants are deservedly called Britains. For all the Inhabitants of the Isle
of Sicily are generally called by the Romans, Sicilians, without any
difference, though they themselves call one another, some Sicilians; other
Siciliotes; so the possessors of Britany are, by Foreigners, all called
Britains; but they themselves often call the ancient Inhabitants Brittons, and
the other Nations living therein, sometime by the private Names of the
Countries, whence they came, and sometimes by the common Name of Britains.
Wherefore the Caledonians, Picts and Scots, are sometimes called Britains.
Caledonians, Picts and Scots, are sometimes called, each Nation by its own
Name, yet all of them, not seldom, by the general term, Britains. But Brittons,
of which I have spoken, no Man ever gave them that appellation.

There is also another difference amongst them, to be observed in the Word
Britannia; as there is amongst the Greeks and Latins in the Word Asia. For Asia
sometimes denotes the third part of the Habitable World, and sometimes it is
taken for that part of the Greater Asia, which is situate on this side the
Mountain Taurus, and is wont to be called Asia the Less. So Britanny is
sometimes used for the Name of the whole Island in general; and otherwhiles,
only for that part of it, which was subjected to the Romans, which part was
bounded sometimes by the River Humber, and sometimes by the Wall of Adrian, and
sometimes by the Wall of Severus; and the Inhabitants of this part, are by
British Writers more usually called Britton than Britans; but the other
dwellers in the Island, i. e. the Scots and the Picts, Bid sometimes calls
Britains, and sometimes Strangers and Foreigners; we may also find the same
observable difference in Geoffry of Monmouth, and William of Malmesbury. And
therefore the Caledonians will be counted Brittons, never a jot the more, for
being styled Britains by Dion, Martial, Lucan, or any other good Author, than
the B^^tians, a People o^ Magna Grecia in Italy, heretofore possessing the two
Calalapr^^^.
Brutians Romans, inhabiting the District about Rome.
will be Romans, though both of them are Italians. If Lud had taken notice of
these things, he had never involved himself in such dark Labyrinths, nor had he
so rashly and inconsiderately made a positive determination in a point so
obscure, nor had denied the Caledonians to have been Picts, because they are
termed by Dion, Britains. Neither has Lud any just cause to wonder, that no
Writer more ancient than Ammianus Marcellinus, and Claudian, has made mention
of the Scots and Picts, though they dwelt so many, I will not say, years, but
ages, in Britain. For, not to speak of the Valli, Cambri, (...) Men.
Loegri, Names lately known to the World, I may ask him, why, seeing so many
Greek and Latin Writers have written of the Affairs of Greece; yet no Grecian
once Names his Countrymen Graeci; nor no Latin Author calls them Hellenes? Why
did the Names of the Nations which I mentioned but now, creep so late into the
History of Britain, which that Cambro-Britain makes to be so ancient? If you
ask any English^man, of what Country he is, none will answer, that he is a
Saxon; yet the Scots, Picts, Irish, both the Brittons, i. e. those that inhabit
Britain, and those who dwell in France, do still unanimously call them Saxons:
Why do not the old Scots, even to this very day, acknowledge and own the Name
of Scots? It ought not then to seem absurd to any Man; if, when the Romans
asked their Captives, of what Nation they were; one said a M^atian, another an
Attacottian, a third a Caledonian; and the Names which Foreign Nations received
from them they still retained, and used in their common public Discourse;
neither, as I judge, will it seem incredible, that some Names are more known to
Historians and Strangers; and others, to the Inhabitants of the Country. Though
the Premises do make it sufficiently appear, that the coming of Scots and Picts
into Britain, is not only more ancient than Lud will grant it to be; yea, that
it was but a little later than the Britains themselves coming into it, yet I
shall add other, and those no contemptible, Conjectures. The Brigantes, a great
and powerful Nation, were seated beyond the River Humber, about York, and did
possess the whole breadth of the Island, between the two Seas; it is probable,
that they came not from the Tract of France, which was nearest, for no
Brigantes are said to have inhabited there, but out of Spain. First into
Ireland, and from Ireland into Britain, as being a Neighbor Island to it;
neither does this differ from the conjecture of Cornelius Tacitus, which he
makes concerning the Ancient Inhabitants of the Isle. If the Brigantes came
from Ireland, then they must be of Scottish Race, as all the rest of the
Inhabitants of Ireland were. Seneca also seems to confirm this Opinion, in that
Elegant Satyr of his, concerning the Death of Claudius, in these Words, Ille
Britannos ultra noti littora Ponti,
Et caeruleos Scutabrigantes dare Romuleis
Colla Catenis jussit, and ipsum nova Romanae
Iura securis tremere Oceanum.
He, the Britains, which beyond known Seas did dwell,
And blew Scutabrigantes did compel
Romes Yoke to bear. Yea the Ocean, so far spread,
His Government, and his new Laws, did dread.


In these Verses, Joseph Scaliger, the Son of Julius, is of Opinion, that for
Scutabrigantes, for Scotobrigantes, according to Joseph Sca^iger.
Scutabrigantes, we ought to read Scotobrigantes. Of how great Learning and
Judgment that young Man is; of what industry in comparing ancient Writers; and
of what acuteness in finding out the meaning of obscure Passages, the Books set
out by him do declare. At present I shall only say, that having undertaken to
illustrate the Affairs of Britain, I thought his Judgment was not to be
omitted; and I will declare, in a few Words, why I think it to be true; for
seeing we read in Caesar, and other Authors, eminent both for diligence and
knowledge, that the Britains were wont to paint their Bodies with Woad; and in
Herodian, that they used narrow Shields in War, (such as Livy ascribes to the
Asiatick Gauls,) and no great Ornament in their Arms; it seemed absurd, to make
mention of the Shield, which was not Painted, the mention of the Body, which
was Painted, being omitted. Now the old Britains were Painted, not for
comeliness, as other Nations, not a few were; but that their bluish color
might render them more terrible to their Enemies in Fight; but how that color
could appear terrible in a narrow Shield, I do not understand. And therefore it
is very probable, that that Learned Man, and Skilful in British Affairs, as
who, according to Dion, kept the whole Island under Tribute, wrote the Word,
Scotobrigantes, that he might distinguish them from the other Brigantes, both
Spanish and Gallick. It makes also for the same purpose, that in those Verses
he separates the Britains and Brigantes, as two different Nations, which is
also done by some British Writers, who make Humber to be the boundary of
Britain. This matter being not well considered by Hector Bo^tius mistaken.
Hector Boethius, as I judge, lead him into a mistake, who, having some where
read, that the Silures and Brigantes were called Scoti, as having their
Original from Ireland, placed them in part of the Kingdom of the Scots, in
Albium. His mistake, though it may justly offend others, yet ought not to have
been so severely censured by Ludd, who has committed as great Mistakes in the
same kind; for he makes the Cumbri, or (as he calls them) the Cumri, to issue
out of a Corner of Britain, to plunder the whole World: For he infers from one
or two Words, common to them both, that the Cimbri and Britanni were of one
Nation. Those Words are Moremarusa and Trimarchia; Here it is worth the while
to take notice of the Man's acuteness, in disputing, and of his subtilty
(forsooth) in drawing out of Inferences and Conclusions. This Word Moremarusa,
says he, is a British Word, Iron.
but it was once a Cimbrick one, and no Nations else besides, which dwelt by
the Baltic Sea. But seeing our Countrymen use the same Word, and are called
by the same Name with those other Cimbri, therefore (sure) both were of the
same Stock and Nation.

In this Matter, first he affirms Falsehoods for Truths, and also takes
Uncertainties for Certainties. For it is a manifest Untruth, That both of them
are called Cimbri, even Ludd censured.
Ludd himself being Witness, who affirms, That all the Inhabitants, his
Countrymen, of Cambria, were so called from their King, Camber, and he calls
himself a Cambrobritain. I could also prove the Falsehood of this Opinion, by
the Testimony of all his Countrymen, who do not call themselves Cimbri, but
Cumri. As That is false, so This is uncertain, whether other People dwelling by
the Baltic Sea, did not use that Word, which you attribute to the Cimbri
alone; especially since it appears out of Tacitus, That many Nations, in that
Tract of Germany, spoke the Gallick Tongue, and I showed before, that Word to
be Gallick. But suppose, that both of your Assumptions were true, What then?
Did you never read, That the Soldiers of Cn. Pompeius, when he waged War in
Asia, were saluted by the Name of Brethren, by the Albans, dwelling in the
Mountain Caucasus, by reason, that Both of them were called Albans? Neither do
I doubt, but that if a Man had observed Both Tongues, he might have found one
or two Words, signifying the same thing in Both: But they wanted such a Man as
Ludd there, who because both People had certain Words common between them,
would thereby prove, that both were of the same Nation; and yet the purblind
Man seems to be sensible of the Non sequitur of his Conclusion, when he adds
that the Cimbri were called Aestiones, inhabiting P^ussia and Liv^nia.
Aestiones, by the Germans; That he might make that out, he should have showed,
at what Time, and upon what Grounds, the Cimbri were Transformed into
Aestiones; and the Aestiones again, into C^mbri. He speaks not a lot of this,
but only cites a British History, collected out of the Mi^esian Fables o^
(...); For the Inhabitants of M^^tum in (...) were infamous for telling Tales,
so far from being true that they had not the least shadow o^ Truth in them.
Milesian Fables, of the Gauls, and also quotes a certain Fragment, whence he,
being now Degraded from an Antiquary, to be either a Botcher, or a Scraper
together of old useless Relics, or (if I may so speak) a Fragmentary, does
piece up New Kingdoms and New Nations, for us; This he does with great Labor,
and yet with no Color of probability, whereas, yet it was very obvious to him,
(unless perhaps it was above the Poor Man's reach) to find out the Causes, why
the Name Cimber was communicated to the Cimbri, and the Valli too: For Plutarch
says, That it was not the Name of a Nation, but of an Occupation or Employment,
and that Robbers were so called by the Germans. Suidas, no ignoble Grammatian
amongst the Greeks, understands the Word in the same sense; and Festus
Pompeius, amongst the Latins, writes, that the Cimbri were called Plunderers,
by the Gauls. If we follow these Men's Opinions, it will not be difficult to
find out, why the Cimbri, whom Ludd places in Britain, came by that Name,
especially since their Neighbors, the Angli or English, do affirm, That, even
in this Age, their Manners did not much abhor from that Thieving Occupation.
Sure I am, That Livy calls that Slave that was sent to kill Marius in the
Prison of the When Marius, by Sylla's Faction, was driven out of Rome, he hid
himself stark naked in the Mud and Weeds of the River Liru, (now Garigliano) in
the Kingdom of Naples; where being found out, he was carried to prison at
Minturnae, a Town hard by, whither a Gaul, or Cimber, being sent to kill him,
he saw such a Majesty in his Countenance, that he returned without perpetrating
the Homicide.
Minturnae, a Gaul; Lucan calls him a Cimber, but no Noted Writer styles him a
Britain. If Ludd had considered these things, or, if, after Consideration, he
had chosen rather to remember them, than to frame new Monsters to himself;
there was no Necessity for him, in one Moment of Time, or rather, with one
Falsehood, to have left all Britain almost destitute and forsaken, all its
Military Young Men being exhausted, and Six Hundred Thousand of them drawn out
from it at a Clap.

I will not here descend to a minute Inquiry, to what Children the Valli are
wont to give the Names of the Cimbrick Kings; for this diligent Writer brings
in This also as an Argument of their Stock.

If I mistake not, besides Latin, German, and Syriack ones, he will find very
few Names. But if a solid Argument may be fetched from the proper Names of Men,
(which are oftentimes arbitrarily imposed by Parents, or vain-gloriously
adopted out of some History) then Ludd might rather persuade us, That his
Countrymen are Jews, Romans, or Germans, than Cimbri: Or, if he would have
advised his Compatriots to give Baptismal Names, fetched out of History, to
their Children, within a few Years, he might transform his Countrymen, into
what Nation soever he pleased. But touching the Names of the Cimbrick Kings,
which, he says, were accustomed to be given to Children; I would willingly have
asked the Man, From what Oracle he received it? Unless I knew beforehand, that
he never wants some Fragment, out of which he can prove what he list himself.
But this I cannot but admire, touching that Cimbrick Expedition, how all their
Military Men being sent aboard, that within the space of Forty Years, (for it
was about that Interval, between the Cimbrick War, and Julius Caesar's arrival
in Britain,) your Country of Vallia, should so soon recover to be so populous;
especially, since, when Maximus drew forth a far lesser Number out of Britain,
even, when it was in its most flourishing Estate, the Britains could, never
after, hold up their Heads, but they were brought into bitter Servitude by the
Saxons: Or why Caesar, who, for his Age, might have made mention of the
Cimbrick War, when he came into Britain, being also a Learned Man, and a great
Favourer of the Marian Party, did find out nothing, by Inquiry, concerning this
Cimbrick Expedition. Lastly, I desire to know, Whether Ludd spoke in Jest or in
Earnest, when he added, that the Affinity of Both the Cimbri might be inferred
from their equal contempt of Gold and Silver? Here I would willingly ask of
him, Whether he spoke in Earnest, when he calls those Cimbrians, who did not
only vex and plunder Gallia or Gaul, and a part of Spain too, but in a manner
wholly wasted and destroyed them both? And yet afterward hastened to Italy, in
quest of a Richer Booty? Whose Opulency, got by Robberies, the Switz ^^.
H^lvetians imitating, they also became Plunderers, as Strabo relates in his
Seventh Book. Dare you call such Men Frugal and Temperate? And that it may
appear, that the Cimbricks Name is truly assigned to your Nation, you make them
emulous of those Employments, to which the Cimbrians were accustomed; yea, you
make your self a P^lferer too, who aspirest to the Iron.
Glory of a Plagiary, with stealing from all Nations: For, not content to have
vindicated the Deeds of the Cimbri, to your Countrymen, you add with as
impudent and fictitious an Untruth, that the Sicambri or Westpha^s^^^s.
Sicambri were also of your Stock: And because in the Name of Both Nations,
there is a certain Similitude of Letters, from that Cognation of Words, you
feign a Conjunction of Blood. At this rate, besides the Sicambrians, the
Franks, and their Childrens Children, to all Generations, will be allied to
you; and so, after a packed Series of Lies, you raise a Bridge to bring back
the Fugitive Brenni; of which, one, who took Rome, lived about an Hundred Years
before the other, who besieged Delphos; but you do jumble and compact them
together into one Body, that so you might dress up a new Monster out of a Dead
and Living Man, piec'd together; as if it were difficult to prove, Irony.
by other Arguments, that Monsters are born in that very Country, which brought
such a Person as you, forth. But, says Ludd, no Writer acknowledges, that
there were two Brennus's, besides Polydore Virgil. Surely, Ludd, thy Reason
has forsaken thee, or else thou have never read the Fourth Book of Strabo,
where he writes, That the Brennus, who besieged Delphos, is, by some, thought
to be Prausus. Yea, not Strabo alone, but every Man, who believes that Rome was
taken by a Brennus's* Two.
Brennus, and that above an Hundred Years after Delphos was besieged by a
Brennus, does acknowledge, That there were Two of That Name; seeing both those
Enterprises could not be performed by one and the same Man. But if we believe
the Monk, the Compiler of the British History, Brennus, the Brother of Belinus,
preceded these two Brenni, three hundred Years; who, if he had led his Army
into Italy at that time, must have fought with Numa Pompilius, or with Tullus
Hostilius, and not with the Free People of Rome. But to omit these things,
whence does this new Logician gather, that Brennus was a Britain? Forsooth,
from one word only, viz. Trimarchia, which word yet is common to Scots, Gauls,
and Welsh. But Pausanias, whom you quote maimedly, and by piecemeal, that so
he may make for your purpose, calls Brennus and his Companions* Gauls, and
acknowledges That Word to be Gallick; but you, Sir, you only, such is your
shamelesness, against the Credit of all Greek and Latin Historians, yea, and in
spite of the Muses themselves too, do strive to prove him a Britain. Perhaps I
have prosecuted this Argument a little more prolixly, than either the obscurity
of the Matters themselves, or the unskilfulness and unconstancy of Ludd, did
deserve; I have done it, not out of a desire to carp at, or blame, others,
(which I am far from,) but that I might abate the edge of the unsavory
abusiveness of a Person so loquacious and reflective, thus reducing him from
his wild and extravagant rage, (whereby he speaks evil of almost all Writers,)
that so I might bring him, at last, to acknowledge his Error. To omit others,
at present, he falls, with great scurrility, upon Hector Bo^tius, a Man not
only well-skilled in the Liberal Arts, but also endued with singular Humanity
and Courtesy, and famous too, beyond the ordinary rate of the Times, he lived
in; and he so falls upon him, as to blame nothing in him, of which he himself
is not more foully culpable. Hector Bo^tius and Lud compared, and Both of them
censured, for some Mistakes.
Hector places the Brigantes in Gallway, wherein he did amiss; for I have no
mind to defend his Mistakes: But Ludd brings out great Forces of the Cimbri,
from one Corner of Britain, how truly, let the Learned judge. Hector attributes
Matters, acted by others against the Romans in Britanny, to his Countrymen,
the Scots. And Ludd does shamelesly and falsely affirm, That Rome was taken,
Macedonia vexed, Greece afflicted, the Noblest Oracle of the World
sacrilegiously violated, by his Countrymen, the Britains; yea, that Asia it
self was compelled to pay Tribute to a few Vagabonds. He blames Hector, but
falsely, for making Gildo, who raised up great Commotions in Africa, a Scot; and
yet, he makes the same Gildo, who was indeed a M^^r, to be a Goth; but Gildus
and Gildo (forsooth) are Names almost alike. Let me ask you, Are they more
like, than Luddus, Lydus, and Ludio? This is certain, that Gildus is an old
Name in Scotland, as the Ancient Clan of the Macgilds, or Macgills, does show;
of whose Posterity there are yet Families remaining of good account, both in
Scotland and England. But, seeing Ludd has such an intemperate Tongue, that he
cares not what he says, provided he may abuse others, I shall leave him, and
conclude this Book, only giving him this Caution, That Loripedem rectus
derideat, Aethiopem albus.
They that Faults in others blame,
Must not be guilty of the same.


The Third BOOK.
THo I have sufficiently demonstrated in the Two former Books, how fabulous,
yea, how portentous, the Memoirs are, which the Writers of the British Affairs
have delivered, concerning their Ancestors; and have also shown, by plain and
clear evidences, that the Ancient Britains had their Original from the Gauls:
Yet, because, I perceive, I have to do with Men, that pertinaciously adhere to
a manifest Falsehood, rather than with such as lapse by Rashness or Ignorance; I
thought it worth my labor, if, out of Writers of great Authority amongst all
Learned Men, I took off the edge of such Hair-brained Men's boldness; and, by
that means, supplied Good Men, and Lovers of Truth, with sufficient Arms to
restrain and curb their daring and affronting Impudence. In the rank of such
Classick Authors, I judge, Iul^us Caesar deserves the first Place, both for his
Diligence in searching, ^
his Certainty in knowing, and Sincerity in declaring things to others. He, in
the Fifth Book of his Commentaries concerning the Gallick War, writing of
Britain, says thus, The inner part of Britain is inhabited by such, as they
themselves record to be born in the Island; and the Maritine Coasts, by such as
came out of Belgium, either to make Incursions, or Invasions; and after the War
was ended, they continued in the Possessions they had gained, and were called
by the Names of the Cities, from whence they came. The Country is very
populous, and well-stored with Houses, much like those of the Gauls; They have
great store of Cattle; they use Brass for Money, or Iron rings, weighed at a
certain rate. In its Mediterranean parts, there is found great quantity of Tin,
and, in the Mountainous parts, Iron; the but in a small quantity; their Brass
is brought in by other Nations. They have all sort of Trees, that they have in
Gallia, excepting the Beech and the Firr. Their Religion will not suffer them
to eat either Hare, Hen, or Goose, notwithstanding they have of them all, as
well for novelty as variety. The Country is more temperate, and not so cold, as
Gallia: The Island lies Triangular, whereof one side fronteth Gallia; on which
side, That Angle, wherein Kent stands, points to the East, where almost all
Ships arrive from France: And the lower Angle, to the South; This side
contains above 500 miles. The other Angle lies toward Spain, and the Western
Coast, in that Circuit, where also Ireland lies, which is an Island half as
big as England, (as some think) and as far distant from it, as Gallia; In the
Midway between England and Ireland, lies an Island called Man; besides many
other small Islands, of which some write, That in Winter time, for 30 days
together, they have a continual Night, whereof we learned nothing by inquiry;
only we found, by certain measures of Water, that the Nights in England were
shorter than in the Continent. The length of this side, according to the
opinion of the Inhabitants, contains 700 miles. The Third side lies to the
North, and open Sea, saving that this Angle does somewhat point toward Germany.
This side is thought to contain 800 miles. And so the whole Island contains
in circuit 2000 miles. Of all the Inhabitants, they of K^nt are most courteous
and civil, all their Country bordering upon the Sea, and little differing from
the fashion of Gallia. Most of the Inland People sow no Corn, but live upon
Milk and Flesh, they are clothed with Skins, and have their Faces painted with
a blew color, to the end, they may seem more terrible in Fight. They wear the
Hair of their Heads, long; having all other parts of their Body shaven, except
their Head* and upper Lip. Their Wives are common to Ten or Twelve, especially
Brethren with Brethren, and Parents with Children; but the Children that are
born, are accounted His, unto whom the Mother was first given in Marriage.

And awhile after, he says,

By these He understood, that ( Verulam,) Cassivellanus's Town was not far off,
fortified with Woods and Bogs, and well stored with Men and Cattle. The
Britains call that a Town, when they fortify Woody Fastnesses with a Ditch and
a Rampire, and so make it a place of Retreat, when they stand in fear of
incursions from their Enemies. (...) taken by Caesar.
Thither Caesar marched, with his Army, and found it well fortified both by Art
and Nature; And, as he assaulted it in Two several places, the Enemy stood to
it awhile, but at last, were not able to bear the brunt and fury of the
Assailants, but made their escape a back way out of the Town. Thus he took it,
and found therein great store of Cattle, and, in the onset, slew and took
prisoners many of the Britains.

Tacitus, in the Life of Julius Agricola. THE Site of Britanny, and the
Inhabitants thereof, tho they have been already described by sundry Writers,
The description of Britain, according to Tacitus.
I purpose here to declare, not to compare with them in careful Ingenuity, but
because it was then first thoroughly subdued, so that such things as our
Ancestors, without perfect discovery, have polished with Pen, shall now be
faithfully set down upon Knowledge. Britanny, of all the Islands known to the
Romans, the Greatest, coasteth by East upon Germany; by West, toward Spain;
and it has France on the South: Northward, no Land lying against it, but only
a vast and broad Sea beating about it. The Figure and fashion of all Britanny
by Livy, of the Ancients, and Fabius Rusticus of the Modern, the most eloquent
Authors, is likened to It does not appear, how this resemblance holds, and
therefore some think, those Aut^^rs to be better Historians, than
Resemblancers: and, indeed, ^f the whole Island were not conquered by the
Romans, (as confessedly it was not) I do not see, how they could give us the
perfect Form and Shape thereof;
a long Dish, or two-edged Axe, and so is that Part shapen indeed, on this side
Caledonia: Whereupon, the Fame went of the whole, as it seems: But there is
beside, a huge vast tract of Ground, which runs beyond unto the furthermost
Point, growing narrow and sharp like a Wedge. This point of the utmost Sea, the
Roman Fleet, then first of all Doubling, discovered Britanny to be an Island;
and withal, found out and subdued the Isles of Orkney, before that time never
known. Thyle also was discovered at aloof, which Snow hither and Winter had
covered. The Sea thereabout they affirm to be dull and heavy for the Oar, and
not to be raised, as others are, with Winds; belike, because Land and Mountains
are ^are, which minister Cause and Matter of Tempests, and because a deep Mass
of continual Sea is slower stirred to Rage.

To examine the Nature of the Ocean and Tides, pertains not to this Work, and
many have done it before. One thing I will add, and may safely avouch, that the
Sea, no where in the World, rages and rules more freely, carrying by Violence
so much River Water, hither and thither, and is not content to Flow and Ebb so
far as the Banks, but inserteth and windeth it self into the Land, shooting
into the Mountains and Cliffs, as to his own Chanel. Now, what manner of Men
the first Inhabitants of Britanny were, Foreign, brought in, or Born in the
Land, as among a barbarous People, it is not certainly known. Their Complexions
are different, and thence may some Conjectures be taken: For the Red Hair of
the dwellers in Caledonia, and mighty Limbs, import a German Descent: The
colored Countenance of the Silures, and Hair most commonly Curled, and Site
against Spain, seem to induce a belief, that the old Spaniards passed the Sea,
and possessed those places. The nearest to France likewise resemble the French,
either, because they retain something of the Race, from which they descended;
or, that in Countries butting together, the same aspects of the Heavens do
yield the same Complexion of Bodies* But generally it is most likely, the
French, being nearest, did People the Land. In their Ceremonies and
Superstitious Persuasions, there is to be seen an apparent Conformity: The
Language differs not much, like boldness to challenge and leap into Dangers:
When Dangers are come, like fear in refusing them; saving, that the Britains
make more show of Courage, as being not mollifi'd yet by long Peace; for the
French also were once, as we read, redoubted in War, till such time, as giving
themselves over to Peace and Idleness, Cowardice crept in, and Shipwreck was
made both of Manhood and Liberty, together: And so it is also befaln to those
of the Britains, which were subdued of old; the rest remain such, as the French
were before. Their strength in the Field consists in Footmen; some Countries
make War in Wagons also: The greater Personage guides the Wagon, his Waiters
and Followers Fight out of the same. Heretofore they were governed by Kings,
now they are drawn, by Petty Princes, into Parties and Factions: And that is
the greatest help we have, against those Puissant Nations, that they have no
common Council together. Seldom it chances, that two or three States meet and
concur to repulse the common danger: So, whilst one by one fights, all are
subdued. The Sky is very Cloudy, and much given to Rain, without extremity of
Cold. The length of Days much above the measure of our Climate; the Nights
light, and, in the furthermost part of the Island, so short, that, between the
going out and coming in of the Day, the space is hardly perceived, and when
Clouds do not hinder, they affirm, that the Sunshine is seen in the Night, and
that it neither Sets nor Rises, but passes along, because, belike, the
Later A^tho^^ can ha^dly reconcile this reason with the Principles of the
Mathematics: And besides, the matter of Fact is very questionable
extreme and plain parts of the Earth project a low Shadow, and raise not the
darkness to an height; so the Night falls under the Sky and the Stars; the
Soil, setting aside the Olive, the Vine and the rest, which are proper to
warmer Countries, takes all kind of Grain, and bears it in abundance; it
shoots up quickly, and ripeneth slowly; the Cause of them both is the same,
the overmuch moisture of the Soil and the Air. Britany bears Gold and Silver,
and other Metals, to enrich the Conqueror. The Ocean brings forth Pearl also,
not Orient, but duskish and wan, which proceeds, as some do suppose, for lack
of skill in the Gatherers. For, in the Red Sea, they are pulled out panting,
and alive from the Rocks; but in Britany, cast out by the Sea, and so taken up.
For my part, I do rather believe the Nature of the Country not to yield it,
than that our Covetousness could not find out the way to gather it aright.

The Britains endure Levies of Men and Money, and all other Burdens imposed by
the Empire, patiently and willingly, if Insolences be forborne: Indignities
they cannot abide, being as yet subdued to be Subjects, not Slaves.

The several Roman Generals, that had come over into Britain, or waged War
therein, in or before Tacitus his time, viz.
The first of the Romans, which entered Britanny with an Army, was Julius
Caesar; who, although he terrified the Inhabitants with a Battle, which went on
his side, and gained the Shore, yet may seem rather to have showed the place to
Posterity, than to have delivered to them the possession thereof.

The Civil Wars ensued, and Bandyings of Men of great quality, against the
Republic of Rome; and long after that, lay Britany forgotten, even in
Peaceable Times. Augustus termed it Policy, and chiefly Tiberius, so to do.

That Cajus had a meaning to invade Britanny, it is certainly known; but his
rash running Head, and hasty Repentance, and chiefly his great Attempts against
Germany, turning to nothing, averted that purpose.

Claudius and Vespasian.
Claudius did first, with effect, prosecute the matter, transporting Legions
and Aids; and assuming Vespasian into the action, which was the beginning of
the Greatness, whereunto he after attained. Some Countries were subdued, some
Kings were taken, and Vespasian made known to the World.

The first Lieutenant General was Aulus Plautius.
Aulus Plautius, then Ostorius Scapula.
Ostorius Scapula, both Excellent Warriers: And so, by little and little, was
the nearest part of the Island reduced to the Form of a Province; and besides,
a Colony of old Soldiers established there. Certain Cities were also bestowed,
in pure Gift, upon King Cogidunus, (who remained most Faithful even in our
days) according to an old Custom, anciently received of the Romans, to use even
Kings themselves, for Instruments of Bondage.

Didius Gallus.
Then Didius Gallus succeeded; who kept That which his Predecessors had gotten,
and builded some few Castles further in the Land, to win by that means a Fame
and Credit to his Office.

After Didius, succeeded Verantius.
Verantius, who died within one year.

Then Suetonius Paulinus.
Suetonius Paulinus, for two years space, behaved himself Fortunately, subduing
the Nations and establishing Garrisons. Upon Confidence whereof, going to assail
the Isle of Man, which ministered supply to the Rebels, he disfurnished the
Country behind, and laid it open to all opportunities of the Enemy. For,
through the absence of the Lieutenant, the Britains, free of fear, began to
discourse the Miseries of Bondage, to lay their Injuries together, and
aggravate them by Constructions and Inferences, as, That their Patience had
profited them nothing, save only to draw heavier Burdens upon themselves, as
Men willing to bear them. That, whereas in former times, they had only one
King, now were there Two thrust upon them, the Lieutenant to suck their Blood,
the Procurator, their Substance, whose disagreeing was the torment of the
Subjects; and their agreement, their undoing; the one vexing by Soldiers and
Captains; the other, by Wrongs and Indignities. That now their Covetousness and
Lust laid hold, without exception, on all. And, whereas in Field, he that
spoileth is commonly stronger: Now, were they, by Cowards and Weaklings, for
the most part dispossessed of their Houses, berest of their Children, enjoined
to yield Soldiers for other Men's behoof, as though they were Men, that knew to
do nothing else, save only to die for their own Country. For otherwise, what a
small handful of Soldiers were come over, if the Britains would fall to reckon
themselves: That Germany had so shakt of the Yoke, having no Ocean Sea, but
only a River, for their Defense. That their cause of taking Arms was Urgent and
Just; their Wives and Children, their Parents and Country; that the Romans had
nothing to move them to War, but their own Covetousness and wanton Lust: And
that they would doubtless depart, as Julius Caesar had done, if the Britains
would imitate the Virtues of their Progenitors, and not be dismayed with the
doubtful event of one Skirmish or two. That Men in Misery had more courage and
vehemence to attempt, more constancy to continue: And now, even the Gods seemed
to pity the Poor Britains Estate, having sent the Roman Captain out of the way,
and confined the Army, as it were, into another Island. That now being
assembled to advise and deliberate together, they had attained the hardest
point in an action of that Nature, wherein, without question, it were more
danger to be taken consulting than doing. With these and the like Speeches,
inciting one another, by common consent, they resolve to take Arms under the
Conduct of Or, ^oadicea.
Voadicea, a Lady of the Blood of their Kings: For, in matter of governing in
Chief, they make no distinction of Sex. And first pursuing the Soldiers, which
lay divided in Garrisons, and winning the Forts, they invaded (anon) the Colony
it self, as being the Seat of their Slavery: In Sacking whereof, no kind of
Cruelty was omitted, which either Anger, or the Rage of Victory, might induce a
barbarous People to practice. And unless, upon knowledge had of the Revolt,
Paulinus had come to succor, with speed, Britany had then been lost, which,
with one prosperous Battle, he restored to her former Obedience, and patient
bearing the Yoke; some few keeping out, and remaining in Arms, whom the guilt
of the Rebellion excluded from all hope of Pardon, and some fear also of the
Lieutenants private Displeasure. Who, though otherwise a singular Man, yet
seemed to show too much haughty and hard dealing toward those which yielded
themselves, and to revenge, in a sort, his own Injury. Whereupon P^^^^nius
Turpilianus.
Petronius Turpilianus was sent in his place, as a more intreateable Person,
and a Stranger to their Fault^, and therefore more ready to receive their
repentance; who having composed former Troubles, and daring no further,
delivered to Trebellius Maximus.
Trebellius Maximus the Charge,

Trebellius, a Man unfit for Action, and altogether unexpert in Service by a
kind of courteous and mild Regiment, kept the Country in quiet. For now the
Britains also had learned the good Manners, not rudely to repulse the sugared
assaults and flattr'ings of Vices; and the disturbances of civil Dissensions
ministered a lawful excuse for his doing nothing. But the Soldier, accustomed to
warfare, waxed wanton with Ease, and grew to be mutinous. Trebellius by flying
away, and hiding himself, eschewed their first indignation, and anon resuming
his place, without Majesty, without Authority, he Ruled by way of Entreaty, and
at his Soldiers discretion: And so coming, as it were to a Capitulation, the
Army, for License to do what them listed; the Captain, for safety of his own
life, the Mutiny ended without any Bloodshed.

Vectius Bolanus.
Vectius Bolanus succeeded him in Place, and in the same looseness of
Discipline; the Civil Wars continuing still, like default against the Enemy,
like License in the Camp, saving, that Bolanus a good honest Man, not odious
for any crime, instead of Obedience, had gotten Good Will.

But when as Vespasian, with the rest of the World, recovered Britanny also;
Great Captains, Good Soldiers, were sent, and the hope of the Enemy was greatly
abated. For straightways Petilius CeCerealis.
Petilius Cerealis struck a terror into them, by invading, upon his first
Entry, the Brigantes, the most populous State of the whole Province. Many
Battles were fought, and some bloody, and the greatest part of the Brigantes
were either conquered, or wasted.

And whereas Cerealis would doubtless have eclipsed the Diligence and Fame of
another Successor, Julius Frontinus.
Julius Frontinus, a Great Man, as he might well be called after that
Predecessor, sustained the Charge with Reputation and Credit, subduing the
puissant and warlike People of the Silures: Where he had, beside the valor of
the Enemy, to struggle with the straights and difficulties of the Places
themselves.

Cicero in his Epistle to Trebatius, in the 7th Book of his Familiar Epistles.
I Hear, that, in Britain, there is neither Gold nor Silver; If that be so, yet
I persuade thee to catch what thou can, and return speedily to us; But if we
can attain our desire, (without the help of Britain) do thou act so, that thou
may be reckoned amongst my Familiar Friends.

Orosius concerning Ireland and Britain.
Paulus Orosius, speaking of Ireland, has these words. THis, (Ireland) being
the nearest Island to Britain, is narrower in circuit, or space of ground than
It, but more commodious for temper of Soil and Air; It is inhabited by the
Nations of the Scots. The Isle of Orosius concerning Ireland and Britain.
Anglesey, or rather Man, is also near to it, an Island not very large, but of
a good Soil, which is also inhabited by the Scots.

The same Author says. THe Conqueror Severus was drawn into Britain by the
revolt of almost all his Allies; after he had fought many great and notable
Battles, he judged it best to separate and divide that part of the Island,
which he had regained from the other unconquered Nations, by a Wall; And for
this end, he made a great Trench and a strong Wall, fortified at the top with
many Towers, for the space of 130 mile from Sea to Sea.

Ado, the Archbishop of Vienna, speaks the same things, almost word for word.
The mistake of both in the number of miles is to be corrected, by writing 32
for 132.

Out of the 35th Chapter of Solinus, his description of Britain, and its
Inhabitants
Solinus. IT (i. e.) Britain, is environed with many Isles, and those not
unrenowned; whereof Ireland draws nearest to it, in bigness; it is an uncivil
Country, by reason of the savage Manners of the Inhabitants, but otherwise so
full of Pasturage, and Cattle, that, if their Herds in Summer time be not now
and then restrained from feeding, they would run a great danger of Over-eating
themselves. There are no Snakes, there, and but few Birds; the People are
inhospitable, and warlike. When they have overcome their Enemies, they first
besmear their Faces with the Blood of the slain, Right and Wrong, Good and
Evil, all is one to them. If a Woman be delivered of a Man-child, she lays his
first Meat upon her Husbands Sword, and, putting it softly into his Mouth,
gives him the first handsel of his Food, upon the very point of the weapon,
praying, (according to the manner of the Country) that he may not otherwise
come to his end, than in Battle, and amongst Arms. They that love to be fine,
do trim the hilts of their Swords with the Teeth of Sea-calves, for they make
them as white, and as clear, as Ivory. The Men do chiefly glory in the beauty
of their Armor. There is not a Be amongst them; and if a Man bring of the
Dust, or the little Stones from thence, and strew them among Bee-hives, the
Swarms forsake their Combs. The Sea, that is between Ireland and Britain, is
stormy and rough most part of the year, so that it can hardly be sailed over,
but a few days in Summer time. They Sail in Keels of Wicker, done over with
Neats-Leather. How long soever their passage continues, the Passengers abstain
from Meat, all the while, such as have thoroughly examined it, have esteemed the
breadth of that narrow Sea, to be 120 Miles. A tempestuous Sea also divided the
Islands of the Silures, from the Coast that the Britains inhabited; the Men of
which Island keep their old customs, even to this day. They utterly refuse
Buying and Selling for Money, but barter one Commodity for another, providing
things necessary, rather by exchange than ready Money. They worship the Gods,
very devoutly. As well the Women as the Men boast of their Knowledge of
Foretelling things, to come. The Isle of Thanet is beaten upon by the French
Sea, and is divided from Britain with a very narrow Strait, it is happy in Corn
Fields, and a fat Soil, and healthful, not only to its Inhabitants, but to
others also. Forasmuch as there is no Snake bred there, the Earth thereof, to
what place soever it is carried from thence, kills that Vermin.

Out of the Third Book of Herodian, concerning Britain.
Herodian, Translated into Latin by Politian. BUt Severus made delays on
purpose, that he might not make his entrance into Rome, Poorly; for, being
desirous of Victory, and of the Surname of Britannicus, he sends the
Ambassadors home before he had done his Business, whilst he himself in the mean
time, with great diligence, prepared all things necessary for War. His first
and chief Care, was, to erect Bridges on the Marish Grounds, that so his
Soldiers might stand safely, and fight as upon firm ground; for many places in
Britain are Marishy, because of the frequent Inwashings of the Ocean. The
Barbarians themselves do swim through these Moors or Marshes, and run up to
the Groins in them, (not regarding the Mud,) with their naked Bodies. For they
are ignorant of the use of Garments to cloth them, but do girt their Belly and
their Neck with Iron, thinking that to be an ornament and sign of Riches; as
other Barbarians do, Gold. And besides, they mark their Bodies with various
Pictures, and with the shapes of all manner of Animals, and therefore they
cloth not themselves, lest they should hide the painted outside of their
Bodies. But they are a very warlike Nation, and greedy of slaughter, being
contented only with a narrow Shield, and a Lance. And moreover, they wear a
Sword hanging down from their naked Bodies, and are wholly ignorant of the use
of Coats of Male, or Helmets, as judging them to be an hindrance and a luggage
to them, in passing over the Marshes, whose Vapors, being exhaled by heat,
make the Air there always dark and misty.

Ammianus Marcellinus, concerning Br^tain.
Out of the 10th Book of Ammianus Marcellinus. THis was the state of Affairs
throughout Illyricum, and the Eastern Parts: But in the Consulship of
Constantius, when matters were very often disturbed in Britanny, by the inroads
of those barbarous Nations, the Scots and Picts, and thereby Peace was broken,
and, the places near to their Borders being wasted, which caused a fear to
seize on the Provinces, already tired with their many past slaughters, Caesar,
then being in his Winter Quarters at Paris, was distracted with diverse Cares,
for he feared to assist those Transmarine People, as I related before, tho
Constantius did, lest he should leave Gaul without a Governor, in the mean
time. The Almaius, or Germans, also then being very eager on Cruelty and War:
And therefore he was pleased to send Lupicinus.
Lupicinus thither, to compose matters, who was as a Commissary-General of the
Army at that time, a stout Man, and very skilful in Military Affairs, and
prided himself much therein, so that he was very supercilious and haughty, and
to speak Proverbially, as proud as a Peacock. It was a great doubt, whether he
was more Covetous or more Cruel; He, having caused the Vanguard to march, viz.
The Lombards, The Hollanders, and many of the M^^sici, inhabiting part of
Pomer^nt^^, an^ part of Mechlenbu^g.
Moes^ci, came to Bolongne, in the depth of Winter. And embarking all his
Soldiers in those Ships, which he had provided, taking advantage of a
favorable Wind, he was wafted over to Sandwich, and so went to London, that,
there he might advise, and be in readiness to act according to emergencies.

Out of his 26th Book. THe Picts, Saxons, Scots, and Attacotti vex the Britains
with perpetual Miseries.

Out of this 27th Book. It Is sufficient for me to say, That, at that time, the
Picts being divided into Two Nations, the Dicalidones, and the Vecturiones, and
also the Attacotti, a warlike People; and the Scots ranging several ways,
spoiled many Shires, and Countries. The Franks and Saxons, as they had
opportunity to make inroads by Land or Sea, plundered the Gallican Tracts, near
to them, and carried from thence mighty Booties, firing all before them, and
killing those which they took Captive. To hinder this, Fortune favoring him,
our warlike Commander came into these extreme parts, from Bolongne, which is
divided from the Land he was to make by the Streights of the Sea; which is wont
to be raised by high Tides, and again levelled, in a Calm, like a Plain,
without any prejudice to the Mariners; from thence he gently passed over to
Richburrow, a safe Harbor over against it, whence, being followed by the
Batavi, Or Lombards.
Heruli, and Iovii trusting to their conquering Numbers, he came to the old
Town of London Anciently called Augusta.
London, since called Augusta, -- where, dividing his Troops, he set upon the
praedatory Bands of his Enemies, and they being laden with spoils, he quickly
overcame them and took away their prey, both of Prisoners and Plunder, to their
great damage. He restored all to the losers, except a small part bestowed on
his wearied Soldiers; thus he re-entred the City, in Triumph, before forelorn,
but now relieved by him. Being lifted up by his prosperous success, he designed
greater matters, and intended to follow safe Counsels, for he had learned both
by Prisoners and Deserters, that such scattered Troops of sundry Nations, and
those fierce ones too, could not be conquered, but by Treachery or sudden
Assault. So that he made Edicts, and proposed Impunity, and, by that means
called in all Stragglers and Deserters. Hereupon, many returning, he being
moved thereby, and anxiously careful, required Civilis.
Civilis to be sent to him to Govern Britain, a Man of a sharp Wit, and very
Just and Honest too, and also D^lcitiu^.
Dulcitius, a Commander, very skilful in Warlike Affairs.

Out of the 39th Book of Dion 's Relation concerning Caesar 's coming into
Britain.
Dion. CAesar, First of all the Romans, having passed the Rhene, afterward was
wafted over into Britanny, in the Consulship of Pompeius and Crassus. The
Island itself is extended 45 Stadia, at least, beyond the Morini. And it is
stretched out beyond the rest of Gaul, and almost all Spain, reaching out into
the Sea. It was unknown to the Ancient Greeks and Romans. And their Posterity
did doubt, whether it were a Continent or an Island; and many Writers who were
ignorant of the Truth, as having not seen it themselves, nor had any
Information from the Inhabitants, (but spoke only by Conjectures) in their
Records, as their Leisures and Humors were, some counted it One, some the
Other. But, in process of time, when Agricola was Chief Commander, and
afterward in the time of Severus the Emperor, it was clearly found out, to be
an Island. Caesar, when he had settled things in France; and subdued the Morini,
desired to pass over thither, and accordingly he transported his Foot, where it
was most convenient, but he Landed not where he ought to Land. For the Fame of
his coming being noised abroad, all the Britains had prepossessed the passages
of the Continent. But he, sailing beyond a Prominent Rock, made his descent
elsewhere, and, repulsing those who first hindered his Landing, he put his Men
on Shore before many of the Britains could unite to impede him; and afterward
he repelled their Aids too, which came in, conquered their Garrisons, and
mastered the Island. Yet not many of the Barbarians were slain, for they,
fighting on Horseback, and out of Chariots, did easily avoid the Romans. (who
had then no Horse Forces.) But being amazed at those things, which were related
concerning them out of the Continent, and that they were so bold as to
transport themselves, and make their descent into their Island, they sent some
of the Nation of the Morini, their Friends and Allies, in Embassy to Caesar.
First of all, Caesar demandded Hostages, and they promised it. But afterward
perceiving, that the Naval Force of the Romans, both those near at hand, and
farther off, were shattered by Tempest, they changed their Minds, yet they did
not openly set upon them, (for their Camp was well guarded) but having
surprised some of them, who were sent in a peaceable manner, to provide things
necessary, they put them almost all to the Sword; excepting some, whom Caesar,
speedily sending forth other Forces, relieved; and presently, they make an
onset on his Camp, but were shamefully repulsed, without effecting any thing,
yet they came not to Terms with Caesar, till they had been often worsted by
him; and on the other side, Caesar had no great mind to make a League with
them. But the Winter being now at hand, and his Forces not then sufficient to
carry on the War, many of those which he brought over, being dead, or slain;
and besides, the Gauls, in his absence, were attempting alterations, he clapped
up a Peace with them, in a manner against his Will, demanding many Hostages,
but receiving a few only. Thus was he wa^ted back into the Continent, where he
quelled the Mutineers, and settled Affairs, neither reaped he any public or
private advantage from Britain, worth his Labor; but that he had assaulted it
by Arms. For this very reason, he was much pleased in himself, and his Friends
did mightily extol him at Rome. For when, they saw, that Places, before
unknown, were now brought to light; and being before never heard of, were now
discovered, they embraced their Hopes, as if they had been Enjoyments, and
antedating their success, they rejoiced, as if they had already obtained their
desired Conquest, and therefore they decreed Supplications to the Gods for
Twenty days.

Out of the First Chapter of the first Book B^de 's Relation, concernning the
B^itains.
of Bid. THe Islanders do profess one and the same Theology, and that in Five
Tongues; viz. Of the Angles, Brittons, Scots, Picts, and Latins, which, by the
Meditation of the Scriptures, is made common to all the rest. But, in the first
place, the Brittons only inhabited the Island, from whom it took its Name, who
coming over into Britain, as it is reported, from the Base-^^etagne in France.
Armorick Tract, seized upon the Southern parts thereof. And they having
possessed a great part of the Island, beginning from the South, it happened,
that the Nation of the Picts, venturing to Sea, with a few Galleys, as is
reported, from Scythia, made their Descent in Ireland, the Winds hurrying them
beyond all the Coasts of Britain, and having Landed there, and peirced even to
the Northern parts thereof; where, finding the Nation of the Scots, they
desired part of their Allotment, for their Habitation, but could not obtain it.

Out of the Fifth Chapter of the first Book of the same Author. SEverus an
African, born at Lebeda, near Tripoli; Rather the 15th.
the Fourteenth from Augustus Caesar obtained the Empire, which he held
Seventeen years. He, being of a fierce Disposition, Severus his expedition into
Britain, according to Bid.
as always vexed with continual Wars, governed the Commonwealth with great
Valor, indeed, but with equal Toil. And, being a Conqueror in the Civil Wars,
which were very grievous in his Time, he was enforced to pass over into
Britain, upon the Revolt of almost all his Allies; where, after many great and
cruel Battles, he gained part of the Island, and divided it from the
Un-conquered part, not with a Wall, (as some think,) but with a Trench only.
For a Wall is made of Stones, but a Trench, wherewith Camps are Fortified, to
repel the force of Enemies, is made of Turf, cut out of the Earth; yet, as a
Wall, it is built high above the Ground, so that there is a Ditch before it,
out of which the Turfs are dug and heaved up, above which, Pallisadoes, made
of strong Wood, are prefixed and hung out. Wherefore, Severus drew a great
Ditch, and a firm Graff or Work, fortified with many Towers above, from Sea to
Sea, and then he died at York.

Out of his Twelfth Chapter of the same Book. Afterward, Britain being
despoiled of all her Armed Soldiery, and of her chief florid Youth, which were
carried away Captive, by the severity of Tyrants, and never returned again, was
laid open to be preyed upon, and plundered, as being wholly ignorant of the Art
of War. At last, it was suddenly harassed by Two Transmarine Nations, the Scots
from the South, and the Picts from the North, under whose yoke she groaned,
many years: I call them Transmarine Nations, not because they had their
Habitations out of Britain, but because they were remote from the Allotment of
the Britains, two Creeks of the Sea running betwixt them, one of them from the
East Sea, and the other from the West, running far into Land, though they reach
not one to the other. The Oriental one has, in the midst of it, the City
Guidi. The Occidental one above it, i. e. on the right Hand of it, has the
City Dumb^^ton.
Alcluyth, which, in their Tongue, signifies a Rock, for Cl^th, or Cite.
Cluyth is situate by a River of the same Name. By reason of the Incursions of
these Nations, the Brittons send Ambassadors to Rome, with complaining
Missives, craving Aid of them with mournful Supplications, and promising
perpetual Subjection to them, if they would drive away those Enemies, that were
at their very Doors; hereupon an Armed Legion was designed for their
Assistance, which being transported into the Island, and fighting with their
Enemies, slew many of them, and drove the rest beyond the limits of their
Allies. And thus, having delivered them from their cruel Bondage, they advised
them to build a Wall within the Island, between the two Seas, which might be a
Safeguard to them, to repel their Enemies; and then, in great Triumph, they
returned home. They, harkening to their advice, erect a Wall, as enjoined, not
so much with Stones, as Turfs, but having no eminent Artificers, fit for such
an undertaking, it was good for little. They made it between the two Seas, or
Bays (of which I lately spoke) of the Sea, for many Miles; that so, where the
Waters were not a Defense, there, by the advantage of the Wall, they might
secure their Borders from the Inrodes of their Enemies. The evident Marks and
Footsteps of this high Wall, and Work, do remain to this day. It begins at
almost a Mile distant from the Monastery of Kebercurnig, toward the West, in a
place called, in the Picts Language, Panuachel, but in the English, Penueltima,
and bending against the West, it is terminated by the City Alcluyth. But their
former Enemies, as soon as they perceived, that the Roman Soldiers were
departed, being carried in Ships, brake into their Borders, killing and
spoiling all before them; and, as if they were Corn ready for the Sickle, they
Mow, Trample upon, and Destroy them. Hereupon, the Brittons send a second
Embassy to R^m^, with redoubled Complaints and Lamentations, desiring Aid, lest
their miserable Country should be whol^y Razed, and the Name of a Roman
Province, wherewith they had been honored so long, should now grow cheap and
precarious, by the Invasion of Foreigners. Hereupon, another Legion was sent,
which, according to Command, arriving in Autumn, made a great Slaughter of
their Enemies, and drove all that made their escape, beyond the Seas, who, the
year before, drove all their Preys beyond those Seas, without any Resistance.
Then the Romans told the Britains, That they could come no more, on such
chargeable and toilsome Expeditions, for their Defense, but they advised them
to take Arms themselves, and Fight with their Enemies; that, were it not for
their Sluggishness, they might be as Valiant as They. Moreover, they thought it
advantageous to their Allies, whom they must leave, that a Wall was drawn
directly from Sea to Sea, between the Cities, which were there built for fear
of Enemies, where also Severus made a Trench. This Wall they built accordingly
with firm Stone, both with the public and private Purse, (as is yet to be
seen) taking to their Assistance a Company of the Britains. It was Eight Foot
broad, and Twelve high, in a direct line from East to West. Both are yet to be
seen, after they had built it, they gave strict charge to the Inhabitants, for
their self-Defence, and afforded them Examples for the Training up in Arms; but
in the South shore, where their Ships were lodged, because from thence they
feared the Irruptions of the Barbarians, they erected Towers, at proper
distances, for the prospect of the Sea, and so they took their leaves, as never
intending to Return.

And a little after.

In short, they fly, and are dispersed, leaving their Cities and Walls; their
Enemies follow, and make more cruel Slaughters than ever before. For, as Lambs
are devoured by Wolves, so were the poor Countrymen torn in pieces by their
Enemies; so that, being ejected out of their Habitations, and in danger to be
Starved, they exercised Robberies, and mutual Rapacities, to keep themselves
alive. Thus they increased external Slaughters, by Domestic Broils, till all
the Country was quite despoiled of Food, but what was got by Hunting.

Out of the Epistle of Gildas. WHom he commanded to build a Wall, between the
Two Seas, on the further side of the Island, that it might be a Terror to
Enemies, and a Defense to the Inhabitants. And after: The remainders of them
sent lamentable Letters to The Britains make a lamentable complaint to Aetius
at Rome.
Aetius, a Man of great Authority in Rome, beginning thus; To Aetius, thrice
Consul, the Groans of the Britains; and, a little after, they complain, The
Barbarians repel us to the Sea; The Sea beats us back to the Barbarians.
Between these Two kinds of Death, we are either killed on Land, or drowned at
Sea, neither have we any Fence or Releif against either of them.

The Fourth BOOK.
HAving undertook to write the History of our Nation, that the Series thereof
might appear more plain to the Reader; I have, in my former Books, premised a
few ancient Memoirs, and especially Those, which are freest from Fabulous
Vanities, and are also most Consonant to Old Writers.

First of all, it is constantly reported, and there are many Evidences to
confirm the same, That a great multitude of A Colony of Spaniards come into
Ireland.
Spaniards, being driven out of their own Country, by their powerful Dons; or
else, voluntarily departing, by reason of their superabounding populousness,
transported themselves into Ireland, and seized upon those Places of that
Island, which were nearest to them. Afterward, the healthiness of the Air, and
the fatness of the Pasturage, invited many others to follow them; especially,
seeing their Seditions at home, and the Injuries offered them by Foreigners,
(to which Spain was always subject) drew many thither, in hopes of a quieter
Life, (which Voyage they were more easily persuaded to undertake) because, they
looked upon themselves as going into an Island already possessed by their own
People, and, by that means, as it were, their second Country. This Stock of
Spaniards did so flourish and increase, in a Country fit for Propagation, that
now they were not contented within the bounds of Ireland, but frequently made
Emigrations into the lesser Islands, near adjacent.

In the mean time, the Scots (for that was the general Name of the whole
Nation,) propagating their bounds through the Islands of Aebudae, and
dispersing themselves by Tribes and Kindreds, without either King or fixed
Government: A A German Fleet is driven into the Aebudae.
German, or, as Bede writes, a Scythian Fleet, came to the Coasts of Ireland,
being driven thither, it is very probable, by stress of Weather; for they had
not their Wives or Children aboard with them. They, being very Poor, having
nothing left them, by reason of so long a Voyage, but only their Arms, sent
Ambassadors to the Scots, desiring them, that they might inhabit amongst them.
Answer was sent them, That they themselves were compelled to seek their
Habitations in those small Islands; which, by reason of the Barrenness of the
Soil, were also Unfruitful; and, if it were otherwise, yet all of them, if they
should forsake them quite, would not be sufficient to entertain so great a
multitude. But in regard, they pitied the common Miseries of Mankind, and were
particularly affected with their Condition, whom Divine Providence had so
grievously afflicted; and who did not seem to be wholly Strangers to their
Lineage, (as by their Language and Customs appeared,) they would therefore give
them their Advice, and, as far as they were able, would assist them to execute
it. Their Advice to them, was, to Sail to their Neighbor Island, Albium, which
was large and fruitful, and, in many places, then uninhabited; and also, by
reason of the Condition of those Inhabitants that were in it, who were under
several Kings, at fewd one with another; and, consequently, very weak. That
amidst those Discords, 'twere easy for them, by supporting the weaker side, to
make themselves Masters of that large Country; and that in this matter, they
would afford them their assistance.

The Narrowness of the From thence they sail to Albium.
Aebudae, and the Lowness of their own Condition, for so it then was, made them
give ear to this Counsel. So that these Germans (which were afterward, both by
the Romans, and their Neighbor-Nations, called Pi^^s were Germans, at first.
Picts) Landing upon the Coasts of the Island, bordering on the German Sea,
having expelled the Inhabitants, which were but few, and those at mutual
Discord amongst themselves, they brought a great part of that District under
their Subjection; and, soon after, in prosecution of the Friendship with the
Scots and Germans join in affinity.
Scots, so happily begun, they took Wives from amongst them, and so were, in a
manner, compacted into one Nation with them. By this mutual Intercourse betwixt
them, a great many Scots, being either detained by their Allies, who were yet
but weak; or else, driven by Want and Penury; or, for loss of their Relations,
fixed their Habitations amongst the Picts: The Picts, at first, were glad of
their coming; but, when they grew numerous, by degrees, they began to fear,
lest, if the Scots increased in strength, they would become their Masters; So
that, First in their secret Assemblings, and afterward in their public
Councils, they muttered, That Care was to be taken, That no stranger should
hereafter be intermixed amongst them: And some Way was to be found, that the
number of those, who were already admitted, might be lessened. A Rumor also was
spread abroad, that it was revealed from Heaven to the A Pictish Prophecy.
Picts, That their Nation should in time be extirpated by the Scots. These
Suspicions caused the Two Nations, which before were very amicable, to part
companies. The Scots betook themselves to the Mountainous places, which were
less fit for Culture, in regard they were more addicted to Pasturage, and
Hunting: And the Scots and Picts fall out, and divide their Habitations.
Picts possessed the Low-lands, which were more fertile, and fit for Tillage,
situate near the German Sea. Thus their Friendship, before contracted by so
many mutual Kindnesses, did soon break forth into a terrible Civil War. For the
Seeds of a deadly hatred were sown between those Two Nations, both of them
being of fierce Dispositions, tho the occasion, at first, was but trivial, as
some little Pets, Chidings, and some few Injuries sustained.

The The Brittons foment the Divisions between the Scots and Picts.
Brittons, being Enemies to both Nations, having gotten this opportunity,
fomented the Dissensions; and did freely offer Aid to the Picts, even before
they desired it, against the Scots. When the Scots perceived, That these things
were in Agitation against them, they sent elsewhere for Aid, and procured a
Foreign King to assist them against so imminent a Danger. The Commanders of the
Islanders, being almost all of equal Authority, and scorning to stoop one to
the other; Fergus sent for out of Ireland by the Scots, and made King.
Fergusius, the Son of Fer^hard, was sent for, with Forces, out of Ireland,
being counted the most eminent Person among the Scots, both for Advice and
Action, He, by the public Consent of the People, was chosen King, and charged
to prepare his Army to undergo the Shock of a Battle, if need required. Just
about the same time, a Rumor was dispersed abroad, which came to the Ears both
of the The Army of the Picts and Scots at a stand.
Scots and Picts, That the Brittons were managing some ambiguous Counsels,
equally pernicious both Nations; and, That they would set upon the Conquered,
and Conquerors together, with their Arms, and, destroying both, or else,
driving them out of the Island, they Themselves would enjoy the Whole. This
Report made both Armies doubtful, What course to take; and, for a time, kept
them both within their Trenches. At length they came to a Treaty, and,
perceiving the secret Fraud of the Brittons, they inclined to make Peace one
with another; which being confirmed, the Three different Armies Returned home.
The Brittons, having failed in their first Project, attempt another Wile. They
privily sent in Robbers amongst the Picts, who drove away their Cattle; when
the Picts demanded Restitution, they answered, That they should seek it from
the Scots, who were accustomed to Thieving and Plundering, rather than from
Them. Thus they eluded the Ambassy, and sent away their Ambassadors, without
their Errands; so that the Matter did appear to be a plain Mockery. Their
fraudulent Counsels being thus more and more discovered, The Scots and Picts
unite against the Brittons.
the late reproach did incense the Hearts of Both Nations against them, more
than the Relics of their Anger, for their former Injuries; and therefore,
Levying as great an Army as they could, both Kings, Two several ways, invaded
the Coasts of the Brittons, and, destroying the Country with Fire and Sword,
returned home with a great Booty. To revenge this Loss, the Brittons enter
Scotland, and came as far as the River Don, Or Down, in Kyle.
and having ravaged the Country thereabouts, with greater Terror than Loss to
the Inhabitants, they pitched their Tents upon the Bank of the River. Fergus,
having sent their Wives and Children, and other portable things, into the
Mountains, and Places inaccessible for Armies, secured all the Avenues, till
the coming of the And actually join.
Picts; with whom he at length joined his Forces, and, communicating Counsels
one with another, they resolved to make a Diversion, and lengthen the War, by
making an Incursion, with vast Forces, into their Enemies Country; and so to
weary them out. But C^ilus, King of the B^ittons overthrown in Coil, now called
Kyle, by the Picts and Scots.
Coilus (that was the name of the King of the Brittons) understanding, by his
Spies, the cause of their delay, sends Five Thousand Men before to lie in
ambush, in the upper grounds, and he determined to lead forth the rest of his
Army directly against the Enemy. When the Picts knew this, they again consulted
with the Scots, and, by way of Prevention, they agreed to assault the Camp of
the Brittons by night, and accordingly, drawing out their Forces, the Scots in
the Pront, the Picts in the Rear, attack their Enemies before day; Viz. Coil.
and, by this means, they made a great slaughter of the Brittons, being as it
were half asleep, whom the former delays of their Enemies had made secure and
confident. In this Battle, Coilus himself fell, with the greatest part of his
Army, and made the Place, in which it was fought, Famous from his Name. Fergus,
the First King of Scotland, drowned at (...)-Fergus, a noted Town, with a ^^^ge
Bay ad^oyning, in the Province of (...) in I^eland.
Fergus returning home a Conqueror, the Scots settled the Regal Government upon
Him and his Posterity, by the Solemnity of an Oath. Afterward, having quieted
Matters in Scotland, he returned back into Ireland, to quell Seditions there;
where, having composed all things, as he was returning home, a Tempest arising
suddenly, he was drowned, not far from the Port, called, from him, Fergus his
Rock (i. e.) Knock-Fergus, or Carrick-Fergus, in the Twenty fifth Year of his
Reign. Historians say, That his coming into Albium, was, at the time when
Alexander the Great took Babylon; about 330 Years before the Birth of Christ.

Feritharis, Second King of Scotland.
FErgus dying, left Two Sons behind him, Ferlegus and Mainus; neither of them
yet able to manage the Government; so that the Chiefs of the Clans meeting
together to declare the succeeding King, there was great Contention amongst
them; Some urging the late Oath, whereby they had bound themselves to preserve
the Scepter for the Fergusian Family; others alleging, What great hazards they
might run under an Infant King. At last, after a long Dispute, a Medium was
found out; whereby, neither the Infant, not yet fit to manage the Government,
should actually Reign, nor yet their Oath be violated; which was, An old Law in
Scotland, concerning Succession to the Crown.
That, whilst the Children of their Kings were Infants, one of their Kindred,
who was judged most accomplished for the Government, should weild the Scepter
in their behalf; And if he dyed, then the Succession of the Kingdom should
descend to the former Kings Sons. This Law did afterward obtain for almost
1025 Years, even until the days of Kenneth the III. of whom I shall speak in
his place. By virtue of this Law, Feritharis, Brother to Fergus, obtained the
Kingdom, and managed it 15 Years, with such Equity and Moderation, that his
Subjects found him, a just King; and the Orphans or Pupils, a good Guardian;
Having, by this Carriage, procured Peace abroad, and got the Love of his
Subjects at home; yet he could not allay the Ambition of his Kindred. For
Ferlegus conspires against his Uncle Feritharis.
Ferlegus, being inflamed with a desire to Reign, having first communicated his
Design to the most turbulent of the Soldiers, and such as were most desirous of
Innovation and Change, comes to his Uncle and demands the Kingdom of him, which
he held (as he alleged) not as his Own, but in Trust only for him. Feritharis
willing to resign the Crown.
Feritharis was so far from being disturbed at this rash undertaking of the
young Man, That, calling an Assembly of the States together, he Declared to
them, That he was ready to lay down and resign the Regal Scepter; adding also
many words in Commendation of the young Man; As for himself, he had rather
freely resign up the Kingdom, with which he was but entrusted, willingly, which
his death, now near at hand, would deprive him of, that so, his Fidelity
toward his Nephews might appear to be rather of Good Will, than of Necessity.
But such was the Respect and Love, all did bear to But the People oppose it.
Feritharis, that they utterly disliked this overhasty Desire of the Kingdom,
in Ferlegus, which they manifested, not only by their Countenances and Frowns,
but by the loud Acclamations of the whole Convention and Assembly. And having
discovered, by Spies, the Conspiracy against the Uncle, tho they judged the
Author of so detestable a Design, to be worthy of Death; yet the Memory of this
Father Fergus, and the present Favor and Desires of his Uncle, did so far
prevail, that they did not inflict it on him for his designed Wickedness; only
they set Ferlegus imprisoned,
Keepers about him, which should watch over, and pry into, all his Words and
Actions. But he, being impatient, not presently to obtain what he hoped for in
his Mind, tho the delay would have proved but short, deceiving his Keepers,
with a few others privy to his design, fled away, First, to the Picts, and
finding there no encouragement for his desired Innovation; But makes his escape.
afterward, to the Brittons, where he lived an obscure, and consequently, an
ignoble, Life. But Feritharis, a few Months after, And, in his absence, is
condemned, for the presumptive murder of his Uncle.
was taken off; it is doubtful, whether by Disease, or Treachery. The former
Ambition of Ferlegus, the De^ection of his Conspiracy, and his late Flight,
raised such Suspicions, that he was guilty of his Death, that he was
unanimously condemned, in his absence, about the Fifteenth Year after his
Fathers Death.

Mainus, the Third King.
FErlegus being condemned, Mainus, his Brother, was created Third King of the
Scots, a Man more like to his Father and Uncle, than his Brother, Ferlegus: He
confirmed and settled Peace with his Neighbors abroad, punished the Wicked and
Profligate at home, and constantly performed Religious Exercises; whereby he
procured to himself such an Opinion of Justice and Piety, That, as well
Foreigners, as his own Subjects, thought it a Nefarious thing to hurt such a
Person. He was better guarded by this Opinion of his The best Guard for a
Prince.
Sanctity, than by his Military Forces; after he had Reigned 29 Years, he
departed this Life, being much lamented by all Good Men.

Dornadilla, the Fourth King.
HE left a Son behind him, called Dornadilla, the Successor of his Kingdom; in
point of Equity, like his Father, but very unlike him in the other parts of his
Life. For he spent much of his time in Hunting, as judging that Exercise to be
proper enough in a time of Peace, and healthful; Laws about Hunting made by
King Dornadilla.
as also very beneficial to harden the Body for War. And besides, the Mind did
suck in the purest pleasures therefrom, and was greatly strengthened thereby,
against Covetousness, Luxury, and other Vices, which spring from Idleness.
Report says, That the Laws about Hunting made by King Dornadilla.
Venatory Laws, which the Ancient Scots observe to this day, were made by him.
He deceased in the 28th Year of his Reign.

Nothatus, the Fifth King.
AFter his Death, the People placed Nothatus, his Brother, on the Throne, his
own Son Reutherus being yet Immature, in point of Age, for the Government. This
Nothatus, the First of the Scottish Kings, that set up Arbitrary Government.
Nothatus changed the Government, which, till then, had been moderate, and
bounded with Laws, into an Arbitrary Domination; and, as if his Subjects had
been given him to Prey upon, not to Defend, he punished High and Low,
promiscuously, with Forfeiture of Goods, Banishment, Death; and all sort of
Miseries, so that scarce any addition could be made to his Cruelty. By these
Severities, most of the People were cowed out, only one Dovalus of Galway, an
Ambitious Man, thinking it a seasonable opportunity for him to advance himself,
by reason of the Peoples Hatred against their King; and knowing also, that his
own Life was insidiously aimed at by the King, he resolves to prevent him. And
accordingly, all things being in a readiness, and being accompanied with a
great number of his Vassals and Friends, away goes he to the King, and openly
upbraids him with the Slaughter of the Nobility, with the seizure of their
Goods and Estates, and with his Enslaving the Commonalty; and demands of him,
to restore the Kingdom, which he was not able to manage, to the Right Heir.
Nothatus, being thus Bearded and Affronted, contrary to his Expectation, yet
remitted nothing of his former Stoutness, but answered peremptorily, That he
would maintain what he had done, by his Kingly Prerogative; and, if he had
carried it somewhat Despotically, it was to be imputed not to his own
Disposition, but to the Contumacy of the Subject, who had enforced him thereto.
These Taunts increased the Animosities between them, so that at last it came to
Blows, and He is Slain by Dova^us.
Nothatus was Slain by Dovalus and his Partisans, after he had Reigned, Cruelly
and Avariciously, Twenty Years.

Reutherus, the Sixth King.
WHereupon, Reutherus was made King by the Dovalian Faction, without the
Suffrages of the People: The Nobles, hearing of it, though they judged Nothatus
worthy of the worst of Punishments, yet did not approve so bad an Example; and
they took it in greater disdain, because a Public Convention was not
consulted, but the choice of the chief Magistrate devolved on the Pleasure and
Arbitrament of one Man: Besides, that it was not to be thought an Obliging Act
in him, thus to advance the young Man to the chief Power, who was, as yet,
unfit to Rule. For such as looked narrowly into the matter, would find, That
only the Name of King would be given to Reutherus, but the whole Power would
reside in Dovalus. However, it did not much concern the Public, whether
Nothatus, or Dovalus were King, unless, perhaps, they did hope for a more
Tolerable Life under Him, who, being a private Man, durst adventure to Murder
his King; and so to deliver over the Scepter to another private Man, than under
one, who was not so extreme or Cruel in his Government, until, by the
Permission of the People, he was backed with Power and with the Terror of an
Army. The Kindred of Nothatus, hearing such things to be bruited abroad,
insinuating themselves into the Societies of those who did Regret such Evil
Carriages, at last gained this Point, That War should be denounced against
Dovalus; and that Ferchard, Nothatus his Son in Law, should be General of their
Army. Neither did Dovalus refuse to give Battle: They fought twice in one and
the same Day; the Dovalians, though Superior in number, yet were beaten and put
to flight, more of them being Slain in the pursuit, than in the Battle. For,
besides Dovalus and Getus, King of the Picts, slain in Battle.
Dovalus himself, and the chief of his Faction, there fell also Getus, the King
of the Picts, with many of his Men. Reutherus, the new King, was taken
Prisoner, and pardoned, out of respect to his tender Age, to the Memory of his
Father, and to the Royal Blood which ran in his Veins. Neither was the Victory
Un-bloody, even to the Conquerors themselves, almost all the chief of the Clans
being Slain, with many common Soldiers also. This Conflict of the Scots and
Picts, brought matters to that low ebb in Britain, that they who survived fled
into Desert and Mountainous Places, and even into the Neighbor Islands, lest
they should become a prey to the The Brittons enter Scotland.
Brittons; who, having now gotten that opportunity, which they long thirsted
after, peirced into the Country, as far as Bodotria, (now called Forth) without
any resistance. Afterward, having made a little Settlement of Things there,
they went forward against the Caledonians, and, having scattered those who were
there gathered together to oppose them, they seized upon the Champion Countries
of the Picts, and, placing Garrisons there, thinking the War to be at an end,
they returned home with their Army. In the mean time, the remainders of the
Scots and Picts, which had retired to the Mountains, Woods, and other
inaccessible Places, did vex the Governors of Castles and Garrisons, by Robbing
them of their Cattle; upon which, they themselves also did Live; and, being
increased by the accession of greater Forces from the Islands, they sometimes
burnt Villages, and fetched in Preys further off, so that the Ground was left
without Tillage in many places. The Brittons, either being detained by
homebred Dissensions, or, not thinking it advisable or safe, to lead their
Army into such difficult and almost inaccessible Places, where they could meet
their Enemies with no Forces more numerous than they had to oppose them, did by
their slow Actings, increase the boldness of their Contrariants. The Scots and
Picts being thus miserably afflicted for Twelve years, at length, a new Fry of
Lusty Warlike Youths grew up, (who, in so great streights that they had
undergone, were enured to Hardship,) those sent Messenger^ all about, and,
mutually exhorting one another, they resolved to try their Fortunes. Whereupon,
Reutherus sails out of Ireland into the Aebuaae, and from thence into Albium,
and Landing his Forces at the Bay, now called Lough Brien, and there joining
with young Gethus, the Son of old Gethus who was slain, who was also his Wifes
Brother, they Consulted together, concerning the Manage of the War. The Issue
of their Consult, was, That it was best to draw toward the Enemy unawares,
whilst he was unprepared; as soon as they met, the Service was so hot, and the
Fight so sharp, that neither Army had reason to boast; so that Both of them,
being wearied with Slaughter, made But make Peace, at last, with the Scots and
Picts.
Peace for some years: Reuther, or (as Bede calls him) Reuda, returned to his
ancient Seat of Argyle, and the Scots were, a long time after, from him, called
Scots called Dalreudini, and Why?
Dalreudini; for Daal, in old Scottish, signifies a It Is Partem (a part) in the
Copy, which, some think, is mistaken for Pratum.
Part, as some; or a Meadow or Plain, as others. From whence, he made a further
Progress, and, in a short time, enlarged his Dominions even to their Ancient
Bounds. After he had Reigned Twenty Six Years, he died, leaving a Son behind
him, named Thereus, begot upon the Daughter of Gethus.

Reutha, the Seventh King.
BEcause Thereus was yet scarce Ten Years old, and so too young to undertake
the Kingdom, according to the Law, long before made and observed, concerning
the Succession of Kings; therefore his Uncle ^
Reutha was declared King; who, being free from External Wars, endeavored to
reduce the People, who were grown almost wild by their former Sufferings, and
also insolent upon their late Victory, (though a bloody one,) into a milder
Carriage and Deportment; and, accordingly, he enacted many public and
profitable Laws, of which, not a few yet remain amongst the Ancient Scots.
Having Reigned Seventeen Years, with so good a Decorum, being reverenced and
beloved of all; either for want of Health, (to which he himself imputed it) or
else, fearing the Ambitious Nature of his Kinsman Thereus, he resigned up the
Government, the People being hardly brought to consent thereunto; and at his
Resignation, there was a large Panegyric made in his Praise.

Thereus, the Eighth King.
Thereus his cruel Reign, he flies his Country, and dies an Exile.
THereus was substituted in his stead; in the first Six Years of his Reign, he
so managed the Government, that Reutha's Predictions concerning him, seemed to
be true. But after That time was expired, he ran headlong into all manner of
Vice, not by degrees, but all at once; insomuch, that putting the Nobles to
Death by False Indictments, some lewd Fellows thereupon did, without fear,
range over all the Kingdom, using Rapines and Robberies at their pleasure. The
Phylarchae, ( i. e. chief of the Clans,) bewailing the deplorable State of the
Public, determined to proceed judicially against him; which he having notice
of, fled to the Brittons; where, despairing of his return, he ended his Days in
great Contempt and Ignominy. In the mean time, Conanus, a prudent and regular
Person, was elected Viceroy; he restored and strengthened what the other had
impaired and weakened; he restrained Robberies, and having composed Matters as
well as he could, he received News of the Death of Thereus, whereupon, in a
Public Assembly, or Convention, of the Estates, he abdicated the Magistracy,
about the Twelfth Year after Thereus began his Reign.

Josina, the Ninth King.
JOsina, Brother of the late King, was raised to the Helm of Government; He did
nothing memorable one way or other, only he had Iosina, with his Nobles, great
Lovers of Physi^k and (...).
Physicians in very high esteem; because, when he was banished, with his
Father, into Ireland, they had been his great Intimates. Whereupon, the rest of
the Nobility complying with the Humor of the King, it came to pass, that for
many Ages, there was scarce a Nobleman or Gentleman in Scotland, which had not
the Skill to cure Wounds: For there was then little use of other parts of
Physic amongst such Men, who were educated parsimoniously, and enured to much
Labor and Toil. He died in a good old Age, having Reigned Four and Twenty
Years.

Finnanus, The Tenth King.
HIS Son Finnanus succeeded him, who, walking in his Fathers Steps, endeavored
nothing more than to accustom his Subjects to a just and moderate Government;
laboring to maintain his Kingly Authority more by Good Will, than Arms: And
that he might cut up the Root of Tyranny, he made a Decree, Finnanus his just
Decree.
That Kings should determine, or command, nothing of great Concernment, without
the Authority of their Great Council. He was beloved both by his Subjects, and
by Foreigners. He deceased, having Reigned Thirty Years.

Durstus, The Eleventh King.
NOthing did so much aggravate the Loss of Finnanus, as the profligate and
deboist Life of his Son Durstus his profligate Life.
Durstus, who succeeded him. For, First of all, he banished from his presence
his Fathers Friends, as troublesome Abridgers of his Pleasures: Then, he made
the Corruptest Youngsters, his Familiar and Bosom Friends, giving up himself
wholly to Wine and Women. He drove away his Wife, the Daughter of the King of
the Britains, who was prostituted to his Nobles. At length, when he perceived,
that the Nobility were conspiring against him, as if he had been just then
awakened out of a deep sleep; foreseeing, that he was not safe at home, and
knew not where to find a secure place abroad, if he were banished; in regard he
was so hated both of his Subjects and Strangers, too; he therefore thought it
his best course to dissemble a His feigned Repentance.
Repentance for his former Evil Life; by that means thinking, he might retain
the Regal Government, and, in time, be revenged of his Enemies too. And
thereupon, in the first place, he recalled his Wife, and, by that means,
endeavored to make fair Weather with the Britains. He assembles the Heads of
his Subjects, and, under a solemn Oath to do so no more, he Enacts an Amnesty
for what was past. He commits Notorious Criminals to Prison, as if he had
reserved them for further Punishment: And religiously promised, That for the
future he would Act nothing without the Counsel of his Nobles. When, by these
Arts, he had made others believe, That he was a true Convert, he celebrates
this Reconciliation and Concord with Plays, Feastings, and other
Divertisements, proper for Public Rejoycings. Thus all Men's Minds being filled
with Jollity, he invites the His cruel Murder of his Nobles.
Nobility to Supper; and then, shutting them up in one place, being unarmed,
and fearing nothing, he sent in Ruffians amongst them, who destroyed them,
every Man. That Calamity did not so much abate and quell the Minds of the rest
with fear, as it raised, and blew up, their Languishing Anger into New Flames.
Wherefore gathering a great Army together, they all conspired to rid the Earth
of so foul a Monster. Durstus, perceiving that all other hope failed him,
resolved to try his fortune in a Battle, with a few others, whom the like fear
of Punishment for the Wickedness of their former Lives had drawn in to join
with him; in which Fight he was He is slain.
slain, after he had Reigned Nine Years. Though all Orders and Estates were
justly incensed against him; yet they gave so great Deference to the Name of
King, and to the Memory of his Ancestors, that he was buried amongst his Royal
Predecessors.

Evenus, the Twelfth King.
AFter his Death, in a Public Assembly of the Nobles, there was a very great
Contest; some alleging, that, according to their Oath made to King Fergus, the
ancient Custom was to be observed; others, fearing, that if they made any one
of the Kindred of Durstus King, that either the Similitude of Manners would
incline him to the same Wickedness; or else, the Propinquity of Blood would
make him study Revenge. At last, Evenus, Brothers-Child to Durstus, being
commended for his former Life, and for his extreme Hatred against the Tyrant,
whilst he was alive, was sent for from amongst the Picts, (whither he had
voluntarily banished himself, out of hatred to Durstus,) and unanimously
created King. He is reported to be the King Ewen, the first Scottish King that
required an Oath of Allegiance of his Subjects.
first, who made his Subjects to take an Oath of Allegiance to him, which
Custom is yet retained by the Heads of the Clans. Evenus, that he might
rectify the Manners of his Subjects, which were depraved by the former King,
did first reduce Youth to the Ancient Parsimony in Diet, Apparel, and in their
daily Conversation. For, by that means, he judged, they would be more Valiant
in War, and less Seditious in Peace. He diligently viewed all the Parts of his
Kingdom, administering Justice with great Moderation, and punishing Offenders
according to their Demerits. He assisted the King of the Picts with Aid against
the Brittons, betwixt whom there was fought a long and cruel Battle till Night
parted them, the Victory being so uncertain, that both Armies departed with
equal Slaughter, and as equal Fear. The Brittons went home; The Scots and Picts
retired into the next adjacent Mountains: But, the Day after, from the High
Grounds, perceiving the departure or flight of their Enemies, they came and
gathered up the Spoils, as if they had been Conquerors, and so returned home
with their Army. Evenus having repelled his Enemies, again betook himself to
the Arts of Peace. And that it might not be troublesome to Kings to Travel over
the Countries so often for the Administering Justice, (which was then their Custom
to do) he divided the Kingdom into He first settled Itinerary Circuits for
Judges in Scotland.
Circuits, and settled Ordinary Judges to do that Work. He also appointed
Informers then allowed, since disused, as being found inconvenient by
experience.
Informers to bring in Accusations against the Guilty. Which Office; being
found inconvenient, was either abrogated by a Law, or else grew obsolete by
Custom. He died in the Nineteenth Year of his Reign, leaving a Base-born Son,
called Gillus, behind him, a Crafty Man, and desirous of the Kingdom.

Gillus, The Thirteenth King.
THere were yet living of the Blood Royal, as Heirs to the Crown, Two Twins,
Dochamus and Dorgalius, the Sons of Durstus. Though their Age was not the Cause
of the Difference, yet there arose a deadly Fewd between them concerning the
Kingdom; which was also further increased by the Fraud of Gillus his cruel
Reign.
Gillus. The Matter being referred to the Arbitration of their Kindred, such
was the Obstinacy of the Factions, that nothing could be determined. Gillus,
who advised each of them to kill one another, when his Secret Counsel took no
effect, gathered together the chief of the Nobles, and his Kindred, (on
pretense to end the Controversy,) into one place, where he suborned Men, fit
for his purpose, to raise a Tumult, and to destroy them Both. And then, as if
he himself had been assaulted by Treachery, he implored the Aid of all that
were present, and fled to Some think it to be Dunstafnage, a Castle standing on
an high Rock in Lorn, in the West-S^^.
Evonium, a place fortified by King Evenus. Having Garrisoned that Fort with
part of the Nobility and other Flagitious Persons; out of an high place in the
Castle, he made a long Oration to the People; who, in great Multitudes, were
gathered about him, concerning the Rashness and Obstinacy of the Two Brothers;
he declaimed also against those Assassins, who killed them; but, at last, he
told them, That he was left by Evenus, the Guardian or Superior of the Kingdom,
as well as of his Domestic Affairs, till a New King was chosen. When the
People heard this, though they believed it to be false, yet when they saw him
fortified in a strong Garrison, for fear of a greater Mischief, they instantly
swore Fealty to him, and declared him King. He, though he had strengthened
himself in the Kingdom by the Consent of the People, (though unwillingly
obtained,) yet, not thinking himself safe from the Posterity of Durstus, as
long as any of them were alive, resolved to destroy his Nephews.

There remained alive of them Lismorus, Gormachus and Ederus, the Sons of
Dochamus, Son of Durstus; they were educated in the Isle of Man. Thither G^llus
went, on pretense to bring them home; and to the Two Elder he behaved himself
with great Reverence and Respect, and carried them with him into Albium,
cunningly pretending, That they be being of a Royal Stock, should be educated
in his Count, suitable to their Princely Quality. As for Ederus, the younger,
^he left Soldiers, on pretense of a Guard, to attend his Person, to whom he
gave Command on a certain appointed Day, to kill him. But the Disposition of
Gillus being well known to all, The Nurse, suspecting Treachery to be hatching
against the Child, conveyed him secretly by Night into the Country of Argyle,
and so she eluded Gillus, who ^ought, in vain, to find him out to destroy him;
for she bred him up for some years privately in a Cave under Ground; whereupon
^he, in fury, put the Two elder Brothers of Ederus, and also their Guard, to
Death. But it being publicly reported, That Ederus himself was conveyed into
Ireland, he made no further enquiry after him. And yet his Cruelty rested not
here, though he had slain the Nephews of Durstus; for not judging himself
sufficiently secure, as long as any one of the Royal Progeny was left alive, he
caused all those of Kin or Alliance thereto, to be also put to Death. The
Nobles, who were grieved at the present state of Affairs, which was bad at
present, and fearing, that it would be worse, entered into a Combination against
him, and carried the Matter with so much secrecy, that a War was begun against
He is wo^sted in Battle, and flies into Ireland.
Gillus, before he had Notice, that any Preparations were making toward It.
But, in Levying an Army against his Contrariants, he soon perceived, how
inconstant the Fealty of Man is toward Wicked and Flagitious Princes. For
there were very few, that came in to him at his Summons; and those that did,
were Debauchees, such as were afraid of Peace, in regard of the Wickedness of
their former Lives. And therefore distrusting his Forces, he left his Army, and
in a Fisher-Boat was wafted over into Ireland. In the mean time, the Scots,
that they might not be without a Legal Government, made Cadvallus, made Viceroy.
Cadvallus, chief of those who conbined against Gillus, their Viceroy, to
whom, upon a Treaty, the Forces of his Enemies did submit, and were thereupon
received into his Protection. When Cadvallus understood, that Gillus was about
to renew the War, and in order thereto, was raising as many deboist Persons as
he could, he resolved to prevent him before he could gather together a just
Army, and so to pursue him whithersoever he fled. First, he Sailed into the
Aebudae, or Hebrides; there he caused Ederus, the only branch of the Family of
Durstus yet alive, to be brought to him, and gave Order for his Liberal and
Royal Education. When Gillus heard of his March, he retired again into Ireland;
there he engaged the Clans of that Nation, with great promises of Reward, to
endeavor his Restitution to his Kingdom; which, if they could effect, then he
would give them the Aebudae Islands for their Reward. By these Promises, he
gathered together a great Army; Cadvallus having prepared all things for his
Transportation, was suddenly called back, to clear himself from a false
suspicion of affecting, or aspiring to, the Kingly Government.

Evenus II. The Fourteenth King.
IN which Case, the first thing he did, was, to take care, That Evenus, an
eminent Person, the Son of Dovallus, Brother to King Finnanus, might by the
Suffrages of the People be created King; who, having accepted the Government,
caused all Places which were commodious for his Enemies, and especially the
Maritime ones, to be filled with strong Garrisons, that so his Enemies might not
make a sudden descent into his Kingdom, without opposition; Gillus, hearing of
this, did also alter his Resolution, and sailed to the Isle Ila; And there,
having wasted the Country far and near, with Fire and Sword, he returned back
into Ireland. Evenus sends a great Army thither, under the Command of
Cadvallus, that so he might exhaust the Springhead of the War. Neither did
Gillus refuse to fight him, but being forsaken of his Men, who followed him for
Booty, rather than for Love, he changed his Apparel, and, with a small Company,
fled into a neighbor Wood: The rest of his Army being thus deserted by their
General, and their Fellow Soldiers too, yielded to Cadvallus. After the Battle
was ended, they sought a long time for Gillus, and at last found him in a blind
Cave, where he was slain, the Third Year after he began his Reign, and his Head
was brought to Cadvallus. Matters being thus happily settled in Ireland by
Gillus Slain by Cadvallus, in Ireland.
Cadvallus, as he was returning home, he met not with the same Felicity; for
being tossed up and down with a grievous Tempest, he lost the greatest part of
his Army, and all the Prey they had gotten, which struck him into such a damp,
that, not long after, he died Ca^^^llus, (...) of Grief.
of Grief, The King indeed, comforted him, (but all in vain,) and, praising his
Valor and Success in the War, he cast all his Miseries upon the crosness of
Fortune. The new King being lifted up with this Success, renewed a Peace with
the Picts; and, in Confirmation thereof, he took to Wife the Daughter of Getus,
the Third King of the Picts. But the sudden Arrival and Landing of the The
Orkney-Men come with an Army into Albium, but were beaten, and their King Belus
slew himself, thereupon.
Orkny-Men in Albium, quickly disturbed this public Joy. But the King falling
suddenly upon them, drove them out of the Field to the Mountains, and from
thence to the Sea, and there being in a fright and hurry, whilst they crowded
and hindered one another in endeavoring to Ship themselves, they were all
slain, to a Man. Belus their King, despairing to obtain Quarter, slew himself.
Evenus, having finished the War, returns to the work of Peace, and constitutes
two Mart-Towns for Trade in convenient Places, i. e. Ennerlochy and Ennerness,
each of them receiving their Name from Rivers, gliding by them. For Enner,
amongst the Ancient Scots, signifies a Place, whither Ships do usually resort.
He subdued the Inhabitants of the Aebudae, who, by reason of their long Wars,
were grown very Licentious and Quarrelsome. He reconciled their Animosities,
and appeased their Disturbances, and soon after died, having Reigned Seventeen
years.

Ederus, the Fifteenth King.
EDERVS, the Son of Dochamus, was made King in his place, who whilst he was
reaping the sweet Fruits of Peace established both at home and abroad, and
giving himself to the sport of Hunting, (according to the ancient Custom of the
Nation,) had News suddenly brought him, That one Bredius one of Gillus's
Faction, overthrown.
Bredius an Or Reds^ank.
Islander, of Kin to the Tyrant Gillus, was Landed with a great Navy of
Soldiers, and plundered the Country: He presently gathered together a
Tumultuary Army against him, and marching as silently as he could in the Night,
he passed by the Camp of his Enemies, and set upon their Ships in the Road,
which by this sudden surprise, he easily mastered, and, killing the Guard, he
burnt the Navy. In the Morning he led his Army against the Camp, which he
easily took, finding the Soldiers negligent, and in no order at all, many were
slain on the spot, whilst they delayed either to Fight or Fly. The rest having
their flight by Sea prevented, by the burning of their Ships, were there taken
and Hanged. The Prey was restored to the Owners, that claimed them. A few years
after, another of the kindred of Gillus, and out of the same Island too, raised
the like Commotion, which had the same Event and Success; for his Army was
overthrown, his Fleet burnt, the Prey recovered back, and restored to the Right
Owners. Thus having settled a firm Peace, being very old, he fell Sick and died
in the Forty Eight year of his Reign.

Evenus III. the Sixteenth King.
EVENVS the Third Succeeded him, a Son unworthy of so Good a Father; for, not
being contented with an Hundred Concubines of the Noblest Families, he
published his Filthiness and Shame to the World by Established Laws. For Even
enacts Polygamy, by a Law, and allows many other Lustful Venereal Orders and
Customs, but being afterward worsted in Battle is committed to Prison, and
there Slain.
he enacted, That every Man might Marry as many Wives as he was able to
maintain. And also, That before the Marriage of Noble Virgins, the King should
have one Nights lodging with them; and the Nobles the like, before the Marriage
of Plebeians: That the Wives of Plebeians should be common to the Nobility.
Luxury, Cruelty and Covetousness did, (as they ordinarily do) attend and follow
this his flagitious Wickedness. For his Incomes and Revenues not answering his
Expense, upon pretended Causes, the Wealthier sort were put to Death, and the
King going snips with the Robbers, by that means Theives were never punished.
And thus, the Favor which he had obtained from corrupt youth, by reason of his
permission of Promiscuous Lust, he lost by his Cruelty and Rapaciousness. For,
a Conspiracy of the Nobles being made against him, he soon perceived, that the
Friendship, and seeming Union of Wicked Men, is not to be relied upon. For,
as soon as they came to Fight, he was Deserted by his Soldiers, and fell alive
into his Enemies Hands, by whom he was cast into the common Jail. Cadallanus,
who Succeeded him, demanding what Punishment he should have, he was Condemned
to perpetual Imprisonment. But there, one or other of his Enemies, either out
of some old Grudge for Injuries received from him; or else, hoping for Favor,
or at least Impunity, for the Murder of the King, Strangled him by Night in the
Prison, when he had Reigned Seven years. The Murderer was Hanged for his Labor.

Maitland.
Metellanus, the Seventeenth King.
METELLANVS, Kinsman to Ederus, Succeeded him in the Throne, a Prince no less
dear to all for his excellent Virtues, than Evenus was hated by them for his
flagitious Vices. He was mightily Prized and Esteemed for This, That during his
Reign, there was Peace both at home and abroad. But it was some allay to his
Happiness, that he could not abrogate the Filthy Laws of Evenus, being hindered
by his Nobility, who were too much addicted to Luxury. He deceased in the
Thirtieth year of his Reign.

Caratacus, the Eighteenth King.
METELLANVS dying without Issue, the Kingdom was conferred on Caratacus, Son of
Cadallanus, a young Man of the Royal Blood. As Soon as he entered upon the
Kingdom, he quieted the People of the Aebudae Islands, (who had raised
Commotions upon the Death of their last King,) but not without great Trouble.
Yet here I The Orcades subdued in Claudius Caesar's days, as some affirm, but
mistakenly.
cannot easily believe what our Writers, following Orosius, Eutropius, and
Bid, do say, viz. That the Orcades were subdued by Claudius Caesar in his
Reign. Not, that I think it a very hard thing for him to attempt, one by one, a
few Islands scattered up and down in the Stormy Sea, and having but a few, and
those too unarmed, Inhabitants to defend them, and seeing they could not
mutually help another, to take them all in; nor, that I think it incredible,
That a Navy might be sent by Claudius on that Expedition, he being a Man that
sought for War and Victory all the World over. But because Tacitus affirms,
that, before the coming of Julius Agricola into Britain, that part thereof was
utterly unknown to the Romans. Caratacus Reigned Twenty years.

Corbredus, the Nineteenth King.
CORBREDVS, his Brother, Succeeded him. He also subdued the Islanders in many
Expeditions, a People, that almost in every Inter-Regnum, did affect
Innovation, and raise up new Tumults. He also quite suppressed the Banditti,
which most infested the Commonalty. Having settled Peace, he returned to
Albium, and making his Progress over all Scotland, he repaired the Places
injured by War, and departed this Life in the Eighteenth year of his Reign.

Dardanus, the Twentieth King.
THE Convention of Estates set up Dardannus, the Nephew of Metellanus, in his
stead, passing by the Son of Corbredus, because of his young and tender years.
No Man, before him, entered upon the Government, of whom greater Expectations
were conceived, and no Man did more egregiously deceive the Peoples Hopes.
Before he undertook the chief Magistracy, he gave great Proof of his
Liberality, Temperance and Fortitude. So that in the beginning of his Reign, he
was an indifferent Good and Tolerable King, but he had scarce sat Three years
on the Throne, before he ran headlong into all sorts of Wickedness. The Sober
and Prudent Counselors of his Father, he banished from his Court, because they
were against his lewd Practices. Only Flatterers, and such as could invent new
Pleasures, were his Bosom Friends. He caused Dardanus, his bloody Reign.
Cardorus, his own Kinsman, to be put to Death, because he reproved him for his
Extravagance in Lawless Pleasures; and, yet he had been Lord Chief Justice and
Chancellor too, under the former King. And a while after, many other Persons,
as they did excel in Virtue, or in Wealth, were circumvented by him, by one
wile or other, and so unjustly brought to their Ends. At last, to free himself
from the Fears of a Successor, he took up a Resolution to destroy Corbredus
Galdus, his Kinsman, with his Brothers, who were Royally Educated, in hopes of
the Kingdom. The Charge of this Assassination was committed to Cormoracus, one
of his Privado's. He being laden with many Gifts, but more Promises, was sent
away to perpetrate the Villainy; but attempting it with less Caution than such a
Butchery required, he was taken in the very Fact, by some of Galdus his Train,
with a naked Fauchion in his Hand; being Arraigned and put to the Torture, he
confessed the Author, and the designed order of the whole Conspiracy, and so
was executed immediately. When this wicked Plot was divulged abroad, there was
a general Combination of almost all sorts of People against the King, insomuch,
that having slain many of those who were Panders to his Lust, as they could be
found; at last they endeavored to make their way to the King himself, the
Source and Fountain of their Mischief. In the mean time, Conanus, one of the
Kings Parasites, a Man meanly descended, but highly Respected and Trusted by
his Master, levied some Troops, and had the Confidence to send them forth
against the Nobles, but being forsaken of his Men, he was taken and Hanged. The
Commons, having now got Galdus for their General, found out And (...) Death.
Dardanus, who was privately lurking to secure himself; while they were
apprehending of him he endeavored to lay violent Hands on himself, but being
prevented, he was brought to Galdus, and immediately put to Death, his Head was
carried up and down in Mockery, and his Body thrown into a Jakes, after he had
Reigned Four years.

Corbred II, The Twenty First King.
COrbred, the Second, Surnamed Galdus, succeeded him; a Prince equally dear to
Lords and Commons, both upon the account, and early proof, of his own personal
Virtue, and promising Ingenuity, as for the Memory of his worthy Father. Some
imagine, that he was That Galgacus, who is mentioned by Tacitus, and that he was
Surnamed Galdus by the Scots, because he had been educated amongst the
Britains. For the Scots according to their Ancient Custom, call all Strangers
Galds, or Galls; as the Germans call them Walls, as I showed largely before.
After he had undertook the Government, he increased the great Hopes which had
been pre-conceived of him. For, making an Expedition into the Islands of Sky
and Lewis, he quelled the Seditions, lately raised there, and suffered to come
to an head, by the negligence of Dardanus, and that with a due and prudent
mixture of Mercy and Severity. He slew the Captains of those Banditti; and
enforced the rest, for fear of punishment, either voluntarily to banish
themselves, or else, to return to their former rural Employments: He, as I
believe, was the Corbredus II. The First of the Scottish Kings, that ever
appeared in Arms against the Romans.
First of the Scottish Kings, that ever advanced his Ensigns, against the
Romans, who had, by little and little, propagated their Empire, even to the
very Borders. For Petitius Cerealis first broke the Forces of the Brigantes,
and his Successor Julius Frontinus conquered the Inhabitants of South Wales.
Silures. It Is very probable, that the Scots and Picts sent Aid to those
Nations, who were situate not far from their Borders. Julius Agricola, a Roman
General in Britain, who makes further Conquests there.
Agricola succeeded the former Generals, who having overcome the ( Inhabitants
of N^rth-Wales.
) Ordov^ces, and reduced the Island Man, when he was come to the narrowest part
of Britain, thinking, that it was not far to the end of the Island, he was
encouraged to the Conquest of it all. And therefore in the Third Year of his
Generalship, he overcame and plundered the neighboring Countries of the Scots
and Picts, until he came to the River Tay; And tho his Army was much distressed
by Tempest, yet he had time to build Forts in all places convenient for
Defense, by which means he defeated the Designs of his Enemies, and withal,
brake their Force. For before, the Adverse party, being Men inured to hardship,
what they lost in the Summer, would many times recover in Winter, when the
Roman Legions were dispersed into Winter Quarters: And sometimes, they would
assault, and take, their Enemies Castles and Garrisons, being not sufficiently
fortified. But at that time, by the cunningness of Agrippa in Building his
Forts, and by his skill in making them defensible; and withal, by relieving
them with his Forces, every Year; Their Arts were deluded. In the Fourth Year
of his Government, perceiving, that the Firths of Forth, and of Clyd, were
severed but by a small Tract of Land, having fortified that Place with
Garrisons, he spoiled the Countries bending to the Irish Sea. In his Fifth Year,
he sent a Fleet to Sea, and made descents in many places, and plundered the
Maritime Coasts, fortifying those that looked toward Ireland with Garrisons,
not only for that present occasion, but also, that he might from thence more
easily transport an Army to that Country. By this prudence of Agricola, the
Scots, and Picts, being shut up in a narrow Angle, and secluded from any
commerce with the Britains, prepared themselves for the last shock and
rancounter; Neither was Agricola overcomes the Caledonians in Two Battles.
Agricola less careful, but commanding his Navy to fetch a compass about, to
discover the utmost parts of the Island; he led his Army beyond the Forth, and
drew toward the Caledonians: There, their Enemies, being ready (as in a
desperate Case) to run their last hazard, assaulted some of the Roman Garrisons,
which struck such a Terror into them, that some of the Romans, as fearing,
either the Number of their Enemies, or their Obstinacy, by reason of their
desperation, gave their advice to retreat with their Army, into a place of
greater safety: But their General, being resolved to Fight, when he was
informed, that the Enemy approached him in three distinct Brigades; he also
drew toward them, having divided his Army into Three Squadrons also, which
Project was almost his total Ruin. For his Enemies understanding his Design,
did with their whole Army assault one of his Legions by night, and having
killed the Sentinels, had almost taken his whole Camp: But being prevented by
the coming in of other Legions, after they had fought desperately till Day
light, at length, being put to flight, they returned into the Mountains and
Woods. Those things were acted about the Eighth Year of his Expeditions. Both
Parties prepare themselves, as for their last Encounter, against the next
Spring: The Romans, as judging that the Victory would put an end to the War.
And their Enemies looking upon their All to be at stake; and, that they were
about to fight for their Liberty, Lives, and for whatsover is to be accounted
Dear and Sacred amongst Men: Hereupon, judging, that, in former Battles, they
were overcome by Stratagem, rather than by Valor, they betook themselves to
the higher Grounds, and, at the foot of Mount Grampius, waited for the coming
of the Romans. There a bloody Fight was begun betwixt them. The Victory was a
great while hovering, and uncertain; at last, all the valiant Men of the
Caledonians being slain, the rest having their Courage cooled, were forced to
retreat to their Fastnesses. After this Battle, there was no doubt at all, but
that Agrippa would have subdued all Britain, by the force of his conquering
Arms, if he had not been called home by But being recalled by Domitian, the
Caledonians, beat the Romans out of their Country.
Domitian, not for the Honor of his Victories, as was pretended, but for his
Destruction and Death. After his departure, Sedition arose in the Roman Camp,
and the Scots and Picts being glad of the occasion, and somewhat encouraged
thereby, began to creep out of their lurking Places; and perceiving, that the
Romans had not a General, nor the same Camp-Discipline, as before; they sent
Envoys up and down, to try the Inclination, not only of their own Countrymen,
but of the Brittons also. Thus, in the first place, being imboldned by some
small successful Skirmishes, they began to take heart, and to assault Garrisons;
and at last, with a formed Army they resolved to venture the hazard of a
pitched Field. By this means, The Romans were expelled out of their
Territories, and were forced, with doubtful success, to contend with the
Britains for their ancient Province. Galdus having obtained respite from War,
made his Progress all over the several Countries of the Land, and resetled the
old Owners in their Habitations, which had been almost destroyed by the War; As
for the Places which were wholly void, he sent his Soldiers to inhabit them.
And having restrained the frequent Robberies which were wont to be committed,
he composed the differences, which began to arise betwixt Him and the Picts. At
length, in great Glory and Endearment, both with Friends and Foes, he deceased,
in the 35th Year of his Reign.

Luctacus, the Twenty Second King.
SO good a Father was succeeded by Luctacus his vicious Reign.
Luctacus, as bad a Son, who despising the Counsel of his Nobles, gave up
himself wholly to Drinking and Whoring. No nearness of Alliance, no Reverence
of the Laws, no respect of Nobility, or of Conjugal Relation, did restrain him
from his vile lewdness with those Women which he had a Mind to. Moreover, He
was inhumanly Cruel, and also unsatiably Covetous. The Soldiers and youthful
Fry, which is still more inclinable to the worse, did easily degenerate into
the Manners of their King. So that, at last, when he had defiled all, with
Whoredom, Rapines and Slaughters, and no one Man durst oppose his exorbitant
Power: An Assembly of the States being called together, and speaking freely
concerning the State of the Kingdom, he Commanded the Nobles, as Seditious
Persons, to be led out to Execution; but by the concourse of the intervening
Multitude, both He, and also the loathed Ministers of his Lust and Lewdness
were And miserable End.
slain, when he had scarce finished the Third Year of his Reign. For the Honor
had to his Father, his Body was allowed to be Buried amongst the Sepulchers of
his Ancestors; but the Bodies of his Associats were cast out, as unworthy of
any Burial at all.

Mogaldus, the Twenty Third King.
AFter him, Mogaldus Reigning virtuously at first, afterward degenerates.
Mogaldus was elected King, the Nephew of Galdus, by his Daughter: In the
beginning of his Reign, he equalled the best of Kings; but, growing older, he
was tainted with Vices, and easily degenerated into the Manners of his Uncle.
When he first entered on the Government, that he might, with greater Facility,
cure the vicious Practices committed by the former King, which did even
contaminate the Public Manners, he made Peace with his Neighbors, he restored
the Ancient Ceremonies in Religion, which had been carelessly neglected: He
banished all Pimps of Lust, and Debauchery, from Court, and acted all things by
the Advice of the Estates, according to the Ancient Custom; by which Deportment
he procured to himself Love at home, and Reverence abroad. Having settled
Matters at home, he turned his Mind to Warlike Affairs, and drove out the
Romans from the Borders of his Kingdom; and, by his Auxiliaries, assisted the
Picts against the Injuries of the Romans: Yea, in some prosperous Battles, he
so weakened the Roman Power amongst the Britains, that They also were erected to
some hopes of recovering their Liberty, and thereupon took up Arms in many
places. And their hopes were increased, because the Emperor Adrian had called
back Severus, a fierce and skilful Warrior, out of Britanny into Syria, to
quell the Seditions of the Jews; so that Adrian the Emperor comes into Britain,
and built the Wall called by his Name.
Adrian himself, the Tumults more and more increasing, was enforced to pass
over from Gallia into Britain: But he, being a greater Lover of Peace than War,
desired rather to maintain the Bounds of his Empire, than to enlarge them.
Whereupon, when he came to York, and found the Country beyond it to be harassed
by the War, he resolved to take a particular View of the Devastation, and so
marched his Army to the River Tine; where being informed by the old Soldiers
who had followed Agricola, almost to the utmost Bounds of Britanny, That there
would be more Pains than Profit in Conquering the rest of the Island, he built
a Wall and Trench for the space of Eighty Miles, between the Firths of the
Rivers Tine and Esk; and so excluded the Scots and P^cts from their
Provincials; and having settled the State of the Province, be returned back from
whence he came. Here I cannot but take notice, that, seeing there yet remain
diverse Marks of this Wall, in many places, it is a wonder to me, that Bid did
wholly omit to mention it; especially, since Aelius Spartianus has taken
notice of it, in the Life of Adrian; and also Herodian, in the Life of Severus.
I cannot persuade my self, That Bid could be so mistaken, to think, as many
yet do, That that Wall was not made by Adrian, but by Severus. This by the by.

Hereupon the Roman Province was quieted, the Excursions of their Neighbors
were prevented, and Peace was observed between them, for a great while. The
Britains did easily embrace it, and the Scots and Picts had thereby opportunity
to divide the Neighboring Lands as a Prey, amongst themselves. But that Peace,
besides the prejudice it did to the Body, by weakening its Vigor, through Sloth
and Idleness, did also enervate the Mind, by the Baits of Pleasure, which then
began to tickle it: For hereby Mogaldus, till then Unconquered in War,
forgetting the Glory of his Ancestors, ran headlong into all kind of Vice; and,
besides other pernicious and foul Miscarriages, prejudicial to the Public, he
made a most unjust Law, The Law to forfeit ones whole Estate for Treason,
without allowance to innocent Wife or Children, made in Mogaldus'^ time,
esteemed unjust.
That the States of such as were condemned should be forfeited to his
Exchequer, no part thereof being allotted to their Wives or Children. This Law
is yet observed and pleaded for, by the Officers of the King's Revenue, who are
willing to gratify his Lust, though they then did, and yet do, know, that it
is an unjust and inhuman Institution. Mogaldus having thus made himself
obnoxious and hateful to the Nobles and Commons too, being unable to resist
their Combinations, with one or two of his Companions, sought to run from their
Fury; but before he could execute his Project, he was taken, and Mogaldus slain.
slain, after he had Reigned 36 Years. This was done, about the Sixth Year of
the Reign of the Emperor Antoninus Pius.

Conarus, the Twenty Fourth King.
COnarus, his Son, succeeded him, who, from an ill Beginning, ended his wicked
Reign with as unhappy a Conclusion: For, he was not only conscious and privy
to, but also a partner in, the Conspiracy against his Father. But, to cover his
Faults, in the beginning of his Reign, a War did fall out very opportunely for
him. For the Britains, having passed Adrian's Wall, took away great store of
Men and Cattle. Whereupon, A Battle between Conarus and the Picts, against the
Romans and Brittons.
Conarus, by the Advice of his Council, joining his Army with the Picts, they
passed over Adrian's Wall in many places, and made great havoc in the Britains
Country; and at last, encountering their Enemy, a great and bloody Battle was
fought betwixt Them, the Romans and Britains. The Slaughter was almost equal on
both sides, which occasioned Peace between Them till the next Year: Yet, the
Romans, because they were not Conquerors, looked upon themselves as, in a
manner, Conquered. Whereupon, their own Forces being much lessened, and Adrian
putting no great Confidence in the Britains, whom, he saw, to conceive some
hopes of Liberty upon his Misfortunes, he sent for Aid from Antoninus Pius,
laying the blame of the Violation of the Peace upon the Scots and Picts, and of
the loss and slaughter of his Men, upon the Britains. Lollius Vrbicus sent to
Aid the Romans in Britain.
Lollius Vrbicus was sent over Lieutenant General by the Emperor, who overcame
his Enemy in a bloody Battle, and drove them beyond the Wall of Adrian, which
he again repaired. Afterward, there was a Cessation of Arms for many Years, as
if a silent Truce had been made. For the Romans had Work enough to keep the
Enemy from ravaging and plundering, and, for that end, their Camp was pitched
on the Borders. And Conarus, who loved nothing in War, but the Licentiousness
obtained thereby, made haste to return home, That he might employ that Vacancy
wholly to immerge himself in Pleasures: Whereupon, those Vices, which he had
before concealed, on design to gain the Love of others, began now to appear
barefaced. And when, by this Dissimulating Art, he judged the Kingdom sure to
him, what his Ancestors had gotten by great Pains and Labor, he did as
profusely spend, on his own Lusts and Pleasures; insomuch, that, in a very
short time, he was reduced to great want. So that, convening an Assembly of the
Estates, he made a long and plausible Oration of the Grandeur and Magnificence
which was necessary for Kings; and complained of the Lowness of his Conarus his
Prodigality enforces him to demand large Subsidies of hi^ Subjects;
Exchequer. Thus covering his Vices under the cleanly Names of Gallantry and
Magnificence; and he was also an earnest Suitor, That a Valuation of every Man's
Estate should be made, and a proportionable Tax imposed on each Individual.
This Speech was unacceptable to all that heard it, whose Answer was, That the
Matter was of more Moment than to be determined on a sudden: Whereupon, the
Estates, having obtained a short time for Consultation, upon asking every
particular Man's Opinion, they soon found, That this new Device of demanding
such a vast Sum of Money, did not proceed from the Nobles, Which are denied by
the Commons, and their Reasons why?
but from some Court-Parasites; whereupon, they Voted, That the King should be
kept Prisoner, as unfit to Reign; until, upon his Abjuration of the Government,
they did substitute another. When they met the next Day, he, who was first
demanded to give his Vote, made a sharp Speech and Invective against the Life
of the former King, saying, That Bawds, Parasites, Minstrels, and Troops of
Harlots, were not fit Instruments for Kings and Kingdoms, as being useless in
War, and troublesome in Peace; besides, they were costly and full of Infamy and
Disgrace. He added, The Complaint was false, That the King's Revenue and Incom
were not sufficient for his Expense; for a great many of their former Kings,
who were famous Warriors, and formidable to their Enemies, had lived Nobly and
Splendidly upon it, in time of Peace. But if any Prince be of Opinion, That the
Public Revenue was too short, then, said he, let a Supplement be made, not out
of the Subjects Purse, but out of his own Domestic Parsimony. He further
added, That the Measure of Expense was not to be taken from the Lust and
Exorbitant Desires of Men, which were infinite, but from the Ability of the
People, and the Real Necessities of Nature. And therefore it was his Opinion,
That those Villains, upon whom the Public Patrimony was conferred, and for
whose sake the King had undone so many Worthy Persons of good Rank and Quality,
by despoiling them of their Estates, and putting them to Death, should be
compelled to refund That to the Lawful Owners, which, by their Flatteries, they
had unjustly robbed them of; and that also they should be further punished, to
boot. In the mean time, he advised, that the King should be kept a Prisoner,
till they could substitute another, that would not only inure himself to
Thrift, but also teach others, by his Example, to live hardly and
parsimoniously, as his Forefathers had done, that so the strict Discipline,
received from our Ancestors, might be transmitted to Posterity.

This Speech, as it was sharp enough of it self, so it seemed more cutting to
those, who had Velvet Ears, and were unaccustomed to hear such free and bold
Discourses, before. Neither did the King endeavor to allay the Heats of his
People, by fair and gentle Words, but rather, by fierce and minatory
Expressions, which did more vehemently inflame and provoke them; so that,
amidst these Quarrellings and Altercations, a Tumult arising, some that were
next the King, Conar^^ imp^isoned, (...) his Evi^ C^^^sellors slain.
laid Hands on him, and thrust him, with some few others, into a Cave,
underground. Those Courtiers, who had been the Authors of such wicked
Counsels, were presently put to Death; and, lest any Tumult of the Mobile
should arise upon this Dissolution of the Bonds of Government, One Argadus set
up in his room, who first Rules justly;
Argadus, a Nobleman, was made Viceroy, till the People could conveniently
meet, to set up a New King. He, though, in the beginning of his Administration,
he settled all things with great Equity, and thereby had procured much
Commendation by his moderate Deportment; yet, his Mind being corrupted by
Prosperity, he soon lost all the Credit of his former praiseworthy Life. For
he cherished Homebred Seditions, afterward degenerating, he is accused;
and strengthened his Authority by External Aid, having such great Familiarity
with the chief of the Picts, that he took a Wife from amongst them, and gave
his Daughters to them, in Marriage; by which practice, it soon appeared, that
he aspired to the Crown. These things being laid to his Charge in a Public
Assembly, wherein he was much blamed for his so sudden Degeneration and
Apostasy, he was altogether ashamed, and knowing them to be True, he brake
forth into Tears; and as soon as his Weeping gave him liberty to speak, being
unable to purge himself from the Objected Crimes, but, upon his Repentance, is
continued in the Government,
he craved Mercy, and humbly deprecated the punishment of his Offenses; Which,
said he, if I can obtain, I will recompense, and make amends for my Errors in
Government, by my future Care, Industry and Valor. These things he humbly
supplicated upon his Knees, so that the Anger of the Nobles being now turned
into Pity, they lifted him up from the Ground, and ordered him to continue in
the Government, remitting his own Punishment to himself. As for Them, they were
well enough satisfied, if he did now truly and heartily repent of what he had
done amiss heretofore. From that Day forward, Argadus assembled the Wisest Men
of the whole Kingdom about him, and acted nothing but by their Advice; yea,
during the Which he managed equitably, for the remainder of his Magistracy.
Remainder of his Magistracy, he Enacted many Laws for the Good of the Public;
of which This was the chief; That he restrained the Arbitrariness of Provincial
Judges, and forbad them to give Sentence against all Offenders, alike; but to
have respect to alleviating Circumstances, where any such were. He either
restrained, or put to Death, Flagitious Persons, and amended the Public
Manners, which had been corrupted by a long course of Licentiousness, not only
by inflicting Legal Punishments on Transgressors of the Laws, but by affording
them the Leading Example of his own Regular Life. Whilst these things were
acting, Conarus, partly afflicted with Grief, and partly worn out by Diseases,
ended his filthy and ignominious Life in Prison, in the Fourteenth Year of his
Reign.

Ethodius, the Twenty Fifth King.
EThodius was set up in his stead, Mogaldus's Sisters Son; He immediately
convened the Estates, and thereupon highly extolled Argadus, and after he had
bestowed on him great Honors, and large Rewards, he made him Plenipotentiary,
under him, for the Administration of the Government; when he had made his
Progress to view all the Counties and Parts of his Dominions, according to
Custom, he Sailed over to the Aebudae Islands; Argadus was sent by him to quell
the Disturbers of the Public Peace; who soon suppressed them, and brought them
Prisoners to the King. These Combustions thus appeased, he returned into
Albium; but the Islanders being freed by his absence, from their present Fear;
and further, being persuaded by false Reports, spread abroad, That he was
engaged in a Foreign War; and besides, being provoked, rather than suppressed,
by the punishment of their Associats, began to raise new Tumults. Argadus sent
General a-against the Islanders, is slain in a Battle by them.
Argadus was again sent to suppress them, but they, being assisted both by the
Picts and Irish, gave him Battle, without any delay, in which Fight, Argadus
himself, being circumvented by Treachery, was slain: That Blow made the King
lay aside all other Business, and to march thither himself; where he so wasted
them, with some light occasional Skirmishes, and by his frequent Alarms and
Inroads upon them, that, being inferior to him in Force, they retired into a
Valley, encompassed on all sides with craggy Rocks, having only one Passage
leading into it, that so, the Conveniencie of the Place, as they thought, might
somewhat contribute to their Safety. Ethodius, having got his Enemy in a Pound,
forces him to what Conditions he pleases himself.
Ethodius, perceiving the disadvantage of the Place for his Enemy, disposed of
his Guards in fit Avenues; and also made a Wall and a Graft at the mouth of the
Passage; by which means they were brought to that extreme Penury of all things,
that they were forced to yield up themselves to the King, at discretion. They
were willing to accept of any Conditions; but the King gave them only These;
That Two hundred of them, such as the King should cull out, with their General,
should be surrendered up to him; The rest should every Man return to his own
home. The Punishment of those, who were thus given up, being presently
inflicted on them, had almost raised up a new Sedition; For the common Soldiers
were so enraged at so terrible a Spectacle, that, for want of Arms, they threw
Stones at the King's Officers. Neither was their tumultuous Fury allayed,
without much Bloodshed. Thus Ethodius, having settled Peace every where, in
order to the Administration of Justice, made his Progress over all his Kingdom,
much delighting himself in Hunting by the way, so that he made many Ethodius,
his vnenary Laws.
Venary Laws, of which, a great part are observed to this very day. He had an
Irish Musician or He is slain by his Harper*
Harper, lying all night in his Bedchamber, (according to the Custom of the
Scottish Nobility) by whom he was slain in the night, in revenge of a Kinsman of
his, whom, he said, the King had put to Death. When he was led forth to
Execution, he was so unconcerned at his Torture, that he seemed to be very
glad, as if he had done but his Duty, and acted his Part with applause.

Satrael, The Twenty Sixth King.
ETHODIVS being thus slain, when he had Reigned Three and Thirty years, and his
Son being not of Age, fit to Govern, his Brother Satrael was elected King; this
Man being of a naughty, yet cunning, Disposition, endeavored to establish the
Kingdom in his own Family, and so to destroy the Sons of Ethodius: In order
whereunto, those Nobles, who were most dear to Ethodius, were, by Calumnies
purposely devised, suppressed and slain by him. Afterward, because the Commons
did much regret the slaughter of their Nobles, he began to oppress them also;
which matter, in a little time, did so increase the Hatred conceived against
him, and so diminish his Authority, that Tumults and Seditions did thereupon
arise. He durst not go forth to suppress them, because, he knew, he lay under a
public Odium, so that he was sculkingly ^
slain at home by his own Men, in the Night, when he had Reigned Four years.

Donaldus I. The Twenty Seventh King.
(...) virtuous Reign.
DONALDVS, another Brother of Ethodius, was set up in his Room, who equalled,
yea, exceeded, the Vices of Satrael, by as great, and as many contrary Virtues,
his Clemency joined with his Love of Equity, did much enhaunce the price of his
other Excellencies. He, by the terror and weight of his Authority, and also,
by present Punishments inflicted, quelled all intestine Commotions; and rightly
conceiving, that the Soldiery, who were before wanton and idle, and spoiled by
Luxury, might be made more ready to resist an Enemy, he caused a Muster to be
made of them, and so accustomed them to Training and Exercising their Arms, and
Military Discipline, that, in a short time, the new-listed Tyroe's did equal
the Valor of the Veterans, and old Soldiers. The Peace which he had abroad,
did much forward this his design. For, the Roman Legions, some few years
before, made a Mutiny in Britanny, as desiring any other General, rather than
Commodus, and especially Aelius Pertinax, after Commodus, comes into Britain.
Aelius Pertinax, who was sent to suppress them; so, that leaving the Scots and
Picts, they turned the whole stress of the War upon themselves. It was also a
further advantage to him, in order to a Peace, that Donald, the first of the
Scottish Kings, that embraced the Christian Religion.
Donaldus had, first of all the Scottish Kings, embraced the Christian Religion;
yet, neither he, nor some other of the succeeding Kings, though a great part of
the Nobility did favor the design, could wholly extirpate the old Heathenish
Rites and Ceremonies. But the Expedition of Severus comes over (...) to
Britain, ^n his time; enlarges the Roman Conquests, and
Severus the Emperor, falling out in his time, did mightily disturb all his
Measures, both Public and Private. For Severus, being very skilful in Military
Affairs, brought so many Forces into Britain, in hopes to conquer the whole
Island, as never any Roman General had done before him. There were also other
Causes for this Expedition of his, as, the corrupt Life of his Sons, by reason
of the Vices reigning in Rome; and the Effeminacy of his Army, occasioned by
sloth and lying still: To remedy these mischiefs, he thought it best to put
them upon Action. Upon his Arrival, the private Tumults, which were about to
break forth, were suppressed, and the Scots and Picts, leaving the Counties
near the Enemy, retreated to Places of greater safety, and more difficult
Access. Severus, that he might, once for all, put an end to the British Wars,
led his Army through all the waste places, deserted by their Inhabitants,
against the Caledonians. Though his Enemy did not dare to give him Battle in
the Field, he was much incommoded by the Coldness of the Country, and underwent
a great deal of Trouble, to cut down Woods, to level Hills, and to throw vast
heaps of Earth into the Marish Grounds, and also to erect Bridges over Rivers,
to make a passage for his Army. In the mean time, the Enemy despairing of
success, if they should Fight so great a Multitude in a pitched Battle, did
here and there leave Herds of their Cattle, on purpose, as a Prey to them, that
so they might stop the Romans, who, in hopes of such Booties, were enticed to
stray far from their Camp: And, indeed, the Romans, besides those, that being
thus dispersed, were taken in the Ambushes laid for them, were also much
prejudiced by continual Rains; and, being wearied with long Marches, and so not
able to follow, were in many places slain by their own Fellows, that so they
might not fall alive into the Hands of their Enemies. Yet, notwithstanding,
though they had lost 50000 of their Soldiers, (as Dion writes) they did not
desist from their Enterprise, till they had pierced even to the End and extreme
Bounds of the Island. As for Severus himself, though he was Sick, during this
whole Expedition, and thereupon was fain to be carried in a covered
Horse-Litter; yet, by his incredible Obstinacy and Perseverance, he made his
Enemies to accept of Conditions of Peace, and to yield up to him no small part
of their Country. He Built a Wall, from Forth to Clyd, Eighty Mile beyond
Adrians.
built a Wall, as a Mound to the Roman Empire, between the Fi^ths of Forth and
Clyd; where Agricola, before him, had also determined to bound their Province.
That Wall, where it touches the River Carron, had a Garrison thereon, so
situate, and the Ways and Passages so laid out, that it was like a small City;
which, some of our Countrymen, though mistakingly, do think to be Maldon. But
it is more probable, that This was the City which Bid calls Guidi. A few years
before the Writing hereof, some footsteps of Trenches, Walls, and Streets did
appear; neither yet are all the Walls so demolished, but that they discover
themselves visibly in many places; and when the Earth is a little dug up,
square Stones are quarried out, which the owners of the Neighboring Countries
use in Building their Houses. Yea, sometimes, Stones with Inscriptions on them
are found, which show, that it was a Roman Pile of Building. Those Words of
Aelius Spartianus do show the Grandeur of this Structure. He strengthened
Britain (says he) with a Wall, drawn Cross-ways, or, Thwart the Island, from
Sea to Sea, which is the greatest Ornament of his Empire. By which Words, he
seems to intimate, That it was not a Trench, as Bede would have it, but a Wall;
especially, since he gives such a Commendation to a Work, which is shorter by
half than Adrian's Wall. Yea, this Fortificati^n, where it is least distant,
yet is Eighty Miles off from the Wall of Adrian. There are also other
Indications of that Peace, if I mistake not. For, a little below that ^arison,
of which I have spoken, there is a round Edifice on the opposite side of the
River Carron, made of square Stones, heaped on one another, without Lime or
Mortar. It Is no bigger than a small Pidgeon-House; the Top of it is open, but
the other Parts are whole, save, that the upper Lintel of the Door, wherein the
Name of the Builder, and Work, is thought to have been inscribed, was taken
away by Edward the First, King of England; who did also invidiously deface all
the rest of the old Scottish Monuments, as much as ever he could; some think,
and have Written accordingly, that That Structure was the Temple of Claudius
Casar. But my Conjecture is rather, That it was the Temple of the Heathen God
Temple of Terminus.
Terminus. There were also, on the left Bank of the same River, two Hillocks,
or, Barrows of Earth, raised (as it sufficiently appears,) by the Hands of Men.
A great part of the lesser one, which inclines more to the West, is swept away
by the Washing and Over-Flowings of the River; the Neighboring Inhabitants
call them yet Duni Pacis.
Duni Pacis. So that Peace being again procured by this Division of the Island,
and all Matters being in a sort accommodated, Donaldus departed this Life,
having Reigned One and Twenty years.

Ethodius II. The Twenty Eighth King.
ETHODIVS the Second, Son of the former Ethodius, was substituted in his Room,
a Man almost stupid. This is certain, he was of a more languid and soft
Disposition, than was fit to have the Government of such a Feirce and Warlike
People conferred upon him; which being taken notice of, the Nobles, in a
Convention, bore that Reverence to the Progeny of King Fergus, that they left
the Name of King to Ethodius, as sloathful as he was; but yet, not guilty of
any Notorious Wickedness; but set Deputies over all the Provinces, to
administer Justice therein, whose Moderation and Equity did so regulate
Matters, that Scotland was never in a quieter State. For, they did not only
punish Offenders, but also made the immoderate Covetousness of the King to be
no burden to the People. This King in the Twenty first year of his Reign, was
Ethodius slain.
slain in a Tumult of his own Officers.

Athirco, The Twenty Ninth King.
ATHIRCO, his Son, manifesting greater Ingenuity than is usually found in such
an Youthful Age, was therefore made King: For, by his Manly Exercises in
Riding, throwing the Dart, and vying with his young Courtiers in Feats of Arms;
as also, by his Bounty and Courteous Demeanor, he won to himself the Love of
all. But his Vices increasing with his Age, by his profound Avarice,
Peevishness, Luxury and Sloth, he so alienated the Minds of Good Men from him,
that the more the Sons were delighted with his Nefarious Practices, the more
their Fathers were offended thereat. At last, a Conspiracy of the Nobles was
formed against him, occasioned by one Nathalocus, a Nobleman, whose Daughters,
being first deflowred by him, and then ignominiously beaten with Rods, he
prostituted to the Lust of those Ruffians, that were about him. He endeavored
to defend himself against them, but perceiving he had not Force enough so to
do, being also forsaken by his Domestics, who detested his lewd Practices, he
laid Athirco, being disgusted for vitiating Noble Virgins, kills himself.
violent Hands on himself, in the Twelfth year of his Reign. After his Death
Dorus flies, and carries his Brothers Children with him.
Dorus, either because he was his Brother, or, else had been a Pander to his
Lust, fearing lest the Nobles, in the heat of their Provocation, should
exercise their Rage upon all the Kings Lineage, saved himself by flight, with
his Brothers Three small Children, Findocus, Carantius and Donaldus. Neither
was he mistaken in his Opinion; for Nathalocus, who had received so signal an
Injury, not contented with Dorus his Exile, suborned Emissaries to kill him,
and his Brothers Children too; who, coming to the Picts, (for the Royal Youths
had chosen the Place of their Banishment amongst them) and lighting upon one
very like Dorus, in Stature and Physiognomy, they slew him, instead of Dorus
himself.

Nathalocus, The Thirtieth King.
NAthalocus, thinking, that he had slain Him, who stood most in his way, was,
the First of all the Scots that ambitiously sought for the Kingdom. It Is true,
a great part of the Nobility were against Him; yet, by means of those whom he
had corrupted by Promises and Bribes, he carried the Point, and was made King.
Neither did he manage the Kingdom any better than he got it. For suspecting the
Nobility, which, in the Parliaments of the Kingdom, he had found to be adverse
to him, he Governed all by the Ministry of Plebejans, whom Audaciousness and
Penury (he knew) would easily incline to any wickedness. Besides those
Suspicions I have mentioned, he was encountered with a far more grievous one;
for, intercepting Letters directed to some of the Chief Nobles, he understood
by them, That Dorus, and the Children of Athirco, were yet alive, and were
brought up amongst the Picts, in hopes of the Kingdom. To avoid this Danger, he
sent for those Nobles, whom he most suspected, to come to him, pretending he
had need of their Advice, in the Public Affairs of the Kingdom. When
Nathalocus Murders the Nobility treacherously.
they were assembled, he shut them all up in Prison, and, the very next night,
caused them all to be strangled. But, that which he hoped would be a Remedy to
his Fears, was, but as a Firebrand to raise up another Conspiracy. For the
Friends of those who were slain, being afraid of themselves, as well as
grieving for the loss of their Relations and Kindred, unanimously take up Arms
against him. Whilst he was raising an Army to oppose them, he was slain by one
of his own Domestics, about the Twelfth Year of his Reign. Some of our
Countrymen do add a Tale in the Case, which is more handsomely Contrived, than
likely to be True. That the very Man, who slew the King, had been before sent
by him to Southsayers, to enquire concerning the King, his Victories, his Life,
and Kingdom; And that an old Wizard should answer him, That the King should not
live long, but his Danger would arise, not from his Enemies, but from his
Domestics; And when he pressed the Woman, From which of them? She replied,
Even, from thy Self, Man. Whereupon, he cursed the Woman; yet returning home in
a great Quandary, he thought with himself, That the Woman's Answer could not be
concealed; and yet it was not safe for him to declare it, lest he should render
himself suspected to the King, who was a depraved Person and guided wholly by
his own Fears. And therefore it seemed to him, the safest Course to kill the
Tyrant with the Favor of many, than to preserve him alive, with the extreme
hazard of his own Life. Presently after he returned home, having obtained
Liberty of private Access, to declare the secret Answer of the Oracle, or
Conjurer, He himse^^ ^ slain by one (...) his Domestics.
he slew the King, now entering upon the Twelfth Year of his Reign; and so freed
his Country from Bondage, and himself from Danger.

Findochus, The Thirtieth First King.
WHen the last King's Death was publicly known, the Sons of Athirco were
recalled home. Findochus, besides his being of the Royal Family, was also
endued with many blandishments of Nature, being very beautiful, tall of
Stature, in the flower of his Age; and besides, being rendered yet more
acceptable, for the afflictions he had suffered, he was chosen King. Neither
did he deceive Men's expectations; For in his ordinary deportment, he was very
Courteous; in administering of Justice, Equal, and Impartial; and a
Conscientious Performer of all his Promises. But Donaldus, the Islander, being
weary of Peace, Sailed over with a numerous Army into Albium; and making havoc
of the Villages where he came, returned home with a great Booty. His Pretension
for the War, was, the revenge of the Death of King Nathalocus; Findochus
or^ecomes Donaldus and his Redshanks.
Findochus speedily listed an Army against him, and transporting them into the
Island, he overthrew Donaldus in Battle, and forced him to fly for Refuge to
his Ships; many were slain in the Fight, and many were drowned, whilst they
endeavored, in an hurry, to get a Shipboard. Donaldus himself being taken into
the Boat, endeavoring to escape, the Boat sunk, by reason of the Multitude of
those, who overladed it, and so he was drowned. Notwithstanding, the Islanders,
not disheartened with this overthrow, after the departure of the King, sent for
Forces out of Ireland, and renewed the War, making Donaldus his Son, their
General, in the room of his Father; under whom they again made a Descent into
the Continent, and drove away much Booty. Whereupon Findochus again wafted over
his Forces into the Aebudae Isles, and marching over all the Islands, executed
severe Punishment on the Plunderers; and overthrowing the Forts, into which
they were wont to fly, he made such a slaughter of the Men, and carried away so
much Prey, That he left many of the Islands almost desolate: Upon Findochus his
return, Donaldus, who had fled for safety into Ireland, returned from thence,
and endeavoring to recruit his Armies, he found his Forces so weakened, that
he left off the Thoughts of managing an open War, and resolved to betake
himself to Guile and Stratagem. And in prosecution of that Design, not daring
to trust the King, tho he had given him the Public Faith for his Security; he
sent Two of his Friends, Persons both bold and crafty, as with a secret
Message, to Him. They, coming to Findochus, and boasting of their Lineage, and
Descent, and withal, grievously complaining of the wrongs they had received
from Donaldus; yet could not induce the King to believe them: Whereupon, they
applied themselves to He is slain by the conspiracy of his Brother Carantius.
Carantius his Brother, a shallow-pated and ambitious Person: Being admitted
into an intimate Familiarity with him, and, by his means, being made acquainted
with the secret Affairs of the State and Commonwealth; having found out his
Disposition, they were at last so bold, as to tell him, They were sent over to
kill the King. He hearing this, looked upon the Kingdom as gotten by other Men's
wickedness and danger, now sure to himself, did therefore show them all the
Countenance and Favor imaginable. Whereupon, all things were prepared for the
Perpetration of the designed Murder; whilst the King was hearing one of them,
relating the various Adventures of his Life; and the rest were busy in running
to see a wild Beast of an extraordinary bigness, the other thrust him through
the Breast with an Hunting Spear, and so slew him. Upon the committing of which
horrible Fact, there was a great Hubbub and Concourse of People; some take up
their dying King; others pursue the Murderers, who were taken, and deservedly
executed; yet they were not put to Death before they had been Rackt, and by
that means they confessed the Design of Donaldus, and the wickedness of
Carantius, who had withdrawn himself to dissemble the Matter. This Carantius
first sled to the Brittons; but they hearing of the cause of his Banishment,
did detest so execrable a Guest; whereupon he went to the Roman Camp.

Donaldus II, The Thirty Second King.
THE best of Men, as well as of Kings, being thus slain, by the detestable
Treachery of his Brother, in the Eleventh Year of his Reign; Donaldus
overthrown, and taken prisoner by the Islander^.
Donaldus, the youngest of his Three Brothers, was set up King in his stead.
He, whilst he was preparing to Revenge his Brothers Death* Word was brought
him, that Donaldus the Islander had entered Murray, not now carrying himself as
a Robber, but as a King. Whereupon, He, with a few of his Soldiers, which were
near at hand (having left a Command for the rest to follow) marches directly
toward the Enemy. Donaldus being informed by his Spies, That the King had but
a small Force with him, continued his March Day and Night, and by that means
prevented the news of his approach. The King being thus surprised, seeing he
could not avoid Fighting, performed more than could have been expected from so
small a Number, but, at length, was overcome by the multitude of his Enemies;
and being grievously wounded, with Thirty more of the prime of his Nobility,
was taken Prisoner; about 3000 Men were slain in the Fight, and 2000 taken. The
King dyed within Three days; either of his Wounds, or for Grief of his
overthrow, having scarce Reigned One full Year.

Donaldus III. The Thirty Third King.
AFter his Death, ^
Donald the Islander, who before, without any Authority, had assumed the Name
of King, did now manage all things as a Legitimate Prince; being advantaged
much by the fear of the Nobles, who (left their Kinsmen, who were p^isoners
with him, should be slain, which Donaldus did daily threaten to do) durst not
make any Insurrections against him. He was a very Tyrant in his Government, and
Cruel to all his Subjects; for he was not content, by an Edict, to forbid any
others to bear Arms, but his own Servants and Officers too; and also he hurried
the Nobility to violent Deaths, whose Destruction he esteemed to be the
establishment of his Government: Yea, He proceeded to sow Seeds of Discord
amongst those who survived his Cruelty; neither did he think any Sight more
lovely, than the mutual slaughter of his Subjects. For he counted their Ruin
was his Gain, and judged himself to be freed of so many Enemies as were slain,
out of both Armies. Neither was he afraid of any thing more, than the union of
his Subjects against him. Hereupon, he kept himself commonly within the Verge
of his own Palace, and being conscious of the wrong he had done to all, as
Fearful of them, and Formidable to them, he seldom went abroad. These Miseries
c^ntinuing Twelve Years, at length, Crathilinthus, the Son of King Find^chus,
with much ado, was found out, to revenge the public Wrongs and Calamities: He
had been bred up privately with his Foster-Father, and was thought to have been
dead. But having few about him, equal to him in strength or cunning,
dissembling his Name and his Lineage; he first applied himself to Court, and
being received into near Familiarity by the King, by the dexterity of his Wit,
he became his most intimate and greatest Favorite. At last, when all things
succeeded according to his Desire; he discovered to a few of his Confidents,
Who he was, and What he designed; and gathering a small Party about him, having
got a convenient opportunity, he slew He is slain by (...).
Donaldus, and departed privately with his Associates.

Crathilinthus, The Thirty Fourth King.
WHen the Death of the Tyrant was divulged, both the Fact itself, and the
Authors thereof too, were entertained with a general Acclamation; so that
Crathilinthus, upon the discovery and legal proof of his Stock, was made King,
with more Unanimity and Applause, than ever any King had been before him; in
regard he had been the Author, not only of their Liberty, but of their Safety
too. At the beginning of his Reign, by Public Consent, he caused the Children
and Kindred of the Tyrant to be put to death, as if he would extirpate Tyranny
from the very Root. Afterward, he made a The Scottish K^ng^ did (...) Travel
all ove^ the whole Kingdom, in their own Persons, to Administer Justice.
Progress over all his Kingdom, to Administer Justice, as accustomed; he
repaired, as carefully as he could, what was damaged by Donaldus. Thus having
established Peace at home and abroad, after the Custom of the Nation, he spent
his time in Hunting. In order to which Exercise, being on Mount Grampius, near
the Borders of the Picts, he Nobly entertained the young Gallants of the Picts
that came to visit him; yea, he was not content with that Friendship, that had
been anciently betwixt them, grounded on old Acquaintance, and strengthened by
a mutual Peace, but he took them also into a nearer Courtship and Familiarity.
But that Familiarity had almost proved his ruin. For the Picts, having stolen a
Dog of the Scottish Kings, wherein he much delighted, the Keeper, having
discovered the Place where he was concealed, in going thereto, and endeavoring
to bring him back, was slain: Hereupon a great Outcry was presently made, and a
Multitude of both Parties were gathered together, between whom there was a
sharp Combat, wherein many were slain, on both sides; amongst whom, there were
not a few of the young Nobility of both Nations; by which means, there were
sown the Seeds of a most Cruel War A War like to (...) between the (...) and
the (...),
betwixt them. For, from that Day forward, each Nation did vex the other with
Hostile Incursions, and never gave over till they met together with full
Armies: Neither could Peace be made up between them upon any Terms, though both
Kings desired it. For although they were not ignorant, that it was to their
Disadvantage to be at odds one another, the Romans and Brittons being their
perpetual Enemies and Assailants; yet they were so madded by, and so set upon,
the Desire of Revenge, that, whilst they were eager on that account, they
neglected the Public Calamity, impending on them both; and unless But composed
by the Prudence of Carantius, a Roman.
Carantius, a Roman Exile, one of mean Descent, but a good Soldier, had
interposed, they had fought it out to the last Man, even till both Nations had
been destroyed. This Carantius, being sent to the Seacoasts of Bologn^ by
Dioclesian, to defend Belgic Armorica from the Incursions of the Francs and
Saxons, after he had taken many of the Barbarians, yet would neither restore
the Prey to the Provincials, the Right Owners, nor yet send them to the
Emperor; hereupon a suspicion arose, that he purposely allowed the Barbarians
to plunder, that so he might rob them at their return, and thereby enrich
himself with the Spoil. For this Reason Maximianus commanded him to be slain;
but he, taking Authority upon him, seized upon Britany; and to strengthen his
Party against (...), and Constantinus Ch^o^us, three Roman Lieutenant-Generals
in (...) suc^^^lively.
Bassianus, the Roman Lieutenant General, he reconciled the Discords betwixt
the Scots and Picts, and entered into a firm League and Alliance with them Both.
The Romans made many Attempts against him, but, by his Skill in Military
Affairs, he defeated all their Designs: After he had restored the Scots and
Picts into the possession of those Lands, which they formerly held, he was
slain by his Companion Allectus, after he had Reigned seven Years. Allectus,
having Reigned three Years, was slain by (...), and Constantinus Ch^o^us, three
Roman Lieutenant-Generals in (...) suc^^^lively.
Asclepiodotus; and thus Britanny was restored to the Romans, in the Twelfth
Year after its Revolt. But neither Asclepiodotus, nor, he who succeeded him,
(...), and Constantinus Ch^o^us, three Roman Lieutenant-Generals in (...)
suc^^^lively.
Constantinus Chlorus, did any memorable thing in Britain; but that this later
begat Constantin, afterward Emperor, on Helena his Concu^bne. Amidst these
Transactions, Crathilinthus died, after he had Reiigned 24 years.

Fincormachus, The Thirty Fifth King.
FIncormachus, his Cousin-German succeeded him, who performed many excellent
Exploits against the Romans, by the aid of the Britains and Picts; Yea, some
Battles he fought them without any Auxiliaries at all. At length, when the
Romans were weakened by their Civil Wars at home, and perpetual molestations
abroad, Matters being a little quieted, the Scots were also glad to embrace
Peace: Who, being thus freed from external cares, did principally endeavor to
promote the Christian Religion; they took this occasion to do it, because many
of the British Christians, being afraid of the cruelty of Dioclesian, had fled
to them: Amongst which sundry, eminent for Learning and Integrity of Life, made
their abode in Scotland, where they led a solitary Life, with such an universal
Opinion of their Sanctity, that, when they died, their Cells were changed into
Temples or Kirks. From hence, the Custom arose afterward, amongst the Ancient
Scots, to call Temples, Cells. This s^rt of Monks were called C^^^ees, a sort
^f Religious Monks, in those days.
Culdees, whose Name and Order continued, till a later sort of Monks, divided
into many Sects, did expel them: Yet, these last were as far inferior to the
former, in Learning and Piety; as they did exceed them in Wealth, in
Ceremonies, and in Pomp of outward Worship, whereby they please the Eye but
infatuate the Mind.

Fincormachus, having settled affairs in Scotland, with great equity, and
reduced his Subjects to a more civil kind of Life, departed this Life, in the
47th Year of his Reign.

Romachus, The Thirty Sixth King.
AFter his Death, there was a great contest about the Kingdom, between Three
Cousin-Germans, begot by the Three Brothers of Crathilinthus, their Names were
Dissension about Succession to the Crown.
Romachus, Fethelmachus, and Augusianus, or rather Aen^anus. Romachus's Plea,
was, that his Father was the Eldest of the Three Brothers of Crathilinthus, and
that his Mother was descended from the Blood Royal of the Picts; as also, that
he himself was of a stirring Disposition; and likely to procure Friends and
Allys.

That which made for Augusianus, was, his Age and Experience in the World, as
also his admirable Deportment; to which was added the Favor of the People; and
that which was the principal of all, Fethelmachus, who was, before, his
Competitor, now voted for him. By reason of this Sedition, the matter being
like to be decided by Arms, nothing could be concluded in the First Convention
of the Estates, but That being dissolved, the whole Kingdom was divided into
Two Factions; and Romachus, who was least in the favor of the People, called
in the Picts Militia, for his assistance, that so he might strengthen himself
by Foreign Aid.

Augusianus, being informed, that Ambushes were laid for him, judged it better,
once for all, to try the shock of a Battle, than to live in perpetual
solicitude and fear: Whereupon, gathering his Party into a body, he fought with
Romachus, but, being overcome by Him, He and Fethelmachus fled together into
the Aebudae Islands.

But perceiving, he could not be safe there, because, on the account of his
Victory, he was formidable to the Heads of the Factions, and that he was also
amongst a people, naturally venal, and corrupted by the promises of Romachus,
he fled into Ireland with his Friends. Romachus Reigns Tyrannically,
Romachus, having thus removed his Rival, and obtained the Kingdom rather by
force than the good will of the People, did exercise his Power very cruelly
over his Enemies; and, to put a pretense of Law on the matter, when he went
about the Country to keep Assizes, he took no Counsel of others, as was
accustomed, but assumed all Capital causes to his own Arbitrament, so that he
made great Execution amongst the People, and struck a general Terror into the
hearts of all good Men. At length, when all were wearied with the present state
of Affairs, the Nobility made a sudden combination against him; and, before he
could gather his Forces together, he was taken, in his flight to the Picts, and
And is therefore slain.
put to death in the Third year of his Reign. His Head was carried up and down,
fastened to the Top of a Pole, and afforded a joyful Spectacle to the People.

Angusianus, The Thirty Seventh King.
HEreupon, Angusianus was recalled, by general consent, to undertake the Kingly
Government. In the beginning of his Reign, They, which were the Ministers of
Cruelty and Covetousness under Romachus, being afraid to live under so good a
King, stirred up Nectamus, King of the Picts, to make War upon Him, in revenge
of his Kinsman. Wars between Angusianus and the Picts;
Angusianus, being a lover of Peace, sent Ambassadors to them, very often, to
advise them, That both Nations would be much prejudiced by those Divisions, in
regard the Brittons did but watch an Opportunity to destroy them both. But they
hearkened not unto them, either out of confidence of their strength; or, out of
anger and vexation of Spirit. So that, perceiving them to be averse from Peace,
he led forth his Army against them; and, after a sharp conflict, obtained the
Victory. The King of the Picts made his escape, with a few in his company; and,
after he had a little mastered his fear, being inflamed with Rage and Fury, he
obtained, but with great difficulty, of his Subjects to raise him a new Army:
And when it was levied, he marched into Caledonia. Angusianus, having again
propounded Terms of Peace, which not being hearkened unto, he drew his forces
toward the Enemy. The Fight was maintained with equal obstinacy on both sides,
one striving to retain their acquired Glory; and the other endeavoring to wipe
away their received Ignominy and Disgrace. At length, the Scots, Wherein
Angusianus was slain.
Angusianus being slain, brake their Ranks and ran away. Neither was the Battle
unbloody to the Picts; Their King and all his Valiant Warriors being slain
therein: The Loss being in a manner equal on both sides occasioned a Peace
between them, for some short time. Angusianus reigned little above an Year.

Fethelmachus, The Thirty Eighth King.
^
FEthelmachus was made King, in the room of Angusianus; when he had fearce
Reigned 2 years he levied an Army, and made foul havoc of the Picts Country:
As soon as the Enemy could meet him, they fought, with a great slaughter on
either side. For the main Battle of the Picts, they having lost both their
wings, was almost all encompassed round and taken, yet they died not
unrevenged. The King of the Picts, three days after, died of his wound. The
Scots, making use of their Victory, having no Army at all to withstand them,
made a great spoil all over the Picts Country; For the Picts, having received
so great a blow, never durst oppose them with their whole force; only they
appointed some small Partys of their Men, in sit time and place, to withstand
the straggling Troops of their Enemy; that so they might not plunder far from
home. In the mean time, one Hergustus, a crafty man, having undertaken the
Command of the Picts, inasmuch as he was inferior in Force he applied himself
to Fraud, for he sent two Picts, who, pretending themselves to be Scots, were
to kill the King. They, according to their Instructions, treated with a certain
Musician, about the Murder of the King: For those sort of Creatures are wont to
lodge in the Chambers of Princes and Noblemen, to relieve them whilst awake,
and also to procure sleep: Which custom still continues in all the British
Isles, amongst the old Scots; But (...) Murderd, afterward, by two Picts,
inborn^d by (...).
so that on a Night agreed upon between them, the Picts were introduced by this
Minstrel, and so slew the King as privately as they could; yet they could not
carry it so secretly, but that the Kings Attendants were awakened at the
hearing of his Death-groans; and so pursued the Authors of the Villainy, and
when they could fly no further, the Kings Officers took them (though they threw
Stones at them to defend themselves, from a steep Rock) and brought them back
to Execution.

Eugenius, or Evenus I. The Thirty Ninth King.
FEthelmachus being thus slain, in the third year of his Reign, Eugenius, or
rather Evenus, the Son of Fincormachus succeeded him. About that time, Maximus,
a Roman General in Britain.
Maximus, the Roman General, being in hopes to conquer the whole Island, if he
could destroy the Scots and Picts both, first of all, he pretends many
favorable respects to the Picts, who were then the weaker Party; and
therefore, by consequence, more ready to treat with him. Them he filled with
vain promises, That, if they would persevere in their Alliance with the Romans,
besides many other innumerable advantages, they should have the Scots Land, to
be divided amongst them. The Roman^ (...) Picts (...) the (...)
Picts were catched with this bait, being blinded by Anger, desirous of
Revenge, allured by Promises, and regardless of future Events; Hereupon, they
joined their Forces with the Romans, and spoiled the Scots Country. Their first
fight with them was at Cree, a River of Galway, the Scots, being few in number,
were easily overcome by a more numerous Army, and being thus put to slight, the
Romans pursued them every way without any order, as being sure of the Victory.
In the mean time, the Argyle Men, and some other Forces of the remote Parts,
who were coming up to join with their vanquished Friends, fell in good order
upon the scattered Troops of the Romans, and made a great Slaughter amongst
their Enemies. Eugenius gathered up those whom he could recall from flight, and,
calling a Council of War, was advised, That seeing his forces were not
sufficient to carry on the War, he should return back to Carrick. But, as
Maximus was prosecuting his victory, word was brought him, That all was in a
flame in the inner parts of Britain. The Scots were glad of his departure, as
being eased of a great part of their Enemies: and, though they were scarce able
to defend their own, yet, between Anger and Hope, they resolved, before the
Summer was past, to perform some great Exploit against their adjacent Enemies;
and thereupon they poured in the remainders of their Force upon the Picts. As
they marched, they slew all they met, without distinction, and made all
desolate with Fire and Sword. Maximus, though he threatened and spoke
contumeliously of the Scots, yet being equally joyful at the destruction of
both Nations, as soon as he found an opportunity, marched against the Scots,
upon pretense to revenge the Wrongs, done by them to the Picts. The Scots, on
the other side, being now to fight, not for Glory, Empire, or Booty, but for
their Country, Fortune, Lives, and whatsoever else is wont to be dear to Men,
drew forth all that were able to bear Arms; not the Men only, but Women also,
(according to the Custom of the Nation) prepare themselves for their last
encounter, and pitched their Tents not far from the River Down, and near their
Enemies Camp. Both Armies, being set in order of Battle, first of all, the
Auxiliaries set upon the Scots, where, some fighting in hope, others incited by
despair, there was a very sharp, though short, encounter; The Picts and Britains
were repulsed with great loss, and had been certainly wholly routed and put to
flight, if seasonable relief had not come to them from the Romans. But, Maximus
bringing on his Legions, the Scots being inferior in Number, in the Nature of
their Arms, and in their Military Discipline, were driven back and almost quite
ruined. King (...) by Maximus, and Eugenius slain.
Eugenius himself fell in this Fight, as not being willing to survive his
Soldiers; and the greatest part of his Nobles fell with him, as loath to
forsake their King. Maximus at first using his Victory moderately, yet
afterward, at the instigation of the Picts*
Maximus, having obtained this great Victory sooner than he hoped, and scarce
finding any on whom he might wreck his hatred, mercifully returned to his
former Clemency; for marching over many Provinces of the Scots, he took those
that yielded themselves* to Mercy; and caused them to till the Land, withal
adding his Commands, That they should be contented with their Own, and not be
offensive to their Neighbors. The Picts, taking this his Clemency in evil
part, did allege, That the Romans and their Allys would never obtain a firm,
solid, peace, as long as the Nation of the Scots, which were always unquiet,
and took all opportunities to plunder, did remain alive; adding further, That
Britanny would never be secure, whilst any of the Scottish Blood remained in it:
That they were like wild Beasts, who would be sweetened by no Offices of Love,
nor would they be quiet, though they received never so many Losses; so that
there would be no end of War, till the whole Nation was extinct. Maximus
replied many things, in bar to such severities, as, That 'twas the ancient
Custom of the Romans, if they overcame any Nation, to be so far from
extirpating them, that they made many of them Denizons of their City: That
though they had almost Conquered the whole World, yet never any People or
Nation were wholly eradicated by Them. That he himself, having slain their
King, with the flower of his Army, had so quelled them, that now they were no
longer to be feared, but rather pitied by their Enemies; he further urged, That
his hatred of the Picts was as great as Theirs; but, if they considered the
matter well, it would be a joyfuller Spectacle, to behold the Miseries of them
being alive, than the Graves of them being Slain; yea, that it was a more
grievous Punishment to live a dying Life, than, by once Dying, to put an end to
all Miseries. This was the Sum of the Discourse which he made, not so much out
of any Affection to the Scots, as out of Hatred of the Picts Cruelty. Moreover,
he had an Eye to the future, as judging it extremely hazardous to the Roman
Province, if the Force of the Picts, upon the Extirpation of the Scots, should
be doubled. But the Picts did so ply him with Complaints, Supplications and
Gifts, that at length they obtained an Edict from him, That all the He banished
the Scots out of all Britain, upon pain of Death, and give away their Lands.
Scots should depart out of Britain by a certain day, and he that was found
there after the time limited, should be put to Death. Their Country was divided
betwixt the Picts and Britains. Thus the surviving Scots, as every Man's Fortune
led him, were scattered over Ireland, the Aebudae Islands, through Scandia, and
the Cimbrick Chersonesus, and were in all places kindly received by the
Inhabitants. But the Picts, though they made public Profession of the
Christian Religion; yet, did not forbear to commit Injuries against Priests and
Monks; which, in that Age, were had in great esteem. So that those poor
Ecclesiastics were dispersed into all the Countries round about, and many of
them came into Icolumbkill, one of the Aebudae Isles, where, being gathered
together in a Monastery, they transmitted an high Opinion of their Piety, and
Holiness, to Posterity. The rest of the Scots being thus afflicted by Wars,
exiled from their Countries, and in despair of returning thither again; The
Inhabitants of the Hebrides, being of a fierce and unquiet Nature, idle, poor,
abounding in Men, yet wanting Necessaries, thought, That they ought to attempt
something of themselves, and so gathering a Navy of Birlins, and small Ships
together, under The E^iled Scots, endeavoring to recover their Country, are
worsted by their Enemies,
Gillo their Commander, they landed in the County of Argyle. Having made their
Descent there, and dispersing themselves scatteredly, amongst a Country almost
wholly destitute of Inhabitants, to fetch in Booty, they were circumvented by
the Picts, who were sent to assist the Inhabitants, and placed in Garrison
there; and being kept from their Ships were slain every Man. Their Navy was
taken, and reserved for Service against the Islanders. And not long after, they
which fled to Ireland, partly out of Remembrance of their Ancient Alliance, and
partly out of Commiseration of their Fortune, did easily incite a Nation,
naturally inclined to War and Plunder, to afford them Aid to recover their
Country and Ancient Patrimony. Ten Thousand Auxiliaries were allowed them, who,
landing in that part of Scotland, which is opposite to Ireland, struck a great
terror to the People over all the Country. Being encouraged by their first
happy Success, when they were consulting how to carry on the War, the Albian
Scots, well knowing the strength of the Romans, and how much they exceeded
other Nations, in their skill about Military Affairs, persuaded them to be
contented with their present Victory, and to return home with their Booty, not
staying till the whole force of Britain was gathered together, to assault them.
And seeing, that the Forces of all Ireland, if they had been there, could not
withstand the Roman Army, which, by its Conduct and Valor, had almost subdued
the whole World; therefore, they were to deal with them, not by open Force, but
by Subtilty. That they were to watch opportunities, and seeing they could not
match their Enemies in Number, Force, or Warlike Skill, that therefore they
should weary them out with Toil and Labor. And that This was the only Method
for the managing the War with them. The Irish-Scots on the other side, did
blame those of Albium, whose former Valor was now so Languid, That though they
were the Offspring of those, who had almost overthrown whole Armies of the
Romans, yet, that they could not now look them in the Face; Yea, there were
some of the Albine-Scots themselves of the same Opinion, alleging, That this
Method of War, propounded by their Countrymen, was very vain and frivolous,
serving only to vex the Enemy, but not to recover their own Country; and that
therefore they ought to follow their good Fortune, and not to think of
returning, till she made way for them. And, if they would act thus, then, no
doubt, but God (who had blessed them with such prosperous beginnings) would, by
their Arms, lessen the power of the Enemy, either by raising up new Tumults
amongst the Britains, or, by calling off the Roman Legions to a War nearer
home. That the Occasion, now offered, was not to be neglected, lest hereafter
it might be sought for in Vain: This Opinion prevailed, and so they joyfully
returned to their Prey. Thus, whilst in hopes, to recover what they had lost,
they indulged their own Will, rather rashly than prudently, being immediately
overpowred by greater Forces, they lost the best part of their Men. This
Slaughter being made known in Ireland, cut off all hopes of return from the
Scots, and made the Irish fear, lest they also should not retain their Liberty,
long; so that, after many Consultations, they could find no way more
advisable, than, that the Irish Scots should send Ambassadors into Britain, to
make And forced to make Peace with the R^mans;
Peace with the And forced to make Peace with the R^mans;
Romans, upon the best Conditions they could procure. Upon their arrival,
Maximus, first of all did severely rebuke them, in that, without any
Provocation, they had causelessly excited the Roman Arms against them. The
Ambassadors, in excuse, laid the blame on the rude Rabble, and so they obtained
Pardon. The Peace was made on these Which they obtain from Maximus, on moderate
Conditions.
Conditions, That the Hibernians, after that day, should never entertain, or
shelter, any Enemies of the Romans; That they should forbear to offer any
Injury to their Allies; and That they should manage their Government, with a
friendly Respect to the Romans. The Hibernians, having thus obtained better
Terms than they expected, returned joyfully home. That which inclined Maximus
to make this easy Pacification, was, not his fear of the Hibernians, (for he
did not much value all the disturbance, they could give him) but because, his
Mind, being intent upon hopes of greater matters, he was willing to leave all
Britain, not only quiet and free from War, but also affectionate and under an
obligation to him. For, when he perceived, after the Defeat and Slaughter of so
many of their Armies, that the Forces of the Roman Empire were shattered and
weakened by their Civil Wars; and that the Emperors were not made by the Senate
and People, but by Military Election and Favor; considering also, That he had
conquered Britain, (which none ever did, before him) and thereby had got great
Fame by his Military Exploits, and had an Army (for the number of it) strong
enough; in this posture of Affairs, he determined, if Fortune offered him an
Opportunity to seize on the Empire, not to be wanting thereunto. Being prompted
by this hope, he treated his Soldiers with great Affability, and bestowed on
them many Largesses; he took advice in all his important Affairs, of the
Noblest of the Britains, he recruited his Army with Picts Soldiers, and
committed several Garrisons, in diverse places, to be kept by them. The Lands of
the Scots he divided betwixt Them, and the Britains. To the Picts he left their
ancient Possessions, free; only he exacted a small Tribute from the utmost
Angle of the Scottish Kingdom, which he had given to them as a Testimony, (for
so he gave it out himself,) that all Britain was partly overcome, and partly
settled on Conditions of Peace, by him. And by these Artifices, he strangely won
the Affections of the common Soldiers: So that all things being in readiness,
according to his conceived hope, he assumed the Diadem, as if he had been
compelled so to do, by his Soldiers. After him, Constantine was chosen General
by the Britains, being recommended only upon the account of his Name, for
otherwise, he was but a common Soldier at first; he being also slain, Gratian a
Person descended of British Blood, ruled over the Island. But Maximus being
slain in Italy, and Gratian in Britain, Victorinus sent from Rome, to Govern
Britain.
Victorinus was sent from Rome to rule Britain, as a Governor. He pretending
to enlarge the Empire, during his Administration, commanded the Who incensed
the Picts, by his Tyrannick Government over them.
Picts, who were reduced into the form of a Province, to use the Roman Laws,
denouncing a great Penalty on those, who should dare to do otherwise: And
whereas, Hergustus their King died whilst these things were in Agitation; he
forbad them to choose another King, or set up any other Magistrate, but what
was sent them from Rome, Thus the Picts looked upon as a mere Slavery.
Whereupon, they begun, though too late, and to no purpose, to resent him, and
complain they had been basely and unworthily betrayed by a Nation, allied to
them, and in amity with them; and though sometimes they were Tumultuous, yet
they were partakers with them of all Hazards, against a Foreign Enemy: So that
now they suffered according to their Demerits, who had deprived themselves not
only of all Aid, but of all Mercy and Pity also. The Picts repent of their
Conjunction with the Romans, to Root out the Scots; and also of the Persecution
of the Monks, being of the same Re^^gion with themselves.
For now who would be sorry for their Calamity, who called to Mind, into what
Miseries and Necessities, they had reduced their ancient Friends. And that the
Oracle was applicable here, which foretold, That the Picts in time should be
extirpated by the Scots. So that n^w, they were punished for betraying the
Scots: Yea, their own Punishment was the greater of the Two, in regard
Banishment is more tolerable than Servitude. For Banished Men are free, let
their Fortune be what it will; but they Themselves were encountered with the
bitterest of all Evils, which were so much the more intolerable, because they
fell into them by their own demerit. Whereupon, That they might have One, to
whom to resort in order to a public Consultation, for the remedying of these
Calamities, they create Durstus, the Son of Hergustus, King. The Nobles being
Assembled about him, to provide Remedy for their Miseries; their Complaints did
express the Severity of their Bondage. They alleged, That they were now not in
an imaginary, but real, Slavery: That they were shut up within the Walls of
Severus, as wild Beasts, severed from all human Commerce; and that all their
Soldiery, under the splendid Name of War, were indeed drawn out for the
Shambles. That, besides the hatred of their Neighbor Nations, they were
bitterly reproached by the Monks too, who cried out, That God did justly
despise and reject their Prayers, who had so cruelly persecuted his Ministers,
though they were their Brethren, and of the same Religion with themselves, in
that they would not suffer them, by whom God might been appeased or exorated,
to live in the same Country with them: These Things did grievously pinch their
Consciences; so that, Adversity infusing some sparks of Religion into their
Minds, and also some ease from their Miseries being obtained, they, at last,
pitched upon This, as the only Way to recover their Liberty. That after they
had reconciled themselves to the Scots, they would also endeavor to appease
the Wrath of God, who was an Enemy to them for their Perfidiousness. Whereupon,
understanding that young They send to recall Fergus, a Scottish Exile, from
Scandia, to take the Regal Government upon him.
Fergusius, of the Blood Royal, was an Exile in Scandia; they thought, if he
were recalled, that the rest also might be induced, by his Authority, to
return. To effect which, they sent an Embassy to him, but secretly, for fear of
the Romans, to found his Inclination, as to the Return into his own Country.

The Fifth BOOK.
AFter Eugenius was slain by the Romans, as has been related before, and all
the Scots banished from their Country, the King's Brother named Echadius, or
Ethodius, for fear of the Treachery of the Picts, and also diffident of his own
Affairs, hired Shipping, and committed himself to the Winds, and to Fortune;
and so Sailed into Scandia, together with his Son Erthus, and his Nephew
Fergusius. As soon as he arrived there, and came to Court, the King of the
Country, being informed Who he was, from whence he came, and what adverse
Fortune he had met withal; his Language, and also his Habit and Beauty soon
procuring Credit to his Allegation, he was admitted into near Familiarity with
him. Fergusius lived there till he grew up to be a Man, (his Father and
Grandfather being dead) he addicted himself wholly to Military Studies; at
which time many Expeditions were made by the United Forces of the North,
against the Roman Empire. Some of the Forces fell upon Hungary, some upon
Gallia; and Fergusius, both out of his love to Arms, and his hatred to the
Romans, followed the Francs, in their War against the Gauls: But that
Expedition proved not very prosperous, so that he returned into Scandia with
greater Glory, than Success: And when his Name began to be famous, not only
there, but also amongst the Neighbor-Nations, his Fame also reaching to the
Scots and Picts, both gave the former hope to recover their own Country again,
and also the later to obtain their ancient Liberty; if, laying aside their old
Grudges, they should choose him General, and try their Fortune against the
Romans. And indeed, at that time, the Affairs of the Romans were brought to so
low an Ebb, by reason of the Successes of the Neighboring-Nations against them,
that the Opportunity it self was Bait enough to excite old Enemies, to revenge
the former Injuries, they had received from them. For, their Emperors, besides
their being weakened by Civil Wars, were so vexed on every side by the Gauls,
Vandals, Franks and Africans, who did severally make In-rodes upon them, each
from his own Coast, that, omitting the care of Foreign Affairs, they called
back their Armies into Italy, to defend Rome it self, the Seat of their Empire.
In the midst of these Commotions, they, who commanded the British Legions,
esteeming the Roman Affairs as desperate, did each study their own Advantages,
and severally to establish their distinct Tyrannies. Neither were they content
to vex the Islanders with all kind of Cruelty and Avarice, but they also
harassed one another by Mutual Incursions. So, the Number of the Legionary
Soldiers did daily decrease, and the hatred of the Provincials against them did
increase. So that, all Britanny would have rebelled against them, if they had
had Forces, answerable to their Desires: But above all their Miseries, That was
most prejudicial to the Britains, which the Emperor Constantine, the last
General of the Roman Army, caused them to endure; For, when he was made
Emperor, he withdrew, not only the Roman Army, but even the British Soldiers
too; and so left the whole Island disarmed, and exposed to all Violence, if
they had had any Foreign Enemy to invade them. This was the chief occasion,
which did mightily hasten the combination of the Scots. When Affairs stood in
this posture, secret Messengers were sent betwixt the The Scots and Picts unite
against the Romans, then brought low by their own Civil Dissensions.
Scots and the Picts; and a Peace struck up between them. Whereupon, they Both
sent Ambassadors to call home Fergusius, to undertake the Kingly Government,
as, descending to him from his Ancestors. Fergusius, being a Military Man,
desirous of Honor, and, besides, not so well pleased with his present Estate,
but encouraged with hopes of a better, easily accepted the Terms. When his
return was noised abroad, many of the Exiled Scots, yea, several of the Danes
also, his acquaintance, and Fellow Soldiers, being encouraged by the same
hopes, accompanied him also home: They all landed in Argyle. Thither all those
Exiles, which were in Ireland, and the Circumjacent Islands, having notice
given them before of his coming, resorted speedily to him; and they also drew
along with them, a considerable number of their Clans and Relations, and also
several young Soldiers, who were desirous of Innovation.

Fergusius II. The Fortieth King.
FErgusius, having got these Forces together, was Created the 40 th King of
Scotland, being Inaugurated according to the manner of the Country. The A
Parchment Chronicle of Scottish Affairs, written by the Monks of the Abbey of
Pasley, a Town and Abbey, situate not far from Glascom, in the Ba^ony of
Renfrew, called from its Cover. The Black Book.
Black Book of Pasley casts his return on the 6th Year of Honorius and
Arcadius, Emperors; Others, upon the 8th of their Reign, that is, according to
the account of Marianus Scotus, 403, according to Funccius, 404 Years, after
the Incarnation of Christ; and about 27 Years after the death of his
Grandfather Eugenius. They who contend, out of Bid, That this was the First
coming of the Scots into Britain, may be convinced of a manifest untruth, by
his very History. When the Assembly of the Estates was Dissolved, Fergusius
being born and bred to Feats of War and Arms, judging it convenient to make use
of the Favourableness of Fortune, and the Forwardness of his Men; and withal,
designing to prevent the Report of his coming, demolished all the
Neighbor-Garisons; having not Soldiers enough to keep them; and having
recovered his own Kingdom, as soon as the season of the Year would permit, he
prepared for an Fergus prepares for War.
Expedition against his Enemy. In the mean time, the Brittons were divided into
Two Factions, some of them desirous of Liberty, and weary of a Foreign Yoke,
were glad of their Arrival; others preferred their present Ease, tho attended
with so many and great Inconveniences, before an uncertain Liberty, and a
certain War. And therefore, out of fear of the Danger hanging over their heads,
and withal, being Conscious of their own Weakness, they agreed upon a double
Embassy, one to the Picts, another to the Romans: That to the Picts, was, to
advise them, not to desert their old Allies the Romans and Brittons, nor to
take part with their ancient Enemies, who were a company of poor, hopeless, and
despicable Creatures. They farther gave them grave Admonitions, and made them
many promises, and added many Threats from the Romans, whom (said they) they
could never equal in Number, or overcome, though the whole strength of both
Nations did jointly make Head against them, much less could they no^ Cope with
them, seeing one of them was exhausted by Draughts and Detachements of
Souldi^rs; and the other worn out with all manner of Miseries*

The Brittons send for Aid to the Romans, and receive one Legion,
The Minutes of their Instructions to their Ambassadors, sent to the Romans,
were these, That they should send Aid to them in time, whilst there was any
thing left to defend, against the rage of a Cruel Enemy; which, if they would
do, then Britain would still remain firm under their Obedience; if not, it were
better for them to leave their Country, than to endure a Servitude, worse than
Death, under Savage Nations. Hereupon the Romans, though pressed upon by War on
every side, yet sent one Legion out of Gaul, to defend their Province, giving
them Command to return, as soon as they had settled matters in Britanny. The
Brittons having received such Aid, did suddenly Who repulsed their Enemies and
return.
assault the plundring Troops of their Enemies, who were careles^ly struggling
up and down, and repelled them with great Slaughter.

The Confederate Kings, having an Army well-appointed, came to the Wall of
Severus, and meeting their Enemies by the River Carron, a bloody Battle was
fought between them. Great Slaughter was made on both sides, but the Victory
fell to the Romans, who, being in a little time to return into Gallia, were
content only to have driven back their Enemies, and to repair the Wall of
Severus, which in many places was demolished; which, when they had done, and
had Garisoned it with Brittons, they departed. The Confederate Kings, though
they were Superior to their Enemies, in swift Marchings, and enduring of
Hardships; yet, being inferior in Number and Force, resolved not to Fight
pitched Battles any more, but rather to weary their Enemies, by frequent
Inrodes, and not to put all at a venture in one Fight, seeing they were not, as
yet, of Force sufficient so to do. But when they heard, That the Romans were
returned out of Britain, they altered their Resolutions, and gathering all
their Forces together, they demolished the Wall of Severus, which was slightly
repaired, only by the Hands of Soldiers, and but negligently guarded neither,
by the Brittons. So that by this means, having a larger Scope to Forage in,
they made the Country beyond the Wall, (which they were not able to keep, for
want of Men) useless to the Brittons, for many Miles: It is reported, that one
Graham was the principal Man in demolishing that Fortification; who,
transporting his Soldiers in Ships, landed beyond the Wall, and slew the Guards
unawares, and unprovided; and so made a passage for his Men. It Is not certain
amongst Writers, Whether this Graham were a Scot, or a Britton; but most think,
That he was a Britton, descended of the Fulgentian Sept, a Prime and Noble
Family in that Nation; as also, That he was the Father in Law of King
Fergusius: I am most inclined to be of this last Opinion. The Wall then being
thus Razed, the Scots and Picts did Rage, with most inhuman Cruelties, over the
Brittons, without distinction of Age or Sex: For (as Matters then stood) the
Brittons were weak and unaccustomed to War, so that they sent a lamentable
Embassy to Rome, complaining of the unspeakable Calamities they endured, and
with great humility and earnestness, supplicating for Aid, farther alleging,
That if they were not moved at the Destruction of the Brittons, and the loss of
a Province, (lately, so splendid an one,) yet, it became the Romans to maintain
their own Dignity, lest their Names should grow contemptible amongst those
Barbarous Nations. Hereupon, The Brittons receive another Auxiliary Legion of
the Romans under Maximianus.
another Legion was again sent for their Relief, who coming (as Bede says) in
Autumn, an unexpected Season of the Year, made great Slaughter of their
Enemies. The Confederate Kings gathered what Force they could together, to beat
them back; and, being encouraged by their Success in former Times, and also by
the Friendship and Alliance of Dionethus a Britton.
Dionethus, a Britton, they drew forth toward the Enemy. This Dionethus was
well descended in his own Country, but always an Adviser of his Countrymen to
shake off the Roman Yoke; and then especially, when so fair an Opportunity was
offered, and the whole Strength of the Empire was engaged in other Wars,
whereupon he was suspected by his own Men as an Affector of Novelty, and was
hated of the Romans, but was a Friend to the Scots, and Picts; who,
understanding, That the Design of the Romans, was, first to destroy Dionethus,
as an Enemy near at hand, and in their very Bowels, to obviate their purpose,
made great Marches toward them; and joining their Forces with Those of
Dionethus's, began a a sharp Encounter with the Romans, who, overpowered by
Numbers, both in Front and Rear, were put to Flight. When the Ranks of the
Legionary Soldiers were thus broken, and gave Ground, the Confederate King
being too eager in pursuit, fell amongst the Reserves of the Romans, and the
rest of their Army, who stood in good Order, and were repulsed by them with
Maximianus overcomes Fergus King of Scots, (...) King of Picts, and Dionethus.
great Slaughter: So that if the Romans, being conscious of the smalness of
their Number, had not forbore any farther pursuit, they had doubtless received
a mighty Overthrow that Day; but because the loss of some Soldiers in but a
small Army was most sensible, therefore they were less joyous at the Victory.

Maximianus (so our Writers call him, who commanded the Roman Legion) being
dismayed at this Check, retired into the midst of his Province; And the
Opposite Kings returned each to his own Dominion. Hereupon, Dionethus took the
Supreme Authority upon him, and, being clothed in Purple after the manner of
the Romans, carries himself as King of the Brittons. When the Romans
understood, that their Enemies were dispersed, they gathered what Force they
could together, and increased them with British Auxiliaries, and so marched
against Dionethus, who infested the Provinces adjoining to him; for they
thought to subdue him, from whom their Danger was nearest, before his Allies
could come to his relief: But the Three Kings united their Forces sooner than
he imagined, and joining all their Forces together, they encouraged their
Soldiers as well as they could, and, without delay, drew forth their Armies to
the Onset. The Roman General placed the Brittons in the Front, and the Romans
in the Reserves: The Fight was fierce, and the Front giving Ground, Maximianus
brought on his Legion, and stopped the Brittons in their flight; and then,
sending about some Troops to fall on the Rear, some Brigades of Scots, being
encompassed by them, drew themselves into a Ring, where they bravely defended
themselves, till the greatest part of their Enemies Army falling upon them,
they were every Man slain: Yet their loss gave Opportunity to the rest to
escape. There fell in that Fight Fergus King of the Scots, and Durstus King of
the Picts, Dionethus, being wounded, was, with great difficulty, carried off to
the Sea, and in a Skiff returned home. This Victory struck such a Terror to
all, that it recalled the memory of Ancient Times, in so much that many
consulted, whither to betake themselves for their Place of Exile. Fergusius
died, when he had Reigned Sixteen Years, a Man of an Heroic Spirit, and who
may deservedly be called, The Second Founder of the Scottish Kingdom; yea,
(perhaps) he may be said to exceed the former The Two Fergus's compared.
Fergusius, in this, That he came into a void Country, and that by the
Concession of the Picts, neither had he the unconquered Forces of the Romans to
deal with, but with the Brittons, who, though somewhat (yet not much) Superior
to them in Accoutrements and Provisions for War, were yet their Inferiors in
enduring the Hardships of the Field. But this later Fergusius, when almost all
were slain, who were able to bear Arms, being also brought up in a Foreign
Country; and after the 27th Year of his Banishment from his Own, being sent for
as an unknown King, by those Subjects who were as unknown to him, marched with
a mixed Army, packed up of several Nations, against the Brittons, who were
sometimes also assisted by the Forces of the Romans; so that, if God had not
manifestly favored his Designs, he might seem to have undertaken a very
Temerarious Attempt, and bordering upon Madness it self. When he was slain, he
left three Sons behind him, very young, Eugenius, Dongardus, and Constantius;
Graham, their Uncle by the Mother's side, was by Universal Consent, appointed
Guardian over them, and in the mean time, till they came to be of Age, he was
to manage the Government, as Regent. He was a Person of that Virtuous Temper,
that, even in the most Turbulent Times, and amidst a most fierce Nation, who
were not always obedient, no not to Kings of their own Nation, yet, there
happened no Homebred Sedition in his time, though he himself were a Foreigner.

Eugenius, or Evenus II, The Forty First King.
EVgenius, or Evenus the Eldest Son of Fergusias, had the Name of King, but the
Power was in the Hands of Graham; he caused a Muster to be made of the
Soldiers, all over the Land, and when he found that his Militia was weakened by
former Fights, beyond what he thought, he saw that nothing then was to be done,
and so ceased from making any Levies. But the Roman Legion having releived
their Allies, and, as they were Commanded, being about to return into the
Continent, spoiled all their Enemies Country, within the Wall of Severus, and
slew the Inhabitants; it is true, they restored the Lands to the Brittons, but
they kept the Prey for themselves. So that the Remainders of the Scots and
Picts, who supervived their late loss, were again shut up between the two
Firth^ of the Sea. Matters being reduced to this pass, the The Roman Legion
leaves Britanny, to maintain their Empire at home.
Romans declared to the Brittons, with how great and strong Armies they were
beset, who had conspired to destroy the Roman Name and Empire; so that they
were not able to take so much pains, nor to be at so great expense to maintain
places so far off; and therefore, they advised the Brittons, not to expect any
more Aid from them, for the future. But they advised rather, that they
themselves should take Arms, and inure themselves to undergo Military Pains and
Hazards; and, if they had offended before, through Slothfulness, that now by
Industry and Hardiness, they would make an amends, and not permit themselves to
grow so contemptible to their Enemies, (to whom they were Superior in Number
and Forces) as to suffer them to drive away yearly Booties from their Country,
as if they had gone forth only as Hunters for their Prey. And the Romans
themselves, that they might do them good for future times, did undertake a
great and memorable Graham's Dike.
Work for them. For they gathered together an huge Company of Workmen out of
their whole Province, (the Romans and Brittons, both vying, who should be
forwardest) and where the Trench or Graft was drawn by Severus, Thirty Mile
long, there they built a Wall of Stone, Eight Foot broad, and Twelve high, they
distinguished it by Castles, some of which represented small Towns. It was
finished and bounded on the West, by a place now called Kirk Patrick, and on
the East, it began from the Monastery of Aberkernick, as Bede affirms; in which
Country, about One Hundred and Twenty years since, there was a strong Castle of
the Douglasses called Abercorn, but no sign of any Monastery at all. Moreover,
left their Enemies should make a descent by Ships into Places beyond the Wall,
(as, in their Memory, they had formerly done) they set up many Beacons or Watch
Towers on the higher Grounds along the shore, from whence there was a large
prospect into the Sea: And, where it was convenient, they appointed Garrisons,
but consisting of such Cowardly and Effeminate Fellows, that they could not
endure so much as to see the Face of an Armed Enemy. The Roman Legion did this
Beneficial and Obliging Work for their Provincials, before their departure.
Withal, vehemently exhorting them to defend their own Country, with their own
Arms; for they must never more hope for Assistance from the Romans, whose
Affairs were now brought to that Exigence, that they could help their Allies,
especially so far remote, no more. When the The (...) by the (...) and (...) of
the R^mans.
Scots and Picts understood for certain, by their Spies, that the Romans were
departed, and would return no more; they assaulted the Wall, with all their
might, and much more eagerly than before, and did not only cast down their
Opposers, by hurling Darts at them, but also drew them off the Wall with
Cramp-Irons, as Bede calls them; which were, as I understand, Crooked Iron
Instruments, of Hooks, fastened on the tops of long Poles; so that the upper
Fortification being thus made destitute of its Defenders, they applied their
Engines, and overthrew the Foundation also; and thus an entrance and passage
being made, they enforced their affrightned Enemies to leave their Habitations
and Dwellings, and to fly away for safety, wherever they could find it. For the
Scots and Picts were so eagerly bent on Revenge, that all their former
Calamities seemed tolerable to their Enemies, in respect of Those they were now
forced to endure. Afterward, the Assailants, rather wearied than satisfied
with the Miseries of their Enemies, returned home, and began, at last, to
bethink themselves, That they had not so much taken away the Goods of their
Enemies, as withal, they had despoiled themselves of the Rewards of their
Victory. And therefore convening an Assembly of the Estates; it was disputed
amongst them, How so great a Victory might be improved; and their first Result
was, to replenish those Lands, which they had taken from the Enemy, with new
Colonies, for the Procreation of a new Progeny. This Counsel seemed the more
wholesome and advisable, because of the abundance of Valiant, but Indigent,
Officers and Soldiers, who had not room enough to live in their ancient
Habitations. This turn of Prosperity, being signified to the Neighboring
Nations, encouraged not only the Scottish Exiles, but a great company of
Strangers too, who lived but poorly at home, to flock in, as to a Prey; for
they supposed, that a Man of that Spirit and Conduct, as Graham was, would
never lay down Arms, till he had brought the whole Island of Britain under his
Subjection; but herein they were mistaken; for he, having run so many hazards,
was more inclineable to Peace, with Honor and Glory, than to hazard his
present certain Felicity, by casting himself into an uncertain Danger. And
therefore he made A Peace made betwixt the Scots and Picts of the one part, and
the Brittons on the other.
Peace with the Brittons, who were not only willing to, but also very earnestly
desirous of, the same. The Terms were, That each People should be contented
with their own Bounds, and abstain from Wrong and Violence, toward one
another; the Mound to both was Adrian's Wall. After this Peace was made, Graham
divided the Lands, not only to the Scots, but to those outlandish Men also, who
had followed his Ensigns. By this means, almost all the Provinces were called
by new Names, because many of them were Peopled with strange and new
Inhabitants, and the rest, for the most part, were born in exile. Galway, a
County next to Ireland, falling by Lot to the Hibernians, is thought to have
got its Name, so Famed in their own Country, from Them. Caithness was so
called, because it was Mountainous; Ross, because it was a Peninsula; Buchan,
because it paid great Tribute out of Oxen. Strath-Bogy, Narn, Strathnavern,
Loch-Sp^y, Strath-Earn, and Monteath, took their respective Names from several
Rivers of the same Appellation. Loch-Abyr was so called from a Lough, or
rather, Bay of the Sea. Many of the Provinces situate on this side the Forth,
as Lennox, Clydsdale, Twedale, Tevidale, Liddisdale, Eskdale, Eusdale,
Nithisdal, Annandale, and Dowglas-dal, had their Sirnames from Rivers: Many
Places retained their ancient Names; and some had theirs only a little changed.
Afterward, to the end, that he might, by just Laws, bridle the Licentiousness,
which was grown to such a height, by the long continuance of Wars; He first
called home the Monks and Teachers of the Christian Religion, from their Exile;
and, lest they might be burdensome to an indigent People, Tithes for
Ecclesiastics.
he ordained, That they should have an yearly Income, out of the Fruits of the
Earth; which, tho it was small, (as those times were) yet, by reason of the
Modesty and Temperance of the Men, it seemed great enough for them. He placed
Garrisons in the most convenient Passages, against the sudden Incursions of the
Enemy; He repaired Places, that were demolished, and erected new. The Fury of
War being thus extinguished, Peace sometimes more dangerous than War.
through the whole Island, tho the Brittons, being saved, as it were, out of a
dangerous Tempest, did enjoy the Sweets of Public Peace; yet, it was doubtful,
whether the War or the Peace did them most mischief. For when their Cities were
razed, their Villages burnt, their Cattle driven away, and all their
Instruments of Husbandry lost; they, who survived this Cruelty of their
Enemies, were enforced to maintain their needy Lives by Hunting, or else to
turn their course of Plunder from their Enemies, upon their own Countrymen: So
that an Intestine War was almost like to ensue, upon an External Peace. Neither
were they only the perpetual Enemies of Foreiners; For, tho they abstained from
open Wars, yet ever and anon they spoiled the Countries, contiguous to them:
Also, a Party of the Hibernians, being encouraged by hope of Booty, did vex the
poor People, who were already miserably enough distressed, with their Marine
Invasions. Their last Calamity, and the worst of all, was Famine the forest of
Evils.
Famine, which did so cow the Hearts of that Warlike People, that many of them
voluntarily surrendered up themselves into their Enemies Hands. At last, those
few of them that remained, lurking in Caves and Dens, were necessitated to peep
abroad, and so to scatter the wandering Troops of those Plunderers; they also
drove the Irish back to Sea, and forced them to depart from Albium. That
Mischief was no sooner removed, but a Calamity New occasions of Dissension
between the Scots and Brittons.
nearer hand, began to press upon them. The Scots and Picts, their perpetual
Enemies, were not contented to drive Preys from them by stealth, but watched an
opportunity to attempt higher Matters. For Eugenius, the Son of Fergus, who,
till that time, had lain still, under the Tutorage of another; his Strength
being increased by a long Peace, and much augmented by a young Fry of Soldiers
flocking in to him, desired to show himself; and besides the weakness of the
Brittons, there happened likewise a private Cause of War: Graham, being his
Grandfather by the Mothers-side, and nobly descended (as I spoke before) in his
own Country, was yet of that Faction, which were desirous to free themselves
from the bondage of the Romans. For which Cause, he was banished by the
contrary Faction, who were then more powerful, and so he fled to the Scots, his
old Allies, between whom many Civilities had formerly passed. After his Death,
Eugenius, by his Ambassadors, demanded a Restitution of those fruitful Lands,
which were his Ancestors, situate within the Wall of Adrian; intimating plainly
to them, That unless they did restore them, he would make War upon them, When
the Ambassadors had declared their Message in an Assembly of the Brittons,
there were such Heats amongst them, that they came almost to blows. They that
were the fiercest of them, cried out, That the Scots did not seek for Lands so
much, (of which they had enough) as for War; and That they did not only insult
over their new Calamities, but also were resolved to try their Patience; if the
Lands were denied, then a War would presently follow; if they were restored,
then a cruel Enemy was to be received into their own Bowels; and yet, they
should not have Peace even Then, unless they imagined, That their Covetousness
would be satisfied with the Concession of a few Lands, who were not contented
with large Provinces, which were parted with in the last War. And that
therefore it was good to obviate their immoderate and unsatiable Desires, in
the very beginning, and to repress their Licentiousness Whereupon the Brittons
Arm.
by Arms, lest, by the Grant of small things, their Desires might be enlarged,
and their Boldness increased to ask more. There was in that Assembly one Tho
d^ssuaded theref^om by Conan^s, their Countrym^n.
Conanus, a British Nobleman, and eminent amongst his Countrymen, on the
account of his Prudence, who discoursed many things gravely, concerning the
Cruelty of their Enemies, and of the present State of the Brittons, and that
all their Soldiers were almost drawn out for Foreign Service; adding withal,
That War abroad, Seditions at home, and Famine, proceeding from Poverty or
Want, would consume, or else weaken, the miserable Remainders of his
Countrymen: As for the Roman Legions, they were gone home to quell their own
Civil Wars, without any hopes of Return; and therefore, he gave his Advice,
That they should make Peace with their formidable Enemies, if not an
advantageous one, yet the best they could procure. This Counsel (he gave, as he
alleged) not out of any Respect to his private Interest, but merely for the
necessities of the Public, which appears, (said he) by this, That as long as
there was any probability to defend ourselves against the Cruelty of our
Enemies, he never made any mention of Peace at all; he added, That he was not
ignorant, that this Peace, which he now persuaded to, would not be a lasting
one, but only prove a small Respite from War, till the force of the Brittons,
weakened by so many losses, and almost ruined, might be refreshed, and gather
strength by a little intermission; Whilst he was thus speaking, a Noise arose
in the whole Assembly, which made him afraid: For the Seditious cried out* That
he did not respect the public Good, but only ende^voured to obtain the Kingdom
for himself, by means of Foreign Aid. Whereupon, he, departing from the
Council, called God to witness, That he had no private end of his own, in
persuading Peace, but, a Tumult arising amongst the Multitude, he was there Who
is (...)
slain* His Loss caused the wiser sort to refrain giving their Votes freely,
tho they evidently saw, that the Destruction of their Country was at hand. The
Ambassadors, returning home without their Errand, The Scots and Picts left off
all other Business, and prepared wholly for War; The Brittons foreseeing the
same, after their fit of Passion was somewhat over, send Ambassadors to
Scotland, who, upon pretense of making Peace, were to put some stop to the War,
and to offer them Money; giving the Scots hopes, That they might get more from
them, by way of an amicable Treaty, than they pretended to seek for by War;
That the Chances of War were doubtful, and the issue uncertain; That it was not
the part of Wise Men, to neglect the benefit which was in their view, and, upon
uncertain hopes, to cast themselves upon most certain and assured Dangers.
Nothing was obtained by this Ambassy, for Eugenius was informed by his Spies,
That the Brittons did but dissemble the obtaining of a Peace abroad, whilst
they were intent upon high Warlike Preparations at home; so that, for that
reason, the Scots and Picts being inflamed with their old hatred, and invited
by the Calamities of the Brittons; or else, lifted up with Success, would give
them no Conditions, but to yield up All; so that, both Armies prepared for the
last Encounter. The Confederate Kings, having been Conquerors for some years,
were now erected to the hope of a greater Victory; and the Brittons, on the
other side, set before their Eyes all the Miseries, that a fierce and
conquering Enemy could inflict upon them: In this posture of Affairs, and
temper of Spirit, when both Parties came in sight of one another, such a A
terrible Fight between the Scots and the Picts; and the Brittons.
sharp Fight commenced between them, as the Inhabitants of Britanny had never
seen before, it was so obstinately maintained, that, after very long, and hot,
Service, the Right Wing of the Scots, was, tho with difficulty, enforced to
give ground; which Eugenius perceiving, having before brought all his other
Reserves into Service, he drew on also the Squadrons, left to guard the
Baggage, into the Fight; They, being entire, routed the Brittons, which stood
against them, so that the Victory began on that side, whence the fear of a
Total overthrow did proceed. The rest of the Brittons, following the Fortune of
the other Brigade, ran away too, and flying into the Woods and Marshes near to
the place where the Battle was fought, as they were thus straggling, dispersed,
and unarmed, their Enemies Baggage-men, and Attendants, slew abundance of them.
There fell of the Wherein the Brittons are overthrown.
Brittons in this Fight 14000, of their Enemies 4000. After this Fight, the
Brittons, having lost almost all their Infantry, send Ambassadors to the Scots
and Picts, Commissioning them to refuse no Conditions of Peace, whatsoever: The
Confederate Kings, seeing they had All in their Power, were somewhat inclined
to Mercy, and therefore Terms of Peace were offered, which were hard indeed,
but not the severest, which (in such their afflicted State) they might have
propounded; The Conditions And have (...) Conditions of Peace imposed on them.
were, That the Brittons should not send for any Roman, or other Foreign, Army,
to assist them; That they should not admit them, if they came of their own
accord; nor give them Liberty to march thr^ their Country; That the Enemies of
the Scots and Picts should be Theirs also, and vice versa; and, That, without
their Permission, they should not make Peace or War, nor send Aid to any, who
desired it; That the Limits of their Kingdom should be the River Humber; That
they should also make present Payment of a certain sum of Money by way of
M^l^t, to be divided amongst the Soldiers, which also was to be paid yearly by
them; That they should give an hundred Hostages, such as the Confederate Kings
should approve of.

These Conditions were entertained by the Brittons, grudingly by some, but
necessarily by all; and the same necessity which procured it, made them keep
the Peace for some years: The Brittons, being left weak and forsaken of
Foreigners, that they might have an Head to resort to, for public Advice, made
The Brittons make Constantine King, who was soon after sl^in by V^rtigern.
Constantine, their Countryman, a Nobleman, of high descent, and of great
repute, (whom they had sent for out of Gallick Britanny,) King. He, perceiving
that the Forces of the Brittons were broken, both abroad by Wars, and at home
by Fewds, Robberies, and Discords, thought fit to attempt nothing by Arms; but,
during the Ten years he reigned, he maintained Peace with his Neighbors; at
last, he was Slain by the Treachery of Vortigern, a Potent and Ambitious man;
He left Three Sons behind him, of which Two were under Age; the Third and
Eldest, as unfit for Government, was thrust into a Monastery; yet he was made
King, principally by the Assistance of Vortigern, who sought to obtain Wealth
and Power to himself, under the Envy of another man's Name. The Fields, which
were now tilled in time of Peace, after a most grievous Famine, yielded such a
plentiful Crop of Grain, that the like was never heard of in Britain, before.
And from hence those Vices did arise, which usually accompany Peace, as Luxury,
the usual Companion of Peace.
Luxury, Cruelty, Whoredom, Drunkenness, which are more pernicious than all the
Mischiefs of War. There was no Truth or Sincerity to be found, and that not
only amongst the Vulgar, but even the Monks, and the Professors of an Holier
Life, made a mock at Equity, Faithfulness, and constant Piety of Life; of which
Bid, the Anglo-Saxon; and Gildas, the Britton, do make an heavy Complaint. In
the mean time, the Ambassadors, who returned from Aetius, brought word, That no
relief could be expected from him, for the Brittons had sent Letters to Aetius,
some Clauses whereof, as they are mentioned by Bid, I shall here recite; both
because they are a succinct History of the Miseries of that Nation; and also,
because they demonstrate, How much many Writers are mistaken, in their Memoirs.
The Words are these, To Aetius, the third time Consul, the Complaints of the
Brittons. And a little after; The Barbarians drive us to the Sea, the Sea beats
us back again upon the Barbarians; between These two kinds of Deaths, we are
either Killed or Drowned. Now Aetius was joined, in his Third Consulship, with
Symmachus, in the 450th year after Christ. Neither could there any Aid be
obtained from him, who was then principally intent upon the observing the
Motions of Attila: The rest of the Brittons being driven to this desperate
point, only Vortigern, having slain Constantine's Heir, makes himself King of
the Brittons.
Vortigern was glad of the public Calamity; and, in such a general
hurly-burly, he thought, he might, with greater Impunity, perpetrate that
Wickedness, which he had long before designed in his mind; which was, to cause
the King to be Slain, by those Guards, which he had appointed about him, and
afterward, to avert the suspicion of so foul a Parricide from himself, in a
pretended Fit of Anger, as if he were impatient of delay in Executing Revenge,
he caused the Guards also to be put to death, without suffering them to plead
for themselves. Thus having obtained the Kingdom by the highest degree of
Villainy, he managed it with as little Sanctity. For, suspecting the
Faithfulness of the People toward him, and not confiding in his own strength,
which was but small, he engaged the Saxons to take his part, who then exercised
Pyracy at Sea, and infested all the shores far and near. He procured their
Captain He sends for Aid to Hengist the Saxon, by whose help he repels the
Scots and Picts.
Hengist, with a strong Band of Soldiers, to come to him with three Galleys,
and he assigned Lands to him in Britain; so that now he was to fight, not as
for a strange Country, but as for his own Demeasne and Estate, and therefore
was likely to do it with greater Alacrity. When this was noised abroad, such
large Numbers of Three Nations, the Iutes, the Saxons, and the Angles are
reported to have flocked out of Germany into Britain, that they became
formidable even to the Inhabitants of the Isle. First of all, about the year of
our Lord 449. Vortigern, being strengthened by those Auxiliaries, joined Battle
with the Scots and Picts, whom he Conquered, and drove beyond the Wall of
Adrian. As touching The Character of King Eugenius.
Eugenius, the King of the Scots, there goes a double Report of him; some say,
he was slain in fight beyond the River Humber; others, that he died a natural
Death. However he came by his end, this is certain, he governed the Scots with
such Equity, that he may deservedly be reckoned amongst the Best of their
Kings. For, though he spent the first Part of his Life, almost from his
Childhood, in War, yet he so profited under the Discipline of his Grandfather,
and his Mind was so established thereby, that neither Military Freedom (as it
usually does) did draw him to Vice; neither did it make him more negligent in
conforming his Manners to the Rule of Piety; nor did his prosperous Success
make him more arrogant. And on the other side, the Peace and Calm, he enjoyed,
did not abate the sharpness of his Understanding, nor break his Martial Spirit;
but he managed his Life, with such an equal and poised Temper, that, by the
advantage of his natural Disposition, he did equal, or rather exceed, those
Princes, who are instructed in the Liberal Arts, and from thence come to the
Helm of Government.

Dongardus, The Forty Second King.
THE same Year that Eugenius died, which was in the 452 Year of our Lord, his
Brother, Dongardus, was made King in his place. He was of a Disposition like
his Brother, for, as he was willing to embrace Peace upon good Conditions; so,
when occasion required, he was not afraid of War. And therefore, in reference
both to Peace and War, he not only prepared all things necessary to resist the
Invasion of an Enemy; but also, he trained up the Youth and Soldiery of his
Country, in Pains and Parsimony; That so they might be restrained from Vice,
and their minds not grow feeble and languid by long Quiet and too much
Prosperity. But the Seditions at home, raised by the Brittons, were the Cause,
that his Arms were not much famed abroad. But being freed from that
Encombrance, he gave himself wholly up to the Reformation of Religion; for the
Relics of the Dongard, an opposer of the Pelagian Heresy.
Pelagian Heresy did as yet trouble the Churches. To confute them, Pope Pope
Celestine sends Pa^ladius, and other Learned Monks, into Scotland.
Celestine sent Palladius over, (in the life of his Father Eugenius) who
instructed many, that grew afterward famous for Learning and Sanctity of Life;
and especially Patricius, Servanus, Ninianus, Or St. Mungo.
Kent^gernus. The same Palladius is reported to have appointed Palladius first
institutes Bishops in Scotland, which before was governed by Monks with less
splendour, but more Piety
Bishops, first in Scotland. Whereas, till then, the Churches were governed
only by Monks, without Bishops, with less Pomp and external Ceremony, but with
greater Integrity and Sanctimony of Life. The Scots, being thus intent about
purging and settling Religi^n and Divine Worship, escaped free from that
Tempest of War, which did shatter almost the whole World. In the Second year of
the Reign of Eugenius* Vortigern deposed, and Vortimer made King of the
Brittons, who concludes a Peace with the Scot^ and Picts.
Vortigern was deposed, and his Son, Vortimer, chosen King of the Brittons. He
renewed the Ancient League with the Scots and Picts, (that so he might more
easily break the Power of the Saxons) which was also made Tripartite of Three
Nations, against the Romans in the Days of Carausius. Dongardus did not long
survive this League; for he died after he had reigned Five Years.

Constantine I. The Forty Third King.
COnstantinos, his youngest Brother, succeeded him in the Government; who, in
his private Condition, lived temperately enough, but as soon as he mounted the
Throne, he let loose the Reins to all Debauchery. Constantine^ wicked Reign.
He was avaricious and cruel toward the Nobility, but familiar with men of an
inferior Rank. He gave himself wholly to the Constupration of Virgins and
M^trons, and to excessive Feastings, having always Musicians and Stage Players
about him, and all other Ministers of Lasciviousness and Pleasures. The Scotch
Nobility, being offended at these Miscarriages, came often to him, to put him
in mind of his Duty. He received their Admonitions very haughtily, bidding them
to look after their own Affairs, saying, That he had better Advice from others:
He also told them, That they were much mistaken, if they thought to Limit their
King, on pretense of Advising him. And as he was thus arrogant toward his
Subjects; so he was as abject and submissive to his Enemies. For he granted
them Peace at first asking, and forgave them the Injuries they had committed;
withal, he demolished some Castles, and delivered up others to them. This
Carriage of his did so far incense the Scots and Picts, that the Scots were
ready to Rebel; and the Picts, who before had secretly dealt with the Saxons,
set up for themselves, and at last made a public League with them. But amongst
the Scots, there was one Dugal of Galway, of great Authority amongst the
Commons, he, for the present, restrained the Multitude by an Insinuating
Oration, wherein he acknowledged, That many of those things which they
complained of, were true, and what they desired was just. But yet, if War
should come, as an accession to their other Miseries, the Kingdom would be
endangered, yea, hardly retrievable from Destruction; especially, seeing the
Picts were alienated from them; the Brittons, since Vortimers Death, but their
uncertain Friends; and the Saxons (who were very strong and potent, and who
managed there Victories with great Cruelties, and in whose Commerce their was
no Faithfulness) were always intent upon the Destruction of all their
Neighbors.

Thus by the Prudence of the Ancienter, the Tumult of the Common People was
appeased, but the King continuing to reign, though with the Hatred and Contempt
of all, was at length slain And violent Death.
by a Nobleman of the Aebudae, for vitiating his Daughter by force, in the
Fifteenth year of his Reign. This is the common Report concerning his Death;
but I rather incline to the Opinion of Johannes Fordonus, who says, in his
Scotochronicon, that he reigned 22 years, and at last died of a wasting
Disease. In his Reign, Aurelius Ambrosius came into This Britain, out of the
Lesser beyond Sea; he was the Son of Constantine, who held the Kingdom some
years before; but, he being Treacherously Slain, and his Brother, who reigned
after his Father, being also slain by Vortigern, by like Treachery, the Two
other remaining Sons of Constantine were conveyed by their Fathers Friends into
Gallick Bretagne. I think, this Original of Aurelius Ambrosius is truer, than
That which others deliver, (among whom is Bid) for they say, that he was the
last of the Roman stock, who reigned in Britanny: These two Brothers, when
Vortimer was slain by the fraud of his Stepmother; and Vortigern had made
himself King without Authority or Power, being now grown up and fit to Govern,
returned, with the great Favor and Expectation of all men, into the Island, to
recover their Fathers Kingdom; and withal, they brought no inconsiderable
number of Britains out of Gaul along with them. After their Arrival, before
they would alarm the strangers, they subdued Vortigern in Wales, and then sent
Messengers to the Scots and Picts, desiring their Alliance and craving their
Conjunction in Arms against the Saxons, the most bitter Enemies of the
Christian Name. Their Embassy was kindly received by the Scots; and the League,
before made with Constantine, was again renewed, which from that day remained
almost inviolate, till the Kingdom of Britanny was oppressed by the Angles; and
the Kingdom of the Picts, by the Scots. But the Picts answered the British
Ambassadors, That they had already made a League with the Saxons, and that they
saw no Cause to break it, but they were resolved to run all hazards with them,
for the future, as partakers of their good or bad success. Thus the whole
Island was divided into Two Factions, the Scots and Brittons unite against
Picts and Saxons.
Scots and Brittons waging continual War against the Picts and Saxons.

Congallus I. The Forty Fourth King.
COngallus succeeded Constantine, the Son of Dongardus, Constantine's Brother;
He was inclineable to Arms; but durst not then attempt any thing, in regard the
People were effeminated and weakened by Sloth and Luxury, during the Reign of
his Uncle. And, though Many, in compliance with his Disposition, (as usually
Kings have many such Parasites) did often persuade him to take Arms; yet, he
would never be induced thereunto. First then, he applied himself to correct the
public Manners, neither did he attempt to reduce the Ancient Discipline, till
he had Created new Magistrates, and, by their means, had abridged Suits and
Controversies, and restrained Thefts and Robberies. Peace being settled at home,
he endeavored to reclaim others to a civiller course of Life, first of all by
his own Example; and, if any took no Copy from him, but persisted obstinately
in their Evil Courses, Such he either gently chastized and punished, or else
slighted them as despicable and worthless Persons, and thus he quickly reduced
all things to their former state: Seeing (as I said before) at the beginning of
his Reign, he gave up himself wholly to the study of Peace, the Brittons began
to persuade Aurelius Ambrosius, in Britain.
Aurelius Ambrosius to recover Westmorland from the Scots, which they had
possessed many years. Hereupon several Embassys being sent, to and fro, betwixt
them, the Matter was like to be decided by the Sword, if fear of the Common
Enemy had not put an end to the Dispute; so that the League made by Constantine
was renewed, and no Alteration made in reference to Westmorland. Congallus had
War with the Saxons all the time of his Reign; but it was a slow and
intermittent one, as Parties fortuitously met in driving of their respective
Preys; in which kind of Fighting, the Scots being nimble, light, and most
Horsemen, accounted themselves Superior to their Enemies; but they never came
to a pitched Battle. For Congallus was of opinion, That it was best to commit
as few things, as we could, to the Arbitrament of Fortune, and therefore he
sent Part of his Forces to help Aurelius Ambrosius; and with the rest, he
wearied his Enemy, and never suffered him to rest Night nor Day. Merlin and
Gilda^, When they lived? with a Comparison between Them; the Former^ counte^ an
Impostor; the La^er, a (...) and (...)*
Merlin and Gildas lived in the days of these and the next Kings; They were
both Brittons, and obtained great Fame amongst Posterity, for the Opinion
conceived of them, concerning Prophecies and Divinations. Merlin was a little
the Ancienter of the Two, a Cheat and Impostor, rather than a Prophet. His
Vaticinations are scattered up and down, but they are obscure and contain no
Certainty at all, to encourage any ones hopes before their fulfilling; or, to
satisfy them, when they are; so that, upon neither account, can you affirm them
to be True. And besides, they are so framed, that you may accommodate, or
apply, them to different, or contrary, Events, as you will your self. Yet, though
they are daily furbished up, and also augmented by new Additions, such is the
Folly o^ credulous men, That what they understand not, they are yet bold to
affirm, to be as True as Gospel; and, though they be taken in a notorious I ^e,
yet they will not suffer themselves to be convinced thereof.

Gildas was later than he, a Learned and Good Man, and one, who was had in
great Veneration, both Alive and Dead, for his Excellent Learning, accompanied
with Sanctity of Life. The Gildas his Prophecies, not Genuine.
Prophecies, which go under his Name, are such Ridiculous Sentences, and so
course and ill-framed in Wording, and also in the whole Series of their
Composure, that no Wise Man can esteem them to be His: Yet each Prophet (as you
call them) had a Patron, suitable to his own Disposition. Merlin had Vortigern
for his Patron; and, after him, Vter, to whom he was a Pander for his Lust.
Gildas had Aurelius Ambrosius, a Person no less admirable for the Probity of
his Life, than for his Victories in War; after whose Death, Gildas retired unto
Glastonbury in Sommerset-shire, where he lived Gildas his Death, at Glastonbury
in England.
and died, very devoutly. Our Books of the Life of Aurelius Ambrosius, do make
mention of him: After his Death, Vter, the youngest of Constantines Three Sons,
succeeded him, in the Year of our Lord Five Hundred. And the next year after,
Congallus, King of Scotland, departed this Natural Life, in the Twenty Second
year of his Reign.

Goranus, The Forty Fifth King.
GORANVS, his Brother, Succeeded him; who, after his Example, governed Scotland
with great Piety and Justice, as much as Foreign Wars would suffer him so to
do; for, he not only traveled all over the Kingdom, (as the good Kings of old
were wont to do) to punish Offenders, but also, to prevent the Injuries, which
great Men did offer to the Poor; who, in such Cases, dared not to complain; and
to curb their oppressive Domination over them, he appointed Informers found
dangerous by Experience.
Informers, who were to find out such Miscarriages, write them down, and bring
them to him; a Remedy necessary, perhaps, for those times, but in our days, a
very hazardous one. He was the chief Means and Occasion, that the Picts,
deserting the Saxons, made a joint League with the Scots and Britains. At that
time, Lothus was King of the Picts, a Person, who excelled the Princes of his
time, in all accomplishments, both of Body and Mind. Goranus persuades Lothus
King of the Picts, and Vter King of the Brittons, to join with the Scots, and
break with the Saxons.
Goranus dealt earnestly with him, to break his Alliance with those Barbarous
Nations, alleging, That he ought to remember his own Country, in which they
were all born, and especially their common Religion. That he was much deceived,
if he imagined, that the Peace betwixt him and the Saxons would be faithfully
kept, when once the Brittons and Scots were overthrown; seeing he had to do
with Men of inhuman Cruelty, and insatiable Avarice; That they had given
sufficient proofs, how little they esteemed Leagues, or any other thing, when
they wickedly slew the Nobility of the Brittons, who had so well deserved of
them, upon Pretense of calling them out to a Conference. That the Son in Law
was saved alive by the Father in Law, not for any releif of his Calamity, but
for upbraiding of the Enemy; he added, That the Sacredness of Leagues, which,
amongst other Nations, are accounted the firmest bonds of Union, was, amongst
them, as a Snare or Bait, to catch the simple and unwary, in. To what purpose
was it to run so many hazards, to free themselves from the Tyranny of the
Romans, if they must spontaneously give themselves up to the much harder and
ba^er Servitude of the Saxons. This were not to make a change of their
Condition, but of their Masters, only: Yea, By the joint Confederacy of those
three Kings, the Saxons are worked.
it was to prefer a Truculent and Barbarous One, before One that was mild and
gentle. What a Foolish, and Wild a thing was it, to take away Lands from the
Scots and Brittons, and to deliver them to the Germans? And so to despoil
those, who were but lately their Friends, and endeared to them by many ancient
Courtesies and Respects, that they might enrich Pirates, the common Enemies of
Mankind, even to their own Destruction. That it ought to be esteemed the most
grievous thing of all, by one, who was a true Christian, to consent to that
League, whereby Christian Religion must be extinguished; profane Rites renewed;
and wicked Tyrants, Enemies of Piety and Humanity, armed with Power against God
and his Law.

Lothus knew all this to be true, which he had spoken, and therefore he
committed the whole affair to Goranus his Management; he easily persuades Vter,
not only to make an Alliance, but to contract an Affinity too, with the Picts,
giving him Anna, who was either his Sister, or else his Daughter, begotten in
lawful Wedlock, to Wife: I am rather of their Opinion, who think, she was his
Sister, as judging, that the Mistake arose from hence, That Vter had another
Natural Daughter, called Anna, by a Concubine. After this League between these
Three Kings, many Victories were obtained over the Saxons, so that the Name of
Vter began to be great and formidable all over Britain. After all the
Commanders of the Saxons were slain, and the Power of those that remained,
broken; and so things made almost hopeless and desperate among them. The Story
of Vter, and of Arthur, his Son, Kings of the Brittons.
Vter might have been accounted one of the greatest Kings of his Age, unless,
by one foul and impious Fact, he had blurred all his other great Virtues: There
was one Gorlois, a Noble Britton, of great Valor and Power, when Vter as yet
was but a private Man, he fell mightily in Love with his Wife, named Igerne, a
very beautiful Woman; but her Chastity being a long time a Guard against his
Lust, at last her Continency was conquered by Merlin, an audaciously wicked
Man; and, in this Adulterous course, he begat a Son on her, Named Arthur. Vter,
his own Lawful Wife being Dead; being now freed from Nuptial Bonds, and made
King; and so (as he thought) free from Law too, not being able to bear the
absence of Igerne, out of Love to her, attempted a very Temerarious Project: He
framed an Accusation against Gorlois, besieged his Castle; took it, slew him,
Married Igerne, and owned Arthur for his own Son, Educating him Nobly, in hopes
of the Kingdom. And seeing the Infamy reflecting on him, by reason of his Wife,
could not be concealed, that he might somewhat extenuate it, they broached a
Tale, not much unlike That, which had been often Acted in Theaters, about
Jupiter and Al^mena, viz. That Vter, by the Art of Merlin, was changed into the
shape of Gorlois, and so had his first Nights Lodging with Igerne; and indeed,
this Merlin was a Man of that Kidney, that he had rather be famous for a Wicked
Deed, than none at all. Arthur, thus begot by a stolen Copulation, as soon as he
grew up, appeared so amiable, in the Lineaments of his Body, and in the
Inclinations of his Mind, that the Eyes of his Parents, and of all his Subjects
too, were fixed upon him, and he gave many Omens of his future Greatness, that,
after his Fathers Death, all designed him to be their King. And his Father was
so much pleased with this Humor of the People, that he cherished it by all the
Ars he could; so that now it was the common Opinion, That none but Arthur
should be Heir to the Crown. Vter died, when he had Reigned 17 Years, and
presently Arthur was set up in his stead; though Lothus, King of the Picts, did
much oppose it, grievously complaining, that his Children (for he had Two,
begotten on Anna, Arthur's Aunt, who were now of years) were deprived of their
Kingdom; and that a Bastard, begotten in Adultery, was preferred before them.
On the other side, all the Brittons stood for Arthur, and denied, that he was
to be counted Spurious, because Vter Married his Mother at last; though it were
after his Birth; and by that Marriage had treated him as his Legitimate Son,
and had always accounted him, so to be: But although they pretended this color
of Right, yet that, which stood Arthur in most stead, was, his great Ingenuity,
and those Specimens of his Virtue, which he often showed; yea, there was a
tacit Impression (as it were) on the Minds of all Men, presaging his future
Greatness. So that all ran in thick and threefold (as we say) to his Party, in
so much that Lothus, being born down not only by that Pretense of Right,
(which, after that time, was always observed in Britanny) but by the Affections
of the People running another way, desisted from his Enterprise in demanding
the Kingdom; which he did so much the rather do, because he was loath to trust
his Children, for whom That Kingdom was desired, to the Brittons, who had
showed themselves so averse to Them. Besides, the Entreaties of his Friends did
prevail with him, who all alleged, That no Kingdom ought to be so dear to him,
as that, for the sake thereof, he should join in Affinity with Infidels, (to
the overthrow of the Christian* Religion) who would no more Inviolably keep
their League and Alliance with him, than they had done before with the
Brittons. Moreover, the Liberal and Promising Disposition of Arthur, and the
Greatness of his Mind, even above his Age, did much affect him. Insomuch that
the League made by former Kings, betwixt the Scots, Picts, and Brittons, was
again renewed, and thereupon so great a Familiarity ensued, that Lothus
promised to send Galvinus, the youngest of his Two Sons, unto the British
Court, as soon as he was old enough to endure Travel. Arthur entered upon the
Regal Government before he was full Eighteen Years of Age. But as his Courage
was above his Age, so Success was not wanting to his Daring Spirit; for,
whereas his Father had divided the Kingdom by certain Boundaries, with the
Saxons, and had made Peace with them on Conditions: The fair Opportunity
offered them, by reason of the youthful Age of the King, more prevailed with
them, to break the Peace, than the Sanctity of the League, to observe it.
Arthur, that he might quench the Fire in the beginning, gathered an Army
together sooner than any Man could imagine, and, being assisted with
Auxiliaries from the Scots and Picts, he overthrew the Enemy in Two great
Battles, compelling them to pay Tribute, and to receive Laws from him. With the
same eagerness and speed, he took Arthur takes London and York from the Saxons.
London, the Metropolis of the Saxons Kingdom; and, having settled things there,
he marched his Army directly toward York. But the report of Auxiliary Forces
coming out of Germany, and the approach of Winter, compelled him to raise his
Siege from thence. But the next Summer after, as soon as ever he came before
York, he had it immediately surrendered to him; his unexpected Success, the Year
before, had struck such a Terror into the Minds of Men. He took up his
Winter Quarters there, whither there resorted to him the prime Persons of the
Neighborhood, and of his Subjects, where they spent the later end of December,
in Mirth, Jollity, Drinking, and the Vices which proceed therefrom; so that the
Representations of the old Heathenish Feasts, dedicated to Saturn, were here
again revived; but the Number of the Days they lasted were doubled; and amongst
the Wealthier sort, trebled; during which time, they count it almost a Sin to
treat of any serious Matter. Gifts are sent mutually from, and to, one another*
Frequent Invitations and Feastings pass between Friends; and Domestic
Offenders are not punished. Our Countrymen call this Feast The Licentious,
rather than Religious, Observation of the Day of Christ's (supposed) Nativity,
called Iuletide.
Iuletide, substituting the Name of Julius Caesar for that of Saturn. The
Vulgar are yet persuaded, that the Nativity of Christ is then celebrated, but
mistakingly; for it is plain, that they imitate the Lasciviousness of the
Bacchanalia, rather than the Memory of Christ, then, as they say, born.

In the mean time, the Saxons were reported to have pitched their Tents by the
River Humber; and, Whether it were so or no, Arthur marched toward them. But
in regard the Brittons were enfeebled by Pleasures, by that means they were
less fit for Military Services; in so much that they did not seem the same Men,
who had overthrown the Saxons in so many Battles heretofore; for, by their
Luxurious Idleness, they had added so much to their Rashness, as they had lost
of their ancient Severity of Discipline. Hereupon Advice was given by the wiser
sort, to send for Aid from the Scots and Picts. Whereupon Ambassadors were
sent, and Aid easily obtained; so that those, whom Ambition had almost
disjoined, yet the mutual Care of Religion, and Emulation too, did so piece
together, That Forces were sent from either King, sooner than could well have
been imagined. Lothus also, that he might give a Public Testimony of his
Reconcilement, brought his Sons Modredus and Galvinus with him into the Camp;
Galvinus he gave to Arthur, as his Companion, whom he received with so great
Courtesy; that, from that Day forward, they lived and died together. The Army
of the Three Kings being thus ready, and their Camps joined, it was unanimously
agreed between them, That as the Danger was common to them all, and the Cause
thereof was also the same, so they would drive out the Saxons, and restore the
Christian Rites and Religion, which were profaned by them. The Armies drawing
near the one to the other, Occa, Son of a former Occa, who was then General of
the Saxons, made haste to join Battle. In the Confederate Army, the Two Wings
were allotted to the Scots and Picts; the main Battle to Arthur. The Scots, at
the first onset, wounded Childerick, Commander of that Wing of the Enemy, which
fought against them, he falling, The Scots, Picts, and Brittons, overthrow the
Saxons.
by reason of his Wounds, so terrified the rest, that the whole Wing was
broken. In the other Wing, Colgernus, the Saxon, after great Complaints made of
the Perfidiousness of the Picts, made an assault upon Lothus, with great
Violence, who was easily known by his Habit and his Arms, he dismounted him;
but he himself, being environed in the midst of his Enemies, was run through by
Two Picts, with Spears on both sides of his Body. The main Battle, where there
was the sharpest Fight, having lost both Wings, did at length give Ground: Occa
being wounded, was carried to the Seaside, with as many as could get on
Shipboard with him, and Transported into Germany; of the rest of the Saxons,
Those, who were most obstinate in their Error, were put to Death: The rest,
pretending to turn to the Christian Religion, were saved.

There were great Forces of the Saxons yet remaining in the Eastern part of
England, and in Kent. The Summer after, Arthur marched against them, having
10000 Scots and Picts for his Assistance; Congallus, the Son of Eugenius,
commanded the Scots; and Modredus, the Son of Lothus, the Picts, both young Men
of great Hope, and who had often given good Testimonies of their Valor and
Conduct. This Army of Three Kings, being about Five Mile from the Enemy, and
their Camps being distant one from another; The Saxons, being informed by their
Spies, that the Picts (who were farthest distant from the other Forces) were
very careless and secure, they made a sudden and unexpected Assault on them,
in the Night. Modredus made a gallant Resistance for a time; at last, when
things were almost desperate on his side, he mounted on an Horse with Gallanus,
his Father-in-Law, and so fled to King Arthur. Arthur was nothing dismayed at
the loss of the Picts, but spent that Day in settling things, which were
discomposed; after that, his Army being commanded to march in the Third Watch,
he came upon the Enemy, with a Treble Army; and was at the Saxons Camp, before
they knew what the Matter was; The And, at last, drive them out of a great part
of Britain.
Saxons, being dismayed, ran up and down, having no time to take counsel, or to
arm themselves; thus their Camp being entered, they were slain by the Brittons;
and especially, the angry Picts were cruel to all without distinction.

Some Writers of English Antiquities, say, That Arthur fought Twelve pitched
Battles with the Saxons: But because they give us only the Names of the Places,
where they were fought, and nothing else, I shall mention them no otherwise. To
speak briefly of his Famous Actions, This is manifest, That he wholly subdued
the Forces of the Saxons, and restored Peace to Britain; And when he went over
to settle Things in Lesser Britain in France, he Trusted the Kingdom to
Modredus, his Kinsman* who was to manage the Government, as King, till his
Return. I have no certainty of the Exploits he performed in Gaul; As to what
Geofry of Monmouth attributes to him there, it has no shadow, much less
likelihood, of Truth in it; so that I pass them by, as impudently forged; and,
as causelessly believed. But to return to the Matter.

Whilst Arthur was absent, and intent on settling the Gallick Affairs; there
were sown the Seeds of a War, most pernicious to Britain. There was a certain
Man in Arthurs Retinue, named Constantine, the Son of Cadoris; who, for the
excellent Endowments both of his Body and Mind, was highly in all Men's Favor.
He did secretly aim at the Kingdom, and to make the People his Own: Whereupon
the Nobles, at a convenient time, when the King was free from business, cast in
Words concerning his Successor* beseeching him, to add this also to the other
innumerable Blessings he had procured for his Country; that, if he died
Childless, he would not leave Britain destitute of a King, especially, when so
great Wars were like to be waged against them. Hereupon, when some named
Competitorship between Modredus and Constantine, for the Kingdom, after (...)
Death.
Modredus as nearest of Kin, and already accustomed to the Government, both in
Peace and War; and One too, who had given good Proof of himself in his
Viceroy-Ship; who, also, was likely to make no small Accession to the British
Affairs. These things being spoken, the Multitude, who favored Constantine,
cried out, That they would not have a Stranger to be their King; and that
Britain was not so devoid of Men, but that it would afford a King within its
own Territories: They added also, That it was a Foolish thing, to seek for that
abroad, which they might have at home. Arthur knew before the Love of the
People, to Constantine; and therefore, though being a Man otherwise Ambitious,
yet he easily took part with the People, and, from that day, showed him openly,
and cherished in him, the hopes of the Kingdom. Modredus his Friends took this
ill, and looked upon it as a great wrong to him; they alleged, That by the
League made by Arthur, with Lothus, it was expressly cautioned, That none
should be preferred to the Succession of the Kingdom before the Sons of Lothus:
To which the contrary Party answered, that That League was extorted by the
necessity of the Times, against the Common good of the whole Nation, and that
they were not obliged to keep it, now Lothus, with whom it was made, was Dead.
And that therefore the Picts would do well, to be contented with their own
Bounds, and not to invade other Men's. That the Kingdom of Britain, by Gods
Blessing, was now in that State, that it could not only defend it self against
New Injuries, but also revenge the Old.

These things being brought to Modredus his Ear, did quite alienate his Mind
from Arthur, and inclined him to set up for himself, by maintaining his own
Dignity; only he a little suspended the War, till he had tried the Minds of the
Scots; when they were brought over to his Party, an Army was listed consisting
of many Picts, Scots, and Brittons, being induced to side with ^
Modredus, either for the Equity of his Cause, the Love of his Person, or their
private Hatred of Arthur. Yea, Vannora, the Wife of Arthur, was thought not to
be ignorant of these new Cabals, as having been too familiar with Modredus.
Both Armies pitched their Tents by Humber; and being ready to Fight, Proposals
were made by the Bishops, on both sides, in order to a Peace, but in vain; for
Constantine's Friends obstructed all, affirming, That the Felicity of Arthurs
Fortune, would bear down all Opposition. Hereupon a most feirce Fight began on
both sides, but Two things did especially advantage Modredus and his
Confederates; One was, a Marsh in the midst between them, which the Brittons
could not easily pass; and Another, in the heat of the Fight, there was one
suborned, to spread a Report among the Brittons, that Arthur was slain, and
therefore, all being lost, every one should shift for himself; at which Bruit,
they all fled, yet there was great Slaughter on both sides; neither was the
Victory joyous to either Party; for on the one side, Modredus was slain; and on
the other, his Brother Galvinus; Arthur himself mortally Wounded, and a great
Prey taken.

I know well, What Fabulous matters are reported, by many, concerning the Life
and Death of Arthur's Character.
Arthur, but they are not fit to be related, lest they cause a Mist to be cast
over his other famous Actions; for, when Men confidently affirm lies, they
cause the Truth it self, many times, to be questioned. This is certain, he was
a great Man, and very Valorous, bearing an entire Love to his Country, in
freeing them from Servitude; in restoring the true Worship of God; and in
reforming it, when it was corrupted: I have spoken these things concerning his
Lineage, Life and Death, more prolixly, than the Nature of my Design required;
for I never meant to Record all the Exploits of the Brittons, but to free and
preserve the Affairs of our own Nation, from the Oblivion of Time, and the
Fabulous Tales of some lewd and ill-disposed Writers. I have insisted longer on
the Exploits of Arthur, partly because some do curtail them through Envy, and
others do heighten them by their Verbosities. He died in the year of our Lord
Five Hundred and Fifty Two, after he had Reigned 24 Years.

But to return to the Affairs of Scotland; Goranus the King, now grown old,
departed this Life, after he had governed Scotland Thirty four years; it is
thought he was Treacherously slain by his Subjects: There was one The People,
by the Instigation of Donald of Athol, Murder Toncetus; and after that, the
King Goranus himself.
Toncetus, Chief Justice in Criminal Matters, a Man no less Cruel than
Covetous; he, having played many foul Pranks against the richer sort, thought,
he might easily get Pardon of all from the King, because, by this means he had
augmented his Revenue. The People could not easily obtain admittance to the
King, now enfeebled by Age and Diseases, to make their Complaints; and, if they
had Access, they judged their Allegations would not have been believed against
such a principal Officer, and high Favorite. So that they set upon Toncetus,
and slew him. But after the heat of their Anger was over, when they began to
think with themselves, how foul a Fact they had committed, and that there was
no Pardon to be expected by them, they turned their Wrath and Fury upon the
King himself, and, by the Instigation of Donald of Athol, they entered into his
Palace and slew Him also.

Eugenius III. The Forty Sixth King.
EVgenius, the Son of Congallus, succeeded him; when he was advised by some of
the Nobility, to revenge the Death of his Uncle Goranus, he entertained the
motion so coldly, that he himself was not without suspicion in the Case: And
the Suspicion was increased, because he took Donald of Athol, into his Grace
and Favor. So that the Wife of Goranus, for fear, fled, with her small
Children into Ireland. But Eugenius, to purge his Life and Manners from so foul
an Imputation, so managed the Kingdom, that none of the former Kings could be
justly preferred before him; he assisted Modred, and also Arthur, against the
Saxons. He sent several Captains to make daily Incursions into the English
Borders; but he never fought with them in a pitched Battle. He died in the year
of Christ Five Hundred and Fifty Eight, having Reigned Twenty Three Years.

Congallus II. The Forty Seventh King.
HIS Brother, Congallus, was set up in his Room, who governed the Kingdom Ten
years, in great Peace, a Man for his excellent Virtues, worthy of perpetual
Memory; for, besides his Equity in matter of Law, and the aversion of his Mind
from all Covetousness, he vyed with the very Monks themselves, in point of
Sobriety of Life, though they, at that time, used a most severe Discipline. He
enriched Priests with Lands and other Revenues, more out of a Pious Intention,
than with any good Success. He restrained the Soldiers, who were declining to
Effeminateness and Luxury, (and abused the blessing of Peace,) rather by the A
Prince's example has a greater influence on his Subject^, than his Laws.
Examples and Authority of his Life, than by the severity of Laws. He called
home the Sons of Goranus, who, for fear of Eugenius, had fled into Ireland; but
before their Return, he died, in the Year Five Hundred and Sixty Eight. He
never fought Battle himself, but only assisted the Brittons with Auxiliary
Forces against the Saxons, with Whom they often fought with various Success.

Kinnatellus, The Forty Eighth King.
WHen he was Dead, and his Brother Kinnatellus designed King; Aidanus, the Son
of Goranus, came into Scotland, by the persuasions of Columba; who, Two years
before, had come out of Ireland. By him he was brought to the King; who, beyond
his own and the Expectation of all other Men, received him Courteously, and
wished him to be of good cheer, for he should shortly be King. For Kinnatellus,
being worn out by Age and Sickness, and not able to Administer the Government
himself, made Aidanus his Deputy, and so died, having Reigned Fourteen, (some
say) Fifteen Months. Some Writers leave him out, and do place Aidanus
immediately after Congallus; but there are More, who insert Kinnatellus betwixt
Them.

Aidanus, The Forty Ninth King.
AIdanus being Nominated King by Kinnatellus, and confirmed by the People,
received the Royal Habiliments from Columbas's great Authority.
Columba. For the Authority of that Man was so great, in those days, that
neither Prince, nor People, would undertake any thing without his Advice. And,
at that time, after he had, in a long Speech, persuaded the King to rule
Equitably over the People, and the People to be Loyal to their King, he
earnestly pressed them Both, to persist in the pure Worship of God, for then
Both of them would prosper; but if they forsook it, they must expect
Destruction, as the reward of their Offenses. Having performed this Service, he
returned into his own Country.

The first Expedition of Aidanus, was, against the Robbers, who infested
Galway, coming thither, he put their Commanders to Death, and Fear restrained
the rest; but a greater Storm encountered him at at his Return. For, after he
had had three Conventions of the Estates in Galway, Abria or Loch-abyr, and
Caithness, and thought all things were settled there; there was a Tumult arose
amongst them in Hunting, that much Blood was spilt, and the Kings Officers, who
came to punish the Offenders, were repulsed and beaten: The Authors, for fear
of Punishment, fled into Lothian, to Brudeus King of the Picts; when
Ambassadors were sent to him, to deliver them up according to the League
betwixt them, they were refused; whereupon a feirce War commenced betwixt War
betwixt Scots and Picts.
the Scots and Picts, but it was quickly ended by the means of Columba, who
was, according to his Merit, highly esteemed by both Nations.

In the mean time, England was again divided into Seven Kingdoms; and the
Brittons were driven into the Peninsula of Wales; but the Saxons, not contented
with such large Dominions, stirred up a new War betwixt the Scots and Picts.
The Author and Kindler thereof was Ethelfrid, King of Northumberland, a
Covetous Man, and who was weary of Peace, out of the desire he had to enlarge
his Dominions. He persuaded the Picts, but with difficulty, Brudeus hardly
consenting thereto, That they should drive away Preys out of the Scots
Territories, and so give an occasion to a War. Aidanus understanding the
Treachery of the Saxons, that he might also strengthen himself with Foreign
Aid, renewed the ancient League with Malgo, the Britton. He sent his Son
Grifinus, and his Sisters Son Brendinus, King of Eubonia, now called Man, a
Military Man, with Forces; who, joining with the Brittons, entered
Northumberland, and after Three days march, came to the Enemy, but the English
refused to engage them, because they expected new Succors, which were reported
to be near at hand; for indeed Ceulinus, King of the East Saxons, a very
Warlike Man, was coming to them with great Forces; the Scots and Brittons fell
upon him in his March, and wholly destroyed the Front of his Army, which was a
long way before the rest, together with his Son Cutha, but they were afraid to
engage the rest, lest they should be circumvented by Ethelfrid, who was not far
distant. The A Fight between the Saxons, Scots, and Brittons, wherein the
Britt^ns are overthrown.
two Kings of the Saxons, being joined together, again renewed the Fight, with
much Slaughter on both sides, wherein the Scots and Brittons were put to
flight. There were slain of the Scots Nobles, Grifinus and Brendinus; in the
opposite Army, Ethelfrid lost one of his Eyes, and Brudeus was carried wounded
out of the Field, to the great Astonishment of his Party.

The next Summer after, Ethelfrid, uniting his Forces with the Picts, marched
into Gallway, supposing, he should find all things there in great
Consternation, by reason of their ill Success the last Year. But Aidanus,
coming with his Forces thither sooner than his Enemies thought, set upon the
straggling Plunderers, and drove them, with great trepidation, to their Camp.
Thus having chastized their Temerity, supposing now, they would be more quiet,
the Night after he passed by their Camp, and joined himself with the Brittons.
Both Armies, having thus united their forces, pitched their Tents in a narrow
Valley of Annandale; and their Enemies, as now Cock-sure of their Destruction,
beset the passages entering into it. But they, having fortified their Camp, as
if they intended there to abide, in the Night, when the Tide was out, marched
through the Ford, (which was known to them) amidst the quavering Sands, into
Cumberland, and afterward into Northumberland, making great Havoc,
whithersoever they came. The Enemy followed them at their Heels, and when they
came in fight of one another, both Armies prepare themselves for the Fight. The
Scots and Britains added Four Commanders to those they had before, who were
noble Persons, of great experience in Warlike affairs, that so, the rash-Headed
Common Soldiers might be commanded by a greater Number of Captains; of the
Brittons there were added, Constantine and Mencrinus; of the Scots, Calenus and
Murdacus: By their Conduct and Encouragement, the Soldiers fell upon the Enemy,
with so great Violence, The Scots and Britons overthrow the Saxons.
that he was presently broken and put to flight. There goes a Report, Columb's
wonderful Narration of a Victory, at a very great distance from him.
that Columb, being then in the Isle Icolumbkil, told his Companions of this
Victory, the very same hour in which it was obtained. Of the Saxon Nobles there
were slain, in this fight, Cialinus and Vitellius, both great Warriors, and
highly descended; about Eleven years after this Victory, the Saxons and Picts
infested the adjacent Country; whereupon, a Day was appointed, wherein the
Brittons and Scots should meet, and, with their united Forces, set upon the
Saxons. Aidanus, though very old, came to the place at the appointed time, and
staid for the Brittons, but in vain, for they came not; yet he drove Preys out
of his Enemies Country* Ethelfrid routs the Scots, being shattered before.
Ethelfrid, having now gotten a fair Opportunity to act something in, set upon
the dispersed Scots, and made a great slaughter amongst them. Aidanus, having
lost many of his Men, fled for his Life; yet the Victory was not unbloody to
the Saxons, for they lost Theobald, Ethelfrid's Brother; and some of those
Squadrons, that followed him were almost wholly cut off: Aidanus, having
received this overthrow, and being also informed of the death of Columb's Death.
Columb, that Holy Man, whom he so highly honored, foreseeing to what Cruelty
the Remainder of the Christians were likely to be exposed, being worn out with
Age and Grief, did not long survive; he Reigned 34 years, and died in the Year
of our Lord, 604. In his Reign it was, That a certain Monk, Named Austin, the
Monk, comes into Britain, rather to promote the Ceremonies, and Domination, of
Pope Gregory, than to Preach the true Doctrine of the Gospel.
Austin, came into Britain, being sent by Gregory Pope of Rome, who, by his
Ambition, in Preaching a New Religion, mightily disturbed the Old, for he did
not so much Preach the Christian Religion, as the Ceremonies of the Roman
Church. Yea, the Brittons, before his coming, were Converted to, and taught the
Principles of, the Christian Religion, by the Disciples of John the Evangelist,
and were instituted in the same by the Monks, who were Learned and Pious, in
that Age. As for Austin, He labored to reduce all things to the Dominion of
the Bishop of Rome, only; and gave himself out to be the only Archbishop of
the Isle of Britain; and, withal, introduced a Dispute, neither Necessary nor
Advantageous, concerning the Day, on which A dispute raised about the
Observation of Easter Day.
Easter was to be kept; and did, by this means, mightily trouble the Churches;
Yea, he so loaded the Christian Discipline, which was then inclining toward
Superstition, with such new Ceremonies and feigned Miracles, that he scarce
left any Mark or Footstep of true Piety behind him.

Kennethus I. The Fiftieth King.
AFTER Aidanus, Kennethus was Elected King, he did nothing Memorable in his
time: He died the 4th, (or, as some say) the 12th Month, after he began to
Reign.

Eugenius, IIII. The Fifty First King.
AFter him, Eugenius, the Son of Aidanus, was made King. In the year of our
Lord 605. He was brought up (as the Black Book of Pasley has it) piously and
carefully, under Columba, being very well educated in human Learning; yet, in
This, he swerved from the Institution of his Master, that he was more addicted
to War than Peace: For he exercised the Saxons and Picts, with daily
Incursions. His Government was very severe and rough; Those, who were proud and
contumacious, sooner felt the point of his Sword, than they received from him
any Conditions of Peace; but to those who asked Pardon for their offenses, and
voluntarily surrendered themselves, he was very merciful and easy to forgive,
and not at all insolent in his Victories. This is what That Book reports,
concerning Eugenius. But Boethius says, on the contrary, That he lived in great
Peace, which happened not so much from his Foreign Leagues, as from the
Discords of his Enemies, who maintained Civil Wars amongst themselves. For the
English, inhabiting the South Parts, making Profession of Christianity, whilst
they endeavored to revenge the injuries offered to them, deprived Ethelfrid,
the Potent King of Northumberland, both of his Life and Kingdom, together.
Edvinus succeeded him, and the kindred of Ethelfrid fled into Scotland, amongst
whom were Seven of his Sons and one Daughter. This was done in the Tenth year
of the Reign of Eugenius. He Eugenius harbors the fugitive Saxons.
entertained these Saxons, flying to him for Refuge, (though he knew them to be
Enemies both to him and the whole Christian Name) with great Courtesy and
Humanity, as long as he lived; giving them Royal Reception, and causing them to
be carefully educated in the Christian Religion. He died in the Sixteenth Year
of his Reign, and was much Lamented by all Men.

Ferchardus, I. The Fifty Second King.
HIS Son, Ferchardus, was substituted in his room, in the Year of Christ, 522.
and in the 13th year of Heraclius, the Emperor. He, being a Cunning and
Politic Man, endeavored to change the Ferchard endeavors to turn limited
Monarchy into Tyranny, for which he is imprisoned, and there lays violent hands
on himself.
Legitimate Government of the Land into Tyranny; in order whereto, he nourished
Factions amongst the Nobility; supposing, by that means, to effect, what
wickedly he designed, with Impunity. But the Nobles, understanding his
Malicious aim, secretly made up the Breach amongst themselves; and, calling an
Assembly of the Estates, Summoned him to appear, which he refusing to do, they
Stormed the Castle wherein he was, and so drew him, per force, to Judgment.
Many and grievous Crimes were objected against him, and particularly the
Pelagian Heresy, the Contempt of Baptism and other Sacred Rites. When he was
not able to purge himself from any One of them, he was committed to Prison*
where, That he might not live to be a public Spectacle of disgrace, he put an
End to his own Life, in the 14th Year of his Reign.

Donaldus, IIII. The Fifty Third King.
HIS Brother Donaldus, or Donevaldus, mounted the Throne in his stead; who,
calling to mind the Elogy of his Father, and the Miserable end of his Brother,
made it his Business to maintain the true Worship of God; and that not only at
home, but he sought, by all Lawful means, to propagate it abroad. For, when
Edwin was dead, he furnished the Kindred and Children of Ethelfrid, who had
remained Exiles in Scotland, for many Years, with Accommodations to return
home; he bestowed upon them Gifts, he sent Forces to accompany them, and gave
them free Liberty to pass and repass, as occasion required. This Edwin, before
spoken of, was slain by Kedvalla, as Bede calls him, King of the Brittons, and
by Penda King of the Mercians; One of which was his Enemy, out of ancient
hatred to the Nation; The Other, for his new embracing of Christianity; but
Both, for the Emulation of his power. The Victory is reported to have been most
Cruel; for, whilst Penda endeavored to root out the Christians; and Kedvalla,
the Saxons; their Fury was so great, that it spared neither Age nor Sex. After
the death of Edwin, Northumberland divided into two Kingdoms, i. e. the Deiri,
Inhabiting on this side Tine; and the B^rnici, Inhabiting beyond Tine to Tweed.
Northumberland was divided into Two Kingdoms. Osticus, Cousin-German to Edwin,
was made King of the Deiri; and Eanfrid, as Bede calls him, but our Writers
name him A^defridus, Ethelfrides Eldest Son, King of the Bernici; They
renounced the Christian Religion, in which they had been diligently educated,
one by the Scottish Monks; the other, by Paulinus, the Bishop, and revolted to
their Ancient Superstition, but were both, shortly after, Apostasy justly
punished.
outed out of their Kingdoms, and their Lives too, by Penda. Oswald, the Son of
Ethelfrid, succeeded them Both, a studious Promoter of the Christian Religion.
He sent Ambassadors into Scotland to Donaldus, to desire him to send him some
Christian Doctors; which he did, Men of great Sanctity and Learning, and who
were accordingly received by him with great curtesy, entertained magnificently,
and rewarded amply. Neither did he think it below his King Donald repeats and
interprets Pious Sermons to his Subjects, himself.
Kingly Dignity, to interpret the Sentences of their Sermons, Preached to the
People, (who did not so well understand the Scottish Language) whom he gathered
together for that purpose; all which is clearly expressed by Bid. Donaldus
died in the 14th year of his Reign, leaving the precious Memory of his Virtues,
behind him.

Ferchardus II. The LIVE. King.
FERCHARDVS, his Brother Ferchardus's Son, succeeded him, a most slagitious
Person, unsatiable in his desires of Wine, and Wealth; of inhuman Cruelty
toward Men, and of as great Impiety toward God. When his Cruelty and Rapine
had raged against those without, he converted his Fury upon his Domestics,
killing his Wife, and Vitiating his Daughter; Ferchard's wicked Life, and
Repentance, at his death.
for which heinous Wickedness, he was Excommunicated out of the Society of
Christians. And as the Nobles were about to Assemble, by way of Consultation,
about his Punishment; Coleman, that Holy Bishop, stopped them, for he openly
told him, That Divine Vengeance should speedily overtake him; and the Event
verified his Prediction, for, a few days after, as he was a Hunting, he was
hurt by a Wolf, and fell into a Fever, and not being able to abstain from his
former Intemperance, at last his Body was eaten up by the Lousy Disease; and
then he cried out, That he was deservedly punished, because he had not hearkened
to the wholesome Advice of Coleman. Thus at last, seeing his Error; and Coleman
comforting him with hopes of Pardon, in case he truly repented: He caused
himself to be carried abroad in a Litter, meanly Apparrel'd, and there he made
a public Confession of his Wickedness, and so dyed, in the Year of our
^edmption 668. Scotland groaned under this Monster 18 Years.

Maldvinus, The LV King.
MAldvinus, the Son of Donald, succeeded him; who, that he might strengthen
those Parts of the Kingdom, which were weakened by the Tyranny of the former
King, made Peace with all his Neighbors. Having quieted things without, he was
disturbed by a Sedition at home, arising between the Argyle and Lennox Men.
Maldvinus drew forth against the Authors of this Tumult, that so he might
punish them, without prejudicing the Commonalty. They, to avoid the King's
Wrath, composed their private jars, and fled into the Aebudae Isles. The King
sent for them, to have them punished; and the Islanders, not daring to retain
them, delivered them up. Their punishment kept the rest in their Duties. About
this time it was, That, when the Scottish Monks had spread the Doctrine of
Christ very far over England, and had so instructed the English Youth, that now
they seemed able of themselves to Preach the Gospel plainly, even to their own
Countrymen; together, with their Institution and Learning, they also
entertained, and sucked in, some Envy against their Teachers; so that by reason
of this Prejudice, the Scots Monks unjustly banished out of England.
Scots-Monks were forced to return into their own Country. Which Contumely, as
it cut off the Concord between both Kingdoms, so the Modesty of Those, who had
received the wrong, kept both Nations from open Hostility, only frequent
Incursions were made, and Skirmishes happened in diverse places. There fell out,
at this time, a terrible Plague over all Europe, such as was never Recorded by
any Writer, before; Only the Scots and Picts were free therefrom.

By reason of the frequent Injuries, mutually offered, and Preys driven away on
both sides, Both Nations were like to break forth into an open War, if the
death of Maldvinus had not prevented it. After he had Reigned 20 years, his
Wife, suspecting that he had been naught with an Harlot Maldvinus Strangled by
his Wife, for which Fact she is Burnt ^li^e.
Strangled him, and Four Days after She herself was punished for the Fact, by
being burnt alive.

Eugenius V. The LVI King.
AFter him, Eugenius the 5th Son of King Dongard, undertook the Kingdom.
Egfrid, King of Northumberland, overthrown by the Scots and Picts.
Egfrid, the King of Northumberland (with whom he principally desired to be at
Peace) sought to deceive him by fained Truces; and he again assaulted Egfrid by
the same Art. Thus, when Both made show of Peace in Words, they each secretly
prepare for War; When the Truce was ended, Egfrid, tho his Friends dissuaded
him from it, joined Forces with the Picts, and, entering into Scotland, he
foraged Galway. But he was overthrown by Eugenius, the Picts giving ground in
the Fight, and lost almost all his Army, so that he hardly escaped, wounded,
and with a few Followers, home. The next Year, his Friends then also Dissuading
him, he drew forth his Army against the Picts, who, pretending to run away,
drew him into an Ambush, and cut him off, with all his Men. The Picts, laying
hold of This, so fair an Opportunity, recovered those large Territories, which
had been taken from them in former Wars: And the Brittons, who freed themselves
from the Government of the Angli, or English, together with the Scots, entered
Northumberland, and made such an Havoc there, that it never recovered itself
since. Soon after Eugenius dyed, in the 4th Year of his Reign.

Eugenius VI. The LVII King.
EVGENIVS the VI, the Son of Ferchard, succeeded Eugenius the V; As did Alfrid,
Brother to Egfrid, succeed him in Northumberland: Both Kings were Two Kings,
very great Theologist^.
very Learned, especially in Theology, according to the rate of those times:
And also friendly one to the other, on the account of their common Studies. So
that, the Peace was faithfully maintained betwixt them. Alfrid made use of this
Tranquillity, to settle the bounds of his Kingdom, tho in narrower Limits than
before. But the Scots had neither an Established Peace, nor yet a Declared War,
with the Picts: Excursions were frequently made, with different and
interchangable Successes, tho Cutberectus an English Bishop, and Adamannus, a
Scottish Bishop, did in vain labor to reconcile them: Yet This they effected,
that they never fought a pitched Battle. In the mean time, Eugenius being
inflamed with an inexpiable Hatred against the Perfidiousness of the Picts, was
stopped in the midst of his Career to Revenge, for he dyed, having Reigned 10
Years. In his Reign, it is reported, Blood rained down from Heaven for 7 days*
etc.
That it Reigned Blood all over Britain for 7 days, and that the Milk, Cheese,
and Butter, were also turned into Blood.

Amberkelethus, The LVIII King.
AFter him, Amberkelethus, the Son of Findanus, and Nephew of Eugenius the 5th.
obtained the Kingdom. At the beginning of his Reign, he counterfeited
Temperance, but soon returned to his Natural Disposition; and broke forth into
all manner of Wickedness. Garnard, King of the Picts, laying hold of this
Opportunity, gathered a great Army together, and invaded the Scots.
Amberkelethus could hardly be excited to take Arms, without much Importunity,
but at last he did; as he was going forth in the Night to ease himself, with
Two Servants, he was Amberkelethus slain.
slain with an Arrow, (it was not known, who shot it) when he had not Reigned
full Two Years, some say, That when he pressed upon the Enemy in a thick Wood,
that he was hurt with an Arrow by them, and so dyed 10 days after.

Eugenius VII. The LIX King.
EVGENIVS, the 7 th. Brother of the former King, was Declared King, by the
Suffrage of the Soldiers in the Field, that so the Army might not disband, nor
be without an Head.. He, putting little confidence in an Army, Levied by a
slothful King, lengthened out the War by Truces; and at last concluded it by
Marrying Spondana, Daughter of Garnardus. She, not long after, was Eugenius
like to suffer for the (supposed) Murder of his Queen.
slain in her Bed by Two Athol-men, who had conspired to destroy the King. The
King himself was accused of the Murder, but falsely, and, before he was brought
to Judgment, the Murderers were found out. Whereupon, he was freed. The
Offenders were most exquisitely punished. When Matters were composed abroad,
the King turned himself to the Affairs of Peace, delighting much in Hunting.
But his chief Care was, for Religion. It was his Design and Appointment, That
the Noble He first appoints the Acts of Kings to be Registered in Monasteries.
Acts and Enterprises of Kings should be Registered in Monasteries. He
maintained a continued Peace 17 Years with all his Neighbors, and then dyed at
A Town in the East part of Strachern, near Fife.
Abernethy.

Mordacus, The LX King.
EVGENIVS, a little before his Death, commended Mordacus, the Son of
Amberkelethus to the Nobility, to be his Successor. There was Peace all over
Britain during his Reign, as Bede says about the end of his History. He did
imitate Eugenius, not only in maintaining Peace, but in endowing of
Monasteries, also. He Repaired the Convent of An Abbey not far from Wigton in
Galway.
White-horn, which was demolished. He dyed at the Entrance into the 16th Year
of his Reign.

Etfinus, The LXI King.
IN the Year of our Lord 730, Etfinus, the Son of Eugenius the 7 th, entered
upon the Kingdom. He, being emulous of the Kings before him, kept the Kingdom
in great Peace, during the space of 31 years, that he managed the Government.
When he was old, and could not perform the Kingly Office himself, he appointed
Four Vicegerents to Administer Justice to the People. Whilst These presided
over the Affairs of Scotland, some loose Persons, resuming their former
Luxuriant Extravagancies, by the Magistrates Neglect, or, (as some think)
Fault, put all things into an Hurly Burly. But their wicked Pranks were the
less taken notice of, by reason of the excessive Cruelty and Pride of one
Donald, a great Plunderer.
Donaldus, who, ranging over all Galway, made the Country People pay Tribute to
him; or else he robbed them, and reduced them to great Want.

Eugenius VIII. The LXII King.
A Midst these Tumults, Eugenius the 8 th, the Son of Mordacus, was set up in
the room of Etfinus, deceased; His first Enterprise, was, to suppress Donaldus,
whom he overthrew in many bloody Fights, took him Prisoner, and publicly
Donaldus slain by Bug^nsus.
executed him, to the Joy of all the Spectators. He put Mordacus to death,
Vicegerent of Galway, for Siding with Donaldus; and set a Pecuniary Fine on the
rest of the Vicegerents. He made Satisfaction to the People, who had been
robbed, out of the Offenders Estates. The Bad being terrified for fear of these
Punishments, and a great Calm ensuing, after a most violent Tempest, he
confirmed the Leagues, heretofore made, with the Neighboring Kings. Yet, after
all this, he, who got so much Glory in War, when once Peace was made, gave
himself up to all manner of Vice. And seeing he would not be reclaimed, neither
by the Advices of his Friends, nor of the Priests, all the Nobles conspired to
destroy him, which they did in a Public Convention, in the Eugenius, slain by
his Nobles, for his vicious Life.
3d year of his Reign. The Companions and Associats of his wicked Practices
ended their Lives at the Gallows, all Men rejoicing at their Executions.

Fergusius, III. The LXIII King.
FERGVSIVS the III, the Son of Etfinus, succeeded him, who, under a like
counterfeit pretense of Virtue, being foully vicious, dyed also after the like
violent manner, having Reigned the like Number of years, viz. 3. He was
poisoned by his Wife. Others write, That when his Wife had often upbraided him
with his Contempt of Matrimony, and his Flocks of Harlots, but without any
amendment, that She Strangled him at night, Fergus, for his Adulteries slain by
his Wife, who, to avoid punishment ^ill^ her Self.
as he was sleeping in his Bed. When Enquiry was made into his Death, and many
of his Friends were accused, and yet, though severely tortured, would confess
nothing. The Queen, tho otherwise of a fierce Nature, yet pitying the suffering
of so many Innocents, came forth, and from an high Place, told the Assembly,
That She was the Author of the Murder; and presently, lest She should be made a
living Spectacle of Reproach, She ran her Self through with a Knife; which Fact
of Hers was variously spoken of, and descanted upon, according to the several
Humors and Dispositions of the Men of that time.

Solvathius, The LXIV King.
KING Solvathius, the Son of Eugenius the 8 th, is the next in Order, Who, if
he had not contracted the Gout, by reason of Cold, in the 3d Year of his Reign,
might well be reckoned for his Personal Valor amongst the Best of Kings; yet,
notwithstanding his Disease, he appeased all Tumults, by his Generals, with
great Wisdom and Prudence. First of all One Donald calls himself King of the
Aebudae.
Donaldus Banus, (i. e.) White, being Fearless of the King, by reason of the
Lameness of his Feet, had the boldness, as to seize upon all the Western
Islands, and to call himself King of the Aebudae. Afterward, making a Descent
on the Continent, and carrying away much Prey, he was forced by Cullanus,
General of the Argyle-men, and by Ducalus, Captain of the Athol-men, into a
Wood, out of which there was but one Passage, so that their endeavors to
escape were fruitless, but He and His Donald slain.
were there slain, every Man. One Gilcolumbus, excited by the same Audacity and
Hope, assaulted Galway, oppressed before by his Father, but he also was
overthrown, by the same Generals, and put to death. In the mean time, there was
Peace from the English and Picts, occasioned by their Combustions at home.
Solvathius Reigned 20 Years, and then dyed, being Praised of all Men. In the
year of Christ 787.

Achaius, The LXV King.
ACHAIVS, the Son of Etfinus, succeeded him; he having made Peace with the
Angels and Picts, understanding, that War was threatened from Ireland, composed
the Seditions that were like to break forth at home, not only by his
Pains-taking, but by his Largesses, also. The Cause of the Irish War, was This.
In the former Kings Reign, who was unfit to make any Expedition; The Irish and
the Islanders, out of hope of Prey and Impunity, had made a descent upon
Cantire, the adjoining Peninsule, with great Armies, both at once. But a Feud
arising between the Plunderers, many of the Islanders, and all the Irish, were
slain. To revenge this Slaughter, the Irish Rigged out a great Navy, to Sail
into the Aebudae. Achaius sent Ambassadors to them, to acquaint them, That they
had no just cause for a War, in regard that Thieves, fighting for their Prey,
had slain one another; That the loss was not, that so many were slain, but
rather, that any of them had escaped. They farther alleged, That the King and
his National Councils were so far from offering any injury to the Irish, that
they had put all the Authors of the late Slaughter to death. The Ambassadors,
discoursing many things to this purpose, were so coursly and barbarously
rejected by the Irish, That they set forth their Fleet against the War between
the Scots and Irish.
Albine Scots, even before their departure; when their Fleet was on the Main, a
Tempest arose, and destroyed them all. This Mischance occasioned some
sentiments of Remorse and Pity in the Irish, Which is soon composed.
so that now they humbly fued for that Peace, which before they disdainfully
refused.

But first of all, Achaius the first of the Scots Kings, that enters into a
Friendship with France.
Achaius made Peace between the Scots and Franks, chiefly for this reason,
because not only the Saxons, who inhabited Germany, but even those who had
fixed themselves in Britanny, did infest Gaul with Piratical Invasions. And
besides, Charles the Great, whose desire was to enoble France, not only by
Arms, but Literature, had sent for some Learned Men sent for out of Scotland,
by Char^es the Great, as Johannes Scotus, etc.
Learned Men out of Scotland, to read Greek and Latin, at Paris. For yet there
were many Monks in Scotland, Eminent for Learning and Piety, the ancient
Discipline being then not quite extinguished, amongst whom was Johannes,
Surnamed Scotus, or, which is all one, Albinus, for the Scots in their own
Language call themselves Albini; He was the Schoolmaster of Charles the Great,
and left many Monuments of his Learning, behind him, and in particular, some
Precepts of Rhetoric, which I have seen, with Johannes Albinus inscribed.
There are also some Writings of Clement a Scot, remaining, who was a great
Professor of Learning, at the same time, too in Paris. There were many other
Scottish Monks, who passed over into Gaul, out of their Zeal for God and
Godliness, Who Preach the Doctrine of Christi^nity in Germany.
who preached the Doctrine of Christianity to the People inhabiting about the
Rhene, and that with so great Success, that the People thereupon built
Monasteries in many Places. The Germans owe this to their Memory, that even to
our days, Scots are the Governors over those Monasteries. Though Achaius was
desirous of Peace, yet the Pictish concerns drew him on to a War. For when A
Battle between Athelstan of England, and Hungus the Pict, who was aided by the
Scots.
Athelstan, the Englishman, had wasted the Neighboring Lands of the Picts, A
Battle between Athelstan of England, and Hungus the Pict, who was aided by the
Scots.
Hungus their King obtained the Aid of Ten Thousand Scots, from Achaius, who
before was disgusted with the English. He placed his Son Alpinus, a Commander,
over them, who was born to him by the Sister of Hungus; by the assistance of
those Auxiliaries, he drove a great prey out of Northumberland. Athelstan, a
feirce Warrior, was almost at his Heels, and overtook him not far from
Hadington. The Picts being dismayed at the sudden coming of their Enemies, run
to their Arms, and keep themselves in their Stations, till Night; having set
their Watches for the Night, Hungus being inferior in other things, desired
Aid of God, and gave up himself wholly to Prayer. At last, when his Body was
wearied with Labor, and his Mind oppressed with Care, he seemed to behold
Andrew the Apostle, standing by him in his Sleep, promising him Victory. Hungus
his Visi^n upon his Praye^ to God.
This Vision being declared to the Picts, filled them full of Hope, so that
they prepared themselves with great Alacrity to the Combat, which otherwise
they could not avoid. The next day they came to a pitched Battle. Some add,
That another Prodigy was seen in the Heavens, a cross like the Letter X, which
did so terrify the English, that they could hardly bear the first brunt of the
Picts. Athelstan overthrown and slain.
Athelstan was slain there, who gave Name to the place of Battle, which is yet
called Athelstan Ford. Hungus ascribed the Victory to St. (...) Andrew.
Andrew, to whom, besides other Gifts, he offered the Tithe, of his Royal
Demeas^s: I am of Opinion, that This was the Athelstan, Commander of the Danish
Nation, to whom the English affirm, That Northumberland was granted by Alured.
Achaius died the Thirty Second year of his Reign, and in the Year of Christ
Eight Hundred and Nine.

Congallus III. The Sixty Sixth King.
CONGALLVS, his Cousin German, succeeded him, who Reigned Five years, in Peace
both at home and abroad.

Dongallus, The Sixty Seventh King.
DONGALLVS, the Son of Solvathius, was next King to him. The Soldiers, not able
to endure the Severity of his Government, gathered themselves together to
Alpinus, the Son of Achaius; and because they could not persuade him by fair
means to undertake the Kingdom, they compelled him by force and menaces to be
seemingly on their side. He having gathered together an Army, and pretending to
do, as they would have him, disappointed them and fled to Dongallus; his coming
was acceptable to the King, but a great dismay to the Rebels; and therefore
they accuse him to the King, as if Alpinus himself had persuaded them to Rebel.
The King, well perceiving their Calumny, suddenly prepared his Army, and so
prevented the rumor of his coming. Those of them which he took, he put to
Death.

In the mean time, Hungus's Death.
Hungus died, and his Eldest Son Dorstologus was slain, by the Fraud of his
Brother, Eganus; neither did the Murderer long survive his Brother. So that
the Male-stock of Hungus being extinct, his Sister's Son Alpinus, as next Heir,
both by an ancient Law, and in Right of Blood, claimed the Kingdom. The Picts
disdained him as a Foreigner, whereupon Dongallus sent Messengers to them, to
expostulate the matter, but they refused to give them Audience, but Commanded
them to depart in four days. Dongal drowned.
Dongallus intended to make War upon them, with all his might. But in the
preparation thereof, as he was passing over the Spey, whose Current was very
violent, the Vessel, in which he was, sunk, and he was Drowned, after he had
Reigned Six Years, some say, Seven.

Alpinus, The Sixty Eighth King.
ALpinus, the Son of Achaius, led the Army raised by Dongallus, against
Frederethus, who had seized upon, and arrogated, the Kingdom of the Picts, to
himself. Wars between the Scots and Picts.
The Armies met at Restenot, a Village of Angus, the Fight was maintained with
great Obstinacy and Cruelty, even until Night; the Victory was uncertain, though
the Death of Frederethus made it to incline to the Scots. For when he saw his
Men to fly in the Fight, with a Troop of Noble Youngsters, he brake through the
main Battle of the Scots, and being thus severed from his Men, was there slain,
with the Flower of his Nobility. Brudus was substituted in his place, a
Slothful Person, and unfit for Military Affairs. In his Reign, the Scots drove
Preys out of their Enemies Country, without Resistance; and the Picts raising
up a Tumult on purpose amongst themselves, slew Brudus, before he had Reigned
one Year. Then they set up Kennethus, another of Frederethus his Sons, in his
stead, one neither Valianter, nor more Successful, than his Brother: For, when
he had levied an Army, and came in fight of his Enemies, he privily stole away,
and so was slain by a Country Man, who upbraided him as a Runaway, not
knowing, Who he was. The Picts having lost their King, before their Enemies
were sensible of it, returned home, and made another Person, named Brudus,
King, one of high Descent and Noble Achievements. He, as soon as he entered
upon the Kingdom, set upon the straggling Plunderers, and curbed their
Rashness, making a great Slaughter amongst them; after that, that he might
strengthen his weak Forces by Foreign Aids, he sent Ambassadors, with great
Gifts, to the English, which were nearest to him. They received their Gifts,
and were large enough in their Promises of Assistance; but, though the Picts
earnestly pressed them, yet they put them off, laying the fault on their own
Combustions at home. The Picts being disappointed of their Hope there, levied
all of their Own, that were able to bear Arms, and resolved to venture their
All; with this Resolution they marched directly toward the Enemy, who were
encamped not far from Dundee. As soon as they met, the Battle was so much the
more sharp, by reason of the old Hatred, the recent Disgust, the many mutual
Slaughters, and the frequent Injuries and Wrongs, committed on both sides. When
the Conflict was a long time doubtful, at last, an Hundred Horse of the Picts
rose out of an Ambush; who, that they might seem to be a greater Number, did
also Horse their Baggage Men, and Attendants, upon their Baggage Horses; and
so, showing themselves upon the tops of the Hills, they wheeled about, as if
they would have set upon the Rear of the Army, which was a Fighting. That
apprehension struck such a terror into the Scots, that they presently
scattered, and fled into the Neighboring Woods; by which many of them were
saved alive; only some few were slain in the Fight, but more in flight, by the
nimble Baggagers, who were set on Horseback. King Alpin overthrown in Battle by
the Picts, and slain.
King Alpinus, and many of his Nobles were taken Prisoners, and cruelly slain.
The Kings Head was fastened to a Pole, and carried up and down the Army; till,
at last, they set it up for a Spectacle in the most eminent place of the
greatest Town they had, (which then was Abernethy.) The place, where he was
slain, as yet retains his Name, being called, Bas Alpin, i. e. The Death of
Alpin.

Kennethus II. The Sixty Ninth King.
ALpin being slain, after he had Reigned Three Years, his Son Kennethus
succeeded him. The next Summer, the Picts having some hopes, that if they did
but endeavor it, the Scots might easily be driven out of Britain, as they had
been heretofore; hereupon they hired some Troops of the English, and joined
them with what Forces of their Own they could make. But a sudden Sedition arose
betwixt the Commanders, and that so outrageous an One, That King Brudus himself
could not compose it; so that the Army disbanded thereupon; and Brudus died
about Three Months after, rather Heart-broken, than of any Disease. His Brother
Druskenus was made King in his stead, who, in vain attempted to compose things
at home; but in the interim, some Scottish Youngsters stole away the head of
Alpinus, from the place where the Picts had set it up, and brought it to
Kennethus, he not only commended them for their Noble Exploit, but also
rewarded them with Lands. Kennethus called together an Assembly to consult
about War with the Picts; and though the King himself, and the forwardest of
the Soldiers, did advise to revenge the Treachery of such a perfidious People;
yet, the Major part, and especially the Graver sort, thought it more
advisable, to stay, till their Forces, which were weakened in former Wars, had
recovered themselves; in the mean time, they would neither seek Peace, nor yet
make War with the Picts, till a better opportunity, for either, did offer it
self. This Opinion prevailed, so that there was Peace betwixt the two Nations,
for Three Years, as if it had been by common Consent. But in the Fourth Year,
Kennethus, desirous to renew the War, yet finding few of the Nobles of his
Mind, invited them to a Banquet; Kenneteus, by a witty Invention, engages his
Nobles to make War upon the Picts.
the Entertainment continued till late at Night, so that they were all
necessitated to lodge there, which they might more easily do, in regard every
Man, according to the custom of his Ancestors, lay on the Ground, and so they
disposed of them in that large House, having nothing under them but Leaves and
Grass. When they were gone to Bed, the King suborned a Youth, one of his
Kinsmen, commanding him to clothe himself with the Skins of Fishes, dried in
the Wind, and so to enter by Night; and to speak through a long Tube, that the
Voice might better reach their Ears at a distance, and thus to exhort them to
War; as if a Message had been sent them from Heaven, to that purpose. The
Nobles suddenly awoke at this Voice, which at that time seemed to them to be
Greater and more August than a Man's; many also were laden with Wine, and the
sudden flashing of Light, from the Fishes Skins, darting upon their drowsy
Eyes, and dazzling them, drove them into a great Astonishment; in fine, an
un-wonted Apparition affected the Eyes of them all, and a kind of Religious
Consternation seized upon their Minds. And That which increased the Admiration,
was, That the Messenger, stripping himself of his disguised Habit, and, by a
secret Passage, conveighing himself away, as in an instant, seemed to have
vanished out of sight. When the News hereof was brought to the King in the
Morning, and many did add to the Story, as is usual in such Cases, he also
affirmed, That the like Apparition was seen by him, in his Sleep. Hereupon, a
War was concluded upon by the general Consent of them all, as if they were
Commanded thereunto by God himself. When the Armies were led forth to Battle,
as soon as ever they came in fight one of another, every one ran upon the
Enemy, which stood next to him, not staying for the Command of their Captains.
The Fight was as fiercely continued, as it was eagerly begun. At last, the
Victory inclined to the The Picts, being deserted by the English, receive a
great overthrow by the Scots.
Scots. Those in whom the Picts put most Confidence proved their Ruin. For the
English Troops, seeing that all things were managed without Order, and by
Tumultuary Force, withdrew themselves into the next Hill, as if they had only
been Spectators of other Men's Dangers. There was a mighty Slaughter made of the
Picts. For the Scots were highly provoked against them, not only by their
ancient Hatred, but by the remembrance of their later Cruelty against Alpinus,
and the rest, whom they had taken Prisoners: But that which chiefly inflamed
their Minds, was a Watchword, spread abroad among the Scots, That they should
remember Alpinus; From that very moment, they spared neither Age, nor Rank, of
Men: The Hills covered the departure of the English, and the Scots were so
pertinaciously intent in revenging themselves on the Picts, that they could not
follow them. This Victory reduced the Picts to so low an ebb, and rendered their
Condition so deplorable, that, though they endeavored to make Peace, yet all
was in vain, for the Scots would hearken to no Conditions, but the full
surrendering up of their Kingdom. The next Year, when all Places were surrendered
up beyond Forth, Northwards; and Garrisons placed in them, as Kennethus was
marching his Army against those on this side thereof, word was brought, That
some of the Garrisons, which he had left behind, were taken, and the Soldiers
slain: Hereupon, he marched his Army back against the Rebellious Picts, of whom
he spared neither Man, Woman, nor Child; But wasted the whole Country with Fire
and Sword. Druskenus, seeing the Picts were enraged, almost like Madmen, at the
Cruelty exercised over them, and knowing now, that they must fight, not for
their Kingdom, but for their very Lives, and the Lives of their Wives and
Children, gathered together all the Force that ever he could make; and so
passing the Forth, came to Scone, a Town situate on the Bank of the River Tay,
where he waited for the coming of the Scots: There they again endeavored to
make a Pacification, offering to surrender all the Country beyond the Forth,
but the Scots would have All, or none. The Fight, as in such Circumstances of
Necessity, was very fierce: At last, the Pertinacy of the Picts was broken, and
the River Tay, putting a stop to their flight, was the cause of their
Destruction. For The Picts again routed by the Scots, their King Drusken slain,
and their Kingdom abolished.
Druskenus, and almost all his Nobility, being not able to pass it, were there
slain: And the Fortune of the common Soldiers was not better; for as they
crowded to the River in several places to save themselves, they labored also
under the same incapacity of passing it, and so they every one of them lost
their Lives. Hence it is, (as I judge,) that our Writers say, We Fought with
the Picts seven times in one Day. The Force of the Picts was wholly broken by
this Overthrow, and Kennethus wasted Lothian and the adjacent Country, together
with Those beyond the Forth, that they might never be able again to recover
themselves. The Garrisons, for fear, surrendered themselves. Those few Picts, who
were left alive, fled into England, in an indigent and necessitous Condition.

The Sixth BOOK.
AS I formerly called Fergusius the First, and, after him, Fergusius the
Second, with great reason, the Founders of the Scottish Kingdom, so I may justly
reckon Kennethus compared with both the Fergus's, and reckoned the Third
Founder of the Scottish Kingdom.
Kennethus, the Son of Alpinus, a Third Founder, also. Fergus the First, from a
mean beginning, advanced the Affairs of the Scots to such an height, as that
they were Envied by their Neighbors. Fergus the Second, when they were
banished and dispersed into remote Countries, and, in the Judgment of their
Enemies, almost extirpated, did, as it were, recall them to Life, and, in a few
years, reduced them to their Ancient Splendour. But Kennethus was so Courageous,
as to accept of the Kingdom, when Matters were almost desperate; yea, when
others thought, that the small remainder of Scots could hardly have been
defended, or kept together; and not only so, but he brake the power of the
Enemy, (though assisted with Foreign aid, and Triumphant also for his late
Victory) in many sharp (yet prosperous) Fights; and, being thus weakened, he
drove him out of Britanny, and took from him the Kingly Name, which to this day
he could never recover again. Though these were Great Achievements, yet they
were not the Greatest he performed; For, as he enlarged his Kingdom to double
of what it was before; so he Governed it, both by making New Laws, and also by
reviving the Old ones; That neither Licentiousness arising from War, nor Pride,
the product of Victory, nor any footsteps of those Evils, which are wont to
accompany Luxury and Ease, did appear, during his Life. Yea, the Affairs of
Scotland seemed to be supported for many Years after, by the Laws, called, by
Posterity, the The wholesome Laws, made by Kenneth, called Mac-Alpin-Laws,
because he was the Son of Alpin.
Macalpin Laws, as much as by Arms. But to let pass these things; I shall
proceed to relate his Noble Acts, as I have begun. Kennethus, having driven out
the Picts, distributed their Lands amongst his Soldiers, according to every
ones Valor and Merit: whose Ambition put New Names on many Places and
Countries, cancelling and obliterating the Old. He parted The Country l^ing
between the Tay and Dee.
Horestia betwixt Two Brothers, Aeneas and Mern; one part of which, in Old
Scottish, is yet called Aeneia, all one with Angus.
Aeneja, (they, who more affect the English Speech, call it Angus:) The other,
The Mearns lie along the East-Sea, between D^e and North-Esk.
Mern. The Country adjoining from Tay to the Forth, was called by the Ancients,
Ross, i. e. Peninsule; there are some signs of the Name, yet remaining, as It
stands on the North-side of Forth, in P^rthshire.
Culross, a Town, which is, as it were, the Back or Hinder part of Ross; and A
Town lying on the beginning, or head of a point of Land, that runs into the
West Side of Loc^ (...).
K^nross, which signifies the Head of Ross. Now at this day, all that Country,
is called Fife, from an Eminent Person, called, Fifus, whose Surname they say,
was Duffus; Barodunum, a Town in Lothian, or, as some call it, D^nbar, was so
called (as it is thought) from a Great Man, named, Bar. Lothian had its name,
not long ago, from Lothus King of the Picts. Cuningham is wholly a Danish Word;
used, as I think, by the Danes, after the Death of Kennethus, who possessed
that Country for some years, having driven the Scots beyond the Wall of
Severus; for Cuningham signifys, in the Danish Language, the Kings House, or
Palace. It Is also probable, That Otherwise called the Sheri^fdom of B^^wick.
Merch was so called, by the Danes, because it was the Limits between both
Kingdoms. As for Edinburgh has several Names.
Edinburgh, either by the gross Ignorance or perverse Ill Will of some, it is
sometimes called, Vallis Dolorosa, i. e. The Dolesom Valley, and sometimes,
Castrum Puellarum, Maiden-Castle; the Name in it self is not very obscure, though
it be made so, by ill management. They borrowed those Names from the
Gallick-Fables, which were devised within the space of 300 Years, last past.
This is certain, That the Ancient Scots called it, Dunedinum; the Later,
Edinburgum, wherein they follow the Country Custom in imposing of Names;
whereas, that Castle in a middle Appellation between both, I think may be
better named, Edinum. But enough in this place concerning the Old and the New
Names of the Countries, of which I have spoken more largely, before. To return
then to Kennethus; Having enlarged his Kingdom, as I said before, and settled
wholesome Laws for the Government thereof; he endeavored further to confirm his
Royal Authority by mean and trivial Things, even bordering upon Superstition it
self; There was a The Story of the Marble Stone, on which the Scotch Kings were
anciently Crowned.
Marble-Stone, which Simon Breccus is reported to have brought into Ireland out
of Spain, which Fergus, the Son of Ferchard, is also said to have brought over
into Scottish Albion, and to have placed it in Argyle. This Stone Keunethus
removed, out of Argyle, to An Abbey on the North-side of (...), a Mi^e above
Perth.
Scone by the Rivet Tay, and placed it there, included in a Chair of Wood. The
Kings of Scotland were wont to receive both the Name and the Habiliment of
Kings, sitting in that Chair, till the days of Edward the First, King of
England, of whom in his Place. Kenneth Translated the Episcopal See, which the
Picts had placed at Abernethy, to Fanum Reguli, which after Ages called St.
Andrews. But the Ancient Scots-Bishops, being chosen out of Monasteries, not
then contending for Place or Honor, but for Sanctity and Learning, The Ancient
Scots Bishops, not Diocesa^s.
did perform their Functions every where, occasionally, as opportunity was
offered without Envy or Emulation; no certain Diocesses being allotted to them,
in regard the Ecclesiastical Function was not yet made a matter of Gain. After
this sort, Kennethus Reigned 20 Years. In the beginning of his Fifth year, he
overthrew the Picts, as the Black Book of Pasley has it. The other Sixteen
years, after he had destroyed the Government of the Picts, he lived in great
Tranquillity, having Peace at home, by reason of his just Government; and Peace
abroad, by the Power of his Arms. He enlarged his Dominions from the Orcades to
the Wall of Adrian. A. C. 854.

Donaldus V. The Seventieth King.
DONALDVS, his Brother, was chosen King next, who quite altered the whole
Public Discipline, together with his own Demeanor. For, whereas, in the Life
time of Alpinus, he made a show of Temperance, and, by that means, had obtained
the Love of the better sort; When his Brother was dead, as if he had been freed
from all Fear and Restraint, he gave himself up wholly to Donaldus's
Licentiousness.
Pleasure. And, as if there had been no danger from any Enemy without, he
neglected all Military Study, and kept almost none about him, but Hunters,
Hawkers, and Inventors of new Pleasures. Upon these, he spent the Public
Revenue. The young Fry, who were prone to Pleasures, did extol the King to the
Skies, as a Noble and Generous Prince; and scoffed at the Parsimony of former
Times, as Rude and Illiberal. The Ancient Counselors, seeing all things likely
to run to Ruin in a very short time, came to the King, and put him in mind of
his Duty; of his present Evils and Miscarriages; and of the Danger imminent
thereupon. He, nevertheless, persisted in his slothful kind of Life, which gave
opportunity to the Remainders of the It gives opportunity to the Picts to
solicit Aid from Osbreth in England.
Picts (as if an hopeful Alarm had been given them, even from the very bottom
of Despair) to address themselves to Osbreth and Ella, Two of the most potent
and prevalent Kings of the English, (for then England was divided into many
Kingdoms.) They bewailed their misfortune to them; and craved earnestly their
Assistance; promising, That they and all their Posterity would become
Feudataries to the English, in case they obtained the Victory over the Scots,
which, they prejudged, would be an easy one, by reason of the slothful Nature
of Donald. The English were easily persuaded, and having settled things at home,
they led out their Army into Merch, from whence they sent Heralds to Donaldus,
requiring, that the Lands which the Scots had forceably taken away from the
Picts, their Friends and Allies, might be restored, which, unless he would do,
they would not neglect their old Confederates, who had now also newly cast
themselves upon them. Donaldus, by the advice of the Estates, which, in this
time of imminent Danger, he had (tho unwillingly) convened, Levied an Army, and
met with the Enemy at Iedd, a River of Teviotdale, where he joined Battle, and
overthrew Osbreth, Osbreth overthrown by the Scots; but his Men rallying,
overcome the Scots, when secure, after their Victory.
enforcing him to fly to the next Mountains: From thence he marched on by Tweed
unto the Sea side, recovered Berwick, which had been taken by the English, and
again deserted by them, upon the ill news of the success of the Battle; where
he took all the Ships riding in the Mouth of the River, and seized upon all the
Enemies Provisions therein. There he got an opportunity to renew his,
interrupted, Pleasures, and, as if his Enemies had been wholly overthrown, he
drowned himself in all kind of Voluptuousness. Whereupon, the English, who, in
the last Fight were rather scattered than subdued, understanding, by their
Spies, the Carelessness and Security of the Scots, gathered together what Force
they could out of the Neighborhood, and by night set upon the Scots, who were
laden with Wine, and fast asleep, making a great slaughter amongst them; but
they took the King, who was between sleeping and waking, Prisoner. From thence
they followed the Course of their Victory, and to make their Ravage more
complete, they divided their Army into Two Parts, and so marched into the
Enemies Country, Part of them when they came to the Forth, got Vessels, and
essayed to pass over by Water into Fife, but a great Number of them were
Shipwrackt, and drowned; and the rest, by the violence of the Storm, were
forced back to the Shore, where they embarked; from whence, marching to
Sterling, and joining with the rest of their Army, they pass over the Forth, on
a Bridge. The Scots, after their flight, gathered themselves into a Body
thereabouts, having the bare show, rather than the strength, of an Army; and
sent Ambassadors to the English for Peace; which they did not refuse, because
their strength was weakened by the unsuccessful Battle of Iedd, and also by
their own Shipwreck. The Peace granted upon hard Terms to the Scots.
English propounded hard Conditions, yet such as the present State of Affairs
made to seem tolerable, As that, The Scots should yield up all the Land, which
was within the Wall of Severus; That their Bounds should be beneath Sterling,
the Forth; beneath Dunbarton, the Clyd; and between the Two Rivers, the Wall of
Severus. Amidst such hard Terms of Peace, yet this happened, as joyous, so
unexpected, to the Scots, That no mention was made concerning the Reduction of
the The Picts driven out of Albium, and never recalled.
Picts. For the English and Britains divided the Lands, surrendered up, betwixt
them; the River being a Boundary betwixt them both. There are some, who think,
the Money yet called Sterling Money.
Sterling was then Coined there. The Lands being thus divided, the Picts, who
thought to recover their own, being eluded of their hopes, passed over to the
Cimbrians and Scandians, (i. e.) (as we now speak,) to Denmark and Norway.
Those few of them, that staid in England, were all put to death by them, upon
pretense, that they would attempt Innovations by their soliciting of Foreign
Aid. Donaldus, after he had made Peace, upon his Return, was Honorably
received, partly, out of Respect to his Ancestors, and partly in hopes of his
Repentance. But he, persevering in his wonted Slothfulness, the Nobles fearing
that so filthy and sluggish a Person, who would neither hearken to the Counsels
of his Friends, nor be reclaimed by his own Calamities, would lose that part of
the Kingdom which remained, Donald cast into prison, where he dies.
cast him into Prison; where, either for Grief in having his Pleasure
restrained; or, for Fear to be made a Public Spectacle of Scorn, he laid
violent hands on himself, in the Sixth Year of his Reign. Others report, that
This Donaldus performed many Noble Exploits, both at home and abroad; and that
he dyed a natural death at Scone, in the Year of our Lord 858.

Constantinus II. The Seventy First King.
COnstantinus, the Son of Kennethus, undertook the Kingdom after him, at Scone;
he was a Prince of a great Spirit, and highly Valorous. He was desirous to
obliterate the Ignominy received under Donaldus, and to enlarge his Kingdom
unto the Bounds, left by his Father; but he was otherwise advised by his
Nobles, because the greatest part of the Soldiery were slain under Donaldus;
and the remainder was grown so Corrupt, that it was not fit to put Arms into
their hands. And thereupon, the King first bent his care to amend the Public
Discipline; and so he reduced the Order of Priests to their Ancient Parsimony,
by severe Laws, in regard they had left off Preaching, and had given up
themselves to Ecclesiastics Reformed by Constantine.
Luxury, Hunting, Hawking, and to Courtly-Pomp. He caused the Young Soldiers,
who were effeminated with Pleasures, to lie on the Ground, and to Eat but once
a day. Drunkenness Punished with Death.
Drunkards he punished with Death. He forbad all sports, but those who served
to harden both Body and Mind, for the Wars. By these Laws, the Soldiery of the
Kingdom were reduced to a better pass. And presently upon, a certain Islander,
named Evenus, whom he himself had made Governor of Loch-Abyr, a Man of an
unquiet Spirit, and Ambitious of Dominion, rose up in Arms; who, knowing, That
the Youthful Fry of Soldiers could not well bear the Severity of these New
Laws, First, gathered together a small Number, and then a greater, complaining
of the present State of Things. And when he found his Discourse was acceptable
to them, he easily persuaded them to conspire for the Destruction of
Constantine. But, being more active than cautelous in gathering strength to
their Faction, they were betrayed by some of their Own, and slain, before they
knew any Forces were gathered together against them. Evenus put to Death, for
conspiring against Constantine.
Evenus, the head of the Conspiracy, was hanged. About this time it was, That
the The Danes Invade Scotland, are worsted at first; yet, afterward, overthrow
Constantine, who was slain by them.
Danes, then the most Potent and Flourishing Nation amongst the Germans, were
solicited by the Picts against the Scots, and also by one Buernus, (or, as
others write, Verna, whose Wife Osbreth had forceably Vitiated) which They,
being over-stocked with Youngsters at home, easily assented to, and so they
transported themselves, in a great Navy, into Britain. Their first Descent was
in Fife, there they slew all they met, without distinction, out of Hatred to
the Christian Religion; and dividing their Army, they spoiled the Country two
several ways. Constantinus drew forth against them, and first he set upon that
Brigade, which Hubba, Brother to the Danish King, commanded; who, being hindered
to join with their Fellows, by the sudden swelling of the River Levin, were
there easily overcome and slain, except a few of his Men, who could swim over
the River, who fled to their other Commander, called Humber. Constantinus
followed after them, as to a Prey, not a Battle, and overtook them not far from
the Town of On the East-point of Fife.
Carail, but not before they had well fortified their Camp. For the Danes,
being very provident after their late unhappy Fight, had made a kind of
Defensive Fortification, upon some small Winding Rocks, near the shore, by
heaping up a parcel of Stones together, which lay thereabouts. In that posture,
Constantine assaulted them; where, by reason of the Incommodiousness of the
place, and the Desperation of the Danes, he paid dear for his Rashness; for he
lost a great Part of his Army, he himself being taken Prisoner, and haled into
a little Cave, hard by, was there slain. There are some Monuments of this Fight
remaining to this day, as the Cave, the Circumference of their Camp, which was
not cut out regularly, or by equal spaces, but turning and winding according to
the Bending of the Rocks. Some lay the blame of this unlucky Accident upon the
Picts, who, being admitted into Constantines Fealty and Army, were the first
that ran away, and drew the greatest Part of the Army after them. The Danes
gathered up the Spoils, and departed to their Ships. The Kings Body was found
the day after, and carried to the Sepulchers of his Ancestors in the Island
Icolumb-kil. He possessed the Kingdom sixteen Years, and died in the Year of
our Lord 874.

Ethus, The Seventy Second King.
HIs Brother, Ethus, succeeded him, from the Swiftness of his Feet, Surnamed
Alipes, he was elected King upon no higher, or other, Account, but because he
gathered together the Relicts of the Army, which was scattered by the Danes.
Amongst the Prodigies of his Time, they reckon those Sea-Fishes then appearing,
which are seldom seen, and not after long Intervals of Time, but they never
appear but in Sholes, nor without some unlucky Presage. The Common People call
them Sea-Monks, a prodigious sort of Fish, swimming in Sholes, always
portending some Evil.
Monachi-marini, i. e. Sea-Monks; others give them the Title of Bassineti, i.
e. Hooded, or Helmered, Fish. Ethus, for his Viciousness, forced to abjure the
Government.
Ethus, being unmindful both of his Brother and of his Ancestors, giving up
himself to all manner of Vices, and drawing the young Soldiers, easily
seduceable, along with him, was taken Prisoner by a Combination of the Nobles,
made against him; and, after all the flagitious Acts of his Life had been
declared to the People, in a long Speech, he was forced to abjure the
Government, in the second Year of his Reign. Three days after, he died in
Prison, for Grief. That which chiefly offended the Martial Men, was, his
slothful Unactiveness; because, that when the Danes were at War with the
English, and many bloody Battles had been fought between them, yet he never
bethought himself of the recovering the Country, he had lost; nor would he
suffer himself to be put in mind thereof, by others. Some write, that he was
not enforced to relinquish his Kingdom, but that he was wounded in a Combat by
Gregorius, who was emulous of the Kingdom, and that he died Two months after*
Anno Christ. 875.

Gregorius, The Seventy Third King.
GRegorius, the Son of Dongallus, was set up in his stead; a Man of a Royal
Spirit, in whom no Virtue, requisite in a King, was wanting. First, he
reconciled all those to him, who were against him in suing for the Kingdom; and
then, he proceeded to compose the Discords of the Nobles amongst themselves; He
so tempered the Severities of his Government with Affability, that he did more
with his Subjects by Love, than by Fear; He restored the Old Laws, concerning
the Immunity of the Ministers of the Church, (who were but in the nature of
Slaves, under the Picts) or else he made New, to the same purpose. His first
Gregory overcomes the Picts and Danes,
Expedition was into Fife against the Picts, left there by the Danes, whilst
they were employing their Arms against the English. He drove them not out of
Fife only, but out of Lothian, and Merch, too. The Danes, when he came to
Berwick, fearing, if they should have any Misfortune, the English also would be
upon their backs, durst not join in a Field-fight with Gregory; but sent Part
of their Forces over the River into Northumberland, commanding them to join
with a small Brigade of their Countrymen, who had gathered themselves together,
and were newly landed, there; The Rest of them entered Berwick to strengthen
the Garrison there. But the English, who were, but unwillingly, under the
Command of the Danes, (as being Men of a different Religion from them) gave
admission to the Scots in the night, by which means all the Danes were put to
the Sword. From thence, Gregory marched into Northumberland, and fought a
prosperous Battle against Hardnute, wherein he made so great a slaughter of
them, that their Numbers, which were lately formidable to all Britain, were
mightily diminished, partly by Gregory of Scotland, and partly by Alfrid of
England. Gregory took in all Northumberland, and gave free leave to those
English to depart, who were willing so to do; to the rest, he very courteously
distributed Lands. The greatest part of the English staid behind, partly out of
love to their native Soil, partly by reason of the Kings Bounty to them; and
partly also, for fear of their Enemies. For, seeing they had now, for many
years, had several cruel Fights with the Danes, the Victory being many times
uncertain, Many of the English chose rather to be under the Dominion of the
Scots; who, though formerly Enemies, were yet Christians, than either to fall
into the power of the Bloody Danes; or, to hope for uncertain Aid from their
own Countrymen; especially, since things were in such an hurly burly over all
Britanny, that the English knew not which Party to succor, first. After he had
so chastised the Danes, that he expected no more Trouble from them, he turned
his Arms upon the Brittons, who, as yet, held some of the Scottish Dominions;
with These also he made Peace, they restoring the the said ^ands, and promising
to assist him against the Danes, if they did return; Whereupon, he disbanded
his Army. But the Brittons, after their return home, repented of the Peace they
had made; and entering Scotland again in an hostile manner, they were driving
away a great Booty, but Gregory met them at In Annandale.
Loch-Maban, and, after a bloody Fight, overthrew them, Constantine, their
King, being also slain. The Brittons, having received this fruit of their ill
Counsel, made Hebert, the Brother of Constantine, King, and then began to
think, in what a dangerous Case they were, having the both the Scots and Danes
their Enemies; and their Alliance with the English seldom long-lived. Hereupon,
they sent Ambassadors to the Scots for Peace, who would not hearken thereunto,
unless And the Brittons also, causing them to restore Cumberland and
Westmorland.
Cumberland and Westmorland were restored to them, which was done, and the
Peace made on those Conditions. About the same time, there came also
Ambassadors from Peace made between A^^red of Eng^and and the Scots.
Alured of England; partly, to Congratulate the Victory over the Danes, which
ought (said they) to be justly acceptable to all Christians; and partly, to
enter into a new League against all the Enemies of the Christian Faith and
Religion. Peace was concluded on these Conditions; That they should oppose a
Foreign Enemy with their joint Forces, if they made a Descent into the Borders
of either People; and that the Scots should quietly enjoy what they had got
from the Danes: Peace being concluded, on those Terms, and a League made and
Established, word was brought Gregory upon his return, That the The I^ish break
in upon Galway in Scotland.
Irish had made an Irruption into Galway. The Cause of the War was pretended to
be, because the Men of Galway had hostilely seized upon, and Plundered some
Galleys, driven on their Coasts, belonging to the Inhabitants of Dublin, a City
in Ireland. The Irish, hearing of Gregory's coming, retired presently in fear
with their Prey to their Ships; and Gregory, with a good Navy, and strong Army,
as soon as he could with convenience, transported himself into Which causes
Gregory to follow them into (...).
Ireland also. Duncan, or Donatus, or rather Dunachus, was, at that time, their
King; but being under Age, Brienus and Cornelius, Two of the powerfullest of
the Nobility next to him, had divided the whole Land into Two Factions. But
patching up a Truce at the Arrival of a Foreign Enemy, they pitched and
fortified their Camps, apart, near the River Bann, a Place which seemed
convenient enough for that purpose. Their End in so doing, was, to take off the
Edge of Gregorys Valor by delay, and to force him to withdraw his Army from a
Foreign harassed Country, for want of Provisions. Gregory smelt out their
Design, and therefore, very secretly, in the Night, he sent part of his Army to
seize upon an ^ill which was, as it were, over Brienus's head. The Day after,
when the Battle was joined, in the Heat of the Fight, they threw down mighty
Stones into his Camp, which crushed many of his Men to pieces, and so terrified
the rest, that their Ranks were broken; and in a confused manner, they fled
away. Cornelius, hearing of the Event of this Fight, withdrew his Army without
striking a stroke into Places of greater safety. Brienus was slain in his Camp;
the rest had Quarter given them, as much as might be, by Gregorys command.
Whereupon, he marched over the Country without any Depopulation at all, which
Lenity occasioned many rather to submit themselves to the Mercy of the King,
than to try it out by Force. The fortified Towns were strengthened with
Garrisons. Gregory reduced Where he takes Dundalk, Tredagh, and Dublin, and then
makes Peace with the Irish, and returns.
Dundalk and Drogheda, Two strong places, made so both by Art and Nature; and
then determined to march directly to Dublin. But, hearing that Cornelius,
General of all the Irish Forces, was coming against him with a great Army, he
turned aside, fought with, and overthrew, him, following the Chase as far as
Dublin, which he besieged. But there was not Provision enough in the City for
so many People, as had fled thither; so that, in a short time, it was
surrendered to him by Cormachus, the Bishop of the City. Gregory, at his
entrance into it, did no prejudice at all to any of the Inhabitants; but
Visited King D^ncan, his Kinsman, and protested, that he came not thither out
of an Ambitious desire to take away the Kingdom from him, or to amass up Riches
for himself; but only to revenge the Injuries he had received. Hereupon he
committed the Care of the Young King to such of his Old Counselors, as he
judged most faithful to him; and himself bore the Name of his Tutor or
Guardian, till he came to be of Age: He also put Garrisons into the Forts, and
exacted an Oath from the Nobility; That they should admit neither English,
Dane, nor Britton into the Island, without his Permission: He appointed Judges
in convenient Places, who were to judge betwixt Man and Man in matters of
Controversy, according to the Laws of the Country; and receiving Sixty Hostages
for the performance of these Conditions, he returned home in Triumph. The Fame
of his Justice made the Peace firmer for the future, than any Terror of Arms
could have done. Having thus managed Matters both at home and abroad, he
departed this Life in the Eighteenth Year of his Reign, being no less eminent
for his Justice and Temperance, than for his Valor: So that he was justly
Sir-named, by his Countrymen, Gregory the Great. He died A. 892.

Donaldus VI. The Seventy Fourth King.
DONALD, the Sixth of that Name, the Son of Constantine, the Second, was made
King, next after Gregory, having been recommended by Gregory, before his Death,
to the Nobility. He deceived not the Opinion, which Men had conceived of him,
i. e. That he was a very prudent Prince; for he Loved Peace no otherwise, but
that therein he always prepared for War. And when, for a long time, he had no
Enemy to encounter with, yet he took care, that the Soldiery should not grow
too Luxuriant, being corrupted by Ease and Rest; and so made inclineable to run
into all manner of evil Practices. When a new Army of Danes drew near to the
Coasts of Northumberland, and Anchored there for some days, without prejudicing
any body, Donaldus gathered an Army together, and, being watchful over all
opportunities, went to guard that Province. But, hearing, that the Danes had
made a Descent upon the Country of the English, he sent Aid to King Alured, who
fought a bloody Battle with the Danes. Yet, after the Battle, he was content to
admit them into Part of his Dominions, The Danes Fight a bloody Battle with the
English, and afterward turn Christians.
provided, they would turn Christians. Peace was made on those Terms, the Army
disbanded, and a new homebred Commotion entertained Donaldus at his return.
Their happened so great a Feud betwixt the Rossians, and the Merch-men, caused
by some small Robberies at first, that more were slain by occasional Combats,
than if they had met in a pitched Battle. Donald marched thither, and, having
slain the Heads of the Factions, restored Peace to the rest. Johannes Fordanus,
a Scottish Chronologer, says, That in this Expedition he dyed at A Town in
Murry-land, not far from E^gin.
Foress, not without the suspicion of Poison; But Boethius affirms, that he
returned to Northumberland, to see, what would become of the Peace he had made
with the Danes; of whom he was always suspicious; and that he dyed there, after
he had Reigned Eleven years. His Memory was precious both to Rich and Poor. His
Death was A.C. 903.

Constantine III. The Seventy Fifth King.
CONSTANTINE, the III. the Son of Ethus, was substituted King in his room; a
man of no ill Disposition, and yet not constant in Good, neither. The Danes,
who could incline Gregory and Donald, the Two last Kings of the Scots, by no
Promises or Persuasions, to take Arms against the English, which were then
Christians; Now they easily wrought upon Constantine* takes part with the
Danes against the English.
Constantine by Gifts, and by the vain Hope of enlarging his Dominions, to make
a League with Them, which lasted scarce Two years, but the Danes, deserting the
Scots, struck up a League with the English. This League had scarce continued
Four years, before Edward of England gathered an Army speedily together, and
spoiled the Danes Country; whereby they were reduced to such (...), that they
were enforced to return to the Scots, whom they had lately deserted; To whom
they Swore most Religiously, That they would for ever after observe the Amity,
most inviolably, betwixt Them. This Second League is reported to have been
entered into with great Ceremony, in the Tenth Year of Constantines Reign. He
gave, the same year, Cumberland to Malcolm, Son of the last King, which was as
an honorable The Ancient Liberty of the Subject invaded.
Omen to him, that he should Reign after him. And afterward the same Custom
was observed, by some succeeding Kings, to the manifest disanulling of the old
way of Convening the Estates, whose Free Suffrages ought not to have been thus
abridged; but this was like the Designation of the Consuls, by the Caesar's,
which put an end to the Roman Liberty. A War being now commenced between
Edward, the Son of Alured, and the Danes; Constantine sent Aid to the Danes,
under the Conduct of Malcolm. He joined his Army with the Danes, and being
Superior in number, they harassed the adjoining Countries of the English, and
made great Devastation, wheresoever they came; to the end, that they might
force the English, who had a far less numerous Army, to Fight: Yea, they were
so arrogantly confident of their Numbers, that, they thought, their Enemy would
never so much as look them in the Face; so that now, as secure of the Victory,
they began to talk of dividing the Spoil. But, as Prosperity does blind the
Eyes of the Wise; so Adversity, and the foresight of Danger, is a good
Schoolmaster, even to the weaker side; What the English wanted in strength,
they supplied in Cunning and Skill; Their Army was well seconded with Reserves,
and so they began the Fight; the First Ranks, being commanded so to do, give
ground, and pretend a Discomfiture and Flight; that so, their Enemies following
them in disorder, they might again return upon them in that straggling posture:
Athelstan, the Base-born Son of Edward, was General of all the English Forces,
as our Writers affirm; and Grafton also says the same thing: They make this
Athelstan guilty of Parricide, for killing his Father, and his Two Brothers
Edred and Edwin, whose Right it was immediately to succeed their Father, in the
Kingdom: Fame does increase the Suspicion, that Edward was violently put to
death, because it accounts him a Martyr. For that Fact he was hat^d* and
therefore, to recover the Favor of the People, by some eminent Undertaking, he
determined to expiate the Blood of his K^nd^ed, by shedding That of his
Enemies; And thereupon, after he had fought stoutly awhile, he gave Ground, by
little and little, but afterward in greater Fear and Confusion, as if he
intended absolutely to run away. The Danes and Scots, supposing themselves
Conquerors, were unwilling to make any brisk pursuit, lest the Cowardliest of
the Soldiers should enjoy all the Prey; and therefore, they returned to plunder
their Camp. Hereupon, Athelstan gave a Signal, and the The Scots and Danes are
overcome by the Policy of Athelstan of England.
Eng^ish, returning to their Ensigns, set upon them as they were scattered and
laden with Booty, and killed them, like Dogs. The greatest part of the Scottish
Nobility was lost in this Fight, who chose rather to dye on the spo^, than to
undergo the Ignominy of deserting their Companions. Malcolm, being much
wounded, was carried off the Field, by his own Men, and sent the doleful
Tidings of the loss of his Army to King Constantine; neither was the face of
things more pleasant amongst the Danes. Athelstan, during this Astonishment of
his Enemies, took Who recovers from them Westmerland, Cumberland, and
Northumberland, which yet soon after re^o^t to th^^^ old Mast^^s.
Cumberland and Westmerland from the Scots; and Northumberland, from the Danes.
Constantine resigns the Kingdom.
Constantine, having not force enough neither to wage War, or to carry on
matters in Peace, called a Convention of the Estates, at Abernethy, and
willingly resigned the Kingdom, and betook himself to the Culde^s (perhaps,
contracted from Cultores Dei) or Kelds, Who?
Culde^, (certain Hermits, so called, living in Cells) Worshippers of God, (for
so the Monks of that Age were called) as into a Sanctuary, amongst whom he
lived the rest of his life at St. Andrews. Here the English Writers, who are
profuse enough in their own Praises, do affirm, That Athelstan was the Monarch
of all Britanny, and that the rest, who had the Names of Kings, in Albium, were
but precariously so; and his Feudataries only, as taking an Oath of Fidelity to
him, as the supreme Lord. And they introduce many ignoble English Authors, as
Favorers of that Opinion: And, to procure the greater Credit thereunto, they
add also Marianus Scotus, an Illustrious Writer, indeed. But here I desire the
Reader to take notice, that there is not the least mention of any such thing in
that Edition of Marianus, which was Printed in Germany; but if they have
another Marianus, different from him, who is publicly read, and interpolated
or foisted by them, let them produce him, if they can. Besides, they, being Men
generally unlearned, do not in some Places sufficiently understand their own
Writers, neither do they take notice, That Bid, William of Malmesbury, and
Geffrey of Monmouth do commonly call that part, Britain, over which the
Britains ruled, i. e. That within the Wall of Adrian; or, when they stretched
their Dominions furthest, within the Wall of Severus; so that, the Scots and
Picts are oftentimes reckoned by them to be out of Britain, and not seldom are
called Transmarine People. And therefore, when they read, that the English
sometime Reigned over all Britanny, they understand the Authors so, as if they
meant all Britanny, i. e. Albium or Albion, whereas they do often Circumscribe
Britanny within narrower limits, as I have said before; But of this I have
spoken more largely, in another place. To return then to the Affairs of
Scotland.

Malcolm I. The Seventy Sixth King.
COnstantine having retired himself into the Cloister of the Monks. Malcolm,
the Son of Donald, was declared King. Athelstan being dead, and his Brother
Edward Reigning, Cumberland and Westmerland revolted from the English, and
returned to their old Masters. Moreover, the Danes, who remained in
Northumberland, sent for Avalassus, their Countryman, of the Royal Progeny, who
was Banished into Ireland, to make him King; Edmund, foreseeing, what Clouds of
War were gathering over his Head, yielded up Cumberland and Westmerland to
Malcolm, upon this Condition, That he who should next succeed in the Scottish
Kingdom, should take an Oath to the King of England, as the Lord Paramount of
that Country. Afterward, he easily reduced the Danes, who had been afflicted
with so many Calamities: Neither did he long survive his Victory. The English
chose his Brother Edred, King after him; against whom, the Danes, who possessed
Northumberland, and never cordially observed any Peace made with the English,
did rebel, and took from him many strong Places, whilst he was busied in other
parts of his Kingdom, and principally, York; but he overcame them, by the
assistance of 10000 Scots; Malcolm returning home, gave himself up wholly to
the Arts of Peace; And, to cure the Inconveniences occasioned by the Wars,
especially Luxury and Bribery, he himself did ordinarily Visit all the Scots
Malcolm, sometimes f^^s in Courts of Justice, himself.
Courts of Judicature, once in two years, and administered Justice with great
Equity. At length, whilst he was busy in punishing Robbers, and in
restraining the lewd Manners of the younger sort, he was He is slain.
slain by some Conspirators of Murray-Land, in the night, in the Fifteenth year
of his Reign. The Perpetrators of that Villainy were, with great diligence,
sought after, and found out by the Nobles, and, being apprehended, were put to
several exquisite Deaths, according to every ones share of demerit, in
committing the Parricide.

Indulfus, The Seventy Seventh King.
INdulfus Reigned after him, who, having settled things in Peace at home, lived
seven years after in great Tranquillity: But in the Eighth year of his Reign,
the Danes, taking it amiss, that the Alliance with the English was preferred
before Theirs, and that a perpetual League was made between the two Kings
against them, came with a Navy of 50 Ships into the Firth of Forth, when the
Scots little expected any such thing, insomuch, that they had almost surprised,
and overthrown them, unawares. In such a sudden emergency, all were full of
fear and amazement, insomuch that some carried their Goods into the midland
Country, as a place of more safety; others came to the Seaside, to hinder the
Enemies Landing. Hago and Helricus were the two Admirals of the Fleet. They
endeavored, first to Land in Lothian, and afterward in Fife, but in vain;
then they essayed to enter the Firth of the River Tay, but there also they were
hindered from making any descent on Land; so that they Coasted about the
Seacoasts of Aeneia or Angus, of Mern, Mar, and Buchan, but, in all places,
being hindered from Landing, they hoisted their Sails into the Main, as if they
intended to return home. But within a few days, when all was secure, they came
back again, and having gotten a convenient place in Bo^^, at the Mouth of the
River Cullin, they there The Danes Land in Scotland.
landed their Men without opposition, before the Country People could give any
alarm of their Arrival. When Indulfus heard of their landing, he marched
toward them, before they could well have any notice of his coming; and first,
he set upon the straggling Plunderers, and drove them to the rest of their
Army, but made no great Slaughter of them, because the Camp of the Danes was
near, for them to retreat to. When the Armies came in sight of each other, they
both set the Battle in array, and fell to it with equal force and courage:
Whilst they were thus fiercely fighting, Grame and Dumbar, with some Troops of
Lothian-Men, appeared on the Rear of the Danes, which struck them into such a
Pannick fear, that they all run away, some to their Ships, others to unknown
places, whithersoever the Fear of the Enemy drove them: But a great part of
them cast themselves into a Ring, in a Woody Vale, and there waited for an
occasion of acting valorously, or dying resolutely. Indulfus, as if his Enemies
had been wholly overcome, rode up and down with a few Attendants, and, casually
lighting on them, was there Indulfus Slain in a Fight with the Danes.
slain, at the beginning of the Tenth year of his Reign. Some say, that he was
slain with an Arrow* shot out of a Ship, having disarmed himself, that he might
be more nimble in the pursuit, and press the more eagerly upon them, as they
were going a Shipboard.

Duffus, The Seventy Eighth King.
AFter his Death, Duffus, the Son of Malcolm, got the Kingdom; in the beginning
of his Reign he made Culenus, Son of King Indulfus, Governor of Cumberland,
and sent him into the Ae^^dae, which were then in War and Disorder, by reason
of the frequent Robberies committed there. For the young Soldiers of the
Nobility, having got a great Pack of their Fellows about them, made the Common
People tributary to them: imposing a pecuniary Mulct on every Family, besides
Free Quarter; and yet Culen^s dealt not harmer with them, than with the very
Governors themselves of the Island, who ought ^o have restrained such outrages.
He commanded; That, for the future, They, by whose negligence, these disorders
had happened, should make Satisfaction to the Commonalty, and also pay a Fine
to the King. This Injunction struck such a Terror into these Idle paltry
Fellows, that Many of them went over into Ireland; and there got their Living
by their Daily labor. As this matter was acceptable to the Commons, so it was
as offensive to the Noble Allies of Those, who were Banished, and to many of
the younger sort, who did approve that idle kind of Life. These Men, Murmurings
against King Duffus.
in all their Meetings and Assemblies, First secretly, Afterward in the
presence of a Multitude of such as applauded them, began openly to revile their
King; alleging, That he despised the Nobility, and was drawn away, and seduced,
by the Counsel of sorry Priests; That he put Men of Gentile Extraction, to
Servile Offices; That he advanced the most abject of the People to the Highest
Honors; That, in fine, he made such Medleys, as to turn all things
Topsy-Turvy. They added farther, That, if things should continue at that pass,
either the Nobility must transport themselves into other Countries; or else,
must make them a new King, who might Govern the People, by those ancient Laws,
whereby the Kingdom had arrived to that height, out of so small beginnings.
Amidst these things, the (...) King Duffus, Ho^, and by Whom?
King was assaulted with a new and unusual Disease, no evident cause thereof
appearing, so that, when all Remedies had been tried in vain, a Rumor was
spread abroad, by I know not who, that he was bewitched; the suspicion whereof
arose, either from some Indications of his Disease, or else because his body
did waste and pine away by continual sweating, and his strength was so much
decayed, that the Physicians, who were sent for far and near, knew not what to
apply for his relief. Thus, no Common causes of the disease discovering its
self, they had recourse to a Secret one. And whilst all were intent on the
Kings Malady, at last News was brought, That Nightly Assemblies and
Conspiracies were made against him at Foress, a Town in Murray: The Report was
taken for truth, there being nothing to contradict it: Whereupon, some faithful
Messengers were sent to Donald, Governor of the Castle, in whom the King
confided much, even in his greatest Affairs, to find out the truth of the
matter. He, by the discovery of a certain Harlot, whose Mother was noted for a
Wizard, detected and discovered the whole Conspiracy. For the Young Girl,
having blabbed out, a few days before, some words concerning the Sickness and
Death of the King; being apprehended, and brought to the Rack to be tortured,
at sight thereof, presently discovered, what was designed against the Life of
the King. Whereupon some Soldiers were sent, who found the Maids Mother and
some other Gossips, Roasting the Kings Picture, made in Wax, by a soft Fire;
Their design was, that, as the Wax did leisurely melt, so the King, being
dissolved into a Sweat, should pine away by degrees; and when the Wax was quite
consumed, then, his breath failing him, he should presently die; when this
Picture of Wax was broken, and the Witches punished, in the same Month the King
was freed from his Disease, as some say. These things I deliver, as I received
them from our Ancestors: What to think of this sort of Witchcraft, I leave to
the Judgment of the Reader, only minding him, That this story is found amongst
our Ancient Archives and Records. Amidst these things, the fear of the King
being laid aside, because they hoped he would shortly die, many Robberies and
Murders were committed, every where. Duffus, having recovered his strength,
followed the Robbers through Murray, Ross, and Caithnes, and slew many of them,
at occasional Onsets; but he brought the Chief of them to A Tour in Murry-land,
(...)*
Foress; That so, their Punishment might be the more conspicuous, in that Town.
There Donaldus, Governor of the Town and Castle, Petitioned the King to pardon
some of his Relations, who were of the Plot; but, being denied, he conceived
great Indignation against the King, as if he had been highly wronged;
whereupon, he was wholly intent on Thoughts of Revenge; for he judged, That his
deserts from the King were so great, that, whatever he asked of him, he ought
not to be denied: And besides, the Wife of Donald, seeing some of her Kindred
too, were like to suffer, did further inflame the, already disaffected, Heart
of her Husband, by bitter words; Moreover exciting him, to attempt the Kings
Death, affirming, That, seeing he was Governor of the Castle, The Kings Life
was in his Power; and, having that Power, he might not only perpetrate the
Fact, but conceal it, after it was committed: Hereupon, when the King, tired
with business, was sounder asleep than ordinary, and his Attendants, being made
Drunk by King Duffus treacherously Murdered by Donald and his Wife.
Donald, were in a Dead-sleep also; he sent in Assassins, no man being aware,
and, after they had Murdered the King, they carried him out so cunningly, a
back way, that not so much as a drop of Blood appeared; and so he was buried
two Miles from the Abbey of In Murry-land.
Kinloss, under a little Bridge, in a blind place, having Grassy-Turfs of Earth
cast over him, that there might be no sign of any Ground, that was dug up.
This seems a more likely story to me, than what others write, that the course
of the River was turned, and so his Body was cast into a hole at Bottom; but
when the Waters were returned again to their own Chanel, then his Grave, such
as it was, was covered. Also the Actors of that bloody Fact were sent away,
because there is an A Traditional Opinion, still obtaining; Especially, if the
Murderer touch the Murdered Body.
Opinion, received from our Ancestors, which as yet obtains amongst the Vulgar,
That blood will Issue from a dead Body, many days after the party was murdered,
if the murderer be present, as if the fact had been but newly committed. The
day after, when the Report was spread abroad, that the King was missing, and
that his Bed was besprinkled with blood, Donald, as if he had been surpised at
the atrocity of the Fact, flys into the Kings Bedchamber; and, as if he had
been mad with Anger and Revenge, he slew the Officers appointed to attend him;
after that, he presently made diligent inquiry every where, if any discovery of
the dead Body might be made. The rest, being amazed at the Fact, and afraid too
of their own selves, returned every one to his own house. Thus this Good King
was wickedly slain, in the Flower of his Age, after he had Reigned 4 Years and
6 Months; and as soon, as they conveniently could, the Estates Assembled to
create a New King.

Culenus, The Seventy Ninth King.
CVlenus, the Son of Indulfus, being made King by the Assembly of the Estates;
the next Thing, there done, was, the questioning the Murder of King Duffus; and
they made the more haste to examine that Affair, Prodigies, upon the Murder of
Duffus, awaken the Estates to revenge it.
because of some Prodigies, that had happened, of which one seemed properly to
respect the very Fact. An Hawk was slain, trussed by an Owl, and his Throat cut
by him; The other Prodigy was also referred to the same thing, in the
interpretation of the Vulgar; For six whole months, after the Murder was
committed, extraordinary Fires appeared in the Element, the Air was agitated
with extraordinary Winds; Yea, the Heavens were so colored and enveloped with
Clouds, that neither Sun, nor Moon, could be seen in Scotland, all that time.
Hereupon, all Men were intent to revenge the good Kings death* and, to that
purpose, Culenus went into Murray, hoping to find some surer Discoveries of the
Murder upon the place, where it was committed. Donald, hearing of his coming,
and being conscious to himself of his Parricidal and Nofarious Cruelty, of
which also his overcurious, and seemingly wild, Inquisitiveness, made in
search after the Authors thereof, rendered him more suspected, procured a Ship
at the mouth of the River Spey; wherein, with some others, he embarked himself,
unknown even to his Wife and Children. This he did out of fear, lest the Truth
should have been extorted from him, by the Rack. This his hasty flight, his
dejected Countenance, (as it was observed) his few Attendants, his trembling at
his entrance into the Ship, which was but casually riding there, without any
preparation for his Voyage; did raise so great a suspicion upon him in the
minds of all, who were present, that they forbore not to vent all manner of
Contumelies against him, calling him an Impious, Sacrilegious, Fellow, and a
Paricide, and what other foul terms of reproach their inflamed anger could
suggest. They added also, That, though he had prevented the coming of the King,
yet he could never avoid the Vindictive Providence and Judgment of Almighty
God. In a word, they followed him with all the Execrations, which the highest
Indignation did offer to provoked Minds, even till the Ship was quite out of
sight. When Culenus heard of his hasty flight, he speeded his march thither,
where he apprehended the Wife of Donaldus, and his three Children; and, for
fear of Torture, compelled them to discover the whole Series of the Conspiracy;
as also how, by whom, and where the Body was buried; and that she her self was
not only privy to the Murder, but also a fellow-actor in it, and a persuader of
her Husband, thereunto. When the People heard this, (for she was publicly
Tried) the Magistrates could hardly dissuade them from tearing her to pieces.
The day after, Donaldus, having been tossed some days, with contrary Winds at
Sea, was Shipwracked and cast ashore, and being brought to the King, The
Murderers of Duffus apprehended and executed.
he and all his underwent their most deserved punishments. They who brought him
to the King were liberally rewarded, his Castle was burnt, and all that were
therein were slain. And the Body of Duffus was honorably interred amongst his
Ancestors. As these things did highly ingratiate Culenus to those who were
good; so the remaining part of his Life did accumulate so much Odium on him, as
never any King, before him, ever labored under. For, whether induced by his
own Nature, or urged for fear of Danger, (as he would have it thought) he
suffered the severity of the Discipline, used under Indulfus and Duffus, to
grow cold and remiss; and permitted the younger Tribe, being given up to
unseasonable Debauchery, Culen. le^s loose the rein^ to Voluptnousness, and
endeavors to justify it in h^mself, and the young Nobility.
and Foreign Delights, to run into those Licentious practices, which were
forbid by the Laws; till, at last, they broke forth into open Violence and
Robbery. And when he saw the greatest part of the young Nobility addicted to
those Vices, he also immerged himself in the same, so that he abstained not
from vitiating Noble Matrons, and even Religious Nuns, (which, in that Age, on
the account of their Chastity, were had in great Veneration) no, nor from his
own Sisters or Daughters, neither; nay, he kept Troops of other Harlots, hired
by his Panders, in his Court, as in a Brothel-house. When he was admonished,
and put in mind of these things, by Wise and Prudent Persons; on the behalf of
the young Nobility, he answered, That something was to be indulged to their
Age; and as for himself, tho he confessed, That, some things were amiss, yet he
was forced, out of fear, to tolerate them: For, I remember, said he, what great
Calamity the unseasonable Severity of the former King brought, not only on
himself, but on the whole Kingdom also: That the Nobility were the Stay and
Prop of the Throne; That it was not true, that the Martial Spirits of Men were
always broken by this free kind of Life, or made low and abject; nor, That the
Thoughts of Arms were so neglected by them in Peace, as if they expected, That
there would never be any more War at all. It Is true, (proceeded he) The Luxury
of Youthful Age is so far to be restrained, that it proceed not too far, that
so the good Seed of Ingenuity might not be choked (as it were) by overmuch
jollity, in the very bud; yet, it is not wholly to be abridged, or taken away,
lest the Seeds of Virtue should be plucked up together with it. When the Nobles
heard this his Defensatory Plea; and perceiving, they could do no good upon
him, by their Persuasions, but rather create trouble to themselves, if they
should use the same liberty of Speech to him in their Rejoynders, they withdrew
themselves from the Court, fearing, lest they should be compelled to be
Witnesses, yea, Partakers also, of these facinorous Practices, the sight and
hearing whereof they did detest, and abhor. The King, being freed from such
troublesome Interposers, gave up himself wholly to Wine and Women. He proposed
Rewards to those, who could invent any new kind of Pleasure, tho never so
sordid and detestable; His Court was filled, Night and Day, with wanton Songs
and the Huzza's of Drunkards; So that, Intemperance and Impudence were as much
praised by him, as Modesty and Chastity are wont to be esteemed by Good and
Pious Princes. Those Evils, which, tho allowed, or connived at, by the Law, in
other Men, yet are acted by Them in Secret, were here openly committed, without
Shame. The young Nobility, being thus Effeminated by Pleasure, and a Multitude
of Parasites and Flatterers with them, extol the King to the Skies, as if he
were the very First of their Kings, who had joined Splendour and Magnificence
with Authority; as tempering the Severity of his Government with Lenity, and
easing the burdens of Care and Labor, by some Relaxation of Spirit and
Allowance of Delight.

Now, to continue these Luxuriant courses, there was need of great Expense, and
therefore the wealthier sort were Fined upon fained Accusations; His
Intemperance enfeebles his Body.
and the Plebeians were suffered to be preyed upon, and harassed with all sorts
of servile Offices. He that was not pleased with the present state of things,
was accounted a barbarous Country-Clown; or, if he seemed to be of an higher
Spirit than ordinary, he was presently accused by a company of Informers, as if
he studied Innovation in the State. After 3 Years were spent in this flagitious
Liberty, when Men were silent, out of Fear, or S^oth, Lust, a punishment to
itself.
Luxury began to be a punishment to itself. For when the King's Strength was
exhausted by immoderate Lust; and his Body had contracted Deformity by
excessive Banquetings, those Diseases followed, which are wont to be Companions
of such Vices; so that there remained naught but a rotten Carcass, fit for
nothing but to ^ear the Punishment of his former misspent Life. The King being
thus disabled Culenus Summoned to appear at Scene.
for all Functions of Life, the strength, both of his Body and Mind, being
enervated, and weakened by Intemperance, and his Courtiers also following the
same practices, some A^^^^cious Fellows, being encouraged by hopes of Prey and
Impunity, committed public Robberies and Murders, regarding neither the
Plebeians, as being Men of poor Servile Spirits; nor the Courtiers, as Persons
enfeebled by Luxurious wickedness.

Hereupon, the founder Part of the Nobility, being encompassed with a double
mischief, and therefore enforced to look to the Main, called an Assembly of the
States at Scone. Or Meffen, lying on the River A^mond, Two Miles above its
Confluence with T^^, Three Miles above Perth.

He is slain by a Thane, for Vitiating his Daughter.


The King also was willed to be there, That he might consult in common with the
rest, in such a dangerous Juncture of Affairs, for the Public Safety, He,
being inwardly struck at this Summons, and, as it were, awakned from his drowzy
Sloth, began to advise with his Confederates, What a Man, in such streights,
were best to do? And, tho he knew not, how to make any Resistance, nor yet, how
to fly away; and, tho his Mind also presaged no good to him, yet he resolved to
go to the Assembly. And, as miserable Men are wont to flatter themselves in
Adversity, so he did not altogether Despair, That he, either out of Pity, or
out of Respect to his Fathers Memory, should procure some Favor, that he might
not be suddenly cast down from so great a Dignity, to an Abyss of Misery. In
his Journey to Scone, having a Train big enough, but unarmed, and dispirited,
about him, he was slain at a Neighbor Village called Th^^e was a (...) of
Dignity amongst the Old Scots, and Picts before them, equal with a Baron, now:
Mr. Selde^ judges it to come from a Saxon roo^. His Office was, like that of a
Sheriff amongst us, to gather up the King's Revenu, Or, as an Under-Steward, to
pay it in to the Lord High Steward, who was called Ab^hane.
Methvin. by the Th^^e was a (...) of Dignity amongst the Old Scots, and Picts
before them, equal with a Baron, now: Mr. Selde^ judges it to come from a Saxon
roo^. His Office was, like that of a Sheriff amongst us, to gather up the
King's Revenu, Or, as an Under-Steward, to pay it in to the Lord High Steward,
who was called Ab^hane.
Thane, or Sheriff of that Country, because he had forceably vitiated his
Daughter. When his Death was made known, tho all Men were well pleased to be
freed from such a Monster, with less trouble than they supposed they should,
yet the Perpetration of the Fact by Roharans, or Rodardus, the Thane, was very
much disliked by all People. He Reigned, as the former King did, 4 Years and 6
Months.

Kennethus III. The Eightieth King.
KENNETHVS, the Brother of Duffus, and Third of that Name, succeeded Culenus:
He, being contrary to the former King, in his Disposition, Manners, and the
whole course of his Life, used as much diligence in amending the Lives of the
younger fort, as the other had done in corrrupting them; tho, herein his Task
was the greater, in regard, Men are carried headlong to Vices, with a greater
Propension of Mind; but the way to Virtue is by a s^eep Ascent. And indeed,
This was the Thing, that gave the chief Occasion to the Opinions of some
Philosophers, who contended, Illustrating (...), upon Philosophical (...).
That Man was Naturally made to enjoy Pleasure, but that he was h^^ed to
Virtue, as it were, violently, and against his own Inclination. I grant, Both
parts of the Dilemma are false; but, perhaps, the Original of the mistake, was,
from hence, That, seeing there is a double Power of Nature in Man, One of his
Body, the Other of his Mind; the Vigor of the Body se^^s to exert itself,
sooner and quicker than That of the Mind; And, as Plants do first send forth
Stalks, Leaves, and Flowers, pleasant to behold, before the Seed begins to be
formed in its proper Pod and Receptacle; but when the Seed ripens, all those
other things fade, and at last wither away; so our Bodies do grow Youthful,
before the Virtue of our Mind, (which is yet but weak and tender) can exert its
force, but as the Members do grow Old by degrees, so the strength of Mind and
Judgment does more and more disclose it self: And therefore, as in Corn, we
restrain the Luxuriant growth thereof, either by causing it to be Eaten up, or
by cutting its over-rank Blade down; so in Young Men the Law supposes, That the
forwardness of Wit, which overhastens to show it self, should be restrained by
careful Culture, until growing Reason may be able, of it self, to repress the
Violence of the, now infirm, Body. But to return to Kennethus.

The right Method for Public Reformations, is, for Princes to begin at home,
as K. Kenneth the 3d did.
He, well knowing, That the Commonalty do usually comply with the Humor of
their Prince, and do diligently imitate what he Loves, first, did form a good
discipline in his own Court and Family, that so he might express in Deeds, what
he commanded in Words; and, as he propounded his own Life to be an Example to
his Household; so he would have the Manners of his Domestics to be exemplary to
others. He first purged his Court from all Ministers of Lust and Wickedness,
that so he might more Justifiably do the same in other parts of his Kingdom:
Whereupon, he resolved to travel over the whole Country, to Indict Assemblys,
for the preventing and punishing of Thefts, Murders, and Robberies, for the
encouraging of Men to Labor by Rewards, and for exhorting them to Concord by
alluring Speeches, that, by this means, the Ancient Discipline might be
restored. But, in the Execution of this his purpose, he found greater
difficulty than he imagined, for the Major part of the Nobility, either had
Guilty Consciences themselves, and so feared their own Personal Punishments; or
else, were Allied in Blood to Those, who were Guilty; And therefore, the First
Assembly being Indicted at On the Banks of Clyd, 5 Miles above Hamilton.
La^erick, a Town of Clysdale. They, who were Summoned to appear, being
forewarned of their Danger by their Kindred, some of them fled into the Aebudae
Isles; Others, to other Parts, infamous for Robberies. The King, understanding
the Cheat, and being not ignorant of the Authors of it, dissembled his Anger,
and dissolved the Assembly; and so passed, with a few of his Confederates, into
Gallway, as if he were to perform a Vow, he had made, to St. Ninian. Being come
thither, he consulted with Those whom he judged most faithful to him, What was
to be done, in such a case. The Result was, That a Convention of all the
Nobility should, the next Year, be held at Scone, upon pretense of some
considerable Matters to be advised upon, concerning the Good of the whole
Nation, Kenneth politickly circumvents his Nobility at Scone, and causes them
to Reform their Clandships.
in General; That there the Heads of the Factions might be apprehended without
any Tumult; and when they were Imprisoned, their Clans and Tenants might be
made to bring in the Malefactors to the King. This Project was judged most
advisable, but it was kept Secret, and communicated but to few, until the
meeting at Scone came. There the King had caused his Servants to prepare
Soldiers, and to keep them privately in the next House to his Palace, the day
before the States Assembled; and at the Opening of it, the Nobility, being very
Numerous, came, where they were courteously treated by the King: but upon a
Sign given, they were immediately beset with Armed Men. They being surprised
with Fear, at this sudden Change, the King encouraged them, by a gentle Speech,
telling them, That they need not be afraid, for he intended no hurt to any good
or innocent Man, and those Arms were not provided for their Destruction but
Defense. He farther alleged, how they could not be ignorant, That all his
endeavors, since he first came to the Crown, tended to This, That Wicked and
Debauched Persons might be punished, and the Good enjoy the Estates, either
left them by their Ancestors, or acquired by their own Industry; and besides,
might have the quiet enjoyment of those Rewards, which the King bountifully had
bestowed upon them, according to every ones Worth and Desert; and that things
might easily be brought to that pass, if they would lend their helping Hands:
The last year, (said he) when I summoned some o^ ^he Offenders to appear on a
certain day, none at all came; that failure, (as he understood) was not made,
so much out of Confidence of their own strength, as of the Assistance of some
of their Kindred and Friends, which, if it were true, was dangerous to the
Public, and also very reflective upon such Kindred. Now was the time, when
they might redeem both Themselves from Crime, and the Kingdom from being
molested by Robberies. This was easy to be done, if those, which were most
powerful in every County, would cause the Malefactors to be apprehended and
brought to condign punishment, where those Malefactors were, was visible to
all. But if they made Excuses, and, having so fair Opportunity to merit well of
their Country, were willingly defective to improve it. The King, to whose Care
the safety of the whole was committed, could not be excused, if he set them at
Liberty, before the Offenders were brought to Punishment, and that This was the
End, why he detained them in Custody: And if any one thought, his long durance
would be a trouble to him, he might thank himself, seeing it was in his own
Power, not only to procure his Liberty, but also to obtain Honor, Reward, and
the Praise of all Good Men into the bargain. The Nobles having heard this
Harangue, unanimously answered, That they had rather assert their Innocence by
Deeds, than Words. Whereupon, they promised him their Assistance, and desired
him to lay aside all Suspicion, if he had conceived a sinister Opinion of any
of them. Upon this their Solemn Engagement, the King told them the Names of the
Offenders. The Nobles, by their Friends, made diligent search after them, and,
in a short time, they were brought to the King, and punished according to Law.
Whereupon, the Nobles were dismissed, having received some Gifts, and many
large Promises, from the King; and the Commonalty also prayed heartily for
their King.

Matters being thus composed at home, he faithfully observed the League, made
by some former Kings with the English. But this great Tranquillity of all
Britain was soon disturbed by the Danes, who appeared with a great Fleet, and
Anchored near the Red-Promontory, a Place in Aeneia, or Angus. Red-Head.
They there staid some days in Consultation, Whether they should Land there, or
direct their Course toward England, as they intended at first; Many of them
were of Opinion, That it was most advisable to make for England, an opulent
Country, A Danish Fleet appears upon the Coast,
where they might have both Provision enough for their Army, and also some
hopes of Auxiliaries and Recruits, in regard that there many of the Danish
stock were yet alive amongst them; and many others stood obliged to them for
old Courtesys and Friendships; and that These, upon the first notice of their
Arrival, would presently flock in to them, as of old they used always to do.
But, as for the Scots, they were a fierce Nation and very hardy, as Those use
to be, who are bred in Barren and Hungry Soiles; That they never attempted
them, without some great and remarkable loss; and, in the present case, if they
overcame them, it would hardly be worth their Labor: But if they were overcome
by them, they must endure the utmost Extremity and Rigor: Others were of a
different Opinion, alleging, That, if they made their Descent on the Coasts of
England, then they should be obliged to Fight Both Nations at once; but if the
Scots were First overcome, the War against the English would be easy, when they
were bereft of Fo^^ign Aid, and also terrified with the Loss of their Friends.
They further urged, That it was not the part of Great and Magnanimous Spirits,
to be intent on Prey and Booty only, they should rather call to mind the Blood
of their Kindred and Ancestors, who had been so often cruelly slain in
Scotland: And that now especially, having a Great Army, and being furnished
also with things necessary for War, they ought to take That Revenge, which
might punish the Savage Cruelty of the Scots, according to their Deserts, and
might also carry the terror of the Danish Name to all the Neighboring Nations.

This last Opinion prevailed, so that they Sailed their Navy to the Mouth of
the River of Eske; Which Lands in Scotland.
and there Landed their Forces. They Plundered the Towns, next to them,
destroying all with Fire and Sword; as for the Castle, they Levelled it to the
Ground. They slew, higly-pigly, all the Inhabitants of the Town, without
distinction of Age or Sex. The like Desolation they also made all over Angus,
even to the Firth of the River Tay. The News hereof was brought to the King,
then residing at Sterlin. Those, who had escaped the Fury of the Enemy, made
things worse in their Relations, than they were indeed. He, by the Advice of
those Nobles which were present, propounded a short Day to such as dwelt near,
to come in to him. Those, who dwelt farther off, he charged, by Letters, to
haste up with their Forces; but, with such Force as he had at present about
him, he drew toward the Enemy, both to make what Discovery he could of their
Posture; and also, to prevent the Plundering of Stragglers, as much as he
could. In a short time, a great Multitude came in to his Camp, which was
pitched at the Confluence of the Rivers Tay and Earn. As he was there ordering
his forces, News was brought him, That the Enemy had passed over the Tay, and
were Besieging Perth. The King, being concerned at the Danger of a Town so near
him, marches directly to it. As soon as the Danes were in sight, the Scots,
eager of Revenge, made have to fight them, and making choice of a convenient
Place to Order their Army, Kenneth fights with the Danes, and is worsted at
First.
they drew toward the Enemy. But the Danes having seated themselves on an
opposite Hill, where they could not, without much hazard, be attacqued; the
Archers and Darts-men compelled them to come down, insomuch that a most Cruel
Fight began at the bottom of the Hill; much Blood was spilt, and the Victory
uncertain; when the Danes gave forth a Word, through their whole Army, That no
man must ever hope to return again to their Camp, unless as a Conqueror.
Whereupon, making a great shout, they made such a brisk Charge and Assault upon
the Scots, that they routed Both their Wings, and eagerly followed the Pursuit.
That day had been certainly most ruinous to the Scots, unless Aid had been
afforded by One man, sent, as it were, from Heaven, in so desperate a Posture
of Affairs! There was a certain Countryman, whose name was Hay, who was
casually Plowing in the Field, over which the Scots-Runaways were a Flying, and
his Two Sons with him; They were strong-bodied men, Stout and Courageous, and
also great Lovers of their Country. The Father took a Yoke; the Sons what
Instruments they could catch, and stood in a narrow Pass, where the thickest of
the Fugitives were flying; there, First by Reproaches, Then by Threatenings,
they endeavored to stop them, but not prevailing thereby, they fell upon those
that pressed on them, saying, That they would be as so many Danes to them, who
thus ran away. Hereupon, Those, who were of more fearful Spirits, The Day
recovered by the Valor of Hay and his Son^.
made an halt; and the Stouter, who fled rather for Company, than for Fear,
joined with Them, crying out Help was at hand, so that the whole Company turned
back again on the Enemy, and forced the Danes to as fearful and hasty a flight,
as they themselves had been lately guilty of. This trepidation of the Danes
occasioned a great Shout among the Baggage men, and other Followers of the
Army, as if a New Army had been coming; This Passage gave so great
encouragement to the Scots, and struck such a terror to the Danes, The Danes
^eceive a mighty overthrow.
That it raised up the Spirits of the former, who were almost upon the point of
Desperation; and occasioned to the other a certain Overthrow, instead of an
hoped Victory. This is the Victory, obtained at the Village Standing 2 Miles
West from the confluence of Almond and Ta^, in Pe^^^shire.
Loncarty, celebrated for That, and some days after; and transmitted down to
Posterity, with great Rejoicing. When the Conquerors were dividing the Spoils,
the Name of Hay was in all their Mouths; many creditable Persons affirmed, that
they saw, wherever He or his Sons made an onset, there Our Ranks were
restored, and the Danes broken; in fine, they all unanimously ascribed the
Prey, the Victory, the Honor of the Day, and their own Lives, to Him. When Hay
was brought to the King, he spoke very modestly of himself, and having Rich and
Splendid Garments offered him, and his Sons, that He and They might be the more
taken Notice of, at their Entrance into St. Iohnstons, called Perth, because
built on a Gentleman's Land, named Perth.
Perth, he refused them, only he wiped away the dust off his Coat, which he
wore every day; and carried the Yoke, which he used in the Fight, and so he
entered the City; a great Train being commanded by the King to follow him at a
distance, as well as some to go before him, such a Confluence of People there
was at this new Spectacle, that He alone did almost take up the Solemnity of
the whole day. After the departure of the D^nes, and so sudden and unexpected a
calm, in an Assembly of the Estates, shortly after Indicted at Scone, the First
thing agitated, was, What Honors and Rewards should be bestowed on Hay and his
Sons. Lands were allotted him, almost the fruitfulest in all Scotland, which
his Posterity enjoy to this day, and their Family is propagated into many
opulent Branches, and they were then taken out of the Class of the Plebeians,
into the Order of the Nobility: And a Coat of Arms was assigned them according
to the custom of Noble Houses, viz. Ar. 3 Scutcheons Gules. Which Bearing
shows, (in my opinion) That the public Safety was procured by the Eminent
Fortitude of those Three Persons, in that Fight.

After this Battle, Peace seemed to have been settled for many Years, when,
behold, some troublesome matters at home did disturb this Calm: As for the
Commotion of the Islanders, who, in a Plundering way, ranged over all Ross,
That was quickly suppressed; some of the Robbers being slain in ^ight, some
taken in pursuit, and after Executed. But Crathilinthus, the Son of Fenella, or
(as some call her) Finabella, gave far greater disturbance: He was then the
chief of all Mern, both in Descent and Wealth. Crathilinthus, his Grandfather,
by the Mothers side, was made Governor by the King, over that part of Angus,
which lies between the Two Rivers, each of them having the Name of Eske, where
he gathered up the Kings Taxes and Revenues; his Nephew, coming with a great
Train to visit him, a sudden Quarrel arose amongst their Servants, so that two
of Crathilinthus's Friends were slain: He complained thereof to his
Grandfather, who laid the blame of the Tumult upon his Nephews rude Retinue and
Company, and, after a sharp Reproof, he was dismissed by him, Crathilinthus
^^^ses a disturbance in Scotland.
but not without Contumelies from his Servants and Domestics: So that
returning home, he in great Wrath, complained of the Affront to his Mother; who
was so far from endeavoring to allay his Rage, and quiet the Mind of the
incensed Youth, by grave and wholesome Counsel, that she importuned him to
Revenge himself by force of Arms, even upon her own Father, and his
Grandfather, too. Hereupon, not long after, Crathilinthus, having gathered an
armed Company together, fit for his purpose, comes by Night into Angus, to his
Grandfathers Castle. He, with some few Followers were admitted in, without
Suspicion, and being once entered, he gave the Word to the rest, who lay in
Ambush, and let in them also; so that he slew his Grandfather, with his whole
Family, plundered the Castle, depopulated the Country adjacent; and, as if he
had done a Famous Exploit, he returned pompously with a great Booty into Mern.
But the Angusians did not suffer this Injury to pass long Unrevenged: For, soon
after, gathering a great many of their Faction together, they made great Havoc
in the District of Mern. From that time forward, Slaughters and Rapines were
occasionally committed on both sides. Kennethus, hearing of it, published a
Proclamation, That the Chief of either Faction should appear at Scone, within
Fifteen Days, to answer, What should be objected against them; for he feared,
that if a greater number should resort to the Factions, further Tumults might
arise; some few being terrified by this minatory Edict, made their appearance
accordingly; but the greatest part, of whom Crathilinthus was Chief, being
conscious of their own Demerits, fled away, as every one thought most
convenient. The King made diligent search after them, the greatest part of them
were taken in Loch-Abyr, and some, elsewhere. But is suppressed, and put to
Death
Crathilinthus, and the Chief of the Faction, were punished with Death; others,
according to the Degree of their Crimes, had lesser Punishments, and those who
were but a little Guilty, had none at all inflicted on them.

This Moderation and Temperament procured to the King Fear from the bad, but
great Love from others; and settled Peace in all his Kingdom, till the Twenty
first year of his Reign. Insomuch, That, if he had persisted in that course of
Life, which he had begun, he might well have been reckoned amongst the Best of
Princes; for, he so performed all the Offices both of Peace and War, that he
got great Renown upon the account of his Equity, Impartiality and Valor. But
the Excellency of his former Life was blurred by one Wicked Fact that he
committed, which seemed, too, more aggravated in him, in regard it was
incredible, and unexpected to proceed from his Disposition, who had before, so
severely punished Grand Offenders. The Occasion of it was This: The King, being
now grown somewhat ancient, had a Son named Malcolm, a Prince of great
Ingenuity, but in point of Age, not yet mature to Govern so fierce a People, if
his Father should die. Further, the Custom of our Ancestors was then against
it, that he should Reign next after his Father. For, They were wont to choose
not the next, but the fittest, of the deceased Kings Relations, provided, he
were descended from Fergus the First, King of the Scots. Besides, the Favor of
the Nobility was another Obstacle, which did incline to another Malcolm, the
Son of King Duffus, the most Praiseworthy Prince of all the Scottish Royal
Race: Moreover, he was then Governor of Cumberland, which County the Scots did
hold as Feudataries of the Kings of England, on such Terms, That the Government
of Cumberland was always looked upon as previous to the Throne of Scotland; for
it had been so observed, for some Ages past. The King, perceiving, Kenneth
embrues his Hands in the Blood of the hopeful Prince, and his Kinsman (...)
That this Malcolm, for the Reasons aforementioned, would be an hindrance to
his Design, not daring to do it openly, caused him privately to be made away by
Poison. Thus died that excellent young Man, much lamented and near to his
greatest Hope; some Signs of Poison appeared in his Body, but no Man ever
dreamt of suspecting the King. Yea, his Deportment was such, as to avert all
Suspicion; for he Mourned and Wept for his Death, and made an Honorable
mention of his Name, when occasion was administered to speak of it; and caused
him magnificently to be Interred, no Ceremony being omitted, which could be
invented for the Honor of the Deceased. But this superlative Diligence of the
King, to remove the Suspicion from himself, gave a shrewd Jealousy to the more
Sagacious. Yet, they forbore to speak out, for the Reverence all bore to, and
had conceived of the Kings Sanctity. But soon after, the King himself scattred
some Words abroad, to try the Minds of Men, How they would bear the abrogating
of an old Law, and the enacting a new, concerning the Succession of their
Kings, viz. That according to the Custom of many Nations, if a King died, his
Son should succeed him; and if he were under Age, then to have a Protector or
Tutor assigned to him, so the Kingly Name might rest in the Child; but the
Power of Government, in the Tutors or Guardians, till he came to Age. Though a
great Part of the Nobles praised his Speech, as being willing to Gratify him;
yet, the Suspicion concerning the Death of Malcolm prevailed upon the Major
part, and especially upon the Nobility, and Those of the Royal Stock, who were
afraid of the King.

Men's Spirits being in this posture, Ambassadors came from England, to comfort
the King upon the loss of his Kinsman; and withal, desiring, That, in
substituting another Governor, he would remember, That Cumberland being the
Bond of Concord betwixt the Two Nations, he would set Such a Person over it,
who might be an indifferent Arbiter of Peace, and that would maintain the
ancient Alliance betwixt the Two Nations, Kenneth III. endeavors to alter the
old Law, concerning Succession of the Crown, and to make it Hereditary.
for the Good of them Both; and, if any new Suspicions or Jealousies should
arise, that he would labor to extinguish them. The King judged this Embassy
fit for his purpose; so, that having Convened the Nobility at Scone, he made a
grave Harangue to them, against the ancient Custom of the Assemblies of
Estates, in this Point; wherein he recited all the Seditions which had happened
for that Cause; and with how great Impiety, some of the surviving Kindred had
treated the Children of former Kings; and what Wars, Rapines, Slaughters, and
Banish^^nts, had ensued thereupon. On the other side, he put them in Mind* How
much more Peaceable, and less Turbulent, the Parliamen^^^y Assemblies of other
Countries were; and what great Reverence was born to the Royal Blood; when,
without convasing for Succession, Children succeeded their Parents in the
Throne. Having thus spoken, he referred the matter to that Great Council, to
determine something in this Case: He acquainted them also with the Demands of
the English Ambassador; and, to give a greater Manifestation of his
Condescension and Civility, whereas it was in the Kings Power alone, to appoint
a Governor of Cumberland, he left it to them to nominate One; supposing, that
by this his Moderation, he might the more easily obtain his Desire, concerning
the Succession to the Crown: For, if he himself had Nominated his Son for a
Governor, he thought, he should have prejudiced his other Request, because, as
I said before, the Government or Prefecture over Cumberland was looked upon as
the Designation of the Person, to be the next succeeding King of Scotland.
Constantine, the Son of Culenus, and Grimus, the Son of Mogal, Brother to King
Duffus, who were thought most likely to oppose both Requests, were first asked
their Opinions, in the Case; who, partly for Fear of Danger; and partly, that
they might not run cross to the Major part of the Nobility, who had been
prepossessed and influenced by the King, gave their Vote, That it was in the
Kings Power, And carries the Point.
to Correct and Amend Laws, which were inconvenient to the Public; and also,
to appoint what Governor he pleased over Cumberland. The rest, though they
knew, that they had spoken contrary to their own Sense, yet Consented to what
they said. And by this means, Malcolm, the Kings Son, though not of Age, but
Immature for Government, was declared Governor of Cumberland; and also Prince
of Scotland, which Title signifies in Scotland, as much as Daulphin does, in
France; and Caesar, amongst the old Roman Emperors; and the King of the Romans,
amongst the Modern Germans; whereby the Successor to the preceding Magistrate
is understood. Other Laws were also made, viz. That as the Kings Eldest Son
should succeed his Father; so, if the Son died before the Father, the Nephew
should succeed the Grandfather: That when the King was under Age, a Tutor or
Protector should be Chosen, some Eminent Man for Interest and Power, to Govern
in the Kings Name and stead, till he came to Fourteen Years of Age, and then he
had Liberty to choose Guardians for Himself. And besides, many other Things
were Enacted concerning the Legitimate Succession of Heirs, which ran in common
to the whole Nobility, as well as to the King. The King having thus, by
indirect and evil Practices, settled the Kingdom on his Posterity, as he
thought; yet, his Mind was not at rest. For, Kenneth troubled in Conscience for
his Murder of Malco^m.
though he were very Courteous to all, and highly Beneficial and Obliging to a
great many; and withal, did so manage the Kingdom, that no one Part of a good
King, was wanting in him; yet, his Mind being disquieted with the guilt of his
Offense, suffered him to enjoy no sincere or solid Mirth; but in the Day, he
was vexed with the Thoughts of that foul Wickedness, which did inject
themselves; and in the Night, terrible Apparitions disturbed his Rest. At last,
a Voice was heard from Heaven, either a true one, as some think; or else, such
an one, as his disquieted Mind suggested, (as it commonly happens to Guilty
Consciences) speaking to him, in his Sleep, to this Sense. Do thou think,
That the Murder of Malcolm, an Innocent Man, An Apparition and Vo^^e, to
Kenneth.
secretly and most impiously Committed by thee, is either unknown to me, or,
That thou shall go unpunished for the same: Nay, there are already Plots laid
against thy Life, which thou can not avoid, neither shall thou leave a Firm
and Stable Kingdom to thy Posterity, as thou think to do, but a Tumultuous
and Stormy one. The King being terrified by this dreadful Apparition, betimes
in the Morning, hastened to the Bishops and Monks, to whom he declared the
Confusion of his Mind, and his Repentance for his Wickedness. They, instead of
prescribing him a true Remedy, according to the Doctrine of Christ, (being then
degenerated, themselves, from the Piety and Simplicity of their Ancestors)
enjoined him those absurd and fallacious ones, which Evil and Self-minded Men
had devised for their own Gain; and unwary People had as greedily received;
which were, To bestow Gifts on Temples, and Holy Places; To visit the
Sepulchers of Holy Men; Mock-Plaisters applied to Kenneth's wounded Conscience,
by S^perstitious Ecclesiastics.
To Kiss their Relics; and to expiate his Sin by Masses and Alms; and withal,
they enjoined him to Respect and Reverence Monks and Priests, more than he had
done heretofore. Neither did the King omit to perform all what they enjoined
him, thinking to be healed in his Conscience by these Mock-Plaisters. At
length, when he came to Mern to Worship, and to do Reverence to the Bones of
Palladius, an Holy Person; he turned aside to view a Neighboring Castle;
called Situate at the Foot of Clermont in Mern.
Fethercarn, which was then, as it is reported, very pleasant with shady Grows
and Piles of curious Buildings, of which, almost no Footsteps remain, at this
day. The Lady of that Castle was called Fenella, of whom Mention is made
before; who bore the King a grudge, not only for the Punishment of her Son
Crathilinthus, but also upon the account of her Kinsmen, Constantinus, and
Grimus; who, by his New Law, were excluded from the Succession to the Crown.
But, dissembling her Anger, she entertained the King very splendidly, and with
great Magnificence; and, after Dinner, she carried him out to view the
Pleasantness of the Place, and the Structure of the Castle; and amongst the
rest, she led him into a Privy Parlor, to see a A strange Mechanical Statue or
Engine.
Brass Statue, most Curiously and Artificially cast, which was made with so
much Ingeniousness, as they say, That when a String or Cord, which was secretly
bent therein, was remitted and let go, it would shoot out Arrows, of its own
accord; and, whilst the King was intent in viewing this Engine, an Arrow
privily darted out therefrom, and slew him. Johannes Major, and Hector Boethius,
do Both say, That the King came thus to his End; though, in my Judgment, it be
not very probable. For, it is not likely, That, after the decay of Noble Arts
amongst other Nations, so curious a Statue should be then made; and that, in
the remotest part of Britain, too; though John Major writes, That Edmond the
Son of Eldred, was slain by the same Artifice; but Both Stories are Fabulous,
as I suppose. Neither can I easily persuade my self, That all Scotland did
possess so many Jewels, as Boethius affirms, that One Lady was owner of. And
therefore, I rather incline to the Opinion of some others, (amongst whom is
Winton) who write, That the Kenneth slain by Fenella.
King was slain by some Horsemen, placed in Ambush, at the Command of Fenella.
He died in the Twenty fifth year of his Reign; a Prince eminent for all other
Things, if the Murder of Malcolm, and his too great Affection to his Kindred,
had not made such a foul Blot in his Escutcheon. He Reigned Twenty five years,
and deceased in the Year of Christ 994.

Constantine IV. The Eighty First King.
AFTER Kenneth his Death, Constantine, the Son of Culenus, Surnamed, The Bald,
used so much Art and Canvasing, to get the Kingdom, as never any Man did,
before him. For he insinuated himself into all sorts of People; complaining,
That he and others of the Royal Blood, were circumvented by the Fraud of
Kennethus, and so excluded from the hopes of the Kingdom, upon the pretense of
a most unjust Constantine inveighs against the Law made by Kenneth, about the
Hereditary Succession to the Crown, with his Reasons to back his Opinion.
Law; to which, he, with others of the Blood, were forced, by Fear, to Consent.
He further alleged, That the Inconvenience of the Law was very Manifest and
Visible, in it self. For, What, said he, can be more Imprudent and Foolish,
than to take away One of the greatest concerns in Government, from the Suffrage
of the Wise, and to leave it to the Liberty of Fortune? And to bind themselves
to Obey a Child, because casually born of a King, who, perhaps, might be ruled
by some Woman; and, in the mean time, to exclude Brave and Virtuous Men, from
sitting at the Helm? He added further, What if the Children of the King should
have some Defect, either of Mind or Body, which made them unfit for Government?
If Children (proceeded he) had enjoyed the Kingdom, in those days, wherein we
fought so many Battles, with the Romans, Britains, Picts, English, and Danes;
the Question would not then have been, Who should Rule over us? But rather*
Whether we should have been any People at all, to be governed by any Body? Yea,
What can border more upon Madness, than to bring That upon our selves by a Law,
which God threatens as the severest Judgment to the Rebellious; and by this
means, either to despise the Threatenings and Predictions of the Almighty; or,
to run into them of our own accord? Neither (said he) is that True, which the
Flatterers of Kenneth please themselves with in urging, i. e. That the
Slaughters and Avarice of the Kings Kindred may be avoided hereby; for the
Kings Children, whilst under Age, have as much Reason to fear the Frauds of
their Guardians; as before they did the Plots of their Kindred. And therefore,
now the Tyrant is removed, let us valiantly recover the Liberty he took away;
and, abrogating that Law, which was enacted by Force, and submitted to out of
Fear, (if it may be called a Law, and not rather a public Enslavement, and
Prostitution of our Freedom:) Let us, I say, return to the ancient Institutions
and Customs, by which this Kingdom arose, almost out of Nothing; and which,
from small Beginnings, have advanced it to that Splendor, that it is inferior
to none of its Neighbors; Yea, and when it was at a low Ebb, have erected it
again. And therefore, let us not neglect, or over-slip, this present
Opportunity, which offers it self, lest, hereafter, we seek it Vain. By these,
and the like Harangues, he cajolled some of the Nobles, and drew a Multitude of
the Commons to his Party; who assembled at Scone, Twelve days after the Funeral
of Kennethus, and declared him King.

In the mean time, Malcolm, Competitor with Constantine for the Crown.
Malcolm* who was busy about the Concern of his Fathers Funeral, hearing, that
Constantine was made King, called his Friends together, to deliberate, what was
fit to be done. Some were of Opinion, That, before he proceeded any further, he
should found how the Minds of the Nobles stood affected, that so he might know,
what strength he was able to raise against a popular Man, supported by so many
Factions and Alliances; and then, according to the Number of his Forces, to
take a Resolution. But those who were young and headstrong, despised this
Course, as slow and dilatory; alleging, That it was best to obviate the Danger
at its first Rise, and to proceed against the Enemy, before he was settled in
his new Kingdom. The King being young, embraced the later Opinion, as the more
specious of the Two, and having gathered an Army of about Ten Thousand Men
together, marches toward the Enemy. Neither was Constantine defective in his
Preparations; for, in a short time, he levied so great an Army, that Malcolm,
at the news of his Approach, disbanded his Soldiers, and retired himself into
Cumberland. But Kennethus, his Natural Brother, begot on a Concubine, judging
that course to be very Dishonorable, persuaded some of the most Valiant Troops
to stay behind, and so to stop the Enemy at the River Forth near Sterling,
which was the Boundary to both Armies. There both Camps lay idle on the high
Banks of the River, which was Fordable but in few places; by which means, they
were so afflicted with Pestilence and Famine, (both which Calamities did rage
very much, that Year) that each Army was forced to Disband. Thus, the Kingdom
being divided into Two Factions, the Commonalty was miserably afflicted with
Hunger, Pestilence, and frequent Robberies. In the mean time, during the
absence of Malcolm, who, according to his League, was assisting the English
against the Danes, Constantine, thinking he had now got a convenient
Opportunity to subdue the Faction opposite to him, marches with great Forces
into Lothian. Kennethus, who was left by his Brother to observe all
Constantine's Motions, gave him an halt at the Mouth of the River Or
Almond-water, dividing Mid-Lothian, from West-Lothian, or Linlithgoshire.
Almon. And, because he was inferior in Number, he supplied that defect by
Stratagem, for he so ordered his Army, that he had the advantage both of the
Sun and Wind; and besides, his Army was flanked, as much as it could, with the
River, which was the chief Cause of his Victory. For the Constantinians,
trusting to their Multitude, rushed violently into the Battle, having the
Sunbeams darting into their very Faces; and besides, a Storm, suddenly
arising, drove so much Dust into their Faces and Eyes, that they could scarce
lift up their Heads against their Enemies. A great Slaughter was made in both
Armies, and both Generals themselves, upon a Charge, Constantine slain.
wounded and slew one another; after Constantine had invaded the Kingdom, an
Year and Six Months.

Grimus, The Eighty Second King.
GRimus, the Son of King Duffus, or, as others say, of his Brother Mogallus,
after Constantine's death, was brought to Scone, and there, by the Men of his
own Faction, was made King. He, perceiving, that some Nobles of his Party were
already corrupted by Messengers sent from Malcolm; and More of them were
solicited by him, to a Defection; took some of those Messengers and committed
them to Prison: Malcolm, being much inceased at the Imprisonment of his
Ambassadors, as being done against the Law of Nations, breaks forth into open
War. As Grimus was making head against him, a sudden Rumor was dispersed
through all Malcolm's Army, of the Vastness of the Army coming against them, so
that all Malcolm's Measures were disturbed thereby; many of his Soldiers ran
privily away; and many others, making frivolous pretenses, did publicly desire
to be dismissed. The Fear first arose from the Merchants, who, preferring their
Private Concerns before the Public Good, scattered the Report throughout the
whole Army. And besides, there were Some among them, who privately favored
Grimus his Party; for indeed, there were many things in him very attractive of
the Vulgar, as the Talness of his Stature, his great Beauty, accompanied with a
singular Courtesy, and a comely Mien in all his Actions; Besides, as there was
occasion, he was severe in punishing Offenders, and he managed Matters with
great Celerity and Prudence, so that many promised themselves an Happy and an
Honorable Calm, under his Government. In this Diversity and Combustion of Men's
Spirits, Malcolm, not daring to commit any thing to an hazard in Battle, by the
Advice of his Friends, dismissed the greatest part of his Army, and, with some
select Troops, resolved to stop the Enemies passage over the Forth.

In the mean time, the Bishop of that Diocese, Forthadus by Name, of whom all
had an high Opinion for his Sanctimony, endeavored, by his Authority, to
compose Matters, and passing to and fro betwixt both Parties, at length he
brought Matters to this pass, That a Truce was made for Three Months; Grimus
being to go into Angus; and Malcolm into Cumberland: And also Arbitrators were
to be chosen by both Parties, by Consent, who were to determine the main
Controversy in Dispute. Neither did Forthadus give over his Endeavors, till
An Agreement made between Malcolm and Grimus, con^erning the Crown.
Peace was made by them on these Conditions; That Grimus should retain the Name
of King, as long as he lived: And, that, after his Decease, the Kingdom should
return to Malcolm; And, for the future, the Law of Kennethus, for establishing
the Succession in the King's Children, should be observed as Sacred and
Inviolate. In the mean time, the Wall of Severus was to be the Boundary to them
Both. That which was within the Wall was to belong to Malcolm; and That
without, to Grimus. Both of them were to be contented with those Limits,
Neither being to invade each other, or to assist the Enemies of one another.
Thus Peace was made, to the great Joy of all Men, which was Religiously
observed for almost Eight Years. Grimus was the first Occasion of the Breach,
for whereas, since the beginning of his Reign, in turbulent Times, he had
carried himself as a good Prince, his Industry being slackened by the Quiet he
enjoyed, he wholly plunged himself in voluptuous Courses; and that kind of
Life, being, as usually it is, a Life of Expense, he was reduced to some
Necessity, and was thereby enforced to pretend Crimes against the Richer sort,
that so, out of Covetousness, he might enjoy their Estates. Being told of the
danger of this Course, he was so far from Reforming it; or, from abating any
thing of his former Vileness, That he resolved to put his Monitors in Prison,
that so others, being terrified by their Punishment, might not use the like
freedom, in reproving Kings. In order whereto, he invited them kindly to his
Court, but they, having notice of his Design, by their Friends, withdrew
themselves; at which, Grimus was so enraged, that he gathered a Band of Men
together, and made after them, spoiling their Lands more than any Foreign Enemy
could have done; he spared neither Men, Houses, Cattle nor Corn, and That which
he could not carry away, he spoiled, That so it might be rendered useless to the
Owners. Thus he made a promiscous Havoc of all things, (whether Sacred or
Profane) by Fire and Sword. Complaint hereof being made to Malcolm, who was
then busy in helping the English against the Danes, he presently returned
home; for he was incensed, not only at the undeserved Sufferings of so many
brave and innocent Persons, but much more, at the Indignity offered him by
Grimus; who, knowing that the Lands were shortly to pass over to another,
without any Respect to future Times, had swept away the Fruits thereof, as if
it had been an Enemies Country. There was a great Resort to Malcolm, at his
return, insomuch, that, tho Grimus had for a time been Dear to, and Beloved of,
the People; yet now the greatest part of the Nobles forsook him.
Notwithstanding, with what Forces he could make, he made Head against his
Enemy. When their Camps were near one another, Grimus, knowing that Malcolm
would Religiously observe As^ensi^n-day, resolved then to attaque him, hoping
to find him unpr^pared. Malcolm, having notice of his Design, kept his Men in
Arms, and tho he did hope well, as to the Victory, in so good a Cause; yet he
sent to Grimus, to advise him to defer Fighting for that day, that so They,
being Christians, might not pollute so Holy a Day, with shedding the Blood of
their Countrymen; Yet he was, nevertheless, resolved to Fight, alleging to his
Soldiers, That the Fear the Enemy was in, tho pretended to be out of Reverence
to so Holy a Feast, was a good Omen of their Victory. Hereupon, a fierce and
eager Fight began; wherein, Grime, having broken the Agreement with Malcolm, is
overthrown by him in Battle.
Grimus, being forsaken of his Men, was wounded in the Head, taken Prisoner,
and soon after had his Eyes put out. Insomuch, that, in a short time, out of
Grief, as well as his Wounds, he Dyed in the Tenth Year of his Reign. Malcolm
carried it Nobly toward the Conquered, and caused Grimus to be interred in the
Sepulchers of his Ancestors. The Faction, which followed him, he received into
his Grace and Favor, laying aside the Memory of past Offenses; Then going to
the Assembly of Estates at Scone, before he would undertake the Government, he
caused The Law concerning Hereditary Succession to the Crown Confirmed.
the Law made by his Father, concerning the Succession to the Crown, to be
publicly Ratified by the Votes of the whole Parliament.

Malcolm II. The Eighty Third King.
AT the entrance into his Government, he labored to restore the State of the
Kingdom, which was sorely shaken by Factions. And as he forgave all former
Offenses to himself, so he took care that the Seeds of Faction and Discord
amongst all different Parties might also be rooted out. After this, he sent
Governors, chosen out of the Nobility, into all Provinces, (Just and Pious Men)
to restrain the Licentiousness of Robbers; who, in former times, had taken
great Liberty to themselves to Steal and Plunder. By Them also the Common
People were encouraged to Tillage and Husbandry; so that Provisions grew
cheaper, Commerce between Man and Man safer, and the public Peace was better
secured. Amidst these Transactions, Sueno, Sueno, or Swain, coming into
Scotland, obtains Aid there against Eng^and.
the Son of Harald, King of the Danes, being banished from home, came into
Scotland. He was oftentimes overcome, made Prisoner by, and Ransomed from, the
Vandals; and having sought for Aid in vain from Olavus, King of the S^edes,
Danes, Laps, and Norts, were anciently so called.
Scandians, and Edward King of England, at last he came into Scotland, and
being turned Christian, of whom before he was a most bitter Enemy, there he
received some small assistance, and so returned into his own Country; from
whence soon after he passed over with a great Army into England. First, he
overthrew the English, alone; and afterward, he had the same Success against
them, when the Scots assisted them, whom he grievously threatened, because they
would not forsake the English, and return into their own Country. Neither were
his Threatenings in vain, for Olavus of The Danes enter Scotland, and overthrow
King Malcolm in Battle.
Scandia, and Enecus, General of the Danes, were sent by him with a great Army
into Scotland; They ranged over all Murray, killed whomsoever they met, took
away all they could catch, whether Sacred or Profane; at last, gathering into
a Body, they assaulted Castles, and other strong Places. While they were
Besieging these Fortresses, Malcolm had gathered an Army together out of the
Neighboring Countries, and pitched his Camp not far from them. The day after,
the Scots, perceiving the Multitude of the Danes, and their Warlike
Preparations, were struck with great Terror; The King endeavored to encourage
them, but to small purpose; at last, a Noise was raised in the Camp, by those
who were willing to seem more valiant than the rest; and when it was raised,
others received, and seconded it; so that presently, as if they had been wild,
they ran in upon the Danes, without the Command of their Leaders, and rushed
upon the points of their Swords, who were ready to receive them. After the
forwardest were slain, the rest fled back, faster than ever they came on. The
King was Wounded in the Head, and had much ado, to be carried off the Field
into an adjacent Wood, where he was Horsed, and so escaped with his Life. After
this Victory, the Castle of Narn was surrendered to the Danes, the ^arison being
dismayed at the Event of the unhappy Fight; yet they put them to Death, after
the surrender. They strongly fortified the Castle, because it was seated in a
convenient Pass; and, of a Peninsule, made it a convenient Isle, by cutting
through a narrow Chanel, for the Sea to surround it; and then they called it by
a Danish Name, A Burgh, or Burough.
Burgus. The other Castles, which were Elgin and Foress, were deserted, for
fear of the Cruelty of the Danes. The Danes upon this good Success, resolved to
fix their Habitations in Murray, and sent home their Ships to bring over their
Wives and Children, in the mean time exercising all manner of cruel hardships
over the Captived Scots.. Malcolm, in order to prevent their further Progress,
gathered a stronger, and more compact, Army together; and when they were gone
into Mar, he met them at a place called A Village on the West of the River
F^ddick near Balvany.
Mortlich, both Armies being in great fear; the Scots being afraid of the
Cruelty of the Danes; and the Danes fearing the Places, which they did not
know, (as being far from the Sea, and fit for Ambushes) more than their
Enemies. In the beginning of the Fight, the Scots were much discouraged at the
Slaughter of Three of their Valiant Worthies, viz. of Kennethus, Thane of the
Islands; of Grimus, Thane of Strathearn; and of Dumbar, Thane of Lothian, who
all fell, presently one after another; so that they were forced to retreat, and
to retire into their old Fastness, which was behind their backs: There, fencing
their Camp with a Trench, Ditch, and huge Trees, which they cut down, in a
narrow place, they fronted, and stopped, the Enemy; yea, they slew some, who,
as if they had fully gotten the Victory, The Danes overthrown by the Scots, and
their Genera^* Ene^^s, sl^^n.
did carelessly assault them, amongst whom, Enecus, one of their Generals, fell.
His Loss, as it made the Danes less forward to fight; so it added Alacrity to
the Scots, who were crest-fallen, before. So that, almost in a moment of time,
the Scene was quite altered; The Danes were put to flight, and the Scots
pursued them. Olavus, the other of their Generals, got some to guide him, and
bent his Course, that night, toward Murray. Though Malcolm knew it, yet,
having slain the forwardest of his Enemies, and wounded many more, he desisted
from following the Chase. When News of this Overthrow was brought to Swain, in
England, he bore it undauntedly; and sent some of his old Soldiers, and some
that were newly come to him from his own Country, under Camus, their General,
to recruit his old and shattered Army, in Scotland. He first came into the
Firth of Forth, but being hindered by the Country (who observed all his Motions)
from Landing, he set Sail, and made for the Called Redhead, Ridhead, or
Reedhead.
Red-Promontory of Angus. There he landed his Men, and attempted to take in
some Places, but, being disappointed, he fell a plundering. Having pitched his
Tents at B^mbreid in the midway between Dundee and Aberbrothock.
Balbridum, i. e. the Village of St. Bride, word was brought him by his Spies,
that the Scots Forces were scarce two miles distant from him; whereupon both
Generals, according to the Exigence of the time, exhorted their Men to fight;
and the next day, they were all ready at their Arms, almost at one time. The
third day, they fought with so great eagerness and fury, as either new Hope, or
old Hatred, could occasion and suggest; At last, the Scots prevailed, and The
Danes, under their General Camus, receive another overthrow from the Scots.
Camus, endeavoring to secure the Remainders of his Army, by flying to the
Mountains toward Murray, before he had gone two miles, was overtaken by the
Pursuers, and he and all his Men cut off. There are Monuments extant of this
Victory, in an Obeliske, and a Neighboring Village, which as yet retains the
Memorable Name of Camus. Another Band of them were cut off not far from the
Town of On the River South-Esk, in Angus.
Breichin; where also another Obeliske was erected; The Remainder, being few in
Number, under the Covert of the night, made to their Ships; These last were
tossed up and down several days in the raging Sea, by cross Winds, at length
coming to the inhospitable Shore of Buchan, they rode there so long at Anchor,
till they were necessitated, for want, to send about 500 of their Men ashore,
to get some Relief, out of the Neighboring Country; Mernanus, the Thane of the
place, stopped them from returning to their Ships, and compelled them to
retire, to a steep Hill, where, being assisted by the Convenience of the place,
they defended themselves with Stones, and slew many of the Scots, who rashly
attempted them: At last, the Scots encouraged one another, and in several
Parties, in great Numbers, got up the Hill, and put every Man of the Danes to
the Sword. There also, as well as at Bambreid, when the Wind blows up the Sand,
there are Bones discovered of a greater Magnitude, than can well suit with the
Stature of the Men of our Times.

Yet Sueno was not discouraged, no not with this Overthrow also, but sent his
Son Canutus sent by Swain, into Scotland.
Canutus, with new Levies, into Scotland. He landed his Soldiers in Buchan,
and so preyed upon the Country. Malcolm, though he had yet hardly recovered his
Loss, sustained in former Battles, yet made head against him, and being not
willing to hazard all by fighting a pitched Battle, he thought it best to weary
the Enemy with light Skirmishes, and to keep him from plundering; for, by this
means, he hoped, in a short time, to reduce him to great want of Provisions, as
being in an Enemies Country, almost quite wasted and desolated by the Miseries
of War, before. He followed this Counsel for some days, but, at last, when the
Scots had got a full understanding of their Enemies Strength, they less
diffided their Own; and both Armies, being equally pressed with Want, did
unanimously crave a Signal to the Battle, pretending, unless it were given,
they would fall to it, even, without the Consent of their Generals. Hereupon,
Malcolm set the Battle in array, which was fought with such A Third desperate
Battle between the Danes, under Canutus their General, and the Scots*
desperate Rage and Fury, that neither Party came off in Triumph. And though
the Victory did nominally rest on the Scots side, yet a great part of their
Nobility being slain, and the rest, wearied and discouraged in their Spirits,
returned to their Camp, giving the Danes liberty to retreat, without any
pursuit; The next day, when both Parties mustered their Men, they found so
great a Slaughter to have been made, that they willingly admitted some Priests
to be Intercessors of Peace between them. Which produces Conditions of Peace
between Them.
Whereupon, Peace was made on these Conditions, That the Danes should leave
Murray, and Buchan, and depart; and that as long as Malcolm and Sueno lived,
neither of them should wage War with one another any more, nor help one
another Enemies; That the Field in which the Battle was fought, should be set
apart, and Consecrated for the Burial of the Dead. Upon this, the Danes
withdrew, and Malcolm took Order for the Interment of the slain.

A while after, he called an Assembly of Estates at Scone; and, that he might
reward those who had deserved well of their Country, he divided all the King's
Lands between them: On the other side, the Nobility granted to the King, The
Originals of Wardships.
That when any of them died, their Children should be under the Wardship and
Tutelage of the King, till they arrived at the Age of 21 Years; and, that the
King should receive all their Revenue, except what was expended for the
Education of the Ward; And besides, that he should have the Power to give them
in Marriage; Or, otherwise to dispose of them, when they were grown up, and
should also receive their Dowry. I judge, this Custom came rather from the
English and Danes; because it yet continues throughout all England, and in part
of Normandy, too. Afterward, the King bent his Thoughts to repair the Damages
sustained by the War; he re-edified many Temples, and Sacred Places, demolished
by the Enemy; he built New Castles, or else repaired the Old, in every Town.
Having thus restored Peace to the Kingdom by his great Valor, he endeavored
further to adorn it with good Institutions and wholesome Laws; and, in order
thereunto, be erected New Names for Magistrates, (I believe, such, as he
borrowed from his Neighbors) which served rather for vain Ambition, than for
any real Use. For, in former times, there was no Name superior in Honor to
that of a Knight, except that of Thane, i. e. Governor, or Sheriff, of a
Province or Country; which Custom, as I hear, is yet observed amongst the
Danes. But, now a days, Princes keep no Mean, in instituting New Titles of
Honor.
New Names, or Titles, of Honor; though there be no use at all of those Names,
but the bare Sound. Thus Malcolm, having finished his Toilsom Wars, Reigned
some Years in great Splendour and Glory. But, in the Progress of his Age, he
sullied the Beauty of his former Life with the blot of Covetousness. That Vice,
being incident to Old Men, partly grew up in him with his Age, and partly arose
from that Want, which his immoderate Largesses had driven him to. So that those
Lands, which he had unadvisedly distributed amongst the Nobility, he did as
unjustly and wickedly labor to resume; by which means, he put some of them to
Death, and reduced others to great Penury. Hereupon, the present sense of
suffering, though sometimes just, drowned the Memory of all former Courtesies;
so that, the Injury reaching to a few, but the Fear to many, the Friends and
Kindred of those which were slain and impoverished, bent all their Thoughts to
revenge Them, and to secure Themselves. And at last, b^^bing the King's
Domestics at About four Miles South of Forfar.
Glammes, in Angus, they were admitted at Night into the King's Bedchamber,
and King Malcolm Murdered.
slew him. When they had committed the Fact, those bribed Domestics, together
with the Parricides, took Horse, which they had ready bridled and saddled for
all Events; and, being not able to find the way, in regard the Snow covered all
the Track, they were confounded, and arrived at a Lake, by the Town of The
Chief Town of Angus.
Forfar; where, endeavoring to pass ov^r, the Ice being not very firm, they
sunk with their Weight, and were all K. Malcolm's Murderers drowned in their
Flight.
drowned. Their Bodies lay undiscovered for a season, by reason the Ice closed
again; but when a Thaw came, they were found, and hung upon Gibbets in the
Highways, there to rot for the Terror of the Living; and in Reproach to them,
after they were dead. This is the common Report about Malcolm's End; though
some write, that he was slain by an Ambush, laid by the Kindred of Grimus and
Constantinus, the former Kings, after a bloody B^ttel joined and fought betwixt
them. Others say, that he was killed by the Friends of a Noble Virgin, whom he
had forceably vitiated; but all agree, that he came to a violent Death. Malcolm
Reigned so justly above Thirty Years, that, unless Avarice had corrupted his
Mind in's Old Age, he might well have been numbered amongst the Best of
Princes. The Year, in which he died, was a Prodigious One, for, in the Winter,
the Rivers did mightily overflow; and in Spring there were great Inundations of
the Sea. Prodigies.
And moreover, a few Days after the Summer Solstice, there were very pinching
Frosts, and mighty Snows, by which means, the Fruits of the Earth being
spoiled, a great Famine did ensue.

The Seventh BOOK.
I Have declared in the former Book, how eagerly Kennethus, and his Son
Malcolm, did strive, to settle the Succession to the Crown in their Families,
That the Eldest Son might succeed the Father: But what the Success thereof,
was, will appear in the Sequel. This is certain, That that Public Benefit
which was promised to the whole Kingdom, nor yet the private Advantage, alleged
to arise to our Kings, thereby, were not at all obtained, by this New Law. An
Universal Good to All was pretended, in thus settling the Succession, that
Seditions, Murders, and Treacheries, might be prevented amongst Those of the
Blood; and also, that Ambition, with the other Mischiefs accompanying it, might
be rooted out from amongst the Nobles. But, on the contrary, Descants, by way
of Reflection, upon the Law of Kenneth about Hereditary Succession to the Crown.
when I enquire into the Causes of Public Grievances, and compare the Old with
the Modern, it seems to me, That all those Mischiefs, which we would have
avoided by this New Law, are so far from being extinguished by the Antiquating
of the Old, that they rather receive a great Increase therefrom. For, not to
speak of the Plots of their Kindred against Those who are actually in the
Throne; nor of a present King's Evil Suspicions of those, whom Nature and the
Law would have accounted as most dear to him; I say, omitting these things,
which, in the Series of our History, will be further explained; all the
Miseries of former Ages may seem light and tolerable, if compared with those
Calamities, which followed upon the Death of Alexander the Third. Neither will
I insist upon the Particulars following, viz. that That Law does enervate the
Force of all Public Councils, without which no Lawful Government can subsist:
That it does willingly, and, by consent, create those Evils to our selves,
which others, who have Interest in Public Governments, do chiefly, if not
only, deprecate; viz. To have Kings, over whom other Governors must be
appointed; and so the People are to be universally committed into their Power,
who have no Power over themselves: insomuch, That those Persons, who are hardly
brought to Obey Wise, Prudent, and Experienced Kings, are now required to yield
Obedience, as it were, to the very shadow of a King; by which means, we
willingly precipitate our selves into those Punishments, which God threatens to
Those, who despise and contemn his Holy Majesty, namely, That Children, Male or
Female, may Reign over us, whom the Law of Nations, and even Nature it self,
(the Mother of all Laws) has subjected to the Rule of others. As for the
private Benefit, That Kings aim at by this Law, i. e. That they may perpetuate
their Name and Stock, how vain and fallacious that Pretense is, the Examples of
the Ancients, yea, even Nature it self, might inform them, if they had but
considered, by how many Laws and Rewards, the Romans endeavored to perennate
the mighty Names of their Families; of which yet, no one Footstep remains at
this Day, no not in any part of the World, which they had Conquered. Which
Disappointment does deservedly attend those, who fight against even Nature it
self, by endeavoring to cloth a fading, frail, Thing, subject to Momentany
Alterations, and Blasts of Fortune, with a sort of Perpetuity; and to endow it
with a kind of Eternity, which they themselves neither are Partakers of, nor
can be; yea, they strive to effect it by those Mediums, which are most cross to
their purpose: For, what is less conducive to Perpetuity, than Tyranny? Yet,
this New Law makes a great Step thereto; for a Tyrant is, as it were, the
White, or Mark, exposed to the Hate of all Men, insomuch that he cannot long
subsist, and when he falls, all His fall with him. It seems to me, That God
does sometimes gently chastize and disappoint this endeavor of Foolish Men;
and sometimes he does expose it, even to Public Scorn, as if it were emulous
of his own Power. There can be no clearer, or fitter, Example of Gods Will and
Pleasure, than That which we have now under our Hands. For Malcolm, who so much
labored to confirm the Law, (which was, almost, forcibly Enacted by his
Father) by common Suffrage and Consent, For the Kings Children to be
substituted in the Room of their deceased Parents, even He, left no Male-Child
behind him; but he had Two Daughters, One called Beatrix, whom he Married to a
Nobleman named Grimus, the Thane of the Western Islands, and the Chief of all
other Thanes, and therefore styled in that Age, Abthane, or great Thane, is the
Chief above all other Thanes, which receives the King's Revenue, as Lord High
Treasurer, from the other Thanes.
Abthane; the Other, named Doaca, he Married to the Thane of Angus, by whom he
begot Mackbeth, or Macbeda, of whom in his Place.

Donaldus VII. The Eighty Fourth King.
MALCOLM being slain, as has been related, Donaldus, his Nephew by his
Daughter Beatrix, succeeded him. A Prince of great Courtesy, and of more
Indulgence to his own Kindred, than became a King: For he was of a mild and
Inclineable Disposition; and, from his Youth, gave forth Omens of his
Popularity; For, in the most difficult times, when he was made Governor of
Cumberland by his Grandfather, and could not come to the King (by reason of the
Danish Troops, which swarmed over the Country, and stopped all Passages) to
Swear to the Laws, yet he faithfully took part with the English, until Canutus,
having had the rest of England surrendered to him, made an Expedition against
him, and then he submitted himself to the Danes, on the same Conditions, under
which he obeyed the English, before. Donald ^ust Government both to R^ch and
Poor
This also was popular in him, That he administered Justice with great Equity,
and every Year he visited the Provinces, to hear the Complaints of the Poor,
and, as much as he could, he would not suffer the Great men to oppress Them.
But, as these Virtues did endear him to the Good, so they lessened his
Authority amongst the Lovers of Sedition, so that his Clemency to the Former
occasioned the Rage of wicked men against him. The beginning of lessening and
despising his Government, happened in Loch-Abyr, upon the account of one Bancho,
Thane of that Country, a strict Lover of impartial Justice; some ill Men, not
enduring his Severity in Punishments, made a Conspiracy against him, Plundered
him of his Goods, and drove him away, being wounded and almost dead. As soon as
ever his Wounds permitted him to endure the jogging of his body, he took a
Journey and complained to the King; the King sent a public Officer to do
Justice upon the Offenders, but he was grievously affronted, and afterward
slain by them; so great Security did they fancy to themselves, by reason of the
Lenity (but, as they interpreted it, Sloth) of a good King. The chief of the
Faction, which raised the Rebellion, was named Mac-duald, who, despairing of
Pardon, prepares himself for an open War. He called in the One Mac-duald Rebels
against Donald.
Or R^dshanks.
Islanders to his assistance, (who were always prone to Sedition) and also the
forwardest of the Irish, in hopes of Prey. He told them, That under an
effeminate and slothful King, who was fitter to rule Monks than Warriors, there
was no fear of Punishment, but there might be great hopes of Advantage; and
that he did not doubt, but the Scots, who were, as it were, fettered with the
Chains of a Long Peace under the former King, when an Alarm was sounded to the
War, would come in to recover their Ancient Liberty. These Exhortations were
seconded with a successful beginning, which much heartned the Party. There was
one Malcolm, of the Prime Nobility, sent by the King against them, with some
Forces; but his Army was presently overthrown by them, and he himself, being
taken Prisoner, had his head cut off by them. The King, being troubled at this
Overthrow, called a Council together, to consult of what was fit to be done.
Some were very slow in delivering their Opinions, but Mackbeth, Kinsman to the
King, laid the blame of the Misfortune on the Slugg^shness of former times,
withal promising, that, if the Command or Generalship were bestowed on him and
Bancho, who was well acquainted with that Country, he would quickly subdue all,
Mackbeth his Character.
and quiet things. This Mackbeth was of a sharp Wit, and of a very lofty
Spirit; and, if Moderation had accompanied it, he had been worthy of a Command,
though an eminent one. But, in punishing Offenders, he was so severe, that having
no respect to the Laws, he seemed soon likely to degenerate into Cruelty.
M^cduald is overthrown by Mackbeth and B^n^ho.
When the chief Command of the Army was conferred upon him, many were so
terrified, that, casting aside their Hopes, whch they had conceived by reason
of the Kings Slothful Temper, they hid themselves in Holes and Corners. The
Islanders and the Irish, their Flight being stopped, were driven into great
Despair, and in a fierce Fight were every one of them slain; Macduala himself,
with a few others flying into a Neighbor Castle, being past all hopes of
Pardon, redeemed Himself and His from the Opprobriousness of his Enemies, by a
voluntary death. M^ckbeth, not content with that punishment, cut off his Head,
and sent it to the King at Perth, and hung up the rest of his Body, for all to
behold, in a conspicuous place. Those of the Red-shanks, which he took, he
caused to be hanged.

This Domestic Sedition being appeased, a far greater Terror succeeded, and
seized on him, occasioned by the Danes. For Sueno, the powerful King of the
Danes, Swain and his three Sons.
dying, left Three Kingdoms to his Three Sons; England to Harold; Norway to
Sueno; and Denmark to Canutus. Harold dying soon after, Canutus succeeded him
in the Realm of Scotland. Swain King of Norway ^ands in Scotland.
Sueno, (or Swain) King of Norway, being Emulous of his Brothers Glory, crossed
the Seas with a great Navy, and Landed in Fif^; upon the Bruit of his coming,
Machbeth was sent to Levy an Army; Bancho, the other General, staying, in the
Interim, with the King. Duncanus, or Donald, as if he had been rouzed from a
fit of Sluggishness, was forced to go meet the Enemy. They fought near A Town
standing on the Forth in Pert^shi^e.
Culross, with such obstinate Courage, that as One Party was scarce able to
fly; so the Other had no heart to pursue. The Scots, who looked upon themselves
as overcome, rather by the Incommodiousness of the Place, than by the Valor of
their Enemies, retreated to Perth; and there staid with the Relicts of their
conquered Forces, waiting for the Motions of the Enemy. Swain, thinking. That
if he pressed eagerly on them, all Scotland would speedily be his Own, made
toward Perth, with all his Forces, to besiege Duncan; his Ships he sent about
by the Tay, to meet him there: Duncan, though he much confided in the present
Posture of Affairs, because Mackbeth was very near him with a new supply of
Force; yet, being counseled by Bancho, to piece out his Force by Stratagem, he
sent Messengers, one to Mackbeth, to desire him to stop where he was; and
another to Swain, to treat about the Surrender of the Town. The Scots desired,
That, upon the Surrender, They and Theirs might have Liberty to depart in
safety; Swain, supposing their Request proceeded from the very bottom of
Despair, would hear of nothing but surrendering at Mercy; upon this, he sent
other Messengers, with unlimited Instructions, and a Command to delay time in
making Conditions; who, to ingratiate themselves the more, told the Norv^gians,
That, whilst the Conditions of Peace were propounding and settling, their King
would send abundance of Provisions into their Camp; as knowing, That they were
not over-plentiful in Victuals; That Gift was acceptable to the Norvegians, not
so much on the account of the Scots Bounty, or their own Penury, as, that, they
thought it was a Sign, their Spirits were cowed out, and quite broken.
Whereupon, a great deal of Bread and Wine was sent, both Wine pressed out of
the Grape, and also strong Drink made of Barly-Malt, mixed with the ^uice of a
Poisonous Herb, whereof abundance grows in Scotland, called, Somniferous The
Sc^t^, by an ineb^^ating D^ink made of Nightshade, stupifie the Danes.
The Herb Nightshade, its Description, and Properties.
Nightshade. The Stalk of it is above two F^ot Long, and in its upper part
spreads into Branches, the Leaves are broadish, acuminated on the outside, and
faintly Green. The Berrys are great and of a Black Color when they are ripe,
which proceed out of the Stalk under the bottom of the Leaves. Their Taste is
sweetish, and almost insipid. It has a very small seed, as little as the
Grains of a Fig. The Virtue of the Fruit, Root, and especially of the Seed, is
Soporiferous; and will make men mad, if they be taken in too great Quantities.
With this Herb all the Provision was infected, and they that carried it, to
prevent all suspicion of Fraud, tasted of it before, and invited the Danes to
drink huge Draughts thereof. Swain himself, in token of Good will, did the
same, according to the custom of his Nation. But Duncan, knowing that the force
of the Potion would reach to their very Vitals, whilst they were asleep, had in
great silence admitted Mackbeth, with his Forces into the City, by a Gate which
was furthest off from the Enemies Camp; and, understanding by his Spies, that
the Enemy was fast asleep and full of Wine, he sent Bancho before, who well
knew all the Avenues both of that Place, and of the Enemies Camp too, with the
greatest part of the Army; placing the rest in Ambush. He, entering their Camp,
and making a great Shout, Danes overthrown.
found all things in a greater Posture of Negligence than he imagined, before.
There were a few raised up at the Noise, who running up and down, like Madmen,
were slain as they were met; the others were killed, sleeping. Their King, who
was almost dead drunk, wanting not only Strength, but Sense also, was snatched
up by some few, who were not so much overcome with Wine as the rest, and laid
like a Log, or Beast, upon an Horse, which they casually lighted on, and so
carried to the Ships. There, the Case was almost as bad as in the Camp, for
almost all the Seamen were slain ashore; so that there could scarce be got
together so many of them, as were sufficient to guide one Ship. Yet, by this
means, the King escaped to his Country. The rest of the Ships, by stress of
Weather, fell foul upon one another, and were sunk; and by the accession of
Sand and other Trash, which the Water carries, heaped up together, there was
made an Hillock dangerous to Sailers, which the Vulgar call, Dru^i^a^-Sands,
(...) North-side of the (...).
Drumilaw-Sands.

While the Scots were joyous for this Victory, obtained without Blood; News was
brought, that a Fleet of Danes rod at A Burgh-Ro^a^ on the North (...)
King^orn, which was sent by Canutus, to help Swain. The Soldiers and
Passengers, Landing, did seize upon, and carry away the Goods of the Fifians,
without any Resistance. Bancho was sent with Forces against them; who,
assaulting the foremost, made a great Slaughter amongst them. Another Fleet of
the Danes overthrown by Bancho.
These were the principal Men of the Nation, the rest were easily driven back
to their Ships. Bancho is reported to have sold the burying Places for the
Slain, for a great deal of Money. Their Sepulchers, they say, are yet to be
seen in the Isle Or, Inch-Colm.
Aemona.

It Is Reported, that the The Danes swore never to invade Scotland any more.
Danes, having made so many unlucky Expeditions into Scotland, bound themselves
by a Solemn Oath, never to return, as Enemies, thither, any more. When Matters
thus prosperously succeeded with the Scots, both at home and abroad, and all
things flourished in Peace, Mackbeth, who had always a Disgust at the un-active
Slothfulness of his Cousin; and thereupon had conceived a secret Hope of the
Kingdom in his Mind, was further encouraged in his Ambitious Thoughts, by a
Dream which he had: For one Night, when he was far distant from the King, he
seemed to see Three Women, whose Beauty was more August and Surprising than
bare Women's uses to be, Mackbeth's Dream, encouraging him to aspire to the
Kingdom.
of which, one Saluted him, Thane of Angus; another, Thane of Murray; and a
Third, King of Scotland. His Mind, which was before Sick, betwixt Hope and
Desire, was mightily encouraged by this Dream, so that he contrived all
possible ways, by which he might obtain the Kingdom; in order to which, a just
occasion was offered him, as he thought. Duncan begat Two Sons on the Daughter
of Sibert, a petty King of Northumberland; Malcolm, Surnamed Cammorus, (which
is as much as Iolt-head,) and Donaldus, Surnamed Banus, i. e. White: Of these,
he made Malcolm, scarce yet out of his Childhood, Governor of Cumberland.
Mackbeth took this matter mighty Hainously; in regard, he looked upon it as
Obstacle of Delay to him, in his obtaining the Kingdom; for, having arrived at
the Enjoyment of his other Honors, promised him by his Dream; by this means,
he thought, that either he should be secluded altogether from the Kingdom; or
else, should be much retarded in the Enjoyment thereof; in regard the
Government of Cumberland was always looked upon, as the first step to the
Kingdom of Scotland. Besides, his Mind, which was feirce enough of it self, was
spurred on, by the daily Importunities of his Wife, (who was Privy to all his
Counsels.) Whereupon, communicating the matter to his most intimate Friends,
amongst whom Bancho was one, he got a fit opportunity, at Innerness, to way-lay
the King, and so slew him in the Seventh year of his Reign; and gathering a
Company together, went to Scone, and under the shelter of popular Favor, made
himself King. He thereupon sl^ys King Donald, or Duncan, (as some call him) and
is declared King.
Duncan's Children were astonished at this sudden Disaster. They saw their
Father was slain, the Author of the Murder in the Throne, and Snares laid for
them, to take away their Lives; that so, by their Deaths, the Kingdom might be
confirmed to Mackheth: Whereupon, they shifted up and down, and hid themselves,
and thus, for a time, escaped his Fury. But perceiving, that no place could
long secure them from his Rage; and that, being of a feirce Nature, Donald's
Children fly for their Lives.
there was no hope of Clemency to be expected from him, they fled several ways;
Malcolm, into Cumberland; and Donald, to the Kindred of his Father, in the
Aebudae Islands.

Mackbeth, The Eighty Fifth King.
MAckbeth, to confirm the ill-gotten Kingdom to himself, procured the favor of
the Nobles by great Gifts, being secure of the Kings Children because of their
Age, and of his Neighboring Princes, in regard of their mutual Animosities,
and Discords. Thus having engaged the great Men, he determined to procure the
favor of the Vulgar by Justice and Equity* and to retain it by Severity, if
nothing else would do. Whereupon, he determined with himself to punish the
Free-booters or Thieves, Mackbeth severe against Thieves.
who had taken courage from the Lenity of Duncan; but, foreseeing, that this
could not be done without great Tumults and much ado, he devised this Project,
which was, to sow the Seeds of Discord amongst them, by some fit Men, for that
purpose, that thereupon they might challenge one another; and so, some of them
might fight in equal and divided Numbers, one with another. All this was to be
done on one and the same day, and that in the most remote parts of Scotland,
too; when they all met at the time appointed, they were taken by an Ambush,
which he had laid for that purpose. Their Punishment struck a Terror into the
rest. Besides, he put to death the Thanes of Caithnes, Ross, Sutherland, and
Narn, and some others of the Clans, by whose Fewds the Commonalty were
miserably harassed, before. Afterward, he went into the Aebudae Islands, and
used severe Justice there. After his return from thence, he once or twice
summoned Macgill or Macgild, the powerfullest Man in all Galway, to appear, but
he refused so to do, rather out of fear for being of Malcolm's Faction, than
for the guilt of the Crimes objected to him; whereupon, he sent Forces against
him, who overthrew him in Battle, and cut off his Head.

The public Peace being thus restored, he applied his mind to make Laws, (a
thing almost wholly neglected by former Kings) and indeed, he Enacted many good
and useful ones, He makes Wholesome Laws.
which now are either wholly unknown, or else lie unobserved, to the great
damage of the Public. In a word, he so managed the Government for ten years,
that, if he had not obtained it by Violence, he might have been accounted
inferior to none of the former Kings. But when he had so strengthened himself
with the Aid and Favor of the Multitude, that he feared no Force to disturb
him; the Murder of the King (as it is very probable) hurried his Mind into
dangerous Precipices, so that he converted his Government, got by Treachery,
into a Cruel Tyranny. He vented the first Shock of his Inhumanity upon But*
afterward* degenerates, and causes Bancho to be treacherously slain.
Bancho, who was his Companion in the Kings Parricide. Some ill Men had spread
a kind of Prophecy abroad among the Vulgar, That hereafter his Posterity
should enjoy the Kingdom; whereupon, fearing lest he, being a powerful and
active Man, and also of the Blood Royal, should imitate the Example proposed by
himself, he courteously invited him and his Son to Supper, but, in his return,
he caused him to be slain, as if a sudden Fray and Tumult had arisen. His Son
Fleanchus, being not known in the dark, escaped the Ambush, and, being informed
by his Friends, how his Father was treacherously slain by the King, and that
his Life was also sought after, he fled secretly into Wales. Upon that Murder,
so cruelly and perfidiously committed, the Nobles were afraid of themselves,
insomuch, that they all departed to their own homes, and came but few of them,
and those very seldom, to Court. So that the Kings Cruelty being partly
discovered by some, and partly vehemently suspected by all, mutual Fear and
Hatred sprung up betwixt him and the Nobility. Whereupon, seeing the matter
could no longer be concealed, he broke forth into open Tyranny, and the Rich
and Powerful for light, frivolous, and, many times, but pretended, Causes, were
put to Death. Their Confiscated Goods helped to maintain a Band of Debauchees,
which he had about him under the name of a Guard. And yet, he thought, that his
Life was not sufficiently secured by them neither, so that he resolved to build
a Castle on the top of the Hill Lying Southwest, 3 miles from Cowper in Angus.
Dunsinnan, where there was a large Prospect all over the Country; which Work
proceeding but slowly on, by reason of the difficulty of Carriage of Materials
thither, he commanded in all the Thanes of the whole Kingdom, and so dividing
the Task amongst them, They themselves were to oversee, That the Laborers did
their Duty. At that time, Mackduff was the Thane of Fife, a very powerful Man
in his Country; He, being loath to commit his Life unto the Kings hands, went
not himself, but sent thither many Workmen, and some of them his intimate
Friends, to press on the Work. The King, either out of a desire (as was
pretended) to see how the Building proceeded, or else to apprehend Mackduff,
(as he himself feared) came to view the Structure, and by chance spying a Teem
of Mackduff's Oxen, not able to draw up their Load against a steep Hill, he
took thence a willing occasion to vent his Passion against the Thane, saying,
That he knew well enough, before, his disobedient Temper, and therefore, was
resolved to punish it; and, to make him an Example, Mackduff, ill resents
Mackbeth.
he threatened to lay the Yoke upon his own Neck, instead of his Oxen.
Maecduff, hearing of it, commended the Care of his Family to his Wife, and,
without any delay, fitted up a small Vessel, as well as the streights of Time
permitted, and so passed over into Lothian, and from thence into England. The
King hearing, that he intended to fly, He flies into England.
made haste into Fife, with a strong Band of Men to prevent him; but, he being
departed before, the King was presently admitted into his Castle, where he
poured out all his Fury upon the Thane's Wife and Children, who were there
present. His Goods were confiscated, He himsel was proclaimed Traitor, and a
grievous Punishment was threatened to any, who dared to converse with, or
entertain, him. He exercised also great Cruelty against others, if they were
either Noble or Rich, without distinction. For now the Nobility was despised by
him, and he managed the Government by Domestic Counsels. In the mean time,
Macduff, arriving in England, found Malcolm there, Royally Treated by King
Edward. For Edward, when the Danes Power was broken in England, being recalled
from Banishment, did favor Malcolm, who was brought to him by Sibert, (his
Grandfather by the Mother side) for many Reasons, as, either, because his
Father and Grandfather, And stirs up Malcolm, Duncan's Son, against him.
when Governors of Cumberland, had always favored the Concerns of his
Ancestors, as much as the Times would permit them to do; or else, because the
Similitude of Events, and the remembrance of Dangers, did assimilate their
Minds, for each King had been unjustly banished by Tyrants; Or, Lastly, because
the Affliction of Kings does conciliate and move the Minds, even of the
greatest strangers, to pity and favor them. Whereupon, the Thane, as soon as
he had opportunity to speak with Malcolm, in a long Discourse declared to him
the Necessity of his unhappy Flight, the Cruelty of Mackbeth against all ranks
of Men, with the universal Hatred of the People, conceived against him; so that
he advised him, in an accurate Harangue, as he was a Son, so to endeavor the
Recovery of his Fathers Kingdom, especially, seeing he could not, without
incurring a great deal of Guilt, leave the Murder of his Father, to pass
unrevenged; nor, neglect the Miseries of the People, which God had committed to
his Charge; nor finally, ought He to shut his Ears, against the just Petitions
of his Friends. Besides, he told him, That King Edward was so Gracious a
Prince, That he would not be wanting to him, his Friend, and Suppliant; That
the People did also favor Him and hated the Tyrant; In fine, That Gods Favor
would attend the Good, against the Impious, if he were not wanting to himself.
But Malc^lm, who had often before been persuaded, and solicited to return, by
Messengers secretly sent to him from Mackbeth; That he might not be ensnared,
before he committed so great a Concern to Fortune, resolved to try the
Faithfulness of Mackduff; and therefore, he framed his Answer, thus, I know
(says he) That all what thou have said is true; but I am afraid That you, who
invite Me to undertake the Regal Government, do not thoroughly know my
Disposition; for those Vices, which have already destroyed many Kings, viz.
Lust, and Avarice, do almost Reign, even in me, too; and tho now, my private
Fortune does hide and disguise them, yet the Liberty of a Kingdom will let
loose the Reins thereunto; And therefore, said he, Pray, have a care, that you
invite me not, rather to my Ruin, than to a Throne: When Mackduff had replied
thereto, That the Lust and Desire of many Concubines might be prevented by a
lawful Marriage; and that Avarice might be also bounded and forborne, when the
fear of Penury (as it must be upon a Throne) is removed: Malcolm subjoyned,
That he had rather now make an ingenious Confession to him, as his Friend, than
to be found guilty hereafter, to the great damage of them both; For my Self, to
deal plainly with you, said he, There is no Truth nor Sincerity in me, I
confide in no Body living, but I change my Designs and Counsels, upon every
blast of Suspicion; and th^s, from the Inconstancy of my own Disposition, I use
to make a Judgment of other Men's. Whereupon, Mackduff replied, Avaunt, says he,
Thou Disgrace and Prodigy of the Royal Name and Stock, worthier to be sent into
the remotest Desert, than to be called to a Throne; and, in a great Anger, he
was about to fling away. Then Malcolm took him by the hand, and declared the
Cause of this his Dissimulation to him, telling him, That he had been so often
assaulted by the Wiles of Mackbeth, that he did not dare, lightly, to trust
every body. But now he saw no Cause to suspect any Fraud in Macduff, in respect
either of his Lineage, his Manners, Fame, nor Fortune.

Thus they, plighting their Faith one to another, consulted, concerning the
destruction of the Tyrant, and advised their Friends of it, by secret Messages.
King Edward assisted him with Ten Thousand Men, over whom Malcolm's
Grandfather, by the Mothers side, was made General. Malcolm, by the assistance
of Edward, K. of England, recovers the Kingdom from Mackbeth.
At the Report of this Armies March, there was a great combustion in Scotland,
and many flocked in daily to the new King; Mackbeth being deserted by almost
all his Men, in so sudden a Revolt, not knowing what better course to take,
shut up himself in the Castle of Dunsinnan, and sent his Friends into the
Aebudae, and into Ireland, with Money to hire Soldiers. Malcolm understanding
his Design, makes up directly toward him, the People praying for him all along
as he went, and, with joyful Acclamations, wishing him good Success. His
Soldiers took this as an Omen of Victory, and thereupon stuck up green Boughs
in their Helmets, representing an Army Triumphing, rather than going to Fight*
Mackbeth being terrified at the Confidence of his Enemy, immediately fled; and
his Soldiers forsaken by their Leader, surrendered themselves up to Malcolm;
Some of our Writers do here Record many Fables, which are like See Note a p. 77.
Milesian Tales, and fitter for the Stage, than an History; and therefore I
omit them. Mackbeth Reigned Seventeen Years. In the first Ten, he performed the
Duty of a very good King; in the last Seven, he equalled the Cruelty of the
worst of Tyrants.

Malcolm, III. The Eighty Sixth King.
MALCOLM, having thus recovered his Fathers Kingdom, was Declared King at
Scone, the 25 th day of April, in the Year of our Redemption, 1057. At the
entrance of his Reign, he convened an Assembly of the Estates at Forsar; where
the First thing he did, was, to restore to the Children their Father's Estates,
who had been put to death by Mackbeth; He is thought by some to have been the
First, that introduced Malcolm, First brought in Foreign Titles of Honor into
Scotland.
New and Foreign Names, as distinguishments of Degrees in Honor, which he
borrowed from his Neighbor-Nations, and are no less Barbarous than the former
were: Such as are Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Riders or Knights.
Mackduff, the first Earl in Scotland.
Mackduff, the Thane of Fife, was the First who had the Title of Earl,
conferred upon him, and many others afterward, according to their respective
Merits, were honored with New Titles. Some write, That at that time Noblemen
began to be Surnamed by their Lands, which, I think, is false, for that Custom
is not yet received amongst the Ancient Scots; and besides, then all Scotland
used their Ancient Rights and Customs, but, instead of a Surname, after the
manner of the Greeks, they added their Fathers Name to their own; or else,
adjoined a Word taken from some Event; or, from some Mark of Body, or Mind; and
that this Custom did then obtain amongst the Gauls, is plain, by those Royal
Sirnames of Crassus, Calvus, Balbus, and also, by the Sirnames of many Noble
Families in England, especially, such as followed William the Conqueror, and
fixed their Habitations there. For the Custom of taking Sirnames from Lands,
was received but lately amongst the other Gauls, as appears by Frossard's
History, no mean Author. Mackduff had Three Requests granted to him, as a
Reward for his Services. One, That his Posterity should place the King, who was
to be Crowned, in the Chair of State; Another, Three Grand Privileges of the
Mackduff^.
That they should lead the Van of the Kings Armies: And a Third, That, if any
of his Family were Guilty of the unpremeditated slaughter of a Nobleman, he
should pay Four and Twenty Marks of Silver, as a Fine; if of a Plebeian, Twelve
Marks: Which last Law was observed till the days of our Fathers, as long as any
of that Family were in being.

Whilst these things were acted at Forfar; They, who remained of the Faction of
Mackbeth, carried his Son, Luthlac, to Scone, (who was Surnamed Fatuus, from
his Disposition)* and there he was Saluted King. Malcolm assaulted him in the
Valley Called Stra^ or S^rath-Bo^y, Forty Miles North of Aberdeen.
Bogian, where he was Luthlac, Mackbeth's Son, slain by Malcolm.
slain, three Months after he had Usurped the Name of King; yet, out of respect
to his Kingly Race, His, and his Fathers Bodies were buried in the Royal
Sepulchers in Or Icolumb^^l an Isle 2 Miles from the South end of Mul.
Ionia. Afterward, he Reigned four years in Peace. Then word was brought him,
that a great Troop of Robbers were Nested in Cockburn-Forest, and that they
infested Lothian and Merch, to the great damage of the Husbandman. Patric
Dunbar, with some Trouble, overcame them, losing Forty of his own Men in the
Onset, and killing 600 of Them. Forty more of them were taken Prisoners, and
hanged* Patric, for this Exploit, was made Earl of Merch.

The Kingdom was now so settled, that no open Force could hurt the King, yet he
was assaulted by Private Malcolm assaulted by private Conspiracies, which he
overcomes.
Conspiracies. The whole Plot was discovered to him, whereupon he sent for the
Head of the Faction, and, after much familiar Discourse, he led him aside into
a secret Valley, commanding his Followers to stay behind. There he upbraided
him with the former Benefits bestowed on him, and declared to him the Plot he
had contrived against his Life; adding further, if Thou have Courage enough,
why do thou not now set upon me, seeing we are both Armed, that so thou may
obtain thy desire by Valor, not by Treachery? He, being amazed at this sudden
Discovery, fell down on his Knees, and asked Pardon of the King, who being a
Merciful, as well as Valiant, Prince, easily forgave him. Matthew Paris makes
mention of this Passage.

In the mean time, Edgar, to whom, next to Edward, the Crown of England
belonged, being driven by contrary Winds, came into Scotland, with his whole
Family. What I am to speak concerning this Person, that it may be the better
understood, I shall fetch things a little higher.

The Story of Edmond, K. of England, and Canutus.
Edmond, King of England, being slain by the Treachery of his Subjects;
Canutus, the Dane, who Reigned over Part of the Island, presently seized upon
the Whole. At first, he Nobly treated Edward and Edmond, the Sons of the
Deceased Edmond, when they were brought to him. Afterward, being edged on by
wicked Ambition, he, desirous to confirm the Kingdom to his Posterity, by their
Destruction, sent them away privately to Valgar, Governor of Swedland, to be
Murdered there. Valgar, understanding their Noble stock, and considering also
their Age and Innocence, withal taking Compassion of their Condition and
Fortune, sent them to Hungary to King Solomon, pretending to Canutus. That he
had put them death. There they were Royally Educated and so much grateful
Towardliness appeared in Edward, that Solomon culled him out of all the Young
Nobles, to give him his Daughter Agatha to Wife. By her he had Edgar, Margaret,
and Christian. In the mean time, Canutus dying, Hardicanute succeeded him. When
he was slain, Edward was recalled from Normandy, whither he was before
Banished, together with his Brother Alured; Earl Godwyn, a powerful man, of
English Blood, but who had Married the Daughter of Canutus, was sent to fetch
them home. He, being desirous to transfer the Kingdom into his own Family,
caused Alured to be Poisoned; as for Edward, he was preserved, rather by Gods
Providence, than by any human Counsel, and Reigned most devoutly in England.
But, wanting Children, his Chief care was, to recall his Kinsman out of Hungary
to undertake the Government, alleging, That when Edgar returned, he would
willingly surrender up All to him; but His Modesty outdid the Kings Piety; for
he refused to accept of the Kingdom, as long as he was alive.

At length, upon Edwards death, Harald, Godwyns Son, invaded the Throne, yet he
dealt kindly with Agatha, the Hungarian, and her Children. But he being also
overthrown by William the Norman; Edgar, to avoid Williams Cruelty, resolved
with his Mother and Sisters to return into Hungary; but by a Tempest he was
driven into Scotland. There he was Courteously entertained by Malcolm, who made
him his Kinsman also by the Marriage of his Sister, Margaret. William the
Norman demands Edgar, then in Scotland.
William, then Reigning in England, upon every light Occasion, was very cruel
against the Nobles either of English or Danish Extraction. But understanding,
what was a doing in Scotland, and fearing a Tempest might arise from thence, he
sent an Herald to demand Edgar, denouncing War against Scotland, unless he were
surrendered up. Whom Malcolm refuses to Surrender.
Malcolm looked upon it as a cruel and faithless Thing, to deliver up his
Suppliants Guest and Kinsman (and one, against whom his very Enemies could
object no Crime) to his Capital Enemy to be put to Death, and therefore
resolved to suffer any thing, rather than so to do. And thereupon he not only
detained, and harbored, Edgar, but also gave Admission to his Friends, who, in
great Numbers, were Banished from their own homes, and gave them Lands to live
upon; whose Posteritys were there Propagated into many Rich and Opulent
Families. Upon this Occasion, there followed a War betwixt the Scots and
English, wherein Sibert, King of Northumberland favoring Edgar, joined his
Forces with the Scots. The Norman, being puffed up with the good Success of his
Affairs, made light of the Scottish War, and thinking to end it in a short time,
he sent one Roger, a Nobleman of his own Country, with Forces into
Northumberland. But he, being overcome and put to flight, was at last Slain by
his own Men.

Then Richard, Earl of Gloucester, was sent with a greater Army, but he could do
but little good, Whereupon a War (...). Roger, Richard, Odo, and Robert,
Generals for William of England, wor^^ed in Scotland.
neither; for Patrick Dunbar, wearied him out with light Skirmishes, so that
his Men could not straggle for to get in Prey; at last, Odo, William's Brother,
and Bishop of Bayon, being made Earl of Kent, came down with a much greater
strength; he made great spoil in Northumberland, and slew some, who thought to
stop him from plundering; but, as he was returning with a great Booty, Malcolm,
and Sibert, set upon him, slew and took many of his Army, and recovered the
Prey. When his Army was recruited, Robert, William's Son, was sent down
thither, but he made no great Earnings of it neither, only he pitched his Camp
at the River Tine, and he rather kept off, than made, or inferred, the War. In
the mean time, he repaired Newcastle, Newcastle repaired.
which was almost decayed by reason of its Antiquity. William being thus
wearied with a War, more tedious than profitable, his Courage being somewhat
cooled, applied himself to thoughts of Peace; which was made on these
Conditions. That in Stanmore, i. e. a Stony Heath, (a Name imposed on it, A
Peace concluded between the Scots and English.
for that very Cause,) lying between Richmond-shire and Cumberland, the Bounds
of both Kingdoms should be fixed; and in the Boundary a Or, Re-Cros^, on the
North-side, it had the Port^aicture of the Scots King, and of the English King
on the South.
Cross of Stone should be Erected, which should contain the Statues, and Arms,
of the Kings of Both Sides: That Cross, as long as it stood, was called, Kings
Cross; That Malcolm should enjoy Cumberland, upon the same Terms as his
Ancestors had held it. Edgar was also received into William's Favor, and
endowed with large Revenues; and that he might prevent all occasion of
suspicion of his innovating things, he never departed from the Court. Voldiosus
also, the Son of Sibert, was to have his Fathers Estate restored to him; and
besides, he was admitted into Affinity with the King, by Marrying a Neice of
his, born of his Daughter.

Homebred Seditions against Ma^colm que^l'd.
Intestine Tumults did succeed this External Peace; for the Men of Galway, and
of the Aebudae, did Ravage and commit Murders over all their Neighboring
Parts; and the Murray-Men, with those of Ross, Caithness, and their Allies,
made a Conspiracy, and assuming their Neighbor Islanders to their Aid, gave an
Omen of a greater War. Walter, the Nephew of Bancho, by his Son Fleanchus, who
was before received into Favor with the King, was sent against the Galway-Men;
and Macduff, against the other Rebels; whilst the King himself was gathering
greater Forces. Walter slew the Head of that Faction, and so quelled the common
Soldiers, that the King at his Return, made him Lord Steward of all Scotland,
for his Good Service.

This Magistrate was to gather in all the Kings Revenues; also* he had a
Jurisdiction, such as the Sheriffs of Counties have; The Original of the Family
of the Stuarts, afterward Kings of Scotland.
and he is the same with That, which our Ancestors called a Thane. But now a
days, the English Speech getting the better of our Country Language, the Thanes
of Counties, are in many places, called Stewards; and he, which was anciently
called Abthane, is now the Lord High Steward of Scotland: Yet, in some few
places, the Name of Thane does yet remain. From this Walter, the Family of the
Steuarts, who have so long Reigned over Scotland, took its Beginning.

But Macduff, warring in another Province, when he came to the Borders of Mar,
the Marrians promised him a Sum of Money, if he would not enter into their
Province; and he, fearing the Multitude of the Enemy, did protract the time in
Proposals and Terms of a pretended Peace, till the King arrived with greater
Forces. When they came to the Village Lying on the South Side of the River Dan^
in Mar*
Monimuss, they joined Camps; and the King, being troubled at the bruit of the
Enemies Numbers, promised to devote the Village, Malcolm's Vow to St. Andrew.
whither he was going, to St. Andrew the Apostle, the Tutelary Saint of
Scotland, if he returned Victor from that Expedition. After a few Removes, he
came to the River Spey, the violentest Current in all Scotland, where he beheld
a greater number of Soldiers, than, he thought, could have been levied out of
those Countries, standing on the other side of the River, to hinder his
Passage. Whereupon, the Standard Bearer, making an Halt, and delaying to enter
the River, he snatched the Standard out of his Hand, and gave it to one
Alexander Carron, a Knight of known Valor, whose Posterity had ever afterward
the Honor of carrying the Kings Standard, Alexander Carron, preferred and
Surnamed Scrimger.
in the Wars; and in stead of Carron, the Name of Scrimger was given him;
because he, being full of true Valor, though ignorant of the Modes and
Niceties of War, had outdone One, who was a Master in handling of Arms, and
who valued himself highly upon that Account. As the King was entering the River,
the Mitred Priests, with their Mitres on their Heads, prevented him; who, by
his Permission, having passed over to the Enemy before, had ended the War
without Blood. The Seditious quelled.
The Nobles surrendered themselves upon Quarter for Life: Those, who were the
most Seditious, and and the Authors of the Rising, were Tried, had their Goods
Confiscated, and themselves Condemned to perpetual Imprisonment.

Peace being thus, by his great Industry, obtained, both at home and abroad; he
converted his pains to amend the public Manners; for, he lived Devoutly and
Piously himself, and provoked others, by his Example, to a Modest, Just, and
Sober, Life. It is thought, that he was assisted herein, by the Counsel and
Monitions of his Wife, a choice Woman, and eminently Pious. She omitted no
Office of Humanity toward the Poor, or the Priests; neither did Agatha, the
Mother, The Piety of Malcolm's Queen, etc.
or Christiana, the Sister, come behind the Queen in any Religious Duty: For,
because a Nuns Life was then accounted the great Nourisher and Maintainer of
Piety, Both of them leaving the toilsome Cares of the World, shut themselves up
in a Monastery appointed for Virgins. Then the King, to the Four former
Bishoprics of St. Andrews, Gasgow, Whithorn, and Or, Mortlich.
Murthlack, (where the old Discipline, by the Bishops Sloth and Default, was
either remitted, or laid quite aside) added Malcolm erects new Bishoprics.
That of Murray, and Caithness, procuring Men Pious, and Learned, according to
the rate of those times, to fill the Sees. And whereas also Malcolm erects new
Bishoprics.
Luxury began to abound in those days, in regard many English came in, and
great Commerce was had with Foreign Nations; and also many English Exiles were
entertained and scatt'red almost all over the Kingdom; he labored, though to
little purpose, to restrain it. But he had the hardest Task of all, with the
Nobles, whom he endeavored to reclaim to the Practice of their ancient
Parsimony; for they, having once swallowed the bait of Pleasure, did not only
grow worse and worse, but even ran headlong into Debauchery; yea, they labored
to cover that foul Vice, under the false Name of Neatness, Bravery, and
Gallantry. Malcolm, forseeing, that such courses would be the Ruin not only of
Religion, but also of Military Discipline, did, first of all, Reform his own
Family, very exactly; afterward, he made most severe Sumptuary Laws made by
Malcolm.
Sumptuary Laws, denouncing great Punishment against the Violators of them.
Yet, by those Remedies he rather stopped, than cured, the Disease;
nevertheless, as long as he lived, he employed all his endeavors to work a
thorough Reform therein. It is also Reported, That his Wife obtained of him,
That, whereas the Nobles had gradually obtained a Privilege, to lie, the first
Night, with any Married Bride, by the Law of Eugenius; That Custom should be
altered, and the Husband have Liberty to Redeem it by paying half a Mark of
Silver, which Payment is yet called Mar^heta Mulierum, What?
Marcheta Mulierum.

Malcolm builds the Cathedrals of Durham, and Dumferling.
Whilst Malcolm was thus busied in reforming the public Manners, William, King
of England, dies: His Son, William Rufus, succeeded him. Peace could not long
be continued between two Kings* of such ^ifferent Dispositions. For the King of
Scots chose that Time, to Build two Temples, or Cathedrals, in, one at Durham
in England; the other, at Dumferling in Scotland; upon Both which Piles he
bestowed great Cost, so that he endeavored to retrieve Church Affairs, which
then began to flag and decay. And withal, he translated Turgot, Abbat of the
Monks at Durham, to the Bishopric of St. Andrews. This he did, whilst Rufus
was plucking down Towns and Monasteries, and making Forests, that he might have
the more room to hunt in. And when Anselme the Norman, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, did, with freedom, rebuke him for the same, he Banished him the
Land. He also sought for an Occasion of War against the Scots; And thereupon,
he surprised the Castle of King William Rufus Wars against Malcolm.
Alnwick in Northumberland, having slain the Garrison which was therein:
Malcolm, having demanded Restitution, but in vain, Besieged the Castle with a
great Army: They within, being reduced to great extremity and want, talked of
surrendering it, and desired the King to come, and receive the Keys with his own
Hand; which, as he was a doing, being tendered to him on the point of a Spear,
the Soldier run him into the Eye, and killed him. And his Son Malcolm, and his
Son Edward, slain by the English.
Edward also, being forward to revenge his Fathers Death, and thereupon, more
negligent of his own safety, made an unwary assault upon the Enemy, wherein he
received a Wound, of which he died soon after; The Scots, being afflicted and
troubled at this double Slaughter of Two of their Kings, broke up the Siege,
and returned home. Margaret did not long survive her Husband and Son, but died
of Grief. The Bodies of the Kings, which, at first, were buried at Tinmouth, (a
Monastery at the mouth of Tine) were afterward brought back to Dumferling:
Malcolm held the Kingdom Thirty and three years, being noted for no Vice, but
famous to Posterity, for his great and many Virtues; he had six Sons by his
Wife Margaret, of whom Edward was slain by the English in the Siege of Alnwick
Castle: Edmond and Etheldred were Banished into England, by their Uncle Donald,
where they died: The other Three, Edgar, Atheldred, and David, succeeded in the
Kingdom, one after another: He also had Two Daughters, the Elder Maud, Surnamed
the Good, Married Henry, King of England; the younger, named Mary, had Eustace,
Earl of On the River Lian, on the British Sea, Went of Calice.
Bologn, for her Husband. Several Prodigies, viz. The Inundation of the
German-Sea, and Men-killing Thunderbolts.
Prodigies happened in those days, and in particular, there was such a mighty and
unusual an Inundation of the German Ocean, that it did not only drown the
Fields and Country, and choked them up with Sand; but also, overthrew Villages,
Towns, and Castles; And besides* there were great and terrible Thunders, and
more were killed with Thunderbolts, than were ever Recorded to have perished,
by that Death, in Britain, before.

Donaldus VII. Surnamed Banus, The Eighty Seventh King.
Donald promises the Islands to Magnus* King of Norway.
UPon the Death of Malcolm, Donaldus (Banus) i. e. The White, his Brother, who,
for fear of Mackbeth, had fled into the Aebudae, was, with great facility,
declared King; for he had promised all the Islands to Magnus, King of Norwey,
if, by his Assistance, he might enjoy the Kingdom of Scotland. And in this his
Obtaini^g of the Kingdom, those were most assistant to him, who did falsely
accuse the former King, for corrupting the Discipline of his Ancestors; and
withal, who stomached, that the Banished English should enjoy the Estates of
Scots, in Scotland: Edgar, in such a sudden Mutation of things, being afraid
and solicitous for his Sisters Children, which were yet but young, caused them
to be transported to him, into Engl^nd. But this Piety of the Good Man was
calumniated by some. For Orgarus, an Englishman, seeking to curry favor with
King Rufus, accused him, that he had secretly boasted, That he and his Kindred
were Lawful Heirs of the Crown. The Accuser was not able to make good his
Allegation by any Witnesses; and therefore, the Matter was adjudged to be
decided by a Duel, wherein the Accuser was overcome by another Englishman, who
offered him the Combat, instead of Edgar, who was now grown old, and also
sickly. All good Men, who had a Veneration for the Memory of Malcolm and
Margaret, hated Donald, who, by Foreign Aid, in Conjunction with those of his
own Faction, had seized on the Kingdom: And he, by his Rashness, did much
increase the Hatred conceived against him, and by severe Threats, which he
uttered, amongst his Familiars, against the Nobles, who would not Swear
Allegiance to him. And therefore they sent for Duncan, a Base-born Son of
Malcolm's; who had served long, with Credit, in the Wars under William Rufus,
to oppose Donald. At his coming, many revolted from Donald; so that he was
diffident of his own State, and therefore Donald flies.
fled into the Aebudae, about six months after he had Usurped the Throne.

Duncan, The Eighty Eighth King.
NEither did Duncan Reign long, for he, being a Military Man, and not so
Skilful in the Arts of Peace, carried it more Imperiously, than a Peaceable and
Civil Government required; so that, he quickly fell into the hatred of the
Major part of his Subjects. When Donaldus, who observed all his motions, heard
thereof, in his Banishment, Duncan slain, by the procurement of Donald.
he corrupted Macpendir, Earl of Mern, and, by him, caused Duncan to be slain
in the night in Monteath, a year and six months after he began to Reign. As for
Donald, he governed a troublesome Kingdom for about three years; Good Men rather
tolerating him, (for want of a better) than approving him. The English, on the
one side, and the Islanders on the other, in his time, much molested Scotland.
The Envy also against him was heightened, in that Magnus, King of Norwey, had
seized on the Western Islands, which though he seemed to have done by Force,
yet all Men smelt out the Cheat, in regard Donald did not so much as stir, at
so great an Affront. And, at last, the public Indignation waxed hotter against
him, when the Vulgar understood, That it was done by a Secret Paction and
Agreement betwixt him and Magnus.

Edgar, The Eighty Ninth King.
UPon those Disgusts, secret Messengers were dispatched to Edgar, Malcolm's
Son. That he would come over, and be General, in order to obtain the Kingdom;
and, as soon as he appeared upon the Borders, they promised to flock in to him.
And they were as good as their Words. For Edgar, being assisted with a small
Force by Rufus, at the instance of Edgar his Uncle, had scarce entered Scotland,
before Donald, being forsaken of his Men, fled away; but being pursued and
taken, was brought back to Edgar, who committed him to Prison, where he died,
soon after. Edgar, having recovered the Kingdom, by the General Suffrage of all
the Estates, First of all, he made Peace, with William, King of England, and he
dying without Children, he renewed it with Henry his Brother. He gave him Maud,
his Sister, to Wife, Surnamed the Good, from her Virtuous Manners, (as I said
before.) By her, he had William, Richard, Eufemia, and Maud. Edgar Reigned Nine
Years and Six Months, in great Peace, Reverenced and Beloved by Good Men; and
so formidable to the Bad, that, in all his Reign, there were no Civil Tumults
or Seditions, nor any fear of a Foreign Enemy. One Monument of his Praise, was,
the Monastery of Edgar's Pious Reign. He builds the Monastery of Coldingham.
Lying within two Miles of Aymouth in Mers^, near the Scottish Sea.
Coldingham, Dedicated to St. Ebb the Virgin, which he built in the Seventh
Year of his Reign; though afterward, it was transferred into the Name of
Cutbert.

Alexander I. The Ninetieth King.
EDGAR dying without Issue, his Brother Alexander, Surnamed Acer, or the
Feirce, succeeded him. In the very beginning of his Reign, some Youngsters,
that loved to Fish in troubled Waters, imagining, that he would be a Peaceable
(or, as they interpreted it, a Sluggish) King, as his Brother was, Conspired to
take away his Life; that so, they might Rob and Plunder, with more Freedom. The
Matter being discovered to him, he pursued the Conspirators, unto the furthest
part of Ross: When they came to the River Spey, they thought to stop the Kings
Pursuit, by reason of the Rapidness of the River; and besides, the Kings
Friends would not suffer him to enter the River, because the Tide coming in,
Alexanders Valor.
they judged it unpassable; yet he set Spurs to his Horse* and was about to
pass over. The rest, lest they might seem to forsake their King, in a Danger so
great, following him. But his own Men (as I said) drew him back, so that he
sent over Part of his Army, under the Command of Alexander Carron, the Son of
that Alexander, I mentioned before, whose Miraculous Boldness, in passing the
River with his Forces, struck such a Terror into the Enemy, that they
presently betook themselves to their Heels. Many were Slain in the Pursuit;
their Leaders were then taken, or else, afterward brought to the King, and
were all Hanged up.

This Expedition procured him Peace, even to the End of his Life. As he was
returning through Mern, a He does Justice to a Poor Woman.
Poor Woman met him, grievously complaining, That her Husband had been scourged
with a Whip of Thongs, by the Earl of Mern's Son, because he had sued him for a
Debt. The King hearing it, presently, in great Disdain, leapt from his Horse,
and would not stir from the Place, till the Offender had received Condign
Punishment. Then he went to Lying on the East Side of the Carss, or Plain, of
Gowry, within two Miles of Dundee.
Envergoury, or, as some write, to Lying in the Braes, or, Risings, of the
Carss of Gowry, five Miles above Dundee.
Balleggary, Edgar's Town; some write, That the Surname of Acer was given him,
for those Exploits; but, others say, it had a more Tragic Original, viz. That
some Thieves, having corrupted one of his Bedchamber, were privately admitted
thereinto, whilst he was asleep; and, their sudden Rushing in awakening him,
he first slew his Treacherous Servant; and afterward, Six of the Thieves.
Whereupon, an Hubbub was raised in the Court, and the rest fled, but Alexander
pursued them so fiercely, that most of them were slain. Afterward, he turned
his Thoughts to the Works of Peace; he built Michael's Church in Scone, from
the very Ground: The College of Priests, which was there, he turned into a
Monastery for Monks. Being once carried by Tempest into the Isle Inch-Colm, or
St. Columb's Isle, in the Firth of Forth, in Fife, near Aberdeen.
Aemona, he was there reduced to great Want and Hunger; for, neither he, nor
his Companions, could procure any Food for some Days, but what they got from
those that Lived Solitary Lives, vulgarly called Hermits. He built also a
Church there, in Memory of St. Columb, supplying it with Canons, as they call
them, and Lands to maintain them. He also gave great Gifts and Largesses, and
settled Revenues, on St. Andrews, which was Rich enough before. He finished the
Church at Dumferling, which his Father had begun, and Endowed it with Revenues.

After these Transactions, in Peace and War, when he had Reigned Seventeen
Years, he departed this Life, leaving no Children by Sibyl, his Wife, Daughter
of William the Norman.

David I. The Ninety First King.
HIS Brother, David, succeeded him in the Kingdom, in the Year of Christ 1124.
He, seeing, that his Brothers Reigned successively, one after another, in
Scotland, stayed with his Sister Maud, in England. There he Married Maud, his
Niece, a Woman of great Beauty, Wealth and Nobility. For Voldiosus of
Northumberland was her Father, and her Mother was Judith, Niece to William, the
Norman. On her, he begot a Son named Henry, in whom both his Father's and
Mother's Disposition did presently appear. By this Marriage, his Revenues were
much increased by the Accession of Northumberland and Huntington-shire thereto.
Thus, with the Universal Gratulation of his Subjects, he came into Scotland, to
possess the Kingdom: It Is true, the Memory of his Parents was of great Force to
procure him the Favor of the People; yet his own Virtue was such, that he
stood in no need of any adventitious Help: For, as, in other Virtues, he
equalled other good Kings; so, in his Condescension to hear the Causes of the
Poor, he was much superior to them. As for the Complaints of the Rich, he
heard them himself; David's just Reign.
and if a false Judgment had been given, he would not rescind it, but compelled
the Judge himself to pay the Damages, awarded. He restrained Luxury, which then
begun to spread, according to the Example of his Father. He banished Epicures,
and such as studied Arts to provoke the Appetite, out of the Kingdom. He far
exceeded the Beneficence of his Parents, and Allies, (which were worthy rather
of Pardon, than Praise) in increasing the Revenues of the Church. He repaired
Monasteries, whether decayed by Age, or ruined by the Wars; and He also built
New Ones from the Ground. To the Six Bishoprics before, he added Four more. He
creates new Bishoprics.
Ross, Brechin, Dunkelden, and Dunblain. He almost impoverished the succeeding
King to Endow them, for he bestowed upon them a great part of the Royal
Revenue. Johannes Major, who, when I was but a Youth, was famous for his
Theological Studies, having highly praised this King for his other Actions;
yet, he blames his profuse Lavishness in Endowing Monasteries in a solemn (and,
I wish, it had been an undeserved) Oration. And I the more wonder at this
immoderate Profusion of the Public Stock and Patrimony; because, in those very
Times, St. B^rnard sharply reproves the Priests and Monks in his Invective and
Severe Sermons, for their excessive Luxury and Expense; He is censured for his
Profuseness toward Monasteries.
which yet, if compared with That of our Age, seems but moderate: And the
Fruits, which followed these Donations, show, That the Design was not well
grounded. For, as in Bodies too Corpulent, the use of all the Members ceases;
so, the Sparks of Wit, oppressed by Luxury, did thereby languish in Abbeys. The
Study of Learning was extinct, Piety degenerated into Superstition, and the
Seeds of all Vices sprung up in them, as in an unplowed Field. All the time of
his Reign he had but one Commotion, and that was rather a Tumult, than a War.
And it was quickly ended in the Slaughter of Aeneas, Earl of Murray, with a
great Number of his Followers. Malcolm Mackbeth, endeavoring to raise a new
Sedition, was committed Prisoner to the Castle of In Teviotdale.
Roxburgh. Other Matters succeeded according to his desire, but yet a twofold
Distress, or rather, Calamity, seized him. One, from the untimely Death of his
Wife; The Other, of his Son. As for his Wife Maud, she was a Woman of high
Descent, of exquisite Beauty, and most accomplished Manners: He loved her
passionately whilst she lived; and the loss of her, in the Flower of her Age,
did so affect him, That, for Twenty Years after he lived a Widower; neither did
he touch any other Woman, all that while: And yet the Greatness of his Sorrow
was no hindrance to him, from managing the Public Offices and Concerns both of
Peace and War. Concerning his Son, I will speak in due place.

David thus addicted himself to the Arts of Peace; but some troublesome Matters,
in England, drew him unwillingly into a War. The Occasion, this. All the
Offspring of King Henry of England, besides his Daughter Maud, were drowned in
their passage out of France into England; which Misfortune did so grieve him,
that (it is reported) he never laughed after. Henry of England never Laughed,
after the Drowning of his Children.
Maud, who only survived, and escaped, that Calamity, Married the Emperor Henry
the Fourth. Her Husband dying without Children, she returned into England to
her Father. He was willing to settle the Succession on her; and in Order
thereto, because she was a Widow and Childless, if he himself should die, he
caused all the K. Henry setles the Succession on his Daughter Maud, the
Empress, by causing the Nobility to Swear Fealty to her, in his Life time.
Nobility to swear an Oath of Fealty to her; and, in hopes, that she might have
Children, he Married her to Geoffry Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou. Five Years
after that Marriage, Robert, Duke of Normandy, and King Henry died, and Geoffry
of Anjou, falling into a dangerous Disease, lay Bedrid.

In the mean time, Stephen, notwithstanding his Oath, seizes on the Crown of
England.
Stephen Earl of Bologne, in this want of Royal Issue, took heart to attempt
the Crown of England: Neither did he look upon it as a Design of any great
Difficulty, both by reason of the Weakness of the adverse Party, and also,
because he himself had some Royal Blood running in his Veins: For he was born
of a Daughter of William the Norman, which had Married the Earl of Bloys. He
himself had also Married Maud, Daughter of the former Earl of Bologne, and
Cousin-German to Maud the Empress, and begotten upon Mary, Sister to David,
King of Scotland: His Pretensions for so doing.
Upon the Confidence of so great Alliances, by reason of the absence of Maud
the Queen, and the Sickness of Geoffry, he thought he might easily obtain the
Crown of England. And to make his Way clearer, without any Conscience or Regard
of his Oath, which he and the other kindred had taken to Queen Maud, he drew in,
by great Promises, the The Bishops of England not True to Maud, according to
their Oaths.
Bishops of England, who had also taken the same Oath, into his Unlawful
design; and, especially, William, Archbishop of York, who was the first that
Swore Allegiance to Queen Maud, and Roger Bishop of Salisbury, who had not only
taken the Oath himself, but had also read the Words of it to the other Nobles,
when they Swore.

Upon this Confidence, even before his Uncle Henry was buried, he stepped into
the Throne, and the Two First Years reigned peaceably enough: Whereupon,
growing insolent, he began to neglect his Agreement made with the English; and
also to deal harsly with strangers. After he had compelled all the English,
partly by Fear, partly by fair Promises, to take an Oath of Allegiance to him,
he sent Ambassadors to David, King of Scots, to put him in mind, to take the
same Oath, for the Counties of Cumberland, Northumberland, and Huntingdon,
which he held of him. David of Scotland maintains the Cause of Maud, his
Kinswoman. He lays Perjury to Stephens's Charge.
David returned Answer, That he, together with Stephen himself, and the other
Nobles of England, had, not long since, bound themselves, by an Oath, to obey
Maud, their Lawful Queen; And that he ought not, nor would, acknowledge any
other King, as long as she was alive: When this Answer was brought to Stephen,
presently a War began. The English entered upon the adjacent Scots; the Scots
doing as much for them. The next Year, an Army of Scots, under the Conduct of
the Earls of Merch, of Menteith, and of Argus, entered England, and met the
English at the Town of Allerton, whose General was the Earl of Gloucester. A
sharp Battle was there fought with equal slaughter on both sides, as long as
the Army stood to it; at last, the North Allerton* lying near the River Swale
in the North Riding of Yorkshire.

He Fights the English, and Overthrows them.


English, being overthrown, many perished in the flight, and many of the
Nobility were taken Prisoners, amongst whom was the Earl of Gloucester, himself;
Stephen, being much concerned at this Overthrow, lest the Friends and Kindred
of the Captive Nobles might be alienated from him, refused no Conditions of
Peace. The Terms were These, That the English Prisoners should be released
without Ransom: An Agreement between David and Stephen not observed.
That Stephen should quit all the Claim, which, as chief Lord, he pretended to
have over Cumberland. But Stephen observed those Conditions, no better than he
did the Oath, formerly taken, to Maud, his Kinswoman: For, before the Armies
were quite Disbanded, and the Prisoners Released, he privately surprised some
Castles in Northumberland; and, by driving away Bootys from the Scots Countries,
renewed the War. The Scots, gathering a sudden Army together out of the
Neighbor Countries, and despising the English, whom they had overthrown in
Battle, the self same Year, did rashly run on to the Conflict at the River
Which has its Source near Black-Laws in Teesdale. The Scots overthrown by
Stephen.
Tees; where they paid for their Folly, in undervaluing the Enemy, by receiving
a great Overthrow; and were also enforced to quit Northumberland: David, to
retrieve this Loss and Ignominy, gathered as great an Army, as ever he could,
together, and came to Roxburgh: Thither Turstan, or (as William of Newberry
calls him) Trustinus, was sent, by the English, to Treat concerning a
Pacification, and, there being some hope of Agreement, a Truce was made for
Three Months, upon Condition, That Northumberland should be presently restored
to the Scots: But this Promise, which was made by Stephen, only to have the
Army Disbanded, was not performed; so that David drove away a great Booty, out
of that Part of Northumberland, which obeyed Stephen; and Stephen, gathering a
great Force together, pierced as far as Roxborough: But, understanding, That
the Nobility were averse, and complained, That they were entangled in an Unjust
and Unnecessary War, without performing any Memorable Exploit, he retired into
the heart of his Kingdom: And, the next Year, fearing some intestine Sedition,
he sent his Wife Maud to David, her Uncle, to treat of Peace. Upon her
Mediation, it was accorded, That David, from Newcastle, where he commonly
abode; and Stephen, from Durham, should send Arbitrators for composing of
Matters, to the Town of Chester in the street, situate in the Midway, equally
distant, from Both Places. David sent the Archbishops of St. Andrews and
Glasgoe; Stephen, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York: Both Parties were
the more inclineable to Peace, because Stephen feared War from abroad, and
Seditions at home; and the Scots complained, That they were forced to bear the
shock of a War, made in the behalf of another; whereas Maud, for whose sake it
was commenced, did nothing at all in it. The Peace was made on These
Conditions, That Cumberland, Another Agreement between the Scots and Stephen
King of England.
as by Ancient Right, should be possessed by David, and that Northumberland
unto the River Tees, (as William of Newberry, the Englishman, writes) and
Huntingtonshire, should be enjoyed by Henry, David's Son, upon the account of
his Mothers Inheritance; and, That he should do Homage to Stephen, for the
same. When things were thus composed, David retired into Cumberland, and
Stephen into Kent. This Peace was made in the Year of our Lord 1139. In which
Year, Maud, being returned into England, sent her Son Henry, Heir of England,
sent to David his Uncle, to be made Knight by him.
Henry, afterward King of England, to Carlisle, to David his Great Uncle, that
he might be instructed in Feats of Arms, and also be made Knight, by him; who,
without doubt was the excellentest Warrior in his time; which Matter, in those
days, was performed with a great deal of Ceremony.

At that time, there was so great a Disturbance in England, by reason of
Domestique Discords, That no Part of it was free from a Civil War, but That
which David the King of Scots held. And, that he alone might not plead
Exemption from the public Calamity; within Three Years after, his Son, the
only Heir (in hope) of so much Power and Felicity, King David loses his hopeful
Son and Heir.
dyed in the flower of his Age, leaving Three Sons, and as many Daughters
behind him. He left so great a Love behind for him, both from the Scots and
English; that, besides the public Loss, every one lamented his own private
Misfortune also, at his death: For so great a Sincerity, and Moderation of
Mind, shined forth in him, even in that Age, wherein Youth is accustomed to
wantonize, That every body expected most rare and singular Fruits from his
Disposition, when it was ripened by Age. His Fathers Grief was also further
increased, by reason of the tender Age of his Nephew, and the Ambition, and
restless Disposition, of Stephen, and if he dyed, he was troubled at the
Fierceness of Henry's Spirit, then in the fervor of his Youth; who, being the
Son of Maud, was to succeed in the Kingdom. When the Thoughts of so many
foreseen Mischiefs did assault his diseased and feeble Mind, insomuch, that all
Men imagined, he would have sunk under them, yet he bore up so stoutly, that he
invited some of the Prime Nobility (who were solicitous for him, lest he should
be too much afflicted, as well they might) to Supper, and there he entertained
them with a Discourse, rather like a Comforter than a Mourner, He told them.
But ^ears his Affliction Piously and Patiently.
That no new thing had happened to him, or to his Son. That he had long since
Learned from the Sermons of Learned and Holy Men; That the World was Governed
by the Providence of Almighty God; whom it was a foolish and impious thing to
endeavor to resist: That he was not ignorant, his Son was born, on no other
Terms, but that he must also dye; and so pay that Debt to Nature, which he owed
even at his very Birth: And when Men were always ready to pay that Debt, 'twas
no great matter, when God, their Creditor, called upon them for it: That, if
only Wicked Men were subject to Death, then a Man might justly grieve at the
Decease of his Kindred; but, when we see Good Men also Dye, all Christians
(said he) ought to be thoroughly settled in this persuasion, That no Evil can
happen to the Good, (either alive or dead;) and therefore, Why should we be so
much troubled at a short Separation, especially from our Kindred, who have not
so much left us, as they are gone before us, to our common Country: Whither we
also, tho we should live never so long, must yet at last follow? As for my Son,
if he has undertaken this Voyage before us, that so he might visit and enjoy
the Fellowship of my Parents and Brethren, those precious Men, beforehand; if
we are troubled at it, let us take heed, That we seem not rather to envy his
Happiness, than to Mourn for our own Loss. As for you, Worthy Lords, as I am
beholding to you for many Offices of Respect, so, both I and my Son (for I
shall undertake also for him) are much obliged for your Loves to me, and your
Grateful and Pious Memory of him.

This Greatness of Mind in the King, as it added much to his own Veneration, so
it increased the Sense of the loss of his Son, in the Minds of all; when they
considered, What a Prince they and their Children were deprived of. And David,
that he might make use of the only way of Consolation, which was left him,
caused his Nephews, and his Sons Children, to be brought to him, and to be
trained up in Court-discipline, which was then most Pious; In Fine, he provided
for their Security, as far as Human Counsel could foresee. He commended
Malcolm, the eldest of the Three, to the Care of the whole Nobility, and
particularly of Mackduff, Earl of Fife, a very powerful and prudent Man, and he
caused him to carry him all over the Land, that so he might be received, as the
undoubted Heir of the Kingdom: William, the next Son, he made Earl of
Northumberland, and sent him presently to take Possession of that Country:
David the Third Son, he made Earl of Huntington, in England, and of Garioch, in
Scotland: He made the more haste to prefer them, because, being Sick of a
mortal Disease, he foresaw, his Time could not be long in this World. He dyed
in the Year of Christ 1553. the May 24.
Ninth of the Calends of June. He was so well beloved, That all Men thought,
they had lost rather a Father in him, yea, the best of Fathers, than a King:
For, tho his whole Life was so Devout, Lying on the North-west of Aberdeneshire.
as no History records the like;) yet, some few Years before his Death, he
Devoted himself to the Preparation for his later End; So that, his Deportment
then did much increase Men's Veneration for the former part of his Life. For,
tho he equalled former Kings, who were most Praiseworthy, in the Art of War,
K. David's extraordinary Character, for Piety and Virtue.
and excelled them in the Study of Peace: Yet now, leaving off contending with
others, for Superiority in Virtue; He maintained a Combat with himself alone,
wherein he advanced so much, That if the Highest, and most Learned Wits should
endeavor to give the Idea, or Pattern, of a Good King, they could never
comprehend in their Thoughts, such an exemplary Prince, as David showed
himself, in his whole Life, to be: He Reigned 29 Years, 2 Months, and 3 Days.

Malcolm, IV. The Ninety Second King.
HIS Nephew Malcolm succeeded him, who, tho yet Underage, gave great hopes of
his future Ingenuity. For, he was so Educated by his Father and Grandfather,
that he seemed to resemble them as much in the Virtues of his Mind, as in the
Lineaments of his Body: In the beginning of his Reign, a great Plague raged all
over Scotland, whereby great Numbers of Men, and Cattle also, were destroyed.
At that time, one Somerled was Thane of Argyle, A great Pestilen^e (...)
Scotland.
whose Fortune was above his Family, and his Mind above his Fortune. He,
conceiving some hopes to enjoy the Kingdom, by reason of the King's Nonage,
and the present Calamity, gathered a Band of his Confidents together, and
invaded the adjacent Countries. Yea, the Havoc he made was spoken of far and
near, and the fear of him spreading itself further, many Bad Men coming in to
him, and some Good good being forced to join with him too, in a short time he
made up a vast Army. Upon the report of this Tumult, Donald also, the Son of
Malcolm Macbeth, made another Bustle; but, being taken at Whithorn in Galway,
and sent to the King, he was committed to the same Prison with his Father: But,
soon after, the King was reconciled to them, Somerled rises in Arms, but is
overthrown.
and they were both released. Gilchrist, Earl of Angus, was sent, with an Army,
against Somerled, who defeated and killed many of his Men, and caused him, with
some few more, to fly into Ireland. This Victory, thus unexpectedly and
suddenly obtained, produced Tranquillity at home, but Envy abroad. For Henry,
King of England, an Ambitious Prince, and desirous to enlarge his own
Dominions, resolved with himself to curb the growing Greatness and Power of
Malcolm. But he could not well make open War upon him, out of Conscience of
that Pact and Oath, which he had sworn to him. For, when he received the
Military Girdle, (as the Custom is) from King David, Malcolm's Grandfather, at
Carlisle, he promised, and took his Oath on it, (as William of Newberry,
besides our own Writers, say,) That he would never go about, to deprive, either
David himself, or any of his Posterity, of any part of those Possessions, which
David then held in England. He being somewhat bound up by this Oath, Henry of
England designs against Malcolm*
That he might find out some color for his Calumniations, he resolved to try
the Kings Patience in a lesser Matter. When John, Bishop of Glascow, was
Dedicating Churches, Shaving Priests, and performing the other Parts of his
Episcopal Office, (as then they were judged to be) all over Cumberland. Henry,
by Trustine, Archbishop of York, sent a new Bishop into that Country, called
the Bishop of Carlisle. John was so moved at the Injury, that, seeing no
sufficient Safeguard, neither in the King, nor in the Law, he left his
Bishopric, and retired into the Monastery of Tours, in France. Whence he
returned not, until the Pope, at Malcolm his Request, drew him unwillingly out
of his Cell, and made him return to his own Country: Malcolm bore the wrong
better, than some hoped; so that, not thinking it a sufficient Cause for a War,
he went to Chester in the Street, there to quiet Suspicions, and to cut off
occasions of Discord. Being arrived there, by the Fraud of Henry, he was
Circumvented, And makes him take a Feodatary Oath to him.
and made to take an Oath of Fidelity to him; whereas, it was not the King
himself, but his Brothers, who had Lands in England, according to an old
Agreement, who were to take that Oath. But this was Craftily and Maliciously
devised by the English King, to sow the Seed of Discord amongst Brethren: which
the following year did more fully appear, when he cokes'd Malcolm out of
Northumberland, which was his Brother William's Patrimony. For, he sent for him
to London, That, according to the Examples of his Ancestors, he, in a public
Assembly, might acknowledge himself his Feudatary, for the Lands which he held
in England. He, under Covert of the Public Faith, came speedily thither, but
without doing any thing of That, for which his Journey was pretended, he was
enforced, against his Will, with that little Retinue, which he had, to
accompany Henry into France: Henry's Design herein, was, partly, that the Scots
might not attempt any thing against him in his absence; and partly, to alienate
the Mind of Lewis, King of France, He carries Malcolm into France.
from him. Thus, Malcolm was compelled, for fear of a greater Mischief, to go
against his old Friend, and was not suffered to come back to his own Country;
till King Henry, having made no great Earnings of the French War, returned home
also. Then Malcolm obtained leave to return to Scotland; where, in a Convention
of the Nobility, he declared to them the Adventure of his Travels; but, he
found a great Part of them very much incensed, that he had joined with a
certain Enemy, against an Old and Trusty Friend; and did not foresee the
Artifices, by which Henry had gulled him. The King, on the other side, alleged,
That he was haled unwillingly into France, by a King, in whose Power he was,
and to whom he dared to deny nothing, at that time; and therefore, he did not
despair, but the French would be satisfied and appeased, when they understood,
he was hurried thither by Force, and carried none of his Country Forces along
with him. This Harangue, with much ado, quieted the Sedition for the present,
which was almost ready to break out.

But Henry, who had Spies every where, knew, That the Tumult was rather
suspended, than that the Minds of Men were reconciled to him; and therefore, he
Summoned Malcolm to come to a Convention at York. There he was accused of a
pretended Crime, That the English had been worsted in France, principally by
his means; and therefore, it was referred to the Assembly, And at his return,
despoils him of his Ancient Patrimony in England.
Whether he ought not to lose all the Countries which he held in England.
Though he answered all the objected Crimes, and fully cleared himself; yet, he
found all their Ears shut against him, as being prepossessed by the Fears or
Favor of their King; so that a Decree was made in Favor of Henry: Neither was
he contented with this Injury, but he also suborned some Persons, fit for his
purpose, to bruit it abroad, That Malcolm had freely, and of his own accord,
quitted his Interest in those Countries. At which, his Subjects, the Scots,
were so incensed, that at his Return home, they besieged him in Perth, and had
almost taken him. But, by the Intervention of some great Men, their Anger was
somewhat abated, when he had informed the Nobility, how unjustly, and
fraudulently, Henry had despoiled him of his Ancient Patrimony. Whereupon, they
unanimously agreed upon a The Scots make War upon England.
War, that so he might recover by just Arms, what was unlawfully taken from him
by Force. Thus a War was Decreed, Denounced, and Waged, not without great
Inconveniences to both Nations. At last, both Kings came to a Conference, not
far from Carlisle, and after much dispute, Pro and Con, Peace concluded between
the English and Scots, wherein Malcolm quits Northumberland.
Henry took away Northumberland from Malcolm, leaving him Cumberland, and
Huntington-shire; Henry had no other Pretense for his Ambitious Avarice, but
This, That he could not suffer so great a Diminution to be made of his Kingdom.
But, seeing no respect to Justice, and Right, no Pacts, Covenants, no, nor the
Religion of an Oath, could hinder the unsatiable Avarice of Henry; Malcolm,
being a Man of a low Spirit, and too desirous of Peace, upon any Conditions
whatever, accepted of his Terms, sore against the Minds of the Scots Nobility;
who denied, That the King could alienate any part of his Dominions, without the
General Consent of the Estates.

After this, the King began to be despised by his Subjects, as not having
Fortitude, or Prudence, enough, to weild the Scepter; neither did any thing
bridle their fierce Minds, from Rising in Arms, but a greater Fear from Henry;
who (they knew) did aim at the Conquest of the whole Island, being encouraged
thereunto, by the Simplicity of Malcolm, and by his Hopes of Foreign Aid. This
General Disaffection to the King did much lessen the Reverence of his
Government. A Rebellion was first begun by Angus, or rather, Aeneas, of Galway,
a Potent Man, but yet more encouraged by the Kings Sloth, than his own Power.
Gilchrist was sent against him; who overthrew him in Three Fights, and
compelled him to take Sanctuary in the Monastery of White-horn, A Rebellion in
Galway quelled.
out of which it was not counted Lawful to pull him by Force; and therefore,
after a long Siege, being driven to the want of all Necessaries, he was forced
to Capitulate: He was to lose part of his Estate for his Punishment; and his
Son was to be given, as an Hostage, for his good Behavior for the future. But,
he being of a lofty Spirit, and not able to endure this abatement of his former
Greatness, turned Monk, shaved himself, and shut himself up in a Monastery near
Edinburgh, to avoid the shame and scorn of Men. Neither was there Peace in
other Parts of the Realm; The Murray-Men under Gildominick rise in Arms.
for, the Murray-Men, being always given to Mutinying, rose in Arms under
Gildo, or rather Gildominick, their Captain; and did not only spoil the
circumjacent Counties; but, when Heralds of Arms were sent from the King, they
most barbarously slew them. Gilchrist was sent out against them also, with a
greater Army, but with unlike Success: For the Valor of an Adversary, which is
wont to be a Terror to other Rebels, drove those wicked Persons* conscious of
their own Demerits, to Desperation; and therefore, endeavoring to sell their
Lives, as dear as they could, they routed the opposite Army, and became
Conquerors. Malcolm, upon this overthrow, recruited his old Army, and marched
into Murray, and met the Murray-Men, at the Mouth of the River Spey; who,
though they knew, that the Kings Forces were increased, and Theirs diminished
in the late Fight; yet, being encouraged by the Opportunity of the Place, and
their newly obtained Victory, they resolved to Adventure a Battle. The Fight
was carried on with great Resolution, and no less Slaughter: For the Moravians
gave not back, till the Kings Forces, being wearied, had new Releif from
Reserves, sent them. But are suppressed.
Then the Moravians were broken, and there was no more Fighting, but Killing.
The Fury of the Soldiers spared no Age, nor Rank of Men. In this Fight, the old
Moravians were almost all slain; which Punishment, though Cruel, seemed not to
be undeserved; and the Greatness of the Revenge was allayed, and made
excuseable, by the Savage Cruelty of that perfidious People, against others.
Hereupon, new Co^onies were sent into the Lands of the slain.

Neither did S^merled stirs agai^^ but is overthrown and slain.
Sumerled, in this hurly burly* think it fit to sit still; he, (as I said
before) after his overthrow, fled into Ireland; and, from that time forward,
exercised Pyracy upon the Coasts of Scotland; but now judging, that a great
Part of the Military Men being slain in Battle, he might either get a rich
Booty from those who would shun the hazard of Fighting; or else, an easy
Victory from them who would stand to it; gathered a great Band of Roysters
together, and arriving at the Firth, or Bay, of the River Clyde, there made a
Descent; and Fortune, at first, favoring his Design, he penetrated, as far as
Renfreu. But there, whilst he was more intent on Plunder, than on the Safety of
his Men, he was surprised by a far less Number than his own, and lost all his
Soldiers, he himself being saved, and brought alive to the King, for further
Scorn and Punishment; though some say, That both he and his Son too were slain
in the Battle. These things were acted about the Year of Christ 1165.

The Kingdom being thus quieted from all Tumults, an Assembly of all the
Estates was Indicted at Scone, where many things were Decreed for the
Confirmation of the State of the Kingdom; and, amongst the rest, the whole
Assembly unanimously made it their Request to the King, That he would think of
Marriage, in regard he was now fit for it, as being above Twenty Two years of
Age, The Estates persuade Malcolm to Marry.
and by that means, he might beget Children to succeed him. They told him, It
was a public Debt, due to the Kingdom, as well as a private One to his Family,
and that he ought to mind, not only the present time, but to have a prospect to
the Tranquillity of future Ages too. His Answer was, That ever since he had
been capable to Order and Direct his own Life, His Negative Answer to their
Request.
he had Solemnly Vowed to God, to live a Continent, and a Batchelor's Life;
which Vow, said he, I think, was the more acceptable to God, both because he
gave me the strength to perform it; and also, because he has prepared Heirs
already to succeed me; so that I am not compelled to break my Vow, neither by
any Weakness of my own Spirit, nor by any other public Necessity. Thus
dismissing the Parliament, having Peace abroad, he applied his Mind to the Arts
of his Forefathers, i. e. Building of Churches, and Donations on Monks, wherein
he would have exceeded his Ancestors, if God had given him a longer Life. For
he died not long after, on the Fifth of the December 9th.
Ides of December, in the Twenty Fifth Year of his Age, and a little more than
the Twelfth Year of his Reign, and in the Year of our Redemption 1165.

William, The Ninety Third King.
HIS Brother, William, Succeeded him; who, entered upon the Kingdom, Fifteen
Days after Malcolm's Death. He would Transact no Public or Private Business of
any weight, till he had craved of Henry of England the Restitution of
Northumberland. Henry commanded him to come to London, to do him Homage, for
the Counties of Cumberland and Huntingdon, according to custom; which he did,
not unwillingly; yet desisted not from pressing to have William solicits Henry
of England, for the restitution of Northumberland.
Northumberland restored. Henry gave him an Ambiguous Answer, saying, That, in
regard Northumberland was taken away from Malcolm, and given to him by the
States of the Kingdom, he could not part from it without their Consent; but he
should come to the next Parliament, and there expect Justice to be done.
William, though he expected no Good from the Parliament; yet, to cut off all
occasions of Calumny from his Adversary, resolved to wait, in England, for the
Convening and Opening of it; He accompanies Henry into France.
and, in the mean time, he accompanied Henry, though against his Will, to the
War in France. There he profited nothing by his daily Solicitations, and
foreseeing, that the King would not speedily return into England, with much
ado, he obtained a Convoy, and returned into Scotland. After his Return, the
first thing he did, was, to repress the Insolences of Thieves and Robbers, by
punishing and clearing the Country of the Offenders. Then, he erected Castles,
and placed Garrisons in convenient Places, to prevent sudden Invasions: At
last, he sent Ambassadors into England, to demand Northumberland, denouncing
War, in case of Refusal. Henry, being entangled in the French War, yielded up
to him that Part of Part of N^rthumberland restored to the Scots.
Northumberland, which William's great Grandfather held. William took It, but
on this Condition, That he would not remit his Right in, or Claim to, the rest.
The English King took this very heinously, and, being sorry, he had parted with
any of Northumberland, before the Controversy was decided, he made Incursions
into the Scots Borders, and thus sowed the Seeds of a new War; and by this
means, he hoped to have taken away also the other Lands, which he would have
brought into dispute. When Right was claimed by the Wardens of the Marches,
according to Custom, the English complained, That their Borders were molested
by Scottish Robbers; so that the Ambassadors were sent away, without obtaining
the thing they came for; yea, almost without an Answer: The Scots, to obtain
that by Force, which they could not do by fair means, levied an Army, and
entered upon, and wasted, the bordering Lands of the English, with Fire and
Sword. This being about Harvest, the English, in the absence of their King,
were content only to stand upon the Defensive, what they could; but then levied
no Army; yet, the Winter following, some Action passed, and many Incursions
were made. The next Summer, William enters England, with an Army.
William listed a great Army, and marched into the Enemies Country; the
English, having few or no Forces ready to withstand them, send Ambassadors to
their Camp, proffering a great Sum of Money for a Truce; which, if they could
obtain, they gave Hopes, that all things would be accorded, to Content.
William, being a plain-Hearted Man, and willing to preserve Peace, (if
obtainable, upon reasonable Conditions) before a War, though a just one, gave
Credit to their Fallacious Promises. The English spent all the time of the
Cessation, in Preparations for War; but, in the mean time, they plied the Scots
with Ambassadors, who made large Promises; though their true Errand, was, to
discover their Enemies Camp; and finding the Scots, on Confidence of the Truce,
re-miss and negligent, and the greatest Part of their Army scattered to get in
Forage; they returned and gave their Army notice, that now was a fair
opportunity for Action, which they urged them not to omit; whereupon, placing
the greatest Part of their Army in Ambush, about Four Hundred nimble Horsemen,
in the Third Watch, a few hours before Sunrising, marched directly to Alnwick,
where the Scots Camp was pitched; there, finding all things in greater Security
than they expected, they set upon the King, who was riding up and down, (with
Sixty Horse only, as if there had been a settled Peace) and before they could
well be discerned, whether they were Friends or Enemies, But is overthrown,
taken Prisoner by the English, and sent to Henry, then in France.
(for they disguised themselves with Scots Arms and Ensigns, that they might
pass for Scots) They took him Prisoner in the Nineth Year of his Reign; some
few were rouzed up at the hubbub, and pursued scatteringly; diverse of them
rushed amongst their Enemies, as not being willing to forsake their King, and
so were made Prisoners, also. William was carried to Henry, then Warring in
France. The English, being elated with this unexpected Success, invaded
Cumberland, thinking to carry it, without Blows. But Gilchrist, and Rolland,
Two Scot^ Commanders, did so entertain Them, that, being repulsed, they made a
Truce, and were content to enjoy Northumberland only, as long as the Scots King
was a Prisoner, and to leave Cumberland and Huntingtonshire to the free
Possession of the Scots.

In the mean time, David, the Brother of William, Earl of Huntington in
England, and of Garioch in Scotland, who then fought under the English Banners,
received a Convoy, and returned into Scotland; where, having settled things for
the present, he sent Ambassadors into England about the Redemption of his
Brother, who was then kept Prisoner at Falise, a Town in Normandy. The King
gave Fifteen Hostages to the English, and surrendered up Four Castles, viz. the
Castle of Roxburgh, of Berwick, of Edinburgh, and of Sterling; and then he was
permitted to return home in the Calends of August 1^th.
February. But then he was called upon by the English, February 1st.
to appear at York, with his Nobles and Bishops, on the K. William Ransomed and
takes an Oath to K. Henry.
18th of the Calends of September. Being arrived there, he and all his
Followers (who were the Chief Nobility) took an Oath of Obedience to King
Henry, and gave up the Kingdom of Scotland into his Guardianship and Patronage.
These Conditions, tho very hard, yet the Scots were willing to accept of, That
so they might have the best of Kings restored to them, as the English Writers
say. Thomas Walsingham of England writes, That this Surrender was not made at
York, but at Not That Constance in Germany, but That in Normandy, now called
Contances.
Constance; Yet some say, That this Interview of Both Kings, was not in order
to the Surrender of the Kingdom, but for the Payment of certain pecuniary
Pensions; and, That the Castles were put into the hands of the English, as
Cautionaries only, till the Money was paid. This Opinion seems to me most
probable, as appears by the League renewed with Richard, Henrys Son, of which
in its due place.

William, at his Return, in a few Months, by Gilchrist his General, quelled the
January (...)
Insurrections made in his absence, in Galway. Gilchrist, King Williams General.
On the Fourth of the Calends of February, there was an Assembly Indicted at
Norham by Tweed. Thither William came, where the English labored extremely,
That all the Scots Bishops should acknowledge the Bishop of York, for their
Metropolitan; The Popes Legate also concurred with them, in their Desire, and
earnestly pressed, That it might be so Enacted. After a long Dispute, the Scots
Answered, That, at present, few of their Countrymen were there, and that they
could not bind the absent to obey their Decree, if they should consent to any.
Hereupon, the matter was deferred to another time; and, shortly after, the
Scots Bishops sent Agents to Rome, to justify their Cause before Alexander the
Third, The Scots Bishops freed from the Jurisdiction of English Bishops.
Gilchrist Kills his Wife for Adultery* and flys into England.
by whose Decree the Bishops of Scotland were freed from the Yoke of the
English; and so the Messengers returned, joyfully, home. Not long after,
Gilchrist, whom I have often mentioned before, slew his Wife, who was the
King's Sister, because she had Committed Adultery. Whereupon he was summoned to
appear on a certain day, but, not coming, was Banished for ever: His Houses
were Demolished, and his Goods Confiscate. About the same time, the Castle of
Edinburgh was restored to the Scots; one of the Pensions having been paid, and
to make the Concord between Both Kings more firm; a Law was made, That neither
King should harbor the Enemy of each other. Upon this Law, Gilchrist, who
lived Banished in England, was forced to return, and, shifting from place to
place, But is Forced to return into his own Country.
as a Stranger, amongst Strangers, and unknown, he passed his Miserable Life,
in great Penury and Want. In the interim, William prepared for an Expedition
into Murray, to suppress the Thieves of the Aebudae, whose Captain was Donald
Bane, i.e. the White, who derived his Pedigree from the Kings, and had also
assumed the Name of King: He made his Descent from his Ships, in many places,
and spoiled not only the Maritime Parts, but, his Boldness increasing, by
reason of Impunity, those Places also, which were very remote from the Sea. The
King sent out Ships to sail about, Donald Bane rises in Arms, but is quelled.
and burn his Fleet, whilst he with a Land Army attacqued them; and, so doing,
he put them almost all to the Sword. In his return, as he was near Perth, he
found Three Countrymen, which yet seemed to be more than so, had not it been
for their shabby and uncouth Habit; who seemed to avoid meeting any Company;
but the King caused them to be brought to him, and viewing them intently, was
very earnest to know, What manner of Creatures they were. Gilchrist, being the
Elder of them, fell down at the King's Feet, and, making a Miserable Complaint
of his Misfortunes, tells, Who he was; upon which, the Memory of his former
Life, which he had passed with so much Splendor, Distressed Gilchrist Pardoned
and Restored.
did so passionately affect all that were present, That they could not choose
but fall a Weeping. Whereupon, the King commanded him to rise from the Ground,
and restored him to his Former Dignity, and the same Degree of Favor, he had
before.

These things fell out about the Year 1190, at which time, Richard, who, the
Year before, had succeeded Henry his Father, in the Realm of England, prepared
for an Expedition into To the Holy War, for Recovery of Ierus^lem from the
Turks.
Syria. He restored the Castles to the King of Scots, and sent back the
Hostages, freeing him, and his Posterity, from all Pacts, either extorted by
Force, or obtained by Fraud, made with the English, and suffered him to enjoy
the The English quit their Claim to any part of (...).
Realm of Scotland, by the same Right, and within the same Limits, as Malcolm,
or any former Kings had held it: Matthew Par^s makes mention of These
Conditions; William, on the other side, That he might not be ungrateful to
Richard, upon his going to War into a strange Country, gave him 1000 Marks of
Silver, and commanded David his Brother, who was Declared Earl of Huntington,
to follow him into Syria. This David, in his Return from thence, had his Navy
scattered by Tempest, was taken prisoner by the Egyptians, redeemed by the
Venetians, and at last, being known at Constantinople by an English Merchant,
after Four years time, he returned into Scotland, and was received with the
general Gratulation of all Men, especially of his Brother. Boethius thinks, that
the Town where this David was landed in Safety, before-named Alectum, was now
called William sends David his Brother, to accompany Richard, to the Holy Land.
David returns from S^^ia.
Deidonum, but because the Name of Alectum is found in no Author but only in
Hector Boethius; I rather think, it was called Taodunum, a Word compounded of
Tay and Dun, i. e. Dundee.

Not long after, Richard, after many Hazards and Misfortunes, So does Richard.
returned also from the same Voyage. William and his Brother came to
congratulate him upon his Return, and gave him 2000 Marks of Silver, as a
Largess, being moved thereunto, either out of Remembrance of his former Bounty
to him, or on the Consideration of his present Want. Neither were ever the
Scots and English more Gracious, than at that time, as many judge: There
William fell very Sick, and a Rumor of his Death being noised abroad, caused
new Combustions in Scotland. Harald, Earl of the Orcades, and of Caithnes,
hated the Bishop of Caithnes, because (as he alleged) he was the Obstacle,
that he could not obtain what he desired of the King; and therefore he took him
Prisoner, cut out his Tongue, and also put out his Eyes. The King, returning
home, overthrew Harald in several Skirmishes, and destroyed most of his Forces:
Lex Ta^^on^^ executed upon one Harald Earl of the Orcades.
Harald himself was taken in his Flight, and brought back to the King, who when
his Eyes also were first put out, by way of Retaliation, was afterward hanged;
his whole Male-Stock were Gelded, the rest of his Kinn, and Companions of his
Wickedness, were deeply Fined. These things are thus related by Hector Boethius,
and common Report confirms them; yea, the Hill receiving its Name from
Testicles, gives credit to the Relation, so that it seems truer than what
others Write in this matter. These things happened in the Year of our
Salvation, 1198. in which Year the King had a Son, named Alexander, Born to
him; and Richard of England dying, his Brother John succeeded him.

Whereupon, the King of Scots went into England, to take his Oath to him, for
the Lands which he held in England; and in the beginning of John's new Reign,
his Coming was not more acceptable, than his Departure displeasing; K. John of
England meditates a War against Scotland.
because he refused to follow John in his Expedition into France, against
Philip his old Friend, So that, as soon as John returned out of France, he
sought Occasion for a War with the Scots, and began to build a Fort over
against Berwick. William, having, in vain, complained of the Injury, by his
Ambassadors, gathered a Company together, and demolished what was built
thereof. Upon which, Armies were Levied on both sides, but when their Camps
were near to one another, Peace was made, by the Intervention of the Nobles, on
these But Matters are accommodated upon Terms between both Kingdoms.
Terms That William's Two Daughters should be given in Matrimony to John's Two
Sons, as soon as ever they were Marriageable. A great Dowry was promised, and
Caution made, That no Fort should be built, and Hostages also were given, in
the case. William at his return, fell into an unexpected Danger; The greatest
Part of the Town of Berth was swept away in the Night, by an Inundation of the
River Tay; Neither was the King's Palace exempted from the Calamity, but his
Son, an Infant, with his Nurse, and 14 more, were drowned, the rest hardly
escaping. Many also of the Promiscuous Multitude lost their Lives. Berth
destroyed and new Built.
The King, perceiving, that the Water had overwhelmed the greatest part of the
Ground, on which the City stood, and that almost every House in the Town had
suffered thereby, caused a new City to be built, a little below, in a more
commodious place, on the same River, and, making some small variation of the
Name, called it Perth, in Memory (as some say) of one Perth, a Nobleman, who
gave the King the Land, on which the City was built. About the same time, Makul
a Criminal abstains from all manner of Food.
the King took Gothered Makul, Captain of the Rebels in the North, who was
betrayed to him by his own Men. When he was Prisoner, he constantly abstained
from all Food, to prevent, as it is thought, a more heavy Punishment. This was
in a manner, the last memorable Fact of William's, which yet, in regard of his
unweildy Age, was acted by his Captains. For he Dyed soon after, in the 74 th
year of his Age, and the 49 th year of his Reign, A. D. 1643.

Not long before his Death, Leagues were renewed with John King of England,
almost every Year; for he, being a Man desirous to enlarge his Dominions, tho
he had War with the French abroad, with the Romanists at home, and moreover,
was never on sure Terms of Peace with the Irish or Welsh; yet, did not break
off his Inclination to invade Scotland, which had then an old Man for their
King, and the next Heir to him, a Child. Frequent Conferences happened on this
Occasion, rather to try what might be obtained, than in hopes of any good
Issue; at length, the Matter broke out into open Suspicion; And, after many
Leagues made between Them, at last William was called to Newcastle upon Tine,
Whither he came, but there, falling into a dangerous Disease, he returned
without doing any thing. In fine, a little before his Death, he was invited to
Norham on the Tweed, and when his Sickness would not permit him to go, his Son
was desired to come in his stead, which, yet, by the Advice of the Council, was
refused; the Leagues, established in those Interviews, I shall not particularly
mention, for they, almost all, contain the same things, having in them nothing
New, save that in One of them it was Articled, Several Leagues between John of
England, and William of Scotland.
That the Scottish Kings should not Swear, nor be Feudataries, to the Kings of
England Themselves, for the English Lands they held; but their Children, only.
The Mention of these things is wholly omitted by the English Writers, also, I
believe, for this very Cause.

Alexander II. The Ninety Fourth King.
WIlliam was succeeded by Alexander, his Son, begot on Emergard, who was
Kinswoman to the King of England, and Daughter to the Earl of Beaumont. A
Maritime Town in Normandy (...) France.
He was but Sixteen years of age when he began to Reign; entering upon the
Government in troublesome Times, he composed and settled things more prudently,
than could be expected from one of his years. First of all, he Indicted a
Public Convention of the Estates, and therein, by a Decree he confirmed all
the Acts of his Father, that good and prudent Prince. His first Expedition was
into England, Alexander enters England with an Army.
not out of any private Ambition, but to bridle the Tyranny of John; and it was
then said, that he was sent for in by the Ecclesiastics of that Kingdom. He
left Norham, upon certain Conditions, when he had begun to besiege it; and
piercing further into the Kingdom, he carried it very severely against all the
Royalists. Upon his Return home, John invaded Scotland, quickly after. He made
a mighty Devastation in Dunbar, John enters Scotland.
Hadington, and all the Neighboring Parts of Lothian; and, to spread the War
and Ruin further, he determined to return another Way. Alexander, being very
desirous to decide it by a Battle, pitched his Tents between the Pentland Hills,
and the River Eske, which way, as it was bruited, he would return; but John, to
avoid fighting, marched along by the Sea, and burnt the Monastery of
Coldingham, he also took and burnt Berwick, which was then but meanly
fortified. As he thus marched hastily back, Alexander followed him as fast as
he could, and, making great havoc all over Northumberland, came as far as
Richmond: But John, by speedy marches having retreated into the heart of
England, Alexander returned by Westmorland, and laid all waste to the very
Gates of Carlisle; The City it self he took by Force, and Fortified it. The
next year, Lewis, the Son of Philip, Alexander takes Carlisle*
King of France, was sent for, by those who favored the Ecclesiastical
Faction, to London, that so, he, upon the Proscription of John, might possess
the Kingdom; and so was King Alexander of Scotland too, who came to aid his Old
Friend. But John, King John agrees with the Pope, and becomes his Feudatary.
being forsaken by his Subjects, and assaulted also by Foreign Arms, upon the
Payment of a great Sum of Money at present, and the Promise of a perpetual
Pension; and moreover, transferring the Right of the Kingdom of England to the
Pope; so that the Kings of England, for the future, were to be His Feudataries,
was received into Favor. So that he obtained Letters from Rome by Cardinal
Galo, Cardinal Galo* Ava^iti^^^.
a Man of known Avarice, wherein the Scots and French were, with great Threats,
forbid to meddle with a People, which were Tributaries to the Holy See.

Upon this sudden Change of things, Lewis returned into France, and Alexander
into Scotland; but his return home was not so quiet, as his entrance into
England was; For the English, pressing upon the Rear of his retiring Army, took
many of the Stragglers, Prisoners. And besides, John had broken down all the
Bridges on the Trent, and had fastened sharp Pikes, or Palisadoes, in all its
Fords, removing away all Ships and Boats, so that it seemed to be so great an
Impediment unto him, that he could not avoid it, but must certainly be
destroyed. In the mean time, John was poisoned by an English Monk at King John
Poisoned.
Others say, at (...) Abbey near Bost^n in Lincolnshire.
Newark, a Town seated on the Trent, and being carried in a Litter, died in two
days. That Casualty opened the way for Al^xander's March. Then, blaming and
punishing his Men for their former Carelessness, he marched on more
circumspectly, but not without the great Damage of those, through whose
Countries he passed: For whatsoever could be driven away, or carried, he took
with him, and so returned home with a great Booty. Galo, the Popes Legate, when
he had settled Henry, the Son of John, in the Throne, mulct the Nobles of
England in a great Sum of Money, and then received them into Favor. And to
give them some Recompense for their Loss, by the like Calamity of their
Enemies; he Excommunicates Lewis of France, The Scots Excommunicated.
and Alexander of Scotland, in hopes to obtain some Prey from them, also. The
Scots were Interdicted all Divine Offices; for he imagined, that his Thundering
Curses would prevail more amongst the simple Vulgar, than with the Kings. But
at last, Peace was made between the Two Kings; the Scots were to restore
Carlisle, and the English, Berwick; and the Ancient Bounds at A Stone-Cross
erected in S^anmo^e in Cumberl^nd, as a Boundary between the Two Kingdoms, of
England and S^otland.
Kings-Cross were to be observed by them Both. Alexander and his Subjects were
released from their Censures by the English Bishops, who were Authorized
thereunto. Hereupon Galo was much enraged, That so great a Prey should be taken
out of his Hands, so that he turned his Anger on the Bishops, and the rest of
the Clergy of Scotland, as his own Peculiar, with whom Kings had nothing to do.
He summoned them to appear at Alnwick, Whither when they came, the more fearful
appeased his Wrath with Money; the more resolute were Cited to Rome. But they,
having also received many Letters from some of the English Bishops and Abbats,
directed to the Pope, concerning the sordid Spirit of the Ambassador or Legate,
made grievous Complaints against him, calling him the Firebrand of all
mischief, Cardinal (...) ill Character.
because he studied not the Public Good, but his own Avarice, and did chaffer
for, and sell, Peace and War amongst Princes, at his own pleasure. Galo* not
being able to acquit himself of the Crimes laid to his charge, was Fined by the
Pope in the Loss of the Money he had got; which was to be divided amongst his
Accusers. Hereupon, they returned home, laden with large Promises, but with
empty Purses. A few years after, Henry of England, being now grown Ripe both in
Years and Judgment, came to York; there he agreed with Alexander, in the
presence of Pandulphus, Pandulphus the Popes Legate, a Witness of the Peace
between the Two Kings.
the Popes Legate, to take Joan, Henry's Sister, to Wife, by whom yet, because
of her untimely Death, he had no Children.

From that time, there was Peace between Both Kings as long as they lived.
There he also solemnly Promised and Swore before the same Pandulphus, That he
would bestow the Two Sisters of Alexander in Honorable Marriages according to
their Dignity, as his Father had promised, before. But one of them returned
home unmarried, one only being bestowed in Marriage. The next Year, viz. 1220,
the Cardinal of St. Giles, came into England, to fish for Money for the Holy
War; and accordingly having scraped together a great Sum, in both Kingdoms,
which, by his Impostures, he had gulled Persons, (...) credulous, of, he
Luxuriously spent it in his Journey; so that he came empty to Rome, falsely
alleging, That he was robbed by Thieves in the way. Another Legate presently
succeeded him; but Men, having been twice cheated by Roman Fraud, by a Public
Decree, Roman Fraud.
forbad him to set his foot on Land. Alexander was busied to suppress Vices at
home, which sprung up by the Licentiousness of War, and he traveled over the
whole Kingdom, with his Queen, to do Justice, whilst Gilespy, a Rossian,
spoiled Ross, and the Neighbor Counties; for, passing over the River Ness, he
took and burnt the Town of Enverness; He cruelly slew all those, that refused
to obey him. John Cumin, Earl of Buchan was sent against him, C^min overthrow^
Gilesp^, a Free-^oo^er.
who took him and his two Sons, as they were shifting up and down, and changing
their Quarters, to secure themselves; and cut off their Heads, and so sent them
to the King. About this time, the Caithnesians entered by night into the
Bedchamber of Adam their Bishop, and there killed a Monk, who was his usual
Companion, (for he had been, before, Abbat of Mulross) and one of his
Bedchamber; as for the Bishop himself, they grievously wounded him, and
dragging him into the Kitchen, The (...) of the ^a^thnessmen against their
Bishop punished.
there they burnt him and the House he was in. The Cause of their great
Cruelty, was, (as it is reported) because the Bishop was more severe than in
former times, in exacting his Tithes. The Offenders were diligently sought out,
and most severely punished; The Earl of Caithnes, though he were not present at
the Fact, yet was somewhat suspected, but afterward being brought privately to
the King in the Christmas Holy Days, which the Scots call Saturnalia,
Saturnalia.
he humbly begged Pardon of the King, and obtained it.

About this time, Alane, of Galway, the powerfullest Man in Scotland, departed
this Life. He left Three Daughters behind him, of whom I shall speak hereafter.
Thomas, his Bastard Son, despising their Age and Sex, sets up for himself, as
Lord of the Family, and, not contented herewith, he gathers 10000 Men together,
Thomas, the Natural Son of Alan of Galway overthrown.
kills all that oppose him, and drives Booties, far and near, from all the
Neighbouring-Countries. At last, the King sent an Army against him, who slew
5000 of the Rebels with their General. The same year, Alexander and his Queen
Visit King Henry.
Alexander, with his Wife, went for England, to allay the Tumults, as much as
he could, raised against Henry, and to reconcile him to the Nobility. Whilst
he was busy about this, at York, his Wife went with the Queen of England, a
Pilgrimage to Canterbury, but at her return, she fell sick, died, and was
buried at London. His Queen dies at London.
Not long after her Death, the King being Childless, Married Mary, the Daughter
of Ingelram, Earl of Coucy in France, in the year of Christ 1239, by whom he
had Alexander, He marries to a French Lady.
who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom. Two years after, viz. in 1242, whilst
the King was hastening to England, to visit that King, newly returned from
France, and refreshed himself a while at Hadington, in Lothian, with
Horse-Races; the Lodging or Inn of Patrick of Gallway, Earl of Athol, was set
on Fire, wherein he, and two of his Servants, were burnt; the Fire speading it
self a great way further. It was not thought to have casually happened, because
of the Noted Fewds between Patrick, and the Family of the Bizets. And though,
William, the Chief of that Family, was at Forfar, above 60 Miles from
Hadington, the same night, that the Fire happened, as the Queen could testify
in his behalf; yet, because the adverse Party, being the Kindred of Patrick,
pleaded, That many of his Servants and Tenants were seen at Hadington at that
time, William was Summoned to appear; He came to Edinburgh at the day prefixed,
but, not daring to stand to his Trial, because of the Potency of his
Adversaries, which were the Cumins's, he would have Tried the matter in a Duel;
but That being not accepted, Biz^^ offers to clear himself by a Duel. He flys
to Ireland.
he, and some of his Sept banished themselves into Ireland, where he left a
Noble Family of his Name and House. There was also another Seditious Tumult in
Argyle, Raised by Sumerled Son of the former Sumerled, but he was soon
suppressed by Patrick Dunbar, and, submitting to the Kings Mercy, obtained
Pardon for all his past Offenses. Sumerled overthrown in Argyle.
The King, not long after, fell sick, and died in the 51 Year of his Age; the
35 of his Reign; and of our Lord, 1249.

Alexander the III. The Ninety Fifth King.
ALexander the Third, His Son, was Crowned King at Scone, the same Year, a
Child, not past Eight years Old. The Power of all things was mostly in the
Faction of the Cumins's. For they turned the Public Revenue to the Enrichment
of themselves, The Cumins's (...) the Roast in (...), which disgusts the
opposite Faction.
oppressed the Poor, and, by false Accusations, cut off some of the Nobles, who
were averse to their humors and desires, and dared to speak freely of the
State of the Kingdom; and being Condemned, their Goods were Confiscated, and
brought into the Kings Exchequer, from whence they (who rather Commanded, than
Obeyed, the King) received them back again for their Private Emolument. A
Convention of the Estates being held, the chief Matter in agitation, was, to
pacify the King of England, lest, in such a troublesome time, he should make
any Attempt upon Them; and, to do it more easily, an Affinity was proposed.
This Way seemed more commodious to the Anti-Cuminian Party, to undermine their
Power, than openly to oppugn it. An Embassy to England.
Whereupon, Ambassadors were sent to England, who were kindly received, and
munificently rewarded, by that King, who granted them all their Desires. An
Interview between the Two Kings. November 24.
The next Year, which was 1251, both Kings met at York, the 8th of the Calends
of Alexander of Scotland made Knight by the K. of England. A Contract of
Marriage between Him and Margaret, Henry's Daughter.
D^cember. There, on Christmas day this Alexander was made Knight by the King
of England, and, the day after, the Match was concluded betwixt him and
Margarite, Henrys Daughter. A Peace was also renewed betwixt them, which as
long as Henry lived, was inviolably observed. And because Alexander was yet but
a Child, and under Age; it was Decreed, by the advice of his Friends, That he
should consult his Father-in-Law, as a Guardian, in all Matters of Weight: Some
of the Prime men, being accused by Virtue of this Decree, secretly withdrew
themselves. When the King returned home, Robert, Abbat of Dumferling,
Chancellor of the Kingdom, was accused, because he had Legitimated the Wife of
Alane Durward, who was but the Natural, or Base-born, Daughter of Alexander the
Second, That so, if the King dyed without Issue, she might come in, as Heiress
Upon this Fear, the Chancellor, as soon as ever he returned home, surrendered up
the Seal to the Nobles. The Chancel^o^ of Scotland (...).
Gam^lin, afterward Bishop of St. Andrews, succeeded him in his Office.

The Three next Years, they, who were the Kings Council, did, almost every one
of them, carry themselves, as Kings; whatever they catched, was their own; so
that the poor Commonalty was left destitute, and miserably oppressed. The King
of England, being made acquainted therewith, out of his paternal Affection to
his Son in Law, came to Werk-Castle, situate on the Borders of Scotland, Work
Castle standing (...) above (...) side.
and sent for his Son in Law Alexander, and his Nobles, thither. There, by his
Advice, many advantageous Alterations were made, especially of those
Magistrates, by whose Defaults, Insurrections had been made at home: And also
many profitable Statutes were Enacted, for the Future. The King returned to
Scotland with his Wife; and having an English Guard to convey him home, he
resolved to dwell in the Castle of Edinburgh. Walter Cumins Earl of Monteath
kept the Castle, who was disaffected because of the Change of the Public
State, made by the King of England; yet, he was compelled to surrender it, by
Patrick Dunbar, with the Assistance of the English Forces. The greatest Part of
the Nobility, and of the Ecclesiastics, were offended, in regard their Power
was somewhat abridged, by those New Statutes, which they looked upon as a Yoke
imposed upon them by the English, and a Beginning of their Servitude: Yea, they
proceeded to that height of Contumacy, that, A Sedition of the Nobles against
Alexander.
being Summoned to give a Legal Account of their Management of Affairs in
former times, they made light of the Summons; The same Persons, who were the
Principal Actors in disturbing things before, were now the Chief Incouragers to
Disobedience. They were generally the Clans of the Cumins's, Walter Earl of
Monteath; Alexander, Earl of Buchan; John Earl of Athol; William Earl of Mar,
and other Considerable Men of the same Faction. They dared not to put their
Cause on a Legal Trial, as being conscious to themselves of the many Wrongs
done to the Poor, and meaner Sort, yea, to the King himself, and therefore they
resolved to outface Justice, by their Impudent Audacity. For being informed,
That the King was but lightly Guarded, and lived securely at Kinross, as in a
time of Peace, They immediately gathered a Band of their Vassals about them,
Seized him as he was asleep, and carried him to Sterling; and, as if there were
no Force in the Case, but they had been rightfully Elected, they discharged and
expelled his Servants, took New, and managed all things at their own Will and
Pleasure; so that now, the Terror and Consternation was turned upon the Former
Counselors.

But this Sedition was allayed by the Death of Walter Cumins, who was Poisoned,
as it is thought, by his Wife, an English Woman; The Suspicion thereof was
increased on her, because, though she were Wooed by many Nobles, yet she Married
John Russel her Gallant, a Young English Spark; She was accused of Witchcraft
too and cast into Prison, but she bought out her Liberty. Russel and his Wife
obtained Letters from the Pope, permitting them to commence an Action of the
Case against their Adversaries, for the Wrong done them, before the Popes
Legate. But it was to no purpose, An Ancient Privilege of the Scots, not to be
cite^ to R^me.
because the Scots urged an Ancient Privilege, exempting them from going out of
the Kingdom, when they were to plead their Causes.

When the King was of Age, upon the humble Petition of the Cumins's, he
Pardoned, them as if all their offenses had been expiated by the Death of
Walter. He was induced so to do, (as some say) by reason of the Greatness of
their Family; and also, because he feared Foreign Wars, when Matters were so
unsettled at home: But that War began not so soon, as Men thought it would.

August 1.
In the Year of Christ 1263. in the Calends of Acho King of Norwey, lands with
an Army in Scotland.
August, Acho, King of Norwey, with a Fleet of 160 Sail, came to Air, a
Maritime Town of Coil, where he Landed 20000 Men. The Cause of the War, as he
pretended, was, that some Islands, which were promised to his Ancestors by
Mackbeth, were not yet put into his Hands, viz. Bote, Aran, and both the
Cumbras's, which were never reckoned amongst the Aebudae. But it was enough for
him, who sought a pretense for a War, that they were called Islands. Acho took
two of the greatest of them, and reduced their Castles, before he could meet
with any Opposition; being lifted up by this success, he makes a descent into
Cuningham, the next Continent, over against Bote, in that part of it which they
call the A Town in Cuningham, standing on the Clyde. But is overthrown by
Alexander Stuart.
Largs. There he met with Two Misfortunes, almost at one and the same: First,
he was overcome in Fight by Alexander Stuart, the Great Grandfather of him,
who, first of that Name, was King of Scotland; and being almost taken by the
Multitude of his Enemies, he hardly escaped in great Fear, to his Ships. The
other was, That his Ships, being tossed in a mighty Tempest, hardly carried
him, with a few of his followers, who escaped, into the Orcades. There were
slain in that Battle, Sixteen Thousand of the Norwegians, and Five Thousand of
the Scots; some Writers say, that King Alexander himself was in this Fight:
Yet, they also make Honorable mention of the Name of this Alexander Stuart.
Acho, died of Grief, for the Loss of his Army, and of his Kinsman too, a
Valiant Youth, And dies of Grief.
whose Name is not mentioned by Writers.

His Son Magnus, who was lately come to him, perceiving Things in a desperater
Posture, than he ever thought they would be brought to; especially, having no
hopes of Recruit from home, before the Spring; and also, finding the Minds of
the Islanders alienated from him, and that he was forsaken of the Scots too, in
Confidence of whose Aid, his Father had undertaken that War; these things
considered, he easily inclined to Terms of Peace: The Spirit of the young Man
was quailed, both by the unlucky Fight; and also, by his Fear of the Islanders.
For Alexander had then recovered, by sending about some Ships, the Isle of Man,
situate almost in the midst between Scotland and Ireland, Isle of Man recovered
by the Scots.
upon these Conditions, That the King thereof should send in Ten Galleys to the
Scots, as often as there was occasion; and that the Scots should defend him from
a Foreign Enemy. When Magnus saw, That the rest of the Islands inclined to
follow the Example of the Manks-Men; he sent Ambassadors to treat of Peace,
which Alexander refused to make, unless the Aebudae were restored; at last, by
the diligence of the Commissioners, it was agreed, that the Scots should have
the Aebudae; Magnus, Acho's Son, makes Peace with Alexander.
for which, at present, they were to pay 1000 Marks of Silver, and 100 Marks an
Year. And moreover, That Margarite, Alexanders Daughter, being then but Four
years old, should Marry Hangonan, the Son of Magnus, as soon as she was fit for
Marriage.

About this time, the King of England, being infested with Civil War, had Five
Thousand Scots sent him for his Assistance, under the Command of R^bert Bruce,
and Alexander Cumins, whom the English Writers call John, ^
the greatest part of them were slain in Fight; and Cumins, with the English
King himself, and his Son, and a great part of the English Nobility, of the
Kings Party, were taken Prisoners.

Moreover, the Scots King was much troubled at the Arrogance of the Priests and
Monks in his Kingdom; who, being enriched by former Kings, began to grow wanton
in a continued Peace: Yea, they endeavored to be equal, if not superior, to
the Nobility, whom they excelled in Wealth. The young Nobility, repining at it,
and taking it in great disdain, used them coursly; whereupon* complaints were
made, by them, to the King; who, imagining, either that their Wrongs were not
so great, as they represented them; or else, that they suffered them
deservedly, neglected their pretended Grievances; whereupon they Excommunicated
All, but the King, ^
and in great Wrath, determined to go to Rome. But the King, remembering, what
great Commotions, Thomas Becket, the prime promoter of Ecclesiastical Ambition,
had lately made in England, called them back from their Journey, and caused the
Nobility to satisfy, not only their Avarice, but even their Arrogance, too:
And indeed, they were the more inclinable to an Accord with the King, because
he had lately undertaken the Patronage of the Ecclesiastical Orders, against
the Avarice of the Romanists: For a little before, Ottobon, the Popes Legate,
was come into England, to appease the Civil Discords, but not being able to
effect the thing he came for, he omitted the public Care, and studied his own
private Gain and Lucre; he Indicted an Ecclesiastical Assembly of the English,
Ottobon the Popes Leg^^e.
Procters from Scotland being also called thereunto; in the mean time, he
endeavored to exact Four Marks of Silver, from every Parish in Scotland, and
Six from all Cathedrals, for the Expense of Procurations. This Contribution, or
Tax, was scarce refused, when News was brought, That another Legate was arrived
in England, intending also for Scotland, on pretense to gather up Money, for
the Holy War; and besides that procurable by Indulgences, and other Lime-Twigs,
Another Legate, (...) Rome.
to catch Money, he endeavored to wrest from all Bishops, Abbats, and Parish
Priests (as judging them to be immediately under Papal Jurisdiction) the Tenth
part of their yearly Revenues; that so, Edward and Edmond, Sons to the King of
England, might go more Nobly and Numerously attended to the War in Syria. The
Scots judged this Tax to be very grievous and unjust, especially, because the
English seemed to be so forward to have it granted, as if Scotland were not sui
Iuris, or, an absolute Kingdom, but Dependent on England. Moreover, they were
afraid, lest the Legate should riotously mispend the Money, designed for the
War, as was done some Years before; whereupon, they forbad him to enter their
Borders, ^
but sent him Word, That they themselves, without his Presence, would gather
Money for, and send Soldiers to* the Syrian War; and indeed, they sent
Soldiers, under the Command of the Earls of Carick and Athol, Two of the Chief
Nobility, to L^wis King of Fran^e* and to the Pope, lest he might think himself
altogether disesteemed, they sent 1000 Marks of Silver.

The Year after, Henry, King of England, died, and his Son Edward the First
succeeded him; at whose Coronation, Alexander and his Wife were present; she
returning, died soon after; yea, David the Kings Son, and also Alexander, being
newly Married to the Daughter of the Earl of Flanders, followed her a little
time after, by their continued Funerals; Margarite also, the Kings Daughter
departed this Life; who left a Daughter behind her, begot by Hangonanus, King
of Norwey. Alexander being thus, in a few years, deprived both of his Wife and
Children too, A Town in France.
took to Wife Ioleta, the Daughter of the Earl of A Borough over against Leith
in Lothian.
Dreux; and within a Year, he fell from his Horse, and broke his Neck, not far
from Kinghorn in the Year of our Lord 1285. and the Fourteenth of the March the
19th.
Calends of April, he lived Forty Five years, and Reigned Thirty Seven.

He was more missed, than any King of Scotland had been before him, not so much
for the eminent Virtues of his Mind, and the Accomplishments of his Body; as,
that People foresaw, what great Calamities would befall the Kingdom, Alexanders
Death, and Commendable Character.
upon his Decease. Those wholesome Laws, which he made are antiquated by the
Negligence of Men, and the Length of Time, and their Utility is rather
celebrated by Report, than experienced by Trial. He divided the Kingdom into
Four Parts, and, almost every year, he Traveled them all over, staying well
near Three Months in each of them, to do Justice; and to hear the complaints of
the Poor, who had free Access to him, all that time. As Soon as he went to an
Assize or Sessions, he Commanded the Prefect, or Sheriff, of that Precinct, to
meet him with a select number of Men, and also to accompany him at his
departure to the end of his Bailywick, till the next Precinct, where he was
Guarded by another like Company. By this means, he became acquainted with all
the Nobility, and was as well known to them; and the People, as he went, were
not burdened with a Troop of Courtiers, who are commonly Imperious, and given
to Avarice, where they come. Idle Persons punished.
He commanded the Magistrates to punish all Idle Persons, who followed no
Trade, nor had any Estates to maintain them; for his Opinion was, That Idleness
was the Source and Fountain of all Wickedness. He reduced the Horse-Train of
the Nobles, when they traveled, to a certain number; because, he thought, that
the Multitude of Horses, which were unfit for War, would spend too much
Provision. And whereas, by reason of Unskilfulness in Navigation; or else, by
Men's Avarice, in committing themselves rashly to Sea, many Shipwracks had
happened; and, the Violence of Pirates making an Accession thereto, the Company
of Merchants were almost undone, he commanded they should Traffic no more by
Sea. That Order lasted about an Year; but being accounted by many, of a public
Prejudice, at length, so great a Quantity of Foreign Commodities were imported,
that, in Scotland, they were never in the Memory of Man, more, or less cheap:
In this Case, that he might study the good of the Merchants-Company, he forbad,
that any but Merchants should buy what was imported, by whole Sale; but what
every Man wanted, he was to buy it at second Hand, or by Retail, from them.

The Eighth BOOK.
ALEXANDER, and his whole Lineage (besides one (...) by his Daughter) being
extinct, a Convention of the Estates was held at Scone, to Treat about Creating
a new King, and settling the State of the Kingdom; whither, when most of the
Nobility were come, in the first place they appointed Vicegerents, to govern
Matters at present; so dividing the Provinces, That Duncan Mackduff, should
preside over Fife, of which he was Earl; John Cumins, Earl of Buchan, over
Buchan; William Frazer, Archbishop of St. Andrews, over that Part of the
Kingdom, which lay Northward. And that Robert Bishop of Glascow, Another John
Cumins, and John Stuart, should Govern the Southern Countries; and that the
Boundary in the midst, Edward of England, desires Margarite of Norway, Heiress
of Scotland, as a Wife for his Son, which is yielded to.
should be the River Forth. Edward King of England, knowing, that his Sisters
(...) Daughter of the King of Norway, was the only surviving Person of all the
Posterity of Alexander; and that She was the Lawful Heiress of the Kingdom of
Scotland, sent Ambassadors into Scotland, to desire Her, as a Wife for his Son.

The Ambassadors, in the Session, discoursed much of the public Utility, like
to accrue to both Kingdoms, by this Marriage; neither did they find the Scots
averse therefrom. For Edward was a Man of great Courage, and Power, yet he
desired to increase it; and his Valor highly appeared in the Holy War, in his
Fathers Life time, and, after his Death, in his subduing of Wales; neither were
there ever more Endearments passed betwixt the Scots and the English, than
under the last Kings; Yea, the Ancient Hatred seemed no way more likely to be
abolished, than if both Nations, on Just and Equal Terms, might be united into
One.

For these Reasons, the Marriage was easily assented to; other Conditions were
also added, by the consent of both Parties; as, That the Scots should use their
own Laws and Magistrates, until Children were begot out of that Marriage, which
might Govern the Kingdom; or, if no such were begot, or being born, if they
dyed, before they came to the Crown; then the Kingdom of Scotland was to pass
to the next Kinsman of the Blood Royal. Matters being thus settled, Ambassadors
were sent into Norway. Michael, or as others call him, David* Weems, and
Michael Scot, Two eminent Knights of Fife, and much Famed for their Prudence in
those days. But Margarite, But She dies before their Marriage.
(for that was the Name of the young Princess) dyed before they came thither,
so that they returned home in a sorrowful posture, without their errand.

By reason of the untimely death of this young Lady, a Controversy arose
concerning the Kingdom, which mightily shook England, but almost quite ruined
Scotland. The Competitors were Men of great Power, John Baliol, and Robert
Bruce, of which Baliol had Lands in France; Bruce in England, but Both of them,
great Possessions and Allies in Scotland. But before I enter upon their
Disputes, that all things may be more clear to the Reader, I must fetch them
down a little higher.

The Three last Kings of Scotland, William, and the Two Alexanders, The Second
and the Third, and their whole Offspring being extinct, Contests for the Crown
of Scotland.
there remained none who could lawfully claim the Kingdom, but the Posterity of
David, Earl of Huntington. This David was Brother to King William, and Great
Uncle to Alexander the Third. He Married Maud in England, Daughter to the Earl
of Chester, by whom he had Three Daughters. The Eldest, Named Margarite,
Married Alan of Galway, a Man very powerful amongst the Scots. The Second was
matched to Robert Bruce, Surnamed the Noble, of High English Descent, and of a
large Estate; The Third was Married to Henry Hastings, an Englishman also,
whose Posterity do deservedly enjoy the Earldom of Huntington, at this day. But
to let him pass, (because he never put in for the Kingdom) I shall confine my
Discourse to the Stock, Cause, and Ancestry of Baliol and Bruce, only. Whilst
William was King of Scotland The Original of the Controversy between the
Baliols, and the Bruces, in Scotland.
Fergus, Prince of Galway, left Two Sons, Gilbert and Ethred; William, to
prevent the Seeds of Discord betwixt the Two Brothers, divided their Fathers
Inheritance equally betwixt them; Gilbert, the Eldest, took this highly amiss,
and thereupon, conceived an Hatred against his Brother, as his Rival, and
against the King too, for his unequal Distribution. Thereupon, when the King
was Prisoner in England, being then freed from fear of the Law, he discovered
his long-concealed Hatred against them both: As for his Brother, he took him
unawares, pulled out his Eyes, cut out his Tongue, and so, (not content with a
single Death) he put him to grievous and excessive Tortures, before he dyed;
and he himself joined with the English, and preyed upon his Neighbors and
Countrymen, as if they had been in an Enemies Country, The Story of the
Discords between Fergus of Galway his Children, after his Decease.
for he wasted all with Fire and Sword. And, except Rolland, the Son of Ethred,
had gathered a Band of Countrymen, who remained firm to the King, together, to
resist his Attempts, he had either wasted the neighbor Countries; or drawn
them all over to his Party. This Rolland was a forward young Man, of great
Abilities both of Body and Mind, he not only abated the Fury of his Uncle, but
many times fought valiantly, and sometimes successfully, with the English, as
he met them, whilst he repressed their Plunderings; or, as he himself spoiled
their Lands. At last, when the King was restored, Gilbert, by the Mediation of
his Friends, got a Pardon, upon promise of a sum of Money for the Wrongs he had
done, Rolland's Valou^ and Genealogy.
and giving Pledges to that purpose; But Gilbert dying a few days after, those
who were accustomed to Blood and Prey under him, and who had given up
themselves into the Protection of the King of England, either out of the
Inconstancy of their Dispositions; or, for fear of Punishment, being stirred on
by Gripes from an accusing Conscience for what they had formerly done, took up
Arms again, under the Command of Gilpatrick, Henry Kennedy, and Samuel; who,
before, had been the Assistors and Companions to Gilbert, in his Wickedness*
Rolland was sent with an Army against them, and after a great Fight he slew
their chief Leaders, and a great Part of the common Soldiers. They, who
escaped, fled to one Gilcolumb, a Captain of the Freebooters and Robbers, who
had made a great spoil in Lothian, and much endamaged the Nobles and Richer
sort, of whom also he killed some. Thence, marching into Galway, he undertook
Gilbert's Cause, when all others looked upon it, as desperate. He not only
claimed his Lands, as his Own, but carried himself as the Lord of all Galway.
At last, October 1.
Rolland fought with him in the Calends of October, about Three Months after
Gilbert's Forces were defeated, and slew him, with the greatest part of his
Army, with very little loss of his own side; amongst the slain, there was found
his own Brother, a stout young Man.

The English, being troubled at the overthrow of these Men, who had put
themselves under their Protection, the Year before, marched with an Army to
Carlisle; thither also came Rolland* being Reconciled to the King of England,
by the Mediation of William, where he refuted the Calumnies of his Enemies, and
showed, That he had done nothing Maliciously or Causelessly, against his own and
the Publicks Enemy, upon which he was honorably dismissed by the King. William
also returned home, and, calling to Mind the Constancy of his Father Ethred,
and how many Noble Exploits he had performed for the Good of the Public, he
gave him all Galway: And besides, he bestowed Carrick on the Son of Gilbert,
though his Father had not deserved so well of him. William of Newberry, the
English Writer, Records these things, as done Anno 1183. Rolland took to Wife,
the Sister of William Morvill, who was Com^ Stabu^^*
Lord High Constable in Scotland, who dying without Issue, Rolland enjoyed that
Office, as Hereditary to him and his Family. He had a Son called Alan; who, for
his Assistance, afforded to John, King of England, in his Irish War, was
rewarded by him with large Possessions; on which account, by the permission of
William of Scotland, he was a Feudatary to the English King, and swore Fealty
to him: This Alan took to Wife Margarite, the Eldest Daughter of David, Earl of
Huntington. By her, he had Three Daughters, the Eldest, Dornadilla, he Married
to John Baliol, who was King of Scotland (for some years.) But Robert Bruce,
Married Isabella, David's Second Daughter, he came to be Earl of Carrick, upon
this Occasion: Martha, Countess of Carrick, being Marriageable, and the only
Heiress of her Father, Martha, Countess of Carrick, falls in Love with Robert
Bruce.
who died in the Holy War, as she was a Hunting, cast her Eye on Robert Bruce,
the Beautifullest Young Man of all her Train; whereupon, she Courteously
invited him, and in a manner, compelled him into her Castle, which was near at
Hand. Being come thither, his Age, Beauty, Kindred, and Manners, easily
procuring mutual Love, they were quickly Married, in a private way. When the
King was informed thereof, he was much offended with them Both, because the
Right of bestowing the Lady in Marriage, lay in him; yet, by the Mediation of
Friends, he was afterward Reconciled to them. Out of this Marriage, Robert
Bruce was Born; who afterward, was King of Scotland.

Thus having enlarged my self in this Prologue, I come now to the Matter in
Hand, and to the Competitors of the Kingdom: They were, Dornadilla, the
Grandchild of David of Huntingdon, by his Eldest Daughter; and Robert Bruce,
Earl of Carrick, Grandson of the said David, by his youngest Daughter.
Dornadilla's Pretensions were grounded on the Custom of the Country; whereby,
he, or she, that was nearer in Degree, The several Pretensions of the
Competitors to the Crown.
had a better Right: Robert Bruce insisted on the Sex; that, in a like degree
of Propinquity, Males ought to be preferred before Females; so that he denied
it to be just, that as long as a Grandson was alive, a Granddaughter should
inherit her Ancestors Estate. And though sometimes the contrary may be
practiced in the Inheritances of private Men; yet, the matter is far otherwise
in those Estates, which are called Feuds, and in the Succession of Kingdoms.
And of this, there was urged a late Example in the Controversy, concerning the
Duchess of Burgundy; which, the Earl of Nevers, who Married the Grandchild of
the last Duke, by his Eldest Son, Claimed; yet, the Inheritance was adjudged to
the Son of the Duke's younger Brother; so that Robert contended, That he was
nearer in Degree, as being a Grandson, than John Baliol, who was but a Great
Grandson: As for Dornadilla, with whom he stood in equal Degree; yet, he was
to be preferred before her, as a Male before a Female.

Which difference could not be decided by the Scots.
The Scots Nobles could not decide this Controversy at home; for, by reason of
the Power of both Parties, the Land was divided into Two Factions. For Baliol,
by his Mother, held all Galway, a very large Country; and besides, he was
allied to the Cumin's Family, which was the most Powerful, next the Kings; for
Mary, the Sister of Dornadilla, had Married John Cumins. Robert, on the other
side, in England, possessed Cleveland; in Scotland, Annandale, and Garioch; and
by his Son, Earl of Carrick, (who was afterward King) was related to many
Noble Families, and he was also very Gracious with his own People; so that for
these Reasons, the Controversy was not able to be decided at home; yea, if it
should have been equitably determined, yet, there was not a sufficient Party in
Scotland to compel both sides to stand to the Award; But was referred to the
Umpirage of Edward of England.
and therefore Edward of England, was, almost, unanimously chosen to be the
Decider thereof. Neither was there any doubt made of his Fidelity, as being
Born of such a Father, as the late King of Scotland had Experienced to be, both
a Loving Father in Law, to him, and a just Guardian, too; and on the contrary
the English King had received a late and memorable Testimony of the Scots
Good Will toward him, in that they so readily consented to the Marriage of his
Son with their Queen.

Whereupon, Edward, as soon as he came to Berwick, sent Letters to the Peers
and Governors of Scotland, to come to him, protesting, That he Summoned them to
appear before him, not as Subjects before their Lord or Supreme Magistrate, but
as Friends before an Arbitrator, chosen by themselves. First of all, he
required an Oath of the Competitors, to stand to his Award; in the next place,
he required the same Oath of the Nobles and Commissioners to obey Him, as King,
whom he, upon his Oath, should declare so to be; and for this, he desired a
public Scrol, or Record, signed by all the States, and each ones Seal affixed
thereto, to be given to him. This being done, he chose, of the most prudent of
all the Estates, 12 English, and adjoined 12 Scots to them, from them also he
exacted an Oath, to Judge Rightly and Truly, according to their Consciences, in
the Case. These things were managed openly and above board, which, in
appearance, were honest and taking with the People, but his private Design was
secretly agitated amongst a few, only; how he might bring Scotland under his
Subjection; The Thing was thought feasible enough, in regard the Kingdom was
divided into Two Factions, but to make the Way more Intricate, and the Fraud
more Covert, he raised up Three other Competitors, besides Bruce and Baliol,
that, out of so great a Number, he might more easily bring over One, or More,
to his Party.

And, lest so great a Matter might seem to be determined unadvisedly, he
consulted with Those, who were most eminent in France, for Piety, Prudence, and
the Knowledge of the Law. Neither did he doubt, but that (as that sort of Men
are never always of One Opinion) he should fish something out of their Answers,
which might make for his purpose; The New Competitors, seeing no Grounds for
their Pretensions, of their own accord quickly desisted; but to the Lawyers,
whom he Governed and Influenced, as he pleased, a false, or made, Case was
Stated and Propounded, Thus, A certain King, that was never wont to be Crowned,
nor Anointed, The (...) Case as p^opounded to Lawyers by K. Edward.
but only to be placed in a kind of Seat, and declared King by his Subjects,
yet not a King so free, but that he was under the Patronage of another King,
whose Homage or Beneficiary he professed himself to be; Such a King died
without Children: Two of his Kinsmen begat by Sempronius, Great Uncle of the
deceased King, claim the Inheritance, to wit, Titius, Great Grandson by the
Eldest Daughter of Sempronius, and Seius, Grandson by his Younger Daughter;
now Which of These is to be preferred, in ^n undividable Estate? The Case being
propounded well near, in those very Words, They all Generally answered, That,
if any Law or Custom did obtain in the Kingdom, which was sued for, they were
to be Guided by, and stand to it; if not, then they must be Guided by him,
under whose Patronage they were, because, in Judging of Freehold, Custom does
not ascend, i. e. The usage and award of the Superior, is to be a Law to the
Inferior, but not on the contrary. It would be too prolix a Task, to reckon up
particularly all the Opinions, but, in brief, The Lawyers differ in their
Opinions about it.
almost all of them answered very doubtfully and uncertainly, as to the Right
of the Competitors; but, as the Case was falsely put, they all gave the Supreme
Power of Judgment in the Controversy, to Edward. Hereby, the Matter was made
more intricate and involved, than before; so that, the next Year, they met
again at Norham. There, Edward, by Agents, fit for his purpose, gently tried
the Minds of the Scots, Whether they would willingly put Themselves under the
Power and Jurisdiction of the English, which (as was alleged) their Ancestors
had often done: But, when they all unanimously refused so to do, he called to
him the Competitors, whom he himself had set up; and, by great Promises,
extorted from them, to Swear Homage to him; and he persuades the rest, to
remove the Assembly to Berwick, as a more convenient Place. There he shut up
the 24 Judges, Elected as before, in a Church, without any Body else amongst
them, commanding them to give their Judgments in the Case, and till they did
so, no Man was to have Access to them. But they, being slow in their
Proceedings, he, ever and anon, went in alone to them, and by discoursing
sometimes One, and sometimes Another, finding that most were of Opinion, That
the Right lay on Baliol's side, though he were inferior in Favor and
Popularity; he went to Bruce, who, because he was Legally cast by their Votes,
he thought, he might more easily persuade to assent to his Design, and promised
him the Crown of Scotland, if he would put himself under the Patronage of the
King of England, and be Subject to his Authority. Bruce answered him
ingeniously, That he was not so eager of a Crown, Edward decides for Baliol.
as to accept of it, by abridging the Liberty, his Ancestors had left him;
Hereupon he was dismissed, and he sends for John Baliol, who, being more
desirous of a Kingdom, than of honest Methods to come by it, greedily accepted
the Condition, offered him by Edward.

John Baliol, The Ninety Sixth King.
WHereupon, John Baliol was declared King of Scotland, 6 Years and 9 Months
after the Death of Alexander. The rest of the Scots, being studious of the
public Tranquillity, led him to Scone, and there Crowned him, according to
Custom, and all Swore Fealty to him, except Bruce; He, being thus made King by
the English, Baliol swears Fealty to Edward.
and accepted by the Scots, being now secure of the Kingdom, came to Edward,
who was at New Castle upon Tine, and, according to his Promise, At which many
of the Scots Nobles are offended.
Swore Fealty to him, so did the Nobles also, who were of his Train, as not
daring to contradict Two Kings; especially, they being so far from home: As
soon as the rest of the Nobility heard of it, they were grievously offended,
but, being conscious of their want of Power, they dissembled their Anger, for
the present.

But soon after, an Occasion was offered them to show it, Mackduff, Earl of
Fife, (who, in the Time of the An Interrognum in Scotland, before Baliol was
made King.
Interregnum, was One of the six Governors of the Land) was slain by the
Abernethians, which was then a rich and potent Family, in Scotland; and the
Earls Brother, being accused, by them, and brought to his Answer before the
Assembly of the States, the King gave Sentence in Favor of the Abernethians.
So that Mackduff was dispossessed of the Land, which was in Controversy
betwixt them; whereupon he conceived a double Displeasure against the King,
One, on the Account of his own Wrong; and Another, because he had not severely
punished the Murderers of his Brother. So that he appealed to the King of
England; and desired, that Baliol might answer the Matter before Him. Hereupon,
the Cause was removed to London; Young Mackduff complains to K. Edward against
Baliol.
and as Baliol was casually sitting by Edward, in the Parliament House, and,
when he was called, would have answered by a Proctor, it was denied him, so
that he was enforced to arise from his Seat, and to plead his Cause from a
lower Place. He bore the Affront silently for the present, not daring to do
otherwise; but as soon as ever he was dispatched from thence, such Flames of
Anger burnt in his Breast, Baliol disgusts Edward.
that his Thoughts were wholly taken up, how to reconcile his own Subjects, and
how to offend Edward. As he was thus musing; it happened commodiously for him,
That a new Discord arose betwixt the French and English, which, presently
after, broke out into a War. Whereupon, Ambassadors were sent to the Assembly
of Estates in Scotland, from Both Kings, The French's Errand, was, to renew the
Old League with their New King. And the English, was, upon the Account of their
late Oath to Edward, to receive Aid from them in the War he had undertaken;
Both Embassys were referred to the Council of the Estates, where the Nobles,
prone to Rebellion, were of Opinion, That the Request of the French, was Just;
of the English, Unjust; For the League made, by universal Consent, with the
French, more than 500 Years before, had been kept Sacred and Inviolable to that
very Day, in regard of the Justness and Utility thereof, but this late
Subjection and surrendering themselves to the English, was extorted from the
King, against his Will; and tho (as they proceeded to allege) he had been
willing, yet, it did oblige neither King nor Kingdom; it being made by the King
alone, without the Consent of the Estates, whereas the King might not act any
Thing, relating to the Public state of the Kingdom, without, much less,
against, the Advice of the States. So a Decree was made, that Ambassadors
should be sent into France to renew the Ancient League; He sides with the
French.
and that a Wife should be desired for Edward Baliol, Son to John, out of the
Kings Royal stem. Another Embassy was also sent into England, to signify, that
the King of Scots did revoke the Reddition of the Kingdom and Himself, which he
had forceably and unjustly made; and renouncing his Friendship, both for that
Cause, and also for the many and innumerable other Wrongs, which he had done to
Him and His, And withdraws his Subjection from England.
he was resolved to assert his Ancient Liberty. No man of any Eminency would
carry this Message to Edward, because he was of a fierce Nature, and was
rendered more so, by reason of the Indulgence of Fortune, which made him even
almost to forget himself; At last, a certain Monk, or, as some say, the Abbat
of Aberbrothoc carried Letters, of that Import, to him, who was grievously
affronted for his Pains, and had much ado to escape home, being protected more
by his, undervalued, Tenuity, than the Reverence of his Embassadorship.

In the mean time, Edward, had made a Truce with the French for some Months,
hoping, That, before they were ended, he might subdue the Scots, taking them
unprovided; and therefore, he sent his Fleet, designed for France, against
Scotland, commanding them to stop all Provisions from being carried into
Berwick, wherein, Whereupon Edward War^ against Scotland.
he heard, there was a very strong Garrison. The Scots fought with this Fleet in
the Mouth of the River, they destroyed and took 18 of their Ships, and put the
rest to flight. Edward, out of Fierceness of Mind, by this Loss, was highly
enraged to Revenge. He Summons Baliol, once and again, to appear; And he
himself Levies a great Army, and comes to New Castle upon Tine. There also he
gave forth an Edict for John to appear, Legally to purge himself from the
Crimes objected against him. But neither He nor any for him, appearing ar the
day appointed, he added Policy to Force, He sides with Bruce.
and sent for Bruce, and promises him the Kingdom, if, he would do his
endeavor faithfully to Depose and drive out Baliol. To do which, (said he) you
need be at little Labor or Cost, only write Letters to your Friends, that,
either they would desert the Kings Party; or, not be hearty or forward, if it
came to a Battle. He, by great Marches, came to Berwick, but not being able to
carry it, by reason of the strength of the Garrison, he pretended to raise his
Siege, and caused a Rumor to be spread abroad by some Scots, of Bruce his
Party, that he despaired of Taking it; and that Baliol was coming, with a great
Army, to raise the Siege, and was now near at hand, whereupon, all the Chief
Men of the Garrison made haste out to receive him Honorably, in promiscuous
Multitudes, Horse and Foot together; Overthrows the Scots, and takes Berwick.
so that Edward sent in some Horse amongst them, some they trod down and
killed, others they divided from their Company, and, seizing on the nearest
Gate, they entered the Town. Edward followed with his Foot, and made a miserable
Slaughter of all sorts of People. Above 7000 of the Scots are reported to have
been there slain, amongst Them were the Flower of the Lothian and Fife Nobility.

Though I love not to interrupt the continued Series of my History (as having
resolved against it, at first) with any unnecessary Digression, yet I cannot
forbear to expose that unbridled Liberty of Evil speaking, Grafton Censured by
This Author.
which Richard Grafton, who lately compiled the History of England, assumes to
himself; that so, they who read what I here write, may judge, what Credit is to
be given to him. For, (he says) that Hector Boethius writes in his 14th Book,
and ad Chapter, That so much Blood was split there, that Rivers of it running
through the City, might have driven a Water-Mill for two days: To which, I say,
First, That Boethius never divided his Book into Chapters; and besides, what he
affirms is no where found in his Writings; but to leave this unlearned and
shameless Relator, I return to Edward; who, by reason of the abounding
Multitude of his Army, sent Part of it to besiege Dunbar; and a few days after,
the Castle of Berwick, despairing of any Relief, was surrendered to him.
Afterward, he joined all his Forces together at Dunbar, to fight the Scots
Army, who came to relieve it; The Battle was fierce; and the Victory inclining
to the English, the chief of the Nobility fled into the Castle, but the Castle
was soon taken, either by the Perfidiousness of Richard Stuart, the Governor,
or else, because he had not Provisions for so great a Multitude, as were shut
up in so narrow a Compass: Edward was very cruel to all the Prisoners: Some
cast the Blame of this Overthrow upon Robert Bruce the Elder, in that his
Friends giving back in the Battle, it struck a Terror into the rest. But our
Writers do constantly affirm, That when Bruce demanded of Edward the Kingdom of
Scotland, according to his Promise, (as a Reward of his Pains that day,) That
Edward should answer in French, of which Language he was Master, What, have I
nothing else to do, but to win Kingdoms, for you? When Dunbar, and some other
Castles, near the Borders of England, were taken, the surrender of Edinburgh
and Sterlin.
Edinburgh and Sterlin followed soon after. Then Edward passing over the Forth,
directed his March where Baliol then was. When he was come as far as Montross,
without any to oppose him, Baliol, by the Persuasion of John Cumins of
Strabogy, came to him and surrendered to him, Himself and the Kingdom. ^
Baliol was sent into England, by Sea, and Edward, returning to Berwick, sent a
strict and severe Summons to all the Scots Nobles, to attend him there; after
they came, he compelled them to Swear Fealty to him. But William Douglas, an
eminent Man, both on the account of his Family, and also his own famous
Exploits, obstinately refusing to do it, was cast into Prison, where, in a few
years, he died.

Thus Edward, having succeeded in his Expedition according to his Mind, left
John Warren, Earl of Surry, as Proxy behind him; and Hugh Cressingham, Lord
Chief Justice, or Treasurer, and so returned to London. There he committed John
Baliol to Prison, in the 4th year of his Reign; but, a while after, at the
Entreaty of the Pope, and his Promise, that he would raise no Tumults in
Scotland, But is released by Mediation of the Pope.
he was sent back into France, his Son Edward being retained as an Hostage.
Edward, having prepared all things for the French War, (which, by reason of the
Commotions in Scotland, he had deferred) now Sails thither, with great Forces;
The Scots, by reason of his Absence, being erected to some hopes of their
Liberty, chose 12 Men to Govern the State. By whose unanimous Consent, John
Cumins, A Duodece^^ virat in Scotland.
Earl of Buchan, was sent into England, with a good Force; and in regard the
English, who were scattered in Garrisons over Scotland, dared not to stir, he
spoiled Northumberland without control, and laid Siege to Carlisle; but to no
purpose: John Cumins marches into England.
Though this Expedition did somewhat encourage the, before, crest-fallen Scots,
and hindered the English from doing them further Mischief, yet it contributed
little or nothing to the Main Chance, in regard, that all the Places of
Strength were possessed by the Enemies Garrisons; But when the Nobility had
neither Strength nor Courage to undertake great Matters, there presently
started up one William Wallace, The Story of Wallis, Wallas, or Wallace, and
his famous Exploits against the English.
a Man of an Ancient and Noble Family, but one that had lived poorly and
meanly, as having little or no Estate; yet, this Man performed in this War, not
only beyond the Expectation, but even the Belief, of all the Common People; For
he was bold-spirited, and strong-bodied, and, when he was but a Youth, had
slain a young English Nobleman, who proudly domineered over him. For this Fact,
he was fain to run away, and to skulk up and down in several places, for some
years, to save his Life, and, by this Course of Life his Body was hardened
against Wind and Weather, and his Mind also fortified to undergo greater
hazards, when time should serve. At length, growing weary of such an Erratick
Life, he resolved to attempt something, though never so hazardous; and
therefore gathered a Band of Men together, of like Fortune with himself, and
did not only assault single Persons, but even greater Companies, though with an
inferior Number, and accordingly he slew several Persons, in diverse Places. He
played his Pranks with as much Celerity as Boldness, and never gave his Enemy
opportunity to fight him, so that in a short time, his Fame was spread over
Both Nations, by which means many came in to him, moved by the likeness of
their Cause, or, with the like Love of their Country; thus he made up a
considerable Army. And seeing the Nobles were sluggish in their Management of
Affairs, either out of Fear or Dullness, this Wallace was proclaimed Regent, He
is made Regent;
by the Tumultuous Band that followed him, and so he managed Things as a Lawful
Magistrate, and the Substitute of Baliol. He accepted of this Name, not out of
any Ambition, or Desire to Rule, but because it was cast upon him by the Love
and Good Will of his Countrymen. With this Army, the first visible Exploit he
performed was at The chief Town of Clydsdale.
Lanerick, where he slew the Major General of that Precinct, being an
Englishman, of good Descent. Afterward he took and demolished many Castles,
which were either slenderly Fortified, or meanly Garisoned; or else, guarded
negligently; which petty Attempts so encouraged his Soldiers, that they shunned
no Service, no not the most hazardous, under his Conduct, as having
experienced, That his Boldness was guided by Counsel; and That Counsel seconded
by good Success.

When the Report of these Things was spread abroad, and perhaps, somewhat
enlarged, beyond the Bounds of Truth, out of Men's Respect and Favor to him;
All that wished well to their Country, or were afraid of their own particular
Conditions, And takes many Places from the English.
flocked in to him, as judging it fit, to take Opportunity by the Forelock; so
that, in a short time, he reduced all the Castles, which the English held on
the other side of the Forth, though never so well fortified, and, for fear of
him, carefully Guarded. He took and demolished the Castles of Dundee, Forfar,
Brechin, and Montross; he seized on Dunoter, unawares, and Garisoned it; he
entered Aberdene, (which the Enemy, for fear of his coming, had plundered and
burnt) even whilst it was in Flames; but, a Rumor, being scattered abroad,
concerning the coming of the English Army, prevented his Taking the Castle;
for, he determined to meet them at the Forth, not being willing to hazard a
Battle, but in a Place, he himself should choose. Edward of England, when he
went into France, (as I said before) put English Garrisons into all the Strong
Holds of Scotland, and besides, having many of the Scots faithful to him, and
unfaithful to their Country, he banished and sent the Scots Nobility, whom he
most suspected, into the heart of England, till his return. Amongst which was
John Cumins, Or Logan.
Lord, or Petty King, of Badenach; and Alan Longan, a Man fit both for Advice
and Action; and having settled Matters, after this sort, he was so far from
fearing any Insurrection in Scotland, that he carried all his Army over along
with him. But, hearing of the many Exploits of Wallace, he thought there was
need of a greater Force to suppress him; yet, that the Expedition was not
worthy of a King, neither, (as being only against a Roving Thief, for so the
English called Wallace) and therefore he writes to Henry Percy, Earl of
Northumberland, and William Latimer, That they should speedily Levy what Forces
they could out of the Neighboring Parts, and join themselves with Cressingham,
who as yet remained in Scotland, to subdue the Rebellious Scots. Thomas
Walsingham writes, that the Earl of Warren was General in this Expedition. But
Wallace, who was then besieging the Castle of Cowper in Fife, left his Army,
which he had increased against the coming of the English, should be idle, the
English being near at hand, marched directly to Sterlin. The River Forth, no
where, almost, fordable, may be there passed over by a Bridge of Wood, though
it be increased by the Addition of other Rivers, and by the coming in of the
Tide, too. There Cressingham passed over with the greatest part of his Army,
but the Bridge, either having its Beams loosned and disjointed, on purpose, by
the Skill of the Architect, (as our Writers say, it was) that so it might not
be able to bear any great Weight; or else, being overladen with the heavy
burden of so many Horse, Foot, and Carriages, as passed over, was broken, and
so the March of the rest of the English was precluded, and hindered; The Scots
set upon Those, He overthrows Cressingham the English General at Sterlin Bridge.
who were passed over, before they could put themselves into a Posture; and,
having slain their General, drove the rest back into the River, the Slaughter
was so great, that they were all either killed or drowned; Wallace returned,
from this Fight, to the besieging of Castles; and, in a short time, he so
changed the Scene of Affairs, that he left none of the English in Scotland, but
such as were made Prisoners. This Victory (wherein none of any eminency, among
the Scots fell, save Andrew Murray, whose Son, some years, was Regent of
Scotland) was obtained in the Ides of September, in the year of Christ 1297.
Some say, that Wallis was called off to this Fight, September 15.
not from the Siege of Cowper, but of Dundee, whither he also returned after
the Fight; so John Major, and some Books found in Monasteries, do relate.

By means of these Combustions, the Fields lay untilled, insomuch, that, after
that Overthrow, a Famine ensued, and a Pestilence after the Famine; from whence
a greater Fear was apprehended, than from the War: Wallis, to prevent this
Mischief as much as he could, called together all those, who were fit for
Service, to appear at a certain day, with whom he marched into England,
thinking with himself, that their Bodies, being exercised with Labor, He
enters with an Army into England.
would be more healthy; and, that Wintring in an Enemies Country, Provisions
might be spared at home; and the Soldiers, who were in much want, might reap
some Fruit of their Labors in a rich Country, and flourishing by reason of its
continued Peace: When he was entered into England, no Man dared to attack him,
so that he staid there from the Calends of November, to the Calends of
February, 1 November. 1 February.
and having refreshed and enriched his Soldiers, with the Fruits and Spoils of
the Enemy, he returned home, with great Renown. This Expedition, as it
increased the Fame and Authority of Wallis amongst the Vulgar sort, so it
heightened the envy of Nobles against him, mightily. For his Praise seemed a
tacit Exprobration to them, who being Men of great Power and Wealth, either
out of Slothfulness durst no^, or out of Perfidiousness would not, attempt,
what He, that was a Mean Man, and destitute of all the Advantages of Fortune,
had not only valiantly undertook, but also successfully performed. Moreover,
the King of England, finding the Business to be greater than could well be
managed by his Deputies, made some settlement of things in France, and returned
home; and gathering together a great Army, Edward returns from France to subdue
Wallace.
but hastily levied, (for he brought not back his Veteran Soldiers, from beyond
Sea) and, for the most part, raw and unexperienced Men, he marches toward
Scotland; supposing he had only to do with a disorderly Band of Robbers. But
retreats from the North without Fighting.
But when he saw both Armies in Battle array, about 500 Paces, one from another
in the Plains of Stanmore, he admired the Discipline, Order, and Confidence of
his Enemies. So that, tho he himself had much the greater Force, yet he durst
not put it to the hazard of a Battle, against such a Veteran and Experienced a
Captain, and against Soldiers inured to all hardships, but turned his Ensigns,
and marched slowly back: Wallace also durst not follow him, The Scots Nobles
envy Wallace for his Success.
for fear of Ambushes, but kept his Army within their Trenches. Having thus got
the Victory, tho Bloodless, over so puissant a King, his Enemies were so much
the more enraged against him, and caused Rumors to be scattered up and down,
That Or Wallace
Wallis did openly affect a Supreme or Tyrannical Power; at which, the Nobles,
especially Bruce and the Cumin's, of the Royal Stock, did mightily disdain; for
they said thus within themselves, That if they must be Slaves, they had rather
be so, under a Great and Potent King, than under an Vpstart, whose Domination
was like to be not only base, but also dangerous; And therefore they
determined, by all means, to undermine the Authority of Wallis. Edward was not
ignorant of these Disgusts, and therefore, the next Summer he Levies a Great
Army, consisting partly of English, partly of Scots, who had remained Faithful
to him, and came to Falkirk, which is a Village built in the very Tract of the
Wall of Severus, and is distant from Sterling, little more than 6 Miles. The
Scots Army were not far from them, of sufficient strength, for they were 30000.
if the Generals and Leaders had agreed amongst themselves; Their Generals were
John Cumins, John Stuart, and William Wallace, the most flourishing Persons
amongst the Scots; the Two former, for their high Descent and Opulency; the
Later, for the glory of his former Exploits.

When the Three Armies were ready to fight, a new Dispute arose, besides their
former Envy, Who should lead the Van of the Army; and when all Three stood upon
their Terms, the English decided the Controversy, who, with Banners displaid,
marched with a swift pace toward them; Cumins and his Forces retreated,
without striking a stroke; Edward gives the Scots a great overthrow at Falkirk.
Stuart, being beset before and behind, was slain, with all that followed him.
Wallace was sorely pressed upon in the Front; and Bruce had fetched a compass
about an Hill, and fell on his Reat, yet, he was as little disturbed, as, in
such circumstances, he could possibly be, but retreated beyond the River
Carront, where, by the Interposal of the River, he had Opportunity to defend
himself, and also, to gather up the straggling Run-aways; and Bruce desiring to
speak with him, A Conference betwixt Bruce and Wallace in the Field.
he assented thereunto. They Two alone stood over against one another, where
the River has the narrowest Chanel, and the highest Banks; And, First Bruce
began, and told Wallace, He wondered what was in his Mind, that, being hurried
on by the uncertain Favor of the Vulgar, he should expose himself to such
assiduous and imminent Danger, against a King, the most potent of that Time,
and who was also assisted by a great Number of the Scots; and that to no
purpose neither, for, if he overcame Edward, the Scots would never Grant him
the Kingdom; and, if himself were overcome, he had no Refuge but in the Mercy
of his Enemy. To whom Wallas replied, I never proposed that Scope to my Designs
and Labors, as to obtain the Kingdom, of which my Fortune is not capable,
neither does my Mind aspire thereunto: But when I saw my Countrymen, by your
slothfulness (to whom the Kingdom does rightly appertain) destitute of
Governors, and exposed not to the Slavery only, but even to the Butchery of a
cruel Enemy, I had pity on them* and undertook the Cause, which you deserted;
neither will I forsake the Liberty, Good, and Safety of my Countrymen, till
Life forsake me: You, who had rather choose base Servitude with Security, than
honest Liberty with Hazard, follow, and hug, the Fortune, which you so highly
esteem; As for me, I will willingly Dye in my Country, which I have often
defended; and my Love to it shall remain, as long as my Life continues. Thus
the Conference was broken off, and each of them retired to their Forces. July
22.
This Battle was fought the 11 th of the Calends of August, wherein there fell
of the Scots 10000, amongst whom, of the Nobles, were John Stuart, Macduff Earl
of Fife: and of Wallis his Army, John Grame, the valiantest Person of the
Scots, next to Wallis himself. Of the English, were slain Friar Briangy,
Wallace dismisses the remainder of his Army.
highly Famed and Notic'd for Military Skill. After this unhappy Fight, Wallis
came to Perth, and dismissed his Army, giving Place to that Envy, which, he
knew, he could not resist; and, from that day forward, he never acted as a
General; yet he ceased not, with a few of his Friends, who still stuck to him,
tho he renounced the Name of a General, as often as a convenient Opportunity
was offered, to press upon the English.

Edward also, after he had wasted all the Country beyond the Forth, even unto
Perth, receiving into his Obedience all those who durst not, as long as he was
present, make any Insurrection, drew back his Army. Those of the Scots, who,
after the Enemies departure, The Scots, by the mediation of the King of France,
obtain a Truce from Edward.
did most study the Liberty of their Country, being a little heartned, made
John Cumins, Junior, their Regent. He, according to the Advice of the Council,
sent Ambassadors to Philip Valois, King of France, to desire him, that, by the
Mediation of his Sister, who was then betrothed to Edward, they might obtain,
at least, a Truce. By her Endeavors, a Truce was obtained for Seven Months,
which yet was not faithfully observed. For the English detained the
Ambassadors, which were sent to Boniface the 8 th, and committed them to
Prison. In the mean time, the Scots, who could neither bear the Tyranny of the
English, nor satisfy the cruel Mind of Edward, by their Punishments, nor yet
obtain an equal Peace from him; with obstinate Minds, and in despair of Pardon,
resolved to Fight it out to the utmost. First of all, they expel all Edward's
Governors, who were English, from all Towns and Castles; next, they afflict the
Scots of their Faction, as much as ever they could. Things remained in this
posture almost Two years, and then Edward sent Ralph Confray, The Scots (...)
in Arm^ again.
with great Forces to subdue the Robbers, (as he called them) and to make an
end of the War. They met with no Opposition, but Preyed far and near, till they
came to Roslin, (...) place in Lothian, about 5 Miles distant from Edinburgh,)
and there they divided their Army into Three parts, to make the greater Havoc,
and so pitched their Tents. John Cumins, with the assistance of John Frazer,
the most potent Man in all Tivedale, gathered 8000 Men together, and marched
toward the Enemy, thinking to abridge the Limits of their plundering
Excursions, or, otherwise, if an happy Opportunity offered itself for Action,
not to be wanting to Fortune. And indeed, he met with a fairer Occasion, than
he hoped for. For the English, little expecting an Assault, from an Enemy that
they had so often Conquered, and brought so low, lived more stragglingly than
they ought to have done in an Enemies Country; so that their first Camp was
soon taken, by the sudden coming of the Scots, and a great Slaughter made;
They, who escaped, carried the Noise into the next Camp; They in a great Fear,
cried out, Arm, Arm, and they all exhorted one another, to succor their
Fellow Soldiers; but perceiving, That the designed Succor was too late, they
prepared for Revenge. A fierce Fight was commenced betwixt them, as Men, eager,
and desirous of Victory and Revenge; at last, the English were routed, and put
to Flight, and the Victory, tho a bloody one, remained to the Scots* In the
mean time, the third Camp, who was farther off, came, And overthrow the English
at Roslin in Mid-lothian.
and occasioned some terror to the Scots. For, in regard, many of them were
wounded, and the greatest Part wearied with the toil of a double Fight, they
saw, that there was imminent Danger in Fighting, and assured Destruction in
flying away. At length, by the Command of their Leaders, they slew all the
Prisoners, lest, while they were busied with their Enemies, they should rise up
and set upon them in the Rear; and arming their Servants with the Spoils of the
Slain, they made a Show of a greater Army than indeed they were. Hereupon, the
Battle was begun, and fiercely carried on by both Parties. The Fight being a
long time doubtful, the Scots by the encouragement of their Leaders, putting
them in mind of their double Victory, took fresh Courage, and charged the Enemy
with such Violence, that they broke their Ranks, and put them to flight. This
Fight was at Roslin, the 6 th of the Calends of March, in the Year 1302. Feb.
24.


As the Victory was the more Famous, being obtained by but One Army, over
Three, in one and the same day, so it mightily incensed the Mind of Edward. To
blot out the Ignominy, and to put an end, at length, to a long lasting War, he
therefore Levies an Army bigger than ever he had before, and assaulted Scotland
both by Sea and Land, Edward, in revenge, enters into Scotland with a vast
Army, and subdues all the Country.
and made spoil of it, even unto the uttermost Borders of Ross, no Man daring
to oppose so great a Force. Only Wallis and his Men, sometimes in the Front,
sometimes in the Rear, sometimes in the Flanks, would snap, either those that
rashly went before, or that loitered after; or, that, in Plundering, straggled
too far from their Fellows, neither did he suffer them to Stray, far from their
Colors. Edward sought, by great Promises, to bring Wallace courted by King
Edward, to come over to his Party, with his stout Answer, in the Negative.
Three Miles E^st of El^in.
him over to his Party; but his constant ^one, was, That he had Devoted his
Life to his Country, to which it was due, and if he could do it no other
Service, yet he would dye in its Defense. There were some Castles yet
remaining, not surrendered to (...) English, as Vrchart in Murray, which was
taken by Storm, and all the Defendants put to the Sword; whereupon, the rest
surrendered themselves, for fear. After these Exploits, the English King joined
his Son Edward, whom he had left at Perth; and, by the Accession of his Forces,
he besieged Sterling, which, after a Months Siege, he took; the Garrison therein
being reduced to the want of all things; the Conditions were only Life and
Liberty. And yet, William Oliver, against the tenor of his Articles of
Surrender, was detained, and sent Prisoner into England. When all Scotland was
reduced, an Assembly of the States was Indicted, by Edward, to be held at St.
Andrews, where all, out of Fear, All the (...) S^e^r Al^e^^ance to (...)
Wallace.
took an Oath of Allegiance to him, except Wallis alone; and, fearing he should
be given up by the Nobility (who were much disgusted at him,) to Edward his
Mortal Enemy, he retired himself into his old Fastnesses, and Lurking holes.

Edward, Edward appoints Magistrates all over Scotland.
having appointed Governors and Magistrates over all Scotland, returned into
England; but, at his departure, he showed an evident Demonstration of his great
Hatred against the Scottish Race, for he was not content only with the taking
with him all those, whom he feared would raise new Seditions, but he
endeavored, as much as he could, to abolish the very Memory of the Nation.
For, Edwards Severity Cens^red.
he repealed their Old Laws, and set up the Ecclesiastical State and
Ceremonies, according to the Manner of England: He caused all Histories,
Leagues, and Ancient Monuments, either left by the Romans, or, erected by the
Scots, to be destroyed: He carried all the Books, and all that were Teachers of
Learning, into England: He carries the Marble Stone into England, on which the
Scots King^ u^ed to be Crowned.
He sent also to London, an un-polished Marble Stone; wherein, it was vulgarly
Reported and Believed, that the Fate of the Kingdom was contained; neither did
he leave any thing behind him, which, either upon the account of its Memory,
might excite Generous Spirits to the Remembrance of their Ancient Fortune, and
Condition; or, indeed, which could excite them to any True Greatness of Mind;
so that, having broken their Spirits, (as he thought) as well as their Force,
and cast them into a servile Dejection; he promised himself a perpetual Peace
from Scotland. At his Return, he left Ailmer Valentine, as his Regent, or
Vice-King, who was to nip all Seditious Attempts, if any did break forth, in
the very Bud. Yet, a new War sprang up against him, from whence he little
thought.

There were some of the Prime Nobility in Scotland with Edward, as Robert
Bruce, the Son of him, who contended with Baliol for the Kingdom, and John
Cumins, Surnamed Red, from the color of his Face, Cousin German to John Baliol
the last King of Scotland. Seeds of new Troubles in Scotland.
Edward called them often to him apart, and put them severally in a vain hope
of the Kingdom, and so he made use of their Assistance in the Conquering of
Scotland. But, at the last, they discovered the Mockery and Cheat, so that each
of them desired nothing more, than a fit Occasion to Revenge the Perfidiousness
of that King. But, in regard, they were Corrivals, their mutual Suspicion kept
them back from Communicating their Counsels, one to another. At last, A formal
Agreement between Cumins and Bruce.
Cumins, perceiving, that Matters, as managed by Edward, were distrastful to
Bruce, he spoke to him, and, taking his Rise from the Beginning of their
Miseries, deplored much the lamentable Condition of their Country, and greatly
inveighed against the Fals^ness of Edward; withal grievously accusing himself
and Bruce too, that they had, by their Labor and Assistance, helped to cast
their Countrymen into this Abyss of Misery. After this first Discourse, they
proceeded further, and, each of them promising Silence, they agreed, That Bruce
should enjoy the Kingdom, and Cumins should wave his Right thereto; but,
instead thereof, that he should enjoy all those large and fruitful Possessions,
which Bruce had in Scotland; and, in a Word, that he should be the Second Man
in the Kingdom: Those Covenants were Writ down, Sealed and Sworn, betwixt
Themselves. Hereupon, Bruce, watching an Opportunity to rise in Arms, left his
Wife and Children in Scotland, Which Cumins discovers to K. Edward.
and went to the Court in England. After his Departure, Cumins, (as it is
reported) either repenting himself of his Agreement; or else, endeavoring
fraudulently to remove his Corrival, and so obtain an easier Way to the
Kingdom, betrayed their secret Combination to Edward; and, in verification
thereof, he sent him the Covenants, signed by them Both. Hereupon, Bruce was
impleaded, as Guilty of High Treason, he was forbid to depart the Court, B^uce
like to suffer for Treason, but is informed of his danger by a Wi^e, and flies
by Night into Scotland.
and a Privy Guard set over him, to inspect his Words and Actions. The Kings
delay to punish him, in a Crime so manifest, proceeded from a Desire he had to
take his Brethren too, before they had heard any bruit of his Execution. In the
mean time, Bruce was informed by the Earl of Mountgomery, his Grandfathers old
Friend, of his sudden Danger, who dared not to commit his Advice for his Flight
to Writing, being discouraged by Bruce his Example, but he sent him a pair of
Guilt Spurs, and some Pieces of Gold, as if he had borrowed them of him, the
day before. Robert, upon the Receipt of the Gift, as Dangers make Men
sagacious, soon smelt out, what his Meaning was, so that he sent for a Smith in
the Night, and commanded him to set on Shoos on Three Horses, the backward way,
Bruce's Horses shod backward, to secure his Flight.
that so his Flight might not be traced by the Mark of the Horses Feet; and,
the same Night, he and Two other Companions, began their Journey, and, Man and
Horse being extremely tired, in Seven days he came to his Castle, situate by
L^ch Maban: There he joined David his Brother, and Robert Fleming; to whom he
had scarce declared the Cause of his Flight, before he lighted upon a flying
Post, who was conveighing Letters from Cumins, to Edward; The Contents were,
That Robert should speedily be put to Death; that there was danger in delay,
lest a Man so Nobly Descended, and so Popular as He, adding Boldness to his
Wisdom too, should raise New Commotions. The Perfidiousness of Cumins being
thus (as well as otherwise,) plainly detected, Robert was inflamed with Anger,
and rode presently to Dumfreiz, where his Adversary, John Cumins, was, in the
Franciscans Church, whom he confronted with his own Letters, which he then
showed him; he very impudently denied them to be His; but Robert, no longer
able to bridle his Wrath, run him into the Belly with his Dagger, and so left
him for Dead. As he was Mounting his Horse, James Lindsay, and Roger
Kirkpatrick, one his Kinsman, the other his old Friend, perceiving by his
Countenance, that he was troubled, asked him the Cause; he told them in brief
the whole Business, adding withal, That, he thought, he had killed Cumins.
What, says Lindsay, will you leave a Matter of that Consequence upon an, Bruce
kills Cumins, for betraying him.
I thought, and as soon as he had spoke the Word, he ran into the Church and
dispatched him quite, and also his Kinsman, Robert Cumins, who, endeavored to
save him. This Murder was committed in the Year 1305. on the Febr. 10.
Fourth of the Ides of February. About the same time also, Wallis was betrayed
in the County of Glascow, Wallis unworthily betrayed by his Friend, is Hanged
and Quartered by Edward.
(where he then hid himself) by his own Familiar Friend John Menteith, whom the
English had Corrupted with Money, and so was sent to London; where, by Edwards
Command, he was woefully Butchered, and his Limbs, for the terror of others,
Hanged up in the most noted Places of London and Scotland. Such an End had this
Person, the famousest Man of his Time, who deserved to be compared with the
most Renowned Captains of Ancient Times, both for his Greatness of Mind in
undertaking Dangers, and for his Wisdom and Valor in overcoming Them: His
Cha^act^r.
For Love to his Country, he was Second to none; who, when others were Slaves,
he alone was Free, neither could be induced by Rewards, or Threats, to forsake
the Public Cause, which he had once undertaken: His Death was the more to be
Lamented, because he was not conquered by his Enemy, but betrayed by his
Friend, who had little Reason so to do.

Bruce, The Ninety Seventh King.
BRVCE stayed so long, till he had obtained Pardon from the Pope, for killing a
Man in Holy Church, and then in April following, Anno Domini 1306. he went to
Scone and was Crowned King.

The first thing he did, knowing, that he had to do with a Powerful Enemy, was,
to levy all the Force he could make; but, in regard, the whole Family of the
Cumins's (whose Greatness was never equalled by any in Scotland, either before,
or since) was against him, and also the Minds of many were offended with him,
for his former assisting of the English; and moreover, most of the Scots were,
out of Fear, willing to be quiet under the English Power; yet, Lying upon the
River A^mon near Perth.
he adventured with a small Army, to try his Fortune at July the 2^.
Methven, where he was overthrown by Ailmer, Edwards General, but with little
Slaughter, because his Men, seeing their own weakness, fled away entire, almost
at the first Charge; this was done Bruce overthrown, and retires in a disguise,
to save his Life.
on the 13th of the Calends of August. And not long after, coming to Athol, and
designing for Argyle, his design was discovered by the Cumins's, and he was
forced in his very march, at a place called Dalree, i. e. Kings-land, to try
his Fortune in a Battle, where he was overthrown also, but lost few, in regard
every one fled several ways, as they thought fit: After that time, he had but
Two or Three in his Company, for he thought himself more secure with a few, and
thus he wandered up and down in secret places, living mostly a Foresters Life,
and in despair of any Aid, if he had a mind again to try his Fortune. For the
Vulgar, upon his double Discomfiture, drew thence discouraging Omens, and so
they all left him, only Two of his old Friends Malcolm Earl of Lennox, and
Gilbert Hay, never forsook him, but remained constant to him, in all
Misfortunes. The English, not yet satiated with his Miseries, send about
through all Parts of the Kingdom, to apprehend his Allies and Kindred; and
besides, they Commanded all the Wives and Children of those who were banished,
to depart the Kingdom, at a time prefixed. The Wife of Robert himself, was
taken by William Earl of Ross, and sent into England; and Neile, his Brother,
with his Wife and Children, came into the Hands and Power of the English; his
Castle of Kildrummy being betrayed, by the Governor thereof, to them. Moreover,
his Brethren, Thomas and Alexander, endeavoring to pass out of Galway to
Carick, were taken at the Loch Ryan, (which Ptolemy calls, the Bay Rerigonius,)
and sent into England. These Three were put to Death in several Places; the
rest of the Brucian Party were diligently sought after, and put also to Death,
and their Estates Confiscate. The King himself, with one or two, and sometimes
alone, wandered up and down, through uncouth Places, daily; yea, hourly,
changing his Recesses; and yet, even thus, not thinking himself safe enough,
from the Cruelty of his Enemies, and the Perfidiousness of his Subjects, he
passed over to another Friend of his, into the Aebudae; where he lurked for
some Months: And, in regard, he did no where appear, he was thought to be Dead,
and so they left searching for him. This Report, as it made for his Safety, so,
if it had continued long, it would have taken away all Hopes from his Friends,
of his ever obtaining and recovering the Kingdom. Whereupon, he judged it fit
to attempt something, and receiving a small Force from his Friends, where he
had hid himself, he sailed over into Carick; and, by Means of his sudden
coming, Bruce, thought to be Dead, starts out from his Retirement, and takes
some Castles.
he there surprised a Castle, which was his own Inheritance, but Garisoned by a
strong party of English, whom he put all to the Sword; and, lest his Passage
might be stopped by the Enemy, he passed over by the Bay of Clyde, and came to
the strong Castle of Ennerness, situate on a pretty high Hill, by the River
Ness, which, as being in a remote Country, and negligently Guarded, he also
happily took.

The Report hereof being divulged, occasioned great Thoughts of Heart all over
Scotland. For, besides his Old Friends, who came to him, from all Places, out
of their Lurking Holes, the Pride of the English had raised him up many New
ones; for They, thinking that he had been dead, began to Lord it more
imperiously, and cruelly, than ever they had done, before. So that his Forces
being considerably increased, and that with very good Soldiers, whom either
Labor had hardened, or Despair urged to the most desperate Attempts, he took
all the Castles in the North of Scotland, and demolished them, as they were
taken; partly, That he might not weaken his Forces by dividing them into
Garrisons; and partly, That the Enemy might have no Harbor there. Thus,
overcoming all as he went, he came into the very Heart of the Kingdom: John
Cumins, Earl of Bachan, being informed thereof, gathered together a sudden
Company of Scots and English, even as many as were able to bear Arms; when he
was come to the Forest, through which the River Esk falls down into the Plains
of Mern, he overtook him at a Place, called In the Braes of ^^gus, on the Head
of the North-Water Esk.
Glenesk. Bruce, perceiving that the Narrowness of the Passages was
advantageous for his Men, stood ready to Fight, expecting his Enemy. Cumins
drew out his Army in length, imagining, that Bruce would be astonished at the
sight of such a Multitude. But when he saw, that he stirred not from the Place,
Cumins of B^chan (...) against Bru^e. But dares not fight him.
and being also Conscious of the Weakness of his Men, he durst not draw them
forth into a Place of greater Disadvantage. Hereupon, he first sent an Herald
to Bruce for a Truce; wherein, they might Treat of Terms of Peace: The Truce
being obtained, Cumins made no more Mention of Peace, but increased his Forces
as much as ever he could; neither would he trust the Scots that were with him,
(the Favor of many of them inclining to Robert,) but craved Aid from England.
In the mean time, Bruce, to remove the Contemptible Opinion, which the English
might conceive of him; and to encourage the Spirits of his Friends, was always
nibbling at his Enemies Heels; here taking some, there others; and, surprising
their weakest Garrisons, he never staid long in a Place, neither gave he
Opportunity to the Enemy to fight him.

But about this time, Simon Frazer and Walter Longan, brave Soldiers Both, and
Lovers of their Country, were taken by some of the Cuminian Faction, delivered
over to the English, and put to Death at London. And almost about the same
time, James Douglas joined himself with Bruce his Party. He was the Son of
William, a young Man, James Douglas joins with Bruce.
passing well instructed in all the Liberal Arts; who, when he was studying at
Paris, hearing that his Father was cast into Prison, by the English, where he
soon after Died, returned home to receive the Advice of his Friends, how he
might Order the Residue of his Life: But, being deprived of his Patrimony, and
all his Friends variously dispersed, in great Want he repaired to William
Lambert, Bishop of St. Andrews; by whom he was admitted, as one of his Family,
and kindly entertained, until King Edward came to Besiege Sterlin, after he had
Conquered almost all Scotland, besides. Lambert, going thither to Salute the
King, carried Douglas along with him, and having gotten a fit Opportunity, he
spoke to the King to restore his Patrimony, to take him into his Protection,
and to make Use of his Faithful Endeavors in his Service; some other things he
also added, in Praise of the young Man; the King, hearing of his Name and
Family, spoke very roughly concerning the stubbornness of William his Father,
withal adding, That he intended not to make any use of his Son, nor of any
Assistance of his; and, as for his Paternal Estate, he could not restore it, if
he would, because he had gratified his Friends with it, who had merited well of
him. James, being thus dismissed by the King, stayed with Lambert, till Bruce
came to Merne. And then, that might he omit no Occasion to prejudice Edward
(whose Mind, he found was implacably bent against him) he took away Lamberts
Horses, and some Money, not without his Privity, and came to Bruce; and his
Service was of great use to him, in many sharp Storms, afterward.

Not long after, Both Kings, almost in the same Moment of time, fell grievously
Sick; Edward, being busy in Preparations for War against Scotland, died within
a few days at Lancaster, leaving his Second Son, Edward, for his Heir, who was
called Edward of Carnarvon, from the Place where he was Born; he, marching into
his Enemies Country, with the Army, which his Father had recruited, sent a
Proclamation before to Dumfreiz, That all the Scots should meet him there, but
there came in but a Few, and those out of the Neighboring Parts, and very
heavily too. He being also informed, That his Matters beyond Sea went not well
on, left a Force, such as he thought sufficient, to quell the Insurrection in
Scotland, and settling things as soon as he could, he passed over into France.
In the interim, Robert, hearing of Edward's Death, was somewhat relieved, and
began to hope better of his Affairs; and so the strength of his Mind, supported
his weak Body. But, not being ignorant, how much the sole Conduct of a General
might contribute to a Victory, he so prepared himself for the extreme Push of
Fortune, that he expected his Enemy and a Battle. On the other side, the
English King coming back more slowly than his Friends hoped; John Cumins, being
greedy of the Glory, That the War was ended by him, hoping also, that Robert
was dead, by reason of his sore Disease added to his other Hardships; or, at
least, that his Sickness would hinder him from being present in the Army,
gathered together all the Forces he could make, and marched directly toward
his Enemy. Bruce causes himself to be carried, sick, into his Army, and
overthrows John Cumins.
On the other side, Robert, to encourage his Men, caused himself to be set on
Horseback. His very Sight, though he was supported by Two Men, and could not stay
long, yet gave such Heart to his Men, that they never began any Fight more
Courageously, than they did That. Cumins, who had placed the Hope of his
Victory in the Sickness of his Enemy, being not able to keep his Men together,
neither by Persuasions nor Punishments, was forced to fly away in their
Company, many were taken in the pursuit, and all courteously used. This Victory
gotten at A Town in Garioch.
Ennerury, as it recovered the King from his Disease, so it was the Omen of his
future prosperous Proceedings; for, from that day forward, he succeeded in All
that he attempted. A while after, he marched into the Country of Argyle, which
he pillaged, and forced Alexander, the Lord of it, to a Surrender, who,
retiring into England, in a little time, there ended his miserable Life, in
great Want. The same Year, the Day before the Calends of June 30th. Bruce
conquers all Galway.
July, Edward Bruce also had prosperous success at a Battle fought at Die, a
River of Galway; Rolland, a Noble Knight of Galway was slain in the Fight;
Donald, the Islander, was taken Prisoner, as he was flying away; and the whole
Country of Galway was wasted, far and near. These Tumults roused up Edward (who
was rather desirous to live in Peace) to a War, even against his Will; for,
perceiving that his Affairs were ill-managed, he, the next Year, Edward enters
Scotland against B^uce, but retreats again.
with a great Army of English, entered Scotland, and there joined a numerous
Body of Scots, who had not yet revolted from the English. With those Forces he
pierced as far as Ranfro^, and then retreated, having performed no Memorable
Act, in his Expedition; either, because he himself was of a dull and unactive
Nature; or else, because Robert (besides the scarcity which did then generally
afflict all Scotland) had caused all the Provisions to be carried away from
those Places, through which his Army was to march, and had laid them up, more out
of the way. After his Departure, Robert spent the rest of the Year in
recovering those Castles which the English yet held, of which Many surrendered
before they were Besieged, as despairing of any help from England.

The next Year, which was 1310. Bruce, to cry quits with the English for the
damage they had done in Scotland, Bruce invades England.
marched twice into England with his Army, and returned back, laden with
spoils, without any Encounter at all. The Two next Years, he recovered almost
all the strong Garrisons, which yet remained in the hands of the English. He
took Perth by Storm, and put all the Garrison Soldiers, both English and Scots,
promiscuously to the Sword; and, that others might be deterred from the like
Obstinacy by their Example, he razed their Walls, and filled up their Trenches.
The Terror of that Example caused Dumfriez, Lanerick, Air, and Bote, He takes
Perth, Dumfreiz, etc. with E^inbur^h and the Isle of Man, from the English.
and many other weaker Forts to Surrender. At the beginning of the Spring,
Roxburgh was taken by James Douglas, when the Garrison was intent upon their
Sports and Pastimes, in those Revels which were wont to be celebrated at the
beginning of Lent. And not long after, Thomas Randolph recovered the Strong
Castle of Edinburgh; The Isle of Man was also surrendered, and the Castles
thereof demolished, that they might not, again, be a Receptacle to the Enemy.
In the mean time, Edward Bruce closely besieged the Castle of Sterlin, situate
on a Rock, steep every way but one, where the Passage to it lay. It was
defended by Philip Mowbray, a vigilant Commander, who, perceiving the Success
of the Brucians in Scotland; and, foreseeing a Siege, had mightily stored and
fortified it with Arms and Provisions, before hand. And therefore, when Edward
had fruitlessly spent many days in besieging it, and had no hopes to carry it,
by force, That he might not seem to be repulsed without doing any thing, he
enters into Conditions with Mowbray, That, if he was not relieved in an Year,
to commence from that very Day, by the English, Sterlin-Castle capitulates with
Edward Bruce.
then the Castle was to be surrendered, and the Garrison should have Liberty, Bag
and Baggage, to march whither they pleased. These Conditions did much displease
the King, yet, that he might not detract from his Brothers Credit, he resolved
to observe them. Yet, in regard he did not doubt, but the English would come at
the time appointed, he prepares, as much, as, in so great a scarcity of things,
he was able, to manage his last Encounter with his potent Enemy. And indeed,
Edward, considering, that he was not only dispossessed of Scotland, whose
People his Father had left to him conquered and broken; but that England was
also in danger, had a desire to root out so Rebellious, Disobedient and Unquiet
a Nation. In order whereunto, Edward of England enters Scotland with a vast
Army.
he levied an Army, not only of English and such Scots who adhered to them, but
he increased it by supplys from his Transmarine Dominions, (which then were
many, great, and opulent) so that his Army was bigger, than ever any King of
England had, before. Yea, he received also an Accession of Force from his
Allies beyond the Seas, especially from Flanders and Holland, whom his Father
had strenuously assisted against Philip, King of France. They say, it consisted
of above 100000 Fighting men. There followed also his Army, a Multitude of
Baggagers, Attendants, and Sutlers, who carries Provision both by Sea and Land,
because they were to come into a Country not very fruitful of it self; and
besides, which had, so many years before, been harassed with all the Miseries
of War. Moreover, there was a Multitude of Such, as were to set out, or
describe, Colonies, and to receive Dividends of Land, who brought their Wives
and Children along with them; so that the Force of so Rich, Powerful and
Flourishing a Kingdom, as England was, being thus, as it were, abridged and
epitomized into one Army, the Consideration thereof produced such a Confidence
in them all, That, now, all the Discourse was, not of Fighting, but rather of
Dividing the Spoil. Bruce, hearing of this great Preparation of the Enemy,
prepares also his Forces, far inferior in Number to so great a Multitude, as
being Thirty Thousand only, but such, as were inured to Hardships, and the Toil
of a Civil War; and who now carried the Hopes of their Lives, Fortunes, and of
all that is dear to Men, as it were, on the Point of their Swords. With this
Army, he sat down on the left Bank of the River Bannock. This River has steep
Banks on Both sides, and it had but a few, and those too, narrow, Passages, or
Fords; it is about Two Miles from Sterlin; Below the Hills, before it makes its
influxe into the Forth, it passes through a little leveller Ground, yet, here and
there, it is Marshy. In the Winter it usually runs with a rapid Torrent; but,
in that hot Time of the Year, the Water was but Low and Fordable, in many
Places. Bruce, by how much the Weaker in Force, was so much the more
Circumspect, Bruce his Policy in a Fight.
and therefore he used Art and Policy to make the Passage over the River more
difficult, to the English, who possessed the right hand Bank thereof. In order
whereunto, he caused deep Trenches to be dug in level Places, wherein he
fastened sharp Stakes, or Spikes, and covered them with some light Turffs a
top, that so his Stratagem might not be discovered; and moreover, he caused
Small Engines, ordinarily round, with sharp Iron Spikes, standing out on each
side of Them, so that, throw them which way soever you will upon the Ground,
one Spike or other turns upward, and wounds, or pierces, the Horses Foot, that
treads upon it, and thus makes him Lame and unfit for Service.
Calthrops of Iron to be thrown up and down on the Ground, in Places most
convenient.

Wherefore, when Camp was almost joined to Camp, as being on different Hills,
only a small River between them: Edward sent 800 Horse a little before to
Sterlin, who marched a little off from the Camp; Robert, imagining, that they
were sent to plunder in the Neighborhood, gave command to Thomas Randolph to
follow them, with 500 Horse, either to prevent the stragglers in wasting the
Country, or, if a fit Occasion were offered, to fight them. The English, seeing
them, desisted from their intended March to Sterlin, and faced about. The Fight
was sharp, and continued long, the Victory inclining, for a time, to neither
Party, so that James Douglas, being concerned for the Scots, who were the fewer
in Number, earnestly desired Bruce, That he might go and relieve them. Bruce
peremptorily denied him, whereupon, though, at present, a Spectator only from an
Hill, yet he resolved, if the Scots were further distressed, to succor them;
but, perceiving the English to give back, and the Scots to get Ground, he
stopped his March, that so he might detract nothing from another man's Praise.
The English, having lost but those Few out of so numerous an Army, were not
discouraged in their Spirits, and also the Scots prepared themselves for the
Encounter, the next day, as if they had already received an Omen of a complete
Victory.

The Night, tho very short, (for the Battle was fought on the 9 th of the
Calends of June ^3.
July) yet seemed long to both Parties, for the Eagerness they had to Fight.
All the Scots were divided into Three Brigades, The King led the Middle, or
Main Battle; His Brother Commanded the Right Wing; and Randolf, the Left. The
English, besides a multitude of Archers, which they placed on the outside of
Both their Wings, had also Curiassiers, out of France. They speeding toward
Randolf, who stood on the Lower Ground, and endeavoring to fall obliquely on
his Flank, fell suddenly into the Di^ches made by Bruce, where they tumbled
one upon another, with great Slaughter, both of Man and Horse. They that first
fell in, were Slain by the pressure of Those that fell upon them, and the last
Ranks being discouraged at the loss of the First, retreated back. This Terror
did also somewhat retard the Foot, for they were afraid of falling into the
like Snares. There also did happen another Accident, which, tho little in
itself, yet contributed very much (as such Niceties are wont to do in War) to
the main Chance. Robert rode up and down before his Army, to keep them in their
Ranks, having a Batoon in his Hand, a certain Englishman knew him, and ran at
him with his Spear. The King avoided the blow, and, as the Horse, in his
Carrier, ran a little beyond him, struck his Rider dead with his Batoon, and
down he tumbled from his Horse, to the ground. The Common Soldiers highly
commended the perilous Audacity of the King; and were hardly kept in by their
Commanders, but hand over head, would rush upon the Enemy, with such an
eagerness of Mind, that they were likely to break their Enemies Ranks, unless
the English Archers, who were placed in their Wings, had repulsed them with
great Loss; and Bruce also sent in some Troops of Horse, who drove them back;
Yet, in this Action, a Mistake did more prejudice to the English, than their
Enemy did. The Rabble-Rout, which followed the Camp, caused the Baggage-men to
mount their Draught horses and to hang out some Linen Cloth instead of Ensigns,
thus they stood on an Hill, where they might easily be seen, and made an
Appearance of a new Army. The English, who stood nearest, were surprised with a
double Fear, and betook themselves to their Heels. Their Fear disordered the
rest of the Army. A Multitude of common Soldiers were slain the pursuit; some
of our Writers say, Thi^ Fifty Thousand English fell at that Fight. Caxton, an
Englishman, does not set down the precise Number, but, he says, it was a mighty
Overthrow, an innumerable Multitude being slain; and he did well in not being
positive in the Number, for it was hard to compute it, in regard the Flight was
so scattered, wherein more perished than in the Battle. This is certain, the
Slaughter was so great, that the English, tho they had many Provocations from
the Scots, yet did not stir for Two or Three Years, after. Of the English
Nobility, The English receive a great overthrow at Banno^k, near Sterling.
there fell about Two hundred, and almost an equal Number were taken Prisoners.
The Prisoners related, That the King himself began to fly first, and if he had
not been received into the Castle of Dunbar, by the Earl of March, and so sent
in a Skiff by Water to Berwick, he had not escaped the hands of Douglass, who,
with 400 Horse, pursued him Forty Miles. Amongst the Prisoners, there was taken
a Monk, One of those who are called Carmelites, from Mount Carmel in Syria, he
was accounted a good Poet for that Age, and was brought into the Army to
celebrate the Victory of the English, in a Poem; but, they being beaten, he
Sung their Overthrow in a Canto, (for which he had his Liberty.) His Verse was
rude and barbarous, yet, it did not altogether displease the Ears of the Men of
that Age. Neither was the Victory unbloody to the Scots; they lost above Four
thousand Men, amongst whom, there were but Two Knights: Hereupon, Sterlin
Castle was surrendered, according to Compact, and the Garrison sent away.

About these times there happened a Passage, not unworthy to be related, in
regard of the variety of Providence, in a narrow compass of time. John Or
Menteith
Menthet, who betrayed his Friend Wallis to the English, and was therefore
worthily hated by the Scots, received, amongst other Rewards, the Government of
the Castle of Dumbritton from the English. When other Forts were recovered,
That only, or, but very few with it, held out for the English. And because it
was naturally impregnable, the King dealt with the Governor, by his Friends and
Kindred, to Surrender it. He demanded the Country, or Earldom of Lennox, as the
Price of his Treachery, and Surrender. Neither would he ever so much as hear of
any other Terms. In this Case, the King did waver and fluctuate in his Mind,
what to do; on the One side, he earnestly desired to have the Castle; yet, on
the Other, he did not so much prize it, as, for its sake, to disoblige the Earl
of Lennox, who had been his Fast, and almost his only, Friend, in all his
Calamities. But the Earl of Lennox, hearing of it, and coming in, soon decided
the Controversy, and persuaded the King, by all means, to accept the
Condition. Hereupon, the Bargain was made, as John Menteith would have it, and
Solemnly confirmed; But when the King was going to take Possession of the
Castle, a Carpenter, one Rolland, met him in the Wood of Cholcon, about a Mile
from it, Or Calhound in the Country of Lennox.
and having obtained Liberty to speak with the King, concerning a matter of
great importance, he told him, what Treachery the Governor did intend against
him; Yea, and had prepared to execute it; It was This, In a Wine-Cellar,
concealed, and under Ground, a sufficient number of Englishmen were hid, who,
when the rest of the Castle was given up, and the King secure, were to issue
forth upon him as he was at Dinner, and either to kill, or take him Prisoner.
Hereupon, the King, upon the Surrender of the other Parts of the Castle by
John, being kindly invited to a Feast, refused to eat; till, as he had searched
all other parts of the Castle, so he had viewed that Wine-Cellar, also. The
Governor excused it, pretending, That the Smith, who had the Key, was out of
the way; but that he would come again anon; the King, not satisfied therewith,
The Treachery of Menteith, who before betrayed Wallace, against the King,
discovered.
caused the Door to be broken open, and so the Plot was discovered; The English
were brought forth in their Armor, and being severally examined, confessed the
whole Matter; and they added also another discovery, viz. That a Ship rode
ready in the next Bay to carry the King into England. The Accomplices in this
wicked Design were put to death; but John was kept in Prison; because the King
was loath to offend his Kindred, and especially his Sons in Law, in so dangerous
a time. For he had many Daughters, all of them very beautiful, and Married to
Men, rich enough, but Factious. Therefore, in a time of such imminent Danger,
the Battle drawing near, wherein All was at stake, lest the Mind of any
powerful Man might be rendered averse from him, and thereby inclined to practice
against him, John was released out of Prison, upon this Condition, (for the
performance whereof, his Sons in Law undertook) That he should be placed in the
Front of the Battle, and there, by his Valor, should wait the Decision of
Providence. And indeed, the Man, Menthet Rewarded for his Valor in Bannock
Fight.
otherwise fraudulent, was, in this, as good as his Word, for he behaved
himself so Valiantly, that that days Work procured him, not only Pardon for
what was past, but large Rewards for the future.

The Fame of this Victory, being divulged over all Britain, did not only abate
the Fierceness of the English, but raised up the Scots even from extreme
Desperation; supplying them not only with Money, but with Glory, with Arms and
other Furniture for War. Neither did they only release their own Men, who were
made Prisoners, either in Fight, or upon Surrenders, but also they raised great
Sums, by the Redemption of the English, they had taken. And, out of the Spoils,
many recompensed and made up the Losses they had received in former Times, yea,
and got great Estates too, for the future. For the English came with all their
Precious Things about them, not as to a War, but as to an assured Victory. The
King, having thus prosperously succeeded in the War, spent the following Winter
in settling the State of the Kingdom, which was much weakened by so long a War,
and also in bestowing Rewards on the well-deserving. The next Spring, Berwick
was taken from the English, Berwick taken by Bruce.
after they had enjoyed it 20 Years. In the next place, he Convened an Assembly
of the Estates at Air, a Town of Kyle. There, in a full Assembly, by the
Suffrages of all the Orders, the Kingdom was confirmed to Bruce; and
afterward, because the King had but one only Daughter, The Kingdom confirmed
to Bruce.
left by his former Wife; The States, remembering what public Mischiefs had
happened by the Dispute, which in former times had been managed concerning the
Right of Succession, made a Decree, That if the King left no Issue Male, his
Brother Edward should succeed him in the Kingdom, and his Sons, in order, after
him. But, if he also should decease without Issue Male, then the Crown was to
descend to Mary, the Daughter of Robert, and to her Posterity; yet so, that the
Nobility were to provide her an Husband fit for her Royal Estate, and for the
Succession in the Kingdom. For it was looked upon, as far more just, That an
Husband should be chosen for the young Lady, than that she should choose an
Husband for her self, and a King for the whole Land. It was also Decreed, That,
in the Minority of the King, Thomas Randolfe, or, if he should miscarry, James
Douglas, should be Tutors to the King, and Governors of the Kingdom. The Fame
of Robert's noble Exploits, both at home and abroad, excited the Irish to send
Ambassadors to him, To put themselves, and their Kingdom, under his Protection.
And, Bruce desired, to accept the Crown of Ireland:
if his Domestic Affairs should not suffer him to accept of the Kingdom,
himself; yet, that he would permit his Brother Edward to do it, that so a
Nation, allied to him, might no longer suffer under the cruel, insulting, and
intolerable Domination and Servitude of the English. The Irish wrote also to
the Pope, to the same purpose; and he, by his Missives, desired the English to
forbear wronging and oppressing the Irish; but in vain, so that Edward Bruce
went thither with a great Army, and, by universal consent, was saluted, King.
In the first year of his Arrival he drove the English out of all Vlster, He
drives the English out of Vlster.
and reduced it to his Obedience; yea, he passed over all the rest of the
^sland with his Victorious Army. The next year, a new Army was sent over from
England; Robert, perceiving, that the War would grow hotter, levied new Forces,
and made haste over to his Brother. He suffered much in that Expedition, by his
want of Provision, and when he was but about one days March from him, Edward
Bruce overthrown in Ireland by the English. October 5.
he heard, That he, and all his Men were defeated, the Third of the Nones of
October. The report is, That Edward, edged on by too much desire of Glory, did
precipitate the Fight, lest his Brother should share with him in the Glory of
the Victory.

The King of England, being informed, that the Flower of the Militia of
Scotland did attend Bruce in a Foreign Country, and thinking This a fit
opportunity offered him to Revenge the Losses of former times, sent a great
Army, under select Commanders, into Scotland. Douglas, Governor of the Borders,
fought with them thrice in several places, and slew almost all their
Commanders, and a great part of the Soldiers. An English Army worsted in
Scotland.
The English having sped ill with their Land Army, came into the Forth with a
Naval Force, and infested all the Sea Coasts by their Excursions: The Earl of
Fife sent 500 Horse to restrain the Plunderers; but they, not daring to
encounter so great a Multitude, in their Retreat, met with William Sinclare,
Bishop of the Caledonians, accompanied with about 60 Horse, who, perceiving the
Cause of their Retreat, did most grievously reproach them for their Cowardice,
Bishop Sinclar's Valor against the English.
and cried out, All you, that wish well to Scotland, follow me; and thereupon,
catching up a Lance, they all cheerfully followed him, and he made so brisk an
Assault on the scattered Plunderers, that they fled hastily to their Ships; and
whilst they all endeavored to get aboard, one Ship, overladen with Passengers,
was sunk, and all, that were in it, drowned. This Attempt of Sinclare's was so
grateful to the King, That, ever after, he called him, His Bishop. That Summer,
when all the English Counties, bordering on the Scots, lay desolate and
unmanured, by reason of want of Provision, (Diseases also abounding amongst all
sorts of tame Animals and Cattle) as also by frequent Invasions; To remedy this
Inconvenience, Edward came to York, but there he was not able to complete an
Army, by reason of the Paucity of the Inhabitants; so that the Londoners, and
the Parts adjoining were fain to supply him with Soldiers, tho many of them had
their Passes and Discharges from all Military Services, before. At length he
made up an Army, and marches to besiege Berwick, he was scarce arrived there,
when Thomas Randolfe passed over the River Solway, and marched another way into
England; where he wasted all with Fire and Sword, no Man resisting him; yea, in
some Places, he could hardly meet with any Man, at all. For a Plague, which
Reigned the former year, had made such a Devastation, that the Face of things
seemed very piteous, even to their very Enemies. When the Scots Edward besieges
Berwick.

Randolfe invades England, and overthrows the Archbishop of York.


had marched above 100 Miles, and had fired all, especially about York, the
Archbishop thereof, more for the Indignity of the Thing, than the Confidence in
his Force, took Arms. He gathered together an Army numerous enough, but raw and
undisciplined, consisting of a promiscuous Company of Priests, Artificers, and
Country-Labourers, whom he led, with more Boldness, than Conduct, against his
Invaders; but, being overcome by them, he lost many of his Men, and He, with
some few, saved themselves by Flight. There was so great a Slaughter of Priests
made there, That the English, for a long time after, The W^it^ Battle, (...)?
called that Battle, The White Battle.

Edward, hearing of this Overthrow, lest his Conquering Enemy should make
further and greater Attempts, brake up his Siege, and retreats to York, (the
Scots having withdrawn themselves) and from thence into the heart of his
Kingdom. The English were busied with Domestic Tumults, so that a short Truce
was made, Edward retreats upon a Truce with the Scots.
rather because both Kings were tired with the War, than, otherwise, any whit
desirous of a Pacification. In this Calm, Robert Indicts a Convention of all
the Estates and Nobility. And, because the Changes, happening in so long a War,
had confounded the Right of Men's Possessions, he commanded every one to produce
and show, By what Title he held his Estate. This Matter was equally grievous to
the Old Possessors, Robert calls for the Deeds of Men's Lands.
as well as the New. Valiant Men thought, they enjoyed That by a good Right,
which they had taken from their Enemies; and they took it much amiss, That what
they had got, as the Price of their Military Toil, yea, of their Blood too,
should be rent from them, in Times of Peace. As for the old Owners of Estates,
seeing there was no one House almost, but had suffered in the War, They had
lost their Deeds, (by which, they held their Lands) as well as their other
Goods. Whereupon, they all entered upon a Project, valiant in appearance, but
bold and temerarious in the event. For when the King, in the Parliament,
commanded them to produce their Titles, every one drew his Sword, and cried
out, Whereupon he receives an Affront.
We carry our Titles in our Right Hands; The King, being amazed at this sudden
and surprising Spectacle, though he took the Matter very heinously, yet he
stifled his Indignation for the present, until a fit Time of Revenge. And it
was not long, before an Occasion was offered him, to show it; Diverse of the
Nobles, being conscious to themselves of the Audacity of their late Attempt,
and fearing to be punished for it, conspire together to betray the Kingdom to
the English. The Fact was discovered to the King, and that so plainly, that the
Letters, A Conspiracy against Bruce discovered, and the Acto^^ put to dea^^.
declaring the Manner, Time, and Place, were intercepted, and their Crime made
evident. Whereupon they were all taken, and brought to the King, without any
Tumult at all raised at their Apprehension. And because it was much feared,
That William Souls, Governor of Berwick, would deliver up both Town and Castle
to the English, before the Conspiracy was publicly divulged, he made a Journey
thither, as it were, by she by. A Convention was made at Perth, to try the
Prisoners, where the Letters were produced, and every ones Seal known; being
convicted of High Treason, by their own Confession, they were put to Death. The
Chief were David Brechin, and William Lord Souls, of the Nobility; also Gilbert
Mayler, Richard Brown, and John Logie; besides, there were many others of all
Orders accused, but there being only Suspicion against them, they were
dismissed. The Death of David Brechin only, did diversely affect Men's minds;
for, besides that he was the Son of the Kings Sister, he was accounted the
Prime young man of his Age, for all Arts both of Peace and War. He had given
given evident Proofs of his Valor in Syria, in the Holy War. He, being
summoned in by the Popular Conspirators, never gave his Consent to the Treason,
only his Crime was, That, being made acquainted with so foul a Machination, he
did not Discover it. The Body of Roger Mowbray, who dyed before Conviction, was
Condemned to all kind of Ignominy, but the King remitted that Punishment, and
caused it to be buried.

Some some few Months before this Process was had, the Popes Legates, who, at
the request of the English, came to compose the Dissensions betwixt the
Kingdoms, not being able to do any thing therein, lest they might seem to have
done nothing for the English in their Legation, Excommunicated the Scots, and
forbad them the Use of Public Divine Service, The Scots Excommunicated
(the Popes Thunderbolts being terrible, in Those days.) Bruce, to show how
little he valued the Popes Curses in an unjust Cause, gathered an Army and
invaded England, following the Legate at his Departure, almost at his very
heels. There he made a foul havoc with Fire and Sword, Bruce invades England.
and came as far as the Cross at Stanmore. The English, not to suffer so great
Ignominy to pass unrevenged, levied so numerous an Army, that they promised
themselves an easy Victory, even without Blood. Robert thought it dangerous to
run the Hazard of All in a Battle against the mighty Army of so great a King,
but rather he resolved to help out the matter with Policy, rather than by
Force. He drove all the Cattle into the Mountains, whither Armies could not,
but with great Difficulty, ascend; and all other things of use for an Army, he
caused, either to be reposited in Fortified Places, or to be wholly spoiled.

The English, who came thither in hopes of a speedy Battle, and had not
Provisions for a long March; when they perceived, what Devastation was made in
their own Country, were inflamed with Anger, Hatred, and Desire of Revenge, and
resolved to pierce into the middst of Scotland, Edward enter^ Scotland, but
soon retreats.
and to ferret the King out of his boroughs; yea, and force him to a Fight,
though against his Will. For the Greatness of his Forces did encourage him to
hope, that, either he should blot out his former Ignominy by an Eminent
Victory, or else, should recompense his Loss lately received, by an enlarged
Depopulation; With this Resolution he came in all have to Edinburgh; he spared
Churches only in his March, but the further he was to go, the more scarcity he
was like to find; So that, in five days time, he was forced to retreat. At his
return, he spoiled all things, both Sacred and Profane. In Teviotdale.
He burnt the Monasteries of Driburgh and Mulross, and killed those old Monks,
whom either Weakness, or Confidence in their Old Age, had caused to stay there.
As soon as Bruce was informed, that Edward was returned, for want of Provision,
and that Diseases did rage in his Army, Bruce follows him and had almost taken
him in a Skirmish.
so that he had lost more Men than if he had been overcome in Battle, he almost
trod upon his Heels, with an Army, noted more for the Goodness, than the
Number, of Soldiers, and came as far as York, making grievous havoc as he
went. He had almost taken the King Himself by an unexpected Assault at the
Monastery of Not ^ar from Malto^ in Yorkshire.
Biland, where Edward, in a tumultuary Battle, was put to Flight, all his
Household-stuff, Money, Bag and Baggage being taken. To blot out the Ignominy
of this Infamous Flight, Andrew Berkley, Earl of Carlisle, was a while after
accused, And^ew B^r^ly put to Death.
as if he had been bribed to betray the English, and so he lost his Life, in
Punishment for the Cowardice of another Man.

The next Year, a double Embassy was sent, One to the Pope, to reconcile him to
the Scots, from whom he had been alienated by the Calumnies of the English; and
Another to renew the Ancient League with the French. They Both easily obtained
what they desired: For, when the Pope understood, That the Controversy arose by
the Injury and Default of Edward the First, who affirmed, That the King of
Scots ought to obey, as a Feudatary, the King of England; and, That the English
had nothing to defend their Claim by, but old Fables, and late Injuries; and
besides, That, in Prosperity, being Summoned by the Pope, they always avoided
an equal Decision of Things, tho, in their Adversity, they were always humble
suitors to him for his Aid; and, on the other side, the Scots always were
willing to have their Cause heard, The Scots absolved by the Pope.
and never shunned the Determination of an Equal Judge, nor the Arbitration of
any Good men; and moreover, when they produced many Grants and Summons of
Former Popes, which made for them, and against their Enemies, the Scots were
always present at the day, and the English, though they had Notice given, never
came. Hereupon, the Pope was easily reconciled to the Scots; and the French as
easily induced to renew the Ancient League, only one Article was added to the
old Conditions, That if any Controversy did hereafter arise amongst the Scots,
And make a League with the French.
concerning him who was to succeed in the Kingdom, the same should be decided
by the Council of the States; and the French, if there were need, were to
assist Him by his Authority, and with his Arms, who, by Lawful Suffrages, was
by them declared King. Our Writers cast the Rise of the Hamiltons, now a
powerful Family in Scotland, upon these Times.

There was a certain Nobleman in the Court of England, who spoke Honorably of
the Fortune and Valor of Bruce; whereupon, one of the Spencers, Bedchamber
Man to the King, either thinking, That his Speech was Reproachful to the
English; or else, The Rise of the Family of the Hamiltons, with the Occasion
thereof.
to curry Favor with the looser sort of the Nobility, drew forth his Faucheon,
and, making at him, gave him a slight wound in the Body. The Man, being of a
great Spirit, was more concerned at the Contumely, than at the Damage; and,
being hindered by the coming in of many, to part the Fray, from taking present
Revenge; the day after, finding his Enemy in a sit Posture, in the same place,
he run him thorough: And fearing the Punishment of the Law, and the great Power
of the Spencers at Court, he fled presently into Scotland, to King Robert, by
whom he was courteously received, and some Lands, near the River Clyde, were
bestowed upon him. His Posterity, not long after, were admitted to the Degree
of Noblemen; and the Opulent Family of the Hamiltons was Surnamed from him, and
also the Name of Hamilton was imposed on the Lands, which the King gave him.

Not long after, Edward had great Combustions at home, insomuch, that he put
many of the Nobles to Death, and advanced the Spencers, the Authors of all Evil
Counsel, higher than his own Kindred could bear; so that, he was apprehended by
his Son, and by his Wife, (who had received a small Force from beyond the Seas,
Edw^rd of England slain by a strange kind of Death, not without the P^ivity of
his Relations.
) and kept close Prisoner; and not long after, he was slain by a course sort of
Death, an hot Iron was thrust into his Fundament, through a Pipe of Horn, by
which his Bowels were burnt up, and yet no Sign of so terrible a Fact appeared
on the outside of his Body. His Wife and Son were thought Privy to the
Parricide, either, because his Keepers would never have dared to commit such a
Deed, so openly, unless they had had Great Authors; or else, because they were
never called in Question for so Immane a Butchery.

These Disturbances in England, which were followed by the Kings Death, Bruce
also growing old and weak in Body, were the Occasions, Bruce settles the
Succession in hi^ Family.
that Peace for some Years did intercede between the Two Neighbor Nations. For
Bruce, being freed from the Fear of the English, and being also called upon by
his Age, converted his Thoughts to settle his Domestic Affairs. And first, he
made have to confirm the Kingdom, (which was not yet quite recovered, nor fully
settled, from the Commotions of former Times) to his only Son, yet but a Child,
by the Consent and Decree of the Estates. And, if he died without Issue, then
he appointed Robert Stuart, his Nephew by his Daughter, to be his Successor: He
caused the Nobles to take an Oath, for the Performance of this Decree. But
afterward, fearing. That, after his Death, Baliol would begin his old Dispute,
about the Kingdom; especially seeing his Heirs, because of their Minority,
might be liable to be injured by others; he sent James Douglas to John Baliol,
being in France, with large Gifts and Promises, That he would cease his Claim
to the Kingdom: This he did, not so much to acquire a new Right, (because,
according to the Scottish Custom, The King is made by the Decree of the Estates,
who have the Supreme Power in their Hands;) but, that he might cut off all
Occasion from Wicked Men, to Calumniate his Posterity; and also, that he might
Eradicate the very Seeds of Sedition. Douglas found Baliol far more placable,
than he, or others, thought, he would be; for he was now surrounded with the
Miseries of Extreme Old Age. And agrees with Baliol then in France, who
consents the^eto.
He ingenuously Confessed, That his Peccant Exorbitance was justly restrained,
and that he was deservedly driven out of the Kingdom, as unworthy to Reign. And
therefore, he was very willing, That his Kinsman Robert should enjoy the Crown,
by whose high Valor, singular Felicity, and great Pains-taking, 'twas
Vindicated into its Ancient Splendor: In one thing, he rejoiced, That they, by
whom he was deceived, did not enjoy the Reward of their Perfidiousness.

When Robert had settled these Matters, according to his own desire, the same
Year, which was 1327. our Writers say, That Ambassadors were sent into
Scotland, by Edward the Third, for a Pacification; in which Matter, they seemed
to act Treacherously, and instead of Peace, they carried home War, but what the
particular Fraud, was, is not expressed, and the English say, That the War was
openly denounced by Robert, but they describe not the Cause of it; surely, it
must needs be some great and mighty One; or else, a valetudinary old Man, when
Peace was scarce settled at home; and, who might have been sated with his former
Victories, rather than with War, would not so soon have been provoked to
reassume his Arms. This is certain, That the King, by reason of his Age,
B^uce's Army (...)
could not manage the War himself in Person; so that Thomas Randolfe, and Iam^s
Douglas, the Valiantest and Wisest of all that Age, were sent by him into
England, with Twenty Thousand brave nimble Horse, but no Foot at all. The
Reason was, That they might fly up and down swiftly, and not abide in one
place; nor, be forced to Fight the English, unless they themselves pleased. For
they knew, that the English would make Head against them in their first
Expedition, Edward makes Head against them.
with a far more numerous Army: Neither were they deceived in their Opinions,
for the King of England, besides his Domestic Forces, had procured great
Assistance of Horse, from Belgium; but, in regard they and the English fell out
at York, some English Writers say, That they returned home again. But Frossard,
a French Writer of the same Age, says, That they accompanied the English during
the whole Expedition; and that, not only for Honors sake, but also for Fear of
Sedition, they had the next Place to the Kings Regiment, always assigned to
them, in the Camp. The King, having made a Conjunction of all his Forces,
(which were clearly above Sixty Thousand Men) marched against the Scots, who
had already passed over the Tine. Now, there were Two Fortified Towns on the
Tine. One nearer Wales, which was Carlisle; and the other, about Fifty Miles
lower, called Newcastle. The English had strongly Garisoned Both of them, to
hinder the Enemies Passage over the River; but the Scots, knowing, where the
River was fordable, passed over without any noise, and so deceived both the
Garrisons. When the English were come into the Bishopric of Durham, from the
Tops of the Hills, they might see Fires afar off, and then beginning to
understand, how near their Enemy was, they tumultuously cried, Arm, Arm, as if
they were presently to fall to it.

They drew forth their Army into a Threefold Order of Battle, and marched
directly to the Place, The Scots flying Army of Horse weary the Eng^ish to
follow them.
where they saw the Smoke of the Fire; the General denouncing a great Penalty
on him, that without his leave, should stir from his Colors. Thus they wearied
themselves till the Evening, and then marked out a Place for their Camp, in a
Wood, near a certain River, and there they placed their Baggage and Carriages,
which could not so swiftly follow the Flying Army.

The next day, they marched in the same Order, and toward Evening, they were
forced to abide in their Tents, which they had pitched, as conveniently as the
Place would afford, that so the Draught-Horses, and the Foot, might receive a
little Refreshment. There the Nobles came to the King, and deliberated, How
they should bring the Scots to a Battle. The most Part were of Opinion, That
the English Foot were never able to overtake the flying Horse of the Scots, and
if they did, yet they could not compel them to Fight, but in those Places,
which they themselves judged most Convenient: But because there was such a
general Devastation, that they could not stay long in an Enemies Country; they
judged it best, to pass over the Tine, with all their Forces, and to intercept
the Enemy in his Return home. And besides, the Country beyond the Tine was
plainer and fitter to draw up an Army in, that so the whole Body of the Army
might be put upon Service. This Opinion was approved, and a Command given to
refresh Themselves, and to do it as silently as ever they could, That they
might more easily hear the word of Command, and the sound of the Trumpets; That
so, leaving the Baggage behind, every one should carry a Loaf a piece; and, as
if the next day they were to fight the Enemy, they were to await the Event of
Fortune; so that their Bodies being refreshed from the weariness of the day
before, a little after Midnight, they took up their Arms, and, in good order,
begun their March; But the Marshes and Hills, by which they were to pass,
quickly made them to break their Ranks, and he, that could, led the Van; the
Rest followed their Steps, and their March was in such Disorder, that many
Horse, and Carriage-Beasts, did either stick in the Mud, or else, did tumble
down from steep Places, and often times they cried, To your Arms, and then all of
them, in great Trepidation, ran to the Place from whence the Noise and Cry
came, without any Order at all. But when they came to those that led the Van,
Stags, suddenly rouzed, affright the English.
they understood, That the Tumult was occasioned by a Multitude of Stags; who,
being rouzed out of the Heath, by the Noise of Men, and afraid to see them, ran
up and down in great Confusion, amongst the Brigades. At last, about Evening,
the Horse, but without the Foot, came to the Fords of Tine, over which the
Scots had passed, and by which, they would return (as they hoped) and, at
Sunset, they Forded over; the round and slippery Stones, which the River roles
up and down, much incommoding their Horse. And besides, they were afflicted
with another Inconvenience, They had, few or none of them, any Iron Tools to
cut down Wood with; so that, after they had marched Twenty Eight Miles, they
were fain to lie in their Arms, that Night, on the bare Ground, holding their
Horses Bridles, in one of their Hands; for, they could not cut down Wood to
make Tents, (having brought none with them) nor Huts, nor so much as Stakes to
tie their Horses to. Early in the Morning, as soon as it was light, there fell
such mighty showers of Rain, The English Army highly incommoded in their march.
that even small Brooks were hardly passable, by Man or Horse; and also, they
were informed by some Country Men, which they took, That the Neighboring
Country was so Barren and Desolate, That no Provision was to be had, nearer
than Newcastle and Carlisle; of which, one was Twenty Four, the other Thirty,
Miles off. Thither they sent their Draught-Horses and Servants; in the mean
time, they made use of their Swords, to cut down Stakes to tie their Horses to;
and some Shrubs and small Trees to build them Huts, with the Leaves whereof
they fed their Horses, and so, that Night, they were fain to Fast.

Three Days after, they, that were sent to the Towns, returned with some small
Provisions, which they brought along with them; some Sutlers came also with
them, with Bread and Wine, to make a Gain of; but it was but little, and also,
not Good; yet, such as it was, the Soldiers were ready to fall out, Who should
have it, first. Having thus passed Seven days, in great Want, and being also
much molested with continual Showers, so that their Horse-Furniture was wet,
and their Horses Backs did Ulcerate, and they themselves stood (many of them)
Armed, Day and Night, in their wet Clothes; neither could they make any Fire,
by reason, that the Wood was Green; and besides, it was wetted by the Rain
water; The Eighth day, they resolved to repass the River at a more commodious
Ford, Seven miles above the Place, where they were; but there also the River
was swollen by reason of the Showers, so that they were much incommoded, and some
were drowned, in their passage. As soon as they had landed their Army upon the
other side, a great Reward was proposed to him, Who could bring the first
certain Tidings, Where the Scots were. The Two next Days, their March lying
through desolate places, and ruined by late Fires, they had Forage enough for
their Horses, but little Provision for Themselves. On the Fourth Day, One of
the Fifteen young Men, who scouted out to bring News where the Scots lay,
returned back, and informed them, That the Scots Army was about Three Miles
distance from Theirs; and that, for Eight Days last past, They had been as
uncertain what became of the English, as the English had been what became of
Them. This he affirmed for Truth, as having been taken Prisoner by the Scots,
and freed without Ransom, upon Condition, he would go tell his King, That, they
would wait for his Coming in that Place; and, That they were as willing to
Fight, as He.

Upon the Receipt of this Message, the King Commanded the Army to make an Halt,
that Man and Horse might take some Refreshment, and so be ready for the last
Encounter; and thus, in Three Brigades, he marched slowly toward the Enemy.
As Soon as they came in fight one of another, the Scots had so divided their Men
into Three Batailions upon an Hill, that the Rocks and Precipices thereof
secured them on the Right and Left, from whence, they might cast down Stones on
the Enemy, if they endeavored to come up to them. At the Foot of the Hill, the
English had a rapid Torrent to pass, so full of Great and Round Stones, that
they could not Ford over to their Enemy; or, if they had so done, they could
not Retreat without certain Ruin. The English, perceiving that they could not
come at the Enemy, but with great disadvantage, pitched their Tents; and sent
an Herald at Arms to the Scots, Reparties between both Armies.
advising them to come down into the Champion Country, to Fight for Glory and
Empire by true Valor, in an open Plain: The Scots answered, That they would
Fight for no bodies pleasure, but their own; That they marched into England, to
revenge the Injuries they had received; if they had done any thing which did
offend them, they had free Liberty to take their own Revenge. As for
Themselves, they resolved to abide There, as long as they pleased; and if their
Enemy did attaque them, at his Peril be it. The next Three Days, their Camps
being near, and Parties placed at the Fords, some slight Skirmishes passed
betwixt them; the Fourth Day, as soon as it was Light, the Watch brought Word,
That the Scots had forsaken the Hill, on which they were; whereupon, Scouts
were sent out to bring certain News, and to follow them, if they had Retreated;
who brought word, That the Scots had pitched their Tents on another Hill by the
same River, much more convenient for them than the First, where they had a Wood
which secured their Ingress and Egress. The English, who hoped that they should
Famish the Scots, (who avoided Fighting) in a Foreign Soil, being frustrated of
their Expectation, followed them, and pitched their Tents on an opposite Hill.
After they had abode there some Days, it was observed, That they grew more
Negligent than formerly in their Night-watches; either, because they
undervalued the Scots, because of their Paucity, or else, because they
meditated nothing, but Flight. Douglas took hold of the Opportunity, to attempt
something, and passing over the River with 200 Select Horse, he entered the
Enemies Camp, where, he saw, it was but slenderly Guarded. He had almost
pierced to the King's own Tent, Douglas breaks in upon the English Camp, and
does Execution.
where, cutting off the Cords, the Alarm being taken, he killed near 300
English in his Retreat, and brought his Men safely off; After this, no
Memorable Action happened, save, that the English, instructed by their own
Loss, placed more careful Watches, in convenient Places. At last, it was told
them by a Scot, whom they had taken Prisoner, That there was a Proclamation in
that Camp, That, at the Third Watch, all should be ready to follow Douglas,
whither-soever he should lead them. This Relation struck such a Terror into the
English, That, dividing their Army into Three Batailions, at a moderate
Distance one from another, they stood all that Night in their Arms; and their
Servants held their Horses, Bridled, Sadled, and ready prepared, for whatever
should happen in their Camp. And moreover, they placed strong Guards at all the
Fords of the River. At last, toward Day, Two Scots Trumpeters were brought to
the King, who told him, That the Scots were Commanded to returned home; and if
the English had a mind to revenge the Loss they had sustained, they must Follow
them. The English Army Retreats.
Hereupon, the English called a Council of War, where it was resolved, That it
was better to march back with the Army at present, than to follow such flying
Stragglers, to the great vexation both of Horse and Man; considering, they had
lost more Men in this Expedition by Famine and Sickness, than might have fallen
in a Set-Battel. When their Retreat was resolved upon, many of the English,
either in hopes of Prey, which might be left behind in their hasty Retreat; or
else, desirous to understand something of their Enemies Affairs, went into
their Camp, where they found about Five Hundred Deer, and especially Stags,
already killed, (of which sort, the English keep many, not only their Kings,
but even many private Persons also,) and also great Budgets, made of raw Skins,
in which they boiled their Meat, and about Ten Thousand Snapsacks. Moreover,
Cruelty to Prisoners.
there were Two English Men, whose Legs were broken, but they were yet alive.
All these things being Evidences of great Hardiness and Poverty, did confirm
the goodness of their Advice, who were for marching the Army back.

This Year, Walter Stuart, and Queen Elizabeth, died, one the Son in Law, the
other, Wife to the King: Besides, the Castles of Alnewick and Norham were
besieged by the Scots, but* without Success: Preys were also driven out of
Northumberland. In March, Ambassadors came from England, to treat of a
perpetual Peace, and a Truce was made for Three Years. The next Year, which was
1328. the English held a Parliament at Northampton, the Eighth of the Calends
of July, June, 24.
wherein all the Orders of Estates agreed to a Peace with the Scots upon these
Terms; A Peace concluded between the Scots and English, with the Conditions
thereof.
That the English should renounce all Right, which they, or their Ancestors,
pretended to have to the Crown of Scotland; and, That they should leave That
Kingdom as Free, as it was at the Death of Alexander the Third; and, That they
should be Subject to no External Yoke of Servitude; and, on the other side, the
Scots were to surrender up all the Lands, they sometimes held in England, as
Feudataries; That Cumberland and Northumberland, as far as Stanmore, should be
Boundaries to the Scots; That David, the Son of Robert, should take to Wife
Joan, the Sister of Henry; That the English should faithfully return all Pacts,
Bonds, and Writings, or any other Monuments of Subjection, into the Hands of
the Scots, and should disanul them, for the future; That the Scots, for the
Damage which they had lately done the English King, and for the Lands which his
Father and Grandfather had given to his Favorites in Scotland, should pay him
Thirty thousand Marks of Silver.

Both Kings had their proper Reasons, why they consented, so easily, to these
Conditions. The English King, having wasted his Treasure, and having been put
to an Ignominious Flight, and thereby lessened in the Eyes of his own Subjects,
as well as of his Enemies, thereupon was afraid, That some Domestic Sedition
would arise, and then a Warlike Enemy, pufft up with his late Success, should
come on his Flank, and thereby mightily endamage his Kingdom. And Robert, being
broken with Old Age, Toil, and Diseases, (for, a little before his death, he
fell into a Leprosy) having also been long exercised with the events of both
Fortunes, good and bad, resolved, if he could, to give up himself to his Ease;
and not only so, but to provide for the Tranquillity of his Heirs, in regard of
their infirm and tender Age. And therefore, having settled Peace abroad, he
turned himself wholly to settle Matters at home. When the Marriage of his Son
was magnificently celebrated, he, perceiving the end of his Life to be near at
hand, composed himself almost into the Habit of a private Man, (for some years
before, all the Grand Affairs of State had been managed by Thomas Randolph, and
James Douglas) and lived in a small House at Cardross, (a place divided from
Dumbritton by the River Levin) and kept himself, but in case of great
Necessity, from the Concourse of People. Thither he called some of his Friends,
a little before his Death, and made his Will. B^^ce's last Will and Testament.
He confirmed those to be his Heirs, which were so declared by the Convention
of Estates. First, David his Son, being eight year old; next, Robert his Nephew
by his Daughter; he commended them to his Nobles, and especially to Thoma^
Randolph, his Sisters Son, and James Douglas. Afterward, he settled his
Household Affairs, and exhorted them all to Concord amongst themselves, and to
observance of Allegiance to their King; if they did so, he would assure them to
be unconquerable by a Foreign Power. Moreover, His Three Advices to his
Successors, with the Reasons upon which they were grounded (...).
he is reported to have added Three Commands, or, if you will, Counsels; First,
That they should never make any one Man, Lord of the Aebudae Islands; Next,
That they should never fight the English, with all their Force, at one time;
and Thirdly, That they should never make with them a Perpetual League. In
Explicating his First Advice, he discoursed much concerning the Number,
Bigness, and Power of the Islands, and concerning the Multitude, Fierceness,
and Hardiness of their Inhabitants; They, with Ships, Such as they were, yet
not inconvenient for those Coasts, coping with Men unskilled in Marine Affairs,
might do a great deal of Mischief to others, but receive little Damage,
themselves: And therefore, Governors were Yearly to be sent thither, to
administer Justice amongst them, by Officers, who should not be continued long
in their Places, neither. His Second Advice concerning the English, stood upon
this Foot, Because the English, as inhabiting a better Country, did exceed the
Scots in Number of Men, Money, and all other Warlike Preparations; and by
reason of these Conveniences, they were more accustomed to their Ease, and not
so patient of Labor or Hardship: On the other side, the Scots were bred in an
hardier Soil, and were, by reason of their Parsimony and continual Exercise, of
a more healthy Constitution of Body; and, by the very manner of their
Education, made more capable to endure all Military Toil; and therefore, That
they were fitter for sudden and occasional Assaults, so to weaken and weary
out their Enemy, by degrees, than to venture all at once in a pitched Battle.
His Third Advice was grounded upon this Reason, Because, if the Scots should
have a long Peace with the English, (having no other Enemy besides them to
exercise their Arms upon) they would grow Lazy, Luxurious, and so easily become
Slothful, Voluptuous, Effeminate, and Weak. As for the English, though they had
Peace with the Scots, yet France was near them, which kept their Arms in ure;
If then, those who are skilful in Warlike Affairs should cope with the Scots,
thus grown unskilful and sluggish, they might promise to themselves an assured
Victory. Robert Bruce's Vow to assist in the Holy War recommended to Douglas to
perform.
Moreover, he commended to James Douglas the Performance of the Vow, which he
had made, which was, to go over into Syria, and to undertake the Cause of
Christendom in the Holy War, against the Common Enemy thereof. And, because he
himself, by reason of his Homebred Seditions; or else, being broken with Age
and Diseases, could not perform the Vow himself, he earnestly desired, Bruce
would have his Heart buried at Jerusalem.
That Douglas would carry his Heart, after he was deceased, to Jerusalem, that
it might be buried there. Douglas looked upon This as an Honorable Employment,
and as an eminent Testimony of the Kings Favor toward him; and, therefore,
the next Year, after the Kings Death, with a good Brigade of Noble young Men,
he prepared for his Voyage. But, being upon the Coasts of Spain, he heard, That
the King of Arragon managed a fierce War against the same Enemy, with which he
was to fight in Syria; and, thinking with himself, that it mattered not in what
Place he assisted in the Cause of Christianity, he Landed his Men, and joined
himself with the Spaniard; Douglas in his Voyage to Jerusalem assists the
Spaniards against the Moors, and was there slain.
where, after many prosperous Fights, at last, despising the Enemy as a weak
and fugitive one, he thought to attempt something against him with his own Men,
and so rushing unadvisedly on the Army of the Sarazens, he was, by them, drawn
into an Ambush, wherein he and most part of his Men were slain. His chief
Friends that perished with him, were, William Sinclare, and Robert Logan. This
happened the next year after the Kings Death, which was 1330.

To be short, Robert Bruce, was, certainly, a most Illustrious Person, every
way, and he can hardly be parallelled for his Virtues and Valor, even in the
most Heroic Times; for, as he was very Valiant in War, so, he was most Just
and Temperate, in Peace; and, Bruce his high Encomi^ms.
though his unhoped for Successes, and (after that Fortune was once satiated,
or rather wearied, with his Miseries) a continual course of perpetuated Victory
did highly Ennoble him; yet, to me, he seemed to have been more Glorious in his
Adversities. For, What a strong Heart was That, which was not broken, no, nor
yet weakened, by so many Miseries as brake in upon him, all at once? Whose
Constancy would it not have tried, to have his Wife a Prisoner, and to have his
Four Valiant Brothers, cruelly put to Death? And his Friends, at the same time,
vexed with all kind of Calamities; and they, which escaped with their Lives,
were Exiled, and lost all their Estates: As for himself, he was outed not only
of a large Patrimony, but of a Kingdom too, by the powerfullest King of those
Times, and one, who was most ready, both for Advice and Action. Though he were
beset with all these Evils, at one time; yea, and brought into the extremest
Want; yet, he never doubted of recovering the Kingdom. Neither did he ever do,
or say, any thing, which was unbecoming a Royal Spirit. He did not do, as Cato
the Younger, and Marcus Brutus, who laid violent Hands on themselves; neither
did he, as Marius, incensed by his Sufferings, let loose the Reins of Hatred
and Passion, against his Enemies; but when he had recovered his Ancient State
and Kingdom, he so carried it toward them, who had put him to so much Hardship
and Trouble, That he seemed rather to Remember, that he was now their King,
than that he had been sometimes their Enemy. And even, a little before his
Death, though a great Disease made an addition to the Trouble of his Old Age;
yet, he was so much Himself, as to confirm the Present State of the Kingdom;
yea, and to consult the quiet of his Posterity. So that, when he died, all Men
bewailed him, as being deprived, not only of a Just King, but of a Loving
Father, too. He departed this Life, the July 9 th.
Seventh of the Ides of July, in the Year of Christ 1329. and of his Reign the
Twenty Fourth.

The Ninth BOOK.
THE Nobles of Scotland, having performed the Funeral Obsequies for the late
King, as soon as they could conveniently, did Indict a Convention of the
Estates, for the Electing of a Regent; where the Inclinations of the Public
easily pitched on Thomas Randolf, Earl of Murray; for, even in the Kings Life
Time, Randolf made Regent, or Guardian.
he had, for some Years, managed that Office, and the King at his Death had
also Recommended him to the People, by his last Will and Testament.

David II. The Ninety Eighth King.
THE Coronation of the King was deferred till the November 24.
Eighth of the Calends of December, the next Year following; that so, by the
Permission of the Pope, he might be Anointed, and that new Ceremony be
performed more Augustly, amongst the Scots. As Soon as the Regent was chosen, he
first of all ratified the Peace, made with the English; afterward, he applied
his Mind to settle quiet at home, and to suppress public Robberies. In order
whereto, he kept a strong Guard of Armed Men about him, which were ready on all
Occasions; so that when News was brought him, as he was going to Situate near
the Irish Sea.
Wigton, (which is a Town in Galway) that there was a strong Band of Thieves,
who beset the Highways, and robbed Travelers in that Country; he sent out his
Guard against them, even as he was in his Progress, who took them every Man;
whom he caused to be put to Death. He was Inexorable against all Murderers, so
that he caused a certain Man to be apprehended, who had obtained the Popes Bull
of Pardon for his Offense, He executes a Murderer, though he had the Popes
Pardon.
and thereupon thought himself secure, to be apprehended, alleging, That the
Pope might Pardon the Soul-Guilt, but the Body-Punishment belonged to the King.

To prevent Robberies, which were yet too frequently committed, by reason of
the remaining Contagion of the Wars, he made a Law, That the Country Men should
leave their Iron Tools, and Plough-Gear, in the Field, A notable Law, made by
the Regent, to prevent Theiving.
all Night, and that they should not shut their Houses, nor Stalls. If any
thing were stolen, the Loss was to be repaired by the Sheriff of the County;
and the Sheriff was to be reimbursed by the King; and the King was to be
satisfied out of the Estates of the Thieves, when they were taken. There was
one Country Man, either over-greedy of Gain; or else, judging that Caution to
be Vain and Frivolous, who hid his Plough Iron in the Field, and came to the
Sheriff to demand Satisfaction, as if it had been stolen; the Sheriff paid him
presently, but inquiring further into the Matter, The Collusive Cheat of a
Country Man, punished.
and finding, that he was the Author of the Theft, himself; he caused him to be
Hanged, and his ^oods to be Confiscate: He restrained the loose Pack of
Drolling Vagabonds and Minstrellers, from wandering up and down the Country,
under most grievous Penalties. If any one assaulted a Travellor, St^ict Laws
made by the Regent.
or any Public Officer in performing his Office, he made it Lawful for any
Body to Kill him. So that when Thirty Assailants had been slain by the
Companions of a certain Public Minister at a Village called In T^v^otda^^.
Halydon, he pronounced, That the Fact was just, and Indemnified the Committers
of it. This Domestic Severi^y made him Formidable to flagitious Persons, at
home; as his Valor did to his Enemies, abroad. And therefore the English, who,
upon Roberts death, watched all Occasions to revenge themselves, perceiving,
That they could attempt nothing by open Force, as long as Randolph was living,
turned their Thoughts to secret Fraud and Stratagem.

The speediest Way to be rid of their Enemy seemed to be, by Poisoning him;
Neither wanted there a fit Minister to attempt it; which was a certain Monk, of
that Class, which are idly brought up, and, for want of Masters to teach them
better, they do many times pervert Good Wits to Evil Arts and Practices: There
were Two Professions joined in him, viz. Monkship, A Monk Poisons Randolf with
a slow-working-dose.
and the Profession of Physic; the First seemed proper to gain him Admittance;
the Second rendered him fit to perpetrate the Wickedness. Hereupon, he comes
into Scotland, giving out in all Places, That, as he had Skill in all other
Parts of Physic, so especially in curing the Stone; by which means, he
obtained an easy Access to the Regent; and, being employed to cure him, he
mixed a Slow-working Poison with his Medicine; and then, taking a few Days
Provision with him, he returned again into England, as if he had gone only to
get and prepare more Drugs and Medicines. There he makes a Solemn Asseveration
before Edward, That Randolf would dye, by such a certain day. Edward marches
for Scotland.
In Hopes whereof, Edward levied a great Army, and marching to the Borders,
found there as great an Army of Scots, ready to receive him, not far from his
Camp; whereupon, he sent a Trumpeter to them, upon Pretense to demand
Reparation for Damages; but, he was enjoined to inquire, Who commanded the
Scots Forces? Randolph, his Disease growing on, and the Monk not returning at
the Day appointed, suspected all things for the worse, and therefore,
dissembling his Grief, as much as he could, he sat in a Chair before his Tent,
Royally apparelled, and gave Answer to the Demands of the Herald of Arms, as if
he had been a man perfectly Healthy and Sound. The Herald, at his Return
acquainted the King with what he had seen and heard; so that the Monk was
punished, as a Lying Cheat; and Edward marched back his Army, only leaving a
Guard on the Borders, to prevent Incursions. Randolph also was hindered from
marching forward, by the Violence of his Disease, but returning he disbanded
his Army, and at Musselborough, about Four Miles from Edinburgh, departed this
Life, in the year of our Salvation 1331. and the 13th of the Calends of Edward
punishes the Monk, because his Poison did not kill Randolf as soon as he said
it would.

Edward retreats.

July 20. Randolf's death and Character.


August, having managed the Regency Two years after Robert's death. He was a
Man no whit Inferior to any of our Scottish Kings in Valor and Skill in
Military Affairs, but far Superior to them in the Arts and Knacks of Peace. He
left Two Sons behind him, Thomas and John, Both worthy of so great a Father.

When Randolf, Guardian of the Kingdom (for so they then called him) was dead,
Duncan Earl of Mar was chosen in his Place, the 4th of the Nones of Duncan
Earl of Mar, made Guardian in Randolfs Place. August. 2. July 31.
August. The King being then Ten year old, on which very Day a sad Message was
brought to Court, That the day before the Calends of that Month, Edward Baliol
was seen in the Firth of Forth, with a Navy very Numerous. To make all things
more plain concerning his coming, Edward Baliol appears on the Scots Coast.
I must go a little back. When King Robert died, there was one The Story of
Twine, or Tuenam Lores^n.
Laurence Twine, an English man, of the Number of Those, who, having received
Lands in Scotland, as a Reward of their Military Service, dwelt there. He was
of a Good Family, but of a Wicked Life: He, conceiving Hope of greater Liberty,
upon the Death of One King, and the Immature Age of Another, gave himself up,
more licentiously, to unlawful Pleasures; so that, being often found in
Adultery, and admonished by the Judge of the Ecclesiastical Court; yet, not
desisting, he was at last Excommunicated by the Official (as they call him) of
the Bishop of Glasgow. Whereupon, he, as if he had received a great deal of
Wrong, waylaid the Judge, as he was going to Air, and kept him so long a
Prisoner, until, upon the Payment of a Sum of Money, he had absolved him.
Twine, being informed, That James Douglas was extremely angry with him for this
Fact, and that he sought for him to have him punished; for Fear of his Power,
he fled into France, and there he addressed himself to Edward Baliol, Son to
John, (who had been King of Scotland, some few years) informing him of the
State of Affairs in Scotland; and withal, advising him, by no means, to omit so
fair an Opportunity of recovering his Fathers Kingdom. For, He stirs up Edward
Baliol then in France to invade Scotland.
(said he) Their King was now but a Child, and he had many Enemies about him,
and readier to be Avengers of the hatred toward his Father, than his Friends;
The Fathers of some were slain in a public Convention at Perth, others were
banished, and lost their Estates; others were mulct with the Loss of a great
part of of their Lands; and besides, many of the English race, who were
deprived of the Lands given them by his Father, would be his Companions in the
Expedition; yea, that there were Men enough, needy and criminal, who, either
for hope of gain, or to avoid the punishment of the Law, being desirous of
Change and Innovation, wanted nothing but a Leader to begin a Disturbance. And
moreover, James Douglas being killed in Spain, and Randolf by reason of his
Sickness, being unfit for the Government, there was not a Man besides, to whose
Authority the giddy and disagreeing Multitude would as soon submit, as to His.

Baliol knew, That what he had spoken was, for the most part, true, and hearing
also, that Edward of England was sending great Forces into Scotland; Thereupon
the crafty Impostor easily persuaded Him, who of himself was desirous of Empire
and Glory, to get what Ships he could together, and so to bear a Part in that
Expedition. But, before the coming of Baliol into England, Edward had disbanded
his Army. Nevertheless, ^he exiled Scots, and those English, who had been
dispossessed of their Lands in Scotland flocked in to him, and so he made up no
inconsiderable Army. Some say, That he had but 600 men accompanying him in so
great an Attempt, Edward Baliol Lands in Scotland.
which seems not very probable. I rather think, Their Speech is more agreeable
to Truth, who write, That the English assisted him with 6000 Foot. And they
were all more encouraged in their designed Expedition, when they heard, That
Randolf was dead, whilst they were making their Preparations; for that mightily
erected their Minds, as a good Omen of their Future Success. With this Navy, he
came to A Burgh on the North side of Firth ^n Fife, over against L^^th in
^oth^an. August (...).
Kinghorn and there Landed his Naval Forces in the Calends of August. The Land
Forces were led by David Cumins, heretofore, Earl of Athol, as also by Mowbray
and Beaumont; and the Forces of the English, by Talbot. At the News of the
arrival of this Fleet, Alexander Seaton, a Nobleman, who happened to be in
those Parts at that time, strove to oppose them, thinking, that, He overthrows
Alexander Seaton.
upon their disorderly Landing, some Opportunity of Service might be Offered;
but, in regard few of the Country came in to him, he and most of his men were
cut off. Baliol allowed some Few Days to his Soldiers to refresh themselves
after their troublesome Voyage; and then marched directly toward Perth, and
pitched his Tents by the Water-Mills, not far from the Water of Earn. The
Regent was beyond, and Patrick Dunbar on this side, the River, each of them
with Great Forces, their Camps being five miles distant one from another.
Baliol, tho, upon the Coming in of Many to him on the bruit of his good
Success, he made up an Army of above Ten thousand men; yet, being between Two
Armies of his Enemies, and fearing to be crushed in the midst, he thought it
best to attack them severally, and that on a sudden, when they least expected
any such thing; and he resolved to set upon Mar, the Regent, first; because,
it was likely, That he, being most remote from his Enemy, would be less
watchful, and so more liable to a surprise. He got Andrew Murray of Tullibardin
to be hi^ Guide, who, In Strathern^
not daring to join himself openly with the English, in the Night, fastened and
stuck up a Pole, or Stake, in the River where it was Fordable, to show Baliol's
men the Way over: They, being covered with the Woods, which grew on the other
Side the River, came near the Enemy before they were aware; where they
understood, That they kept but a thin Watch, and slender Guard, and passed the
Night as in no Expectation of an Enemy at all; upon the Account of this their
Negligence, they marched by their Camp, in great Silence, thinking to make an
Assault on the adverse part thereof, where, they supposed, they should find
them more secure. But it happened, That, And afterward beats the Regent
Himself, making great slaughter of his men, and himself being also slain.
in that Part where they presumed the greatest negligence was, That Thomas
Randolf, Earl of Murray; Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick; Murdo, Earl of
Monteath; and Alexander Frazer kept the Guard, and Watch. They, gathering a
lusty Band of their Friends together, received the First Charge and Onset of
the Enemy very Valiantly, upon the Edge of a Ditch, which the falling down of
the Rainwater had made. In the mean time, a great Noise and Tumult was made in
the Camp, each one hastening to his Arms, and running in to the Conflict, but
rushing in rashly in no Order, and without their Colors, first they broke the
Ranks of their own men, who bore the Brunt of the Baliolans, and so the Last
pushed on the First, who falling into the Ditch, they also, in a ruinous
manner, foll down upon them; There many were slain by the Enemy, but more, both
of Horse and Men, pressed to death by their ^all; and the most part were so
weakened, that they had hardly strength enough left, either to Fight or Fly.
There fell of the Scots 3000; many of those, that escaped, fled to Perth, but
they being few, and generally without Arms, or Guides, were easily taken by the
pursuing English, together with the City itself.

The next Day, Dumbar, hearing of the overthrow of the other Army, and that
Perth was taken, and being informed also, of the Paucity of the English,
marched directly toward the Town, with an intent to Besiege it, and destroy
the Enemy whilst they were yet in want of all things; but the Matter being
debated amongst his Chief Commanders, each one excused himself, and so they
departed, without effecting any thing. Baliol, having performed so great
Matters in so short a time, even beyond his Hope, was encouraged to attempt the
rest of the Scots, either to win them by Favor, or to conquer them by Force.
And there being such a mighty concourse of People made to him, Edward Baliol
Declared King.
he now thought it seasonable to Declare Himself, King. That Advice was safer
to him, because the greatest part of the Slaughter had fallen upon the
Families, adjoining to Perth. For there were slain in the Battle, besides the
Regent, Robert Keith, with a great number of his Kindred and Tenants. There
fell Eighty of the Family of the Lindseys, and amongst them, Alexander the
chief of the Sept. The Name of the Hays would have been quite extinguished in
this Fight, if William, the Chief of the Family, had not left his Wife big with
Child, behind him. Moreover, Thomas Randolfe, Robert Bruce, Murdo, Earl of
Monteath, William Sinclare, Bishop of the Caledonians, and Duncan Macduff, Earl
of Fife, made Prisoners by him, and being thus in such a desperate Posture,
were enforced to take an Oath of Obedience to him.

Baliol, The Eighty Ninth King.
HEreupon Baliol, trusting to his present Fortune, went to the Neighboring
Abbey of Scone, and there entered upon the Kingdom, Aug. 25.
in the Year of our Lord, 1332. the Eighth of the Calends of September. By this
Wound and Loss, the Power of David Bruce was much weakened in Scotland; yet his
Friends, not broken in their Spirits, K. David Bruce, in his Minority, to
secure him, sent to France.
by this Calamity, took care to secure him from the danger of War; he not being
yet fit to manage the Government; and therefore they sent him and his Wife to
his Fathers Friend, Philip, King of France, to be there out of Harms way; In
the mean time, they prepare themselves for all hazards, being resolved to Dye
Honorably, or else to restore their Country to its former State. And First of
all, they set up Andrew Murray, an Eminent Person, Son of the Sister of Robert
Bruce, Murray made Regent by K. David's Party.
as Regent, in the place of Duncan, then they sent Messengers into all parts of
the Kingdom, partly to confirm and fix their old Friends, and partly to spur up
the more Remiss to Thoughts of Revenging their wrongs. A Castle standing on the
North Bank of the River Ear in Strathern.
The first, who took Arms, as being excited by their Grief for the loss of
their Parents and Kindred at Duplin, were Robert Keith, James and Simon Frazer,
who, about the Autumnal Aequinox, besieged Perth; the Siege lasted longer than
they expected, yet in Three Months they took it. Macduff, Earl of Fife, who
held the Town for Baliol, was sent Prisoner with his Wife and Children to
Kildrum, a Castle in Mar; Andrew Murray, of Tullibardin, Built on the side of
the River Don.
who discovered the Ford over the River Earn to the English, was put to death.
The Black Bock of Pasley says, That the Walls of the Town were demolished,
Perth Walls demolished.
which seems more probable to me, than that it should be made a Garrison, as
others write, especially, in so great a want of Faithful Friends, and Soldiers.

At the same time, Baliol was at Annandale, very busy in receiving the Homage
of the Nobles, who were so much surprised and astonished at the sudden
Mutation of Things, That even Alexander Bruce, Lord of Carrick and Galway,
despairing of the Retrieve of his Kinsman David's Affairs, came in to him.
After this prosperous Success, he despised his Enemy, and grew more negligent
and regardless of him. When the Regent heard thereof by his Spies, A County in
the South of Scotland, not far from Northumberland. A Town in the head of
Annandale, near the source of the River Annan.
he sent Archibald Douglas, Brother to James, who was lost in Spain, That, if
there were any Opportunity for Action, he should lay hold upon it. He took with
him William Douglas, Earl of Liddisdale; John Randolfe, the Son of Thomas, and
Simon Frazer, with a Thousand Horse; and so came to Maufet; where having sent
out Scouts, to see that the Coast was clear, he marched in the Night, and set
upon Baliol, as he was asleep, and put his Army into so great a Fright and
Consternation, that Baliol himself, half Naked, was fain to get upon an Horse,
neither Bridled nor Sadled, and so fled away; Baliol like to be surprised by
Archibald Douglas.
many of his Intimate Friends were slain. Alexander Bruce was taken Prisoner,
and obtained his Pardon, by the means of his Kinsman, John Randolfe. Henry
Baliol got great Credit that day, by his Valor, amongst both Parties, who, in
so confused a Flight, defended some of his Men, whom their persuers pressed
upon, he wounded many, and killed some of his Enemies, and at last was slain,
Fighting valiantly. There fell also the Chief of the English Faction, John
Mowbray, Walter Cumins, and Richard Kirk. These Things were acted the Eighth
of the Calends of January, in the Year 1332. Dec. 25.


The Brucian Party were somewhat relieved by these Successes, The Brucian^
prevail against the Baliolans, and Declare War against England.
so that they came in great Numbers to Andrew Murray, the Regent, to consult
about the main Chance. They made no doubt, but that Baliol fought the Kingdom,
not for himself, but for the English; by whom he was guided and influenced in
every thing. Wherefore they resolved to Declare the King of England their
Enemy; and accordingly, they prepared all things necessary for the War, with
great Diligence, as against a very powerful Enemy. They made the Garrison of
Berwick very strong, for, they thought, the English would Assault That, first.
They made Alexander Seton a worthy Knight, Governor of the Town, and Patrick
Dunbar, of the Castle, and the adjoining Precincts. William Douglas, Earl of
Liddisdale, The Brucian Nobles divide the Provinces they were to Govern.

And Declare War against Fran^^.


whose Valor and Prudence was highly commended in those Times, was sent into
Annandale, to defend the Western Coasts: Andrew Murray went to Roxburgh, where
Baliol kept himself. Thus their several Governments being distributed at home,
John Randolfe was sent into France to visit David, and to make an Address to
Philip of France, informing him of the State of Scotland, and desiring some Aid
from him, against the Common Enemy. Murray, at his coming to Roxburgh, had a
sharp encounter with Baliol, at a Bridge without the City; and whilst he
pressed too eagerly after the English, who were retreating over the Bridge into
the Town, he was intercepted from his Men, and taken Prisoner; whereby a
Victory, almost quite obtained, slipped out of his hands.

At the same time, in a contrary Province, William Douglas of Liddisdale, in a
Fight with the English, was wounded and made Prisoner, whose Disaster so
troubled his Men, that they also were put to flight. This Inconstancy and
Variableness of Fortune divided Scotland again into Two Factions, even as Love,
Hatred, Hope, Fear, or each Man's private Concern, inclined him. The King of
England, presuming, That, by reason of these Dissensions, he had a fit
opportunity to seize upon Scotland, The King of England espouses Baliol's
Cause, and invaded Scotland.
received Baliol into his Protection, (for he was too weak to support himself
by his own Strength) and took an Oath of Obedience from him; yea, nothing
regarding his Right of Affinity with Bruce, nor reverencing the Sanctity of
Leagues, nor the Religion of an Oath, so that he might satisfy his immoderate
Ambition; he, at once, denounced, and also made, War on the Scots, at that
time, destitute of a King, and also at variance amongst themselves. His
Pretensions for the War.
And to give a colorable Pretense of Justice to his War, he sent Ambassadors
to demand Berwick, which Town his Father and Grandfather had held many Years,
and he presently followed with an Army. The Scots answered the Ambassadors, He
claims Berwick.
That Berwick always belonged to Scotland, till his Grandfather, Edward, had
injuriously seized upon it. At length, when Robert Bruce, their last King, had
recovered the rest of Scotland, he took away that Town from Edward, The Scots
Answer to the (...).
(Father of him, who now requires the Reddition of it) and reduced it unto its
Ancient Rightful Possessor, and Form of Government; yea, not long ago, Edward
himself, by the Advice of his Parliament, had renounced all Right, which He or
his Ancestors might pretend to have over all Scotland in general, or any of the
Towns and Places therein, in particular. From that time, they were not
Conscious to themselves, That they had acted any thing against the League so
solemnly Sworn to, and confirmed by Alliance of a Marriage; Why then, within
the compass of a few Years, were they assaulted by secret Fraud, and by open
War? These things being so, they desired the Ambassadors to incline the Mind of
their King to Equity, and that he would not watch his Opportunity to Injure and
Prejudice a young King in his absence, who was both Innocent, and also his own
Sisters Husband; As for Themselves, they would refuse no Conditions of Peace,
provided, they were Honorable; but, if he threatened them with an unjust
Force, then, according to the Tutelage of the King, committed to them, they
resolved rather to dye a Noble Death, than to consent to a Peace, prejudicial
to Themselves, or the Kingdom. This was the Answer of the Council of Scotland.

But the King of England sought not Peace, but Victory; and, therefore, having
increased his great Army with Foreign Aid also, he besieged Berwick by Sea and
Land, neither did he omit any thing, which might Contribute to the Taking of
it; for, having a Multitude of Men, he gave his Enemy no rest, Night nor Day:
Neither were the Besiegers behind hand with them, The English besieges Berwick
but Valorously Sallied out upon them, every day. They threw Fire into their
Ships, which Anchored in the River, and burnt many of them. In which Skirmish,
William Seaton, the Governors Bastard-Son, was lost, much lamented by all, for
his singular Valor. For, whilst he endeavored to leap into an English Ship,
his own being driven too far off by the Waves, he fell into the Sea, neither,
in that Exigent, could any Relief come to him. And besides, another Son of
Alexanders begot on his Lawful Wife, who, out of eagerness to fight proceeded
too far in a Sally, was taken by the English. But the Siege, which was begun in
the Ides of April, had now lasted Three Months; Ap^i^ 13.
and the Defendants, besides their Toil and Watchings, were also in great want
of Provisions; A Capitulation with the English about the surrender of B^rwick.
July the 30.
so that they seemed hardly able to hold out the Town any longer, but made an
Agreement with the English, That, unless they were relieved by the Third of the
Calends of August, they would surrender up the Place; And for this, Thomas,
Alexanders Eldest Son, was given in Hostage.

Whilst these things were acting at Berwick, the Scots Indicted an Assembly, to
consult about their Affairs; and, in regard the Regent was Prisoner at
Roxburgh, that they might not be without a General, Archibald Do^^las made
Regent by (...) Party.
they chose Archibald Douglas, Captain General; they also Voted, That he should
have an Army to march into England, that so, by Foraging the Neighboring
Countries, he might draw off the King of England from the Siege. Douglas,
according to this Order and Decree, He makes inroads into England. And com^^
near the E^^lish Army (...) Berwi^^*
marched toward England; but hearing of the Agreement, which Alexander had
made, he changed his Mind; and, tho against the Advice of his most prudent
Commanders, he marched directly toward the English, and on the Eve of Mary
Magdalen, came in Sight of them; and was beheld both by Friends and Enemies.
The King of England, though the Day was not come, wherein it was agreed, That the
Town should be surrendered, yet, when he saw the Scots Forces so near, he sent
an Herald into the Town, to acquaint the Governor, That unless he presently
Surrendered up his Garrison, he would put his Son Thomas to Death; The Governor
alleging, Alexander Seatons Sons threatened to be put to Death, unless he
surrendered Berwick
That the Day appointed for the Surrender was not yet come, and that he had
given his Faith to stay, till the time allowed by their Paction was expired,
but all was in Vain. Hereupon Love, Piety, Fear, and Duty toward his Country
did variously exercise his Paternal and Afflicted Mind; and the English, to
drive the Terror more home, had set up a Gallows in a Place, easily visible to
the Besieged, whither he caused the Governors Two Sons, One the Hostage, the
Other a Prisoner of War, to be brought forth to Execution. At this miserable
Spectacle, his Fatherly mind was at a great stand; and in this Fluctuation of
his Thoughts, his Wife, the Mother of the Young Men, a Woman of a Manly
Courage, came to him, and put him in mind of his Faithfulness toward his King,
his Love toward his Country, and the Dignity of his Noble Family, upon all
which grounds, she endeavored to settle his wavering Mind. His Wife incourages
him, to part with his Children, rather than the Town.
If these Children be put to Death, (said she) you have others remaining alive;
and besides, we are neither of us past Age, You to beget, and I to bear, more.
If they escape Death, yet it will not be long, but that by some sudden
Casualty, or else by maturity of Age, they must yield to Fate; but if any Blot
of Infamy should stick upon the Family of the Seatons, it would remain to all
Posterity; and be a foul Blur even to their Innocent Offspring; She further
told him, That she had often heard those Men much commended, in the Discourses
of the Wise, who had given up Themselves and their Children, as a Sacrifice for
the safety of their Country; but, if he should give up the Town committed to
his Trust, he would betray his Country, and, yet be never the more certain of
his Childrens Lives, neither; For, how could he hope, That a Tyrant, who
violated his Faith Now, would stand to his Word, for the Future? And therefore,
she entreated him not to prefer an Uncertainty, and (if it should be obtained)
a Momentany, Convenience, before a certain and perpetual Ignominy. By this
Discourse, she somewhat settled his Mind, and that he might not Behold so
dismal a Spectacle, Alexanders Children put to Death by a S^mmum, jus as some
think.
she carried him to another Place, from whence it could not be seen. The
English King, after this Punishment inflicted, which was not very acceptable
neither to some of his own men, removed his Camp to Halidon-Hill, near Berwick,
and there waits his Enemies coming.

Douglas, who before would not hearken to the Advice of his Grave Counselors,
as to the Foraging of the English Counties, and, so averting the Siege, now was
inflamed with raging Wrath; and withal presuming, That, if after the
Perpetration of so horrible a Wickedness, almost before his Eyes, he should
draw off without Fighting, it might be said, That he was afraid of his Enemy,
was resolved to fight at any rate, and so marched directly toward the Enemy;
and, because the English kept their Ground, and would not come down into the
Champion, he placed all the Scots Army on a contrary Part of the Hill. This his
rash Counsel and Project had the like Event, for, as with great Difficulty they
were getting up the Hill, the Enemy with their Darts, and the hurling down of
Stones, did wound them very sore, before they came to handy Blows; and when
they came near, they rushed upon them in such close Bodies, that they tumbled
them headlong over the steep Precipices. There fell that day about Ten, The
Scots overthrown near Berwick.
some say, Fourteen, Thousand of the Scots; almost all such, who escaped out of
the unhappy Battle of Duplin, were lost here. The chief of them, whose Names
are recorded, were, Archibald himself, the General, James, John* and Alan,
Stuarts, Uncles to Robert, who Reigned next after the Brucians. Hugh, Kenneth,
and Alexander Bruce, the several and respective Earls of Ross, Sutherland, and
Carr^ck; B^^wick Surrendered to the English.
Andrew, John, and Simon, three Brothers of the Frazers. This Overthrow of the
Scots happened on St. Mary Magdalens Day, in the Year 1333.

After this Fight, all Relief was despaired of; so that Alexander Seaton
surrendered up the Town to the English, and Patrick Dunbar the Castle* upon
Condition, to march out with all their Goods; Both of them were forced to Swear
Fealty to the English; and Patrick Dunbar was further enjoined to Re-edifie the
Castle of Dunbar, at his own Charge, which he had demolished, that it might not
be a Receptacle to the English. Edward, having staid there a few days,
Commended the Town and the Relics of the War, to Baliol; and he himself,
retired into his own Kingdom, leaving Edward Talbot in Scotland, a Noble
Person, and very Prudent, with a few English Forces, to assist Baliol in
subduing the rest of Scotland: And indeed, it seemed no great Task so to do, in
regard, that almost all the Nobility were Extinct; and of those few that
remained, some came in to the Conqueror, others retired either into Desert, or
else, Fortified, Places. The Garrisons, which remained Faithful to David, were
very few; as, on this side the Forth, an Island in a Lough, whence the River
Down flows, scarce big enough to bear a moderate Castle; and Dumbritton beyond
the Forth, a Castle situate in Lough Levin; and also Kildrummy and Vrchart.

The next Year, Ambassadors came from the Pope, and from Philip, King of
France, to end the disputes between the Kings of Britain. The English were so
puffed up with the prosperous course of their Affairs, Edward pufft up with hi^
Success, refuses to hear foreign Ambassadors, who were sent to mediate ^ Peace.
that the King would not so much as admit the Ambassadors into his Presence;
for, he thought, That, the Hearts of the Scots were so cowed, and their
strength so broken, That for the future, they durst not, neither were they able
again, to Rebel. But this great Tranquillity was soon changed into a most
grievous War, and that, upon a very light Occasion, where it was least
expected, viz. Upon a Discord arising amongst the English themselves, at Perth.
James Mowbray had Lands given to his Ancestors in Scotland, Dissensions between
the English in Scotland, occasion a War.
by Edward the First; but they being lost by the various Changes of the Times,
he recovered them again, when Edward Baliol was King. He dying without Issue
Male, Alexander, their Uncle, Commenced a Suit against his Daughters, for those
Lands: Those of the English Faction, that maintained the Cause of the Females,
were, Henry Beaumont, who had Married one of them; also, Richard Talbot, and
David Cumins, Earl of Athol. Baliol took Alexanders part, and decided, or
adjudged, the Lands to him, which so offended his Adversaries, that they openly
complained of the Injustice of the Decree; and seeing, that Complaints availed
nothing, they left the Court, and went every one to his own home. Talbot was
going for England; but, being apprehended, was carried to Dunbarton. Beaumont
Garisoned Now demolished.
Dundury, a strong Castle of Buchan, and took Possession not only of the Lands
which were in Controversy, but also of all the Neighboring Country. Cumins
went into Athol, where he fortified some convenient Places, and prepared to
defend himself by force, if he were attacked. Baliol, being afraid of this
Conspiracy of such Potent Persons, altered his Decree, The Nobles Bandy against
Baliol.
and gave the Lands in Question to Beaumont; he also reconciled Cumins, by
giving him many Fertile Lands, which belonged to Robert Stuart, the next King.
Alexander, being concerned at this injurious Affront, joins himself with Andrew
Murray, Regent of the Scots, who had lately Ransomed himself from the English
for a great Sum of Money. These things were acted at several times, yet I have
put them together, that the whole course of my History might not be interrupted.

In the mean time, Baliol, in another part of the Country, attacked all the
Forts about Renfrew; And Baliol against them.
some he took, others he battered down and demolished. Having settled Matters
there, according to his own Mind, he Sailed over into the Island Bote, and
there fortified the Castle of Rothsay, of which he made Alan Lisle Governor,
whom he had before made Chief Justice, for Matters of Law. He diligently sought
after Robert Stuart, his Nephew, or Grandchild, to put him to Death; but he, by
the help of William Heriot, and John Gilbert, was wafted over in a small
Vessel, into the Continent, on the other side, where Horses stood ready for
him, which carried him to Dunbarton, to Malcolm Fleming, Governor of that
Castle. Baliol having settled things at Bote, at his return, took Dun^oon, a
Castle seated in Coval, the Neighboring Continent; whereupon, the Nobility of
the Vicinage were struck with so great Fear, that they almost all submitted to
him. Marching from thence, the next Spring, he bent all his care to besiege the
Castle of Lough Levin; but this project seeming too slow, John Sterlin besieges
the Castle at Loch-Leven.
he left John Sterlin, a powerful Knight of his Party, to besiege the Castle,
to whom he joined Michael Arnold, David Weemes, and Richard Melvin, with part
of his Army. They built a Fort over against it, where the passage was
narrowest, and having in vain tried all ways to subdue it by force, Alan A
Veteri po^^e.
Wepont, and James Lambin, Inhabitants of St. Andrews, making such a vigorous
Resistance, at length, they endeavored to drown it, by stopping up the passage
of the River; for the River Levin goes out from the Lake, or Loch, with a
narrow Girt or Neck, and an open Rock. This Place they essayed to stop up, by
making a Wall, or Bank of Stones, and Turfs, heaped upon one another; but the
Work proceeded on very slowly, because, as the Heat did incommode the
Laborers, so the Brooks, which flowed into the Lake, were then almost dry; and
the Water being far spread abroad, received an increase by moderate Additions.
By this means, the Siege was lengthned out to the Month of July, when there was
an Holy Day kept in Remembrance of St. Margaret, heretofore Queen of Scotland,
on which day there used to be a great Concourse of Merchants at Dumferlin,
where the Body of that Saint is reported to be buried. Thither went John
Sterlin, with a great part of his Men; some for Merchandising, some for
Religion, leaving his Camp, and the Wall but slenderly Guarded, for they
thought themselves secure from the Enemy; in regard, they knew, that none of
the opposite Faction were in all the Neighboring parts, except those few,
which were shut up in the Castle; But the Governor beats him off, and raises
the Siege.
but the Besieged being made acquainted with the absence of Sterlin, and the
weakness of his Camp, as soon as the Evening came, shipped that Furniture, which
they had before prepared, to pierce through the Wall; and, whilst the Watch was
a Sleep, made many Holes in it, in several Places.

The Water having gotten some small Passages, widened the Orifices of them by
degrees, and at last brake forth with such a Violence, that it tumbled down All
that was before it; it overflowed all the Plains, and carried away with it,
Tents, Huts, Men half a Sleep, and Horses, with a mighty rushing Noise, into
the Sea. And they which were in the Ships, running in with a great shout upon
the affrightned Soldiers, added a second terror to the first; Edward enters
Scotland again, but retreat^, and (...) with him to (...) General, in Scotland.
so that upon such a double surprise, every Man minded nothing, but how to save
himself: Thus shifting away, they fled, as every Man could, and left the Prey
to their Enemy. Alan, at his leisure, carried into the Castle, not only the
spoils of their Camp, but Provisions also, prepared for a long Siege. Moreover,
in another Sally, made against the Guards, which were at Kinross, there was as
happy Success; the Guards were routed and taken, and the Siege raised.

About the same time, that these things were acting in Fife, the English entered
Scotland with great Forces both by Sea and Land. When the Ships came into the
Forth, their Admiral struck upon the Rocks, and the rest were grievously
turmoiled, so that they returned home with greater Loss, than Booty. But the
Landforces pierced as far as Glasgoe, where Edward called a Council of his own
Faction, and finding, That there was neither General nor Army on foot of the
contrary Party, he thought his presence was no longer necessary, so that he
returned into England, taking Baliol with him, whom he somewhat distrusted, and
leaving David Cumins, Earl of Athole, to Command in Scotland; He first of all
seizes upon the large Estates of all the Stuarts, which contained Bote, Arran,
the Lands of Renfrow, and a great part of Kyle and Cuningham; He confirms Alan
Lisle, Chief Justice of Bote, which some call Sheriff; others, Seneschal; and
also commanded the Neighboring Countries to obey him. Then he himself marched
into another part of the Country, where he reduced the Provinces of Buchan and
Murray; and though he were now grown almost beyond the rate of a Private Man,
yet he sent forth all his Proclamations and public Edicts in the Name of both
Kings, Edward and Baliol.

At that time, there was not a Man in Scotland, that durst profess, That Bruce
was King, only waggish Boys would sometimes do it, as it were, in sport and
pastime; yet Robert Stuart, who then lay hid in Dunbarton, judging that
something might be attempted in the absence of Cumins, made the Cambels, a
Powerful Family in Argyle, Robert Stuart, and Calen Cambel, rise in Arms for
Bruce, and make Prosperous Beginnings.
acquainted with his Proposal. Calen, the Chief of them, met him at Dunnoon, a
Castle in Coval, with about 400 Men, and presently surprises it; At the Noise
whereof, the Islanders of Bote, who were divided but by a narrow Sea, generally
rise, and hasten to their old Masters. Alan gathered what united Force he could
to stop their march; whereupon, the poor People, being for the most part
unarmed, and who had assembled rather in a fit of Passion, than by any solid
Advice, being struck with a Panick Fear, ran to the next Hill, where they found
a great Company of Stones, which they threw down, like Showers of Hailstones
upon their Enemies, who, in contempt of their paucity, rashly adventured to
assault them; the greatest Part of them were thus rudely treated before they
came to Blows, but as they retreated, they so pressed upon them, that the
Valiantest of their Enemies with Alan Lisl^ himself, were slain, and John
Gilbert, Governor of the Castle of Bote, taken Prisoner; so that they armed
many of their own Men with the Spoils of the slain. This, not unbloody,
Victory, was followed with the Surrender of the Castle of Bote. When the Rumor
of these Things was spread abroad, Thomas Bruce, Earl of Carrick, with his
Neighbors and Allies out of Kyle and Cuningham; as also William Carruder, of
Annandale, who always had withstood the Government of the English, with his
Friends and Kinsmen, crept out of his Hole, and came in to Stuart. And besides,
John Randal, Earl of Murray, being returned out of France, gave some hopes of
Foreign Assistance; whereupon, being encouraged, in their Minds, to higher
Attempts, they made up an Army, by the Assistance of Godfrey Ross, Sheriff of
Air, and in a short time, drew all Carick, Kyle, and Cuningham to their Party.
Also the Renfroans came to their old Masters, the Stuarts, uninvited. The
Vassals of Andrew Murray, following their Example, drew in the rest of
Clydsdale, part willingly, and part against their Wills, into their Cause.
Their Confidence being increased by these happy Beginnings; that there might be
some Representation of a Public State among them, they called together the
Chief of their Party, and made Two Regents, Robert Stuart and John Randolf made
Regents in behalf of David Bruce.
viz. Robert Stuart, though a Young Man, yet One, who, in these lesser
Expeditions, had given a great Pledge of his Good Will toward his Country; and
John Randolfe, a Person worthy of his Father and Brother, Both Eminent
Patriots. Randolfe being sent with a strong Party into the Northern Countries,
there flocked in to him all those, who were weary of the Heavy Yoke of the
English; So that, David Cumins, being amazed at this Inclination and Change of
Men's Minds, fled into Loch Abyr, whither he followed him, and driving up into a
Nook, and being also in great want of Provisions, he forced him to yield; but
upon his Swearing Fealty to Bruce, he dismissed him, and withal gave so much
Credit to his Promises, that, at his Departure, he made him his Deputy; and
indeed afterward, he was not backward in Bruce his Cause. In the mean time,
Randolfe returning into Lothian joined his old Friend, William Douglas, who
being released, and newly come out of England, did revenge the Noisomness of
his long Imprisonment with a great slaughter of his Enemies. In Teviotdale.
Andrew Murray returned also, who was taken Prisoner at Roxburgh; so that,
there being Commanders enough, the Regent Indicted an Assembly at Perth, to be
held in the Calends of April, April 1.
where, when Abundance of the Nobility met together, they were not able to
effect any thing, by reason of the Great Feud betwixt William Douglas and David
Cumins. A Fewd between Douglas and Cumins.
The Cause whereof was pretended to be, That Cumins was the Occasion, why
Douglas was not sooner released by the English. Stuart favored Cumins; but,
almost all the rest, Douglas; Moreover, Cumins alleged, That he came with a
more than ordinary Train unto the Assembly, by reason of that Feud, for he had
brought so Many of his Friends, and Tenants, along with him, that he became
formidable to all the rest; and besides his Disposition, which was various and
mutable, his vast Mind, and the Noise of the coming of the English, with whom
every one knew, that Athol would join, increased their Suspicions of him.
Edward invades Scotland.
And, indeed, not long after, Edward invaded Scotland, with great Forces, both
by Sea and Land, bringing Baliol along with him, his Navy, consisting of 160
Sail, entered the Forth; He himself marched by Land as far as Perth, spoiling
the Country as he went along, and there waited for Cumins. In the mean time,
Randolfe went to John, who challenged the Aebudae, as his Own; and not being
able to draw him to his Party, he was content, in so troublesome a posture of
Affairs, to make a Truce with him for some months; and thereafter, returning to
Robert, the other Regent, he found him dangerously sick. So that, it was as bad
a time as could be for all the Burden to be cast upon his Own Shoulders, and
therefore he durst not Fight the English in a set Battle, but divided his
Force, that so he might attack them by Parties. And hearing that a strong Army
of Gueldrians were coming through England, to join the English, (...) of the
(...) Provinces.
in Scotland; he waited for their coming on the Borders; Where also, Patrick,
Earl of Merch, and William Douglas of Liddisdale, met him, together with
Alexander Ramsay, one of the most experienced Soldiers of that Age; All these
waited for the said Gueldrians in the Fields, near Edinburgh. As Soon as ever
they came in sight one of another, they fell to it, immediately; and, after a
sharp Conflict, the Gueldrians were overcome, and fled to the next Hill, where,
there was an old ruinous Castle: The next day, having no Provision, they
surrendered themselves, only upon Quarter for Life. Randolfe, out of respect to
Philip Valois, who was their singular good Friend, (as was then said,) did not
only freely release them, The Gueldrians, Auxiliaries to the English,
overthrown by Randolfe. Randolf taken Prisoner.
but accommodated them with Provisions for their March; yea, he himself
undertook to be their Convoy; in his march, he was taken by an Ambush of the
English Party, and so brought to the King, who was then besieging Perth with a
powerful Army.

At the same time, David Cumins, who steered all his Counsels according to the
Inclinations of Fortune, being glad of the Distress of his Enemy, comes to the
King of England, and promises him, Cumin's large Promises to Edward. Perth
taken by Edward
in a very short time, to drive all the Brucians out of the Kingdom; and the
Truth is, he was as active in performing his Promise. For Perth being
surrendered, and the Walls thereof demolished, the King prepared to return to
England, because Provision for his Army came but slowly in; in regard, That all
the Scots, upon notice of his coming, were advised to drive their Cattle into
the Mountains: As for their other Provisions, they should either convey them to
some Fortified Places far remote; or, if they could not do so, they should
spoil them, altogether. Neither did his Fleet, on which he most relied for
Bread for his Army, much relieve him. For, as soon as it arrived at the Forth,
Edward (...) to England.
and had destroyed a Monastery of Monks in the Isle Inch-colm, as it rode at
Anchor in the open Sea, it was grievously turmoiled, and suffered great Losses
by a Tempestuous Storm, so that part of the Ships could hardly get to
Inch-Keith, a desolate Island, near adjoining. Others were carried further by
the Winds, but as soon as they could recover themselves, they imputed the Cause
of the Tempest to the Anger of St. Columb, because they had avaritiously, and
cruelly, destroyed a Monastery of His; and therefore, whatever Prey, or
Plunder, they had got, they carried it thither, as an Expiation for their
Offense; neither was any memorable Act performed, by that Fleet, the whole Year.

Though these Causes did much incline the King of England to return, yet, that
which did most accelerate it, was, his Propension to the French War, which was
then most in his thoughts. And therefore, he marched back his Army, and took
Baliol with him, as if the Scottish War had been almost at an end, and left
Cumins, as Regent, Cumins left Regent by him in Scotland.
to perfect the Remainder thereof. He, to ingratiate himself to Both Kings, and
to avenge himself on his Enemy, was extraordinary cruel in his Proceedings,
which Severity of his was the more resented, because, that lately he himself
obtained his Pardon so easily, when he was reduced to the lowest Ebb, not many
Months before. There were scarce above Three of all the Scottish Nobility, whom
neither Promises could entice, nor Dangers enforce, to submit to the English
Yoke; and Those were, Patrick, Earl of Merch; Andrew Murray, In Mar.
and William Douglas. These joined their Forces, and march to Kilblane Forest,
On the side of the River Don in Mar.
against Cumins, who was besieging Kildrummy Castle; with him they had a sharp
Fight. Cumins was more in Number, and a Few might easily be snapt by a great
Many; but the coming in of John Craig, Cumin's Army overthrown, and himself
slain.
Governor of the Castle, with 300 Fresh Men, decided the Controversy, and gave
an undisputed Victory to the Brucians. All the Valiantest of Cumins his Army
were slain, either in the Fight, or in the Pursuit. Many were saved in a
Neighbor Castle, called Cameron, belonging to Robert Meinze; But, seeing there
were not Provisions for so great a Multitude, pent up in so narrow a Room, the
next day it was surrendered, and the Defendants, upon their Submission,
confirmed by an Oath, Pardoned. There fell in this Fight, besides the General
himself, Robert Brady, and Walter Cumins, Two of his intimate Friends; Thomas,
his Brother, being taken Prisoner, was the next day put to death.

Upon this Victory, in regard Randolfe was a Prisoner, and Stuart was sick,
Murray made Regent.
the Name and Power of Regent was confirmed on Andrew Murray, by Military
Suffrage. For, when Letters came from the King of France concerning a Truce,
the Nobles of the Brucian Party, being forced to receive them, did, by
unanimous Consent, restore that former Honor to Murray, which his Calamitous
Misfortune had deprived him of. He, after the Truce, for a few Months, was
ended, laid Siege to the Castle of The English again enter Scotland. Standing
on a Rock in the Sea.
Lochindores, which was held by the Wife of David Cumins; She, foreseeing, what
would happen, had craved Aid of the English, who shortly after landed some
Forces in Murray, and raised the Siege. They also pierced as far as Elgin, (a
Town situate by the River Lossy,) wasting all as they went, with Fire and
Sword. As they were marching to Perth, they burnt Aberdene, and, Garrisoned the
Castles in all Merss, Dunoter, And upon their Retreat leave Ed^. Ba^iol, their
General.
Kinneff, and Laureston. They laid a Command on the six adjoining Monasteries,
to repair the Walls of Perth, which were demolished; and then committing the
Affairs of Scotland to Edward Baliol, who was returned thither, they went back
for England. Upon the Departure of the English, and the low Condition of the
Scots, Henry Beaumont thought it a fit Opportunity for him to stir, to revenge
the Death of his Son in Law, the Earl of Athole, and therefore he killed all
that he could take, without any distinction, who had been in the Fight of
Kilblane, in a very cruel manner. A strong Castle in Buchan.
Andrew Murray besieged him in D^ngarg, and enforced him to a Surrender, and,
upon taking his Oath, That he would return no more into Scotland, in an Hostile
manner, he was dismissed; Thus, by one continued Course of Victory, he took all
the Strong Holds on the further side of the Forth (besides the Castle of
Cowper, and the Town of Perth,) and, casting out their Garrisons, M^rray's
prosperous Succe^s^s.
he wholly demolished Them, Afterward, he entered England, where he got great
Booty, and somewhat relieved the Spirits of his Soldiers, who had suffered much
by reason of want, in their own Country. For, in regard, Scotland had been
harassed, that Year, by the Injuries of War, and wasted by the daily Incursions
of both Parties, the Fields lay untilled, and there was such a Famine, that the
English were enforced to desert the strong Castle of Cowper, for want of
Provisions. And a Scottish Seaman, who had been abused by them, (...) Cruelty.
being employed to Transport the Garison-Soldiers by Night to Lothian, Landed
them upon a Bank of Sand, which was bare, when the Tide was out; they, thinking
it had been the Continent, went a little way, and then met with Sea again,
which made them call again for the Vessel, but in vain, for they all perished
there.

The next Year, which was 1537. the English Besieged the Castle of Dunbar; it
was defended by Agnes, the Wife of the Earl of Merch, who was commonly Surnamed
the Black, a Woman of a Manly Spirit. The Besiegers were the Earls of Salisbury
and Arundel* the Siege lasted longer than any body thought it would, so that
Two diverse Supplies were sent into Scotland to relieve Baliol; Salisbury and
Aru^del Command some English in Scotland. Monfort slain by Preston.
the One led by Monfort, the Other by Richard Talbot; Lawrence Preston
undertook Monfort, and in a Fight slew him, and routed his Army, but he himself
dyed soon after, of the Wounds he there received, which caused his Soldiers to
wreck their Fury, for the loss of their General, on the Prisoners, whom they
inhumanly slew. Talbot was taken Prisoner by William Keith, and his Army
routed; yet the Siege of Dunbar continued, still. A piece of Savage Inhumanity.
And the Sea being stopped by the English, the Besieged were driven to so great
a want of Victuals, that, without doubt, it must have been surrendered, if
Alexander Ramsay, by a seasonable, tho bold, Attempt, had not relieved it. He,
in the dead time of the Night, slipped by the Watch, Talbot overthrown by Ke^th
which in Galleys of Genoa, kept the Sea-Coast-side, and came up to the Castle,
where he landed Forty choice Men, and a great quantity of Provisions. And then,
joining part of the Garrison with his own Men, in the Covert of the Night, he
rushed in, with such a noise, on the English Guard, that he made a great
slaughter amongst them; for they little expected a Sally from an Enemy, whom
they looked upon, as almost Conquered; and so, the next Night, he returned
back, as s^curely as he came. Thus, after Six Months, the Siege of Dunbar was
raised: For Edward called back his Forces to the French War, Dunbar res^ved,
and the Siege raised.
after they had wearied themselves, and tried all ways to become Masters of the
Place.

Andrew Murray, his Country being then almost freed from Foreign Soldiers,
attempted to reduce, First Sterling, then Edinburgh; but was fain to depart
from them Both, without carrying them; yet, he subdued all Lothian, and brought
it under the King's Subjection. In the mean time, to give his wearied Mind a
little Relaxation, he went to see his Lands and Possessions beyond the
Mountains, where he fell Sick, and Dyed; he was Buried at Rosmark, much
Lamented, and Desired, by all Good Men. For, ^
in those Two Years and an half, whilst he sat at Helm, he performed such
great Achievements, Murray the Regent dies.
as might seem sufficient for the whole Life of One of the Greatest Captains in
the World.

After him, Stuart was made Regent, till the return of David out of France;
Stuart made Regent.
he, being yet but young, did, that Year, get the better of the English, in
many light Skirmishes, which were managed under the Conduct of William Douglas;
yet, not without the great hazard and danger of Douglas himself, who was often
wounded: He drove the English out of Teviotdale; He took the Castle of
Hermitage in Liddisdale, and, surprising great store of Provision belonging to
the Enemy at Mulross, he fortified it, too. He had such a sharp and obstinate
Encounter with Berclay, His prosperous Beginnings.
That he himself, with but Three in his Company, hardly escaped, and that by
the benefit of the Night, too. He overthrew the Forces of John Sterling, in a
bloody Onset, yet He himself was, a while after, like to be taken by him; but
recovering himself, after a fierce Encounter, he put Sterling to flight* slew
Thirty of his Companions, and took Forty of them, Prisoners; he so pressed upon
William Abernethy, by whom he had been worsted Five times in one Day, That,
before Night, he slew all his Men, and brought him Prisoner along with him. And
he had as great Felicity in conquering Lawrence Vaux, He Sa^l^ over to David,
then in France.
a stout Enemy: At last, he Sailed over to King David in France, to acquaint
him with the State of Scottish Affairs. The next Year, which was 1339. Stuart,
hoping to follow on his good Fortune, Levied an Army, and divided it into Four
Parts, and so attempts to reduce Perth, but the English defended it so
valiantly, that he was wounded and beaten off; After the Siege had lasted Three
Months, Douglas came to their Assistance, when they almost despaired of
Success; he brought with him Five Pyratical Ships, At his return he Levies an
Army.
which he hired, wherein there were some Soldiers, and warlike Engines. Part of
the Soldiers were Landed, but the rest were sent, in their Ships, to keep the
Mouth of the River Tay. Douglas himself went to recover the Castle of Cowper;
which, being deserted by the English, was seized on by the Scots. And William
Bullock, an English Priest, who was Treasurer also, made Governor. Douglas
agreed with him, that he should have Lands in Scotland, Bullock turns to the
Scots.
and so come over to his Party; he was the more easily persuaded to it, because
he could expect no Aid from England, and he had not much confidence in the
Scots, who were in Garrison with him. This Man was afterward very faithful to
the Scots, and of great use to them.

The Siege of Perth had now lasted Four Months, and would have continued much
longer, unless the Earl of Ross had drained the Water out of the Trench, by
Mines, and subterraneous Passages; so that, Perth taken by the Scots, so is
Sterlin.
by this means, the Assailants came to the very Walls, and threw the Defendants
off their Works, by the Darts sent, principally, from the Engines, so that the
English were forced to Surrender, upon Terms, To march out Bag and Baggage,
whither they pleased. In a little time after, Sterlin, being Besieged, was also
Surrendren on the same Terms* and Maurice Murray, the Son of Andrew, was made
Governor of the Castle. Baliol was so terrified at this sudden Mutation of
Affairs, That he left Galway, where he usually abode, and went for England. A
while after, the Castle of Edinburgh was taken, not by Force, but Stratagem.
Walter Curry, a Merchant, who then chanced to have a Ship laden with
Provisions, in the Bay, or Firth, of the River Tay, at Dundee, was sent for by
William Douglas into the Forth. There, He and Bullock agreed, That Curry should
fain himself to be an Engl^shman, and should carry Two Bottles of his best
Wine, and some other Presents, to the Governor of the Castle; desiring his
Leave to sell the rest of his Provision in the Garrison; and withal, to inform
him, That if He, or the Garrison, stood in any need of his Service, he would
Gratify them as far as ever he was able. Hereupon, the Governor commanded him
to bring some Hogsheads of Wine, and a certain Number of Biskets, and promised
him Free Admittance, whenever he came. He, for Fear of the Scots, (forsooth)
who often made Incursions into the neighboring Parts, promises (happy be
lucky) to come betimes, the next Morning.

That Night, Douglas, with Twelve Select Men, accompanying him, clad themselves
in Mariners attire, under which their Armor was hid, and so carried Provisions
into the Castle; as for his Soldiers, he laid them in Ambush, And Edinburgh
Castle by Stratagem.
commanding them to wait for the Signal to be given; Douglas and Simon Frazer
went before, and commanded the rest to follow Them, at a moderate distance;
When they were let, by the Porter, into the Fort, which was made of Beams
before the Gate of the Castle, they observed, That the Keys of the Doors hung
on his Arms, him therefore they killed, and so opened the Castle-Gate; and
then, (as they had before agreed) they gave the Signal to their Fellows, by
blowing an Horn; the Noise whereof was a Sign to the One, That the Castle was
entered by their Friends; To the Other, That it was surprised by their Enemies.
Both Parties made all the haste they could, the Scots cast down their Burdens
in the very Passage of the Gate, lest the Doors might be shut, and so they kept
out from their Fellows, who could march but slowly up, on so steep an Ascent:
Here, there happened a sharp Dispute with Loss of Both sides, at length the
Garison-Soldiers had the worst, who were all slain, except the Governor and six
more.

It was this self same Year, or, (as some say) the next, That Ramsay (the most
Experienced Soldier of all the Scots) made his Expedition into England. A^ex.
Ramsays House, the School of War.
Men had so great an Opinion of his Skill in Military Affairs, That every Body
was accounted, but a Fresh Water Soldier, who had not been disciplined under
Him. And therefore, all the young Fry came in to him, as the only School where
the Art of War was to be taught. His Expedition into England.
He having before made many prosperous Expeditions into his Enemies Country,
tho but with small Forces, their Affairs being now at a Low-Ebb in Scotland,
took heart to attempt greater Matters; so that, gathering together an handsome
Army of his Tenants and Friends, he spoiled and harassed Northumberland; and,
He harasses Northumberland.
upon his Retreat, the English drew fotrh all their Force from the Country and
Garrisons, and so followed him with a very great Army: What was to be done, in
this case? Alexander could not avoid Fighting; and yet, he perceived, That his
Soldiers were somewhat Crest-fallen, by reason of the Multitude of the Enemy.
In these Circumstances, he sent away his Booty before, and placed his Foot in
Ambush; and commanded his Horse to straggle abroad, as if they were Flying, and
when they came to the Place of Ambush, then to rally again at Sound of Trumpet;
The English, imagining, That the Horse had fled in good earnest, pursued them
as disorderly; and, when the Signal was given to come together again, they, in
a moment, turned back upon Them, The Foot also skipping out of their Ambushes;
which struck such a Consternation, and Terror, into the English, That they
fled back faster, than before they had pursued. And takes Roxburgh.
Many of them were slain, many taken, and the Prey carried home, safe. Amongst
the Prisoners, there was the Governor of Roxburgh, who had drawn out almost all
his Garrison to follow him; so that Alexander, knowing the Town to be empty,
assaulted and easily took, It, at the First Onset; and when he had taken the
Lower Part of the Castle, the Remainders of the Garison-Soldiers sled up into a
strong Tower therein; but, being vigorously assaulted, and having no hopes of
Relief, They surrendered up Themselves. Some say, That the The Earl of Salisbury
taken Prisoner by the Scots, as some say.
Earl of Salisbury was there taken, and exchanged for John Randolf. But most
Writers, whom I am rather inclined to follow, affirm, That Salisbury was taken
Prisoner in France, and that by French Troops. Randolf, going into Annandale,
took his Castle, which was seated by It is 3 Miles in Compass.
Loch-Maban, from the English: And the Three Governors of the Borders,
Alexander Ramsay of the East, William Douglas of the Mid-Border, Three
Governors of the Borders. The English driven out of all Scotland, except
Berwick.
and Randolf of the West, drove the English beyond their old Bounds, which they
had in the Reign of Alexander the Third, and left them no footing at all in
Scotland, but only Berwick. Some say, That Roxburgh was taken by Ramsay, in the
Night, who set Ladders to the Walls, when the Watch was asleep, in the Year
1342. the 30 th Day of March; and the Black Book of Pasley says so, too.

The same Year, on the 4 th of the Nones of July 2. K. David returns to
Scotland.
July, David Bruce, and His Wife, arrived at Ennerbervy, Nine Years after his
Departure; His Coming was the more acceptable, because the Affairs of Scotland
were then at such a low Ebb. For, Edward, having made a Truce, for Three Years,
with Philip, King of France, at Tournay, and so being freed of his French War,
determined to invade Scotland, with all his Force. Edward enters Scotland with
a great Army.
He had then in his Army Forty Thousand Foot, and Six Thousand Horse, and he
had also Equipped out a Gallant Navy of Ships to carry Provisions for his Foot
Soldiers, that there might be no Want, that way; They set Sail in the Month of
November, but were encountered by so fierce a Tempest, that, after a long
Distress at Sea, they were cast upon the Belgic and German Shores, and so were
of no use to him in the present War. In the Interim, Edward and his Land Forces
staid about New Castle upon Tine in great want of Victuals; Ambassadors from
Scotland obtain a Pacification.
Thither Ambassadors came to him from Scotland, desiring a Pacification for
Four Months, which they obtained upon Condition, That if David came not to them
before the Calends of June, all the Scots would become Subjects to Edward; but
David, hearing of the Preparation of the English, June 1.
had set Sail before the coming of Ambassadors to him.

Amongst those who flocked in to gratulate the King, at his Return, (as Many
did, from all Parts of the Kingdom) there came Alexander Ramsay, also; who,
being eminent both for the splendid Achievements of his Former Life, and
especially for his late, and yet reaking, Conquests, was received with a great
deal of Favor, The Scots Nobles stock in to David.
and had the Government of Roxburgh bestowed on him; yea, and the Sheriff-wick
of all Teviotdale was also added to his Authority. William Douglas took this
mighty heinously, that Ramsay was preferred before him in that Honor; For,
seeing he had expelled the English from almost all Teviotdale, he had sometimes
presided over the Public Assembly there, tho without the Kings Command; yet,
relying upon his Merits toward his Country, the Nobleness of his Stock, and
the Power of his Family, he hoped, That no man would have been his Competitor,
for that Office. Whereupon, being wholly bent on Revenge, he, at present,
dissembled his Anger, but, in Three Months after, he met with his Adversary,
holding an Assembly in the Church of Hawick, and unawares assaulted and wounded
him, A Town in Teviotdale. Ramsay taken, and starved to Death by Douglas.
Bullock put to Death.
having also slain Three of his Followers, who endeavored to rescue him; and
so set him upon an Horse, and carried him to the Castle of Hermitage, where he
starved him to Death.

About the same time, William Bullock, a Man of singular Loyalty to the King,
was put to the same kind of Death, by David Berclay. These Two Savage and Cruel
Facts filled almost the whole Kingdom with Seditions, and distracted it into
several Parties. These things did mightily exercise the King, who was yet but
Young, and not accustomed to Men of Rough and Military Dispositions; yet,
though he used great diligence to find out Douglas, to bring him to Condign
Punishment; he, by Means of his Friends, Douglas pardoned.
(of which he had procured Many, by his Noble Exploits for the Liberty of his
Country) and especially of Robert Stuart, the King's Son by his Sister,
obtained his Pardon; And, indeed the Magnificent, yet True, Report of his
Famous Actions, did much facilitate the Obtaining thereof, together with the
present Conjuncture of the Time, wherein, there being but an uncertain Peace
abroad, and Seditions at home, Military Men were to be respected, yea, and
honored too. Upon which Account, he was not only pardoned, but preferred also
to the Government of Roxburgh and of Teviotdale too; a Clemency, which,
perhaps, in the present Circumstances of Things, might be useful; but,
certainly, of very ill Example for the Future.

David, having thus settled Matters at Home, the best he could, denounces War
against England, the greatest Part of the Nobility dissuading him from that
Expedition, David makes several Expeditions into England.
by reason of the great Scarcity of Provisions: Yet, he Listed an handsome Army,
and made Thomas Randolfe General thereof; he himself accompanied him, but in
disguise, that he might not be known to be the King. This Army, having wasted
Northumberland for about Two Months time, returned home with great Booty:
Within a few Days after, he made another Inrode into the Enemies Country; but
then he did not disguise, but openly professed Himself, both King and General.
The English, being inferior in Strength, would not venture to give a set
Battle, whilst their King was absent in France; but skirmished their Enemies
with their Horse, and so kept them from plundering much, by a close March. Five
of the Chief Nobility, whom David had lately raised to that Honor, straggling
too far from their Men, were taken Prisoners, their Followers being also
killed, or put to Flight. So that, David, to spend no more time there, in vain,
returned with his Army. He made also a Third Expedition, with what Force he
could privately Levy, that so he might fall upon his Enemy, unawares. But,
entering England in a stormy Autumn, the small Brooks were so swollen with large
Showers, that they made all the Country unpassable, and also hindered the
Carriage of Provision, so that, Home he came again; yet, that he might not seem
to have taken so much Pains to no purpose, he demolished a few Castles.

Not long after, Ambassadors were sent, to and fro, in order to obtain a Truce
for Two Years, which the Scots consented to, upon Condition, That Philip, King
of France, gave his Consent; for That was one Article in the Treaty between the
Scots and French, That neither of them should make Truce, or Peace, with the
English, without the Other's Consent. A Truce for two Years betwixt the Scots
and English. Calais besieged by the English.
For those Two Years, Scotland was quiet. About the Fourth Year, after David's
Return, the French were overcome in a great Battle; and Calais, a Town of the
M^^ini, was besieged by them; so that Philip pressed the Scots, by his
Ambassadors, to Invade England, and to so draw away some of their Force from
Him. Hereupon, an Army was commanded to meet at Perth. Thither they came in a
great Abundance, and there David, Earl of Rosse, waylaying Reginald, Lord of
the Aebudae, his Old Enemy, fell upon him in the Night, See p. 4. Note i.
and slew him with Seven Nobles in his Company. This Murder did much weaken the
Army, for the Kindred and Tenants of both Parties, yea, the Neighboring
Inhabitants, fearing a Civil War between Two such Potent Families, returned to
their own Homes. And therefore, William Douglas of Liddisdale, earnestly
persuaded the King to desist from his present Expedition, and to compose
Matters, at Home. His Counsel was refused; and the King (his Friendship to
Philip overcoming his Love to his Country) marches forward into England, and
destroyed all as he went, by Fire and Sword. David at the solicitation of the
French, enters England with an Army.
And thus in Sixteen Days he came into the County of Durham, where the English,
parley levied by Percy, and partly sent back from the Siege of Calais, made a
great Body, and showed themselves to the Enemy in Battel-array, sooner than
ever the Scots could have imagined. David, who feared nothing less than the
coming of the Enemy, and therefore had sent abroad Douglas to forage the
Neighboring Country, gave a Signal of Battle to his Soldiers. Douglas fell
unawares amongst his Enemies, and having lost Five Hundred of his Men, was put
to slight, and returned, in great Fear, to the Camp. And the End of the
Conflict was as unhappy, as the Beginning: For, the Fight being sharply begun,
John Randolfe's Men were routed at the first Onset, and he himself slain. The
main Battle, in which the King was, was assaulted by Two Brigades of the
English; One, that had conquered before; Where he receives a great overthrow,
and is taken Prisoner by John Capland.
and Another, that was entire, and had not yet charged, who shattered it, and
cut it off quite; They being resolved to die, and therein almost all the
Scottish Nobility were utterly lost; and the King himself, after his Arms were
taken away, was taken Prisoner by John Copland, but he struck out Two of his
Teeth with his Fist, though he himself was sorely wounded with two Arrows. The
Third Wing, commanded by Robert Stuart and Patrick Dunber, Upon which, the
English regain a great part of Scotland.

A strong Pass on the Sea shore, in that Bourn which divides East-Lothian from
the Me^^s.


perceiving the Slaughter of their Fellow Soldiers, withdrew themselves with
little Loss. The Nobility were so destroyed in this Fight, that, immediately
after it, Roxburgh, Hermitage, and many other Castles, were surrendered to the
English: And the Scots were enforced to quit their Claim to all the Lands they
held in England, and also to Merth, Teviotdale, Liddisdale, and Lauderdale; and
the Bounds, and Borders, of the English, were enlarged to Coc^burns-Path, as
they call it, and Soltra-Hill.

Baliol, not contented to have recovered the Possessions of his Ancestors in
Galway, marched over Annandale and Liddisdale, and all the Country lying near
the Clyd, and destroyed all by Fire and Sword: He also, by the Assistance of
Percy of England, made the like Havoc in Lothian; neither could there a
sufficient Army be raised against them in Scotland, for some Years. As an
Addition to this Misery, there happened also a grievous Plague, A Plague in
Scotland.
which swept away almost the Third Part of the People. And yet, in such an
afflicted State of Things, Men did not abstain from Domestic Mischiefs. David
Berclay, a Noble Knight, who, before, had slain Bullock, was, at this time
also, present at the Murder of John Douglas at Dalkeith. William Douglas of
Liddisdale (who was taken Prisoner by the English, at the Battle of Durham,
Bloody Feude.
and was not yet released) caused him to be slain, by the Hands of his Tenants;
and after he himself was Released, and returned into Scotland, he did not long
survive him: For, as he was a Hunting in the Wood of Attic, he was killed by
William Douglas, the Son of Archibald, newly returned from France, in Revenge
for his Murder of Alexander Ramsay. Neither did the Clans of the Ancient Scots,
as impatient to be quiet, abstain from injuring one another.

In the midst of these Calamities, which pressed in on every side; William
Douglas gathered together a Band of his Vassals and Tenants, and recovered
Douglas, the Patrimony of his Ancestors, having driven the English out of it;
and afterward, upon this little Success, Men's Minds being more inclined to
him, Douglas prevails against the English.
he reduced a great part of Teviotdale, also. In the mean time, John King of
France, Heir to his Father Philip, both in his Kingdom, and in his Wars,
fearing, lest the Scots, being broken by so many Misfortunes, should quite
succumb under so Puissant an Enemy, sent Eugenius Garanter to them, with Forty
Gallant Cavaleers in his Train, to desire of them, To make no Peace with
England, without his Consent. John of France, persuades the Scots to make no
Peace with the English, but by his Consent.
He brought with him Forty Thousand French Crowns, to press Soldiers; and,
besides, by large Promises, he wrought over the Nobility to his Side and
Opinion. They received the Money, and divided it among themselves, but levied
no Soldiers, only they carried on the War, by light Incursions, as they were
wont to do. As Soon as the English heard of this, they almost wasted all
Lothian, The English waste Lothian.
which had been sorely harassed, before. To Revenge this wrong, Patrick Dunbar,
and William Douglas, gathered a good strength together, as privately as they
could, and placed themselves in Ambush, but sent out David Ramsay of Dalhouse,
a noted and Valiant Soldier, with part of the Army, Norham burnt by the Scots.
to burn Norham, a populous Town upon the Banks of Tweed. When Ramsay had
accomplished his design, the English were trained on to the Ambush, where some
were surprised and slain; at last, being not able to resist so great a
Multitude, The English drawn into an Ambush.
the English surrender themselves. This success heartned the Scots, and
therefore, the same Commanders uniting their Forces together, Thomas Stuart,
Earl of Angus, resolves to attack Berwick: And, to do it privately, he hired
Vessels, Ladders, and other Implements used in Scaling the Walls of Towns,
wherever he could procure them; he acquaints Patrick with his coming, Berwick
Town taken by the Scots, but not the Castle.
he meets him at the Hour appointed, and creeping to the Walls, with as little
noise as they could; yet, the Sentinels espied them, whom, after a sharp
Conflict, they repulsed, and so became Masters of the Town, but not without
loss on their own side; the Castle was still kept by the English, which they
assaulted, but in vain.

When the King of England heard, how Matters went in Scotland, he gathered
together a Puissant Army; and, in swift Marches, hastened thither. Edward enters
Scotland.
The Scots hearing of his coming, and not being provided with Materials for a
long Siege, spoiled and burnt the City, and so returned home; Edward employed
all kind of Workmen, and Artificers, to repair what the Flames had Consumed; in
the Interim, he himself quartered at Roxburgh. Baliol Surrenders the Kingdom to
him.
Thither Baliol comes, and Surrenders up the Kingdom of Scotland to him,
desiring him earnestly not to forget the Injuries offered him, by the Scots.
Edward, as it were in Obsequiousness to his Desires, invades Lothian by Land
and Sea, and makes a further Devastation of what was left after the former
Ruin. He determined, in that Expedition, so to quell all Scotland, that they
should never recover strength to Rebel again. But his Purpose was disappointed,
by reason of a most grievous Tempest, which so shattered and tore his Ships,
that carried his Provisions, that very Few of them ever met in one Port; so
that, he was enforced to return home, Edward retreats, upon which the Scots
recover some of their Losses.
for want of Provision; only he vented his Spleen upon Edinburgh, Hadington,
and other Towns of Lothian. Edward and his Army being gone for England, Douglas
drove the English out of Galway; Roger Kirk-Patrick, out of Nithisdale; and
John Stuart, Son of the Regent, out of Annandale, so that those Three Countries
were recovered by the Scots.

About the same time, John King of France was overthrown by the English, Edward
overthrows ^ohn of France in Aquita^n, and has two Kings his Prisoners at one
time.
in a great Battle in Poictou, and he himself taken Prisoner. Edward, having
Two Kings his Prisoners at once, passed the Winter merrily amongst the
Gratulations of his Friends; so that the Scots thinking, that his Mind, being
sated with Glory, might be more inclined to Equity, they sent Ambassadors to
him, to treat about the Release of their King. Bruce, that the Scots might have
easy Access to him, was sent to Berwick; but, in regard they could not agree
about the Conditions, he was carried back to London. Not long after, (...)
Bruce, ^^eased upon p^ying a great Ransom, wherein the Pope assists the S^^ts.
the Popes Legates were sent, who took great Pains to make a Peace, betwixt the
English and French; they also transacted the same for Scotland, upon the
Promise of the Payment of an Hundred, (as our Writers say,) or, as Frossard, of
Five Hundred Thousand Marks of English Money to them; Part of which was to be
paid in Hand, the rest by Parcels. To make up that Sum; the Pope gave the
Tenths of all Benefices, for Three Years; in the mean time, a Truce was made,
and many young Nobles given for Hostages, who died almost all in England, of
the Plague.

Hereupon, David returned, the Eleventh Year after he was taken Prisoner. The
first thing he did, was, to punish those who had been the forwardest to fly in
the Battle of Durham. From Patrick Dunbar, he took away a great part of his
Lands; he cut off all hope from Robert Stuart, his Eldest Sisters Son* of
succeeding in the Kingdom, and substituted Alexander, Son of the Earl of
Sutherland, David settles the Succession, first on Alexander, and then on
Robert Stuart.
by his Youngest Sister, and made the Nobles to swear Fealty to him. This young
Man's Father distributed large and fruitful Lands amongst the Nobles, to engage
them more firmly to his Son. But, Alexander dying soon after, he was reconciled
to Robert Stuart; and, in a full Assembly of the Estates, he was, by a General
Suffrage, named Heir Presumptive of the Crown. But this was done some Years
after.

The King spent the next Five Years in appeasing the Discords at home, in which
time there happened Two great Calamities: One reached but to a few, by an
Inundation of Water; for, the Heavens sent down so much Rain, that Lothian
seemed to be all a Float; yea, Great Inundations of Water endammage Lothian.
the force of the Water was such, that it carried away Bridges, Water-Mills,
Country Houses, with their Owners, and Cattle, into the Sea; it rooted up
Trees, and almost quite destroyed the Towns, which stood near the Banks of
Rivers. This Misery was seconded by Another, namely, a grievous Pestilence, A
Grievous Pestilence.
which consumed many of all Ranks and Ages.

In the Year 1363. the state of things grew Calmer, and then, Eight Prudent
Persons, chosen out of all the Orders, to prepare Matters for that High Court.

David's unacceptable Propositions to the Scots.


in the Assembly of the Estates, the King propounded to the Lords of the
Articles, That the King of England, or else his Son, might be sent for into
Scotland, to undertake the Kingdom, if he should chance to Die. This he did,
either by his weariness of War; or, foreseeing, That it would be for the Good
of both Kingdoms; or, (as others think) because of his Oath, which the English
had made him to Swear, but his Speech was so Unacceptable and Offensive to them
all, that, before every ones Vote could be asked in order, they all confusedly
cried out upon it, as an abominable Propose; and it was almost come to That,
that they, who had most freely spoken against it, fearing his Displeasure, were
meditating a Revolt. But he, understanding their Fears, abated his Anger, and
received them into Favor. When he had quieted all things elsewhere, yet the
Highlanders continued still in Arms, and did not only commit Outrages upon one
another, but also made Havoc of the adjacent Countries. The King tried all
probable Means to bring them to a mutual Concord; but, being not able to do it,
his next Plot was, David's Policy to subvert the Islanders.
To suborn some Crafty Fellows, to foment and heighten their Dissensions; that
so, when the feircest of them had destroyed one another, the rest might become
more Tractable and Pliant. The King, having performed these Exploits, both at
home and abroad, departed this Life in the Castle of Edinburgh, on the Seventh
Day of June, in the Forty Seventh Year of his Age, about the Thirty Ninth of
his Reign, and of our Lord 1370.

He was certainly, a Man eminent in all kind of Virtue; but especially in
Justice and Clemency; and, though he had been exercised with Good and Bad
Events, His Death and Character.
alternately; yet, still, his Fortune seemed rather to fail him, than his
Industry.

Robert II. The Hundredth King.
AFter David's Decease, the Nobles met together at Linlithgo, to Congratulate
Robert, at the beginning of his Reign, who had, before, been designed King by
his Uncle; but here, the Ambition of William Douglas had almost cast things
into a Sedition, and Uproar. For he demanded the Kingdom, as his Hereditary
Right, in regard he was descended from Baliol and the Cumins's. But finding,
that his Suit was unacceptable to them all; and especially to his most intimate
Friends, as the Two Brothers, George, and John, Dunbars, of which one was Earl
of Merch, and the other of Murray; as also to Robert Erskin, Robert Douglas,
William's Son, Marries Eufemia, the Kings Daughter.
Governor of the Three well-fortified Castles of Dunbarton, Sterling, and
Edinburgh, he desisted, and promised to obey Robert, as his Liege King; and the
King, to oblige him in a more strict Bond of Friendship, espoused his Daughter
to Earl William's Son.

This year, the Truce, made for Fourteen years, was broken by the English.
There was a great Fair usually kept, the Third of the Ide^ of August, August 11.
whether huge Numbers of both Nations, even from very remote Places, used to
resort; thither came the Inhabitants of Merch; and it happened, that one of
George Dunbar's Familiar Friends was slain there. George, according to the Law
which was observed among the Borderers, sent Heralds to demand the Murderers to
be given up to him; or else, That they would Punish them, Themselves; but, New
Discord^ betwixt the Scots and English.
perceiving, that Favor did outvy Equity, he dissembles the Affront, and
against the next day appointed for the Fair, he secretly prepared a Band of
Men, and setting upon the Town unexpectedly, he slew all the Youngsters, burnt
the Houses, and returned home, with a great Booty. The English, to revenge this
Injury, did with like Cruelty ravage over all the Lands of John Gordon, a Noble
Knight; and not long after Gordon entered England, and took away a great Prey of
Men and Cattle; but as he was returning home, John Lilburn, Lilburn overthrown.
met him with a far greater Force than he had: A terrible Fight began betwixt
them, and Victory seemed a long time to flutter over both Parties with doubtful
Wings; but, at last, she inclined to the Scots. The Commander of the English
Forces was taken Prisoner, with many of his Allies and Tenants.

Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, a Man of a great Spirit, being then Lord
Warden, A Town in the Merss, six Miles Northwest from Berwick, John Scotus born
at Duns. Percy enters Scotland.
or Governor, of the Eastern Marches or Borders, took this Overthrow of his
Countrymen in great Disdain; and thereupon, gathered together a Body of above
7000 Men, and encamped at a Village, called Duns, remarkable for being the
Birth Place of John Scotus, Surnamed, Subtilis, rather than for any thing else.
There the Countrymen and Shepherds gathered themselves together, having no
other Arms, but such Rattles and Gimcracks, wherewith they frighten Stags and
other Cattle, which do pasture there up and down, without any Keeper; They run
from the Scots Sea to (...) and divide (...) from Lothian.
and so by night they placed themselves on some Risings of the Lamormore Hills,
which were near to the said Village of Duns. The Form of the Gimcrack is This;
On the top of a long Spear, or Pole, they fasten some Staves or Hoops of Wood,
made crooked and bent into a Semicircle; all over them they stretched a Skin,
after the same Form as the Lanterns, which the Vulgar Parisians call Falots,
are made; into these Lanterns, or Concavities, they put small Stones, but very
hard ones, which when they are stirred, and tumbled, up and down, make such a
rattling noise, as drives away the Beasts and Cattle from the Corn. With these
Rattling Instruments, they made a mighty Noise on the Hills, hanging over Duns,
wherewith the English Horse were so affrighted, that they broke the Headstalls
they were tied with; and ran up and down the Fields, and so were taken by the
Countrymen; And in the whole Army, there was such a Tumultuous Bustle, that
they cried out, Arm, Arm; and thinking the Enemy had been at their Heels,
Perc^'s Horse are affrighted with rattling Instruments, and (...)
they passed that night without sleep. But in the morning, perceiving their
mistake, in regard they had lost many of their Baggage Horses, as well as those
for Service, they retreated six Miles (for that Place is so far distant from
England) on Foot, leaving their Baggage behind them, almost in the Posture of
such, as Fly away.

The same day, that Percy retired back from Duns, Thomas Musgrave, Governor of
Berwick, had issued out of his Garrison with some Troops, to join Percy; John
Gordon had notice of his March, and laid an Ambush for him, into which he fell;
and imagining his Enemy to be more numerous than he was, he sought to Fly, but
was taken with his Party in the pursuit, and brought back again. The (...)
Moreover, in the Western Borders, John Iohnston carried it so, that he
obtained both Honor and Booty, too; for he so exercised his Neighboring Foes
with small, but frequent, Incursions, that he did them as much mischief, as a
great Army would have done.

Thus all things succeeded prosperously with Robert, for the First Two Years of
his Reign; but in his Third Year, Eufemia, Daughter to Hugh Earl of Ross, dyed.
The King had three Children by her, Walter, afterward made Earl of Strathearn;
David, Earl of Athol; and Eufemia, whom Robert Douglas Married, as I said
before. Robert, not so much for the Impatience of his Widowed, and unmarried,
Estate, as for the Love of the Children, which he had before begot on the Body
of Elizabeth More, took her to Wife. This Woman was exceeding Beautiful, the
Daughter of Adam More, an Illustrious Knight; the King fell in Love with her
when he was young, and had Three Sons and Two Daughters by her, and he bestowed
her in Marriage on one Gifard, a Nobleman in Lothian. It happened, that
Eufemia, the Queen, and Gifard, Elizabeth's Husband, died about one and the
same time. Whereupon, the King, Robert upon his Queens decease. Marries
Elizabeth More, by whom he had Children before, whom he prefers to great (...)
either induced by the old Familiarity he had with Her; or else, (as many
Writers report) to Legitimate the Children, she had born to him, took their
Mother to Wife, and presently advanced her Sons to Riches and Honor. John, the
Eldest Son, was made Earl of Carrick; Robert, of M^nteith; and Alexander, of
Buchan, to which Badenock was adjoined. Neither was he content with this
Munificence, but he prevailed upon the Assembly of Estates, met at Scone, to
pass by the Children of Eufemia, and to observe the Order of Age, in making his
Son, King after him; which Matter was, in aftertimes, almost the utter Ruin of
that numerous Family.

During the next Two years, there was neither assured Peace, nor open War, but
light Incursions, or rather Plunderings, on both sides; In the mean time,
Edward the Third dies, and his Grandchild Richard the Second succeeds him.
Ambassadors from Charles the Fifth, to Scotland, to s^i^ them up to War against
England. Berwick Castle surprised by Ramsay, but regained by Percy.
Edward the Third died, and Richard, the Second, his Grandchild by his Son
Edward, born at Bourdeaux, succeeded him, being Eleven years of Age, at which
time Ambassadors were sent by Charles the Fifth, King of France, into Scotland.
The Cause of their Embassy, was, To renew the ancient League with Robert, and
to desire him to invade England with an Army, and so to take off the Stress of
the War from France. In the interim, whilst they were treating with the
Assembly, Alexander Ramsay, (as the English Writers report out of Frossard)
being accompanied with Forty young Fellows, in the middle of the Night, when
the Sentinel was asleep, took the Castle of Berwick; all that were in it, being
either killed, or made Prisoners. The Townsmen, being amazed at this sudden
surprise, send for Percy, who came and laid Siege to the Castle with Ten
thousand Men When the News hereof was brought to the Assembly of the Estates at
Scone, Archibald Douglas, being concerned for the danger his Kinsman was in,
took with him a flying Body of 500 Horse only, and speeded thither; but all
Passages to the Besieged were intercluded and stopped, so that he was forced to
return again, without any Action. And the Castle, after a valiant Defense for
some days, was, at length, taken by Storm, and all put to the Sword, except
Alexander alone; Thus the English; but, Our Writers say, That the Castle was
taken by the help of six Country People of Merch, who, not being able to keep
it, were fain to desert it. Not long after the Assembly, James, the First Earl
of Douglas, enters England with an Army.
James, the First Earl of Douglas, gathered together an Army of Twenty thousand
Men, and entered England, and coming unawares to a Town called In Cumberland.

A Pestilence in Scotland.


Penrith, on a Fair-Day, he took, plundered, and burnt it, and then marched his
Army back again in safety, laden with Spoil; but withal, he brought the
Pestilence home with him, which was greater than any before, so that it raged
over all Scotland for the space of Two years.

The English, to cry Quits with the Scots, passed over the Solway, and entered
Scotland; Talbot, a fierce General, led them, being 15000 Men, with which
Number he made a great Desolation far and near; and as his Army was returning
back laden with Spoil, he pitched his Tents in a narrow Valley, not far from
the Borders of England; about 500 Scots came upon them in those Streights,
being secure, Talbet overthrown in Scotland.
unprovided, and generally without their Arms; and, at the first Assault, they
killed all, who were in their way, so that the Tumult, and Fear, diffusing it
self, they were wholly put to Flight; many were slain upon the Place, 250 taken
Prisoners, and a great Number, in such a sudden Trepidation, taking the River,
were drowned; the rest left their Prey behind them, and ran home, the nearest
way they could.

In the mean time, the English carried on a fierce War, both by Sea and Land,
against the French; and besides, part of their Forces were sent into Portugal,
so that it was resolved by their Parliament, That John Duke of Lancaster, the
King's Uncle, should be sent Ambassador into Scotland, to Treat about a Peace;
that so, they, being engaged in so many Wars, might have Quiet on that side at
least, A Truce between the Scots and English for three Years.
which lay most exposed, and open. The Scots, being made acquainted with his
coming by an Herald, appointed James, Earl of Douglas, and John Dunbar Earl of
Murray, to Treat with him; a Truce was made for Three Years. But whilst they
were Treating about a Peace there, a most grievous Civil War broke out in
England. Quatuor nummos Ang^^co^.
The First Author of it is said to be one John Ball, a Priest: He, perceiving
that the Commonalty was grievously offended, because Poll-Money of Four English
Pence an Head was imposed on Them, First of all obliquely, and in private
Confessions, Discourses, and Meetings, inflamed the Minds of the Commons
against the Nobility; and, perceiving that his Speech was well entertained,
then he discoursed it openly; besides this New Occasion, there was also another
more Ancient one, viz. That the Greatest Part of the Commons were made little
better than Slaves to the Great Ones. A great many Tradesmen and Day-Labourers
came in to them, and others also, who, in point of Estate or Credit, had
nothing to lose; insomuch, that they raised so great a Tumult and Combustion, A
Rising of the Commons in England, at the Instigation of John Ba^ a Priest.
that the Main Chance seemed greatly to be hazarded, and to lie at stake. These
things were known at the Meeting of the Ambassadors; yet Both of them
dissembled the Matter till they had Treated, and made a Pacification. Then
Douglas told John of Lancaster, That he knew, from the beginning, in what State
the Affairs of England stood, but they were so far from laying hold on the
Opportunity either to make a War, or to hinder a good Peace, That they offered
him, even then, to stay securely in Scotland, till the Tumults in England were
appeased; or, if he would return, that he should have 500 Scots Horse for his
Convoy. Lancaster, the English Ambassador in Scotland, denied entrance into
Berwick.
Lancaster gave them Great Thanks, yet he hoped at present, that he had no need
to accept of either of the Conditions. But, as he was returning home, the
Governor of Berwick shut him out of the Town, so that He, upon the Public
Faith given, returned into Scotland, and there kept himself, till the Sedition
of the Commons was quelled in England. When the Three Years Truce was ended, in
the Year 1384. June the 4th, Archibald Douglas of Galway, with the Assistance
of James Earl of Douglas, and George Earl of M^rch, Loch-Maban Castle taken by
the Scots.
laid Siege to the Castle of Loch-Maban, situate near a Lake of the same Name,
and from whence daily Inroads were made upon the Neighboring Country. The
Governor of the Castle, being affected at this sudden Misfortune, Articled
with the Enemy, That unless he were relieved in Eight Days, he would surrender
the Castle; whereupon, after the Scots had endured great trouble, by reason of
the Winter-Storms, and continual Showers, even from the 4th Day of February,
the Castle was surrendered, according to Covenant, on the Ninth Day. They who
lived near Roxburgh, fearing lest that Castle might be also taken, took care,
That one Grastock, a Noble and Wealthy Person, and much famed for his Warlike
Skill, should be made Governor thereof; whereupon, as he was sending in great
Provisions thither, unbar surprises the Governor of Roxburg.
and also, all his own Household Goods, imagining, that they could no where be
better kept from his Enemies use, or secured for his own. Dunbar, being
informed by his Spies of the Day of his March, and the way he was to go, laid
his Ambushes in convenient Places, and so suddenly assaulted a long confused
Train, made up of Soldiers, Waggoners, and a promiscuous Multitude, and without
any Fighting took the Prey, and the Owner of it too, Lancaster enters Scotland.
and presently retreated back. The English in revenge of their Losses, and to
prevent future Incursions, by some memorable Exploits, send Lancaster into
Scotland with great Forces, both by Sea and Land. Lancaster himself came
through Merch and Lothian as far as Edinburgh. His Fleet was sent to waste the
Maritime parts of Fife.

The Soldiers were desirous to burn down Edinburgh; but he, remembering that,
but a few Years before, he had been liberally, and bountifully entertained
there, when he was excluded by his own People, He favors the Edinburgers.
forbad them so to do. But his Fleet showed not the same Civility, for, entering
into the Isle of Inch-colm, they robbed a Monastery of Monks, and burnt it;
using the like Cruelty in all places where they landed, till Nicholas and
Thomas Erskins, Alexander Lindsay, and William Cuningham met them, killed many,
took some, and forced the rest to fly in such Fear to their Ships, But is put
to a Retreat.
that, besides the other Loss received by their hasty Flight, they suffered
Forty of their own Men, who, being upon one of the Ships Ropes, after the Rope
was cut, Douglas prevails in Scotland, he dies, and his Son William succeeds
him.
to be Drowned before their Eyes. Lancaster was scarce returned home, before
William Douglas trod almost on his Heels, partly sacking, partly demolishing
all the Castles, which the English held in Scotland, after the Battle of
Durham. He reduced all Teviotdale, except Roxburg, to the Scots Obedience; and
restrained Robberies, which the licentiousness of the Wars had multiplied and
encouraged; and he himself did not long outlive these Exploits, but dyed of a
Feavor in the Castle of Douglas. His Son William Douglas succeeded him; One
every way worthy of so Great and Virtuous a Father.

In the mean time, when an Annual Truce was made betwixt the French, Eng^ish,
and Scots near Bologne, in Belgium, and the French, who were commanded to give
the Scots notice thereof, had neglected so to do; the English Nobles, who
bordered upon Scotland, thinking now they had a fit Opportunity to give their
Enemy some notable and unexpected Overthrow, and not leave them any time for
Revenge. They, before the Truce was published, gathered together Ten Thousand
Horse, A Truce made for a Year, between French, English, and Scots, which the
French were to acquaint the Scots with. The English enter Scotland, before
Notice is given them of a Truce made.
and Six Thousand Archers; and so entering Scotland, under the Command of the
Earls of Northumberland and Nottingham, they made a vast Havoc of the Country,
especially on the Lands of the Douglasses and Lindsays. The Scots, who upon the
noise of a Truce, had laid aside all thoughts of War, were exceedingly
offended, both at their own Negligence, and at the Perfidiousness of the Enemy,
and resolved upon Revenge, as soon as they could. In the Interim, the noise of
the English Invasion of Scotland, did Alarm the French, who were to give notice
of the Truce, and put them in mind of their slackness therein. They,
endeavoring by a late Festination, to make amends for their former Omission,
came to London, even in the very height of the Invasion, where they were
Bountifully and Nobly Entertained, and detained so long, by Kind and Friendly
Invitations, till it was known that the English were returned out of the
Enemies Country; Then they were dismissed, and came into Scotland, where they
declared their Message, as they were commanded. Whereupon, almost all the
Nobility, especially Those who had felt the Loss, sustained by the late Inroad,
did Murmr, Storm, and Cry out, That this Mockery of the English was not to be
endured. Some Scots Nobles also invade England, before the Truce is Proclaimed.
The King did in vain endeavor to pacify them, for he was willing to observe
the Truce; but they so long debated on, and delayed the Matter, till their
Friends had privately Levied almost 15000 Horse, and then, on an appointed Day,
Douglas, Lindsay and Dunbar, depart secretly from the Court, and joining their
Countrymen, invade England with a powerful Army; They wasted Northumberland,
even unto Newcastle, and returning th^o the Lands of the Earl of Nottingham,
and the Mowbrays, they spoiled all by Fire and Sword, that they could not carry
away. Then, and not before, they returned home with a great Booty, and many
Prisoners, and presently caused the Truce to be Proclaimed.

About the end of the Truce, in the Year 1385. Monsieur John de V^^nne, Admiral
of the French Navy, was sent over by the King of France, with about 2000
Auxiliaries, of which an hundred were Curiassiers, Armed Cap-a-pee, and 200
which flung Darts out of Engines, called Cross-bows, in after Ages; the rest
were Foot, of a promiscous kind; They brought with them Money for Six Months
Pay, besides many Gifts and Presents; and amongst the rest, 400 Suits of
complete Armor, to be divided between the most valiant Commanders; Having
first waited on the King, he, and James Douglas entered Northumberland; and
having demolished Three Castles, they would have proceeded further, but there
was so much Rain fell that Autumn, that they were forced to return. Moreover,
they heard a Report, that Richard the Second of England was coming against
them, which hastened their Retreat. His Anger was more enflamed now against the
Scots, than ever; because they had not only made a desolating War upon his
Kingdom, Themselves; but had also sent for Foreigners to aid them; and that in
such a conjuncture of Time, when the French Themselves designed also to Land a
vast Army in England; whereupon, he gathered a very puissant Army together,
consisting, as the English Writers say, of 60000 Foot, and 8000 Horse; with
this Force he resolved so to tame the Scots, Richard II. entered Scotland with
an Army.
that they should not, in many Years after, be able to Levy any considerable
Army; Besides, he Rigged out a great Navy, which were to bring Provisions into
the Forth. For he knew, That part of Scotland, wherein he was to make his
Descent, had been harassed, for many Years, by continual Wars; And if any
Provisions were left in it, that the Inhabitants would convey them away into
the neighboring, or other remote, Places. Add hereto, he was secure of the
French, for he knew, that they would not put to Sea in a Stormy Winter. With
those Forces he entered Scotland, sparing no Place, neither Sacred nor Profane;
no, nor any Age, nor Degrees of Men, if they were capable to bear Arms. In the
mean time, Monsieur Vien, being more mindful of his Kings Commands to him, at
his parting from him, than of the present posture of Affairs in Scotland, was
earnest with Douglas to come to a Battle. He still answered him, That the Scots
forbore to engage, not out of any Alienation of Mind from the French, but being
Conscious of their own Weakness; and thereupon, he took him up into an high
Place, from whence he might safely take a view of the Enemy; Whereupon the
Scots enter England.
He, then perceiving the long Train of the English in their March, quickly
turned to be of his Opinion. Whereupon, they both concluded, That, in the
present circumstances, the best and only Way for them to incommode the Enemy,
was, to gather together what Force they could, and so to invade England.
Thereupon, they entered, far from the Kings Army, into Cumberland, and made a
great Havoc therein, and in the neighboring Counties. The English, Winter
being now at hand, and the Country of Lothian being spoiled by the War, (for
they durst not g^ ^ar from their Ships, lest Provisions should fail them)
consulted about their Return; Some were of Opinion, that it was best to follow
after the Scots in the Rear, and, in their Return, to compel them to Fight,
whether they would or no. But those, who knew the Ways better, through which
they were to march, replied on the contrary, That there would be great
difficulty in passing over such Marshes and Mountains, and sometimes narrow
Places, wherein there was also so much want of all things, that a very few Men,
and those nimble ones too, could carry Provisions enough with them, tho but for
a few days, to finish the March; and besides, if they should overcome those
Difficulties, yet the next Country, which was to receive them, was not
overfruitful of itself; and also, it had been wasted by the War. Again, if they
should wade through all those Inconveniences, yet they had to do with a nimble
and shifting Enemy, whom it would be more difficult to find, and to bring to a
Battle, than to overcome; and, if they could find him out, yet he would not be
compelled to Fight, but in his own Places of Advantage: That Edward the Third,
his Grandfather, had Experience hereof, to the great Damage of his Own, and
little Inconvenience of the Scots Army. Upon Hearing of this, as also casting
in their Minds, what Miseries they might suffer in an Enemies Country, They
both return home.
in a cold Winter; and in the mean time, leave their Wives, Children, and what
else was dear to them, desolate at home; they changed their Minds, and marched
back directly the same way, that they came. Thus both Armies had a free Time of
plundering in their Enemies Country; and each of them returned home again,
without seeing any Enemy.

The Scots, well knowing, That the English could not attempt another Expedition
till the next Summer, resolved to attack Roxburgh, a Neighbor Town, and the
Garrison there, which was greatly annoyous to the Country thereabout. When they
were ^ome thither, a dissension arose betwixt the Scots and the French, about
the Town, even before it was taken. The French and Scots quarrel about the
Bears Skin, before he was caught.
The French alleging, That, seeing by a large Experience in Wars at home, they
were more skilled in the Methods of taking Towns, than the Scots; and moreover,
that they had spent a great deal of Money in the War; They therefore thought it
but just, That, if the Town were carried, it should be Theirs, and remain under
the Jurisdiction of France. On the contrary, the Scots urged, That it was very
unjust, That Auxiliaries should reap the Reward and Benefit of the whole War;
and for what Expenses they had been at, it had been spent rather on Themselves
than the Scots, it being in order to distract and divide the Forces of England,
and so to avert Part of the War from France; and if the Friendly Offices on
Both sides were put in the Balance, the Scots might, upon juster grounds,
demand the Charge of the whole War of the French, than the French could
challenge any Reward for their Assistance, especially such a Reward, as no
History, in the Memory of Man, does relate either to have been demanded, or
given, by Allys one to, or amongst, another: Yea, The Unjustness of their
Demand appeared by This, That the Scots might have sat still in Peace, without
being prejudiced by the English; and so might have been Spectators only of the
Wars betwixt Two potent Kings; but the French could not have Obtained the same
Quiet, unless they would have yielded up a good Part of their Country. Neither
could they see, of what use that Town would be to the French, if they had it,
save only to be as a Bridle; that so the Arbitrament of War or Peace might be
at their dispose; and if That were their intent, it were more for the Profit,
yea, and for the Credit too, of the Kings of Scotland, to be without the Town,
than, on a Trivial occasion, to give up Themselves to a voluntary Servitude:
But, if by so unequal a Postulation, they thought to excuse their Return home,
which they sometime before attempted, there was no need at all of such a Blind,
for as they freely came, so they had Liberty always, at their pleasure, freely
to depart; neither was it advisable in the Scots to stay Them; in regard they
might easily foresee, their Service would be but small, if they were detained
against their Wills.

Hereupon, They retreated from Roxburgh without attaquing it; and, whereas
there had grievous Complaints been made betwixt Both Parties, before; so, (if
matters should still continue at that Pass) open Enmity did seem likely to
arise. French Soldiers more licentious than Scots, or English, which occasions
a disgust betwixt them.
The Original of the Dissension arose from the different Custom and Carriage of
either Nation, in managing of a War. For the Scots and English Soldiers pay
honestly for what they take at their Quarters, and carry it amongst their
Countrymen, as moderately and soberly in War, as in Peace. But the French
otherwise; wherever they march, All Is their Own, as if they had public
Permission to Rob and Spoil; for, they, having been accustomed to this kind of
Life, think, they might lawfully do That, which Custom has inured them always
to do, heretofore: And therefore, before that time, there had often Quarrels,
and sometimes Blows, happened betwixt the Scots and French; These endeavoring
to practice their wonted Rapacity; and the Other not submitting to such an
unaccustomed Servility; so that as One snatched away what was none of His; the
Other labored to defend his Own. After this Disgust and Alienation of Minds at
Roxburgh, the French Commissaries used greater Licentiousness than ever before,
in gathering in Provisions, as intending shortly to depart; and the Countrymen,
disdaining to be made a Prey to a Few men, and those Strangers, too, many times
took away their Baggage and their Horses; and the Officers and straggling
Soldiers, sent out to Forage, were sometimes wounded, sometimes slain outright,
by them. When Complaints hereof were brought to the Council; the Countrymen
answered with one Consent, The French Army leaves Scotland, but their General
is retained to satisfy damages.
That they were Treated more Coursly, and Robb^d, by the French, who called
Themselves Friends, than by the English, their Professed Enemies; and therefore
they resolved, That they should not depart the Land, till they had made them
Recompense for their Losses, neither could this obstinate Humor of theirs be
stopped by the Douglasses, tho they were the most Popular men of that Age.
Hereupon, the Army was sent back, but the General was detained, till full
Payment was made. The French set Sail in the Calends of November; Nov. 1.
the Scots, either tired with the Military Toil of the last Year, or satiated
with the Spoils of so many Prosperous Expeditions, sat still all that Winter.
But the next Spring, William Douglas, the Son of Archibald Earl of Galway,
sailed over into Ireland, both to revenge at present the often Descents of the
Irish upon the Coasts of Galway, and also to restrain them for the Future.

This William was a Young man, the Eminentest in all Virtues both of Body and
Mind, amongst all the Scots. He was a big-bodied Man, Will. Douglas sails into
Ireland.
and had strength accordingly; and his comely Beauty was accompanied with a
Manly and Graceful Dignity of Presence (which seldom happens in Bodies of that
Bulk) And moreover, his Successful Exploits in War, did much recommend him;
for he oft-times, with a Few, And takes Dundalk.
would assault a greater Number of his Enemies, and come off a Conqueror;
Neither was he ever employed in any Expedition, but he gave evident Proofs of
his Valor. These Excellencies, which, in some, are matter of Envy; yet, in
him, by reason of his Affability, Complaisance and courteous Modesty, were
acceptable to All. And upon the account of those Virtues, though the King knew
him to be Base-born, yet he bestowed his Daughter Aegidia upon him, in
Marriage, a Woman of the rarest Beauty in those Times; and one, who had been
Courted by many of the Noblest Youngsters of the Court. With Her, he gave
Nithisdale, the next Country to Galway, as a Dowry.

He Landed his Men at Carlingford, a rich Town in that County, and the
Suddenness of the Thing struck such Terror into the Townsmen, That they
presently sent out to him to Treat about Conditions of Surrender. Douglas
entertained them courteously, and, in the mean time, as secure of the Enemy, he
sent out Robert Stuart, Lord of A Town on the North side of the Nith, a Mile
about Drumlanerick in Nithisdale.
Disdeir, with 200 Soldiers to bring in Provisions into his Ships. The
Townsmen, having gotten this time for Consultation, send for Aid from A Sea
Town in the County of Louth and Province of Vlster, in Ireland.
Dundale. Five hundred Horse were sent, with whose help, they divided
themselves into Two Bodies, and so drew forth against their Enemy, for, because
they were so much Superior to them in Number, they thought presently to kill
them all, and so to become Masters of their Ships, too. But both their Bodies
were routed, the Town taken, plundered, and burnt; Fifteen Ships, which rode in
the Harbor, And returns from thence.
were laded with the Spoils of the City; and, in his return home, he plundered
the Isle of Man by the way, and so arrived at Lough-Rian, which divides Part of
Galway from Carrick. There Douglas heard, That his Father was gone in an
Expedition against England; Whereupon, he hastened after him, as fast as he
could. That Expedition was undertaken chiefly upon this Ground; Richard of
England, having entered Scotland the Year before, The Scots enter England (...)
and spated nothing, either Sacred or Profane, at his return home, met with a
Domestic Sedition, which had changed the State of his whole Kingdom. To heal
this Mischief, he transferred the Government of the Provinces, and the
management of Lesser Matters (as is usually done in such Cases) from one to
another; and by this means, the Fire of Hatred was not so much quenched, as
covered in the Ashes, and likely soon after to break out, again: But, on the
the contrary, Scotland enjoyed a Great, but yet uncertain, Tranquillity. For it
was full of Young Soldiers, fit for War, and as fruitful and well-stored with
good Commanders, as ever before. So that, the Nobility were desirous of a War,
and, in all their Assemblys and Meetings, they still muttered, That so gallant
an Opportunity to be revenged upon the English for their old Injuries, was not
to be neglected, and that the English would never have omitted it, in reference
to Scotland, if the Affairs thereof had been in the like Perturbation.

But King Robert, being a Man of a quiet Disposition; and, moreover, by reason
of his growing and unweildy Age, Against the mind of Robert and his Son.
not so forward for War, seemed not to be sufficiently concerned at the Public
Injuries: And his Eldest Son, John, was naturally Slow, and, besides, Lame with
the stroke of an Horse, so that he was not well able to endure the Hardships of
a Camp. And therefore the Nobles made their Addresses to Robert, the next Son,
Earl of Fife; To whom they complained of the deplorable State of the Public,
and they all presently Concluded, That the wrong, lately received, was to be
revenged, and therein every one promised his Cheerful Assistance; so that it
was agreed, That a Levy of Soldiers should be made against the Nones of Aug. ^.
August next, but so secret, That neither King, either Scots, or English,
should know thereof.

But the English were quickly advertised by their Spies, of the Time and Place
of Meeting; so that they resolved to prevent their Enemy with the same
Surprise. For they advised the rest of the Nobles with all their Followers to
be in a readiness, not at any one day, but whenever there was need, that they
might draw to their Colors. Matters being thus resolved on, when they heard,
That the Scots, to the Number of 30000, or, as Frossard will have it, of 40000,
were met together in Teviotdale, nor far from the Borders; they resolved
further, that (seeing they were not able to encounter so great a Multitude)
they would attempt nothing before the Coming of the Enemy upon them. And in the
mean time, to conceal their Project the better, every man was to stay at his
own home, till they saw, upon what Country so great a Storm would fall; and
then, according to the Enemies Motion, they would steer their Course, and (as
the Scots had done the Autumn before, in reference to England) so now, they
would enter into Scotland another Way, and repay Loss for Loss.

In the interim, they sent a Spy to inform themselves fully of the Enemies
advance, who was now so near them; for they counted it highly conduceable to
their affairs, to know, not only the Design, but even the very last Words,
Resolves, and Actions, of their Enemies. An English Spy in the Scots Army
discovered.
He that was sent, differed nothing in Speech, Habit, or Armor from the rest,
and so was easily taken for a Scots Man. So that, having found out every thing,
which he desired to know, he was going to a Tree, where he had tied his Horse,
to fetch him, and so to be gone; but he found, that some Body had stolen and
carried him away before; so that he was fain in his Boots, Spurs, and
Riding-Apparel, to undertake his Journey on Foot. Hereupon, the Matter began to
be suspected, and when he was gone a great way, some Horsemen were sent after,
to bring him back, as a Runagate; when they came up to him, and demanded, Who,
or What he was, and Why he went from his Colors in that Fashion; he not being
able to give a ready Answer, they brought him back to the chief Officers of the
Army, to whom, for fear of a greater Punishment, he discovered all the designs
of the English. When the Scots heard this, they also changed the Order of their
Designs, The Scots Army divide themselves to attack England.
they divided their Army so, That the greatest Part of it should march toward
Carlisle, and that the Kings Two Sons, the Earls of Fife, and Strathern should
command them; to whom were joined Archibald Douglas of Galway, and the Earls of
Mar and Sutherland. The other Part was to enter Northumberland, under the
Command of James Douglas, and the Two Brethren, Dunbars, George and John; the
One Earl of Murray, the Other of Merch. Their Party consisted of 300 Horse, and
2000 Foot, besides Servants and Attendants on the Horse; for every Horseman
has at least one Servant, who, being lightly armed, can run almost as fast as
an Horse, and, when occasion is offered, can, with his Fellows, encounter an
Enemy.

When their Forces were thus divided, They, who marched toward Cumberland and
Carlisle, carried all before them, by reason of the Numerousness of their Army,
and met with no Enemy at all. But Douglas in the Devastations which he made, in
the other Circuit, had not the same Fortune; for he had so ordered the Course
of his Expedition, as to take great, and yet secret, Marches; and so passing
over Tine, to pierce as far as Durham, before he gave his Army leave to spoil
and plunder. This he did, with such Secrecy and Speed, That the English did not
know, where their Enemies were, but by the Smoke of the Fires they had made.
Douglas, in Northumberland, encountered by Percy.
Percy, the Elder, was the Greatest man in Northumberland and the adjacent
Countries, both for Wealth and Power. When the News was brought to him, he sends
Two of his Sons, Henry, and Ralph, very active Young men Both, before to
New Castle, commanding the rest to follow them thither. His Intent was, to stop
the Scots in their Retreat, and to keep them from returning. But they, having
spoiled the Wealthy County of Durham, returned home with a great Prey, and
repassed the Ti^^ about Three Miles above New Castle. There, the Commanders,
being nobly descended in their own Country, as also desirous of Glory; and
besides, lifted up with their present Success, such as it was, thought it an
Inglorious thing, in Them, to strike terror only into Rusticks, and Pl^beians,
if they did not also affright Cities; Whereupon, they marched to New Castle,
and threatening to besiege it, they endeavored by Contumelies and Big Words, to
draw out the Enemy.

When they had staid there Two Days, and some light Skirmishes, with various
Success, had passed betwixt them; There was one Combat, which, toward the
Evening of the Last Day, attracted the Eyes of all the Beholders: And that was,
A Duel between Earl Douglas and Earl Percy.
a Duel betwixt the Two Generals; for they, being, in a sort, equally matched,
in respect of Lineage, Power, Age and Courage, had a mind to encounter each
other, in the Sight of both Armies. Hereupon, a Challenge was sent, and they
Both, James Douglas and Henry Percy, entered the Lists, and ran at one another
with their Spears. Percy was unhorsed at first Brush, and Douglas got his
Spear, but he could not touch his Person, because the English came in to his
Assistance; He shook the Spear, and cried out aloud, so as he might easily be
heard, That he would carry That, as a Trophy, into Scotland. So, the Combat
being ended, the Scots kept very diligent Watch, in regard they were near a
City, well-Peopled, and full of Enemies. The Day after, they retired toward
Scotland, but very slowly, as being laden with Booty. As their Prey moved
leisurely on, they themselves assaulted a Neighbour-Castle of the Enemies,
carried and demolished it; and from thence they marched to Otterborn, about
Three Miles distant from Newcastle. There, The Scots march to Otterborn.
they took Counsel concerning the Rest of their March. The Major Part were of
Opinion, to March toward Carlisle, to meet the other Army, and so, not to
Fight singly, (as was, at first, agreed) but to wait the Conjunction of Both
Armies. But Douglas was minded to stay Two or Three Days in that Place, that so
he might make a Real Confutation of the Vaunts of Percy, who had boasted, That
they should never carry his Lance into Scotland. In the mean time, that they
might not be idle, they would attaque the Neighboring Castle. This Opinion,
though it was judged by Many none of the best, yet, for Douglas his sake, they
all submitted to it. And therefore they fortified their Camp for the present
Occasion, which on one side was sufficiently guarded by Marshes, and and then
proceeded on to take the Castle. But Percy being of a fierce Nature, that he
might blot out the Ignominy he had received, would have followed him presently
upon their Retreat, with those Forces which he had about him; but the Graver
Sort detained him, for fear of an Ambush; for they did not think it probable,
that so small a Number of Scots would have appeared before so strong a Town,
unless they had more Forces, near at hand, hid in some secret Places. That Day
and the next, they were busy in making Discoveries; but finding, that there
was no Danger of the Greater Army, as being far distant from Douglas his Party,
thereupon Percy immediately, with Ten Thousand Fighting Men, put himself upon
the March, without staying for the Bishop of Durham, who, that very Night, was
expected with some Forces; for, he thought, he had Force enough to overcome his
Enemies, who were not half as many, as He. When the English came in Sight, some
of the Scots were at Supper; others, being wearied at the Taking of the Castle,
had composed themselves to Rest; but presently, an Alarming Word was given, To
your Arms. Whilst the rest were arming themselves, the Major Part of the Foot,
and many of the Horse-Mens Servants, making use of that slender Fortification
they had, bore the Brunt of the English Assault. But the Horse had a great
Advantage, in that they were sensible of the thing, before; for, disputing
among themselves, how they should entertain the Enemy when he assaulted them,
(for, an Assault they expected) they saw, that a Neighbor Hill would be of
great Convenience to them. Thither therefore they Trooped about, and whilst the
English were assaulting the Passage into the Camp, they fell in upon their left
Flank, and made a great Slaughter, but a greater Noise: Yet, the English,
having Men enough, brought up their Reserves, and quickly made good their Ranks
again; yet, that disorder did this good to the Scots, That the Fight before the
Camp was managed more remisly, so that they had Liberty to draw out, and Range
their Army in order of Battle.

Whilst these things were doing, the Night drew on, but it was a short one, as
it uses to be in July, in the Northern Countries especially, and the Weather
also chanced to be fair; so that the Moon shining all Night, it was as bright
as Day. The Fight was maintained Gallantly, A terrible Fight between the Scots
and English, under Percy and Douglas.
as between Two Noble Champions, who were more solicitous for their Honor,
than for their Lives. Percy endeavored to redeem his Credit, and Douglas to
maintain His, by a New Achievement; so that there was as much Eagerness on the
one side, as on the other, though their Numbers were unequal, and so the Fight
continued till it was late at Night. And then the Moon began to be Clouded,
that Friend could not be discerned from Foe; whereupon, they rested a while, to
take a little breath; and as soon as the Moon brake forth from the Clouds, the
English pressed hard upon the Scots, so that they gave Ground, and Douglas his
Standard was like to be lost. When the Two Patrick Hepburns, Father and Son,
saw this, they hastened from the other Wing, and brake through the Ranks of
their own Soldiers, and so pierced to the Front, where the main Danger was; and
there they began so fierce an Assault, that they gave and received many Wounds;
and in fine, brought back their Men to their former Ground, from whence they
had been driven. Neither was Douglas content therewith, but with his Two
Friends and Followers, Robert Heart, and Simon Glenduning his Kinsman, he rushed
in amongst the midst of his Enemies, and being of a stout Spirit, as well as
strong Body, made a great Slaughter wherever he came. Heart slain, And Douglas
mortally Wounded.
His Friends strove earnestly to come up to him; yet, before they could do so,
he was mortally Wounded in Three Places, and lay upon the Ground; Heart lay dead
by him having a great many Wounds about him; and the Priest, who had
accompanied him in all his Hazards, when he fainted, defended his Body from
Injury. In this Condition, John Lindsay, and the Two Sinclares, John and
Walter, found him, and asked him, How he did? Very well, said he, for I am a
Dying, yet I do not Die like a Sluggard, upon my Bed, but as almost all my
Ancestors have done; His Three last dying Requests
and I have Three, my last, Requests to make to you: First, That you would
conceal my Death, both from Friends and Foes. Secondly, That you would not
suffer my Standard to be taken down. Thirdly, That you would Revenge my Death:
And if you will do this, I shall bear the rest more contentedly. Whereupon,
they in the First place, covered his Body with a Cloak, that it might not be
known, and then they set up his Standard, and cried out, (as the Custom is,) A
Douglas, A Douglas. At that Cry, there was such a Concourse made, and they ran
in upon the Enemy with such Alacrity and Courage, that they drove him far away
from the place of Battle* For, at the Name of Douglas, not the Common Soldiers
only, but John, Earl of Murray, came in, as thinking things to be there in the
greatest Danger. For, they had before routed that part of the Enemies Army they
fought with, and taken Percy the Younger, Ralfe P^rcy (...).
who was much Wounded, and sent by them into the Camp, to be dressed of his
Wounds, so that the Service being not so hot, in other parts of the Army, the
Duglassians, which had run in to the Standard, routed the English, who were
wearied with their Day-toil, and Night Fight; The English overthrown.
and in the brunt, Henry Percy, their General was taken Prisoner* When he was
lost, the rest betook themselves to a confused Flight. There were slain of the
English, in that Battle, 1840, about 1000 wounded, and 1040 taken Prisoners. Of
the Scots, there were 100 slain, and 200 taken Prisoners, in regard a Few in
pursuit followed a greater Number of their Enemies. James Lindsay, perceiving
Matthew Redman, Governor of Berwick, Lindsay takes Redman Prisoner, and
releases him on his Parol.
to be one of the straggling Flyers, judging him by the Goodness of his Army,
to be One of the Principal Commanders, made presently after him; when he had
fled Three Miles, his Horse being weary, he thought he could not escape by
Riding, and so he dismounted, and ran away on Foot. Lindsay did the same; At
last, after some Skirmish betwixt them; the Englishman, not being so good at
that kind of Weapon, yielded himself to Lindsay, who sent him home, having
first taken his Oath, That he would return in 20 days. Courtesy to Prisoners.
This was then the Courtesy of the Neighbor Nations toward their Prisoners,
which, to this day, is punctually observed amongst the Borderers. And if a Man
do not return at the Day appointed, This is his Punishment. In the Meetings
which are made for Reparation of mutual Damages, he that complains how he was
deceived, holds up the shape of an Hand or Glove, on a long Spear, that it may
be seen of all; The ancient punishment of Prisoners not returning upon their
Parol.
That is counted the highest Brand of Infamy upon any Man; so that He, who has
thus violated his Faith, becomes thereby detestable to his own Friends and
Kindred, to such a degree, that no Man of any Quality will eat, or drink, or
talk with him, or, so much as harbor him in his House. Lindsay, having
dismissed his Prisoner on the forementioned Terms, perceived a great Body of
Men before him, and Trooped up to them; he knew them not to be Enemies, till he
was so near, that he could not retreat, but was taken Prisoner. The Bishop of
Durham comes too late to Assist Percy.
These were the Forces of the Bishop of Durham, who, coming late to Newcastle,
and not being able to overtake Percy, not thinking that he would engage till
the next Day, made an halt to refresh his Men, and, after they had supped, he
renewed his March. But he had not gone far from the Town, before those, that
run away, informed him of the Loss of the Day. Whereupon he returned into the
Town, and advised with his Tenants concerning his Following the Scots. The
Resolve was, That before Daybreak, they should all be in Arms; and so, in the
morning, there were Ten thousand Horse and Foot from the Neighboring Places, a
promiscuous multitude, which came in. They encouraged the Bishop to march the
nearest way to the Enemy, and to give him Battle, alleging, That He was so
wearied with his yesterdays Fight, and so many were wounded, and the rest
secure by reason of their late Victory, that he might obtain an easy Conquest
over them. The Earl of Murray, upon whom the Eyes of all were fixed, when
Douglas was gone, was advertised of his coming by his Scouts, whereupon he
consulted with his Chief Commanders about the Prisoners; To kill them, in cold
Blood, after they had given them Quarter, seemed cruel; and to save alive a
number of Enemies, almost equal with their own, seemed dangerous. The Resolve
was, That they should all Swear not to stir, whilst the Battle was fought, and
though their Friends might relieve them, yet they should continue and own
themselves as Prisoners, still; Upon these Terms, they were left in the Camp
with a small Guard, who were commanded to fall upon them all, if any one did
stir. This Matter thus settled, the Scots, being full of Courage, by reason of
their Former Victory, marched out with their Army, being fortified and secured
in the Rear with Marshes, and, on the Right and Left, with Trees which they cut
down; and moreover, the Word of Command was given, The Bishops Forces terrified
with the Sound of Horns, and Retreat.
That as soon as the Enemy drew near, every Man should blow his Horn, which he
carried behind him at his Back, which would make such a mighty Noise and Sound
as was terrible of it self; but, being multiplied by the Repercussion and Echo
of the Neighboring Hills, gave forth the Representation of a Greater Force,
than indeed they were. The English had marched very fast, and moreover were to
fight amongst the dead Bodies of their own Men, being astonished at that
horrible Noise, and also at the Alacrity of their Enemies, who stood in good
Order over against them; and besides, having no Skilful Commander over so
tumultuary a Body, and also the Commander not much confiding on such a Raw
Soldiery, they presently turned their Colors, and marched back, as they came.
Lindsay's Kindness to Redman requited by him.
In the mean time, Lindsay, who, as I have said, was taken Prisoner, and left
at Newcastle, being seen and known by Redman, was courteously treated by him,
and set at Liberty without Ransom. The Scots, having passed over this sudden
Brunt so easily, resolved to return home; but before, they dismissed Ralfe
Percy, who was much wounded, Ralfe Percy released on his Parol.
so that he could not endure the Jogging of an Horse, and sent him to Newcastle
to be healed of his Wounds; upon his Promise, That, as soon as ever he was able
to ride, he would wait on the Earl of Murray, where he pleased to appoint; and
engaging his Faith thereto, as the manner is, he departed; Seven hundred other
Prisoners followed his example, and were released, on their Parol, upon the
same Terms. Many of the Common Soldiers, who were like to be more burdensome,
than beneficial, was dismissed gratis. Of the Nobler sort, Henry Percy, and
almost 400 more, were detained, and carried into Scotland; and shortly after,
upon Payment of a Ransom set upon their Heads, they were all set at Liberty;
Henry Percy Ransomed.
so that in that Age, as Ennius says, Men did not huckster out a War, but
fought it out, as contending, mainly, for Liberty and Glory. Three days after,
the Bodies of Douglas, and the other Great Commanders that fell, were carried
to Douglas buried at Mulross.
Mulross, and there magnificently interred. When the Tidings of these Matters
were brought to the other Army, which was wasting Cumberland, it disturbed all
their Mirth, so that the Joy conceived for their good Success, was turned into
bitter Mourning. The Loss of Douglas did so affect all Military Men, that not
only that Army which followed him, but this Other also, returned home in
Silence and Sadness, Both the Scots Armies lament Doug^a^.
as if they had not been Conquerors, but Conquered. The Public Sentiment was
also further increased, That he died without Children, and in the Flower of his
Age; and that almost He alone was deprived of the Fruit of the Victory, which
he had gotten. His Estate fell to Archibald, Earl of Galway, Surnamed the
Austere, who also was a brave Cavalier, in his days. This is that memorable
Fight of Otterborn, remarkable not only for the Magnanimity and Hardiness of
the Commanders, and Soldiers, therein, and their Modesty in Victory; but also
for the various and changeable event of it: That the Conqueror, in the highest
expectation of his Glory, was taken off by Death, and could not enjoy the Fruit
of his own Labor; And the Conquered General, though then discomfited and made
a Prisoner, yet outlived this Battle many years, in great Glory and Splendor.
It was Fought the 12th of the Calends of August, in the year of our Lord 1388.
July 21.


By this Victory, Matters were more composed and quiet both at home and abroad;
but, in regard the King, by Reason of his Age, was not fit to manage Business,
and withal, understanding of the Reflection that was made upon him by reason of
the late Expedition, which was undertaken without him; and his eldest Son John
was of a slow nature, and addicted more to Ease, Robert Earl of Fife made
Governor of Scotland.
than to difficult Enterprises; he therefore Indicted an Assembly of the
Estates, and made Robert, Earl of Fife, Deputy of the Kingdom, by the name of
Governor; yet, they, who managed that Office before him, were usually called
Custodes, i. e. Keepers. When Henry Percy, eminent for Stock and Prowess, was
Prisoner in Scotland, the Earl of Merch, commonly called Earl Marshall, a Man
fiercer in his Words, than Actions, was put in his Place: He, Earl Marshal
vaunts over the Scots.
undervaluing the Scots Valor in the Fight of Otterborn, and also grievously
blaming the Cowardice of the English, did thereby incur the Hatred of Both
Nations. And indeed, Robert, Vice-King of Scotland, was so offended at his
boasting Insolence, That he thought it a just Cause to make an Expedition
against him. Hereupon he entered the Enemies Country, and with Archibald
Douglas, then Earl of Douglas, marches directly toward the Enemy, who was
reported to stay for him with a great Army; when he came near him, he gave him
opportunity to engage, Whereupon Robert enters England, and returns with a
great Booty.
which he declining, he sent a Trumpeter to him, to desire him to try it out in
a plain Field; but the Marshall kept himself in his Fastnesses and Places
unaccessible; so that Robert, after he had showed his Army some hours to the
Enemy, sent them forth to pillage in the Neighborhood; and he ransacked those
Places especially, which the Marshall was wont to have his Residence in, and
afterward he marched them back, laden with Booty, without any Fight at all.
This Expedition, though undertaken upon slight grounds, yet was very pleasing
both to the English and the Scots, who Both rejoiced to see the vanity of the
Man so to be confuted; but he, to excuse the Matter, as often as Mention was
made of it, did allege, That he did it for the Love of his Countrymen, as being
unwilling to expose them to needless danger. At this very time, a Truce was
made; and Hopes of Peace between France and England by the Mediation of the
Pope, A Peace between France and England.
and the Neighboring Princes, on This Condition, That the Allies of Both might
be comprehended by Name, viz The Portugals of the English side; the Scots and
Spanish Castilians, of the French's. King Robert, against the Advice of his
Counsel, gave his single Assent thereunto, but upon no solid ground, for he was
able to make neither Peace nor War, but by the Public Advice of the Estates;
neither could he promise any firm Truce, Robert assents thereto on his own Head.
without their Decree in the Case. Neither could the Nobility conceal any
longer that hidden Grief and Disgust, which they had conceived against the
French, who had only done them this Courtesy, (the backward way) that when
they were to do Service against an Enemy, they would strike the Weapons out of
their Hands; and so take away the Fruit of a former Victory, and also the Hopes
of a New. At last, after much dispute and quarrelling, the French Ambassador
gained this Point, but with much ado, That the Scots should send Ambassadors
into France, about the Matter, that so the Hopes of a Peace, so near at hand,
might not be hindered by their Obstinacy. Robert the King lived not long after,
but departed this Life in his Castle called Lying on the River Irwin. Apr. 19.
Dundonald, in the Year of Christ 1390, the 13th of the Calends of May. He
lived 74 Years, and Reigned 19 Years and 24 Days. This King managed Wars by his
Deputies, and usually with good Success; he was present in few Battles himself,
Roberts Death and Character.
which some impute to his Age, others to his Cowardice; but all say, That he
was a very Good Man, and, in the Arts of Peace, easily comparable with the best
of Kings. He administered Justice, diligently and impartially to all; he
severely punished Robberies. In his Actions, he was Constant; in his Words,
Faithful. He undertook the Kingdom in troublesome times, yet he settled things
at home, appeased Discords, and governed with great Equity and Justice, and he
got such Conquests over his Enemy, that he reduced all the Castles they had,
but Three.

After his Death, Tumults arose, where they were least expected. Alexander,
Earl of Buchan, the youngest of the Kings Sons by Elizabeth More, fell into a
deadly fewd with the Bishop of Murray, upon a light Occasion; and when he could
not come at him to kill him, he wrecked his fury upon the Church of Elgin,
Alexander Earl of Buchan, burns Elgin Church.
(which was then, one of the fairest in all Scotland) and burnt it down to the
Ground. The same Year, William Douglas, Earl of Nithisdale, (who, as I said
before, for his Valor, was made the Kings Son in Law,) was slain at William
Douglas slain at Dantzick by the procurement of Clifford of England.
Dantzick, on the Vistula, by some Ruffians, who were sent to perpetrate the
Murder, by Clifford of England. For Douglas, when Matters were quieted at home,
that he might not lie lazy and idle, intended for the Holy War; and in Or,
Prussias A noted Ma^t Town of great Trade on the Wesse^, acknowledge the King
of Poland for Protector.
Borussia, he gave such Proof of his Valor, That he was made Admiral of the
whole Fleet, which was a Great and Magnificent One, and, withal, well
accommodated. But a Quarrel arising between him and Clifford, grounded upon Old
Emulations, because he gruded him that Honor, he sent him a Challenge, to
Fight with him, Hand to Hand. But the Challenger, perceiving, into what an
Hazardous Adventure he had run himself, by that Challenge, before the set time
came, caused him to be slain by hired Assassins.

The Tenth BOOK.
Robert III. The Hundred and First King.
ROBERT the Second, was Succeeded by his Eldest Son, John, in the Ides of
August, and Year of our Lord 1390. He was called John, till that time; but
then, August 1^.
by the Decree of the Estates, his Name was changed into Robert; whether it
were for the Misfortunes and Calamities of Two Kings, Robert the Third, his
Name changed from John.
called John's, one of France, the other of England: Or, for the Eminent Virtues
and Felicity of Two Roberts, both in Peace and War, who lately Reigned in
Scotland, as Authors are silent in, so I will not determine.

The Excellency of this Robert, was, That he rather wanted Vice, than was
Illustrious for any Virtue; so that the Name of King was in him, but the
management of all public Affairs rested on Robert, his Brother. In the
Beginning of his Reign, there was Peace abroad, by reason of the Three Years
Truce, made with the English; which, a while after, was enlarged for Four Years
more. But at home, a Sedition was begun, by Duncan, or Dunach, Stuart. He was
the Son of Alexander, Earl of Buchan, the Kings Brother; Duncan Stuart rises in
Arms but is suppressed.
and was every jot as feirce, as his Father; who, upon the Death of his
Grandfather, imagining now, that he had a fit opportunity for Rapine and
Pillage, got a Band of Roisters about him, and, descending into Angus, spoiled
all, as if it had been an Enemies Country. Walter Ogilby, and Walter Lichton
his Brother, endeavoring to oppose him, were slain, with Sixty of their
Followers. They being lifted up with this Success, did afflict the Country more
grievously than ever; but hearing of the approach of the Earl of Crawford, whom
the King had sent to restrain their Insolence, the nimblest of them fled
speedily to their lurking Holes; of those who made not so much have, some were
slain, some taken, and afterward put to Death. Thus the Wickedness of these
Unquiet and Turbulent Men, being hindered from breaking in upon the Plain and
Champion Countries, they fell out most grievously amongst Themselves, at their
own homes. And especially, Two Families of them did exercise great Rage and
Cruelty, one upon another. They refused to end their Fewds by course of Law;
or, to refer them to indifferent Arbitrators. So that the King sent Two Earls
to suppress them, Thomas Earl of Dunbar, and James Lindsay, his Father being
Dead, now Earl of Crawford: These Commanders, considering they were to engage
against a feirce and resolute People, who valued not their Lives, nor the
Pleasure thereof; so that they were not likely to subdue them by force, without
great Slaughter of their own Men; they therefore resolved to try what they
could do by Policy. And thereupon, they accosted the Clans of both Families a
part, and represented to them, what danger would accru to Both, by their mutual
Slaughters one of another; and if one Family should extirpate the other; yet,
that was not likely to be effected, without the Great Damage, even of the
Conquering Side; and if either Party should prevail, yet the Contest would not
end so; A notable Policy to divide the Islanders, and make them Instruments to
destroy one another, which takes effect accordingly.
For then they were to engage the King's Forces, (though they were weakened before
by their mutual Conflicts) of whose Anger against them Both, they might be
justly sensible, because he had sent them with Forces to destroy them Both,
even before they had severely, and irrecoverably, engaged against one another.
But in regard, they were more desirous of their Preservation than their Ruin,
if they would hearken to them, they would show them a Way, How they might be
reconciled, with the King's good Liking, and that on no dishonorable Terms,
neither; no, nor unrevenged one upon another, To this Motion they seemed
inclinable, so that the Condition was proposed; That 300 of each side should
Try it out in Fight before the King, Armed only with their Swords. They that
were Conquered, should have an Amnesty for all past Offenses, and the
Conquerors should be Honored with the King's Favor, and the Nobles, too. Both
sides were well pleased with the Terms; so that a day was fixed for the
Combat, and at the time appointed, the Heads of the Families, with their
Parties, came to Court, and part of a Field, on the North side of the Town of
Perth, which was severed from the rest, by a deep Trench, was appointed for the
place of Combat; and Galleries built round for Spectators. Hereupon, an huge
Multitude was Assembled together, and sat ready to see the Dispute; but the
Fight was delayed awhile, because one of the 300, of the One Party, had hid
himself for Fear, and their Fellows were not willing to engage without having
just an equal number with their Adversaries; neither was any one found to
supply the Place of him who was absent; And of the other Party, not a Man would
be drawn out, or exempted from the Fight, lest he might seem less valued, and
not so courageous as the rest. After a little pause, an ordinary Tradesman
comes forth, and offers to supply the Place of him, that was absent, Provided,
That if his Side Conquered, they would pay him half a Gold Dollar of France;
and also, provide for him afterward, as long as he lived. Thus, the Number
being again equalled, the Fight began, and it was carried on with such great
Contention, both of Body and Mind, as old Grudges, inflamed by new Losses,
could raise up in Men of such fierce Dispositions, as were accustomed to Blood
and Cruelty; especially, seeing Honor and Estate was propounded to the
Conqueror; Death and Ignominy, to the Conquered: The Spectators were possessed
with as much Horror, as the Combatants were with Fury, as detesting to behold
the ugly and deformed Mutilations, and Butcheries, of one another Bodies; the
Detruncation of their Limbs; and, in a word, the Rage of Wild Beasts, under the
shape of Men. But all took notice, that none carried himself more valiantly,
than that Mercenary and Supposititious Hireling, to whose Valor a great Part
of the Victory was to be ascribed: Of that Side that he was of, there were Ten
left alive, besides himself, but all of them grievously wounded: Of the
contrary Faction, there remained only One, who was not wounded at all; but,
seeing there was so much odds, that he alone must encounter with so many, he
cast himself into the River Tay, which was near at hand; and in regard, his
Adversaries were not able to follow him, by reason of their Wounds, he escaped
to the other Side. By this means, the forwardest of Both Parties being slain,
the promiscuous Multitude, being left without Leaders, left off their Trade of
Seditioning, for many Years after, and betook themselves to their Husbandry,
again. This Fight, or Combat, happened in the Year 1396.

About Two Years after, in an Assembly of the States at Perth, the King made
David his Son, being 18 Years before old of Rothes, and Robert his Brother Earl
of Menteith, and Fife Dukes of Albany. This vain Title of Honor then was first
Celebrated in Scotland, a great increase to Ambition, but none at all to
Virtue; neither did it afterward thrive with any, who enjoyed it. The King
would have bestowed the same Title of Honor upon the Earl of Douglas also; but
he being a grave and solid Person, Dukes First made in Scotland.
absolutely refused that nominal Shadow of empty Honor; and if any Man told
thim, that he should be a Duke, he rebuked him sharply for it: Some say, That
the Name of Governor, which was given by his Father to Robert the Kings
Brother, was this Year confirmed by the King* E. Douglas refuses that Title.
as also That the Family of the Lindsys had the Earldom of Crawford added to
their former Honors: But they do not fully clear, Whether the Name of the
First Earl of that Family were, Thomas or David.

The next Year after, Richard the Second, King of England, was enforced to
resign the Crown; and Henry the Fourth, succeeded him. Richard the Second of
England, resigns his Crown; and Hen. the Fourth succeeds him.
In the Beginning of his Reign, before the Truce was quite ended, new Seeds of
War with the Scots were sown. George Dunbar, Earl of Merch, had betrothed his
Daughter Elizabeth to David, the King's Son, and had already paid a good part
of her Dowry. Archibald Earl of Douglas storming, That so powerful a Man, and
his Corrival, should be preferred before him, alleging, That the Consent of the
Estates was not obtained in the Case, (which no Man ever remembered, but was
asked in any of the King's Marriages, before) offered his Daughter Mary, with a
larger Dowry; and, by means of Robert the King's Brother, who could do All at
Court, He brought it about, that the Condition was accepted, and the Marriage
was Consummated by the Decree of the Estates. Difference in Scotland,
occasioned by the Marriage of the King's Son.
George was much affected at this Injury, as well as Reproach, and made great
complaint to the King; but, seeing what was once done, could not be undone, he
desired, at least, the repayment of the Dowry. This his just Demand being
denied, and perceiving, that he was not like to obtain any Right, in regard the
Minds and Ears of all the Court were prepossessed by his Rival, he departed
upon very angry, yea, threatening Terms, and so giving up the Castle of Dunbar
to Robert Maitland, his Sisters Son, he went for England. Robert presently
yielded up the Castle to an Herald, sent by the King to demand it, and Douglas
was admitted into it with a Garrison, so that when George returned home, he was
denied entrance. Hereupon, he took his Wife, Children, and some intimate
Friends, and returned into England. Being there, as he was a Man powerful at
home, and famous abroad, he joined Counsels with Percy, a mortal Enemy to the
name of the Douglas's; and in regard, he was well beloved by the bordering
Scots, of which, many were either his Tenants, Allies, or otherwise obliged to
him, Dunbar joins with Percy, and infests Scotland.
he made an Inroad into the whole Province of Merch, and drove great Preys from
the Country, especially from the Lands of the Douglasses. The King of Scots
first proclaimed George a Public Enemy, and confiscated all his Estate; next,
he sent an Herald to England, to Demand, That he might be given up as a
Fugitive, according to the League made betwixt them; and also to complain of
the violation of the Truce. Henry of England gave a peremptory Answer to his
Demands, That he had given the Public Faith to George for his Protection, and
that he would not break his Royal Word; as if a private Pact with a Runagate
were more Religiously to be observed, than That which had been publicly
confirmed by Ambassadors and Heralds; for the Days of the Truce made with
Richard, were not yet expired. In the mean time, Henry Percy, the Younger,
called Hot-Spur, and George Dunbar ceased not to infest the Neighboring Lands
of the Scots with their Incursions. Which when they had often and successfully
done, their Boldness increased with their Success; so that, gathering 2000 Men
together, they entered Lothian, and made great havoc about Hadington. They
besieged Standing upon Tine, 3 Miles below Hadington.
Hales-Castle, but in vain. When they came to Linton, (a Village situate on
the Tine, a River of Lothian) they were so disturbed at the sudden Coming of
Douglas against them, that they left their Prey, and all their Baggage behind
them, and ran away in such Fear, that they never stopped, till they came to
Berwick. This was done about the beginning of February, in the Year 1400.

The same Year, upon the return of the Herald, War was denounced against
England, and then also Archibald Douglas, Surnamed the Austere, The Death of
Archibald Douglas.
a man inferior to none of his Ancestors in all kind of Praise, fell sick and
died, in a very bad time for his Country, which had lately lost, by sundry
misfortunes, so many brave Generals, before. His Son, August 13.
of the same Name, succeeded him. In the Ides of August, the English King, with
great Forces, entered Scotland. When he came to Haddington, he stayed there
three days, and then marched to Leith; and staying there as many days, he laid
Siege to the Castle of Edinburgh. The Governor led an Army against them, but
very slowly; so that it easily appeared, that he did not much care, if the
Castle of Edinburgh were taken by the English; and in it, David, the Kings Son.
For, by this time his wicked Ambition did begin to show it self: Henry of
England Enters Scotland,
For, he undervalued his Brother, as an effeminate Person, and sought the
Destruction of his Children, as much as he could, that he might enjoy the
Kingdom, himself. So that their Loss he counted his Gain. But the King of
England, and his Army, on the contrary, did Exercise their Enmity very
moderately; as if, by an Ostentation of War, Carries it Moderately,
they had only sought for Peace; for, having made some slight Onset on the
Castle, he raised the Siege, and returned home, without doing any considerable
damage to the Places, through which he marched; insomuch, that, in his Marches
both backward and forward, he got the Praise and Commendation of a mild,
clement, and moderate Enemy; he was courteous to Those* that surrendered
themselves; he offered no violence to consecrated Places; yea, he rewarded
those bountifully, And Retreats.
who had formerly entertained his Father. All which did more ingratiate Him,
and render the Governor more odious; in regard he did not prosecute the War
with any Eagerness, as against an Enemy; nor yet, endeavor to make so easy and
beneficent a King, his Friend. After Henry was returned for England, George
Dunbar did still trouble the Borders rather with frequent, than great, Inroads.
To suppress him, there was more need of a diligent, than numerous, Force, and
therefore Douglas divided the Forces of each County into small Bands, and
appointed Commanders over them; who, by turns, were to stop the Enemy; or, if
they saw cause, to Fight him. The First lot sell upon Thomas Halyburton of
Birlington, who took a great Booty from the Enemy, out of the Lands near to A
Castle over against Holy-Isle, in Northumberland.
Bamburgh. But Patrick Hepburne, who wandered further abroad with a greater Band
of men, had not the like Success, for trusting too much to the Numbers of his
men, and not being very wary in his Retreat with his Prey, he was cut off by
the English, and, with him, all the flower of the Lothian Soldiery. Archibald
Douglas, to revenge the slaughter of his Friend, by the consent of the
Governor, gathered above Ten thousand men together, abundance of the Nobles
accompanied him in his March, and amongst them Murdo, the Governors Son; The
Scots overthrown by Percy and Dunbar at Homeldon.
when they came to Northumberland, at New Castle upon Tine, they passed the
River, and spoiled the Country with Fire and Sword; but there encountering with
Henry Percy the Younger, and George Dunbar, in a pitched Battle, they were
overcome, many of the Nobles were slain, Douglas was taken Prisoner, having
lost one of his Eyes; so were also Murdo, Earl of Fife; Thomas, Earl of Murray;
and George, Earl of Angus, with many other Noble and Illustrious Persons. And
indeed, the strength of Scotland was not so much weakened (...) any one Fight,
for many years before, as it was in This. It was fought at Homeldon, May. 7.
a Town in Northumberland, in the No^es of May, and Year of Christ 1401.

Percy, having obtained so notable a Victory, resolved to subject all the
Country, which lay betwixt Northumberland and the Forth, to the English
Scepter; and, he thought it would be a work of no great difficulty so to do, in
regard most of the Nobility of those Countries were either slain in the Fight,
or held Prisoners by him. Thereupon, beginning with Cocklaw, a Castle in
Teviotdale, Co^^^aw-Castle besieged by the English* but they raise the Siege
themselves.
the Governor agreed, That unless the Castle was relieved by the Scots in forty
days, he would surrender it up. When these Conditions was brought to the King,
and then to the Governor, some were of Opinion, that the Castle should be
surrendered, in regard it was not of That Consequence, as, for the sake thereof,
to hazard the strength of the Kingdom, a second time, which had been so sorely
shal^en and weakened in the late Fight. This Dejection of spirit proceeded, not
so much from Fear of the Enemy, as from the Perfidiousness of the Governor, who
gaped for the Kingdom. He, on the other side, to avert all Suspicion from
himself, in high confident Words affirmed, That this Cow-heartedness and
Confession of Public Fear, would more encourage the Enemy, than the loss of a
Battle. And if any one thought, That the English would be contented with the
taking in of One Castle, they were very much mistaken; for, as Fire is more
increased by a light Aspersion of Water, so the desire of the English, upon
Surrender of some Places, would not be extinguished, but rather inflamed to the
Taking of more, so that What was given up at First, would be but a Step to a
further Progress: But, (says he) if all of you refuse to march out, for the
relief of the Castle, I my self will go alone; for as long as I live, and am in
health, I will never suffer such a Mark of Disgrace to be branded on the
Scottish Name. Upon this stout Speech of the Governors, the rest, either
extinguishing, or dissembling, their Suspicion, cried out, That they would
follow Him. But Fortune decided the Controversy, and blew off that danger; For
Percy was called back to the Civil War in England, and so the Siege was raised
without Blows.

Whilst these things were acted abroad, against the Enemy matters stood* less
prosperously at home; For shortly after the Death of Archibald Douglas, the
Year before* there immediately followed the Decease of the Queen Annabella,
Arch Bishop Tra^^e an observer of Ancient Discipline.
and of Walter Trayle, Archbishop of St. Andrews, insomuch, that all men's
minds did presage a great Mutation of Affairs. For the splendor of Military
Matters was upheld by Douglas; the Ecclesiastical Authority and Resemblance
(such as it was) of Ancient Discipline, by Trayle; and the Dignity of the
Court, by the Queen; as did soon appear by what happened, after her death. For
David, the Kings Son, was a Young man of a fierce Disposition, and inclined to
Wantonness and Lust. The Indulgence of his Father increased those Vices; for,
though he had not Authority enough to maintain the Reverence due from him to his
Father; yet, by the diligent Monitions of Those, David after his Mothers
decease, lets loose the reins to Licentiousness.
who were appointed to be his Tutors in his Youth, but much more by the Counsel
and Advice of his Mother, his Youthful Heats were somewhat blunted and
restrained; but, when she was dead, he, as new freed from this Curb, returned
to his own Manners and Lustful Courses; for, laying aside all shame and fear,
he took away other Men's Wives by Force; yea, and Virgins too, though well
descended, and Those that he could not persuade by fair means, he ravished by
Compulsion; and, if any one endeavored to stop him in his libidinous ways, he
was sure to come off, not without Punishment. Many Complaints were brought to
his Father about These his Exorbitancies; so that he wrote to his Brother, the
Governor, to keep him with him, and to oversee his Conversation, until his
Lustful Spirit did abate: And till he gave some hopes of his Amendment of Life.
The Governor had now an Opportunity put into his hands, to effect that, he
most desired, which was, ^o destroy his Brothers Issue; so that, he met David,
three Miles from St. Andrews, and carried him into the Castle thereof, David
most cruelly starved to Death by his Uncle Robert.
which he kept in the nature of a Garrison, after the Archbishops death: After
a while, he took him out from thence* and carried him to his own Castle of
Situate at the North bottom of Loc^-Lomond near the Center of Fife.
Falcoland; and there shut him up close Prisoner, intending to starve him. But
that miserable death, which his Uncles Cruelty had designed him to, was
prorogued and staved off for a few days, by the Compassion of Two of the Female
Sex: one was a Maid, and Virgin, whose Father was Governor of the Castle and
Garrison. She gave him Oate Cakes made so thin, that they would be folded up
together, (as it is usual in Scotland, so to make them) and as often as she went
into the Garden, near the Prison, she put them under a Linen Vail, or Hood,
which she did, as it were, carelessly cast over her Head, to keep her from the
Sun, and thrust them into the Prison to him, through a small Crany, rather than a
Window. The other was, a Country Nurse, who Milked her Breast, and, by a little
Canale, conveyed it into his Mouth. By this mean fare, which served rather to
increase, than kill, his hunger, his wretched Life and Punishment was
protracted and lengthned out for a little while; till, at length, by the
vigilance of the Guards they were discovered and put to Death. The Father
mightily abhoring the Perfidiousness of his own Daughter, The Governor of
Fa^k^and's cruelty to his own Daughter.
whilst he endeavored to manifest his Faithfulness to an unfaithful Regent.
The Young man, being thus left destitute of all human Support, having, by Force
of Hunger, gnawed and torn his own Flesh, died at length more than a single
kind of Death. His End was concealed from his Father, tho it were commonly
known abroad, because no Man durst to be the Messenger of such sad Tidings to
him.

But to return to the Affairs of England, as far as they are intermixed with
Ours. When Percy, and a great Number besides of the Nobility, had conspired to
make War upon their own King, he agrees with Douglas, whom he still held
Prisoner since the Battle of Homeldon, That, if he would improve his Interest,
by assisting him against the King, as strenuously and as faithfully as he had
before done against him, he would set him at Liberty, without ransom, Douglas
join with Percy, against the K. of England.
which Douglas frankly promised him to do, as being willing to omit no
Opportunity of service against the English King. Hereupon, he gathered some of
his Friends and Tenants about him, and prepared himself for the Fight, wherein
he behaved himself as stoutly, as he promised to Percy; so that, without regard
to the Common Soldiers, his Mind, and Eye, was wholly intent upon the King
only; and, in regard, there were several Commanders clothed in Royal attire,
which was done on purpose by the English, either to deceive the Enemy, if they
should press hard upon him; or else, that the Soldiers, in more places than
one, might find him a present witness of their Courageousness or Cowardice:
Douglas took notice of One of these, who had Gallant Armor, and rushed in upon
him, with all his might, and so unhorsed him. But he, being relieved by those
who were next, he did the same to a Second, and a Third, who were all attired
as Kings, (thus Edward Hall, the English Writer affirms, as well as Ours) so
that he was not taken up so much with the Apprehension of his own danger, as
with a wonderment, Having Performed valiantly in a fight he is taken Prisoner,
and after ransomed
from whence so many Kings should start up, at once. At length, after a
terrible and bloody Fight, Fortune turned about, and the King won the day;
Douglas was sore wounded and found amongst the Prisoners* and whereas many
urged to put him to death, the King saved him, and did not only commend his
Faithfulness to his Friend, but also rewarded him for his Valor, and, when his
Wounds were cured, after he had staid some Months with him, upon the Payment of
a great sum of Money he was released.

In the mean time, the Scottish King heard of the death of David his Eldest Son,
by the unnatural Cruelty of his Uncle. The Author was sufficiently pointed at
by private whisperings, though no man dared publicly to accuse so potent a man.
Whereupon, the King sends for his Brother, and makes an Expostulation with him
concerning the matter; He had prepared his Tale beforehand, and charges others
with the Guilt of the Young Man's death; Robert accused for David's Death.

Undergoes a partial Trial, and is Acquitted.


as for him and his, they were ready, forsooth, whenever the King pleased, to
plead and assert their Innocence, in a due course of Law; as for the Murderers,
some of them he had taken already, and the others he would diligently look out.
Thus the matter being brought to Examination in the Law. The Author of the
wickedness Summons a Council, sets up an Accuser, and he who was impleaded as
Guilty, was by them acquitted, as Innocent of the Murder. King Robert
imprecates God's judgment on the Murderers of his Son.
The King imprecated a most dreadful punishment from the God of Heaven above,
to be poured down on him and his Posterity, who had committed that horrid
Wickedness: And thus being overpressed with Grief and bodily Weakness he
returned to Bote, whence he came. The Suspicion was increased in him, That his
Brother had committed the Parricide, though he was too powerful to be brought by
him to Justice and Punishment, for the same. But he, like a strong dissembler,
brings the supposititious Authors of the wickedness out of Prison, and put them
to Cruel deaths; it is true, they were Lewd Persons, yet Innocent of that
Particular Fact, for which they suffered.

In the interim, the King advised with his Friends, how he might preserve
James, his Youngest Son, for whose safety he was very solicitous, and whom he
had left in the custody of Walter Wardiloe, Archbishop of St. Andrews, an
honest man and faithful to him; They gave their Opinion in the case, that he
could not be safe in any part of Scotland, and that therefore it was best to
send him over to Charles the IV. King of France, the old Ally, and only Friend,
of the Scottish Nation; for he could be Educated no where more safely and
honorably, than there: The fresh Example of David Bruce stuck yet in their
Minds, who, in dubious and troublesome times at home, had there, for some
years, an Honorable retreat and Entertainment. Hereupon a Vessel was prepared,
and he put on board at the Bas^, a Rock rather than an Island. Henry Sinclare,
Earl of the Oreades, was sent with him, as his Guide or Rector; whilst they
were compassing the shore, he Landed at the Promontory of Flamburgh, either
driven in by Tempest, or else to refresh himself on shore, from his S^^-Vomit
and Nauseation; There he was detained by the English, till they sent to their
King, who commanded, that he should be brought up to Court: So that neither the
Law of the Truce, which was made a little before, for 8 years, nor the
supplicating Letters of his Father did prevail, but he was kept, as a Lawful
Prisoner. For his Father, James, the K. Son, for security, sent into France,
but Landing in England is detained There.
at his departure, had sent Letters by him to the King of England, (if possibly
he should be necessitated to land there) wherein he made complaining, and
lamentable discourses, both of his own, and also of the common fortune of all
Mankind. But, though the King of England were not ignorant of the Inconstancy of
human affairs; yet the old grudge against the Nation of the Scots more
prevailed with him, than either the respect of the Youth's Innocent Age, or the
Tears of his grieved Father, or the dignity of the Kingly Name, or the Faith of
the Pacification and Truce. For having referred the matter to his Council, how
he should treat the Son of the King of Scots being arrived in his Dominions,
Those, who had any regard to Equity, and were weary of the present War,
inclined to the milder Opinion, viz. That the Royal Youth, who fled from the
Cruelty of his own Countrymen, and was now their Suppliant, should be
hospitably and Friendly Entertained, That so a feirce Nation, Dispute (...)
King (...), concerning the Detention, o^ Di^mission, o^ James.
and unconquered by the War of so many Ages, might be won and wrought over to a
Reconciliation, by Courtesy. For this, they thought, was the most solid and
firm victory, not when Liberty was taken away by force, but when Minds are
united by the indissoluble bond of Amity. Others were of contrary Opinion, That
he might be lawfully detained as a Prisoner; either, because many of the Scots
Nobility had Personally assisted Percy in the Insurrection, which he made
against the King; or, because his Father had Entertained and Relieved Percy the
Elder, when he was Banished and Condemned, as a Traitor in England.

This Opinion (as commonly the worst things do) prevailed, the they that were
present at the Consult knew well enough, that those Scots who fought against
the English King in Percy's Insurrection, were not sent by any Public
Commission from the King, but came out of their private Affection to Douglas,
who was then also in Percy's Power. They might also have remembered, what Henry
himself had answered to the Scots, a few Years before, when they demanded
George Dunbar to be given up; yet notwithstanding, they stuck to this last
Opinion, as commonly in the Courts of Princes, a false pre^ence of Advantage
does weigh down Honest and Righteous Counsels; Yet, in one thing Henry dealt
Nobly and Royally with his Captive, That he caused him to be Educated in
Learning, James well Educated in England, yet his Captivity breaks his Fathers
Heart.
and Good Discipline: This Calamity of the Son was brought to his Fathers Ears,
whilst he was at Supper, and did so overwhelm him with Grief, that he was
almost ready to give up the Ghost in the Hands of his Servants, that attended
him: but, being carried to his Bedchamber, he abstained from all Food, and in
3 Days dyed for Hunger and Grief at Rothesay, which is a Town in the Island
Bote, in the 16th Year of his Reign, in the Calends of April, and Year of
Christ, 1406. He was Buried at the Abbey of Pasley. This Robert, April 1.
for tallness of Stature, and for the Beauty and Composition of his whole Body,
was inferior to none of his Contemporaries. His Life was very harmless,
Robert's Death and Character
and there was no Virtuous Accomplishment, fit for a private Man, wanting in
him, so that it may be truly said of him, That he was a better Man than a King.

After the King's death, Robert, his Brother, made Regent.
the Government of the Kingdom was settled upon Robert his Brother, by the
Decree of all the Estates; who had many things in him worthy of that Office and
Dignity, if, out of a blind Ambition to Rule, he had not used unjust Courses to
hasten to the Throne. He was Valiant in War, Prudent in Counsel, Just in
Judgment, Liberal to the Nobles, and Tender in Levying Taxes on the Commons.
The same Year, Percy the Elder again entered into a Conspiracy against the King,
Percy overthrown, and flies to Scotland.
to revenge upon him the deaths of his Brother and Two Sons, who had been
slain; but his Design was discovered, many of his Accomplices taken and put to
death, and he himself, for fear, fled into Scotland, that from thence he might
pals over into Flanders and France, to procure Auxiliaries to renew the War. In
the mean time, Henry, the King of Englands Son, made great Incursions into
Scotland, both by Land and Sea; when he was returned home with a great Boo^y,
the Castle of Iedburgh which the Enemy had kept from the Fight in Darham to
that day, Henry of England invades Scotland.
was taken by the Commons of Teviotdale, Pillaged, and then, by the Governors
Order, wholly demolished: And George Earl of Merch, who had done much damage to
his Countrymen, in behalf of the English, being not able to procure from them
Aid to recover his Own, nor an honest Maintenance amongst them neither,
pacified the Governor by his Friends, and so returned home, yet he lost part of
his Patrimony, Dunbar returns to Scotland.
viz. his Castles in the Loch-Maban, and Annandale, which were given to
Douglas, for the Losses he had sustained: and thus all Offenses were forgiven
on both sides, and he passed the rest of his Life, in great Concord with his
Neighbors, and faithful Subjection to his King.

The next Year, Percy, after he had made a vain and fruitless Peregrination
over France and Flanders, returned into Scotland, to his old Friend the Earl of
Merch; by whom he was courteously Entertained, and Accommodated, according to
his Estate: There he Transacted by private Messengers, about returning into his
own Country, and, amongst the rest, he wrote to Ralph Rokesby, his Ancient and
Faithful Friend, as he thought, That he did not want Force, both of Scots and
English, Percy betrayed by Rokesby his pretended Friend, and put to Death.
who were ready to assist him to recover his Ancient Patrimony; provided, that
he would join in his assistance with them. This Ralfe was, at that time,
Sheriff of Yorkshire, so they there call the Officer which presides in Chief
over Juridical Assemblies. He enticed Percy to him, upon pretense of giving him
Aid, and then discovered the Conspiracy to the King. Thus his Friend was
betrayed by him, his Head cut off, and sent to the King at London.

There was also, at that time, a certain Englishman in Scotland, who called
himself Richard the Second, A Supposititious Prince.
but, I judge, falsely. For when Percy, the Elder, did often and earnestly
desire to speak with him, he would not, by any persuasion, be induced
thereunto, fearing, as may be guessed, left his Imposture might be detected by
a Man, who so well knew his King. Yet he was, for some Yearss, Treated, as one
of the Blood Royal: and that he might live more securely, he feigned himself
most averse from any desire of enjoying the Kingdom. But at last he was Buried
in the Church of the Franciscan-Fryers at Sterlin. Standing on a Rock above the
Firth, of Forth, near St. Eb^s Head, in the Merss
The Title of the King of England being inserted in his Epitaph: ^ot long
after, Fastcastle, a very Strong Castle (as the Name intimates) in Merch, was
taken from the English by Patrick Dunbar, Son to George, and therein Thomas
Holden Governor thereof, who had infested all the Neighboring Places of
Lothian, with his continual Thievery. And moreover, in Teviotdale, William
Douglas, and Gawin Dunbar, youngest Son to the Earl of Merch, had broken down
the Bridge of Roxburgh, and burnt the Town; but they attempted not the Castle,
because they were destitute, and unprovided, of all things, necessary for a
Siege: But the next Year after, which was 1411. Donald the Islander, Lord of
the Aebudae, claiming Ross as the next Heir (for so indeed he was, ^
) as unjustly taken away from him by the Governor, when he could get no Right,
he Levied 1000 Islanders, and made a Descent on the Continent, and so easily
seized on Ross, the whole Country being willing to return to the Subjection of
their own just Master: But this Facility of the Rossians, in submitting to him,
gave him (whose Mind was greedy of Prey) Encouragement to attempt greater
Matters. For, he passed over into Murray, and there being no Force to defend
it, he reduced it to his Obedience, A County lying on (...) River St^a^-Bogy,
40 (...) A^^rdeen.
and then passed further in his Depredations into Strath-Bogy, and did threaten
Aberdeen: Against this sudden and unexpected Enemy, The Governor gathered
Forces, but, in regard, the Greatness and Propinquity of the Danger did not
admit the expectancy of slow-paced Aid, Alexander Earl of Mar, the Son of
Alexander, the Governors Brother, and almost all the Nobility, beyond the Tay,
at a Village called In Murray.
Harlaw, set themselves and their Men in Battel-array against him. The Fight
was Cruel and Bloody, for the Valor of many Nobles did then contend for Estate
and Glory against the Savage Cruelty of the opposite Party; At last the Night
parted them, and it may be rather said, That they were Both weary with
Fighting, than that either Party had the better; so that the event of the Fight
was so uncertain, that when Both sides had reckoned up, how many they had lost,
A Cruel Fight between Donald and the Governor.
each counted himself the Conqueror. In this Fight there fell so many Eminent
and Noble Personages, as scarce ever perished in one Battle against a Foreign
Enemy, for many Years before: And therefore the Village, which was obscure
before, grew Famous therefrom, even to Posterity.

This Year also, Public Schools began first to be opened at St. Andrews, which
was effected, rather by the consent of Learned Men, The Erection of St. Andrews
University
who made an overture at the Profession of Science, than by the Occasion of any
Private or Public Assistance. The next 10 Years, there was hardly any
Memorable thing acted betwixt the Scots and English, either, because there was
a Truce made, which yet Authors are silent in; or, March 21.
because Henry the 4 th Dying on the 12 th of the Calends of April, and his Son
Henry, the 5 th, Henry the 4 th Dies, and Henry the 5 th ^^^^ceeds (...)
presently succeeding him, being all the rest of his Life, intent on the
Affairs of France, the English abstained from offering any Injury to the Scots.
And besides, the Governor of Scotland did not dare to stir on his side, for
fear, lest the English should bring back upon them the true Heir of the Crown,
whom, he knew, many of the Scots would close with, out of the Commiseration of
his Misfortunes. Therefore, what Inroads were made, at that time, were rather
like Robberies than Wars. For both Penrith in England was burnt by Archibald
Douglas, and Dunfrize in Scotland, by the English: And also there was an
Exchange of Prisoners made, Murdo, the Governors Son, taken at Homildon Fight,
was exchanged for Percy, who, when his Grandfather's Party was subdued in
England, was brought into Scotland, and left with the Governor; But upon the
New King's coming to the Crown, he was restored to the Dignity of his
Ancestors. He, though he were not properly a Prisoner by the Law of Arms; yet
the unjust detention of James, Son to the King of Scots, stopped the mouths of
the English, Percys Posterity restored to their Dignity.
that they could not justly complain of any injury, in the Case: As for Percy
himself, he was so far from resenting it, that as long as he lived, he
acknowledged the Civility and great Friendship of the Scots to him, in all kind
of mutual Service.

Moreover, the same Year, another Embassy came from the Council of Constance,
Council of Constance send Ambassadors to Scotland, so does Peter Lune,
Antipope.
the Head whereof was the Abbat of Pontiniack; and another from Peter Lune, who
had seized on the Papacy, and as pertinaciously kept it. He, by Henry Harding,
an English Franciscan, had wrought over the Governor to his Party, but in vain,
for the whole Body of the Priesthood was against him; for they, having assented
to the Council of Constance, had subscribed to the Election of Martin the
Fifth. In the mean time, the King of France, by means of a violent Disease,
fell besides himself, and his Distemper was increased by the Monks, who
pretended to Cure him. By which means, France was divided into Two Factions.
The Head of the One, was the Duke of Burgundy, who having slain the Kings
Brother, drew him to the English Party. The Head of the Other, was, the Kings
Son, who being disinherited by his distracted Father, was called by his Enemies
in a jeer, the King of The King of France distracted.

Divisions in France.

A County of France, lying on the River Carus.


Berry, because he usually kept himself at Burges in Berry, a Town of the
Bernois. He being forsaken by a great part of his own Country Men, and
destitute also of Foreign Aid, in the Year 1419. sent the Earl of Vendosme, his
Ambassador to the Scots, The French King craves Aid of the Scots, which is sent
him under the Command of the Earl of Buchan.
to demand Aid of them, according to the League made betwixt the Two Nations:
The Assembly of the Estates ordered him Seven Thousand Men, and indeed, at that
time, in regard the Soldiers were increased by reason of the long Peace with
England; it was no hard matter, to make up such a Number of Men, being only
Volunteers. John, Earl of Buchan, the Governors Son, was made General of the
Forces, and many eminent Persons followed him; but Archibald Earl of Wigton,
the Son of Archibald the Second, Earl of Douglas, was far more eminent than all
the rest. When they came into France, they were sent by the Dolphin, (so they
call the Eldest Son of the King of France) into Turein, a Country very
plentiful in all sorts of Provision, The Scots Auxiliaries Land in France.
and near to the Enemy: For the Duke of Clarence, Brother to the King of
England, was then in France, instead of the King himself, and made great Havoc
of the Country of Anjou, whose Inhabitants remained in their Obedience to the
French King. And it was thought, he would have come as far as the Town of
Beujeu. This was done Two Days before Easter; whereupon the Scots, thinking,
that the General would cease from any Military Action those few days of that
Feast, (as the custom is) and apply himself to Ecclesiastical Duties; or, (as
others say) presuming upon an Eight Days Truce, which was made, carried
themselves more securely, than otherwise they were wont to do. The Duke of
Clarence was informed thereof, either by Andrew Fregose, an Italian; or else,
by some Scots Foragers, whom his Horse had taken Prisoners, and having gotten a
fair opportunity for Action, (as he thought) he rose up presently from Dinner;
and, ^
with his Horse only marched toward the Enemy, he himself, besides his other
Gallant Furniture and Armor, had a Royal Diadam on his Head, beset with many
Jewels. Some few French, who were quartered nearest the Enemy, in a Village
called Little Beaujou, being terrified with his sudden coming, fled into the
Tower of a Church adjoining; whilst he was assaulting of these, the Alarm was
given to the rest of the Army, and presently, in great dismay, they all cried
out, To your Arms. The Earl of Buchan, whilst the rest were sitting themselves,
sent out 30 Archers, to take possession of a Bridge, which was the only Passage
over a Neighbor River. There a Skirmish begun, and Hugh Kennedy, who quartered
in a Church hard by, came in to them, with One hundred Men, who in so sudden a
Fright were but half-armed. This Party with their Arrows hindered the Horse from
passing over; whereupon Clarence, with the forwardest of his Men, leapt from
his Horse, and maintained the Combat on foot; so that, in a Lusty Charge, they
repelled the Scots, who were some unarmed, and some but half-armed, from the
Bridge, and this opened the Passage for his Men. In the mean time, whilst
Clarence was mounting his Horse, and his Men were passing the narrow Bridge, a
few at a time; the Earl of Buchan, was at hand with 200 Horse; Is overthrow^ by
them,
who being very earnest to show themselves on Both sides, a sharp Fight began,
with equal courage and hatred: For the Scots were glad, that they had gotten an
Opportunity, to give the first Proof of their Valor, and so to refute the
Reproaches of the French, who were wont to upbraid them, as Men given more to
Eating and Drinking, than Fighting. The like Reproach do the same French use to
cast upon the Britains; The Spaniards, on the French; and the Africans, on the
Spaniards: On the other side, the English took it in great disdain, That they
should be attacked by such an implacable Enemy, not only at home, but even
beyond the Seas; and so they fought stoutly, but none more fiercely than
Clarence himself; He was known by his Armor, John Swinton ran at him, and,
with his Lance, grievously wounded him in the Face; and the Count of Buchan
also smote him with a Truncheon, and struck him from his Horse; when he was
fallen, the English ran away, and were slain in the pursuit, even until night.
This Battle was fought the day before Easter, when the days are short in cold
Countries, a little after the Vernal Equinox. There fell of the English in the
Fight, above 2000, And slain.
amongst which were 26 of eminent Rank. Many Prisoners were taken of good
Account in their own Country; and, especially, some of the Dukes Allies: Few of
the Scots or French were lost, and those of no great Note, neither: This is the
most common report concerning the Death of Clarence, but the Pluscarty Book
says, that he was slain by Alexander Maccasland, a Knight of Lennox, who took
off the aforesaid Diadem from his Head, and sold it to John Stuart of Derneley,
for 1000 Angels of Gold; and he again pawned it to Robert Huston, to whom he
owed 5000 Angels; This, he says, was the Vulgar Opinion: The chief Praise of
this Victory was ascribed to the Scots, Buchan made Lord High Constable of
France.
neither could their greatest Detractors deny it. Whereupon Charles, the
Dolphin, created the Earl of Buchan Lord High Constable, which is the highest
Office in France, next the King: The rest of the Commanders had also Honors
bestowed on them, according to their Rank, and Valor.

Whilst these Things were acted in France, in the year 1420, Robert, Governor
of Scotland, September 3.
died the same year, in the Third of the Nones of September, Robert dies, and
his Son Murdo made Governor of Scotland.
and Fifteen years after the Death of King Robert, the Third: His Son Murdo
succeeded in his place, a Man of a sluggish disposition, and scarce fit to
govern his private Family, much less the Commonwealth: So that either by his
Slothfulness; or else, his too much Indulgence, he so spoiled his Children,
(for he had Three) that, in a short time, he brought both them and himself into
great Calamity, and, at last, Destruction. This change of Domestic Affairs
caused the Earls of Buchan and Wigton, with many of their Kindred, to return
from France: But Matters being soon settled at Home, Buchan returns to Scotland,
but is recalled to France.
the Dolphin recalled the Earl of Buchan, who, with his Son in Law Archibald,
James his Son, and the Flower of the Scottish Soldiers, sailed into France,
leaving his other Son, the Earl of Wigton, behind him, who, being grievously
sick, could not follow him: They landed with 5000 Soldiers at Rochel, Douglas
made Duke of Turein.
and so came to the Dolphin at Po^ctou, where they were joyfully received, and
Douglas was made Duke of Turein.

When Henry of England heard of the Death of Clarence, he substituted John Earl
of Bedford, Earl of Bedford sent by Henry into France, who carries with him
James I. King of Scotland.
his other Brother, in his place, and sent him before into France with 4000
Horse and 10000 Foot. He himself followed soon after, and took with him James,
King of Scots, in the Expedition: thinking, by that means, either to insinuate
himself with the Scots, who fought against him in France; or else, to render
them suspected to the French: But he obtained neither of his Ends, nor could he
prevail with them, at the desire of their own King, so much as to return home,
and to be Newters and Spectators only, of the War: For, addressing to all the
Garrisons held there by the Scots, They made him one General Answer, That they
could not acknowledge him for their King, who was under the Power of another
Man: Henry, being offended at their Peremptoriness and Constancy, having taken
the Town of A Chief Town of the County o^ B^^e in France, situated near the
Matrona. A Town in, or near Normandy.
Meaux, by Storm, hanged up 20 Scots, which he found there, alleging, That they
bore Arms against their own King. Soon after, He and Charles the Sixth, King of
France, died, immediately one after another. About Two years after, the English
prevailed in a Battle at A Chief Town of the County o^ B^^e in France, situated
near the Matrona. A Town in, or near Normandy.
Vernevil, where there were slain of the Prime Scots, the Earl of Buchan and
Douglas, one Duke of Turein, the other Master of the Horse to the French King;
and also James Douglas, his Son; Alexander Lindsay, Robert Stuart, and Thomas
Swinton; and, of Common Soldiers above 2000. And about three years after, the
Auxiliary Scots received another great Overthrow at A large Country about
Orlean^, on the (...).

The Sc^ts overthrown in F^ance (...) English, and their Chief (...).


Beaux, when they were carrying Provisions to Orleans. They set upon the
English in the way, in which Fight there were slain of Scots of note, William
Stuart with his Brother, and two eminent Knights of the Family of the
Douglas's, whose Posterities do yet enjoy two Castles, and large Possessions
about them, in Scotland, viz. one of them, the Castle of Drumlanerick, and the
other the Castle of Lough Levin in Fife. Thus have I briefly touched at the
Actions of the Scots, performed in a few years in France, as External and
Foreign Occurences, the farther Explication of them is to be had in the French
Annals, which though they be not quite alien from the Affairs of Scotland, yet
I had not stepped out of my way to mention them, if the calumny of some English
Writers had not compelled me so to do: For they endeavor to undervalue and
speak evil of what they do not deny; if Histories did not mention their
Achievements, yet the Munificence of the Kings, the Decrees of the Cities, and
the Honorable Monument at Orleance and Turein do sufficiently declare them;
What, I pray, Reflections on some English Writers.
can they here object? The Scots, say they, are too poor to maintain so great a
Force in a Foreign Country: I answer, First, That if they be Poor, it is the
fault of the Soil, not of the Men; neither would I have taken this for a
Reproach, if it did not appear by their Writings, That the English intended it
for Such; and therefore, I shall only answer them with this: That these Poor
and Indigent Scots (as they call them) have got many great and famous Victories
over the Opulent and Wealthy English: And if they do not believe me herein, let
them consult their own Histories; and, if they suspend their Belief of them
also, let them not require of us, to receive them for True in other things. But
to return to the Affairs of Scotland.

Murdo being set up, as I said but now, in the place of his Father, he
maintained a very loose Discipline in his own House, his Children (whose Names
were Walter, Alexander, and James) did despise their Inferiors, and
consequently oppress them with many Injuries, and they infected the Youth, with
those Vices, to which they themselves were addicted; Fond Indulgence to
Children, justly punished in a Father.
and seeing their Father did not curb nor restrain them, at last he was
punished himself for giving them such bad Education. The old Man did highly
prize a certain Bird he had, of that sort of Hawks, which they call Falcons:
Walter had often begged him of his Father, and was as often denied; so that
upon a time, he catched it out of his Fathers Hand, and wrung off his Neck. To
whom his Father replied, Because thou can not find in thy Heart to obey me,
I will bring in another, That both thou and I too shall be forced to obey. And,
from that time forward, he bent his Thoughts to restore his Kinsman James; and
there was an Eminent Man of Argile, chief of the Country, named Calen Cambel,
whom, before, Walter had affronted and wronged, who approved of his Design
herein; so that, he assembled the Estates at Perth, and a Consultation being
had concerning the Revocation of their King; They all, either out of Favor to
the true Heir of the Kingdom, or out of Weariness of the present posture of
Affairs, willingly agreed to send an Embassy about his Restitution: The Scots
send for King James the First, out of England.
Some Nobles were chosen Ambassadors, who coming into England, found the
English more inclinable to it, than they expected: For the Duke of Gloucester,
who, in the Kings Minority, governed the Affairs of England, called the Council
together, and easily persuaded them, That James, Son to the King of Scotland,
should be sent back, at the desire of his People, into his own Country; seeing,
he was not, in his present posture, of so great Authority amongst them, as to
be able to recall the Scots Auxiliaries out of France, or to draw any Part of
the Kingdom to an Alliance with England. And besides, he thought to make
another advantage of him, That he would not only be his sure and fast Friend,
but would always be under the power and influence of England, for he had
Married Joan, the Earl of Salisbury's Daughter, the Beautifullest Woman of her
Time, (which he then was mightily in Love with) he persuaded himself, that, by
her means, the League with France might be easily undermined; and, if he were
freed, either he would be obliged by that Courtesy; or else, whilst he was
busy in revenging the Wrongs his Kindred had done him, he would entangle his
Country in a grievous intestine War; and, by this means, it would come to pass,
That either the English would be made stronger by the Accession of such a
Friend; or, if their Scottish Enemies disagreed amongst themselves; yet, they
should be more disingaged, and readier for a Foreign War. And, indeed, these
were no imprudent Considerations, if they themselves, by the Narrowness of
their Spirits, had not marred their own Market. For seeing they demanded a
greater Sum of Money, for his Redemption, than the Scots, in their present
Circumstances, either durst promise, or were able to pay, Who returns upon a
Ransom.
a Compremize was made, That the Dowry of his Wife should be retained, as for
One half, and that the Sons of some Noblemen should be given in Hostage, for
the payment of the Other. James, being set at Liberty upon these Terms,
returned home, 18 years after he had been a Prisoner, in the year of our Lord
1423.

Amidst the great Concourse of People, which flocked in, to see him, and to
Congratulate his Return, he was soon entertained with the Complaint of those
who grievously lamented, what Wrongs they had sustained since the last Kings
Death, partly by the Negligence, and partly by the Injuries of the late
Governors: Walter, the Son of Murdo, Malcolm Fleming, and Thomas Boyd, were
highly accused, who, to pacify the Commons for the present, were committed to
several Prisons, until the next Convention of the Estates, which was appointed
to be the Sixth of the Calends of June. May 27.
But Fleming and Boyd upon payment of Damages, and some kind of Compensation;
and also upon laying down a round Sum, which they were Fined at, into the Kings
Exchequer, were set at Liberty.

James I. The Hundred and Second King.
IN the mean time, the King, with the Queen, was Crowned on the Eleventh of the
Calends of May; April 20.
he being placed in the Chair of State, by his Cousin Murdo, (an Office
belonging to the Earl of Fife.) A while after, many profitable Laws were
enacted for the Good of the Public, but especially to restrain Robberies;
which, by the Licentiousness of former times, had grown to such an height,
that Laws and Magistrates were despised, as if Right had been only in Arms.
Afterward, they consulted how to raise the Kings Ransom, for, seeing the
Public Treasure was very low, by reason of so many Wars, the Governors having
pardoned the Offenders, and bestowed Rewards on good Patriots, so that the
Kings Revenue being Mortgaged, and Money taken up thereupon, he could not pay
it of his Own, but was forced to crave Aid of his Subject^; And indeed, the
Nobles, whose Sons were left Hostages, easily obtained, That an Act should pass
to that purpose; but, in the payment of the Money, there was not so ready an
Obedience. For, upon a Valuation of all Movables, a Twentieth part was
imposed, which, in so great a want of Money; (...) Scotl^nd, about (...)
yet Plenty, and consequently, Cheapness of other things, seemed intolerable to
Men, who were not accustomed to Taxes: And who also were more concerned at the
Example for the future, than for the present Damage: And moreover, the higher
Sort were calumniated by the Vulgar, as if they had cast too much of the Burden
upon the Shoulders of the Poor. But that which troubled the Commons most, was,
the short Day appointed for the payment of the Tax, for it was Commanded to be
brought in within 15 Days; and if any one did not pay, his Cattle were to be
seized upon, either by the Lord of the Manor, or the Sheriff of the County.
And if any one alleged his being in Debt, or in Arrears of Rent to his
Landlord, the Exception did not avail to abate his Contribution: And the
Mischief was increased by the Severity and Harshness of the Collectors, who did
not only thus vex the People; but, by false Reckonings; or, upon the account of
Charges, they deducted a great part of the Money, which was Collected for the
Public Use: Besides, the Imposition seemed more Grievous, because the former
Governors had been very remiss and moderate in their Levies and Cessments,
that so they might insinuate themselves into the Love of the Commons, and
thereby keep them off from designing the Restitution of their Lawful King: And
for that cause, it was, that when the Assembly had given Liberty to Robert, the
King's Uncle, to Levy a Tax, he, to ingratiate himself with the Commonalty,
refused to let it pass into an Act, affirming, The King remits one half of his
Ransom-Tax.
That he had rather pay down so much Money of his own, than that the Commons
should be burdened on such an account. When the King had exacted the First
Payment, which came in very hardly, and with the Ill Will of the People, who
complained, That besides the burden of the Wars, they had these new Taxes
imposed upon them, he forgave the rest.

In this Assembly, Murdo, Duke of Albany, Walter and Alexander his Sons; Dunac
Earl of Lennox, his Son in Law, and Robert Grame, who some Years before had
killed the King, were taken, Several Scots Nobles imprisoned.
and committed to Prison; so were 24 more of the Chief Nobility, but the rest
were not long after set at liberty; Murdo only with his Son, and Son-in-law,
being retained in Custody. The same day that Murdo was taken, the King seized
upon all his Castles, as Falcoland in Fife, and Down in Menteith, out of which,
his Wife was carried to the Castle of Tintallon in Lothian. James his youngest
Son, hearing of the Havoc of his Family, gathered a Band of Men together, and
burnt the Town of Dunbarton, and slew John Howard (the King's Uncle) Surnamed
Rufus, and 32 of his Followers; and then he fled into Ireland, where he dyed
shortly after. And also Finlaw, Bishop of Lismore, one of the Dominican Order,
who fled with him, and was his Counselor in all his Affairs, departed this
Life there. The Wife also of Walter, with her Two Sons, Andrew, Alexander,
Others (...) to (...)
and Arthur a Baseborn Son, fled into Ireland also, who, in the Reign of James
the Third, returned again, and were Endowed with great Honor. The same Year,
Murdo brought to his Trial.
in an Assembly of the Estates at Sterlin, Murdo, with his Two Sons, and
Son-in-law were had out of Prison to be Tried, according to Law; the Procee,
dings were after the Custom of the Country, which was This. Some Man, Eminent
for Wisdom and Authority, is chosen out, to be President of the Court, and he
has at least Twelve Assessors joined with him, who are to hear the Crimes
Objected, and to pass Sentence on the Prisoner, or Party accused, The Ancient
manner of Trying Nobles in Scotland.
according to their Oaths. These Judges are usually of the same Quality with
the Party accused: Or, at least, of the next Condition to him, as near as may
be: The Prisoner has Power to except against his Judges, till the number of
12, and sometimes more, be completed; and when the Crimes are weighed, the
Sentence is Pronounced, according to the Majority of Voices. In this Case,
Judges were chosen after the same manner, it is not much material to mention
their Names, Murdo, etc. found Guilty, and Beheaded.
(but certainly, they were Persons of Repute, and some of them nearly related
to the Accused) but the Prisoners were condemned by them of High Treason. The
Two young Men were put to death the same Day; Their Father and Grandfather by
the Mothers's side, the Day after, on a little Rising Hill, over against the
Castle of Sterlin: There is a constant Report, though I find it not mentioned in
History. That the King sent to Isabella, Wife of his Cousin-German, the Heads
of the Father, Husband, and Son, to try, whether so fierce a Woman, out of
impatience of Grief (as it sometimes comes to pass) would not reveal the
Secrets of her Mind: But though She was much disturbed at the sudden Spectacle,
yet She gave no intemperate Language, only Answered, That if the Crimes
Objected were True; That the King had done Justly, and according to Law.

When the Assembly was ended, John Montgomery, and Humphry Cuningham, were sent
by the King to take a Castle, which was held in the Name of James Stuart, the
Fugitive, and they reduced it accordingly. And not long after, John Stuart of
Dernely, (who, when the Scots Commanders in France were destroyed, several
ways, was made General of the Horse amongst them) together, Ambassadors from
France to Scotland, about Peace and a Marriage.
with the Archbishop of Rhemes, came into Scotland, to renew the Ancient
League with the French, and to contract a Marriage between Lewis the Son of
Charles the Seventh, and Margarite, Daughter of James, Both of them yet but
Children. Which Matters being Accomplished the next Year, which was, 1426. All
Scotland was subdued within the Mount Grampius: And the King took heart to
proceed further in his Conquests. And First, he caused the Castle of Inverness
to be Repaired, which is situate in a convenient place, in the furthest part of
Murray. K. James the First, his prosperous Beginnings.
Two Years after, he went thither to Administer Justice, and Suppress
Robberies; thither he sent for the Chief of all the Families, especially of
those who were wont to issue out with great Troops, and fetch in Booties from
the Neighboring Countries: And when he had subdued them, he laid Taxes on
them, and made the Commonalty provide Victuals for them which were Idle,
themselves; Some of those Robbers had 1000, some 2000, some more Pattizans, at
their Command, whereby Good People were kept under for fear of Danger: And the
Bad, who found a sure Refuge amongst them, were made more bold to commit all
manner of Wickedness: The King had persuaded most of them, some by Threatenings,
others by Flatteries, but he committed about 40 of the chief of them to Prison,
and, upon Trial, Two of the most Eminent, Alexander Macrory, and John Macarthur
were hanged up, Free (...) punished by the King.
also James Cambel was put to death for the Murder of John the Islander, one
of Note in his Country; The rest were divided into several prisons, of which
some afterward suffered, and others were freely set at Liberty. Thus the Heads
of the Faction, being either Slain or kept Prisoners; the King judged the
Common sort, being deprived of their Leaders, would not stir, and therefore he
persuaded them by kind and gentle words, to do that which was just, and to
place the hopes of their safety upon no other Basis, as firm and secure, but
Innocence of Life. If they would do so, he would be always ready to honor and
reward them; if not, they might take Example by the Punishment of others, and,
most certainly, expect the like Themselves.

When other Matters were thus composed; yet the King had still with Him,
Alexander the Islander, one of the most potent Persons in the Land, next the
King himself; for he Commanded over all the Aebudae; and besides, he had an
Accession of the fertile County of Ross, by means of his Mother, who was
Daughter to Walter Lesly, Earl of Ross. He having committed many cruel and
flagitious Acts, was thereupon in great Fear of the King, whom yet he found
very exorable, by the Mediation of his Friends; insomuch that he was
courteously invited to Court, kindly entertained there; Alexander the Islander,
^ise^ in Arm^
and having obtained an Amnesty for what was past, great Hopes of Favor were
propounded to him, if he would inure himself to a more quiet and obedient
Carriage and Deportment for the time to come, and so he was sent home. But he
was so far from being thankful to the King for his Pardon, and afterward for
his Liberty, that, he thought, he had Great wrong done him, that he was kept
some days in Prison. And therefore, as soon as he was returned to his old
Comrades, he gathered a Company of Them together, who were accustomed to live
upon the Spoil, and went to Innerness, in a seemingly peaceable manner; where
being hospitably entertained, he suffered his Followers to pillage the Town,
and after he had set fire to the Houses, he laid Siege to the Castle; but,
hearing of a Force coming against him, was compelled to raise his Siege, and
march in great haste to Loch-Abyr. There, by reason of the opportunity of the
Place, he resolves to put himself upon the Fortune of a Battle, with that Army
which he had with him, which were 10000 men, hardened to the Wars. But Two
Tribes or Clans of Those, who followed him cheerfully to the Plunder, when they
heard of the Kings Preparations made against them, deserted him; to wit, The
Catans and the Camerons, called vulgarly, Clan-Chattan, and Clan-Cameron.

Being thus deprived of Part of his strength, and having no great Confidence in
the Fidelity of the rest, he began to think of hiding himself again, and so,
dismissing his Army, he retired, with some few into the Aebudae, But is
suppressed.
and there consulted concerning his Flight into Ireland. But, presuming, that
even there he could not be safe from the wrath of the King, he thought it best
to fly to his last Refuge, viz. the Kings Mercy and Clemency; which, before, he
had so large experience of: But here his Thoughts were at a loss betwixt Hope
and Fear; when he considered, what Mischiefs he had done at his first Revolt;
and, after the King had graciously pardoned him, with what perfidiousness and
cruelty he had again broke forth, and so had cut off all hopes of further
Indemnity; and, therefore was in great Doubt and Perplexity, whether he would
commit himself, his Life and Fortunes to the Kings Anger, so justly conceived
against him. In these Circumstances, he resolved to take a middle Course,
between Flight and Surrendering himself, which was, to send Agents to Court, to
beg Pardon for his Offenses; and to incline the Kings Heart to Lenity toward
him. And, for this Service, he chose quiet, moderate, Men, and not at all
infected with the same contagious Villainies, whereof he himself was Guilty; and
on that account, not unacceptable to the King; yet notwithstanding, they could
obtain no other Answer from him, but That he would hear nothing unless he would
put himself into his hands; neither would he Treat with him, as long as he was
absent. Alexander cast up all his dangers in his mind, and foreseeing, that he
could be safe no where from the Kings Fury, resolved to choose a fit Time and
Place, and so to cast himself upon him; for, he thought, he would count it a
shame to injure, or punish, an humble Supplicant. Whereupon he comes privately
to Edinburgh, where the King then was, and on the day wherein our Easter.
Lord's Resurrection is celebrated with great Solemnity, he threw himself at
the Kings Feet, having a Linen Cloak, or Plad, about him, wherewith he was
rather covered than clothed, and in a Speech composed to procure pity, And
submits to the Kings Mercy.
put himself into his hands, and begged his Life and Estate. His Habit, the
Place and Time, and so great and sudden a Change of Fortune, did much affect
the Bystanders. The Queen and the Nobles, who were present, interceded with
the King for him, and did so far incline and affect his Mind, That they were
commanded to stay, till their Devotions were ended. In the Interim, the King
pondered every thing with himself, and thought it not safe to dismiss so
perfidious, potent, and Factious a Person, without any Punishment at all; and
yet, on the other side, to make some Gratification to the Request of the Queen,
he thought it best to keep him alive, in safe Custody; for, by this means, he
might gain an Opinion of Clemency; and also prevent his opportunity to do
further Mischief; provide for the security of the Common People; and withal
terrify others by his Example. Hereupon he was sent Prisoner to
Tintallon-Castle, and his Mother, a fierce Woman, was Banished into the Isle of
Inch-colm. For it was thought, That she would have excited him to new Attempts.

The Licentiousness of Alexander being thus repressed, yet all things were not
quiet in the Northern Countries. For the men of Caithnes and Cameron, who, the
Year before, had deserted Alexander, fell out grievously amongst themselves;
and fought one another with so great eagerness. That many of Caithnes were
slain, but the Cameronians almost all lost. Also in the Aebudae, where 'twas
thought Things would be quiet by reason of Alexander's Exile, yet new
Commotions were raised by Donald Balock, Cosin-German to Alexander, on pretense
to revenge the wrong done to his Kinsman. Donald B^l^ck makes an Insurrection.
To quell this Insurrection, Alexander and Alan, both Stuarts; One Earl of
Caithnes, the Other of Mar, gathered some of their Countrymen together, and
went into Loch-Abyr to meet Donald, (for the Report was, that he would make his
descent there) where they waited his Coming. He, perceiving that they kept no
Order, but were without Tents or Guard, in the Fourth Watch landed his men
without any Noise, and so set upon them unexpectedly whilst they were half a
sleep, and made a great slaughter amongst them. Alan, with almost all his
Brigade, was lost there; and Alexander, with a Few, saved his Life by Flight.
Donald was exalted with this Success, and so wasted all Loch-Abyr, with Fire
and Sword, no man daring to oppose him; but, at length, hearing, That the King
was making toward him with a greater Force, he trussed up his large bundles of
Pillage, sent them a Shipboard, and returned into the Aebudae. The King marched
as far as Dunstafnage after him, and there saw the ruin and fearful devastation
which had been made; whereupon he conceived great wrath in his Breast, and was
about to pass over into the Islands; but the Chiefs of their Families came with
their humble Supplications to him, alleging, That there was no general guilt in
the Case, But is quelled.
because nothing had been acted by public Advice, but all the fault lay at
Alexanders own door, and of some indigent and lewd Persons besides, that sided
with him. The King answered, he would not admit of their Excuse, unless they
would apprehend the Authors of those wicked Pranks, and deliver them up to him
to be punished; when they had promised to do their endeavor therein, the King
let some of them go, to find out the Thieves; the rest he kept in the nature of
Hostages: Those, who were dismissed slew many of the Thieves, and brought 300
of them Prisoners to the King, ( Donald himself, for fear of Punishment, being
fled away) who caused them all to be hanged.

This punishment of the Robbers, though for the present, it made things a little
more quiet in the Aebudae, and the Neighboring Parts; yet, the unquiet
dispositions of some wicked and turbulent Persons would not suffer that Calm to
be long-lived. The King, at the desire of his Nobles, had released Two of the
Augus's, Duffus, and Murdo, Commanders of the Thieves. These turned their Fury
upon one another, Tories fall out among themselves.
meeting in equal Numbers (for each of them maintained about 1500 Partisans,
out of the Rapines of the People.) They fought so obstinately, that there was
scarce any one left, on either side, to be Messengers of the Slaughter made;
for it is said, that, on the one side there were but Twelve, on the other but
Nine left alive; so that the King, who was equally Angry with Both, had scarce
any left of them to inflict Punishment upon.

And yet their Calamity did not restrain one Macdonald from his wonted
Fierceness. He was a noted Robber, born in Ross, whose wicked Disposition was
excited by the Impunity of the Former Times; so that he, (as we say) played
Rex, along time, Mackdonald a Free-booter.
among his Neighbors. Amongst the rest, they say, he committed one Fact,
superlatively Cruel. A Widow-woman being robbed by him, grievously bemoaned her
Case, and ever and anon cried out, that she would complain to the King; Will thou so, says he? Then to the intent thou may better compass thy Journey, I my
self will assist thee, His Cruelty to a Woman,
and so calling a Smith, he caused him to nail Horse-shoes to the Soles of her
Feet, and, not contented with that wrong, he added also contumelious and
jeering words, telling her, now that she was more fenced against the roughness
of the ways, and, in a mockery, he showed her thus shod to those that passed
by. The Woman being of a fierce and stern disposition, and rather enraged than
terrified by his Reproaches, as soon as she was able to go, went to the King,
and declared to him the Matter of Fact. The King had heard of the same, before,
by others; and he having then the Authors in Prison, bid the Woman be of good
cheer; for she should speedily see the same Punishment inflicted on the
Inventors of it; and hereupon, he caused Mackdonald, Retaliated on himself and
his Followers.
and Twelve of his Accomplices, to be brought out of Prison, and to have their
Feet shod with Iron-Nails, and so to be carried Three days about the City, a
Crier going before, and declaring the Cause of this new Punishment; then the
Captain was beheaded, and his Twelve Associates hanged, all their Bodies being
set upon Gibbets in the Highways.

These new Crimes, which a Pardon, once obtained, had not prevented, made the
King more eager to find out Donald the Islander. And therefore, being informed
that he lay concealed in a Noblemans House in Ireland, he sent Messengers to
him to give him up to Punishment, the Nobleman fearing, that if he should send
him away alive, through so long a Tract both by Land and Sea, he might possibly
make an escape, and then his Maligners might allege, that it was done by his
Connivence, Donald's Head sent to the K. from Ireland.
caused him to be slain, and sent his Head to the King by his own Messenger.
Open Robberies being thus diligently suppressed, the King endeavored to
extirpate some hidden Crimes and evil Customs; The King reforms Public Manners.
and to accomplish this Work; he made choice of eminent Persons, much commended
for their Prudence and Sanctity, giving them Power to Travel all over the
Kingdom, to hear Complaints; and if their were any Offenses complained of to
them, which ordinary Judges, either for Fear durst not, or for Favor and
Affection would not, He also rectifies Weights and Measures.
intermeddle with, then They themselves should hear the Case, and determine it.
And moreover, he added to them, One, who was to correct and rectify Weights and
Measures, a Thing very necessary; seeing, then, not only every City, but almost
every House, used a different kind of measure; In a Parliament he made
wholesome Laws to this purpose, and caused Iron Measures to be set up in
certain Places, and sent out one to all Markets and Fairs, who was to regulate
all the Measures according to that Standard, and a grievous Punishment was
denounced on him, who used any other Measure, than That which was publicly
thus Signed and Marked.

Whilst he was Transacting these things for the Public Good, in the year 1430.
the Fourteenth day of October, his Queen was brought a Bed of Twins; His Queen
brings forth Twins.
and thereupon a public Rejoicing was made, and the King, to add something to
the Popular Mirth, forgave former Offenses to some Noblemen, the Chief whereof,
were, Archibald Douglas, and John Kennedy, who, Do^gla^ and Kennedy released
from Prison.
because they had spoken too rashly and unadvisedly concerning the State and
Government of the Realm, were made Prisoners, Douglas in the Castle of
Loch-Levin, and Kennedy in the Castle of Sterlin. And, as a farther Testimony
of his Reconciliation to Douglas, he made him Godfather (as we call him) at the
Baptizing of his Children, which is wont to be accounted a matter of great
Honor, and a Testimony of intimate Friendship; and moreover, he made his Son,
one of the Knights, which were created in Testification of the public Joy, on
this occasion. The other parts of his Kingdom being thus purged and amended; he
next bent himself to reform the Ecclesiastical State; He reforms the
Ecclesiastica^ Estate;
but the Priests could not be corrected by the Civil Magistrate, for the Kings
of Europe having been long engaged in mutual Wars, the Ecclesiast^cal Order
had, by little and little, withdrawn themselves from their Obedience, and
obeyed only the Pope of Rome; and he indulged their Vices, partly because he
gained thereby, Which was Woefully degenerated and corrupted.
and partly because he might make Kings more obnoxious to him, by reason of the
great power of the Clergy in their Kingdoms. Whereupon he resolved to prevent
their Tyranny the Best and Only way he was able; for, seeing it was not in his
power to amend what was past; nor to Out unworthy Men of those Preferments
which they once enjoyed; he thought to provide the best he could for the
Future, which was, to set up public Schools for Learning, and liberally to
endow them; He Erects Public Schools, and is present himself at their
Disputations*
because these would be Seminaries for all Orders of Men; and whatsoever was
eminent or noble in any Commonwealth, issued out from them, as from a Fountain.
Hereupon, he drew Learned Men to him by Rewards; yea, himself would be
sometimes present at their Disputations, and when he had any Vacation from
Civil Affairs, he delighted to hear the Collations of the Learned, thereby
endeavoring to eradicate the False Opinion which many Nobles had imbibed, viz.
That Learning drew Men off from Action to Sloth and Idleness, and did soften
Military Spirits, either breaking, or, at least, weakening all their Vigorous
Efforts; so that the Study of Letters was only fit for Monks, who were shut up,
as in a Prison, and good for no other use. But alas, the Monks, as they had
degenerated from the Simplicity and Parsimony of their Ancestors, so they had
turned themselves wholly from the Culture of their Minds, to the Care of their
Bodies; and Learning was as much neglected by the rest of the Priesthood, also;
and especially for this Cause, That Benefices were bestowed on the most
slothful and worst Persons of Noblemens Families, Parish Priests and Begging
Friars the Causes of the Decay of Ecclesiastical Discipline, with the Manner,
how.
which were unfit for other Employments; or else they were intercepted by the
Fraud of the Romanists; so that a Parsonage was nothing else but a Reward for
some piece of Service, and that ordinarily none of the Best. And besides, there
was another Mischief which added much to the Corrupting of Ecclesiastical
Discipline; and That was, the Orders of Begging-Friers. These Friars at the
beginning pretended greater Sanctity of Life, and so easily imposed upon the
People, to hear Them rather than their Parish Priests, who were commonly
gross-bodied and dull-witted. Yea, those Parish-Curates, or Priests, as they
grew Rich, did scorn to do their own Work themselves, but would hire These
Friars, (for so they called Themselves) for a small yearly Stipend, to Preach a
Few Sermons, in the year, to the People; In the interim, they withdrew into
Cities, and there chaunted out their idle Songs, as it were, after a Magical
manner, not knowing what they said; and there was none of them, that ever
hardly looked toward his own Parish, but when Tithes were to be gathered. Yea,
and by degrees, they withdrew themselves from this Office of Singing at certain
hours in Cathedrals and Churches, too; which, though it were but a light, was
yet a daily, Service; and hired poor Shavelings to supply their Places in
Singing and Massifying; and so by muttering and mumbling out a certain Task and
Jargon of Psalms, which was appointed every day, they made a collusive kind of
a Tragedy, sometimes contending in alternate Verses and Responses; otherwhiles
making a Chorus between the Acts, which at last closed with the Image, or
Representation, of Christ's Death. And the Friars, their Hirelings, on the one
side, did not dare to offend their Masters, on whom their Livelihood depended;
neither yet, on the other, could they bear their Insolence, conjoined with so
much Avarice; so that they pitched upon a middle way, that they might engage
them to make easier Payment of their Pensions; they oftentimes bitterly
inveighed against their Lust and Avarice before the People, who gave ear to
their Doctrine; and, when they had raved enough in their Sermons to keep them
in Fear; and also, to conciliate the minds of the Vulgar, they took up, and
consulted for themselves also in time, seeing they were also in Ecclesiastical
Orders. They told them, that whatever Disorders were, yet the Order of
Priesthood was a Sacred thing, and that the Temporal, or Civil, Magistrate, had
no Power to punish them; they were only responsible to God and to the Pope,
(who had almost equal Power with God) and because, their Avarice increasing
with their Luxury, they thought they should not squeez Gain enough from the
People; therefore these Friars set up a new kind of Tyranny, holding forth, in
their Sermons, the Merit of Works. Hence arose Purgatory, and the Lustration of
Souls (which the Pope was pleased to detain there) by the Sacrifices (forsooth)
of the Mass, by the sprinkling of Holy Water, by Alms and Pensions given or
offered, by Indulgences, Pilgrimages, and Worshipping of Relics; The Friars
being exercised in this kind of Bartering Trade and Chaffer, in a little time,
claimed the Power to themselves, both over the Living and the Dead, too.

In this ill Condition, James, the First, found Church Affairs in Scotland; and
therefore he thought it the most Compendious Way to restore the Old Discipline,
King James aims to prefer only Worthy Persons to Benefices and Church
Preferments.
if Good and Learned Men were admitted to Benefices. And to Increase the
Emulations of Young Scholars, he told the Masters and Governors of Universities
and Schools, that, because he himself was hindered by the Public Affairs of
State, so that he could not consider every Students particular Merit, they
should therefore be very careful to Commend Learned and Virtuous Young Scholars
to him, that he might gratify them with Church-Preferments; who being thus
advanced, might not only be Useful to the People by their Doctrine and Example,
but also might assist the Meaner and Poorer sort of those that were designed
for Churchmen, with their Substance; and so far to Relieve their Tenuity, that
Good Wits might not be compelled, for Want, to break off their Studies and
Course of Learning, and betake themselves to Mechanical, Sordid, or Mercenary,
Trades, and Employments. And to the intent, that good Men might, with more
diligence, apply themselves to Learning, and the Slothful might know, that
their only Way to Preferment was by Virtue, he distinguished Degrees of
Studies, that so he might know who were fit for such or such Promotions; Which
Course, if succeeding Kings had followed, certainly we had never fallen into
these times, wherein the People cannot endure the Vices of the Priests; nor,
the Priests, the Remedy of those Vices. Neither was the King ignorant, that the
Church was encumbered with those great mischiefs, under which it then labored,
by reason of the Immoderate Opulency thereof, and therefore he did not approve
the Prodigality of Former Kings in exhausting their Treasury to enrich
Monasteries, so that he often said, That though David was otherwise the Best of
Kings, yet his profuse Piety, so praised by many, was prejudicial to the
Kingdom; yet notwithstanding, He himself, as if he had been carried away by the
Rapid Torrent of Evil Custom, could not withhold his hand from building a
Monastery, for the Carthusians, near Perth, nor from endowing it with large
Revenues. One thing in him was very admirable, that, amidst the greatest Cares
for the high Affairs of the Public, he thought the most inferior and private
Matters not unworthy of his Diligence, provided some benefit came to the
Public by them. For whereas Scotland had been exercised with continual Wars,
after the death of Alexander the Third, for almost 150 years, wherein her
Cities had been so often spoiled, and burnt, and her Youth generally made
Soldiers, so that other Trades were much neglected, he invited Tradesmen of all
sorts to come out of Flanders, proposing great Rewards and Immunities to them;
He invites Tradesmen out of Flanders.
by which means he filled his Cities, (almost empty before, in regard the
Nobility did usually keep themselves in the Country) with this sort of
Artificers, neither did he only restore the appearance of ancient Populousness
to the Towns hereby; but also engaged a great number of Idlers to fall to
honest Labor; and hereby it came to pass, that what was with small cost made
at home, need not with far greater, be fetched from abroad.

Yet, whiles he was thus strengthening all the weak parts of his Kingdom, by
proper Remedies, he ran into the great dislike and offense of his Subjects,
especially for Two Reasons. The one, seemed light in appearance, yet 'was That,
which is the beginning of almost all Calamity to a People. For when Peace was
universally settled; Idleness, Luxury, and Lust, to the destruction, first of
ones self, then of others, followed thereupon. Hence arose sumptuous Feastings,
Luxury and Prodigality, the trust of Idleness.
Drinking Caresses, by day and night, personated Masks, Delight in strange
Apparel, Stateliness of Houses, not for necessary Use, but to please the Eye; A
corruption of Manners, falsely called Neatness, and, in all things, a general
neglect of the Country Customs; so that nothing, forsooth, was accounted
handsome or comely enough, but that which was Newfangled and Strange. The
Commonalty did willingly cast off the fault of these things from themselves,
and laid it on the English Courtiers, who followed the King, and yet they did
not inveigh against such wanton and pleasurable Courses, more bitterly in their
Words, than they studiously practiced them in their Lives. But the King
obviated this Mischief, as much as he could, both by good Laws, and also by his
own good Example, for he kept himself in his Apparel and Frugality, within the
rate of the Richer sort of private Men, and if he saw any thing of Immoderation
in any part of a Man's Life, he showed by his Countenance, and sometimes by his
Words, that 'twas displeasing to him. By this means, the course of increasing
Luxury was somewhat restrained, rather than the new Intemperance extinguished,
and the old Parsimony reduced. His other Fault was bruited abroad by his
Enemies, and afterward broke forth into a Public Mischief. Robert, the King's
Uncle, and Murdo his Cosin-German, who had the Regency of the Kingdom for many
Years, Robert and Murdo affect the Throne.
seeing they themselves aspired to the Throne, and yet knew not how to remove
James out of the way, they did what was next to it i. e. Engage the Affections
of Men so to them, that the better sort might have no extraordinary miss of a
King; nor any ardent Desires after him, so that they used such great Moderation
in the management of Affairs,, that their Government seemed to many, not only
tolerable, but very desirable, if Walter, M^rdo's Son, had carried it with a
semblable Popularity and Moderation. For they so engaged the Nobles to them, by
their Liberality and Munificence, that some enjoyed the Lands, belonging to the
King, by Connivence. To others they gave them, and, in favor of some
particular Men, they Cancelled Proceedings and Judgments in Law, and restored
some, who had been banished, and, amongst them, one Eminent and Potent Person,
George Dunbar, Earl of Merch; who, during his Exile, had done much mischief to
his Country; and by this means, they hoped so to engage the Nobility, that they
would never so much as think of calling home the King; and then, if James Died
without Issue, the Kingdom would come to them, without any Competitor; but if
he should chance to return from his Banishment, yet their Faction would be so
powerful, that if the King bore them a Grudge, yet they were able to defend
themselves by force against him; but when the King did actually return, the old
Favor and Respect born to the Uncle, seemed to be quite extinguished by the
new Injury and Flagitiousness of Murdo, so that, it plainly appeared, that
nothing was more popular than Justice. And therefore the People were not only
consenting, but also contributed their assistance, to the Execution of Murdo,
Murdo and his Sons put to Death.
the Father, and his Two Sons; and to the Banishment of of a 3d. So that the
King's Revenue was Augmented by the Confiscation of their Estates: and also by
the Access^on of the Estates of John Earl of Buchan, who Dyed Childless in
France, and of Alexder Earl of Merch, who was also Childless, and a Bastard,
who Died at home, concerning whom I shall speak a few Words, by way of
Digression.

This Alexander was the Son of Alexander, Son to King Robert; In his Youth, by
the ill Advice of some bad Men, he turned to be a Commander amongst Th^eves*
but when he came to ^an's Estate, he was so Reformed, that he seemed plainly to
be quite another Man, so that his Vices gradually decreasing, by the benefit of
wholesome Counsel, he so managed things, both at home and abroad, The (...) of
(...) and his Exploits.
that he left a Memory behind him, precious to Posterity. For at home, he
quelled the Insurrectio^ of the Islanders at Harlaw, making great Slaughter of
them. And so he extinguished a dangerous War, in the very Rise and Bud, and tho
he had great Wealth well gotten, and had bought (...) stately S^^ts, insomuch,
that he much exceeded his Neighbour^* yet he addicted not himself to Idleness
or Pleasure, but went with ^ good Party of his Countrymen into Flanders, where
he follow'^ Charles D. of Burgundy, against the Luick-landers; in which War he
got both Estate and Honor, and besides, he Married richly in Holland, and
Island of the Batavians, but the Hollanders not being able to bear the
Government of a Stranger, he returned back, and provided a stately Fleet, with
great Cost, yet no great Benefit, because it was against Men, who were very
well provided, both with Land and Sea-Forces. At length, he set upon their
numerous Fleet, returning from Dantzic, which he took and pillaged, and slew
the Mariners, and burnt the Ships, so that he repaid the Enemy for the Loss he
received from them, many times over; yea, he so subdued the Fierceness of their
Minds, that they desired a Truce for an Hundred Years, and obtained it; He also
caused a Breed of brave Mares to be brought from as far as Hungary, into
Scotland, whose Race continued there for many Years after.

These Rich Earls Dying without Issue, Buchan and Mar, their Patrimonial
^nheritances, descended Rightfully to the King. And moreover, he alone enjoyed
all the Possessions of the Three Brothers, Sons to King Robert the 2d, by his
last Wife; but not without the Grudges of the Nobility (who had been accustomed
to Largesses,) that he alone should enjoy all the Prey, without sharing any
Part of it amongst them. Further, they conceived another, and fresher Cause of
Offense, Exceptions taken against James.
That the King had revoked some Grants made by Robert and Murdo, the last
Regents, as unjust. Amongst those Grants, There were Two noted ones, George
Dunbar, who was Declared a Public Enemy, was afterward recalled by Robert,
and part of his Estate restored to him. His Son George succeeded him therein,
to the Joy of many; who were well pleased, that so Ancient and Noble a Family,
which had so often deserved well of their Country, were restored to their
Ancient Dignity. But the King, who looked narrowly (and perhaps, too pryingly)
into his Revenue, was of Opinion, that the Power to restore Incapacities, to
recall Exiles, and to give back their Goods forfeited for Treason, and so
brought into the King's Exchequer, was too great for One that was but a
Guardian of another Man's Kingdom, and chosen but as a Tutor only, to Claim and
Use; especially, since Largesses made in the Minority of Princes, by the Old
Laws of Scotland, might be recalled; if not confirmed by their respective
Kings, when they came to be of Age. And therefore James, that he might reduce
the Merch-men into his Power, without noise, in regard they were a Martial
People, and Borderers upon England, detains George with him, and sends Letters
to the Governor of the Castle of Dunbar, Commanding him, on receipt thereof, A
Castle standing upon the T^ne, 3 Miles below Hadington.
he should immediately Surrender it up to William Douglas, Earl of Angus, and
Alexander Hepborn of Hales, whom he had sent to receive it. Hereupon, George
complained, that he was wrongfully dispossessed of his Ancient Patrimony, for
another Fault; and such a Fault too, as was forgiven by him, who then had the
Supreme Power. The King, to pacify him, and to proclaim his Clemency amongst
the Vulgar, bestowed Buchan upon him. This Fact of the King's was variously
spoken of, as every ones Humor and Disposition led him. And moreover, there
was also another Action, which much hastened his End, the Beginning whereof is
to be fetched a little higher.

I said before, that King Robert the 2d. had Three Sons by his Concubine, he
had also Two by his Wife Eufemia, Walter Earl of Athole, and David Earl of
Stratherne, The Dispute between K. Robert's Legitimate, and Natural Children,
occasion great Troubles.
yet when their Mother the Queen was Dead, he Married the Concubine
afore-spoken of, that so he might, by that Marriage, Legitimate the Children he
had by her, and leave them Heirs to the Crown; and accordingly, at his Death,
he left the Kingdom to the Eldest of them. To the 2d. he gave great Wealth, and
the Regency also. The 3d. was made Earl of several Counties. In this Matter,
though his other Wif's Children thought themselves wronged, yet being younger,
and not so powerful as they, they smothered their Anger for the present. And
besides, their Power was somewhat abated, by the Death of the Earl of
Strathern, who left but only one Daughter behind him, afterward Married to
Patrick Graham, a Noble young Man, and one of a potent Family in that Age, on
whom he begat Meliss Graham; His Parents lived not long after, and the Child,
after a few Years, being yet a Stripling, was sent as an Hostage into England,
till the Money for the King's Ransom was paid. The Earl of Athol's Ambition.
But the Earl of Athole, though every way too weak for the adverse Faction, yet
never gave over his Project to cut off his Kindred, nor cast away his Hopes to
recover the Kingdom; and because he was inferior in open Force, he craftily
fomented their Divisions and Discords, and invidiously made use of their
Dangers, to promote his own Ends, so that by his Advice that large Family was
reduced to a few. For many were of Opinion, that he gave the Counsel to take
off David, King Robert's Son; and James had not escaped him neither, unless he
had past a good part of his Life in England, far from home; for he gave Advice
to the Earl of Fife, that seeing his Brother was a Drone, he Himself should
seize on the Kingdom. When the King lost all his Children, and was obnoxious to
his Brothers Will, and not long after, dyed of Grief himself; There was only
the Regent of the Kingdom, with his Children, that hindered his hopes, in
regard, he was an active Man, of great Wealth, Power, and Authority, and
moreover, very Popular, and full of Children. These Considerations did somewhat
retard his Counsels, but when Robert Dyed of a Natural Death, and his Son John
was slain in the Battle of Vernevil, A Town of Normandy in France.
then he resumed his former Project with greater earnestness, and bent all his
Mind and Endeavor how to free James, and set him at variance with Murdo, and
his Children. And seeing they could not, all of them, stand safe together,
which soever of them fell, he foresaw, that his Hope would be advanced one step
higher, to the Kingdom. And when James was returned into his Country, he turned
every Stone to hasten Murdo's Destruction, he suborned Men fit for the turn, to
forge Crimes against him, and he himself sat Judge upon Him and his Sons. And
when they were cut off, there was only James left, and one little Son, a Child,
not yet 6 Years old. And if he were slain by the Conspiracy of the Nobles, he
did not doubt, but himself, who was then the only remaining Branch of the Royal
Stock, should be advanced to the Throne. Athole was in these Thoughts Night and
Day, yet he concealed his Secret Purposes, and made a great show of Loyalty to
the King, in helping to rid his Allies out of the way; for that was his only
Contrivance, that, by the Offenses of Others, he might increase his own Power,
and diminish his Enemies.

In the mean time, Meliss Graham (who, as I said before, was given in Hostage
to the English) was deprived of Strathern: because the King making a diligent
Enquiry into his Revenue, found, that 'twas given to his Grandfather, by the
Mothers-side, upon condition, That if the Male-Line failed, it should return to
the King, in regard 'twas a Male-Feo, as Lawyers now speak. This Young Man's
Loss, who was absent, and also an Hostage, did move many to Commiserate his
Case; but Robert his Tutor took it so heinously, that it made him almost Mad.
For he, Plots against James.
taking the Case of his Kinsman more impatiently, than others, did not cease to
accuse the King openly of Injustice, and being Summoned to Answer for it in
Law, he appeared not, and thereupon was banished the Land. This made his fierce
mind more enraged for revenge, as being irritated by a new Injury; So that he
joined secret Counsels with those, who had also their Estates confiscated; or,
who took the punishments of their Friends, though justly inflicted, in great
disdain; or, who accused the King as a Covetous man, because he was so intent
upon his gain, that he had not rewarded them, according to their Expectations:
And besides, he bewailed, That not only many noble Families were brought to
ruin, but that the Wardships of Young Nobles, which were wont to be the Rewards
of Valiant Men, were now altogether in the Kings hands, so that all the wealth
of the Kingdom was almost in one hand, and others might starve for misery and
want, under such an unjust Valuer of their labors.

Now that which he upbraided him, concerning Wardships, with, is This, It Is the
Custom in Scotland, England, and some Countries of France, that Young Gentlemen
or Nobles, when their Parents dye, should remain in the Tutelage of those,
whose Feudatarys they are, till they arrive at the age of 21 Years, and all the
Profits of their Estates, (besides the Charges necessary for their Education)
and also the Dowry given with their Wives, comes to such their Tutors and
Guardians. Now these Tutelages, or, (as they are commonly called) Wardships,
were wont to be Sold to the next of kin, for a great Sum of Money; or
sometimes, well deserving men were gratified with them; Upon the Account of
Wardships etc.
So that they expected Benefit upon the Sale of such Wardships or Incomes, for
a reward by their keeping of them. But now, they were much vexed, that the King
took them all to himself, neither did they conceal their vexation and
displeasure. When the King heard of these Murmurings and Complaints, he excused
the thing, as done by Necessity, because the public Revenue had been so
lessened by former Kings and Governors, that the King could not maintain his
Family, like himself, nor be decently guarded and attended, nor yet give
Magnificent Entertainment to Ambassadors, without them. Besides, he alleged,
that this Parsimony and Care of the King in providing Money in all just and
honest Ways, was not unprofitable to the Nobility, themselves; whose greatest
damage was, to have the Kings Exchequer low. For then Kings were wont to extort
by Force from the Rich, what they could not be without; yea sometimes, they
were forced to burden and vex the Commons too, by exacting Taxes and Payments
from them, and that, the Parsimony of the King was far less prejudicial to the
Public, by imposing a Mean to immoderate Donations, than his Profuseness was
wont to be, for then he was still forced to seize on other Men's Estates, when
his Own was consumed. This answer satisfied all those who were Moderate, but
those who were more Violent, and who rather sought after occasions of
complaint, than were willing to hear any just Compurgation of an imputed Crime,
were more vehemently enraged by it.

This was the State of Scotland, when Ambassadors arrived out of France to
fetch Margarit, James his Daughter, who had before been betrothed to Lewis, Son
of Charles the 7th, home to her Husband; That Embassy brought on another from
the English; Ambassadors from France and England, to Scotland.
For seeing that the Duke of Burgundy was alienated from their Friendship, and
meditated a revolt, and that Paris, and other transmarine Provinces were up in
a Tumult, lest, when all the strength of the Kingdom was drawn out to the
French War, the Scots should invade them, on the other side; The English sent
Ambassadors into Scotland, to hinder the Renovation of the League with France,
and the Consummation of the Marriage, but rather to persuade a perpetual League
with them, who were born in the same Island, and used the same Language. And if
they would do so, and solemnly Swear, That they would have the same Friends and
Enemies with the English, then they promised that their King would quit his
claim to Berwick, Roxburgh and other Places and Countries, which were, before,
in Controversy betwixt the Nations.

James referred the Desire of the English to the Assembly of the Estates, The
Scots join with the French against England.
then met at Perth; where, after a long debate upon it, the Ecclesiastics were
divided into two Factions; but the Nobility cried out, That they knew well
enough the Fraud of the English; who, by this new League, sought to break their
old Band of Alliance with the French, that so when the Scots had lost their
Ancient Friend, they might be more obnoxious to them, if, at any time, they
were freed from other Cares, and could wholly intend a War with Scotland; and
that the liberal Promises of the English were for no other End; but as for
themselves, they would stand to their old League, and not violate their Faith,
once given. The English, being thus repulsed, turn from Petitions to Threats,
and seeing they refused to embrace their Friendships, they denounced War;
telling the Scots, that if their King sent over his betrothed Daughter into
France, one that was an Enemy to the English; The English would hinder their
Passage, if they could; yea, and take them Prisoners, and their Retinue too,
having a Fleet ready fitted for that purpose. This Commination of the
Ambassadors was so far from terrifying James, that he rigged his Navy, James
Marries his Daug^^^^ (...) to (...) o^ France, and sends her thither.
and Shipped a great Company of Noblemen, and Ladies, for her Train, and so
caused his Daughter to set Sail sooner than he had determined, that he might
prevent the designs of the English. And yet notwithstanding all this
precaution, it was God's Providence, rather than Man's Care, that she came not
into the Enemies hand; for, when they were not far from the Place, where the
English, concealing themselves, waited for their Coming; behold! upon a sudden,
a Fleet of Hollanders appeared, laden with Wine from Rochel to Flanders. The
English Fleet made after them, with all their Sail, (because the Burgundian,
being a little before reconciled to the French, did oppose their Enemies with
all his might) and being nimble Ships, they quietly fetched them up, being heavy
laden and unarmed, and as easily took them; but before they could bring them
into Port, the Spaniards set upon them unawares, and took away their Prey, and
sent the Flandrians safe home. Amidst such changeable Fortune betwixt Three
Nations, the Scots landed at Rochel, without seeing any Enemy: They were met
with many Nobles of the French Court, and were brought to A Stately City on the
L^^r.
Tours, where the Marriage was Celebrated, to the great Joy and mutual
Gratulation of Both Nations.

Upon this Occasion, the English Writers, especially Edward Hall, and he, that
pilfers from him, Grafton, The English Writers imputing Perfidiousness to
James, are blamed by this Author, and their Reflections upon him Wiped off.
inveigh mightily against James, as Ungrateful, Perfidious, and forgetful of
Ancient Courtesys, who, being Nobly entertained among the English for so many
Years, honored with a Royal Match, and large Dowry; and besides, restored to
Liberty, from a long Imprisonment, suffered all these Obligations to be
post-pon'd, and preferred the Alliance with France, before That with England;
But the thing it self does easily refute their Slanders. For, First, their
Detaining of him, when he landed on their Coast, being against their League,
and also the Law of Nations, 'twas a Wrong, not a Courtesy; Next, as to their
not killing him, but putting him to a ransom for Money, rather than imbrue
their hands in the Blood, not of an Enemy, but of a Guest, That was
attributable not so much to their Love or Mercy toward Him, as to their
Covetous and avaritious Minds; and grant, there were any Courtesy in it, yet
what was it other, but like that of Thieves, who would seem to give the Life,
which they took not away? and, if he were engaged to the English on that
account, 'twas a private, not public, debt. As for their bestowing Education
upon him, who was Innocent, by reason of his Age, a Suppliant by his Fortune,
and a King by Descent, though most unrighteously detained, it bears, indeed, some
show of Humanity, which, if they had neglected, they might have been justly
blamed; and indeed it had been a commendable piece of Kindness, if the Injury
going before, and the Covetousness following after, had not marred it; unless
you will say, that if you purposely wound a Man, you may require him to give
you thanks for his Cure, and so you imagine a light Compensation for a great
Loss, is to be esteemed as a Courtesy; or, because you have done some Part of
your duty, that, therefore you should expect the Reward, in full, of a benefit,
bestowed on another. For, he that takes Care that his Captive should be
Educated in Learning, either for his own pleasure; or that he may yield him a
better Price, tho some advantage accrue hereby to the Party educated, yet the
Master does not aim at the Good of the Slave, in his Institution, but at his
Own. But (says he) the King honored him with the Marriage of his Kinswoman,
and thus the Royal Young Man was as Royally b^st^wed. But, what if that
Affinity were as honorable to the Father, as the Son in Law? He would else
have Married her to a private Man, but now he made her a Queen, and ingrafted
her by Marriage into that Family, on which the Famousest of the English Kings
had often before bestowed their Children, and from whom so many Former Kings
had descended. But, he gave a very large Dowry with her; To whom, I pray, was
it given, but to the English themselves, who took it away, before it was paid,
and made a show of it in Words to the Husband, but, indeed, kept it for their
own use? so that the Dowry was only spoken of, not given; and so spoken of,
That they would have the Young Man, whom they also had otherwise grievously
wronged, much indebted to them, that he carried his Wife away with him, without
a Dowry. But, they sent him home a Freeman, say they; Yes, as a Pyrate does
Discharge his Captive, when his Ransom is paid: But how free, I pray? Even if
we may believe the English Writers themselves, under the enforced Obligation of
an Oath, always to obey the English King, as his Lord, and so to bring a
Kingdom, which he did yet enjoy, into a perpetual Servitude, which if he had
actually enjoyed he could not alienate; and yet he must mancipate it, forsooth,
before he received it. This is not to set one free, but to turn him loose with
a longer Chain, and that, not as a King, but as a Steward only, or Vicegerent
of another man's Kingdom. I forbear to urge, that they compelled a man in
Captivity, and as yet under the Power of another, to make a Promise; yea a
promise of That, which he could not perform; neither could he compel those to
perform it, who had Power so to do. This is that high piece of Liberality,
which, they say, James was unmindful of: But let us suffer these unskilful
Writers, and forgetful of all Moderation and Modesty in their Stories, to
account Profits received as Courtesys given; How great must we think, That
Liberty of falsifying, or else Desire of evil Speaking, to be, which they use
against the Daughter of the aforesaid King? For (whereas such men, otherwise
impudent enough, had nothing to allege against her Manners) they write, that
she was unacceptable to her Husband, because of her stinking Breath? Whereas
Monstrelet, a Contemporary Writer of those days, does affirm, that she was very
faithful and beautiful, and he who wrote the Pluscartin Book, who accompanied
that Queen, both at Sea, and at her Death, has left it on Record, that as long
as she lived, she was very dear to her Father and Mother in Law, and to her
Husband, too; as appeared by the Inscription and Epitaph, In Champaign in
France.
in French Verses at Chalons, by the River, Matrona, where she dyed, which
sound much to her Praise, 'twas then published, and afterward turned into the
Scottish Lingue, which some of our Country men have by them, to this day. But I
will leave these Men, who do so calumniate other men's Credits, and neglect
their Own, that they care little, what they say of others, or what others think
of them, and return to the Matter.

When the King, having been at Charge to rig out his Navy, had tried to exact a
Tax from the People, and the greatest Part plainly refused to pay a Penny, a
Few paid a small matter, and that grudgingly too, he commanded his Collectors,
to desist from levying the rest, and to restore what they had already received.
And yet he did not hereby shun the clamours of the People, for some malevolent
Persons, who were angry for some private loss, did daily incite seditious
Persons and Innovators against him. At the same time, the English began to prey
upon Scotland, both by Land and Sea, under the Command of Percy, Earl of
Northumberland; A Fight between the S^^ts and Eng^ish.
William Douglas, Earl of Angus was sent to encounter him, with near an Equal
number of men, for they were about 4000. on either side; of the Scots, there
fell Alexander Iohnston of Lothian, a Noble Person, and of known Valor, some
Write that 200. others, that only 40 were slain of both Armies, and about 1500
English taken Prisoners.

James having been twice provoked by the English, First, by their Fleet, which
lay in wait to intercept his Daughter; and Next, by the late spoiling of his
Country, resolves to proclaim open War against them; whereupon he listed as
great an Army as he could, and made a fierce assault on Roxburgh, and, in a
short time, he expected the Surrender thereof, when, behold, James enters
England, but retires upon notice of a Conspiracy formed against him by his own
Kindred.
the Queen came posting to him in as long Journys, as ever she was able to
make, to inform him of a sad Message, which was, that there was a grievous
Conspiracy formed against his Life, and unless he took special Care, his
Destruction was at hand. The King, being dismayed at this sudden news,
Disbanded his Army, and returned home, but was very ill spoken of amongst the
Vulgar, because, just upon the point of Surrender, at the beck of a Woman, he
retired after the Kingdom had been at so much charge and trouble; so that, he
seemed to have sought for nothing by his Arms, but Disgrace. After he returned,
he went to the Monast'ry of the Dominicans, near the Walls of Perth, to make a
private enquiry into the Conspiracy, as well as he was able; but his design was
smelt out, by Men, that Watched all opportunities to do mischief; for one of the
Kings Domestics, who was in the Plot, (Historians call him John, but his
Surname is not mentioned) discovered to his Accomplices, what was doing at Court,
so that, they hastened the matter, lest their secret Caballs should be
discovered, and Remedies applied against them. Walter, Earl of Athole, the
Kings Uncle, though he were the Ringleader of the Conspiracy, yet did what he
could to avert all Suspicion from himself; He sent for his Kinsman, Robert
Graham, (of whom I have spoken before) as fit for Execution, but rash in
Counsel, and who bore an old grudge to the King, because of his former
Imprisonment and Banishment, and also upon the account of his Brothers Son, (to
whom he was Guardian, in his hope) who had Strathern taken from him; he joins
with him Robert his Nephew by his Son, an active Young Man, he informs them,
what he would have them to do, and that when the Deed was done, he should be in
high Authority, and then he would provide for their Safety well enough; they
freely promise to do their Endeavor, and accordingly hasten to perpetrate the
Fact, before the whole Series of the Plot was made known to the King. Hereupon
they privately gathered their Company together, that so, knowing the King had
but a few about him in the Monast'ry of the Dominicans, he might with as little
noise as might be cut him off; and that they might surprise him unawares, they
advise John his Servant, abovementioned, whom they had drawn to their Party,
to be assistant to them; according to his promise, he brings the Conspirators
in the midst of the Night into the Court, and placed them privately near the
Kings Bedchamber, and shows them the Door, which they might easily break, in
regard he had taken away the Bar thereof; Some think, that they were received
into the Palace by Robert, Nephew of the Earl of Athole.

In the mean time, whilst they waited there, being solicitous how to break the
Door, which they thought would be their greatest Obstacle, Fortune did the Work
without their Helps, for Walter Straton, who, a little before, had carried in
Wine, coming forth, and perceiving Men in Arms, endeavored to get in again,
and cried out with as loud a Voice as he could, Traitors, Traitors. Whilst the
Conspirators were dispatching him, a noble young Damsel, of the Family of the
Douglas's, as most say, though some write She was a Lovel, shut the Door, and not
finding the Bar, which was fraudulently laid aside by the Servant, She thrust
her Arm into the Hole or Staple, instead of a Bolt, but they quickly brake
that, and so rusht in upon the King. The Queen threw herself upon his Body, to
defend him; K. James Cruelly Assassinated.
and when He was thrown down, She spread Herself over him, and after She had
received Two Wounds, She could hardly be plucked off. And then, when he was left
of all, they gave him 28 Wounds, and some of them just in his Heart, and so
killed him. Thus this Good King came to his End, (and that a most Cruel one
too, and much lamented by all Good Men) by the Conspiracy of most wicked
Assassins and Robbers; when his Death was divulged by the Noise and Lamentation
which was made, a great Concourse of People came presently into the Court, and
there spent the rest of the Night (for the Paricides had made their Escape in
the dark) in Bewailings and Complaints. There, every one spoke variously
according to their several Dispositions, either bitterly, to raise a greater
Odium against the Parricides; or, lamentably, to increase the Grief of their
Friends; each Man reckoned up what Prosperities, or Adversities, he had
undergone. In his Childhood, he was exposed to the Treacheries of his Uncle;
and endeavoring to escape them, he was precipitated into his Enemies hands*
Afterward, his Father died, and the rest of his Youth was spent in Exile among
his Enemies. Then Fortune changed, and he had an unlooked for Restoration; and
after his Return, in a few Years, he Governed so, that the turbulent State of
the Kingdom was changed in a Calm and Serene One. And again, having a sudden
Mutation of Affairs. He, whom his Enemies had spared abroad, was now slain by
the Treachery of his Kindred at home; His Death highly lamented, with his
Laudable Character.
and that in the Flower of his Age, and in the midst of his intended Course, to
settle good Laws and Customs, in his Kingdom. And besides, they gave him his
deserved Elogies for all his Virtues, both of Body and Mind, for Men's Envy was
extinguished toward him, now he was dead. For tho his Bodily Stature was
scarce of a full size, yet he was robust and strong; so that he exceeded all
his Equals in those Exercises, wherein Agility and Manhood use to be shown; and
as to his Mind, he was endued with that quickness and vigor of Wit, that he was
ignorant o^ no Art, worthy the Knowledge of an Ingenious Person; yea, he could
make plain Latin Verses, according to that Age, Ex tempore; Some Poems of his,
written in the English Tongue, are yet extant, in which there appears
excellency of Wit, though perhaps, some more polite Learning be wanting in them;
he was excellently well skilled in Music more than was meet or expedient for a
King; for there was no Musical, or Singing, Instrument, but he could readily
Play thereon, and Tune his Voice so, that he might have been compared with the
best Masters of that Art, in those Days. But, perhaps, some will say, These are
but the Flowers of his Studies, where is the Fruit? These are more for
Ornament, than Instruction or Use, to strengthen a Man for doing of Business:
Know then, that, after he had Learned other Parts of Philosophy, he was also
skilled in Politics, concerning the Regulation of Kingdoms, and of Men's
Manners. How Great, and how Ripe, Civil Abilities were in him, does
sufficiently appear, by the order of the Matters performed by him, and by the
Laws which he made; whereby he exceedingly benefited, not only his own Age, but
even Posterity also. And his Death declared, that there is nothing more Popular
than Justice; for they who were wont to detract from him, whilst he was alive;
now he was dead, had most flagrant Desires after him. Insomuch, that the
Nobles, as soon as they heard he was Murdered, came in of their own accord,
from their respective Countries, and, before a Trial was appointed, they
voluntarily sent out into all Parts, to apprehend the Murderers, and bring them
to Justice; very many of them were taken. The Principal of them were put to new
and exquisite kinds of Death. The rest were hanged. The Chief Heads in
perpetrating the Wickedness, were reckoned to be, Walter, Earl of Athole,
Robert his Nephew by his Son, and their Kinsman Robert Graham; Earl of (...)*
and other of K. James's Murderers Tortured and Executed.
the Punishment of Walter (because he was the Chief Author, and Instigator, of
the who^e Plot) was divided into Three Days Suffering. In the 1st, he was put
on a Cart, wherein a Stork-like Swipe or Engine was erected, and by Ropes, let
through Pullies, was hoisted up on high, and then the Ropes being suddenly
loosed, he was let down again, almost to the Ground, with grievous pains, by
reason of the Luxation of the Joints of his Body. Then he was set on a Pillory
that all might see him, and a Red-hot-Iron-Crown set on his Head, with this
Inscription, that he should be called King of all Traitors. They say, the cause
of this punishment, was, that Walter had been sometimes told, by some Female
Witches, (as Athole was always noted to have such) That he should be Crowned
King in a mighty Concourse of People; for, by this means that Prophecy was
either fulfilled or eluded, as indeed, such kind of Predictions do commonly
meet with no other Events. The Day after, he was bound upon a Hurdle, and drawn
at an Horse-Tail through the greatest Street in Edinburgh. The 3d Day, he was
laid along upon a Plank in a conspicuous Place, and his Bowels were cut out,
whilst he was alive, cast into the Fire, and burnt before his Face, afterward,
his Heart was pulled out, and cast into the same Fire, then his Head was cut
off, and exposed to the view of all, being set upon a Poll in the highest Place
of the City. His Body was divided into Four Quarters, and sent to be hanged up
in the most noted Places of the best Cities of the Kingdom. After him, his
Nephew was brought forth to suffer, but, because of his Age, they would not put
him to so much pain; and besides, he was not the Author, but only an Accomplice
in another Man's wicked Design, as having Obeyed his Grandfather therein; so
that, he was only Hanged, and Quartered. But Robert Graham, who did the Deed
with his own Hand, was carried in a Cart through the City, and his Right Hand was
nailed to a Gallows, which was set up in the Cart, and then came Executioners,
which did continually run Red-hot-Iron Spikes into his Thighs, Shoulders, and
those Parts of his Body, which were most remote from the Vitals; and then he
was Quartered, as the former. After this manner was the Death of James
vindicated, it is true, 'twas a cruel one, but 'twas revenged by Punishments so
Cruel, that they seemed to exceed the very bounds of Humanity; Descants upon
such severe Executions.
for such extreme kinds of Punishment do not so much restrain the Minds of the
Vulgar, by the fear of Severity, as they do make them wild to do, or suffer,
any thing; neither do they so much deter wicked Men from committing Offenses by
their Acerbity, as they lessen their Terror, by often beholding them;
especially, if the Spirits of the Criminals be so hardened, that they flinch
not at their Punishment. For among the unskilful Vulgar, a stubborn Confidence
is sometimes praised for a firm and stable Constancy. James departed this Life
on the Beginning of the Year 1437. the 12 th day of February, when he had
Reigned 13 Years, and in the 44 th year of his Age: So great diligence was used
in revenging his Death, that within 40 Days, all the Conspirators were taken
and put to Death. He left one Son, the younger of the Twins, half of whose
Face was Red, as if it had been Blood-shotten.

The Eleventh BOOK.
James II. The Hundred and Third King.
AFTER the Punishment of the Parricides, James the only Son of the Deceased
King, as yet scarce arrived at the Seventh Year of his Age, entered upon the
Kingdom the Sixth of the Calends of April, March ^7.
in the Abbey of Holy-Rood-House at Edinburgh. The King being as yet not fit for
Government, there was a dispute among the Nobles, who should be Elected Vice
King, or Regent. Archibald Earl of Douglas did exceed all the Scots at that
time, in Wealth and Power; but Alexander Levingstone, and William Creighton,
Both of them of worthy Families, did bear away the Bell in point of Authority
and Opinion of Prudence, in the managing of many Affairs under the former King.
To them therefore the consent of the Nobles did most incline, Alexander
Levingston made Regent.
because they had some Suspicion of Douglas's Power, (which even a King could
hardly bear:) Whereupon, Alexander Levingston was made Regent, and William
Creighton, Chancellor, which Office he had born under the former King. The
Nobility was scarce gone from the Assembly, but presently Factions arose. For
the Chancellor kept himself with the King in the Castle of Edinburgh; and the
Regent with the Queen, at Sterlin; and Douglas, fretting, that he was put by in
the last Assembly, not knowing which Faction he hated most, was well pleased to
see all things in Disorder; William Creigton made Chancellor. Douglas labors
to imbroil things.
so that rather by his Connivance, than Consent, the Men of Annandale, who were
always accustomed to Theiveries and Rapin, did infest all the Neighboring
Parts, and drove Preys out of them, as if it had been an Enemies Country. When
complaint hereof was made to the Governors, they sent Letters to Douglas to
suppress them, (knowing that the Annandians were under his Regulation and
Power) but these not prevailing, they wrote others in a sharper Style, to put
him in Mind of his Duty, but he was so far from punishing past Offenses, that,
through his neglect, by impunity, the growing Mischief was increast; for he
likewise gave forth a Command, that none of them should obey the Kings
Officers, if they Summoned them into the Courts of Justice, or performed any
other Act of Magistracy; in regard, (as he alleged,) That was a Privilege
granted to him (they commonly call it a Regale, or Royalty,) by former Kings,
and he that should go about to infringe it, it should cost him his Life.

The Regent, and the Chancellor, did bewail this State of Things, but they
could not Rectify it; so that this Gangreen spread further and further, till
it had soon infected all those parts of Scotland, which lay within the Forth.
The other Two Factions did also disagree amongst themselves, insomuch, that
Proclamations were publicly made in Market Towns and Villages, by Alexander,
that no Man should yield Obedience to the Chancellor; and by the Chancellor,
that none should obey Alexander. The R^gent and Chancellor dis^gree.
And if a Man addressed himself to either of them, to complain of his wrongs, at
his return, he was sure to be Evil entreated by the Men of the contrary
Faction; yea, sometimes his Mansion Houses and Farms would be burnt, and he
utterly undone. So that both Parties, with a more than Hostile Enmity,
destroyed one another, by mutual Slaughters. But the good Men, who had joined
themselves to neither Faction, not well knowing what to do, kept themselves at
home, privately bewailing the deplorable State of their Country. Thus, whilst
every Party sought to strengthen it self, the Public was neglected, and stood
as 'twere in the midst, forsaken of them all.

The Queen, who was with the Regent at Sterlin, that she might seem to make a
considerable Accession to her Party, performed an attempt both Bold and Manly.
For she undertook a Journey to Edinburgh, on pretense to visit her Son, and so
was admitted into the Castle by the Chancellor. There she was Courteously
entertained, and after some Complements had past, she turned her Disc^urse to
bewail the present State of the Kingdom, making a long Oration, how many and
great Mischiefs would flow from this public Discord, as from a Fountain; for
her Part, she had always endeavored, that the Differences might be composed,
that so they might have, at least, some tolerable, if not a fully peaceable,
State of a Kingdom: But seeing she could not prevail either by her Authority or
Counsel, to do any good abroad, she was no come to try, what she could do
privately, for she was resolved to do her utmost, that her Son might be
liberally, and piously, educated in hopes of the Kingdom; that so, in time, he
might be able to apply some Remedy to these spreading Evils. The Queen, by
Policy, get the Kings Person out of the Chancellors Power.
And, seeing this her Motherly Care was given her by Nature, she hoped, that no
Man would Envy her therein; as for other Parts of the Government, let them take
it, who thought themselves fit to manage, and undergo, so great a Burden; yet,
they should manage it so, as to Remember, that they were to give an account to
the King, when he came to be of Age.

This Harangue she made with a Countenance so composed, that the Chancellor was
easily persuaded of her Sincerity; neither did he discover any thing in her
Train of Followers, which gave him the least hint to suspect either Fraud or
Force; so that hereupon, he gave her free Admission to her Son, when she
pleased; and they were often alone together, and sometimes she staid with him
all Night, in the Castle: In the mean time, the Crafty Woman did often entertain
the Governor with Discourse, concerning peicing up of Matters between the
Parties; and she called also some of the contrary Faction to the Conferences;
and thus she insinuated her self so far into the Man, that he made her
acquainted with almost all his Designs: When she had thus choused and gulled
the Chancellor, she easily persuades the young King to follow her, as the
Author of his Liberty, out of the Prison, and so to deliver himself out of the
Hands of a Person, who pretended the Kings Name for all his Wickedness, and who
had drawn all Public Offices to himself; and thus neglecting the Good of the
Public, had highly advanced his own particular Fortune. To effect this, there
wanted only a Will in him to hearken to the good Counsel of his Friends, for
other Matters, let him leave Them to her Care. By such kind of Glozing
Speeches, she, being his Mother, and crafty too, easily persuaded him, who was
her Son, and but a Youth, to cast himself wholly upon her; especially, seeing a
fre^r Condition of Life was proposed to him. Whereupon, she prepared all things
for their Flight, and then goes to the Chancellor, and told him, that she would
stay that night in the Castle, but early in the morning she was to go to
Situate below ^anton Bridge, on the Ti ne, in (...)- Lothian.
White Kirk, (that was the name of the Place) to perform a Vow which she had
made, for the Safety of her Son, and she commended him to his Care, until she
returned. He suspected no deceit in her Words, but wished her a good Journey, and
a safe Return, and so parted from her. Hereupon, (as 'was agreed before) the
King was put into a Chest, wherein she was wont to put her Woman's Furniture,
and, the day after, carried by faithful Servants out of the Castle to the
Seaside at L^ith. The Queen followed after only with a few Attendants, to
prevent all suspicion. There was a Ship there ready to receive them, into which
they entered, and, with a Fair Gale, made for Sterlin. The Kings Servants waited
late in the morning, expecting still, when he would awake, and arise out of his
Bed; so that, before the Fraud was detected, the Ship was quite out of danger,
and the Wind was so favorable, that, before the Evening, they landed at
Sterlin. There the King and Queen were received with great Joy and mighty
Acclamations of the Regent, and of all the promiscuous Multitude. The Craft of
the Queen was commended by all, and the old Opinion of Wisdom which the
Chancellor had obtained, became now to be a Ridicule, even to the Vulgar. This
Jovialty and immoderate Joy of the Commons lasted (as is usual) Two days, and
was celebrated by them all.

The Third day, those of Alexanders Faction came in, some out of new Hopes;
others, invited by the Authority of the Kings Name, to whom, when the Series of
the Project was declared in order; the Courage of the Queen in undertaking the
Matter; her Wisdom in carrying it on; and her Happiness in effecting it, were
extolled to the Skies. The Avarice, and Universal Cruelty, of the Chancellor,
and especially, his Ingratitude to the Queen, and the Regent, were highly
inveighed against. He was accused, as the only Author of all the Disorders, and
consequently of all the Mischiefs arising therefrom; Moreover, That he had
diverted the Public Revenue to his own use; That he had violently seized on
the Estates of Private Persons, and what he could not carry away, he spoiled;
The Chancellor highly accused,
That he alone had all the Wealth, Honor, and Riches, when others were pining
in Ignominy, Solitude, and Want; Those Grievances, though great, yet were like
to be seconded with more oppressive Ones, unless, by Gods Aid and Counsel, the
Queen had, no less valiantly, than happily, freed the King out of Prison, and
so delivered others from the Chancellor's Tyranny* for, if he kept his own King
in Prison, it was evident, what private Men might fear and expect from him?
What hope could there ever be, that he would be reconciled to his Adversaries,
who had so perfidiously circumvented his Friends? And how could the inferior
sort expect Relief from him, whose unsatiable Avarice all their Estates were
not able to satisfy and fill up? And therefore, seeing, by Gods help in the
first place, and then by the Queens Sagacity, they were freed from his Tyranny,
all Courses were to be taken, that this Joy might be perpetual: And to make it
so, there was but One way, which was to pull the Man, as it were, by the Ears,
out of his Castle, that Nest of Tyranny; and either to kill him, or so to
disarm him, that for the future, he might do them no more Mischief; though
(said they) his disarming was not very safe, in regard such a Beast as he, who
had been accustomed to Blood and Rapin, would never be at quiet, so long as the
Breath was in his Body.

This was Alexander's Discourse in Council, to whom all did assent, so that an
Order was made, that every one should go home, and levy what Force they could
to besiege the Castle of Edinburgh, And besieged in Edinburgh Castle.
from which they were not to depart, till they had taken it. And that this
might be done with greater Facility, the Queen promised to send thither a great
Quantity of Provision, which she had in her Storehouses in Fife; but Haste was
to be used, whiles their Counsels were yet private, and the Enemy had no
Warning to provide things, fit and necessary for a Siege: And in the interim,
they need not fear Douglas, who, they knew, was a mortal Enemy to the
Chancellor, so that now, seeing they had all the Power, Treasure enough, and
withal the Authority of the Kings Name, That being now taken from Him, he could
have no Hope, but to fly to their Mercy.

Thus, the Assembly being Dissolved, all things were speedily provided for the
Expedition, and a close Siege laid to the Castle. The Chancellor was acquainted
well enough with their Designs, but he placed the greatest Hope of his Safety,
and of maintaining his Dignity, The Chancellor craves Aid of Douglas,
in Douglas his Concurrence with him. Whereupon, he sent humble Suppliants to
him, to acquaint him, That he would always be at his Devotion, if he would aid
him in his present Extremity; urging, that he was deceived, if he thought, that
their Cruelty would rest in the Destruction of himself alone; but that they
would make his Overthrow as a step to destroy Douglas, too. Douglas answered
his Message, with more Freedom, than Advantage; viz. That both Alexander and
William were equally guilty of Perfidiousness and Avarice, and that their
falling out was not for any point of Virtue, or for the good of the Public,
but for their own private Advantages, But receives an affronting Answer from
him.
Animosities, and Feuds; and that it was no great matter, which of them had the
better in the Dispute; yea, if they fell Both in the Contest, the Public would
be a great Gainer thereby; and that no good Man would desire to see an happier
sight, than two such Fencers to hack and hew one another. This Answer, being
noised abroad in Both Armies, (for the Castle was already besieged) was the
Occasion, That a Peace was sooner clapped up, than any one thought it would.
There was a Truce made for Two days, wherein Alexander and William had a
Meeting, where they discoursed one with another, how dangerous it would be,
both for the Public and their private Estates, too, if they should persist in
their Hatred, even to a Battle; Whereupon he agrees with the Regent,
seeing Douglas did but watch the event of the Combat, that he might come
fresh, and fall upon the Conqueror, and so attract all the Power of the Kingdom
to himself; when either One of them was slain, or Both weakn'd and broken; and
therefore, the H^pes of Both their Safeties were placed in their common and
mutual Agreement, so that the present Dangers easily reconciled those Two, who
were, upon other accounts also, otherwise prudent enough. William, according to
Agreement, And s^rren^ers up Edinburgh Castle.
gave up the Keys of the Castle to the King, professing, that both Himself, and
^t, were at his Service; and that he never entertained any other Thought, than
to be obedient to the Kings Will; Hereupon, he was received into Favor with
the universal Assent of all that were present. The King supped that night in
the Castle, thus surrendered to him, and the next day, the Government of the
Castle was bestowed on William, and the Regency on Alexander. Thus, after a
deadly hatred between them, it was hoped, that for ever after, the Foresight of
their mutual Advantage, and the Fear of their Common Enemy, had tied a firm and
indissoluble Knot of Friendship betwixt them.

After these Civil Broils between the Factions were composed; besides
Robberies, and the Murders of some of the common sort, which were committed in
many places, without punishment, there were some remaining Feuds, which broke
out between some Noble Families. The year after the Kings Death, September 29.
in the Third of the Calends of October, Thomas Boyd, of Kilmarnock, had
treacherously slain Alan Stuart of Darnly in a Truce, Lying on the River (...)
in Cuningham. July 9. Deadly ^ewds.
as he met him between Linlithgoe and Falkirk. The next year after, on the 7th
of the Ides of July, Alexander, Alan's Brother, with his Party, fought Thomas,
where many were slain on both sides, their Numbers being almost equal; and,
amongst the rest, Thomas himself fell.

The Death of Archibald Douglas fell out opportunely at this time, because, in
his Life time, his Power was formidable to all. He died of a Fever, the next
year, after the Death of James the First. His Son William succeeded him, being
the Sixth Earl of that Family, he was then Fourteen years of Age, a young Man
of great hopes, if his Education had been answerable to his Ingenuity. But,
Flattery, The (...) of Archiba^d Doug^as
which is the perpetual Pest of great Families, did corrupt his tender Age,
which grew a little more insolent by the premature liberty in entering on his
Estate; for such Men, as were accustomed to Idleness, and who made a Gain of
the Folly and Indiscretion of the Rich, did magnify his Fathers Magnificence,
Power, and, almost more than, Royal Retinue; and, by this means, they easily
persuaded a plain, simple Disposition, and unarmed against such Temptations, to
maintain a great Family, and to ride abroad with a Train, beyond the State of
any other Nobleman; so that he kept his old Vassals about him, in their former
Offices, by his Respects to them; and obtained also new Clans by his profuse
Largesses; With the Profuseness of his young Heir.
he also made Knights and Senators, and so distinguished the Order and Degrees
of his Attendants, as to imitate the public Conventions of the Kingdom; in
fine, he omitted nothing, which might equal the Majesty of the King himself.
Such Carriages were enough to create Suspicions, of themselves, but good Men
were also much troubled for him, upon another account, that he would often go
abroad with 2000 Horse in his Train, amongst whom some were notorious Thieves,
and many of them worthy of Death, for the Murders they had committed; yet, with
these, he would come to Court, and even to the Kings Presence, not only to show
his Power, but even to strike Terror to the Hearts of others. This his
Insolence was further heightened, by his sending some Eminent Persons as his
Ambassadors into France, viz. Malcolm Fleming, and John Lauder, Or L^ther, a
great and ancient Family in Lothian.
who were to declare the Merits of his Ancestors from the Crown of France, and
to desire, that the Title of Duke of Tours might be bestowed upon him; which he
easily obtained, for his Grandfather had that Honor conferred upon him by
Charles the Seventh, for his great Service performed in the Wars; and his
Father also had enjoyed it, after him. Being lifted up with this Accession of
Honor, he undervalued the Regent and the Chancellor too, being, as he
alleged, his Fathers Enemies, neither did he much fear the King himself. For
these causes, the Power of the Douglasses seemed too excessive; yet, a further
cause of Suspicion was added.

William Stuart had a large Patrimony in Lorne; His Brother James, after the
Kings Death, had Married the Queen, and had Children by her, but disdaining and
repining, that he was admitted to no part of the public Government; to the end
he might more easily obtain what he desired, and revenge his concealed Grief,
he seemed not much averse from Douglas his Faction, and, it was thought, that
the Queen was not ignorant of his Design, The Queen, with her Husband, James
Stuart, and others, committed to Prison.
for she also took it amiss, that the Regent had not rewarded her Services, as
she expected: By reason of these Suspicions, the Queen, her Husband, and her
Husbands Brother were committed to Prison the Fourth of the Nones of August, in
the year of our Lord.... The Queen was shut up in a Chamber narrow enough of it
self, August 2.
yet there she was diligently and watchfully guarded; for the rest were laid in
Irons in the Common Prison; and they were not freed, before, in an Assembly of
the Nobles held the day before the Calends of September; the Queen had cleared
her self from being any way privy to these new Plots; August 31. But she is
Releast again.
and James and his Brother had given in Sureties, that they would act nothing
against the Regent; neither would they undertake any Office in the Government*
without his Consent.

In this Uncertainty of Affairs, the Aebudians made a Descent upon the
Continent, The Aebudians ravage the Continent.
and wasted all with Fire and Sword, without distinction of Age or Sex, so that
their Avarice and Cruelty was not to be paralleled by any Example; Neither
were they contented to Prey only upon the Seacoast, but they also slew John
Colchon, a Noble Person in Lennox, having called him out from Inch-Merin in the
Loch-Lomond, to a Conference, and given him their Faith for his Security; This
was done the 23d of September: Many Foul Offenses of this Nature were
committed, so that partly on the account of want of Tillage, and partly of
Unseasonable Weather, Provision came to be very dear; and moreover, there was a
Pestilence for Two years, so dreadful and fierce, A Two years Pestilence in
Scotland.
that they who were visited with it, died within the space of a day. The Vulgar
ascribed the cause of all these Calamities to the Regent; for Matters
succeeding prosperously with him, he despised the Chancellor, and the Nobles of
that Faction, and drew the Administration of all things into his own Power. The
R^gent and C^^^cellor again Disagree.
Complaints were made against him, that he cast Noble and Eminent Persons into
Prison, upon light and ungrounded Suspicions, and afterward most grievously
punished them, and that he gave Indemnity to those who were really guilty,
merely by his own Arbitrary Will and Pleasure, and that he held Secret
Correspondence with Do^glas. The Chancellor could not bear these Things in
silence, neither was he able to prevent them by Force, and therefore he
suppressed his Anger for the present, and resolved to depart from the Court. And
accordingly, upon the First Opportunity, he left the King and the Regent at
Sterlin, and with a great Train of Followers came to Edinburgh; and there he
fixed himself in that Strong Castle, being intent, and Vigilant in all Occasions
of Change, which might evene.

When this matter was noised abroad, it raised up Envy on the Regent, because
of his Power, and procured favor to the Chancellor, because of his Retirement;
neither did William neglect his opportunity amongst their Feuds; for, he
resolved, by some bold Attempt, to curb the Insolence of his Adversary, and to
remove the Undervalue, he had set upon him And therefore, having understood, by
his Spys, that the King went every day a hunting, and was but Slightly guarded,
watching the Season when Alexander was absent, and having made sufficient
Enquiry into the Convenience of the Country, the Fitness of the Time, and the
due Number of the Undertakers, he chose out a Place not far from Sterlin, where
the Faithfullest of his Friends, with what Force they could make, should meet
and wait for his Coming. And he, with a few Horse, lodged himself in a Wood
near the Castle of Sterlin, before day, and there waited for the Kings coming;
neither did Providence deceive him, in this bold Attempt. The King came forth
into the Wood, The Chancellor surpr^zes the Kings Person.
early in the Morning, with a small Train, and those unarmed, too, and so he
fell amongst the armed Troops of the Chancellor, they saluted him, as King,
according to Custom, and bid him to be of good Cheer and take Courage. The
Chancellor, in a few Words, as the Time would permit, advised him to provide
for himself and the Kingdom, and to deliver himself out of Alexanders Prison,
that so he might live, hereafter, at Liberty, and as a King; and might not
accustom himself to fulfill the Lusts and Dictates of Other men, but might,
himself, lay those Commands, which were just and equal upon Others; and so
might free all his Subjects from their present Misery, which they had been
plunged into by the Ambition and Lust of their Subordinate Governors, and that
so deeply, that there could be no Remedy found for them, unless the King
himself would undertake the Government; and This be might easily do without
Peril or Pain, for he himself had provided a good Body of Horse near at hand,
who would attend him to what fit Place soever, he would go. The King seemed by
his Countenance to approve of what he had said, either that he really thought
so; or else, that he dissembled his Fear. Whereupon, the Chancellor took his
Horses Bridle in's hand, and led him to his own Men; They which were with him,
being few, and unarmed, not able to Encounter so many Men, returned back, in
great sadness. Thus the King came to Edinburgh, guarded with 4000 Horse, well
accoutred, where he was received, by the Commonalty, with great demonstrations
of Joy.

After the Regent heard of what was done, his Mind was confounded betwixt Anger
and Shame, The Regent being Outwitted by the Chancellor, inwardly frets.
insomuch, that he returned to Sterlin, to consider of what was most advisable
in the case. His great Spirit was mightily troubled to see himself so
Childishly deluded by his own Negligence; he suspected, it was done by the
Fraud and Connivance of his own Followers, and thus he stood long wavering whom
to trust, and whom to fear; Shame, Anger, and Suspicion bustling together in
his mind. At length, he took a little heart, and began to think with himself,
what Remedy to apply to his present Malady; He knew, that his own Strength was
not sufficient against the Chancellor, a Man politic in Counsel and strong in
Force; and besides, he had the Favor of the People, and the Authority of the
Kings Name, as Buttresses to support him; as for the Queen, he had so offended
her by her close Imprisonment, that she was hardly ever like to be reconciled
to him; and if she were, He had no great confidence in her Assistance. And
Meditates a Reconciliation with him.
And for Douglas, it is true, he had Strength enough, but no Prudence; his Age
was tender; his Mind infirm; he was corrupted by Flatteries, and carried about
by the Persuasions of others; and (as in such Circumstances it usually falls
out) the worst of Men could do most with him, and therefore he thought it below
his Dignity to have any thing to do with such a Raskality of men; But the
Chancellor, though he were of a Contrary Faction to him, yet was a Wise man, and
his Age and Disposition might more safely be trusted; neither was the Cause of
Offense, between them, so great, but that it was superable by their ancient
offices of Respect one to another; but the greatest likelihood of their
Reconciliation was grounded upon the Similitude of their Danger, and their
joint Consent to maintain the Safety of the Commonwealth. And besides, the
Enmity of the Chancellor was most of all to be feared by him, for if he joined
himself to other Factions, he had Power in his hands either to reduce, or
banish, him. Having pondered upon these things, for some days, in his Mind, and
communicated them to some of his most familiar Friends, Good men and Lovers of
their Country, by their Advice, he took a small ordinary Train of Attendants,
and went to Edinburgh. It happened, that the Bishops of Aberdene and Murray
were then there; Men, according to the rate of those times, of Learning and
Virtue. By their Means and Intercession, the Regent and Chancellor had a
Meeting in St. Giles's Church, with some few of their Friends on each Side. The
Regent First began to speak; I think it not necessary (says he) to make a long
Discourse, in bewailing those things, which are too well known to all, or in
reckoning up the Mischiefs arising from intestine Discords, His Condescending
Ha^angue to the Chancellor.
and the Good issueable from Concord; I wish, we might experience those
Miseries rather by Foreign than Domestic Examples; I will then come to those
things, which concern the Public Safety of all the People; and, next to
theirs, our Own, most of all. This Disagreement betwixt us arises, neither
from Covetousness, nor from Ambition to rule, but because, in the
Administration of Public affairs, which Both of us wish well to, we are not of
one Mind, but take different Measures; yet, we are to take great Care, lest
this our Dissension should be publicly Prejudicial to the Kingdom, or
privately Injurious to our Selves. The Eyes of all men are upon us Two: Wicked
Persons propose to themselves a Licentiousness to do any thing, when we are
destroyed; and Ambitious ones think then, also, to obtain an Opportunity to get
Wealth and Power; and besides, we have a great many Maligners and Envyers, as
usually Men, raised up from a low Estate to the highest Dignity, are wont to
have. All These, as they grieve at our Successes, and calumniate our
Prosperity; so they willingly receive the News of our Adversity, as thereby
hoping, and wishing for our Ruin, and therefore it will be worth Both our
labors, to consult our Own Safety, which is conjoined and twisted with That of
the Public, and so to revenge our selves on our Enemies and Detractors, to our
great Glory and Praise. And the only Way to accomplish those Ends, is This,
That we forget our private Injuries, and contribute all our Thoughts and
Counsels for the Good of the Public; let us remember, that the Kings safety is
committed to our Cares, and so is also the Safety of the Kingdom; yet so, that
we are Both liable to an Account. And therefore, as, heretofore, we have been
to blame in contending, which of us should be the greater in Honor and
Authority; so, for the Future, let our contest be, which shall exceed other in
Moderation and Justice: And, by this means, we shall bring it to pass, that the
Commonalty, who now hate us, and impute all their Calamities to us, will be
reconciled to, and revere, us, again. And the Nobility, who, upon our disunion,
have broke forth into unbridled Licentiousness, may be reduced to Moderation;
and the Great Men, who slight us, as weakened by Division, may fear us, when
united and reconciled, and so carry themselves with greater Sobriety toward us,
than ever. As for me, I willingly give up the tender Age of the King to be
modeled and governed by you, as his Father, in his Life time, appointed; for,
as often as I seriously think of that Function and Service, I judge my self
rather to be eased of a Burden, than despoiled of an Honor, thereby; If I have
received any private Injury from you, I freely forgive it for the sake of the
Public; and if I have done you any Wrong, let honest Arbitrators adjust the
damage, and I will make you Satisfaction to the full; and hereafter, I will so
carry it, that neither my Losses, nor my Advantages, shall be the least stop to
the Public Prosperity. And if you also be of the same Mind, we may Both of us
rest Secure for the present, and also leave our Memorys more grateful to
Posterity; but if you think otherwise, I call all men to Witness, both present
and to come, that it is not my Fault, that the Evils, under which we now labor,
are not, either fully cured, or, at least, in some sort relieved and mitigated.

To This the Chancellor replied, As I unwillingly entered upon this Stage of
Contention, so, ^
I am very willing to hear any mention made of an honest Agreement: for, as I
did not take up Arm^, before the Injuries, I suffered, provoked me thereunto;
so your Modesty has urged me, not to suffer the Public to be indamag'd by my
Pertinaciousness. For, I see as well as you, by this our Discord, That Good Men
are exposed to the Injuries of the Bad; The minds of the Seditious are excited
to hopes of Innovation; Our Country is left for a Prey* The Kingly Dignity is
lessened; Public Safety betrayed; Authority bearded and ridiculed, even by the
mean of the People. And whilst we thus betray the Safety of the Public, our
private Affairs are in no better a Posture. In the mean time, Men, who are
given to Sedition, make advantage of our Discords; and our Enemies behold them,
as a pleasant Sight, (for they hate us Both alike) and if the loss fall on
either of us, yet they count themselves to gain, what either of us does lose:
And therefore I shall not repeat the Causes of our Feuds; lest I make old sores
to bleed afresh, but, in short, I declare, that I forgive all my private Wrongs
and Injuries upon the Score of my Country, for there never was, nor shall be,
any thing more preferrable with me before the Safety of the People, and the
Good of the Commonwealth.

Those, who were present, did highly commend both their Resolutions; A New Knot
of Amity between the Regent, and the Chancellor.
and so, by joint Consent, Arbiters were chosen, to compose Differences; and,
to the great joy of all, old Discords were plucked up by the roots, and new
Foundations of Amity laid; and thus they, by joint Counsel, again undertake the
Management of the Kingdom. After this Concord, an Assembly of the Estates was
held at Edinburgh. Thither came not a Few Persons, as is usual, but even whole
Clans and Tenantrys, (as if they had removed their Habitations) to complain of
the Wrongs they had sustained; and indeed, the Sight of such a miserable
Company could not be entertained without deep Affliction of Spirit, every one
making his woeful moan, according to his Circumstance; that Robbers had
despoiled Fathers of their Children; The Miseries of the Commons,
Children of their Fathers; Widows of their Husbands, and all in general of
their Estates; Whereupon, after Commiseration of the Sufferers; The Envy (as is
usual) and Reflection was carried to, and fixed upon, the Captains of those
Thieves; whose Offenses were so impudent, that they could, in no wise, be
suffered; and their Faction was so far diffused, that no man was able to defend
his Life or Fortune, unless he were of their Party; yea, their Power was so
great, that the Authority of the Magistrate could afford little help to the
poorer and weaker Sort against their Violence and Force: Whereupon the Wiser
sort of Counselors were of Opinion, That, seeing their Power was insuperable
by plain Force, 'twas best to undermine it by degrees; They all knew well
enough, that the Earl of Douglas was the Fountain of all those Calamities,
Occasioned Principally by the Earl of Douglas.
yet no Man durst name him publicly; whereupon the Regent, dissembling his
Anger for the present, persuaded the whole Assembly, That it was more
advisable for them to cajole Douglas by Flatteries, than to irritate him by
Suspicions; for he was of so great Power, that he alone, if he remained
refractary, was able to hinder the Execution of the Decrees of All the Estates;
but if he joined himself with the Assembly, then he might easily heal the
present Mischiefs.

Semblable to this Advice, a Decree was made, that Letters of Complement, in
the Name of the Estates, should be sent to him, to put him in Mind of the Place
which he held; and of the great and Illustrious Merits of his Ancestors, for
the Advantage of their Country; and withal to desire him to come to the Public
Assembly of the Estates, which could not be well Celebrated, without the
presence of him and his Friends. If he had any Complaint to make in the
Assembly, they would give him all the Satisfaction they were able to do; and if
he or his Friends had done any thing prejudicial to the Public; in respect to
his Noble Family, which had so often well deserved of their Country, they were
ready to remit many things upon the account of his Age; of the Time; of
himself, and the great Hopes conceived of him. And therefore they desired, he
would come and undertake what part of the Public Government, he pleased; for,
seeing Scotland had often been delivered from great Dangers by the Arms of the
Douglas's, they hoped, that, by his Presence, he would now strengthen and
relieve his Country which labored under Intestine Evils.

The Young Man, who, by his Age and Disposition, was desirous of Glory, was
taken with the Bait; and his Friends also persuaded him, for they were all
blinded by their particular Hopes; so that their Minds were turned, from all
Apprehension of Danger, to the sole Consideration of their particular
Advantages. When the Chancellor heard, that he was on his Journey, he went out
several Miles to meet him, and gave him a Friendly Invitation to his Castle,
which was near the Road, (it was called Creighton) where he was Magnificently
entertained, for the space of Two Days, in which time, the Chancellor showed
him all imaginable Respect, that he might the more easily entrap the unwary
Young Man: For, to show that his Mind was no way alienated from him, he began,
in a familiar manner, to persuade him to be mindful of the Kings Dignity, and
of his own Duty; that he should own him for his Leidge Lord, whom his Birth,
the Laws of the Country, and the Decree of the Estates had advanced to be King;
that he should transmit the great Estate, which his Ancestors had got by their
Blood and Valor, to his Posterity, in like manner as he had received it; that
so the Name of the Douglasses, which was Illustrious for their Loyalty and
Achievements, might be freed from the foul Blot of Treason; yea, and from all
Suspicion of the same; that he and his Tenants should forbear oppressing the
poor Commons; that he should put all Robbers out of his Train; and for the
future, he should so addict himself to the maintenance of Justice, that if he
had offended heretofore, it might be thought attributable to the ill Counsel of
Bad Men, and not to the Wickednese of his own Nature; for, in that tender and
infirm Age, his Repentance would pass for Innocence. By these and the like
Speeches, he persuaded the young Man, that he was his entire Friend, and so
drew him on to Edinburgh, with David his Brother, who was privy to all his
Projects and Designs. But his Followers smelt out some suspicion of Deceit, by
reason of the frequent Messages that past betwixt Alexander and the Regent; for
almost every Moment, Posts ran betwixt them; and besides, the Chancellors
Speech seemed to some more glozing and kind, than was usual for one of his
Place and Dignity. His Train did secretly mutter this, and some freely told him
That if he were resolved to go on, yet he should send back David his Brother,
and (according to his Fathers advice to him, on his Death Bed,) not give up his
whole Family to one stroke of Fortune. But the improvident Youth was Angry with
his Friends, that had thus advised him; and caused a Word to be given forth to
all his Followers; to surcease all such private Whisperings: And to his Friends
he made Answer, That he knew well enough, that 'twas the common Plague of great
Families, to be troubled with Men, who loved not to be quiet, and who made a
gain of the Dangers and Miseries of their Patrons: And that such Men, because
in time of Peace, they were bound up by Laws, were the Authors and Advisers to
Sedition, that so they might Fish the better in troubled Waters; but for his
part, he had rather cast himself on the known Prudence of the Regent and
Chancellor, than give Ear to the Temerity and Madness of Seditious Persons.
Having spoken these Words, to cut off any occasion of further advice in the
Case, he set Spurs to his Horse, and with his Brother, and a few more of his
Confidents, hastened to the Castle, with more speed than at the rate of an
ordinary March; and so, Fate drawing him on, he precipitated himself into the
Snares of his Enemies.

In that very Moment of time, the Regent came in too, for so it was agreed,
that the whole weight of so great Envy might not lie on one Man's Shoulders
only. Where he and his Brother David were slain.
Douglas was kindly received, and admitted to the Kings Table; but in the midst
of the Feast, some Armed Men beset him, being Weaponless, and put a Bulls Head
upon him, which, in those Times, was a Messenger and Sign of Death. When the
young Man saw that, he was troubled and sought to arise, but the Armed Men laid
hold on, and carried him to a Court near the Castle; where, by the loss of his
Head, he paid for the Intemperance of his Youth. David his Brother, and Malcolm
Fleming, whom, next to his Brother, he trusted most of all, were also put to
Death with him. It Is said, that the King, who was now fully entering on his
being of Age, wept for his Death; and that the Chancellor did greatly Rebuke
him for his unseasonable Tears, at the Destruction of an Enemy; whereas the
Public Peace was never like to be settled, as long as he was alive. William
dying thus without Children, James (Surnamed Crassus, or the Gross, from his
Disposition,) succeeded him in the Earldom, (for 'twas a Male-Feo, as Lawyers
speak) the rest of his Patrimony, which was very great, fell to his only Sister
Beatrix, a very beautiful Person in her Days. This James, the Gross, though he
were no bad Man, yet was no less suspected by the King, and hated by the
Commons, than the former Earl; because, though he did not maintain Robbers, as
the former Earl had done; yet he was not very Zealous in subduing them; but he
was subtracted from this Envy, by his Death, which happened Two Years after.

William, the Eldest of his Seven Sons, Succeeded him, he being Emulous of the
ancient Power of the Family, that he might restore it unto its Pristine
Splendour, resolved to Marry his Uncles Daughter, who was the Heiress of many
Countries: Many of his Kindred did not approve of the Match, William Douglas
Marries Beatrix his Uncles Daughter.
partly because 'twas an unusual, and by consequence, an unlawful thing; and
partly because, by the Accession of so much Wealth, he would be envied by the
People, and also formidable to the King. For a Rumor was spread abroad, and
that not without ground, that the King himself would do his utmost, to hinder
the Match. This made William to hasten the Consummation of the Marriage, even
in the time when Marriages were forbidden, that he might prevent the Kings
endeavors, to the contrary. Thus having obtained great Wealth, he grew
insolent, and envy followed his Insolence, The high (...) o^ Thieves.
in regard Troops of Robbers did swarm every where, whose Captains were thought
to be no Strangers to Douglas his Design. Amongst them there was one George
Gorm, of Athole, who pillaged all the Country about him, and set upon William
Ruthven, Sheriff of Perth, because he was leading a Thief of Athole to the
Gallows, and fought with him, as it were, in a set Battle. At last Gorm the
Captain, and 30 of his Followers, were slain, and the rest sled to the
Mountains. This Bustling Fight was in the year of Christ 1443.

A few days after, the Castle of Dunbarton, impregnable by Force, was twice
taken in a little time: Robert Semple was Commander of the Lower Castle; and
Patrick Galbreth of the Higher, and their Government was so divided, that each
had a peculiar entrance into his own Part. These Two were not free from
Factions, amongst themselves. For Patrick was thought secretly to favor the
Douglasses; whereupon Semple, Dunbarton Castle twice surprised.
perceiving that his Part was but negligently guarded, seized upon him, and
commanded him to remove his Goods. The day after, Patrick entered with four
Companions attending him, without Arms, to fetch out his Goods; where, first,
he light upon the Porter alone, and then, catching up Arms, drove him and the
rest out of the Upper Castle, and thus, sending for Aid out of the Neighboring
Town, he beat them out of the Lower Castle also, and so reduced the whole Fort
into his own hands.

About that time, there were very many Murders committed upon the inferior
Sort, which were partly perpetrated by the Douglassians, and partly charged
upon them, by their Enemies. The King was now of Age, and managed the
Government himself, so that Douglas, being unable to stand against the Envy of
the Nobles, King James, being of Age* enters on the Government.
and the Complaints of the Commons, too, resolves to become a New Man, to
satisfy the People, and, by all means possible, to atone the Heart of the
King, which was alienated from him; and, in order thereunto, he came with a
great Train to Sterlin. And when he had Intelligence by some Courtiers, whom he
had greased in the Fist, and made his Own, that the Kings Anger was appeased
toward him, then, and not before, he came into his Presence, and threw down
his Life* and Fortune, and all his Concerns, at his Feet, and to his Dispose;
he partly excused the Crimes of his former Life, and pa^^ly, (because That
seemed the readier way to Reconciliation,) he ingenuously confessed Them, withal
affirming, that whatever Fortune he should have hereafter, Douglas throws
himself at the Kings Feet, acknowledges his Offenses, is Pardoned, and Received
into Favor.
he would ascribe it solely to the Clemency of the King, not to his Own
Innocence; but if the King were pleased to receive Satisfaction from him, by
his Services and Obsequiousness, he would do his utmost endeavor for the
future, that no Man should be more Loyal and observant of his Duty, than
himself, and that in restraining and punishing all those exorbitant Offenses
which his Enemies cast upon him, none should be more sharp and severe than he;
in regard he was descended from that Family, which was not raised by opp^^^sing
the Poor, but by defending the Commons of Scotland, by the^^ Arms: By this
Oration of the Earls, and the secret Commendation of the Courtiers, the King
was so changed, that he forgave him all the Crimes of his former Life, and
received him into the Number of his Privadoes, and communicated all his secret
Designs to him.

And indeed the Earl, in a very little time, had so obliged the King to him by
his Obsequious Carriage; and had won so much on his Ministers by his
Liberality; yea, had so ingratiated himself into all Men, by his modest and
courteous Condescension, that the ordinary sort of People conceived great Hope
of his gentle and pliable Deportment; The Regent and Chancellor lay down their
Offices.
but the Wiser were somewhat afraid, whither so sudden a change of Manners
would tend: And especially Alexander Levingston, and William Creighton,
imagining, that all his Counsels would tend to their Destruction, having laid
down their public Offices in the Government, went away, severally; Alexander,
to his own Estate; and William into the Castle of Edinburgh, there to watch and
observe, where the Simulation of Douglas would terminate and end; Neither did
their preconceiv'd Opinion deceive such Wise Men, as they were: For Douglas
having gotten the King alone, and destitute of graver Counsel, and who was
somewhat unwary too, by reason of the Greenness of his years, thought now, that
he had a fit Opportunity to revenge the Deaths of his Kinsmen, Douglas by his
Power at Court, summons them to Appear.
and so easily persuaded the King to send for William Creighton, and Alexander
Levingston, with his two Sons, Alexander and James, to give him a Legal Account
of (...) Administration of their former Offices. His Design herein, (...) if
they came to the Court, he might either destroy them, or (...) bring them
under, by the power of his Faction; but if they refused to come, then to
declare them public Enemies; and so having the Authority of the Kings Name, as
a pretense for his Power, to despoil, and out them, of all their Estates.
Hereupon, they were summoned to appear, but returned Answer, by Letters, That
they had never any thing more prevalent and superior in their Thoughts, than
the Good of the King and Kingdom, and that they had so managed their Offices,
that they desired nothing more than to give up a full Account; They excusing
themselves, are declared public Enemies.
provided, it were before equal Judges, but, for the present, they desired to
be excused in regard they perceived, that the Minds of those, who were to be
their Judges, were preposses'd in Favor, and by the Largesses, of their
Enemies; and besides, all Passages were beset with Armed Men* not that they
shunned a Legal Hearing, but only withdrew from the Violence of their Mortal
Enemies at the present, and reserved their Lives for better Times, till the
Commanders of Thieves being driven from the Kings Presence, as they had often
done in doubtful times before, they might then justify and asse^t their
Innocence to the King and all Good Men.

When this Answer was received, an Assembly was Indicted to be held at Sterlin
the Fourth day of November, wherein Douglas so carried the Matter, that they
were declared Public Enemies, and their Goods Confiscate. And then he sends
out John O^ Forester.
Froster of Gorstorphin, his Confident, with Forces to spoil their Country, In
Mid-Lothian, two (...) West of Edinburgh.
and bring their Goods into the Kings Exchequer: He took in their Castles by
Surrender, part of them he demolisht, and part he put new Garrisons into, and
thus making a vast spoil, without any resistance, he carried off a great Booty;
The Douglassians had scarce retired, before Creighton had gathered an Army of
his Friends and Vassals, sooner than Men thought; and with them, he ran over
the Lands of the Foresters, and of the Douglasses, even as far as Corstorphin,
S^rabrock, A Town on the River (...) West-Lothian.

A Castle standing on a Rock, lying near the Firth of For^h, above Abercorn.
Creighton, late Chancellor, defends himself by force.


Abercorn, and Blackness, he burnt their Houses, spoiled their Corn, and
brought away as much Prey, as he was able, and amongst the rest, a stately
Breed of Mares; and thus he did his Enemy much more Mischief, than he received.
Douglas, knowing that Creighton had done this, by the assistance of Others,
rather than his own Force, turns his Anger upon his Friends, who (he was
informed) had sent him Aid privately (for few durst do it openly.) The Chief of
them were James Kennedy Archbishop of St. Andrews, George Earl of Angus, John
Earl of Morton, Both the later of Douglas's his own Family; but One Born of the
King's Aunt, the Mother of James Kennedy; the Other had Married the King's
Sister. These Persons did always prefer the Public Safety, and their Duty for
the Conservation thereof, before the private Respect to their own Family: But
Kennedy exceeded the rest, in Age, Counsel, and consequently in Authority; and
therefore his Wrath was, principally, incensed against him: Whereupon, the Earl
of Craford, and Alexander Ogilby gathered a reasonable Army together, and
spoiled his Lands in Fife; and following the Prey, rather than the Cause, they
plundered the Neighbor Farms also, with a great devastation; and then, without
any Opposition, returned into Angus, laden with Spoil. In this case, Kennedy
betook himself to his proper Church-Arms of Defense; and, in regard Craford
avoided the Decision of these Disputes by Law, Douglas incensed against
Creighton's Friends.
he prosecuted him with Ecclesiastical Censures; which when he despised,
according to his wonted Contumacy, a little while after, he was justly punished
for his contempt of all Divine and Human Laws. For, the same Year, wherein
these things were acted, the College of the Benedictins at Aberbrothock, (in
regard, Monks might not intermeddle to judge in Civil Causes) had made
Alexander Lindsy, Eldest Son of the Earl of Craford, their Chief Judge in
Civils, or, as they call him, Sheriff, or Bailiff. He, with his huge Train of
Followers, became burdensome to the Monast'ry; and besides, he carried himself
as their Master, rather than their Servant, so that they dispossessed him of his
Offices, and put Alexander Ogilby, in his Place; Lindsy looked upon This as a
Wrong to him, in his Opinion, so that each of them gathered together what Force
they could, as if a War had been denounced between them; when Both Armies stood
in a readiness to Fight, the Earl of Craford having notice of it, made all the
haste he could, and rode in betwixt Them Both, thinking, that the sole
Authority of his Name had been Armor of proof to him; and whilst he was
hindering his Son from engaging, and calling out Ogilby to a Conference, The
Clans of the Lindsys and Ogilbys Fight.
a Soldier darted a Spear into his Mouth; it was not known, Who he was, nor
What he aimed at, and struck him down dead from his Horse; His Death was as an
Alarm to Both Armies, and after a sharp Conflict, many being wounded on Both
sides, the Victory fell to the Lindsys: They say, the Cause thereof was, that,
whilst Both Armies stood with their Spears upright, representing the fashion of
a Wood, a certain Man cried out, Why do you bring those Goads with you, as if
you had to do with Oxen? Pray, cast them away, and let us fight it out with our
Swords, hand to hand, by true Valor, as becomes Men? Upon which Words, they
all cast away their Pikes, on both sides, except 100 Clydesdale Men, whom
Douglas had sent in to Aid the Lindsyst These held the Tops, or Points, of
their Pikes in their Hands; and drew the rest of them behind their Backs; but
when they came to Handy-blows, then they held them out as a thick Fence, before
them, and their Enemies, being terrified with the sudden Spectacle, had their
Ranks broken thereby. The Conquering side lost 100; the Conquered 500, and
amongst them, some Men of Note; Alexander Ogilby was taken prisoner, and Dyed a
few Days after, either of his Wounds, or for Grief; Gordon, Earl of Huntly, was
put upon a Horse by a Friend of his own, and so escaped. The Slaughter had been
much greater, Ian. 24.
if the Night had not covered the Flyers away, for the Battle began a few hours
before Night, on the 9 th of the Calends of February.

The Lindsys prevail.
The Lindsys managed their Victory with great Cruelty, they pillaged and
demolisht Houses, and utterly spoiled the Country. The War was as hotly carried
on between the Factions in other Parts; Douglas had besieged William Creighton,
some Months in the Castle of Edinburgh; and to make a more close Siege, he
removed the Assembly of the Estates, which was summoned to be held on the Ides
of July, July 15.
and was already begun at Perth, to Edinburgh; when the Siege had lasted 9
Months, both the Besiegers, and the Besieged, grew equally weary, Creighton
received into Favor, and is made Chancellor again.
and so a Surrender was made on these Conditions, That, William should be
Indemnify'd for whatsoever he had done against the King, and He and His should
march safely off. Thus in every Dispute, he, who is most powerful, would seem
to be most innocent. And not long after, Creighton was received into the King's
Favor, and was made Chancellor again, by the general Consent of all, but he
refrained the Court, and all Public Business, as much as ever his Office would
suffer him to do. Douglas, having thus rather terrified, than overthrown,
Creighton, turned the rest of his fury upon the Levingstons. But before I come
to that Part of my History, I will touch upon the Slaughter of some of these
Noble Persons, (for 'twould be infinite to name the Deaths of all,) who were
put to Death in those Days.

James Stuart, a Noble Knight, was slain by Alexander Lisle, and Robert Boyd,
at Kirk-Patrick, about Two Miles from Dunbarton; neither was their Cruelty
satisfied with his Death, but they endeavored to get his Wife also, Deadly
Fewds betwixt particular Persons and Families.
who was then great with Child, and almost ready to lie down, into their Power;
In order whereto, they sent a Priest to her, as in great have, to tell her,
That all the Roads were full of Horse and Foot, and that there was no Way for
her to escape the present Danger, but to go a Shipboard, and fly to Robert Boyd
at Dunbarton, who had solemnly promised to return her safe home; The credulous
Woman, who did not know, that Robert was present at the perpetration of the
Murder, being carried from Cardros into the Castle, perceiving, An Abbey in
Lenn^x.
that She was circumvented by the Fraud of her Enemies, being overcome by the
Greatness of her Grief, Fear, and Indignation, brought forth an Abortive Birth,
which, with the Mother, Dyed a few hours after.

About the same time, Patrick Hepburn, Earl of Hales, A Castle standing upon
Tine, near Hardington.
kept the Castle of Dunbar, and had with him Joan the Wife of James the I. who
in those tumultuous times, had fled thither for refuge; Archibald Dunbar,
thinking this to be a just Cause for a Quarrel, set upon Hales, Hepburn's
Castle, in the Night, killed the Garrison Soldiers on the First Onset, and took
it; yet, in a few Hours, for fear, he gave it up to the Earl of Douglas, upon
condition, That He and His should march safely off. Not long after, Queen Joan
Dyed, leaving these Children by her later Husband, John Earl of Athole, James
Earl of Buchan, and Andrew, afterward Bishop of Murray. After She was Dead,
Hepburn delivered up the Castle of Dunbar, un-Garison'd, and empty, to the King.

In Angus, Alexander, Earl of Craford, put John Lions to death in the
Marketplace at Dundee, because he had been raised up to great Wealth, and
Honor, even to a Match in the Royal Family, by his Father; yet he proved
ungrateful, and forgot the Courtesies he had received.

Amidst these Discords, the Men of Annandale did vex the adjoining Countries
with all sorts of Calamities. The Cause of all these Mischiefs was cast upon
the Earl of Douglas, who yet did all he could to conceal these Facts of his
Clans, for he openly Studied nothing more than to afflict the Men of different
Parties, in regard, he was grown to that height of Power, that 'twas a Capital
Offense to question any of his Doings. He caused James Stuart the King's Uncle
to fly the Land, because he spoke something freely concerning the State of the
Kingdom, but his Ship being taken by the Flemings, he lived not long after.

Now, he thought, it was high time to attempt the Levingstons, Douglas attempts
the Levingstons* of whom, James is put to Death. etc.
whereupon, he caused Alexander, the Head of the Family, and his Son James, and
also Robert the King's Treasurer, and David, to be summoned to an Assembly at
Edinburgh; and, of his Friends, Robert Bruce, James and Robert Dundasses; of
these, Alexander, and the Two Dundasses, were sent back to prison to Dunbarton;
the rest were put to Death; of what Crime they were guilty, meriting so great a
Punishment, the Historians of those Times do not mention, neither will I
interpose my own Conjectures, in a business so remote from our Memory; only I
will relate what I have heard, That James Levingston, when he came to the place
of Execution, complained heavily, and expressly, of the Inconstancy of Fortune
That his Father, who was Honored with a Power next to the Kings, did yet
freely give up the invidious Title of Regent, and went to his own Estate far
from Court, and out of his Enemies sight, whose Cruelty wa^ never satiated with
his Miseries, and therefore he was forced to take Arms to preserve his Life,
which he again laid down at the Kings Command; if there were any fault, in
that; he had long ago obtained his Pardon; and since that time, he had lived
remote, and free from all suspicion of any Crime, of which, this was an evident
Token, That the Nobility thought them innocent, and did solicitously deprecate
their Punishments, and yet notwithstanding, the severe Cruelty of their Enemies
prevailed more, than the former Demerits and good Offices of their Family; or,
than the Kings Pardon obtained, or, than the interceding Supplications of the
Nobility. And therefore he entreated all, who were there present, to look upon
those lofty Titles of Empire and Dominion, to be nothing else but the Glosing
Complements of Fortune, who then intended to do most Mischief; and that they
were rather flowery Embelishments for ones Funeral, than Safeguards to a Man's
Life; especially since Bad men can always do more to destroy the Good, than the
Consent of the Good can do to save them. And having thus spoken, to the great
grief of all the Spectators, he submitted his Neck to the Executioner.

Amidst these Combustions, Creighton was sent into France, partly to renew the
Ancient League, Creighton sent Ambassador to France.
and partly to obtain from thence a Royal Bride; Douglas took his Absence very
well, though in an Honorable Employment, because, though he was a prudent and
potent person, yet, out of the Relics of their former discords, he was not
over-fond of him. In this troublesome state of the Kingdom, the same Disease
which vexed others, did also infect the Ecclesiastical Order: James Cameron,
Bishop of Glasco, had, himself, committed many acts of Cruelty and Avarice,
upon the Husbandmen of his Diocese, (which was very large) and he had also
given Encouragement to Those who were in power, to do the like, that so, when
the Owners were unjustly condemned, their Estates might be Confiscated to him;
so that, he was believed to be the Author, or the Favourer, of all the
Mischiefs which were acted abroad. It Is reported, that the Man came to an End
worthy of his wicked Life; The Day before the Nativity of Christ, as he was
asleep in a Farm of his own, about 7 Miles from Glasco, he seemed to hear a
loud Voice calling him to the Tribunal of Christ, to plead his Cause. That
sudden Fright wakened him out of his Sleep, The Bishop of Glasco frightened by a
Voice from Heaven for his wicked Life, which does him to Death.
he called up his Servants to bring a Candle, and sit down by him; he took a
Book in his hand, and began to read, but presently the same Voice was heard
louder than before, which struck all, there present, into a Great horror.
Afterward, when it sounded again more terribly and frightfully, than before,
The Bishop gave a great groan, put out his Tongue, and was found Dead in his
Bed. This so evident an Example of God's Vengeance, as I shall not rashly
credit, so I have no mind to refute; yet, it being delivered by others, and
constantly affirmed to be true, I thought good not to omit it.

James Kennedy retires from a Corrupt Court.
At the same time, James Kennedy, One of a far different Life and Manners, as
referring all his Counsels to the Good of the Public; when, neither by his
Authority, nor Counsel, he could resist the daily new-springing Evils of his
Country; and seeing likewise, That the Kings Power was not able to oppose the
Conspiracies of Wicked men, he left all his Estate for a Prey, and shifted for
himself. Neither, in these Domestic Miseries, were Matters much quieter
abroad; When the Truce made with the English was expired, the Scots made an
Inrode into England, and the English into Scotland; and wherever they went,
they wasted all with Fire and Sword; in England, ^
Al^wick was taken and burnt by James, Brother to the Earl of Douglas: In
Scotland, the Earl of Salisbury did the like to Dunfreiz, and the Earl of
Northumberland to Dunbar; great Booties of Men and Cattle were driven away, on
Both sides. But the Commanders agreed amongst themselves, that the Prisoners
should be exchanged, for they were in a manner equal, both for Number and
Degree. By these Incursions, the Country was depopulated, and yet the main
chance of the War not concerned; so that a Truce was again accorded for 7 Years.

In this state of Affairs, James Dunbar, Earl of Murray, departed this Life, he
left two Daughters his Heiresses, the Eldest of them was Married, by her Father
before his Death, to James Creighton; Dunbar, E. of Murray Dies, and Archibald
Douglas succeed^ (...).
The Younger, after her Fathers decease, married Archibald, Brother to the Earl
of Douglas. He, against the Laws and the Custom of his Ancestors, was called
Earl of Murray; so superlative was Douglas's Power then at Court; neither was
he contented with this Accession of Honor; but, that he might further
propagate the Dignity of his Family, he caused his Brother George to be made
Earl of Ormond; his Brother John had many fair and fruitful Farms and Lands
bestowed upon him, and was also made Baron of Balvany, A Barony ^^ing on the
(...) Spey.
against the mind of many of his Friends, who had in Suspicion the Power of
that Family, too great before, that it would be at last formidable, even to the
King himself; yea, they imagined that these immoderate Accessions and Frolicks
of Fortune would not be long-lived. But his Enemies did, as invidiously as they
could, inveigh against This unsatiable Ambition; The immoderate Power of the
Douglas's, e^poses them to Envy.
for who (say they) could safely live under the Exorbitant rule of such a
Tyrant, for whose Avarice nothing was enough, and against whose Power there was
no Safeguard; who, right or wrong, invaded the Patrimony of the Nobles, and
exposed the Countrymen to be a Prey to his Tenants; and those who opposed his
Lust, he caused them, by Thieves and Cutthroats, either to lose all they had,
or else to be put to death; that he advanced Upstar^s to high Honors, whom he
grafted on the ruin of Noble Families; so that, all the Power of the Kingdom
was now brought into one House; besides many Knights and Barons, there were
five Opulent Earls of the Family, insomuch that the King himself did but Reign
precariously, and men were like to suffer all Extremities under the Cruel
Bondage of the Douglas's, and he that uttered the least word tending to
Liberty, must pay his Life for his Boldness. These, and other discourses of
this kind, some true, others to create greater Envy, stretched beyond the Lines
of Truth, were spread abroad amongst the Vulgar; which made Those; who were of
neither* Faction, to fit loose from the Care of the Public, and every one to
mind his own private Concerns: The wiser sort of his Enemies were glad to hear,
that a man of such Power, against which there was no making Head, should thus
voluntarily run headlong to his own Destruction. Neither did they presage
amiss, ^
for his Mind was grown so proud and insolent, by reason of his Great
Successes, that (...) his Ears against the free Advices of his Friends; yea,
many (...) not, with any safety, dissemble and cover, by their silence, what
they did dislike, because he had Parasites, which did not only lie at catch for
Words, but observed men's very Countenances; As for his old Enemies, many of
them were haled to Judgment, before him, who was both their Adversary and Judge
too, so that some of them were outed of their Estates, some deprived of their
Lives, and others, to avoid his unrighteous and partial Judgment, fled out of
their Country.

The men also of Douglas's Faction lived in no Fear, at all, of the Law, (for
no man durst implead them) but letting the Reins loose to all Licentiousness,
they invaded and made havoc of things Sacred, as well as Profane; Those which
were obnoxious to them they slew, and killed out of the way, neither was there
any End of their Wickedness; The Miserable Estate of the Commons under Douglas.
sometimes, when they had no sufficient Cause to do a man a Mischief, they then
did it unprovoked, and gratuitously, as it were, lest through disuse of offending
any honest and tender Thoughts should arise in their Minds, so as to allay
their Brutish Cruelty; Every one thought himself the noblest and bravest
Fellow, that could cast the greatest Contumely on the Commons. When such great
Miseries were diffused into so many Parts of the Kingdom, Scotland had
certainly sunk under the Burden, unless England, at the same time, had been as
much embarassed with civil Combustions; which, at last, being somewhat allayed,
the English violated their Truce and invaded Scotland; When they had runover a
great Circuit of Ground, and pillaged many Villages; They drove away a Vast
Number of Cattle, and returned home; neither was it long before the Scots cried
quits with them; for they also entered England with a good Force, and did the
Enemy more Damage than they received. Thus, the Minds of Both were irritated by
these alternate Plunderings, Mutual Incursions betwixt the Scots and English.
so that a mighty Desolation was made in the Territories of either Kingdom; but
the greatest share of the Calamity fell upon C^mberland, which had been the
Rise of the Injury and Wrong, for that Province was so harassed by the War,
that it was almost quite destroyed. When this war related at London, it
occasioned the English to levy a far greater Army against the Scots, for
thereby, they thought easily to reduce the Country into their Power, they being
poor, and also weakened by Civil Discords. Hereupon an Army was raised of the
Better sort of People, and the Earl of Northumberland made their General, in
regard he knew the Country well; and besides, his Name and Power was great, in
those Parts. To him they joined one Main, of a Knightly Family, but who had
long served in France, and was commended for his Industry and Valor. It Is
said, that he, out of his Mortal hatred against the Scots, had bargained with
the King of England, that what Lands he took from the Scots, either by killing,
or driving away, the Inhabitants, he, and his Posterity after him, should
enjoy. On the other side, the Scots, hearing of the Preparation of their
Enemies, were not negligent in gathering Forces, on their Part. George Dunbar,
Earl of Ormond, was made Captain General, who presently marched into Annandale,
whither his Intelligence informed him, that the Enemy would come. And indeed,
the English had prevented him, and entered Scotland before. They had past over
the Rivers Solway and Annand, and pitched their Tents by the River Sarc, from
whence they sent out Parties on every side, Or Sa^s.
to pillage; but hearing of the coming of the Scots, they recalled them all, by
Sound of Trumpet, and contracted all their Force into One Body. As soon as ever
they came in sight one of another, they fell to it without delay, Main
commanded the Left Wing of the English, and John Penington, the Right, he had
the Welsh, the Relics of the Ancient Britains, for his Assistants, the Earl
himself commanded the Main Battle. George Douglas appointed Walter, Lord of
Craig, to fight Main; and Maxwel and Iohnston, each with their Troops to attack
Penington; he himself took Care of the Main Body, he gave them a short
Exhortation, to conceive a good Hope of Victory, because they had taken up Arms
in their own Defense, as provoked by the Injuries of their Enemies; and that a
prosperous Issue must needs attend so just a Cause; and if they could abate the
Pride of their Enemy, by some Notable overthrow, they would reap a lasting
Fruit of their short Labor: The English, who abounded in the number of
Archers, wounded many of the Scots, with their Darts, at a distance: Whereupon
Wallace, who commanded the Left Wing, cried out aloud, so as to be heard of
most of his men, Why they ^rifled so, and Skirmish'd at a distance, they should
follow him, and rush in, upon the Enemy, hand to hand, and then their Valor
would truly appear, for that was the Fighting, fit for Men. Having thus spoken,
The English overthrown by the Scots.
he drew the whole Wing after him; And presently with their long Spears,
wherewith the Scots, both Foot and Horse, were furnished, they drove the Enemy
back, routed, and put them to Flight; Main perceiving his Wing to give back,
being more mindful of the just Glory of his former Life, than of his present
Danger, rushes, with great Violence, upon Wallace, that so, by his Boldness, he
might either renew the Fight; or else, breath out his last, in the Glory of
some Illustrious Attempt; but unwarily Charging, he was intercepted from his
own Men, and, with those few that followed him, was slain. When Both Armies
heard, that he was slain, the Scots pressed on more cheerfully, so that the
English Army did not stand long; as they fled home straggingly and in great
haste, more were slain in the Pursuit than Fight; but the chiefest Slaughter
was upon the Banks of the Solway; for there the Tide had swollen up the River,
so that they could not pass. About 3000 of the English were slain in this
Fight, and 600 of the Scots. There were many Prisoners taken, the Chief were
John Penington and Robert Huntington. The Earl of Northumberland's Son might
have escaped, but, whilst he was helping his Father to Horse, he himself was
taken Prisoner. The Booty was greater than had been ever known, in any Battle
betwixt the Scots and English, before. For the English, trusting to the Number
and Goodness of their Soldiers, and depending also on the discord of the Scots,
came on so securely, as if it had been to a Show, not to a Fight; so great was
their Confidence and Undervaluing of their Enemy: Wallace was wounded, carried
home in a Litter, and in 3 Months after died of his Wounds.

Ormond, being thus a Conqueror, took a view of the Prisoners, the chief
Commanders he sent Prisoners to the Castle in Loch Ma^an, he himself returned
to Court, where every Body went out to meet him, and he was received with all
kind of Honor. The King did highly extol his Military Services, but withal,
advised him and his Brother, That as they had often given a Proof of their
Courage abroad, and had defended the State of Scotland, by their Labor and
Valor, even in Perilous Times; so, at home, that they would accustom
themselves to a modest Deportment, and that they themselves should refrain from
Injuring the Poorer sort; and also, inhibit their Clans from doing it; and that
they should show their Puissance and Grandeur, which their Ancestors had
obtained by their many Merits, both of King and Subjects, rather in restraining
of Robbers, than in cherishing them; that This was the only thing which was
wanting to complete their Praise, and make it absolute; and if they would do
this thing, they should certainly find, that he would esteem the Honor of the
Douglas's, and their Family, before any thing else whatsoever. They answered
the King submissively, and so took their leave, and went Joyfully home.

After this Fight at Sarc, as the Borders of Scotland were quieter from the
wrongs of their Enemies; so, when the matter was reported at London, it did
rather irritate the English, than deject them: For, a Council being called
about a War with Scotland, A Truce between the Scots and English.
a new Army was ordered to be raised, to blot out the former Ignominy. Whilst
they were all intent hereupon, presently Civil Wars arose amongst themselves,
and a strong Conspiracy of the Commons, made against the King, took off their
Thoughts from a Foreign War; so that Ambassadors were sent into Scotland, to
treat of a Peace, which were so much the more welcome, because their own
Affairs were not well settled at home. Yet they could not well agree on Terms
of Peace, but only made a Truce for Three Years, and so returned home: These
things were acted in the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Four Hundred Forty Eight.

This Public Joy was soon after increast by a Message, sent out of Flanders,
from the Chancellor, who went Ambassador to Charles the Seventh, James Married
to Mary of Gelderland.
about contracting a Marriage. By his endeavors, Mary the Daughter of Arnold,
Duke of Gelderland, was betrothed to James; she was of the Kingly Race by her
Mothers side, who was a Sister of the Duke of Burgundy. The Year after, she
came with a great Train of Noble Persons into Scotland, and, in July, was
Crowned in the Abbey of Holy-Rood-House, near Edinburgh.

This Universal Joy, for the Victory, for the Peace, and for the Marriage, was
soon disturbed by the Death of Richard Colvill, a Man of Note; which, though
perhaps, in it self, not undeserved, yet was of very bad Example to the
Commonwealth. This Colvil having received many and great wrongs, from one John
Afflech, a Friend of Douglas's; and, after many complaints, could get no Remedy
in Law nor Equity, he fought with and slew him, and some of his Followers.
Douglas took the Fact so hainously, that he made a Solemn Oath never to rest,
Colvil put to Death by Douglas.
till he had expiated the Murder by Colvil's Death* Neither were his
Threatenings in vain, for he Stormed his Castle, took and plundered it, and
killed all therein, that were able to bear Arms. This Fact, though 'twas
performed against Law and Custom, yet some did excuse, and, in effect, commend,
as proceeding from Indignation, a Passion not unbeseeming a Generous Mind.
Thus, as it commonly happens in degenerate Times, Flattery, the perpetual
Companion of Greatness, did clothe the highest Offenses with Honest and
Plausible Names. Moreover, Douglas was so lifted up with the Flatteries of
Fortune, which did now incline to his Destruction, that he had a great Ambition
to make an Ostentation of his Power, even to Foreign Nations; as if the
splendour of so great a Family o^^ht not to be straightened within the narrow
Theater of one Island on^^; so that he had a Mind to go to Rome; he pretended
Religion, Douglas goes vain-gloriously in a year o^ Iubilee to Rome.
but the principal design of his Journey, was, Ambition; the Church of Rome had
adopted the old Rites of the Jewish; for, as the Jewish Church, every Fiftieth
year, was to forgive all the Debts of what kind soever, to their Country Men,
and to restore all Pledges, Gratis; and also to set their Hebrew Servants at
Liberty: So the Pope, taking an Example therefrom, as Gods Vicar on Earth, did
arrogate the Power of forgiving all Offenses. For, whereas at other times he
trucked out his Pardons by Peice-Meal; every Fiftieth Year, he opened his full
Garners thereof, and poured out whole Bushels full of them publicly to all;
yet, I will not say Gratis.

Douglas, with a great Train of Nobles, who were desirous, partly to see
Novelties, and partly allured by hopes of Reward, sailed over into Flanders.
From thence he Traveled by Land to Paris, and took with him his Brother,
appointed Bishop of Caledonia; who, afterward, seeing Douglas had no Children,
was, by the Kings Permission, put in hopes to be his Heir. In France, he was
highly caressed, partly upon the account of their Public League with the
Scots, and partly in Memory of his Ancestors Demerits, from that Crown;
hereupon all Rome was filled with the Expectation of his coming.

About Two Months after his departure from Scotland, his Enemies and Rivals
began to lift up their Heads; they durst not, for Fear, complain of him, when
he was present; but now they laid open all the Injuries they had received from
him. And when it was once noised abroad, that the Access to the King was easy,
and that his Ear was open to all just Complaints. The Troop of Complainants,
lamenting their Sufferings, did daily increase, so that all the ways to the
Palace were almost stopped by them. The King could not well either reject the
Petitions of the Sufferers, In his absence, his Enemies sue him, and (...)
Damages for wrong^ received.
nor yet condemn the Earl, in his absence, without hearing of him; so that he
gave a middle Answer, which satisfied their Importunity for the present, viz.
That he would Command the Earls Proctor, or Attorney, to appear; that so, in
his own Presence, a fair Trial might be had. Whereupon, the Proctor was
summoned, but did not appear, so that the Kings Officers were sent out to bring
him in by force; when he was brought to Court, some alleged, that he ought to
be immediately punished for disobeying the Kings Command; in regard, that, by
too much Patience, the Kings Authority would be despised and run low, even
amongst the meaner sort; for, under the pretense of Lenity, the Audaciousness
of the Bad would increase, and the Impunity of Offenders would open the way for
more Crimes. The King was not moved by those Instigations, but remained
constant to his Resolution, which was, rather to satisfy his greatest
Accusers, by the Compensation of their Losses, than to satiate their
Vindicative Minds, with the spilling of his Blood. Hereupon he caused the Earls
Proctor to be brought out of Prison, and to plead in his Masters behalf,
telling him, That if he had any thing to allege in Purgation of the Crimes
objected, he should freely declare it, without any fear at all. When he was
cast in many Suits, and the King Commanded him immediately to pay the Damages;
The Proctor answered, He would defer the whole matter, till the return of the
Earl, who was expected in a few Months. This he spoke, as 'twas thought, by the
advice of Ormond and Murray, the Earl's Brothers: When the King was informed of
his Resolution, Which are answered out of his Estate.
he sent William Sinclare, Earl of the Orcades, who was then Chancellor, first
into Galway, and then into Douglasdale; he appointed Sequestrators to gather up
the Rents of Douglas's Estate, and so to pay the Damages adjudg'd by Law. But
in regard, Sinclare had not Power enough to enforce his Order, some eluded,
others Contumeliously abused him, so that he returned without effecting his
Business.

The King, being provokt by this Contempt of his Authority, Commands all the
Favorers of Douglas his Faction to be Summoned to appear, which they refusing
to do, were declared Public Enemies; an Army was Levied against them, which
marched into Galway. At their first coming, the Commanders were driven into
their Castles, but a small Party of the Kings Forces, pursuing after the rest
through Craggy Places, were repulsed, and not without Ignominy driven back to
the King. The King, taking it in great Indignation, that a few Vagabond Thieves
should dare to make such Attempts, resolved to redeem their slighting of him,
by attempting their Strongs Holds; he took the Castle of Maban, with no great
difficulty; but his Soldiers were so much toiled and wearied in the taking of
Douglas Castle, that therefore he wholly demolisht it. As for the Vassals and
Tenants who had submitted themselves, and their Fortunes to him, he Commanded
them to pay their Rents to his Treasurers, till Douglas's Estate had fully
satisfied what was awarded against him by Law. And when this was almost done,
he dismissed his Army, having obtained a good Report for his Lenity and
Moderation, even amongst his very Enemies.

When these Matters were related to the Earl at Rome, his great Spirit was
mightily moved; yea, his Esteem did then abate amongst his own Attendants, so
that a great Part of them deserted him, and he entered upon his Journey
homewards, with but a few Followers. He came through England, Douglas at his
return from Rome, received into Favor.
and drawing near to the Borders of Scotland, he sent his Brother James, to
feel the Kings Pulse, how he stood affected toward him. And when the King was
appeasable, he returned home, and was kindly received, only he was admonisht to
abandon and subdue all Robbers, especially those of Annandale, who had played
many Cruel and Avaritious Pranks in his absence; Douglas undertook to do so,
and confirmed his Promise by an Oath. Whereupon, he was not only restored into
his former Grace and Favor, but also made Regent over all Scotland, And made
Regent.
so that every one was enjoined to obey his Commands.

But his vast Mind, which was always hankering after Supremacy and Height, was
not content with this Honor, which was the greatest he could be advanced to,
under the King; but, by his Temerity, he gave the State new Occasions of
Suspicion: For he undertook a Journey, very privately, into England, and after
his Address to that King, he told him, that the cause of his coming was, That
his Estate, Douglas gives James new occasion of Suspicion.
though Claimed by him, was not yet restored. But this seemed to James, a
light, and no way probable, cause of his Journey; and therefore the King
conceived a greater Suspicion in his Mind, which before was not well
Reconciled, against him; neither did he conceal his Anger, as supposing that
there was a deeper Design hid under that his Discourse with the English King;
Douglas, having now an offended King to deal with, fled presently to his wonted
Refuge, the Kings known Clemency, and cast himself at his Feet. The Queen also,
and many of the Nobles, interceded for him; and after a Solemn Oath, that, for
the future, he would never act any thing which might justly offend the King,
his Fault was forgiven; only he was deprived of his Office. Whereupon the Earl
of the Orcades, and William Creighton, who had always remained Loyal, were
advanced again, to sit at the Helm.

Douglas was very angry with all the Courtiers for this Disgrace, (for so he
interpreted it) but he was most of all incensed against William Creighton, for,
he thought, that 'twas by his Prudence, that all his Projects were
disappointed, and therefore he was resolved to dispatch him out of the World,
either by some Treachery; or, if that succeeded not, by any other way,
whatsoever. And that he might do it with the less Odium, he suborned one of his
Friends to Witness, that he heard Creighton say, That Scotland would never be
(...) quiet, Douglas design against Creighton's Life.
so long as any of the Family of the Douglas 's were left alive; and that the
safety of the King and Kingdom, the Concord of the Estates, and the Public
Peace, did depend upon the Death of that one Man: For, he being of a Turbulent
Nature, and supported by many and great Assinities, and Irreconcilable by any
Offices of Respect, and Advancements to Honor; 'twere better to have him taken
out of the way, that so the public Peace might be confirmed and settled. This
Tale, when noised abroad, and believed by many, by reason of the Probability
thereof, raised up a great deal of Ill Will against Creighton. Douglas, being
informed by his Spies, when he was to depart from Edinburgh* lays an Ambush for
him, late in the Night, as secretly as he could; and when he and his Train came
to it, the liers in wait set upon them with a great shout; they, who were first
assaulted, were so astonished at the suddenness of the Danger, that they could
not lift up an Hand to defend themselves. But William, being a Man of great
Courage and Conduct, as soon as he had a little recovered himself from his
Fright, slew the first Man that Assaulted him, and Wounded another; and so he,
and his Attendants, brake through the midst of their Enemies, having only
received some Wounds. He fled to Creighton Castle, (...) de^ends himself (...).
and there staid some days, to cure his Wounds; and soon after, he got a great
Number of his Friends and Tenants about him; Douglas joins with Craford and
Ross.
and in great silence came to Edinburgh: His speed did so prevent the Noise of
his coming, that he had almost surpised his Enemy unawares.

Douglas, being thus freed from an unlooked for Danger, either out of Fear,
Shame, or Both, when he saw the Power of the Adverse Faction to increase with
the good liking of the People, endeavored also to strengthen his own Party, as
much as ever he could, and therefore he joins himself in League with the Earls
of Craford and Ross, which were the most Noted and Potent Families in Scotland,
next to the Douglas's; a mutual Oath was entered into betwixt them; That each of
them should be aiding and assisting to the Friends, and Confederates, one of
another. And, in Confidence of this Combination, they slighted the Forces of
their opposite Faction; yea, and the Kings, too. The King took this in great
Indignation; and besides, he had other fresh Causes of Provocation against him,
which hastened his Destruction. John Herris, a Knight, of a Noble Family in
Galway, He provokes the King,
being averse from the ill Practices of the Douglas's, ordinarily kept himself
within the Walls of his own House; but the Annandians were sent in upon him,
which did him much mischief; he often complained hereof to Douglas, but in
vain; so that, at length, he determined to revenge himself, and to repel Force
by Force. And accordingly, he gathered a Company of his Friends together; and,
entering Annandale, he, and all his Followers, were there taken Prisoners by
those Bandity, and being brought to Douglas, he hanged him up as a Thief;
though the King had earnestly interceded for him, by his Letters. That matter
seemed very heinous, as indeed it was; so that Speeches were given out, That
Douglas, by evil Practices, did endeavor, and that not obscurely, to make his
Way to the Crown; for-now there was nothing else remaining, In the Case of
Herris,
which could satisfy his vast and aspiring Mind; Which Suspicion was soon
after increast by another Fact, which he committed, as foul, as the former.
There was a certain Family of the Macklan's in Galway, one of the best and
chiefest, there: The prime Person of that Family had slain one of Douglas his
Attendants, from whom he had received continual Wrongs and Affronts, whereupon,
he and his Brother were, by Douglas, cast into Prison: The King being made
acquainted with it, was very much importuned by the Friends of the Prisoners,
not to suffer so Noble, and otherwise a very honest Man, to be haled forth, not
to a Legal Trial, but to an undoubted Destruction, the same Man being both his
Capital Enemy and his Judge too; And Macklan.
and that it was not his present Crimes, which did prejudice him so much, as
that he had always been of the Honest or Royal Party. Hereupon, the King sent
Patrick Gray, Macklan's Uncle, a worthy Knight, and Kin also to Douglas, to
Command him to send the Prisoner to Court, that the Matter might be Tried
there, in due course of Law. The Earl received Gray very courteously, but, in
the mean time, he caused Execution to be done upon the Prisoner, and entreated
Gray to excuse him to the King, as if it had been done by his Officers, without
his Knowledge: But he, perceiving how manifestly he was deluded, was in such a
Rage, that he told Douglas, That from that Day forward, he would renounce all
Alliance, Friendship, or any other Obligation to him, and was resolved to be
his perpetual Enemy, and do him all the Mischief he could; when the news hereof
was brought to Court, the Fact seemed so unworthy to all that heard it, that
Speeches were openly scattered, That now Douglas did exceed the bounds of a
Subject, and plainly carried himself as a King; For, to what other purpose else
did his Combinations with the Earls of Craford, Ross, Murray, and Ormond tend?
And moreover, his private Discourse with the King of England, his putting Good
Men to Death, and his allowed Licentiousness in pillaging the People, were
Indications of the same Design: Now, Innocence was accounted Cowardice, and
Loyalty to the King punished as Perfidiousness; that the Enemies of the
Commonwealth grew insolent, by the overmuch Indulgence of the King; That 'twas
time for him now to take the Reins of Government into his own Hand, and to act
as a King, himself; and then it would appear, who were his Friends, and who
were his Enemies; or, if he did not dare to do it openly, by reason of the
Powerfulness of some Men; yet, by some private way or other, he should punish
Treachery; but, if he were so fearful, as not to do so, neither; what remained,
but that they, who had hitherto been constant in their Loyalty to him, should
now at length provide for themselves? These Discourses, tho the Life of the
Douglas's, and the Credulity of the King, (prone to Suspicion) did confirm to
be true: Yet the King, out of his innate Clemency, or else, having, before,
laid his Design, se^ds for Douglas to Court; He, being conscious of so many
mischievous pranks he had played, and calling to remembrance, how often he had
been pardoned; and withal, understanding, how distastful his new League with
Craford was to the King, though he put great confidence in the King's Clemency;
yet, being more inclined to Fear, refused to come; alleging, that he had many
powerful Enemies at Court, and some of them had lately lain in wait to take
away his Life. Hereupon, to remove this his Fear, many of the Nobles about the
King sent him a Schedule with their Hands and Seals to it, promising upon Oath,
that if the King himself should meditate any thing against his Life, yet they
would dismiss him in safety; so that Douglas, Douglas, on safe Conduct, comes
to Court.
encouraged by the King's Clemency, and by the Public Faith, testified by the
Subscriptions of so many Noble Persons, with a Train of Followers came to
Sterlin, where he was courteously Treated by the King, and invited into the
Castle. After Supper, with great hilarity, was ended, the King took him aside
into his Bedchamber, with but a few of his Confidents, he did not so much as
admit Those, to whom he was wont to communicate his most secret Counsels.
There, he ripped up, from the very beginning, the Loyalty and Valor of his
Ancestors, and his own Indulgence toward their Family; and especially toward
himself; who, having committed many heinous Offenses, either by the Greenness
of his Years, or by the Persuasions of wicked Men, he had freely pardoned;
always hoping, that either by his courteous Clemency toward him, or else by the
Maturity of his Age he would be Reformed; and as yet, says he, I despair not,
but it may be so; and, if you repent of what you have impiously committed, the
door of my Clemency shall never be shut against you. This last League
(proceeded he) with Craford and Ross, as it is not Creditable for you; so it is
ignominious to me, and therefore, though I take it much amiss, that you entered
into it, yet I put it into your Power, and, as yet give you liberty to cancel
and break it off; which though, by my Prerogative, I may command, yet I had
rather, by fair means, persuade you so to do; that seeing all Men's Eyes are
upon you, you may avert all cause of Suspicion with greater Diligence: Douglas
answered submissively enough to all other Points; but when he came to the
Mention of the League, he was somewhat perplexed, and did not clearly declare,
what he would do; but that he would advise with his Associats, neither did he
see any Cause, why the King at present should tie him to a Breach of it, seeing
there was nothing contained therein, which might justly offend him. The King,
either having resolved upon the Fact before, or e^se provoked by his
contumacious Answer (as the Courtiers say) replied, If thou will not break it,
Where the King Stabs him with his own Hand.
I will; and immediately struck his Dagger into his Br^ast. Those that stood at
the Door, hearing the Noise, rusht in, and destroyed him quite with many
Wounds; Some say, that next after the King, Patrick Gray, of whom mention was
made before, struck him into the Head with a Bill; and the rest that came in,
to show their Duty to the King, every one gave him a Blow. He was slain in the
Month of February, in the Year 1452. according to the Roman Account.

He had then 4 Brothers in Sterlin, whom a great number of the Nobility had
accompanied thither; they, as soon as ^ver they heard of what was done, ran in
great amazement to the^^ Arms (as in such sudden Hurly-burlies it uses to
happen,) and filled the Town with Noise and Clamor; but when the Tumult was
appeased by the Nobles, they were Commanded to go, each Man to his respective
Lodging. The next Day they met to consult, and First of all, James was called
Earl, in the room of his Brother, who was slain; he mightily inveighed against
the Perfidiousness of the King and the Courtiers, and advises to Besiege the
Castle with what Force they then had, and with all speed, to Levy more; and so
to pull out those Men out of their lurking holes, who were valiant only to
commit perfidious Mischiefs, whilst they were yet in some Fear and Trepidation
for the Guilt of their Offense. The Company commended the Piety of James, and
the Couragiousness of his Spirit, but were averse from his advice to a Siege,
because they were not prepared with any Materials for so great an Enterprise;
so that they all departed home, and after Consultation with the Chief of their
Friends, M^rch 27.
the 6th of the Calends of April, they returned again, and tied a Cord to an
Horse Tail, on which they fastened the Schedule of the King and Nobles,
promising the Public Faith to Douglas for his Security; This they drew through
the Streets, abstaining from no manner of Reproach, either against the King or
Council; when they came to the Marketplace, they Proclaimed the King, and
Those that were with him, Whereupon, the rest of the (...) rise in Arms.
Truce Breakers, Perjured Persons, and Enemies to all Good Men. Moreover, they
were angry with the Town, though that had committed no Offense, and after they
had pillaged it, they sent James Hamilton back to Burn it; yea, their Fury
continued for some Days, so that they ranged all over the Country, and made
Havoc of the Lands of all those, who were Loyal to the King; they besieged the
Castle of Dalkeith, and took an Oath not to depart from it, till they had taken
it; for they were very Angry with John, the Owner of it, because he, and the
Earl of Angus, had separated themselves from the Counsels of the rest of the
Douglasses; The Siege lasted longer than they expected, for Patrick Cockburn,
Commander of the Garrison, made a strenuous Resistance against all the Efforts
of the Enemy; So that, after they had lost a great many men, they were worn out
with Toils and Watchings, and so broke up the Siege. In the mean time, the King
levied an Army, to relieve his distressed Friends, but seeing he had not
Strength enough to encounter the Douglasses, he resolved to wait the coming in
of Alexander Gordon, to his assistance, who had levied a good Force in the
Northern Parts, and was marching toward him; but as he was coming through Angus,
Craford, with a considerable Body, met and opposed him at Brechin, where a
sharp Battle was fought, betwixt them; when the King's main Battle was giving
ground, as not able to endure the shock of the Angusians, John Colace, who
commanded the Left Wing, forsook Craford; having born him a Grudge, and so left
the main Body of the Army naked. Hereupon, those who were almost Conquerors,
being struck with terror, turned their Backs and sled away. Thus Gordon
unexpectedly got the Victory, yet with much loss on his side, his two Brothers,
and a great Number of his Friends and Followers being Slain; of the Angusians
also, there fell several men of Note; and, amongst the rest, the Earl's own
Brother. As for the Earl himself, he turned his Wrath from the Enemy to those
who had deserted him, he stormed their Castles, and spoiled their Lands with
Fire and Sword; and he had the better Opportunity so to do, because that Gordon
made a speedy Return into his own Country, when he heard, that the Earl of
Murray was exercising all manner of Cruelty against his own Territories; so
that, he was forced to march back with his Victorious Army, where he not only
revenged his Loss upon his Enemy, but also quite expelled him out of his
Country of Murray. These things were acted toward the End of the Spring.

In the interim, the King, by the advice, chiefly of James Kennedy, caused an
Assembly of the Estates to meet at Edinburgh, to which he Summoned, by an
Herald, the Earl of Douglas, The Douglas^^ proclaimed public Enemies.
and the Nobles of his Party, to come. But he was so far from obeying him,
that, the next Night, he caused a Libel to be hung on the Church doors, That he
would not trust the King with his Life, nor yield Obedience to him, for the
future, any more, who had sent for his Kinsman to Edinburgh, and his Brothers
to Sterlin, under the Protection of the Public Faith, and there had
perfidiously slain them, without Hearing their Cause. In this Assembly, the
Four Brothers of the late Earl which was slain, James, Archibald, George and
John, with Beatri^ the Earls late Wife, and Alexander, Earl of Craford, were
declared Public Enemies to the Commonwealth. Many persons were advanced to be
Noble men, and Rewards were assigned them out of the Rebels Estates; An Army
was levied to pursue the Enemy, which, after some devastation of the Country,
driving of Bootys, and burning Corn in the Granarys, was again dismissed in
Winter, because the Soldiers could not then keep the Field, and an Expedition
was appointed against the Spring.

In the mean time, James Douglas, left the wealth of his Family, which was
mightily increased, James Douglas Marries his Brothers Wife.
by rich Matches, should pass away to others, took Beatrix, the Relict of his
Brother to Wife, and treats with the Pope to confirm the Marriage; But the
King, by his Letters, interposed and hindered him from giving his Ratification
to it. This Year, and the next following, there was Bandying between the
Parties, Lands were pillaged, some Castles overthrown; but they came not to
decide the main Controversy in a Set Battle; the greatest Part of the damage
fell on the Countys of Annandale, Foress, and the Neighboring Countys of the
Douglasses: After this Devastation of the Lands, A Famine and Pestilence in
Scotland.
there followed a Famine, and after the Famine, a Pestilence; yet the Wisest of
Douglas's his Friends sought, many times, to persuade him to endeavor a
Reconciliation with the King, and so to lay himself and all his Concerns at his
Feet, whom his Ancestors had before found very merciful; Especially, since he
had a King, who was easily exorable in his own Nature; and moreover, might be
made more reconcilable by the Mediation of his Friends, and that he would not
suffer so noble a Family, Douglas persuaded to a Reconciliation with the King.
as His was, to be extirpated by his Obstinacy; nor betray the Lives of so many
brave Men, who followed his Party; neither yet bring them to that Point of
Necessity, that, after having suffered so many Calamities, they should be
forced to make Terms for themselves: Whilst he was in a good Condition, he
might make an easy Pacification; but, if once his Friends deserted him, there
would then be no Hope for him to obtain his Pardon. The Man, being in his
Youthful Age, and of a Fierce Disposition too, Which he refuses.
made Answer, That he would never submit himself to their Power, who were
restrained by no Bonds of Modesty, nor by any divine or human Law; who under
fair Promises had enticed his Cosins, and his Brother to come to them, and
then, perfidiously and cruelly. Slew them: In a Word, he would suffer the
height of all Extremities before he would ever put himself into their hands.

This his Answer was either approved, or disliked, according to every Man's
Humor; Those who were Violent, or who made a Gain of the public Miseries,
commended the Greatness of his Courage; but the Wiser sort persuaded him to
take Opportunity by the Forelock, lest, after his Friends had forsaken him, he
might complain, that he had neglected the Time for a Pacification, when 'twas
not to be redeemed, which is usually the end of Headlong Counsels. But the Earl
of Craford, being wearied out with so long a War, and withal, considering with
himself the very Unjustness of his Cause, together with the common Mutations of
human Life, as also knowing that Pardon might easily be Obtained, if he did
preoccupy the Kings Favor; but very difficultly, if he stood it out; and
besides, being forsaken by some of his Friends, and suspecting the Fidelity of
the rest, put himself into such an Habit, as might most move Pity, and thus
bare-headed and barefooted, in most humble manner, he came to the King, as he
was passing through Angus; he ingeniously confessed the offenses of his former
Life; he cast himself and all his concerns upon the King's Mercy, having first
prefaced something concerning the Fidelity and good Services which his
Ancestors had performed to their Kings; he was conscious, Craford forsakes
Douglas, and is pardoned by the King.
that his fault had deserved the Extremity of Punishment, but whatsoever
hereafter he had either of Life or Fortune, it would be a Debt wholly due to
the Kings Clemency. Having spoken these, and other words, of the same import
not without Fear, all the Spectators were much moved and affected, especially
some of the Nobility of Angus, and though they themselves had, in former times,
followed the Kings Party, yet they were unwilling, that so eminent and ancient
a Family should be destroyed. James Kennedy carried himself, at the same time,
like a good Bishop and a Friendly Patriot, for he not only forgave the Earl the
many grievous Injuries he had done him, but further commended his Suit, and
spoke in his Favor, to the King, for he foresaw, as it after happened, That, by
this Accession, the Kings Party, would be strengthened, and his Enemies
weakened daily, for the future; in regard many were likely to follow the
Example of this Great Man. And besides, the King thinking, that his former
Fierceness was tamed, and that he was really penitent for what he had done, was
not hard to be entreated, but gave him his Pardon, restored him to his former
Estate and Honor, only advised him, for the future, to keep within the Bounds
of his Duty: And indeed, Craford, being thus engaged by the Lenity and
Facileness of the King, did afterward endeavor to perform him all the Service
he possibly could, he followed him with his Forces in his March to the furthest
Parts of the Kingdom, and having settled Things there for the present, he
entertained him nobly at his House, in his return, and when he marched to make
a full end of the Civil War, he promised him all the Force, he could make; and,
indeed, the whole course of his Life was so changed, that, laying down his
former Savageness, he lived courteously, and in Complaisance, with the
Neighboring Nobility; so that his Death, which followed soon after, brought
the greater Grief to the King and to all the People.

The King thus weakening Douglas's Party by degrees, his remaining Hopes were
from England, if possibly he might obtain Aid from thence. Hereupon, he sent
Hamilton to London, who brought him back Word, Douglas applys to England for
Aid, but in vain.
that the King of England would undertake a War against Scotland, on no other
Terms, but that Douglas must submit himself and all his Concerns to that King,
and acknowledge himself a Subject of England; So that, his Hopes thence were
cut off; and, on the Other side, the King of Scotland pressed hard upon him by
his Edicts, Proscriptions and Arms; yea, by all the Miseries, which accompany
Rebellious Insurrections; So that, Hamilton advised the Earl, not to suffer the
King to nim away his Forces by piecemeal; and, by catching a Part, to weaken,
and in time, overthrow the Whole; he should rather march out with his Army,
trust Fortune, put it to a Battle, there to dye Valiantly, or conquer
Honorably. This Resolution (said he) is worthy of the name of the Douglass^s,
and the only Way to end the present Miseries. Being alarmed with this Speech,
he gathered as great an Army as he could, of his Friends and Dependants, and
marched out to raise the Siege of the Castle of Abercorn; for the King, after
he had demolished many Castles of the Douglasses, had at last besieged That. It
was a very strong Hold, se^tuate almost in the Midway between Sterlin and
Edinburgh. When Douglas came so near, that he saw, and was seen by, the Enemy,
his Friends advised him to push at all, and either to make himself renowned by
some Eminent Victory; or, by a Noble Death, to free himself from Reproach and
Misery; but when all his Party were ready for the Onset, he daunted all their
Spirits by his own Delay, for he retreated with his Army again into his Camp,
and determined to draw and eke out the War, at length: His Commanders disliked
his Design; and Hamilton, not enduring his Cowardice, and despairing of the
Success of his Arms, H^milton (...) Douglas.
that very Night revolted to the Kings Party. Upon this his Defection, the King
gave him his Pardon, but not putting any great Confidence in him, because of
his Subtilty, he sent him Prisoner to Standing upon N^^th-Esk in Mid-L^thi^n, 4
Miles above Da^keith
Rosseline, a Castle belonging to the Earl of the Orcades, but afterward, by
the Mediation of his Friends, he was released, and received into Favor, and
that unbloody Victory ascribed to him, as the main Occasion thereof.

The rest of the Douglassians followed Hamilton's Example, and slipped away from
him, every one, whither he thought most convenient for himself; so that, at
length, the Castle, after much Loss on both sides, was taken, the Garrison put
to the Sword, and after 'twas half demolished, it was left as a Monument of the
Victory. Douglas, being thus deserted by, almost, all his Friends, with a few
of his Familiars fled into England, from thence, not long after, he made an
Inrode with a small Party into Annandale, which was then possessed by the Kings
Garrisons; but, being worsted in a Skirmish, He, and his Brother John escaped;
Archibald, Earl of Murray, was slain; George was much wounded and taken
Prisoner, and after his Wounds were cured, was brought to the King, and put to
Death. In an Assembly of the Estates held at Edinburgh, June 5.
in the Nones of June, in the Year 1455. James, John, and Beatrix, all
Douglasses, were again proscribed: The Public Acts do make Beatrix their
Mother, which seems not very probable to me, unless, perhaps, they might be
called her Sons, by Adoption. Earl James having thus lost his Brothers, being
deserted by his Friends, and distrusting the English, that he might leave no
Stone unturned, Douglas joins with the Enlish, and then with Donald the
Islander.
applied himself to Donald, King of the Aebudae, a man bad enough in his own
Nature: They met at Dunstafnage, where he easily persuaded him to join with
him, in the War; whereupon, they committed great Outrages on the Kings
Provinces, near adjoining, without distinction either of Age or Sex; there was
nothing spared which could be violated by Fire or Sword; the like Cruelty was
used in Argyle and Arran, and then being laden with Booty, he returned home;
and afterward, having wasted Loch-Abyr and Murray, he turned to Innerness, he
took the Castle, pillaged and burnt the Town.

Neither were the English quiet all this while, but, watching their
Opportunity, they made Incursions into Merch, where they slew some men of Note,
who endeavored to oppose their furious Ravaging, and so returned home without
Loss, but full of Plunder, from that opulent Country. Douglas's Wife forsakes
him, and (...) to the King.
The next Year after, Beatrix, Wife to the former Earl of Douglas, and also
living for some years with James, his Brother, as his Wife, came in to the
King; She laid all the Fault of her former Miscarriages upon James, that she
being a Woman, and helpless, was enforced to that Wicked Marriage; but at the
first Opportunity, as soon as James was absent, she was fled from that
Servitude; that now she laid her self, and all her Concerns, at the Kings Feet,
and whatever Order he should please to make concerning her, or her Estate, she
would willingly obey it. The King received her into his Protection, gave her an
Estate in Balvany, Lying on the River Sp^^.
and Married her to his Brother, the Earl of Athole, by the same Mother; The
Wife of Donald, the Islander, followed her Example, she was the Daughter of
James Levingston, and was Married to Donald, So does Donald's Wi^e* too.
by her Grandfather, the Regent, by the persuasion also of the King, that so He
might a little soften the rugged disposition of the man, and keep him firm to
the Kings Party: But then, her Kinsman being restored to the Favors and Graces
they formerly had, and her Husband having joined himself to the Douglassian
Faction, she was every day more and more slighted and despised by him, so that
she implored the Kings Assistance against his barbarous Cruelty. There was no
need of her making such an Apology, in regard, the King himself had been the
Author of the Match, so that she was nobly treated, and had a large Revenue
settled upon her for her Life.

About the same time, Patrick Thornton, who had followed the Court a great
while, yet was secretly of Douglas's Faction, slew John Sanderland of In
Mid-Lothian.
Caldar, a Young man of about 20. years of Age, and Alan Stuart, of Noble
Families, Both, and of eminent Faithfulness to the King, having got a
convenient Opportunity so to do at Dunbarton, Thornton put to death for Murder.
and soon after he himself was taken by the Clans of the Adverse Party, and
Executed for the same*

This Year was remarkable for the Death of many Noble Personages, but
especially of William Creighton. He, The death of Will. Creighto^
though born of an Equestrian Family, yet, by reason of his great Prudence,
Fortitude, and his Singular Loyalty to the King, even to the last day of his
Life, left a great Loss behind him to all Good men. The next Year, the English,
being encouraged by their Impunity for former Injuries made great spoil in
Merch, under the command of Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, and James
Douglas, the Exile; to hinder their devastations, George Douglas, Earl of
Angus, gathered a Party of his Countrymen together, and made an Assault on the
Plunderers, and drove that Part of them, which he assaulted, in great
Confusion, back to their own Standards; the English, being moved at this
Indignity, marched on their Army, before the rest had recovered their Colors,
and the Scots were as ready to receive them.

The Fight was managed on both sides, with greater Courage than Force, a great
while, neither did any odds appear, till the English, who were scattered up and
down the Country by the Noise and Temult, perceiving that the Enemy was come,
for fear of losing the rich Booty they had gotten, hasted directly home; A
Party of English wor^^ed in Scotland.
their departure gave an easier, but yet not unbloody, Victory to the Scots,
there being almost an equal number slain on Both Sides, but many of the English
taken in the pursuit: The News of this Victory, being brought to the King, did
something relieve his Mind, which was oppressed with Thoughtfulness between the
Arms of his own Subjects; and of the English; afterward, Donald the Islander,
perceiving the ill success of his Affairs, was enforced to send Agents to the
King, to intercede for a Peace; Donald the Islander submits to the King.
They, in an humble Oration, commemorated the King's Clemency showed to
Craford, and the rest of his Partisans, in the same Cause; as for their own
Crimes, they laid them on the Fatality of the Times; but, for the future they
made large Promises, how Loyal and Obsequious Donald would be. The King seemed
to be somewhat affected with their Speech, yet gave them but a middle Answer;
neither quite pardoning Donald, nor utterly excluding all hopes of his Pardon;
he told them, That his many Crimes were very evident, but he had discovered no
Specimen of a changed Mind in him; if they would have the Penitence, which they
pretended in Words, to be believed as really True and Hearty, he should make
Restitution for the Loss, he had formerly caused; and restore their Estates to
such, as he had outed of them; and thus to cancel the Memory of his former
Mischiefs, by some Eminent and Loyal Service. It Is true (said he) no Virtue
becomes a King more than Clemency, but Care must be had, lest the Reins of
Government be not let loose by too much Lenity; and so Evil Men rather made
more insolent, than Good Men excited to their Duty, thereby; that he would give
Time to Donald, and his Party to manifest by some Tokens, that they repented of
their Miscarriages, and that they should always find him toward them, such as
their Actions and their Words did Declare them to be. In the mean time, they
need not fear, for Now it was put into their own Power, whether they would
every Man be Happy or Miserable, for the future.

By this means, intestine Discords were either composed, or else laid asleep,
so that the King now bends all his Care against England; whilst he was
consulting concerning a War with them, and concerning their frequent violations
of Truces; The English Nobles crave Aid of James, against Henry their King.
behold! Ambassadors came from the English Nobility, to Desire Aid against
Henry, their King; For Henry had slighted the Nobles, and advanced Upstarts; by
whose Advice, his Wife, a Woman of a Manly Spirit and Courage, Ruled the Roast.
And, besides, the King had incurred the Displeasure and Contempt of his
Friends, because things had not succeeded well in Aqui^ane and Normandy; for
they, having lost so many Provinces, and being now pent up within the Ancient
Bounds of their own Island, did mutter and grumble, that the Kings
Sluggishness, and the Queens Pride were no longer to be endured. The Heads of
the Conspiracy, were, Richard Duke of York, with the Earls of Salisbury and
Warwick; when the English Ambassadors had discoursed much concerning the
Justness of their Cause to begin a War; and also concerning their own Power,
and the Cowardly Temper of their King, they craved Aid against him, as against
a Common Enemy, who was fearful in War, fordid in Peace; and who had nourished
Civil Discords amongst the Scots, and had assisted their Exiles; withal, they
promised, if they got the Victory, to restore the Castles and Countries which
were taken in former Wars from the Scots. The King, by Advice of his Council,
made Answer, That he, before, knew the State of the English Affairs, and that
he was not ignorant of the Right or Demands of either side; but that he would
not, intetpose Himself an Arbiter in another Man's Kingdom, unless he were
chosen by both Parties to that Office. As to the War, he had long since
determined to revenge the Injuries of the former Times, and ^f he could not
otherwise obtain the Places he had lost, on the Occasion of these Discords, he
would recover them by Force; But if the Duke of York, and his Party, would
promise to restore Them, then he would assist him against Henry. The
Ambassadors agreed to the Terms, and so returned home. The King prepared his
Forces, and was about to enter England, when, behold! an English Impostor* sent
by Henry, met him, he had been a long time at Rome, and was well acquainted
with the Speech and the Customs of the Italians; his Habit and Train was all
Outlandish, and he had counterfeit Letters, as from the Pope; whereby he was
easily believed by Men, suspecting nothing, but to be a Legate sent from him;
He marches to their Assistance, but is diverted by a Counte^feit Le^at from
Rome.
and to gain the greater Credit to his Impostures, he had a Monk with him,
whose fained Sanctity made the Fraud less suspected; they were brought to the
King, and in the Popes Name, Commanded him to proceed no further with his Army;
if he did, they threatened to Excommunicate him with Bell, Book, and Candle. For
the Pope (said they) is wholly intent upon a War against the Common Enemy of
Christendom, and so would have the differences composed all over Europe, that
they might be free for that War; and that they were sent before to give him
Notice hereof; but there was a more Solemn Embassy, which would shortly arrive,
and which, they believed, was already come as far as France, to decide the
Civil Discords of England, and to give satisfaction to the Scots, for the
Wrongs they had sustained. The King did not imagine any Fraud in the Case, and
desiring nothing more than an Honorable Peace, in regard, things at home were
not quite settled to his Mind, Obeyed the Legate, and Disbanded his Army. He had
scarce dismissed it, but he was advised from England, that this supposed
Ambassador was a Cheat, so that he gathered again some Forces; and because he
could not join the Duke of York, that he might keep off some of the King's
Force from him, and also revenge his own Wrongs, he marched directly to
Roxborough; the Town he took, and destroyed it at his first coming; but whilst
he was laying Siege to the Castle, Ambassadors came from York, and his
Associats, informing him, that their King was overcome, James takes Roxborough
Town.
and the War ended in England; They gave him Thanks for his Good Will, and his
Desire to assist them in the maintenance of their Lives and Honors, and that
they would, in time, be mindful to requite the Courtesy; but, at present, they
desired him to raise the Siege, and draw off from the Castle, and likewise to
forbear any other Act of Hostility against England. For otherwise, they should
be laden with great Envy amongst the People, who could hardly be contained, or
satisfied, but that an Army must presently march against the Scots. James
congratulated their Victory, but asked the Ambassadors, Whether the Duke of
York, and his Allies, had given them nothing in Command concerning restoring
the Places promised. He Answered, Nothing: Then, (said he) before your last
Embassy came to me, I was determined to pull down that Castle, which is built
upon my Land; neither, since that time, am I so much obliged by the Courtesies
of that Faction, as to give over an Enterprise, which is begun, and almost
finished: As for the Threatenings made, either by the People, or by Them, let
them look to it, go you and tell them, that, I will not be removed hence by
Words, but Blows. Thus the Ambassadors were dismissed without their Errand, and
whilst he did press upon the Besieged, by all the hardships of War; Donald, the
Islander, came into his Camp with a great Band of his Countrymen. He, to
obtain the easier Pardon for his past Offenses, and fully to Atone and
Reconcile the King, promised him, that if he would march forward into the
Enemies Countries, as long as he was there, he would march a Mile before his
Army, and endure the sharpest, and first, of all Brunts and Hazards: But he was
Commanded to be near the King, yet some of his Troops was sent out to prey upon
the Country. And besieges the Castle.
It happened also, that, at the same time, Alexander Gordon Earl of Huntly
brought in new Forces to the King. This Accession of Strength made the King
more resolute to continue the Siege, though a strong Defense was made by Those
within; So that, whereas before it was a Blockade only, a well-laid and close
Siege was now made; when he had Soldiers enough, some presently succeeded in
the Places of others, insomuch, that the Garrison Soldiers (of whom many were
Slain, many Wounded, and unfit for Service, the rest tired out with continual
Toil and Labor) were not so eager to run into the Places of most Danger, as
before; and to strike the more Terror into them, the King gave Command to
batter part of the Wall with Iron pieces of Ordnance, which were then much
used, and were very terrible: And whilst the King was busy about one of them,
to press on the work, the Fire caught within it, and with its force drove out a
wooden Wedg, Where he is casually slain.
or Plug, which immediately felled the King to the Earth, and slew him, without
hurting any body else. Those Courtiers who stood next him, though they were
terrified at this sudden Accident, yet they covered his Body, left, if his
Death were divulged, the Common Soldiers should run away. The Queen, who that
very Day came to the Camp, did not give up her Mind to Womanish Lamentations,
The Queen shows Herself a virago, immediately after her Husbands Death.
bur called the Nobles together, and exhorted them to be of good Courage, and
that so many valiant Men should not be so dismayed at the Loss of One, as
counting it dishonorable to desert a Business, that was almost ended; She told
them, She her Self would speedily bring them another King in the place of him
that was slain; in the mean time, they should press with might and main, upon
the Enemy, lest he might grow more resolute, upon News of their Generals Death,
and so imagine, that all the Courage of so many valiant Men was extinguished in
in the Fate of one Person only: The Officers were ashamed to be exceeded in
Courage by a Woman. Whereupon, they assaulted the Castle with such Violence,
that neither Party was sensible that the King was lost. In the mean time, James
the King's Son, being about 7 Years of Age, was brought into the Camp, and
Saluted King. And 'twas not long after, Roxburgh Castle Surrendered and
Demolisht.
before the English, being tired out with Watching, and continued Service,
surrendered up the Castle to the new King, upon Condition, to march away with
Bag and Baggage. The Castle, that it might be the Occasion of no new War, was
levelled to the Ground. This End had James the 2d, in the Year of Christ, 1460.
a few Days before the Autumnal Equinox, James II. his Character.
in the 29 th Year of his Age, and the 23d of his Reign; he had been exercised
always, even from his Youth, with Domestic or Foreign Wars; he bore Both
Estates of Life, the Prosperous and Adverse, with great Moderation of Mind, he
showed such Valor against his Enemies, and such Clemency to those that
submitted themselves, that All Estates were much afflicted for his Loss; and
his Death was the more lamented, because 'twas sudden, and that in the Flower
of of his Youth, too; after he had escaped so many Dangers, and when the
Expectation of his Virtues was at the highest: And he was the more missed,
because his Son was yet immature for the Government; whilst Men considered,
what Miseries they had suffered for the last 20 Years, the Ashes of which Fire
were hardly yet raked up; so that from a reflective Remembrance of what was
Past, they seemed to Divine the Estate of future Things.

The Twelfth BOOK.
James III. The Hundred and Fourth King.
JAMES II. as I have related, being slain in his Camp, to prevent all
Controversy concerning the Right of Succession, (which had happened at other
times) his Son James a Child of about 7 Years Old, James III. begins his Reign
about 7 years of Age.
who was the younger of the Twins, and survived his Brother, entered upon the
Government in the Town of Kelsoe. Afterward, when the Nobles, according to
Custom, had taken their Oaths of Allegiance to him, 8 Days after he began his
Reign, he left his Army, and retired home ^o the Castle of Edinburgh, to be
under the Tutelage of his Mother, till an Assembly of the Estates were
Celebrated, to determine of the Grand Affairs of the Kingdom. The Assembly was
Indicted later than ordinary, because Matters was not composed in England, and
yet quiet in Scotland: So that, the Nobility were of Opinion, That War was
first of all to be thought on, that so they might revenge old Injuries, and
punish their Enemies by some notable Loss, who did always lie at catch, to take
Advantage of the Distresses of Others. Hereupon, they marched into the Enemies
Country, without any resistance, where they committed much spoil, and
demolished many Castles, from whence the Enemy was wont to make sudden
Incursions, the Chief of which was W^rk, situate on the Banks of the River
Tweed, formerly very injurious to the Country of Merch. The Army ravaged over
the Enemies Country, as far as they could, for the time of the Year, and, at
the very beginning of Winter, returned home.

This Year, Henry King of England was Taken by the Duke of York, and brought to
London; there a Form of Peace was concluded betwixt them, for Henry durst not
deny any thing; That He, as long as he lived, should bear the Name, and Ensigns
or Badges, of a King, but the Power of Government should be in York, under the
Name of a Protector. Henry of Enggland, taken Prisoner by the Duke of York.
And when Henry Died, Then the Name also of King was to be transferred to
Edward, and his Posterity. Whilst these Things were acted at London, News was
brought. That the Queen was marching up with a great Army, to Redeem her
Husband out of Prison. York went out to Engage her with about 5000 Men with
him, York overthrown by the Queen.
leaving the Earl of Warwick, and King Henry behind; he marched as far as
Yorkshire, and, lest He, who, in France, had Defended himself against great
Armies, not with Walls, but with Arms, should now shun a Battle with a Woman;
He Fought against a far greater Number than his Own; and, in the Fight, He, his
youngest Son, and a great many Nobles were slain. The Heads of the Commanders
were set up as a Spectacle, upon the Gates at York. The Queen, thus Victorious,
and marching on further to Deliver the King; the Earl of Warwick met her,
bringing the King along with him, as if he would Defend the Pact made
concerning the Kingdom, under his good Omen. Both Armies met at St. Albans,
which is thought to be the Old Verulam, So is Warwick
where the Queen was again Victorious; She slew the Commanders of the adverse
Army, released her Husband, and marched directly up for London; but
considering, that the Earl of Pembroke was sent by Her to gather Forces, as was
also York's Son by his Father, and that these Two had had a Fight in their
March; wherein Edward the Son of her Enemy was Victorious; and withal, knowing,
what cruel Hatred the Londoners bore against Her, She withdrew toward
Northumberland, because She looked on that Part of England, as the Seminary, or
Source, of Her Strength. There She was also Overcome in a Bloody Fight, The
Queen overthrown, and flies wit^ her Husband into Scotland.
more than 36000 valiant Men being reported to be slain, and the Enemy pressing
upon Her, and giving Her no Time to recollect Her Forces, She, her Husband and
Son, fled into Scotland.

The Conqueror called himself Edward the Fourth, King of England; Henry desired
Aid in his Distress, and, by means of James Kennedye, Archbishop of St.
Andrews, who then surpassed all in Scotland in point of Authority, and Opinion
of his Prudence, he was Entertained with a great deal of Honor and Respect; so
that he was erected to some Hope of recovering his former Dignity; and to
nourish that Hope, Berwick surrendered to the Scots by King Henry.
by all the actual good Offices which he could, he restored the Town of Berwick
to the Scots, (which the English had held ever since the Days of Edward I.) The
Scots, upon this Obligation, did assist Henry's Faction in all things, not only
in piecing up the Relics of his former Misfortunes, but promising him more
Aid, in time, to recover his Own. And, that the Friendship now begun might be
the more firmly established; the Two Queens, Both of Them of French Descent,
began to Treat concerning a Marriage between James his Sister, and Henry's Son,
whom they called Prince of Wales, though neither of them, as yet, were above
Seven Years old. Philip of Burgundy, Uncle to the Queen of Scots, but a Mortal
Enemy to the Queen of England, endeavored by all means possible to hinder this
Marriage; For he sent Grathusius a Nobleman, his Ambassador for that purpose:
For Philip was at such deadly odds with Renatus, Grandfather to the Lady by the
Mother's side, Henry's Queen sues for Foreign Aid.
that he sought all Occasions to hinder his Stock from increasing; so that in
Favor of him the Matter was, at that time, rather delayed, than broke off. But
the Fortune of Henry kept off the Event, which Philip of Burgundy feared. For,
being something encouraged by the Kindness of the Scots toward him, and also
by some comfortable Letters sent from his Friends out of England, he sent his
Wife beyond Sea to Or Renny.
Renatus her Father, to procure what Aid she could from her Foreign Friends;
She prevailed so much in France, that her Faction were to have a safe Place of
Retreat there, but her Adversaries were excluded; and, moreover, she obtained
2000 Men, as Monstrelet says, under Warren their General; but as Ours, and the
English, Writers, Which having obtained, (...) enters Scotland and England
again.
(to whom I rather assent) 500, Commanded by Peter Brice, or, as some call him,
Brace, a Britton, rather as Companions for her Journey, than as any Auxiliary
Aid; With this small Band she returned into Scotland, and thought fit to
attempt something, not doubting, but at the Noise of Foreign Assistance, her
Countrymen would rise and joi^ with her, whereupon she made a Descent at
Tinmouth; but this small Company, being dismayed at the report of a great Force
coming against them, without the performance of any thing remarkable, returned
to their Ships; where also, as if Fortune had crossed them on all hands, they
were encountered with a grievous Tempest, which drove the greatest Part of
them, who followed the Queen to Scotland, into Berwick; bu^ some few of them
were cast upon the Isle Lindisfarm, Holy-Isle, seven miles South-East of
Berwick, on the Coast of Northumberland.
where they were taken by the Enemy and slain.

But the Manly spirited Queen was nothing discouraged at this Misfortune, but
levied a great number of Scots to join with her own Soldiers, and resolves to
try her Fortune, once again. Whereupon she left her Son at Berwick, and she and
her Husband entered Northumberland, where she made great Devastation, by Fire
and Sword, in all the adjacent Parts. At the report of this new Army, some of
the Nobles, as the Duke of Somerset, and Ralph Percy, and many of Henry's old
Friends besides, who, for fear of the Times, had retired to King Edward, came
into Them; but there was a far greater Confluence from the adjacent Parts of
England, of such Persons as had lived Rapacious Lives, in hopes of some new
Prey. To appease this Commotion, Edward makes great Military Preparation both
by Land and Sea; he commanded the Lord Mountague, with a great part of the
Nobility, to march against the Enemy, and he himself would follow with his
whole Army. Both Armies pitched their Tents not far from Hexham; but the Common
Soldiery who came in for Booty, beginning to slip away, Henry's Army overthrown
at Hexham.
Henry thought it best, in such a desperate Case, to put it to a Push, and
accordingly a Fight begun, wherein he was overthrown, his chief Friends were
either slain, or taken Prisoners, and he himself made an hasty Retreat to
Berwick; of the Prisoners, some had their Heads cut off presently; and some, a
while after. Edward having thus got the Day, by the Generals of his Forces,
came himself to Durham, that so he might prevent the Incursions of the Scots by
the Terror of his Neighboring Army; and also, that, by his Presence, he might
quell any Domestic Insurrections, if any such should happen. Whilst he was
there, he sent out part of his Army under several Commanders to take in the
Places possessed by his Enemies, of which having taken many by Storm, or by
Surrender, Alnwick Castle besieged, and Douglas's gallantry in bringing off the
Garrison.
at last he laid Siege to the Castle of Alnwick, which was greater, and better
fortified, than the rest, and which was maintained by a Garrison of French, who
defended the Castle very well, in hopes of Relief from Scotland, which was so
near at hand. But the Scots having lately had ill success in England, an Army
could not be so soon levied, as the present Exigent required, for the raising
of the Siege; insomuch, that whilst others were backward, and delayed to give
in their Opinion, George, Earl of Angus, undertook, with great Audacity, the
Matter, which was so full of hazard. He collected about 10000 Horse, of his
Friends, Vassals, and the Neighboring Province, of which he was Governor; He
came to the Castle, and Horsed the French, that were in Garrison, upon some
empty Horses he had brought for that purpose, and so brought them off safe,
even to a Man, into Scotland, whilst the English stood and looked on, as amazed
at the Boldness of his Miraculous Enterprise; or, thinking that Douglas had
help near at hand; or rather, hoping to have the Castle given up without a
Battle, and so they would not put the Whole to an hazard, by joining in Fight
with that small, though select, Party. Edward settled Guards at all convenient
Places, that so, no Rebellious Troops might march to and again; and then, as if
he had quieted the whole Kingdom, he returned to London.

In the mean time, Exiled Henry, either on the Account of some Hopes cast in by
his Friends, or else weary of his tedious Exile, determines to shelter himself
privately amongst his Friends in England. Henry of England taken Prisoner, and
his Queen (...).
But Fortunes Malice followed him to the last; he was there known, taken,
brought to London, and committed Prisoner to the Tower. And his Wife Margaret,
distrusting her present Affairs, with her Son and a Few Followers left
Scotland, and Sailed over to her Father Renat, into France.

To return then to the Affairs of Scotland: The time for the Assembly, which
was Indicted to be held at Edinburgh, was come: where there was a Full
Appearance, but the Body of them was divided into Two Factions; Part of the
Nobles followed the Queen; but the Major Part, by far, stuck to James Kennedy,
and George Douglas, Earl of Angus, the Heads of the contrary Faction. The Queen
lodged in the Castle; the Bishop and the Earl lay in the Abbey of
Holy-Road-House, at the furthest part of the Suburbs, toward the East. The
Cause of the Dissension, was, That the Queen thought it equal and just for her
to have the Tutelage, or Guardianship, Disputes in the Assembly of Estates
about the Regency.
of her Son; the other Party judged it most fit, that One should be chosen out
of the whole Assembly, for that careful Work. The Queen alleged the Maternal
Name, her Interest, and Propinquity; the Adverse Party insisted on the old Law,
confirmed by perpetuated Custom. In the Third day of the Assembly, the Queen
comes down from the Castle with her Followers, and caused her self to be
Decreed Tutrix of the King, and Governess of the Kingdom, by her own Faction,
Which the Queen claim^.
and so returns into the Castle, again. When Kennedy heard of this, he hastened,
with his Party, into the Marketplace, and there, in a long Speech, he told the
Multitude, which was thick about him, That he and his Associates did aim at
nothing, but the Public Good, and the Observation of their Ancient Laws; But
Kennedy and Douglas oppose.
but their Adversaries were ^^d, each one, by his private advantage; And That
he would eviden^^y make appear, if he might have a Place Free to dispute the
Poin^ Having thus spoken, he retired with his Followers to his Lodgi^^* but was
not gone far from the Marketplace, before he heard That the other Party was
coming down Armed from the Castle. Douglas looked upon This as an intolerable
Thing, That Valiant Men should yield to the Threats of a Few and That their
Retirement should be looked upon, as a Flight; and therefore was hardly kept in
by Kennedy, from assaulting the adjoining Gate of the City; and, Weaponless, as
he was, to encounter Armed Men; and unless the Three Bishops of Glasgo, Galway,
and Dumblane, upon Noise of the Uproar had come in, his Indignation would not
have been stopped, till they had come to Blows. But, by the Mediation of those
Bishops, A Truce for a Month betwixt the Parties.
the Matter was so far composed, That a Truce was agreed upon, for one Month.

Though the Chief of the Faction were thus quieted, yet the Multitude could not
be restrained from expressing their Wrath and Indignation, The Commonalty
dislike the Queens Regency.
in rough and cutting Language; as, that the Desire of the Queen was
Dishonorable to the Kingdom, and Undecent for Herself. What (said they) is the
Valor of the old Scots at so low an Ebb, That, amongst so many Thousand Men,
there is none worthy to Govern the Affairs of Scotland, but a Woman must do it?
What, was there no Man, that could Rule over the Nation? And That would live
the greatest part of his Life in Arms? What likelihood was there, That those
who had not been altogether Tractable to their King, when weak, should now
yield Obedience to a Woman, and that a Stranger, too? What, had they undergone
so much Labor, and lost so much Blood, these many years, by Sea and Land, That
Men, born and brought up in Arms, should freely give up themselves to the
Servitude of a Woman? What, if the English should invade them, as they had
often done at other times, in revenge of their Losses, with a great Army? Who
could (in that case) Give, or Accept, Terms of Peace or War? These were the
Discourses of the Commonalty in all their Clubs.

But when the Month was expired, their Minds were a little calmer; and, the
Truce ended, there was another Convention, where the Queen alleged This for her
self, in Justification of her Cause, That, seeing she had not entered upon the
Government the Year before by Force, or against the minds of the Nobility, but
was chosen to that Dignity by their Unanimous Consent, The Queens Plea for the
Regency.
she had but used her own Right, and therefore she took it amiss to be
degraded, and no Crime at all imputed, as to her Mal-Administration. If, (said
she) as it is usual, Degrees of Affinity be regarded in Pupillages, there is
none nearer than a Mother; if the Safety of the King were Eyed, none could be
more Faithful; for if the King should die, other men may have their various and
distinct Hopes, but she could hope for, or expect, nothing but Orbity,
Solitariness, and Tears. And, if they had respect to the Good of the Public,
she was a stranger, and concerned in no Interest of Feuds or Friendships, and
That was especially to be eyed in such who sat at the Helm of Government; That
so their own Lives might not only be free from actual Vice; but also, that they
might have as few Temptations, and Incitements as may be, to those Lusts, which
do disturb and hurry the Mind, and pervert righteous Judgment. Some had
Assistance of Parents, Kinsmen, Allies, by whose aid they might hope for an
Excuse for their Offenses, or, at least, an easier Pardon. Yea, sometimes the
Rulers were compelled to square and accommodate their Actions to such men's
Wills and Humors. As for Her self, her Hope of Defense was in Innocence alone;
She had but one Son to eye, and both their Benefits and Advantages were
combined and twisted together. And unless she had respect to these Things, she
would choose much rather to live a quiet and happy Life in Retirement with the
good Liking of all, than to u^dergo the Enmity of Evil men, by punishing all
their Crimes; yea, and sometimes to incur the Displeasure of the Good, too.
Neither was it a New Thing for a Woman, to desire the Regency of another's
Kingdom, sithence, not only in Britain, but even in the Greatest and most
Puissant Kingdoms of the Continent, Women have had the Supreme Power, and their
Reigns have been Such, that their Subjects never repented of their Government.

When she had thus spoken, Many assented to her; Some to prepossess a Place in
in her future Grace and Favor; Others, in Hopes, that the Fruits of another's
Envy would redound to their advantage; Yea, there were some, who had an evil
jealousy, That, if the Election should be made out of All, they themselves
might be passed by, as less fit; and therefore, they rather desired, that the
Queen should be preferred over them all, than that Others, of the same Order
with themselves, or even of a Superior one, should be preferred before Them.

Nowithstanding, the more uncorrupted Part of the Nobility did, both by their
Countenance and Speeches, highly disgust the Queens Oration; but that which did
most Vehemently affect the whole Assembly, was, the Authority and the Speech of
James Kennedy, who, as it is reported, spoke in this manner.

IT is my chief Desire, Noble Peers, That they whose aims are at the Good of
all, in general, Kennedys Grave and Prolix Oration, in Answer thereunto.
might freely declare their minds without offense to any one particular Person.
But, in our present Circumstances, when things spoke for public Advantage are
distorted to the Reproach of those private persons, who speak them, it is a
very difficult thing to observe such a Mean between disagreeing heats, and
different opinions, as not to incur the offense of one of the Parties. As for
me, I will so temper and moderate my Discourse, That no man shall complain of
me, without first confessing his own Guilt. Yet, I shall use the Liberty of
Speech, received from our Ancestors, so modestly, that, as, on the One side, I
desire to prejudice no man; so, on the Other, neither for Fear nor Favor, will
I pretermit any thing, which is of use in the Debate before us; I see* That
there are Two Opinions which do retard and impede our Concord; The One, is, of
Those, who judge, That in a matter relating to the Good of All, an Election out
of All is to be made; and as we all meet to give our Suffrages in a business
concerning the safety of the whole Kingdom; so, it is equal and fit, that no
man should be Excluded from the Hopes of that Honor, who seeks after it by
Honest and Virtuous Ways. The Other, is, of such, who count it a great Injury
done to the Queen, who is so noble a Princess, and so choice a Woman, if she be
not preferred before all others in the Tutelage of her Son, and the
Administration of the Government of the Kingdom.

Of these Two Opinions, I like the Former best, and I will show you my Reasons
for it, by and by: In the mean time, I so far approve the design of the Later,
That they think it below the Queen's Grandeur, That any Single Person should
Vye with her for this point of Honor, lest her Authority, which ought to be,
as it indeed is, accounted Venerable, should be lessned by coping with
Inferiors. And, indeed, I would be quickly of their mind, if the Dispute lay
here, about the Honor of One, and not the Safety of All. But, seeing that,
this day, we are to make a Determination about That which concerns the Lives
and Fortunes of all private men, and the Safety of the whole Kingdom, too; it
is fit, that all Single Interests, and Concerns, should stoop and truckle under
That: And therefore, I earnestly advise Those, that are of this Opinion, so to
consult the Dignity of the Queen, That, in the interim, they forget not the
Reverence they owe to the Laws, to the old Customs, and, to the Universal Good
of their Country; if they can show, by any Statute, That it is Lawful and
Publicly expedient, That the Guardianship of the King, and the Regency of the
Kingdom, ought to be in the Queens Hands, I will pass over into their Opinion.
But if their Orations be pernicious to the Public, I hope the Queen, first;
and next, all Good men will pardon me, if (always saving the Majesty of the
Queen, as Sacred, so far as, by Law, and the Custom of our Ancestors, I may) I
do not conceal my Opinion, or, rather, if I speak out That, with Freedom, which
it were the greatest Impiety in me to conceal. To begin then with the Laws;
There is a Law made 500 year ago, by King Kenneth, a Prince no less eminent for
his Wisdom and Prudence, than for his military Performances; and it was
assented and yielded to by All the Orders of the Kingdom; and approved of, even
to this very day, by the Constant Observance of so many Ages, That, when the
King was in his Minority, the Estates, or Parliament, of the Kingdom should
Assemble and choose some one Man, eminent for Wisdom and Power, to be his
Guardian, and to Govern the Kingdom, whilst he was yet unable to weild the
Scepter, with his Own hands. Though this Law be referred to Kenneth, as the
Author of it; yet, it seems to me, That he did not so much Enact it first, as,
thereby, revive and confirm the Ancient Custom of the Scots, by a New Sanction.
For, Our Ancestors were so far from Committing the Supreme Power into the Hands
of a Woman, That, if you look over all our Chronicles, you shall not find so
much as the Name of a Woman Regent, recorded therein; for, why, pray, should
they mention such a Name, of which, they thought, they had no need, at present;
and hoped, they should never have any for the Future? For those Females which
other Countries call Queens, we only call Wives (or Consorts) of our Kings;
neither do we entitle Them to any Higher Name; for, I judge, our Wise Ancestors
had This in their Eye, That, as often as they heard their Names mentioned with
the Adjunct of Husband, they might remember, That they were obnoxious and
Subject to men. And therefore, to this very day, a Woman was never admitted to
the Regency, or the Administration of Public Affairs. The same Course has
been also constantly observed in lesser Magistracys, both as to their
Appointments and Executions. For, though many Honors and some Seigniorys amongst
them have come by Inheritance to some Women, by reason of their Great deserts
from their Country; and have also been allotted to them, as Dowrys; yet it was
never known, since the memory of man, That any Woman did ever preside in any
Public Council, or in any Court of Judicature, or to have taken upon her any
of those Offices, which are appropriated to men. Which Custom, seeing our
Ancestors, though not bound by Law thereunto, did constantly observe, only by the
Impulse of Nature, if we their Posterity should cast the Commonwealth into an
apparent Danger, by opposing a Law, received by the Votes of all, and approved
by so long an Usage, Who will free us from the Brand (I will not say, of
Tomerity, but) even of Madness it self? Especially, since we have been warned
by Examples near at hand; For the Saxons, by reason of the Wickedness of one
Woman, viz. Ethelburga* made a Law, That, after that time, no Woman should be
called Queen, nor should fit in Public, next the King, in any Seat of Honor.
I beseech you therefore, consider seriously, how much they degenerate from
Their Prudence, who against a Law so Ancient, and as advantageous to Women, as
honorable to Men, would put the Reins of Government into Their hands, to whom
our Ancestors never gave so much as a Royal Name; and from whom our Neighbors,
after they had given it, took it away. Other Nations, I grant, have been of
another Opinion; with what Success I shall declare, after I have first answered
Those, who dare not calumniate this Law, openly; but, in the
Carpet-Conventicles of Women, do implead it, as unjust. But whosoever he be,
that finds Fault with it, he seems to reprehend, not some Sanction only,
approved by the suffrages of Men, but even Nature it self, i. e. That Primary
Law, imprinted in our hearts by God himself; I say, Nature it self, whom our
Lawmakers had, as a Guide, and Directress of all his Counsels, when he proposed
and enacted this Law. For Nature, from the beginning, has not only
distinguished Men from Women by the strength of Mind and Body, but has also
appropriated distinct Offices and Virtues to each Sex, the same indeed for
Kind, but far different in Degree; For, how is it less uncomely for a Woman to
pronounce Judgment, to levy Forces, to Conduct an Army, to give a Signal to the
Battle, than for a Man to teiz Wool, to handle the Distaff, to Spin or Card,
and to perform the other Services of the weaker Sex: That which is Liberality,
Fortitude, and Severity in Men, is Profusion, Madness and Cruelty in a Woman.
And again, That which is Elegant, Comely, and Ornamental in a Woman, is Mean,
Sordid, and Effeminate in a Man: They that endeavor to confound and mix these
things, which Nature, of her own accord, has distinguished, do they not seem
to you, not only to disturb, but also to overthrow, the State of the Kingdom,
which is founded upon so good Laws and Customs? This they do, when they would
obtrude on us the Government of a Woman, which our Ancestors did not so much as
once Name. For the Maker of that Law (as I told you before) does not seem so
much to induce a new Sanction in the Enacting thereof, as only to commit to
Writing the perpetual Usage of our Ancestors, that it might be transmitted to
Posterity; and, That which has been always observed by the Guidance of Nature,
in the making a King, to have consecrated the same Thing to be observed by
Public Authority, in choosing a Guardian for a King, under age. They which go
about to undermine and infringe this one Law, what do they thereby but
endeavor to overthrow all the other Laws, Rites and Customs of our Ancestors?
I speak this, (that I may prevent all Calum^y) not that I think all Laws are
immutable, as if they were enacted to last for ever; No, Laws are of different
Sorts and Kinds: Those which are accommodated to the Vicissitude of Times, are
subject to the Inconstancy of Fortune, and are wont to last so long, as the
Necessity does, which imposed them; and Those which are obtruded on men by the
Wills of Tyrants, are commonly disannulled and abrogated, with their Authors.
But as for that Instinct or Impress of Nature, which is, as it were, a Living
Law, ordained by God, and deeply imprinted and engraven in Men's hearts, That,
the Consent of no Multitudes, nor no men's Decrees, can abolish. For (as an
excellent Poet is reported to have said) it was not born yesterday or to day,
but it grew up together with Dame Nature it self, and lives and dies together
with it. And seeing the Law, of which we now speak, is of that sort, and a
Principal one, too, he does not oppose the Dignity of the Queen, who desires,
That she of her own accord would prescribe to her self those Bounds, which
Nature it self has appointed, her Sex requires, Custom allows, and the Laws,
made by the consent of almost all Nations, do approve: But they, who would have
her forget her Sex and Station, do persuade her to break through all Bonds of
Law, and to disturb the Order of things appointed by God, received by use, and
allowed in all Cities and Countries, well-governed: And, certainly, whosoever
slights that Order will be grievously punished, not by Men only, but by God
himself, who will revenge his own Law. For, if good Laws threaten a Man with
Death, who shall cloth himself with a Woman's Apparel; and a Woman, if she wear
the Habit of a Man, what Punishment can be inflicted on them, too great for
their Offense, who, by a preposterous Flattery, would overthrow the whole Force
of Nature, and the everlasting Constitution of God himself? Will you
understand, how these Flatterers do not speak what they cordially mean? In a
public Assembly, to give a Vote, to be President in a Court of Law, to enact
or abrogate a Law: These are Great Things in themselves, yet they are but a
small Portion of the Government. Why do they not bring their Wives hither to
us, to consult? Why do not these also preside in Judicatures? Why do they not
persuade, or dissuade, Laws? Why do not they themselves look after their
Domestic Affairs, at home? And, Why do they not send their Wives abroad to the
War? But if they would impose Those Regents upon us, whom they themselves dare
scarcely trust in the Management of their own Household Affairs, much less think
them fit for the least Part of any Public Business: Consider, I pray, how they
contradict themselves; but if they themselves are conscious of their own
Infirmity, if they speak as they think, and so are restrained by Modesty rather
than Judgment; yet, let them hope well of others, who both can, and will,
perform their own, i. e. the Services proper for Men, But if (as I rather
judge) They think, by this kind of Compliance, to gratify the Queen, I advise
and admonish them, to lay aside that false Opinion of a Princess of so great
Prudence, as she is, nor, that they would believe her to be so ignorant of
Things, as to account, That to be an Increase and Accession of Dignity, (to
her) which would be the foulest thing imaginable, in other Women. I enter upon
this Part of my Discourse very unwillingly; For, seeing our Noble Princess has
so well deserved of the whole Kingdom, that it is fit she should hear nothing,
which might justly offend her Ears and Spirit. I will not mention those things,
which ill Men do commonly allege in contemning and undervaluing of that Sex, I
shall rather insist on those Virtues, which are proper to the Queen: And though
these are Many and eminently Illustrious; yet none of them have procured
greater Praise and Commendation to her, than her Modesty. For, That is esteemed
so proper to her Sex, that, even in a private person, it does either cover, or,
at least, much extenuate, other Faults. But, in our Princess, none of whose
Words or Deeds, in regard of the Eminency of her Stock and Condition, can be
concealed, it does shine out so illustriously, that her other Virtues come much
more acceptable, and commended, upon the Account thereof. And therefore I shall
need to say but a few words in reference to her, save only to warn and
encourage her, to persist in That way to Glory and Honor, which she has
already entered upon; and that she would not give Ear to the Flatteries of any,
so as to be forgetful of Her self; but that she would rather tread the sure and
experienced way to immortal Renown, than by running on unsafe and craggy
Precipices, to hazard the Splendour of her former glorious Life.

But my great Business, is, with you (My Lords,) who, either out of Envy, are
afraid that your Betters should be preferred before you; or else, by wicked
Ambition, do lay the Foundation of your future Favor with a good Princess. I
will therefore, most Noble Queen, under the shelter of your Prudence, speak,
and speak freely, my Thoughts, in this case. Such Persons do not Accost, or
Court You, but your Fortune: And whilst they think upon the Queen, they forget,
that the same Person is a Woman. When I name the Word Woman, (I do not use it
reproachfully) but I mean a Person to whom Nature has given many
Blandishments, and eminent Endowments; but withal, has mingled them (as She
usually does, in the most beautiful and preciousest things) with some allay of
Infirmity; and therefore would have her to be under the Guardianship of
Another; as not sufficiently able to protect Herself: So that, She is so far
from having an Empire over others allotted to her; That the Laws, in Imitation
of Nature, do Command Women to be under the perpetual Tutelage of their
Parents, Brothers, or Husbands. Neither does this tend to their Reproach, but
is a Relief to their Frailty. For, that it keeps them off from those Affairs,
for which they are unfit; it is a Courtesy which consults, or makes Provision
for, their Modesty; not a Scandal, detracting from their Honor. I will not
call to remembrance, how difficultly they are restrained by the Diligence of
Husbands, and the Authority of Parents; neither will I mention, how far the
Licentiousness of some Women has proceeded, when the Reins have been loosed on
their Necks. I shall confine my Speech only to what the present Case offers;
yea, what it does exact and require, and which, without Damage to the Public,
cannot be concealed: If there be any thing of private Inconvenience in the Sex,
let their Husbands and Kin lock to that, I shall only briefly touch, what may
be Publicly prejudicial. Greatness of Mind was never required in this Sex; it
is true, Women have other proper Virtues, but as for This, it was always
reckoned amongst Virile, not Female, Endowments; besides, by how much the more
they are obnoxious to Commotions, Passions, and other efforts of Mind, by
reason of the Imbecility of their Nature, by so much, does their Extravagancy,
having once broke through the restraints of the Law, straggle further away, and
is hardly ever reduced, and brought back again within its due Bounds; in
regard, Women are alike impatient, both of Diseases, and Remedies, too: But if
any of them seem more valiant and courageous, they are so much the more
dangerous, as being liable to more impetuous and vehement Passions: For they,
who, out of tediousness of their Sex, have put off the Woman, are very willing
to extend their Liberty, even beyond the Precincts of Manly Cares, too; If you
once exceed, and pass over the Mound, and Limits, set by Nature, whatsoever is
beyond is infinite, and there is no Boundary left either for Desire or Action:
Moreover, there is a further Accession to this Infirmity of Nature, by how much
the less Confidence one has in himself, so much the more easily he interprets
the Words and Actions of others to his own Reproach; he is more vehemently
Angry, and more hardly appeased. Such a Party does also execute Revenge more
immoderately, and does punish his Despisers, with greater Hate: Now that all
those things are unfit for, yea, contrary to, Magistracy, there is none of you
are ignorant of. And if any Man think, that I devise these things of my own
Head, let him consider, What great Disturbances there were not long ago, when
Joan of Naples Reigned. Look over the Histories of Ancient Times. I will not
mention Semiramis of Assyria, nor Laodice of Cappadocia; Those were Monsters,
not Women. Queen of Palmira, a City in Syria, now called Faid.
I shall only mention, That Zenobia Palmirena so much spoken of, the subduer of
the Parthians, and Defender of the Roman Empire, was at last Overcome, Taken,
and Triumphed over: And so She herself, and her Kingdom, which was enlarged,
and increased by her Husband Odenatus, was lost in a moment.

Neither may I pass over in silence, what is principally to be regarded, in the
management of other Men's Affairs; That the Chief Command is not to be entrusted
to such sort of Persons, who are not accountable for their Mal-Administration:
I do not at all distrust the Disposition, Faithfulness, nor Care of the Queen;
but if any thing be acted amiss (as it often happens) by the Fraud of others;
and Matters be carried otherwise, than the Public Good, or the Dignity of Her
Place does Require, What Mulct can we exact from the Kings Mother? What
Punishment can we require? Who shall give an account for Miscarriages? The
Highest Matters will then be managed in the Meetings of Women; in the Nursery
or Dressing Room: You must There, either each Man in particular subscribe to
Decrees; or All in General Make them; and She, whom you scarce now restrain,
though She be without Arms, and obnoxious to you by Laws and Customs, when you
have, by your Authority, put Power into Her hands, you will certainly feel Her
Womanish Wilfulness and Extravagance? Neither do I speak this, as if I did fear
any such thing from our Queen, who is the Choicest and Modestest of all Women;
but because, I think it base and unseemly for us, who have all things, yet, in
our own Hands and Power, to place the Hope of our Safety, which we may owe to
our Selves, only in another Power, especially, since both Divine and Human
Laws, the Custom of our Ancestors, yea, and the Consent of all Nations,
throughout the whole World, make for us. It Is true, some Nations have endured
Women to be their Chief Magistrates, but they were not elected to that Dignity,
by their Judgment and Suffrage, but were cast upon them by the Lot of their
Birth and Nativity; but never any People, who had freedom of Vote, when there
was plenty of able Men to choose, did ever prefer Women before Them. And
therefore, most Eminent Patriots, I advise, and earnestly entreat, you, That,
according to the Laws of our Country, and the Customs of our Ancestors, we
choose One; or, if you think fit, More, the Best out of the Noblest and Best,
who may undertake the Regency, till the King arrive at that strength both of
Body and Mind, as to be able to manage the Government, Himself. And I pray God
to Bless your Proceedings herein.

Kennedy spoke thus with the Approbation of the, undoubtedly, major part of the
Assembly; and the rest, perceiving that it was in vain to oppose, passed over
to their Opinion. The Matter was thus composed, That neither Party seemed to
have the Better of the other. Two of each Faction were chosen for the
Guardianship for the King, who were to manage all Public Affairs, with
Fidelity; to Collect, The Parliament Gra^ity neither Party fully, but choose
Regents, of which the Queens Friends are an equal Number with the rest.
and Expend, the King's Revenue; and to undertake the Charge of the Royal
Family: Of the Queens side, William Graham and Robert Boyd, then Chancellor: Of
the Other, Robert Earl of the Orcades, and John Kennedy, All, on both sides,
the Chief of their Families. To these were added the Two Bishops of Glasgo and
Caledonia. The Queen was allowed to be present at the King's Education, but She
was not to touch any part of the Public Government; As for the other Children,
which were Four, viz. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John Earl of Mar, and Two
young Females, She had the Charge of their Educations, Herself.

Matters being thus composed at home, Ambassadors from England had their
Audience, who desired a Truce, which was granted for Fifteen Years; The next
Year, which was 1463. A Truce with England for 1^ Years. The Queen Mothers
Death.
The King's Mother Died, being not well spoken of in point of Chastity: The
same Year, Alexander, the King's Brother, returning from his Grandfather, by
the Mothers-side, out of France, was taken Prisoner by the English, but freed
soon after, in regard the Scots urged it as a Breach of the Truce, and
threatened a War thereupon.

Peace being obtained abroad, it was not long, Intestine Commotions in Scotland.
before Intestine Commotions arose at home; for, when the Disputes and
Controversies betwixt the Nobility, concerning ordering the State of the
Kingdom, were bruited abroad, and magnified by vulgar Rumors. And Moreover, the
King's Minority, together with the fresh Remembrance of the Licentiousness of
the late Times, were brought upon the Stage, all these Temptations put together
did easily let loose the Reins to Men, who were turbulent enough in their own
Nature. Alan of Lorn, a Seditious Person, had a mind to enjoy the Estate of
John, By Alan of Lo^n,
his Elder Brother; and therefore, kept him Prisoner, intending there to detain
him so long alive, till the hatred of his cruel Practice did, with time, abate,
and so he yield to his Will and Pleasure; when Calen Cambel, Earl of Argyle,
heard of it, he gathered a Band of his Tenants together, freed John, and cast
Alan into Prison, in his room; resolving to carry him to Court, that he might
suffer Punishment for That, as well as for his other noted Robberies; but he
prevented his Punishment by Death, whether voluntary, or fortuitous, is not
known.

And Donald the Islander.
In another part of the Country, Donald, the Islander, as being a more powerful
Person, began to make a far greater Commotion; for, after the Kings Death, as
free from Fear, and judging, That turbulent state of things to be a fit
Opportunity for him to injure his Inferiors, and to increase his own power, he
came to Enverness, with no great Train, and was kindly invited into the Castle,
by the Governor thereof; who had no Thoughts, or so much as the least Fear, of
any Hostility from him; when he was entered, he turned out the Garrison, seized
upon the Castle, and gathering his Or, Redshanks.
Islanders about him, proclaimed himself, King of the Islands: He sent forth
Edicts into the Neighbor Countries, That the Inhabitants should pay Tribute to
none, but himself; and that they should acknowledge no other Lord or Master,
denouncing a great Penalty to those that did otherwise. The News hereof caused
Debauched Persons to flock to him from all Parts; so that having made up an
Army great enough, he entered Athole, with such celerity, that he took the Earl
thereof, who was the Kings Uncle, and his Wife, Prisoners, before they
suspected any such thing. For the Earl, Donald takes the Earl of Athol
Prisoner; pillages and burns St. Brides Church.
hearing the sudden Tumult of a War, distrusted the strength of his Castle of
Blare, and went into the Church of St. Brides near adjoining, to defend himself
there as in a Sanctuary, by the Religion of the Place; many also of his Vassals
and Countrymen, being surprised at the sudden danger, carried, and laid up
their best Goods there. That Church was venerated in those Parts with great
Ceremony, and it had remained inviolate, to that very day, by reason of the
great Opinion of its Sanctity; but the consideration of Gain was more prevalent
with that Savage and Avaritious Person, than any sense of Religion. For he
violently pulled out the Earl and his Wife from thence, and a great Number of
Prisoners, besides; and after he had pillaged the Church, he burnt it with
Fire; and when the Priests spoke to him, to deter him from that Sacrilege,
some of them he slew, others he sent away, evilly enough entreated. Then having
wasted the adjacent Countries, up and down, with Fire and Sword, he was
returning home, with a great Booty, but a sudden Tempest arose, which sunk many
of his Ships, and grievously distressed the rest; so that he, and a Few only of
his Followers were rather cast up, than landed, on the Island of Ila; they,
which superviv'd this Shipwreck, thought, That this Calamity happened to them
by the manifest Anger of the Deity, because they had violated the Church of St.
Bride; and therefore they went barefooted, and covered only with a little
Linen Garment, in an humble manner to carry Gifts to her, whom, a few days
before, they had so contumeliously abused: It Is reported, That, from that day
forward, Donald, their Commander, fell out of his Wits, either for Grief, He is
Shipwrack^d, and the^eupon fal^s distr^cted.
that he had lost his Army and the Spoil; or, because his Mind, though brutish,
was at length gaul'd with the Conscience of his Irreligious Sacrilege, and
Contempt of Divine Worship. This Misfortune of their Commander occasioned his
Kindred to set the Earl of Athole, and his Children, at liberty, and to come to
atone St. Bride with many Large and Expiatory Gifts.

When the News hereof was brought to Court, it broke off their Consultations,
of making any Expedition against the Islanders. The first Tumults being thus
appeased, the Administration of Scottish Affairs was carried on with so much
Equity and Tranquillity, that the oldest Man, then alive, never remembered more
secure, quiet, and halcyon, days; such was the Prudence and Gravity of James
Kennedy, (on whose Authority the Court did then principally depend, James
Kennedy his commendation.
) and such the Modesty of the rest of the Nobility, who did not grudge to yield
Obedience to the Wiser sort. For, this James Kennedy had obtained such Credit
by his many Merits and Services to his Country, and by his good Offices toward
the former King; yea, he had procured such a real Opinion of his Fidelity in
all Matters, by reason of the Composedness of his Manners, and his near
Alliance to the King, That the rest of the Kings Guardians, which were to
succeed one another, Two and Two by turns, did willingly admit and suffer him,
when ever he came to Court, to be the sole Censor and Supervisor of their Pains
and Diligence, in that Service. By this their Concord, the Kings Education was
carried on very smoothly, and his own Towardliness and Ingenuity making an
accession to their Industry, all Men conceived great Hopes of him.

Thus Matters were carried on, till about the Sixth year of the Kings Reign;
There was then at Court Robert Boyd, the Chief of his Family, who, besides his
Personal Estate, was allied to many other Great and Noble Families, The Boyds
c^eep into Favor at Court.
he had also a Flourishing Stock of Children of his own, as Thomas and Robert;
he had a Brother too, named Alexander, who was well instructed and versed in
all good Letters: This Alexander, at the desire of John Kennedy, his Kinsman,
(who, by reason of his declining Age, was not so fit for Youthful Services) and
with the consent of the rest of the Kings Tutors, or Guardians, was preferred
to the King, to teach him the Rudiments of the Art Military, in the Knowledge
whereof he was esteemed to exceed all his Equals. The Boyds, upon the account
of these Advantages, were not content with that Place and Authority, though it
were very great and Honorable, which they had at Court, but further sought to
transfer all Public Offices into their own Family; to accomplish which,
Alexander was desired by them, to incline the Kings Favor toward them; He,
having got the King in the Tenderness and Ductility of his Age, did so
insinuate into him by his Flattering Complaisance, that he could do all things
with him. Being admitted into such private Intimacy and Converse, he would often
scatter words before the King, that he was now fit to govern, himself; and that
'was time for him to be emancipated from the servivitude of old Grey-Beards;
and to maintain a Company of Noble (...) You^hs about him, that so he might
enter on those Studies, betimes, wherein, whether he would or no, he was likely
to pass the remaining part of his Life. Discourses of this kind were easily
entertained by a Youth, unskilful in Matters, and in the slippery Part of his
Age, too; which was prone to liberty, so that he began to be a little Stubborn
and Headstrong against his Governors; Some things he would do, without their
advice, and Many against it, as seeking an opportunity to be delivered from the
severity of those Seniors, as from a kind of Bondage and Captivity. Whereupon,
being at Linlithgoe, when he went out a Hunting, unknown to Kennedy, whose turn
it was then to wait, the old Man, being informed thereof, went forth to
overtake him not far from the Town; and having done so, he took his Horse by
the Bridle, and endeavored to stop and bring him back, alleging, that 'twas no
convenient Time, nor was his Company fitting for such an Exercise; Alexander
Boyd abuses Kennedy.
hereupon Alexander ran in, and with the Bow, which he had in his Hand, struck
the old Man a Blow on his Head, though he deserved better things at his hands;
Kennedy, being thus beat off, as a troublesome Hinderer of their Sport, they
proceed on to the Place, they intended they go to; Kennedy, being wounded,
returned into the Town. And when Robert Boyd came again to Court, he did not
disapprove, what his Brother Alexander had done; By this means, the Seeds of
Enmity were sown between the Two Factions, which grew up to the great Detriment
of the Kingdom, and at length to the total Destruction of One of them.

The Fewd was first discovered upon This Occasion; The Boyds would have the
King removed from that place to Edinburgh, but Kennedy and his Party would have
Sterlin to be the Place of his Residence. The Boyds could then do most at
Court, and so, without public Consent, The Boyds carry the King to Edinburgh.
they carried the King to Edinburgh, there to enter upon the Regal Government.
The Attendants of the Journey, were, besides their own Kindred, Adam Hepburn,
John Somerval, and Andrew Car, all Heads of their respective Families. This was
acted about the 10th of July in the year 1466. The Kennedies, having lost the
day in the Dispute, departed severally to their own Homes, John into Carrick,
Whereupon the Kennedies depart from the Court. Boyd's Sarcasm to John Kennedy.
James into Fife, their minds swelling with Anger, and resolving to omit no
Opportunity of Revenge. The Boyds, thus Conquerors, not contented with the
Wrong they had done, sent John an Ape, in a jeer, for the old Man to play and
sport himself with at home, thereby upbraiding him, as if he had doted for Age.

Not long after, James Kennedy departed this Life, maturely enough for himself,
if we respect his Age; but his Death was so lamented by all good Men, James
Kennedy's Death, and Character.
as if, in him, they had lost a public Father. For, in that Man, besides the
Virtues above- mentioned, there was an high degree of Frugality and Continence
at home, yet great Splendour and Magnificence abroad: He exceeded all former
Bishops, yea, and all those which have sat after him in that See, to this very
day, in Liberality toward the Public; and yet notwithstanding, his own
Ecclesiastical Revenues were not very great, for as yet the Scots had not
arrived at that ill Custom of heaping up Steeples upon Steeples; nor had
learned to spend that worse upon Luxury, which was before ill gotten by
Avarice: He left one Eminent Monument of his Munificence behind him; and That
was the Public Schools at St. Andrews, which he built with great Expense, and
endowed with large Revenues, but issuing out of Church Incoms; he took order,
that a Magnificent Monument should be erected for himself therein, which yet
the Malignity of Men envied him for, though he had deserved so well privately
of most Men, and publicly of all Men: They alleged, 'twas a thing of too much
vanity, to bestow so much Cost upon a Structure of no Use. His Death made his
Virtues more illustrious, and increased Men's desire after him; for when he, who
was a perpetual Censor, and Corrector, of Manners, was once removed out of the
way, the public Discipline began, by degrees, to grow weak and remiss, and, at
last, to be so corrupt, as to bring almost all things, with it self, to ruin.

The Boyds made use of pretenses in Law, to increase the Domestic Power of
their Family, and to abate the Potency of their Enemies, and first Patrick
Graham Elected Bishop of St. Andrews, in the room of James Kennedy, and
Confirmed by the Pope.

But the Boyds obstruct his Admission.


Patrick Graham seemed most pat for their purpose; he was the Brother of James
Kennedy, by the same Mother, and was also Cousin by the Mothers-side, to Robert
Boyd. He, as the Manner was in those days, was Elected Bishop by the Canons, in
the Room of his Brother James, but was hindered by the Court-Faction, from
having the Kings leave to go to Rome, so that he went privately to the Pope,
without any Train, and so was easily admitted into his Brothers Place; for
besides the Nobleness of his Stock, and the great Recommendation of his high
Virtues, he was also well Learned, as for those times. And therefore whilst he
staid at Rome, fearing the Power of the Adverse Faction; The old Controversy
concerning the Liberty of the Church of Scotland, began to be revived. For the
Archbishop of York pretended, That the Bishops of Scotland were under his
Jurisdiction, so that he endeavored to retain That Power in time of Peace,
which had been usurped in the Licentious Times of War. But a Decree was made at
Rome, in Favor of the Scots; and Graham was not only made Primate of Scotland,
Scots Bishops freed from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of York, by the
Popes Decree.
but also was Constituted the Popes Legate there for Three years, to inquire
into the dangerous Manners and Conversations of Priests; and to restore decayed
Ecclesiastical Discipline to its pristine Integrity and State; and yet, this
great Man, though so illustrious for Indowments of Mind and Fortune, and having
also the superadded Authority of the Pope to back him, durst not return home,
till the Power of the Boyds did somewhat decline at Court.

The Boyds perceiving, The Boyds strengthen their Faction, and procure Pardon
for their Mis^a^iage^, by Public Instruments, to which the King assents.
That the Concourse of the Nobility to them was not so great as they hoped; to
avert the Accusations of their Enemies, and provide for their own Security for
the future, cause a public Assembly, or Parliament, to be Indicted against the
13th Day of October. There Robert Boyd, the Elder, fell down on his Knees
before the King and his Counselors of State, complaining, That his Service to
the King in bringing him to Edinburgh, was ill interpreted and traduced by the
Malign Speeches of his Adversaries, who gave out threatening Words, That the
Advisers to that Journey should, one Day, suffer Punishment for the same; and
therefore he humbly besought the King, That, if he had conceived any ill will,
or disgust in his Mind against him for that Journey, That he would openly
declare it; that so the Calumnies of his Detractors might be either prevented,
or allayed. The King, having advised a litt^e with the Lords of the Articles,
made answer, That Robert was not the Adviser of him to that Journey, but rather
his Companion in it; and therefore, that he was more worthy of a Reward for his
Courtesy, than of Punishment for his Obsequiousness and Compliance therein;
and this he was willing to declare in a public Decree of the Estates, that so
all invidious Discourse might be stopped; and, in the same Decree, Provision
should be made, That that Matter should never be prejudicial to Robert, nor his
Companions: Boyd desired, that This Decree might be Registered amongst the Acts
of the Assembly; and that the same should be confirmed also by Letters Patents,
under the Great Seal; and accordingly the Decree was presently Registered
amongst the Acts, and the Letters Patents were delivered to him soon after,
viz. the 25th Day of the same Month. The same Day also, the King, by advice of
his Council, gave him other Letters Patents, wherein he was Constituted Regent,
and had the Safety of the King, his Brothers, Robert Boyd made Regent.
Sisters, Towns, Castles, and all the Jurisdiction over his Subjects, committed
to him, till he himself came to 21 Years of Age; and he dealt so with the
Nobles, then present, that they solemnly promised to be assistant to the Boyds
in all their public Actions; and that they would be obnoxious to Punishment,
if they did not carefully, and with Faithfulness, perform, what they now
promised: To this Stipulation, or Promise, the King also subscribed.

By this means, when the King was their Friend, Part of the Nobility in League
with them, and also the Administration of the whole Government put into their
Hands, they thought themselves sufficiently secured for a long time; Thomas
Boyd Marries the Kings Eldest Sister.

The Greatness of the Boyds occasions their Ruin.


yea, and to lay a Foundation also for the future Greatness of their Posterity,
they brought it about, that Thomas Boyd, the Son of Robert, should Marry the
King's Eldest Sister. That Marriage, as it was opulent, and seemed a Prop and
Establishment of their Power, so it increased the Hatred of their Enemies; and
gave Occasion to variety of Discourse, amongst the Vulgar. For, though, by this
means, all passage to the King's Ear seemed to be precluded, and they alone
made the sole Arbiters of his Words and Actions; yet, they did not flourish so
much in Favor at Court, as they were prosecuted with public Hatred abroad;
which, after Four Years Concealment, did, at last, break out to the Destruction
of their whole Family; and the wiser sort of the adverse Party did not much
dislike this their sudden Increase of Honor, for, they hoped, (as it is usual)
That Arrogance would be the Companion thereof, which would not endure a
Superior, and despise an Equal, yea and trample upon an Inferior; and when the
Bounds of a Subjects Condition are exceeded, it also awakens Kings, who are
impatient of Corrivals, to overthrow such suspected Persons. The Noise of this
Discord betwixt such Potent Factions, let loose the Reins to Popular
Licentiousness. For the People, accustomed to Robberies, did, by Intervals,
more eagerly return to their former Trade. The Seeds of Hatred, which were
suppressed for a time, did now bud forth again with greater Vigor; and the
Seditious did willingly lay hold on these Occasions for Disturbances, so that,
there was a general Liberty taken to do what Men listed, in hopes of Impunity.

Neither were the Kennedys wanting to the Occasion, who partly did spread
abroad Rumors to inflame the People, and to cast all the Cause of their
Disturbance and Miseries upon the Boyds; and partly also, (as some thought)
they were not much averse from the Design of the Seditious, but did privily
cast Fuel into the Fire. This was plain and evident by their very
Countenanc^s, That this troublesome State of Affairs was not unpleasant or
unacceptable to them. There seemed but only One thing wanting, utterly to
subvert the flourishing Power of their Enemies, and That was, to make the King
of their Party: For they had Strength enough, or too much; they knew, that the
Commonalty, who affect Innovations, and love every thing more than what is
present, would crowd in to their Party; hereupon they agreed to try the King's
Mind, by some crafty Persons who should pretend themselves to be Lovers of the
Boydian Faction.

In the interim, Ambassadors were appointed to pass over into Denmark, to
desire Margarite, the Daughter of that King, James by his Ambassadors desires
Margarite Daughter of the King of Denmark for a Wife.
as a Wife for James; and that they should take all the care they could, that
the Old Controversy concerning the Orcades and the Isles of Shetland, which
had cost both Nations so much Blood, might be accorded: The Chief of the
Embassy, was, Andrew Stuart, Son to Walter, who was then Chancellor of
Scotland. The Danes easily assented to the Marriage, The King of Denmark
resigns up the Orcades and Sche^land to the Scots, as a Dowry.
and they quitted all their Right which their Ancestors claimed over all the
Islands about Scotland, in the Name of a Dowry; only the private Owners of
Estates, in those Islands, were to enjoy them upon the same Terms, as they had
formerly done. Some write, that they were passed over in Mortgage, till the
Dowry was paid, but that afterward, the King of Denmark gave up all his Right
thereto for ever to his Nephew James, who was newly born by his Daughter.

When the Chancellor had informed the King, that all things were finished
according to his desire, the next Consult was, to send an handsome Train of
Nobles to bring over the New Queen. And here, by the Fraud of his Enemies, and
Inadvertency of his Friends, Thomas Boyd, Son of Robert Earl of Arran, was
chosen Ambassador, Thomas Boyd, sent Ambassador to bring the new Queen from
Norwey.
his very Maligners and Envyers purposely commending his Aptness for that
Employment, by reason of his Valor, Splendour and Estate, fit for such a
Magnificent Errand: He judging all things safe at Home, in regard his Father
was Regent, willingly undertook the Employment; and at the beginning of Autumn,
with a good Train of Friends and Followers, he went a Shipboard.

In the mean time, the Kennedy's had loosened the Kings Affection to the Boyds;
and whereas they thought to retain his Good Will, by Pleasures and Vacation
from Public Cares: Those very Baits they imputed as Crimes to them, and by
magnifying their Wealth, though Great in it self, yet as too Bulky, and even
dangerous to the King himself; and withal alleging, what a great Advance would
accru to his Exchequer, by the Confiscation of their Estates, upon their
Conviction, they did variously agitate the infirm Mind of the King, who was
inclined to Suspicions and Avarice. The Boyds undermined in the absence of
Thomas.
And the Boyds on the other side, though they endeavored by their Obsequious
Flatteries, and their hiding the public Miseries from him, to banish all
Melancholy Thoughts out of his Mind; yet, the Complaints of the Vulgar, and
the Solitariness of the Court, Both which were, of set purpose, contrived and
increast by their Enemies, could not be hid. And besides, there were some, who
when the King was alone, did discourse him freely, concerning the Public
Calamities, and the Way to Remedy them; yea, the King himself, as if he were
somewhat awakned to Manly Cares, declared, That what was sometimes Acted
abroad, did not please him. But the Boyds, though they perceived that the King
was every Day less and less Tractable to them, than formerly; and withal, that
popular Envy rose higher and higher against them, yet remitted nothing of their
former Licentiousness, as trusting to the Kings former Lenity, and to the
Amnesty, which they had for what was past.

Whereupon the contrary Faction, having secretly wrought over the King to their
Party, and Thomas, Earl of Arran, being sent packing Ambassador into Denmark,
from whence he was not expected to return, till late in the Spring, because
those Northern Seas are Tempestuous and Unpassable, for a great part of the
Year; upon these accounts, they thought it a fit season, to attempt the Boyds,
who were Old and Diseased, and therefore came seldom to Court; and besides,
were destitute of the Aid of many of their Friends; who were go^^ away in the
Train of the Embassy. The First thing t^^y did, was, to persuade the King to
call a Parliament, which had been much longed for a great while, to meet at
Edinburgh on the Twenty Second Day of November, in the Year 1469. Thither the
Boyds, Two Brothers, were Summoned to come, and make their Appearance; where
Matters were variously carried toward them, as every ones Hatred of them, or
Favor to them, did dictate and direct. But they were so astonished at this
sudden Blow, as having made no great Provision against so imminent a Danger,
that their Minds were quite dejected, not so much for the Power of the adverse
Faction, as for the sudden Alienation of the Kings Mind from them; so that
Robert, in Despair of his safety, fled into England; Robert Boyd flies into
England.
but Alexander, who by reason of his Sickness could not fly, was called to his
Answer. The Crime objected to both the Brothers, was, That they had laid Hands
on the King, and by private Advice had carried him to Edinburgh. Alexander Boyd
Beheaded.
Alexander alleged, That he had obtained his Pardon for that Offense in a
public Convention, and therefore he humbly desired, That a Copy of that Pardon
might be Transcribed out of the Parliament Rolls, but this was denied him: What
his Accusers did object against that Pardon, the Writers of those Times do not
Record; and I, though a Conjecture be not very difficult to be made in the
case, yet had rather leave the whole Matter to the Readers Thoughts, than to
affirm Uncertainties for Truths. Alexander was Condemned on his Trial, and had
his Head cut off. Robert, a few years after, died at Alnwick in England, the
Grief of Banishment being added to the pains of his old Age. His Son, though
absent, and that upon a public Business, was declared a public Enemy, without
Hearing; and all their Estates were Confiscate. Thus stood the matter of Fact,
but I shall not conceal, what I have heard some Good Men, A Critical or
Ambiguous Pardon.
and not Ignorant of the History of those Times, affirm; They say, That the
Amnesty given to the Boyds, was thus Worded in the Records, That the King
forgave them all the Prejudice and Rancour of Mind, (as they then Phras'd it)
which he might have conceived against them; which they, who were willing to
Gratify the King, Thomas Boyd declared a public Enemy in his ^bsence.
did Interpret (according to the Distinction then Celebrated, amongst Divines,
concerning the Remission of the Fault, and of the Punishment) after this
manner, That though the King forgave them his Personal Resentment, yet they
were not exempted from the Punishment of the Law. Thomas Boyd, when he heard of
the Calamity of his Family, though some put him in hopes of Pardon, in a time
of public Rejoicing, yet durst not come ashore; but being informed by his
Wife, who upon the first News of the approach of the Danish Fleet, made
immediately to him, that there was no Hopes of Readmission to the Kings
Favor, his Enemies having stopped all Passages thereunto, sailed back into
Denmark, whence he came, and so Traveled through Germany into France, where
he, in vain, endeavored to obtain the Mediation of Lewis the Eleventh, (who
then had turned the Legitimate Empire of the French into a Tyranny) for his
Reconciliation; and thereupon he went to Charles of Burgundy, Who thereupon
retires into Burgundy.
where he carried himself Valiantly, and did him much Faithful Service in the
Wars, for which he was well rewarded by him with Honors and Largesses. There
he lived a Private, yet Honorable, Life; and his Wife bore him a Son, called
James, and a Daughter called Grekin, of which, in their place.

The Marriage of James the Third, and Queen Margarite, King James Married to
Margarite of Norwey.
was Celebrated with a great Concourse of the Nobility, on the Tenth Day of
July, in the Year of our Lord 1470. There was born out of that Marriage, Three
Years after, on Saint Patricks Day in March, James, who Succeeded his Father in
the Kingdom.

In the interim, the King, not yet satisfied with the Misery of the Boyds,
writes over into Flanders, to recall his Sister home; but knowing that she bore
so great a Love to her Husband, that she would hardly be induced to part from
him; he caused others to write to her, giving her some Hopes, that the Kings
Anger might, in time, be appeased toward her Husband; and that no doubt was to
be made, but that she her self might prevail much with her Brother, for his
Relief; but that she must come to plead for him in Presence, and not commit his
Apology to others; upon these Hopes, she returned, and was no sooner arrived in
Scotland, but the King transacts with her about a Divorce; and thereupon he
affixt public Libels and Citations, attested by many Witnesses, at A Town on
the River Irwyn in Cuningham.
Kilmarnock, (which was the Chief House of the Boyds, before their Fall,)
wherein Thomas was Commanded to appear in Sixty Days, though all Men knew,
that, though the public Faith had been given him; yet he would hardly have
returned; he not appearing at the Day, the former Marriage was pronounced Null,
and a Divorce made, though the Husband were absent and unheard; and so Mary,
the Kings Sister was, compelled, against her Will, to Marry James Hamilton, a
Man raised but a little before, and much inferior to her former Husband,
Thomas Boyd's Wife divorced from him, and Married to James Hamilton.
in Estate and Dignity; yet, she bore him a Son, named James, and a Daughter
called Margarite. The Children she had, by her former Husband, were also
recalled by the King. And he himself lived not long after. He died at Antwerp,
Thomas Boyd's Death.
and having no Kinsmen there to claim his Estate, Charles of Burgundy caused a
Magnificent Monument to be erected for him, with the Money, which he had
munificently bestowed upon him in the Church of...... wherein an Honorable
Epitaph was inscribed. Thus the Family of the Boyds, which then was the most
flourishing one in all Scotland, within a few Years, grew up and was cut down,
to the great Document of Posterity, What slippery things the Favors of young
Kings are.

Their Ruin did not only amaze their Friends, but it also kept off, and damped,
their very Enemies, so that none would adventure to Aspire to that Dignity,
from whence they were cast down; partly, upon the account of the Instability of
Human Affairs; and partly, in Consideration of the Kings sudden Repentance, for
bestowing of his Graces and Favors, and his continued Perseverance in his
Hatred, when once began. This is certain, that they which were erected to great
Hopes of Preferment, by this change of Public Affairs, found themselves much
mistaken: For the King, who, before that time, had used himself to Domestic
Ease, and seldom appeared in Public, being now also newly Married, spent a
great part of his Time in the Pleasures of his Palace; he excluded the
Nobility, and was wholly governed by a few of his Servants; for, being of an
eager and fervid Disposition, he could not well bear the being contradicted in
his Opinion, so that he avoided the Liberty which Nobles would take, in
advising him, and had only those about him, who would not reprehend, but rather
approve of, what he did; that so by avoiding any occasion of Offense, by their
Flattery, they might curry his Favor. Amidst these Manners of the Court, the
Ecclesiastical State was not much better; for though the Ministers of the
Church had been given, for many years, to Luxury and Avarice, yet there was
still some shadow of ancient Gravity remaining; so that some encouragement was
given to Learning, and Advantage to such as were good Proficients therein. For
the Bishops were chosen by the Colleges of Canons, Bishops anciently chosen by
their Canons, and Abbats by their Monks.
and the Abbats by their respective Sodalities; but then the Parasite Courtiers
persuaded the King, (for it was they only, who had his Heart and Ear) that it
would be very gainful to him; and those with whom he was to deal, were not able
to hinder his Design, if he recalled and assumed the Designation of such
Offices to himself, and not suffer a Matter of so great Advantage to rest in
the Hands of such a dronish Generation of People, and unfit for any public
Business, as Ecclesiastics were. The King was easily persuaded thereunto, in
regard, they alleged, That, by this means, besides other Advantages, he might
have Opportunity to curb the Contumacious, to oblige Neuters, and to reward the
well deserving; but, (said they) in our present Circumstances, Promotions and
Honors are in the Hands of the Dregs of the Vulgar, who are as Parsimonious in
case of public Necessities, as they are profuse in their private Pleasures;
but it was fit, that, in such Cases, all Men should depend upon the King alone,
that so he might have the sole Power of Punishing, Pardoning, and Rewarding.

By these and the like Flattering Arguments, they persuaded the King to their
Opinion, B^t King James assumes the naming of (...) to himse^^.
for his Mind was not yet confirmed by Ripeness of Years; besides, 'twas
weakened by ill Custom, and not fortified against the Temptations of
Money-Matters: And moreover, he was naturally Prone to Liberty. Hereupon, a new
Face of things presently appeared throughout the whole Kingdom, and all Matters
both Sacred and Profane, were brought to Court, to be huckster'd and sold, as
in a Public Fair. But Patrick Graham was the only Man, who endeavored to stop
the precipitous Ruin of the Church; when his Enemies swayed all at home, he
staid at Rome some years, but being there informed by his Friends, in what
State things were, Which Patrick Grah^m labo^rs to withstand*
he, trusting in his Alliance to the King, being the Son of his Great Aunt,
resolved to return home; but that he might make some Essay of the Minds of Men,
before; he sent the Bull, which he had obtained from the Pope, for his
Legantine Power, and caused it to be Proclaimed and Published in the Month of
September, and the Year of our Lord 1472. which raised up much Envy against
him. For they that had bought Ecclesiastical Honors at Court, were afraid to
lose both their Prey and Money too; and they, who thought to make advantage by
this Court Nundination, were grieved to be thus disappointed; yea, that Faction
did no less Storm, that had obtained Ecclesiastical Preferments from the King,
for Mercenary Gain, that so they might sell them to others. Their Fear was,
that this gainful Practice would be taken out of their Hands. All these made a
Conspiracy against Patrick, and in his absence, loaded him with Reproaches;
they came to Court, and complained, that their Ancient Laws, as well as the
Kings late Decrees, were Violated, and that the Romanists were carrying on many
Matters, very prejudicial to the Kingdom; and unless the King did speedily
oppose their Exorbitance, they would quickly bring all things under their
Power; yea, and make the King himself truckle under them.

To prevent this Danger, there were some sent, by Order of Council, to Patrick,
before he had scarce set his Foot on Shore, to forbid him to execute any part
of his Office, until the King had heard the Complaints made against him; and a
Day was appointed him to appear, the First of November at Edinburgh, in order
to an Hearing.

In the mean time, when his Friends and Kinsfolk did assure him, that the King
would do what was Equitable in so just a Cause: The adverse Faction, hearing of
it, did so engage the King and his Courtiers, by the Promises of great Sums of
Money, that Patrick could never have a Fair Hearing afterward: When he was
come to the Assembly, he produced the Popes Bull and Grant, wherein he was
Constituted Archbishop of St. Andrews, Primate of Scotland, But the
Court-brokers ^ppose him.
and the Popes Legate for Three Years, to order Ecclesiastical Affairs. The
Inferior sort of Priests were glad of the thing, that an Office so necessary
was put into the Hands of so Pious and Learned a Man, but they did not dare to
speak it out, for Fear of some powerful Persons, who had got the Ear of the
King and his Counselors. His Adversaries made their Appeal to the Pope, who
alone could be judge in the Case; which they did on purpose to create delay,
that so the Favor of the People toward Patrick, might in time abate. He
himself was sent back by the King to his Church, but forbid to wear the Ensigns
and Habiliments of an Archbishop, till the Cause was determined; neither was he
to perform any Office, but what the former Bishops had done before him.

Whilst these things were acting, William Sivez rose up, a new Enemy, against
Patrick, but the bitterest of all the rest, and that upon a light Occasion. He
was a young Man of a prompt Wit, and had lived some Years at Lovain under the
Institution of John Sperinc, a Man well-skill'd in the Study of Physic and
Astrology; in both which Faculties he was very Famous; and returning home, he
quickly insinuated himself into the Favor of the Courtiers; The Story of
William Sivez, and his worming of Graham out of the Archbishop^ick of St.
Andrews.
partly, upon the account of his other Accomplishments; and partly, because of
his noted Skill in Astrology. This Endowment won him great Respect from the
Court, which was then addicted to all sorts of Divinations, even to a Madness;
so that this Sivez, being of a Fluid Wit, and in great favor at Court, was
soon made Archdeacon of St. Andrews. But the Bishop would not admit him to
that Office; whereupon he communicated Counsel with John Locc, Rector of the
Public Schools there, and a back Friend of Patricks, and they Two plotted
together, to overthrow him. The Rector, having a Grant from the Pope, whereby
he was Privileged and Exempted from Patricks Jurisdiction, Patrick Graham
Excommunicated, and his Rents gathered into the Kings Exchequer.
pronounced the Sentence of Excommunication against him. But he so slighted
this Commination of one of an Inferior Order to himself, that though it were
Twice or Thrice served upon him, yet he remitted nothing of the ordinary Course
of his former Life; whereupon his Enemies (as is usual in such Cases, wherein
Ecclesiastical Censures are contemned) implore the Assistance of the King, and
cause Patrick to be shut out of all Churches. Officers of the Exchequer were
sent to Inventory his Goods; his Retinue was Commanded, under an heavy Penalty,
to depart; and a Guard was set upon him, to observe that he did nothing
contrary to the Edict. The rest of the Bishops, that they might not seem
ungrateful toward so Benevolent a King, levied a great Sum of Money, which they
had violently extorted out of small Benefices, and presented him with it. The
King being Master of such a Sum, seemed to deal more mildly with Patrick, as if
he took pity on him, and accordingly he sent the Abbat of Holy-Rood, and Sivez,
to him. Whereupon, the Bishop was reconciled to the King, and also Sivez and
the Bishop were made Friends; but his Money was gathered up before, and carried
to the King. Now Patrick seemed to be freed out of all his Troubles, and so he
retired to his Manor House of Monimul, and prepared himself for the Execution
of his Office both Publicly and Privately; Situate upon the Head of Monks-Moor
Five Miles North of Falkland.
when, behold! the Roman Mony-Mongers were sent in upon him, by his
Adversaries; and because he had not paid his Fees for the Popes Grant, (or
Bull, as they call it) they also Excommunicated him: The Man was reduced to
extreme Poverty; for his Revenues, both before and after his return, were for
the most part gathered up by the Kings Collectors, and brought into his
Exchequer; and what ever his Friends could make up, was given to the King and
his Courtiers. And when the Kings Officers were again sent to take Possession
of his Estate, Guards were set upon him by the King; his Household Servants were
discharged, and he was kept prisoner in his Castle, and thereby was deprived of
the Advice of his Friends, also; William Sivez, his Capital Enemy was First
imposed upon him by the King, as his Coadjutor, as they call him, as if he had
been besides himself. The Pope also afterward approving of the Man for that
Service; and also, (...) of his B^shoprick imprisoned till (...) Death, and hi^
Adversary Sivez succeeds him.
the aforesaid Sivez was made Inquisitor by the Power of the Adverse Faction,
to inquire into his Life and Conversation; many trifling, many ridiculous, and
incredible things were Objected against him, and amongst the rest, this was
One, That he had said Mass Thrice in one Day; whereas, in that Age, there was
hardly a Bishop who did the same in Three Months; Hereupon, his Enemy being
Judge, and Witnesses being hired against him, he was Ejected out of his
Bishopric. And Sivez, who carried the Decree to the Pope, was made Bishop in
his room. Neither were his Enemies contented with this Mischief they had done
him; but, perceiving, that he bore all their Contumelies with much Greatness of
Spirit; They took order, that he should be shut up in some desolate Monast'ry,
under Four Keepers; Inch Colm was chosen to be the Place, a Rock, rather than
an Island, from whence, A Town four Miles above Queens-Ferry in Fife.
Three Years after, he was removed to Dunferlin, for fear of the English Fleet,
betwixt whom and the Scots a War had then broke forth, and from thence he was
again carried to the Castle, which lies in Loch Leven, where, being worn out
with Age and Miseries, he departed this Life; He was a Man guilty of no known
Vice, and, in Learning and Virtue, inferior to none of his Age. The other Good
Men, being terrified by his Calamity, and perceiving no hopes of any
Church-Reformation, went all about their own private Affairs; In the Court,
Church-Preferments were either Sold, or else given away to Flatterers, and
Panders, as a Reward for their filthy Service.

Though these things were acted at several times, yet I have put them altogether
in my Discourse, that so the Thread of my History might not be too often
interrupted; and also, that by one memorable Example, we might have an entire
View of the Miseries of those Times; For one may easily imagine, how vicious the
ordinary sort of Men were, seeing a Man that was so Eminent for all kind of
Virtue; and besides, had the Advantage to be Allied to the King, and to many
Noble Families besides, was, by a few Scoundrels of the Lowest-sort, exposed to
the Reproach and Cruelty of his Enemies. But to return to the other Occurrences
of those Times.

In the Year 1476. there was a Public Decree made against John Lord of the
Islands, who had seized upon some Provinces, John the Islander rises in Arms,
but quickly submits himself.
and had done great spoil on the Maritime Coasts; insomuch, that the King
resolved to march against him by Land, and Commanded the Earl of Craford his
Admiral, to meet him by Sea; Hereupon, John perceiving, that he was too weak to
withstand such great Preparations, by the Advice of the Earl of Athole, the
King's Uncle, came, in an Humble manner, to Court, and surrendered up himself to
the King's Mercy. The Provinces which he had forcibly entered upon, were taken
from him, as Ross, Kintire, Cnapdale, but the Command of the Islands was still
permitted to him. The same Year, the Controversy with the English, which was
just about to break forth into a War, James Kennedy built a vast Ship, which is
rifled by the English; but upon a Peace made by Ambassadors, he receives
satisfaction.
was ended and decided. The Occasion was this, James Kennedy had built a Ship,
the biggest that ever Sailed on the Ocean, at that time; She, being at Sea,
was, by a Tempest, cast upon the English Shore, and her Lading rifled by the
English; Restitution was often sought for, but in vain. This bred a disgust
betwixt the Nations for some Years; at last, the English sent Ambassadors into
Scotland; The Chief of which, were, the Bishop of Durham, and Scroop a
Nobleman; by whom Edward, having been tossed by the Inconstancy of Fortune, and
his Exchequer drained by continual Wars, desired a Pacification, which was
easily renewed, upon Condition, That the value of the Ship rifled, and its
Lading, might be estimated, by indifferent Persons, and just Satisfaction made.

Ambassadors to Charles of Burgundy,
The same Year, Ambassadors were sent to Charles Duke of Burgundy, in behalf of
the Merchants, who were disturbed in their Trades: When they came into
Flanders, they were Honorably received by him. But one Andrews a Physician,
and a great Astrologer too, being occasionally invited by them to Supper,
understanding the Cause of their coming, took them aside, and told them, That
they should not make too much haste in their Embassy; for, in a very few Days,
they should hear other News of the Duke. And accordingly, his Prediction was
fulfilled, for within Three Days after, his Army was overthrown by the
Switzers, who soon after was slain at Nants by the Switzers.
at the City of Nants in Lorain, where he was slain: Hereupon, the Ambassadors
returned without effecting their Business; and when they came to the King, and
told him, how highly skilled that Andrews was, in Predicting Things to come,
they persuaded him, who of himself was inclinable to those Arts, to send for
the Man, upon promises of a good Reward; and accordingly he came, was well
received, and gratified with a rich Parsonage, and other Boons. He, (as it is
reported) told the King, That he should speedily be Destroyed by his own
Subjects, and that Speech agreed with the Vaticinations of some wizardly Women,
(to which the King was immoderately addicted) who had Prophesied, That a Lion
should be killed by his Whelps; Hereupon, from a Prince, at first, of great
Ingenuity, One Andrews an Astrologer and Physician,
and good Hopes, and as yet not wholly depraved; he degenerated into a fierce
and cruel Tyrant; for when his Mind had entertained, and was stuffed with,
Suspicions, he accounted even his nearest Kindred, and all the Best of the
Nobility, as his Enemies; and the Nobles were also disgusted at him, partly, by
reason of his Familiarity with that Rascally sort of People; but chiefly*
because he slighted the Nobility, and chose mean Persons to be his Counselors
and Advisers. The Chief of them, were, Thomas Preston, One of a good Family,
foretells K. James's Death. K. James degenerates into Tyranny.
but who was resolved to humor the King in all things; Robert Cockrain, a Man
endued with great strength of Body, and equal Audacity of Mind; he came to be
known by the King, by a Duel which he fought with another; and presently, of a
Tradesman was made a Courtier, and that in a fair way of rising to some greater
Advancement; for having performed some lighter Matters, entrusted to him, with
Diligence; and also applying himself to the King's Humor, he was soon admitted
to advise concerning the Grand Affairs of the Kingdom; insomuch, that Preston
chose him out to be his Son-in-law. The Third, was, William Rogers, an English
Singing Man, or Musician; who, coming into Scotland with the English
Ambassadors, after the King had heard him once or twice in a cast of his
Offense, he was so taken with him, That he would not suffer him to return, but
advanced him to wealth and honor, soon after making him a Knight. The rest of
his Intimates were the most despicable sort of the meanest Tradesmen, who were
only known by their Improbity and Audaciousness. Whereupon, the Nobility had a
Meeting, wherein the Kings Brothers were the Chief, to purge the Court from
this sort of Cattle; and some notice of it being divulged abroad, John the
Youngest of the Brothers, John, the Kings Brothe^, put to Death.
more unwary than the rest, speaking a little too boldly, and rashly,
concerning the State of the Kingdom, was seized upon by the Courtiers, cast
into P^ison, condemned by the King's privy domestic Council, and put to Death,
by having a Vein Opened, till he expired his last. The Cause of his Death was
given out amongst the Vulgar, to be, because, he had conspired, with Witches,
against the King's Life; and to make the matter more plausible, twelve of the
Witches of the lowest condition were Tried and Burnt. The Death of John did
rather stifle than dissipate the Conspiracy, which seemed almost ready to break
forth.

Alexander, the next, as in Blood, so in Danger, though he endeavored to avert
all Suspicion from himself, as much as he could; yet the Kings Officers
thought, they should never be Secure, as long as he was alive, And A^exander
impri^oned.
and therefore they presently clapped him up Prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh,
where he was strictly kept by those who judged his Power would be their
Destruction; and seeing he could not appease the Kings Wrath by the Mediation
of his Friends, he began to think of making an Escape; he had but one of his
own Servants left t^ wait upon him in his Chamber, him, and none else, he
acquainted with his Design; who hired a Vessel for him, to be ready fitted in
the adjoining Road, then he suborned Messengers to make frequent Errands to him
from the Court, who should tell him Stories before his Keepers, (for he was
forbid to speak with any Body, but in their presence) that the King was now
more reconcilable to him, than formerly; and that he would speedily be set at
Liberty. When the day appointed for his Escape approached, he composed his
Countenance to as much Mirth, as, in that calamitous Condition, he was able to
do, and told his Keepers, that, now, he believed the Messages sent him by the
King, that he was reconciled to him; and that, he hoped he should not be held
much longer in Durance; hereupon* he invited them to a noble Supper, and
himself drank freely with them, till late at Night, then they departed; and,
being all full of Wine, fell into the Sounder sleep; being thus alone, he made
a Rope of the Linen-Blankets of his Bed, long enough, as he thought, But he
make^ his Escape to Dunbar, and then to France.
for the height of the Wall, and First, to make a Trial, he caused his Servant
to slide down by it; but perceiving, by his Fall, that 'twas too short, he
lengthned it out, as well as he could, in those Circumstances, and himself Slid
down too, and took up his Servant, who had broke his Leg by his Fall, upon his
Shoulders, and, carried him about a Mile to the Vessel, where they went aboard,
and having a Fair Wind, failed to Dunbar; there he fortified the Castle against
any forcible Assault, and, with a small Retinue, passed over into France. In his
absence, Dunbar Castle deserted, and taken by the Scots.
Andrew Stuart, the Chancellor, was sent with an Army to take in the Castle,
they besieged it closely some Months, and 'twas defended as bravely; but, at
last, the Garrison, for want of Necessaries, were forced to get Vessels, and, in
the Night, to depart privately for England, so that in the Morning the Empty
Castle was taken by the Besiegers; some men of Note, of the Besiegers, were
slain there.

About these Times it was, that the Kings both of England and Scotland, Peace
between the Scots and English; wherein it was agreed, That Cecily, Edwards
Daughter, should Marry James's Young Son.
being wearied out with Domestic Troubles, had each of them a desire to make
Peace, and an Embassy was appointed to complete it, which was kindly received,
and the Peace was not only agreed upon, but an Affinity accorded to confirm it,
that Cecilia, the Daughter of Edward, should be Married to James his Son, as
soon as they were Both Marrigeable. Part also of the Dowry was paid, on this
Condition, That, if when they came to Years, the Marriage were not Consummated,
the Dowry should be paid back to the English, and, Hostages were given for
performance of Conditions, which were some Burgers of Towns. But this Peace
lasted not long, for, by reason of the old grudges remaining since the last
Wars, Incursions were made, Preys driven, and Villages burnt: So that, by
reason of these mutual Injuries, the matter broke forth into an open War. And
besides, each King had other peculiar Provocations. Douglas, the Old Exile, But
the Peace is soon broken, and an Army Marches into England.
and Alexander the Kings Brother, the new One, excited Edward thereunto. For
Alexander, as I said before, going into France, Married the Daughter of the
Earl of Bulloign, but not being able to procure Aid from Lewis the II. then
King of France, for the Recovery of his own, he Sailed over into England,
hoping from thence to make some Attempt upon Scotland. As for James of
Scotland, Lewis of Fran^e edged him on to a War, having sent Robert Ireland, a
Scots man, and Dr. of the Sorbon, with Two French Knights to him, on that
Errand. Hereupon, the Peace was violated, and although the Scottish Affairs, in
regard some of the Country was wasted, were in none of the best State and
Condition; yea, an Army also was decreed, to be sent against Scotland, by the
English, under the Command of the Duke of Gloucester; yet the King, and those
which were about him, did levy Forces, though very unwillingly. For the Upstarts,
(such they lately were, and very poor too,) whose Greatness was founded on the
Calamities of others, and who had been the Authors of such desperate Counsels
to the King, feared nothing more than the frequent Assembly of the Nobility;
when he came to In Lauderdale.
Lauder, a Town near the Borders of Merch and Teviotdale, Countries either
wasted by the Enemy, or else, by Force, necessitated to submit to him, the King
yet proceeded on in his wonted Course of Exactions from them; he distrusted the
Nobility, and managed all by his Cabinet-Council. The Nobles would endure the
Indignity no longer, and therefore, in the third Watch, they met in a Church in
the Town, where, in a Full Assembly, Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus, is
reported to have declared the Cause of their Meeting, in this wise.

I think it not necessary, Noble Peers, to make a long Oration concerning the
state of Scottish Affairs, you your selves Partly remember it, and Partly you
see it with your Eyes; Douglasses Oration to the Nobles in the Camp, against
the King's Evil Counselors.
the Chief of the Nobility, are either banished, or else compelled to suffer
intolerable, and to act nefarious, things; and you, in whom the strength of the
Kingdom does reside, are left without an Head, as a Ship without a Steers-man,
subject to all the Storms and Tempests of Fortune; Your Lands are burnt, your
Estates plundered, the Husbandman, either slain, or else, perceiving no other
Remedy, or relief, has submitted to the Enemy. And the King, if he were
Himself a man of a generous Spirit and rare Prudence, yet being carried away by
poisonous Insinuations, refers all things, perta^ning to the Good of the
Commonwealth, as to Peace, War and the like, not to an Assembly of the Nobles,
but to inferior Underlings; these men do consult South-sayers and Wizards, and
so carry their Answers to the King, whose mind is Sick, and easily taken with
such vain Superstitions; and thus Decrees are made, under the Influence of such
Authors, concerning the Safety of us all; for they, knowing, that they are
deservedly hated by all, do persecute all by as alternate an hatred; and their
endeavor is, not only to undermine your Authority, but to cut you all off, by
all the possible Arts and Practices, they can; they have removed some of us by
Death, others by Banishment; neither do they ascend gradually to play their
Pranks, as inferior Persons, when they are promoted, are wont to do, but these
do immediately pitch upon the Royal Blood, to exercise the Trials of their
Cruelty and Avarice upon: One of the King's Brothers they have most inhumanly
put to death; the Other they have robbed his Country of, by banishing him, and
so have given him as a General to our Enemies; they, being thus taken out of
the way, their next work, is, to deal with the Nobility, for, being of low
Estate and Condition themselves, they would have nothing of Excellency and
Sublimity to survive them. All those, that have either Riches to satisfy their
Avarice, or Power to resist their Audaciousness, Them they account as their
Enemies; and yet, in the mean time, we manage a War against the English, as our
Public Enemy, as if any Enemy were more deadly than That* who is never
satisfied, in point of Covetousness, with your Estates, nor, in point of
Cruelty, with your Blood. Now to make it clear to you, that this intestine
Plague is more dreadful than That Foreign one, suppose, (which God forbid) that
the King of England should conquer us, doubtless he would remember old Grudges,
and, in pursuance of that Conquest, what End of his Successes would he propound
to himself? or, what Reward of his Victory? Would he aim at the Life of the
King, his Enemy, or, at your Lives? I think, at Neither. For the Dispute
between us, is, not for Life, but for Glory and Empire; and a generous Mind, as
it is vehement and eager against those that resist it, so it is easily mitigated
and inclined to Lenity by Submission and Obsequiousness, even upon the account
of remembering the Instability of all human Affairs. But suppose, that the
Enemies rage should aim at the Kings Life and Destruction, I pray, Which of the
Two do act more mercifully, either he that, together with Life takes away all
Sense of Misery; or they, that reserve him, whom they ought principally to love
and reverence, next to God, to a daily Butchery and Execution? Who arm his
Mind, already prepossest with Witch-crafts, to the Destruction of his Friends;
who keep the King, now almost encompast by the Arms of his Enemies, in the
nature of a Prisoner, and do not suffer him to see the Faces of his Friends,
that he may understand their Affection to him, and experience their Loyalty:
They are not so much Enemies, who pitch Camp against Camp, and so openly
profess their Hostility, as they, who, at home, do treacherously contrive our
Destruction. They alienate the Kings mind from his Friends, and betray him to
his Enemies; and thus they deprive us of our Commander, and expose us as a Prey
to our Enemies Arms, by whom if your Lives are given you, after you are
conquered, yet you will fall into Shame and Servitude; and if you overcome
them, yet you will not procure Quiet to your selves, Strength to your Country,
nor Glory to your King, but a greater Liberty to your Enemies, to play their
Pranks at present, and that in security, for the future; and thus we shall
bring a Plague and Misery on our selves, and a stricter Servitude on our King,
^o that Victory will not free us from Foreign Miseries, but will increase our
Domestic Ones. And therefore, in short, my Opinion is, That we shake off the
Yoke at home, before we venture to ^ngage the Enemy; For, otherwise, we shall
all be made Slaves to the Lusts of a few men, we shall strengthen the Enemy,
and betray the Commonwealth: God bless your Consultations, in this matter.

After Douglas had ended his Speech, there followed, not a Debate, but a
confused Noise, over the whole Assembly, crying out, To your Arms against the
Public Enemy; for the Minds of all present were so inflamed, That though they
had none to lead them, yet they were about to break in upon the Kings Quarters.
But the graver Sort, who, by reason of their Honor and Authority had a great
Interest in the rest, appeased the Tumult; for they feared, lest, in an
impetuous assault of the People, the King himself should come to some harm: And
therefore they agreed, That the prime Commanders should take a small number of
their chiefest Confidents, and, without any general remove of the whole Army,
should go the Kings Pavilion, and so lay hold on the Offenders, who had the
Management of things, and bring them forth to be judged before the whole Army,
that so they might suffer condign Punishment, according to the Laws.

Whilst these things were in agitation, News was brought to the Court, that the
Nobles were assembled, before day, in the Church; for What, 'twas not known;
but it must certainly be some great Matter, which engaged such Persons to
assemble* unknown to the King and his Counselors. The King was awakned, and
rose in great fear out of his Bed, and asked those about him, What was best to
be done? Cockran and the Rest of the Evil Counselors dragged out by an
Incensed Army to their Deaths.
In the mean while, he sends Cockran before, to observe, what was a doing, and
to bring him certain word; when he was coming to the Church with a small
Retinue, he meets with the Chief of the Nobility coming to Court, Douglas
presently laid hands upon him, and took him by a Massy-Gold-Chain, which he
wore about his Neck, whereby he somewhat strained his throat, and gave him up a
Prisoner to the Marshal, and then he goes directly to the Kings Bedchamber.
They, which were there, made no Opposition, either because they were astonished
at his sudden Coming; or else, out of Reverence to the Man, so that there the
rest were seized upon, who were thought to have corrupted the King by their
wicked Counsels, only one Young man hung about the Kings Neck, and he desired
them to pardon him, his name was John Ramsy, of a good Family; who, being
excused, upon the account of his Age, was dismissed. Whilst the rest were led on
to their Trials, there was a Tumult and Noise raised over the whole Army,
crying out, Hang them, Rogues, whereupon they were presently hurried away, and
ended their Lives in an Halter; yea, the Army in general was so intent upon
their Execution, that when they wanted Ropes, upon such a sudden, they all
offered the Reins of their Horse-Bridles and their Baggage-Horse Tackle, for
that Use; and they strove much, Who should have the honor to offer his own,
first.

This Court-Faction had committed many Injuries against private Persons, but
their Wrongs to the Public lay chiefly here, Their Crimes Objected, were,
They had been the Authors of Coining new Brass-Money, which the common People
did call by the invidious Name of Black-Money: Upon this Project, there first
ensued a Dearth of all things, and afterward a Famine; for the Sellers had
rather suffer their Commodities to be spoiled at Home, than, under a pretense
of Sale, Brass-Money Coined,
to give them away to the Buyers. But that all Commerce might not wholly cease
amongst the People, this one Remedy was found out for Bargainers and Chapmen,
That they should mention in their Contracts, in what sort of Money the Payment
should be made. It Is true, some of our former Kings had Coined that kind of
Money, but 'twas more for the necessary use of the Poor, than for their own
Gain; and also Provision was made by a Law, beyond what Sum, Sellers might not
be compelled to take it in payment. And thus the Buyers of small Commodities
had a Benefit, Their Ali^nating the King's Heart from the Nobility, with (...)
Encouraging of him in Magical A^ts, and Exciting him to Cruelty against his own
Flesh and Blood.
and also it seemed sufficiently cautioned by the Law, that the Richer Sort
should have no Damage by this way of Change* or Sale. It was also objected
against them, That they had alienated the King's Heart from the Nobility, and
had set him a-gog upon Magic, and had hurried him on to the Destruction of his
own Kindred. But that which made Cockran most envied, was, his Earldom of
Merch, which Country and Title the King had given to him; or else, had
committed to his Trust, upon the Death of the Youngest Brother.

When those Evil Counselors were removed out of the way; The King had no great
Confidence in the Soldiery, nor the Soldiery in him; so that the Army was
dismissed, and returned Home; and the King, though, for the present, he suppressed
his Anger, The Scots Army disbanded.
and made many large and fair Promises to the Nobility, yet his Heart inwardly
boiled with Blood, Slaughter, and Revenge. And therefore, as soon as he thought
himself at Liberty, he retired, with some few of his Confidents, into the
Castle of Edinburgh; and the Nobility, not knowing what to think of it, had
also their Consultations, apart. The King of England gathered Forces in the
Winter-Season, by the persuasion of Al^xander chiefly, who informed him of the
Dissension betwixt the King and his Nobles in Scotland; and also assured him,
That, as soon as ever he entered Scotland, great Numbers of Horse and Foot would
come in to him; whereupon he made Richard, his Brother, Duke of Gloucester, An
English Army under the Duke of Gloucester, and Alexander the Kings Brother,
enters Scotland.
General, and commanded him to march into Scotland. He began his March, when it
was about Midsummer; and understanding in what Condition the Scottish Affairs
were, he turned aside to Berwick: He was received immediately into the Town,
and left 4000 Men to besiege the Castle; and, with the rest of his Army, he
marched directly to Edinburgh, making a foul Devastation in all Places, where
he came. But Alexander leading them on, they entered the City without committing
any Rapine; and, by a Public Proclamation made in the Marketplace, he advised
James, (seeing he could not come to speak with him) First, to perform what he
had promised to Edward; and then, that he would cause Satisfaction to be made
for all the Wrongs and Injuries he had offered to the English; and, unless he
would so do, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, would persecute him and his Country
with Fire and Sword. But James perceiving at present that he was not able to
perform what was required, and, on the other side, that he was as unable to
withstand the Power of the Enemy, returned no Answer at all, either by Writing
or Message. But the Nobles of Scotland, being thus forsaken of their King, that
they might not be wholly wanting to the Public Safety, Levied another Army,
The S^ots Nob^^^ty raise an Army;
and formed a Camp at Hadington; and that they might somewhat alleviate the
imminent Danger and Pressure, and stop the Enemy in his Career of Victory, they
sent Agents to the Duke of Gloucester, to desire, That the Marriage, so long
promised, might be consummate; they were also to declare, That it should not be
their Fault, if the Agreements made between the Nations, were not punctually
performed. The English General knew, That the Scots would not put things to the
Hazard of a Battle, Yet, mediate a Peace by their Agents.
in regard part of their Strength was with him upon the account of Alexander, a
popular Man, and that the rest were divided into several Factions, and
therefore he made this Answer, That he did not know, what his King did resolve,
in reference to that Marriage; but he thought it fit, that the Money paid to
James upon the account of the Dowry, Reparties between both Armies.
should be presently repaid to him; and if they would have Peace, they should
promise to surrender up the Castle of Berwick; or, if they could not do that,
then to make a solemn Promise, That they would not attempt to relieve the
Besieged, nor to hinder the Besiegers, until it was either taken by Storm, or
surrendered upon Conditions. The Scots returned Answer by their Ambassadors,
That 'twas not their Fault, the Marriage was not consummated, but it happened
because both Bride and Bridegroom were under Age; That the Money was not yet
due, because the Day of Payment was not come; and if there were not sufficient
Security given for the payment thereof, they would give more; but the Castle of
Berwick, as being built by the Scots, and that in the Scottish Soil; and was,
and, for many Ages, had been under their Jurisdiction, they could not part
with; and though the English had possessed it sometimes by Force, yet their
Injury did not prejudice the Scots ancient Right; but Gloucester, who was
Superior in Strength, resolved to carry the Point, and to admit of no legal
Dispute in the case. The same Day, Calen Cambel, Earl of Argyle, Andrew Stuart,
and the Bishops of St. Andrews and Dunblane, sent to Alexander, who was in the
English Camp at Near Hadington in (...)- Lothian.
Lethington, a Chart signed with their Hands and Seals, promising him, if he
would be Loyal to the King in the next Assembly, they would take care that his
Estate should be restored* and an Amnesty given for what was past; for the
performance whereof, they solemnly interposed their Faith. Alexander acquainted
Gloucester with the thing, who was very friendly, Alexander is reconciled to the
King, returns into his own Country and is made Regent.
and did dismiss him thereupon, and so he returned into his own Country; where,
in the next Assembly of Estates, he was made Regent, by an unanimous Consent,
and presently a Proposition was made concerning raising the Siege of Berwick.
The wiser sort were of Opinion, that in so dangerous a time, when things were
thus unsettled by reason of Domestic Seditions, that if the Enemy were quiet,
yet Storms would rise amongst themselves, that it was best to clap up a Peace
upon any Terms; for they saw plainly, that if they should have the better of so
powerful an Enemy, yet it would rather provoke, than dishearten, him; but if
they themselves were overcome, it was uncertain, how an Enemy, fierce by
Nature, and further elevated by Success, would use his Victory; Some that were
more hot-spirited than they had then any Reason for, did oppose this Opinion,
yet it was carried in the Parliament. After many Conditions were canvast to and
fro, at length 'twas agreed, Be^wick Cast^e surrendered to the Eng^ish.
That on the 26th of August 1482. the Castle of Berwick should be surrendered up
to the English, and a Truce was made for a few Months, till they could have
more time to Treat of a Peace. Thus Berwick was lost, after it had been enjoyed
by the Scots 21 Years, since they last recovered it. Then the Duke of
Gloucester* having made a prosperous Expedition, returned in Triumph Home.

Edward, by the Advice of his Council, The intended Marriage be- James's Son,
and Edward's Daughter, Nulled, and the Dowry repaid.
judged it more for the advantage of England, to nullify the Marriage, for he
feared that the Intestine Discords of the Scots were so great, that possibly
the Issue of James might lose the Crown; and if Alexander were made King, be
hoped to have a Constant and Faithful Ally of him, in regard of the great
Kindness he had received at his Hands. Hereupon, an Herald was sent to
Edinburgh, to renounce the Affinity, and to demand the Repayment of the Dowry;
when he had declared his Errand publicly on the Twenty Fifth of October, the
Scots obtained a Day for the Payment thereof, and restored it to a Penny; and
withal, they sent some to convoy the Herald, as far as Berwick. Alexander, that
he might extinguish the Remainders of the Old Hatred of his Brother against
him, and so obtain new Favor by a new Courtesy, brought him out of the
Castle, and restored him to the free Possession of his Kingdom. But the memory
of old Offenses prevailed more with his Proud Huffing Spirit, than This of his
late Courtesy: Moreover, besides the Kings own Jealousies, there were Those
who did daily calumniate him, and buzz into the Kings Ear his too great
Popularity, as if now 'twas very Evident, that he affected the Kingdom; he,
Alexander disgusted, condemned, and flees to England.
being advised by his Friends, that Mischief was hatching against him at Court,
fled privately into England, and gave up the Castle of Dunbar to Edward. In his
absence, he was Condemned. The Crimes objected against him, were, First, That
he had often sent Messengers into England, and then, that he had retired
thither himself, without obtaining a Passport from the King, and that there he
joined in Counsel against his Country, and his Kings Life. All the other of his
Partisans were pardoned, and amongst the rest, William Creighton, who was
accused not only to have been an Abettor of his designs against his Country,
but also the chief Author and Instigator of him, thereunto. But after he had
obtained Pardon for what was past, he was again accused, that he did encourage
Alexander, by his Advice and Counsel; after he was Condemned, frequent Letters
passing between them, by the means of Thomas Dickson a Priest; and that he had
caused his Castle of Creighton to be Fortified against the King, and commanded
the Garrison Soldiers not to surrender it up to the King's Forces. Creighton
condemned, with the Reasons, why?
Hereupon, he was summoned to appear the 13th Day of February, in the Year
1484. but he, not appearing, was outlawed, and his Goods Confiscate. These were
the Causes of his Punishment, mentioned in our public Records. But, it is
thought, that the Hatred the King had conceived against him, upon a private
Occasion, did him the most Mischief of all. It was this, William had a very
beautiful Wife, of the Noble Family of the Dunbars; when her Husband found,
that the King had had the use of her Body, he undertook a Project, which was
rash enough in it self, but yet not unproper for a Mind sick of Love, and also
provoked by such an Injury, as his was; for he himself lay with the King's
young Sister, a beautiful Woman, but ill spoken of for her too great
Familiarity with her Brother, and on her he begot Margarite Creighton, who died
not long since. In the interim, Creighton's Wife died at his own House; and the
King's Sister, whom, as I said, the King had vitiated, was so much in Love with
William, that she seemed sometimes to be out of her Wits, for him. The King,
partly by the Mediation of William's Friends, and partly being mindful of the
Wrong he himself had done him, of the like sort, and being willing also to
cover the Infamy of his Sister, under a pretext of Marriage, permitted William
to return Home again to Court, upon Condition, that he would Marry her: William
was persuaded by his Friends; and, for want of better Counsel, especially since
Richard of England was dead, came to E^verness, where he had Conference with
the King, not long before Both their Deaths, and great Hopes were there given
of his Return. His Sepulcher is yet there to be seen. These things were done,
at several times, but I have put them together, that so the Thread of my
History might not be discontinued and broken off. Let us now return to what was
omitted before.

Edward of England died in the Month of April, next after Dunbar was delivered
to him, in the Year 1483. leaving his Brother Richard Guardian to his Sons.
Edward of England dies, and his Brother Richard made, first Protector, and then
King.
He was first content with the Name of Protector, and, under that Title,
Governed England for two Months: but afterward, having, by several Practices,
engaged a great part of the Nobility and Commonalty to his side, he put his
Brothers Two Sons in Prison, the Queen and her Two Daughters being forced to
retire into a Sanctuary near London; but the next June he took upon him the
Name and Ornaments of a King.

Alexander of Albany, and James Douglas, being willing to try, how their
Countrymen stood affected toward them, came with 500 select Horse to
Loch-Maban on Maudlins-day, because a great Fair used, that day, to be there
held. There a Skirmish began between the Parties, with enraged Minds on Both
sides, and the Success was various, as Aid came in out of the Neighboring
District, either to This, or That, Party. They fought from Noon till Night, and
the issue was doubtful, but at last the Victory inclined to the Scots, A
Scuffle in Scotland.
though it were a Bloody one, as having lost many of their Men; Douglass was
there taken Prisoner, On the Northside of Fife, upon the Rive^ Tay.
and sent away by the King to the Monastery of Lindors. Alexander was set on a
Horse and escaped, but staid not in England, long after that. In the mean time,
many Incursions were made to the greater Loss of the English, than Benefit of
the Scots. Richard was uncertain of the Event of things at home, and withal
feared his Enemy abroad, for many of the English did favor the Earl of
Richmond, who was then an Exile in France, and had sent for him over to
undertake the Kingdom, so that Richard was mightily troubled; neither was he
less vexed with the Guilt of his own Wickedness; and because he saw he could not
quell Domestic Seditions, as soon as he hoped, therefore he thought it best to
Oblige Foreigners by any Conditions whatsoever, that so, by their Authority and
Power, he might be safer at home, and more formidable to his Enemies. For this
cause, he sent Ambassadors into Scotland, to make Peace, or, at least, a Truce
for some years, there he found all things more facile than he could have hoped
for. For James, who, for his many and notable Crimes, was grievously hated by
his own People* as well as Richard was by His, willingly gave ear to his
Ambassadors; for he hoped, That, if once he had Peace with England, that he
could revenge his Wrongs at home at leisure, when England could not be a Refuge
to his Opposers. For these Reasons, especially, Both Kings sent some of their
Confidents to the Borders, where, after many and long Disputes concerning
Compensation for Losses, seeing Peace could not be made, A Truce between
Richard of England, and the Scots.
by Reason of the Multitudes of Complainants, and the Weakness of their Proofs,
they made a Truce for Three Years.

And because Matters could not then be adjusted, for the Difficulties
abovementioned, and also the Straitness of Time; Arbiters were appointed on
Both sides, who, together with the Commanders of the Borders, should see all
things done according to Equity. One Condition, in the Truce, was set down very
intricately, about the Castle of Dunbar to be restored to the Scots, for the
English interpreted it, that they might keep it; and the Scots, Richard of
England (...), and Henry the 7 th (...) him.
that they might reduce it by Force, notwithstanding the Truce. For when the
Scots, after the Expiration of the Six^Months allotted, sent Ambassadors to
Demand the Castle; Richard, by his Letters made them Promises of his Good Will,
but he delayed the Reddition (alleging sometimes This, and sometimes Other
things, as an Obstacle in the way) till his Death, which followed not long
after. He was slain by his Countrymen, and Henry the 7 th not yet fully settled
in the Throne, when ^ames laid Siege to the Castle, in a very sharp Winter: The
Garrison Soldiers, seeing, Dunbar-Castle surrendered to the Scots.
that they were not like to have Relief from England, in regard of the present
Distractions, surrendered it up. But Henry being troubled with many Cares, that
he might cut off the Occasion of Foreign Wars, and extirpate the Seeds of old
Hatred, came to Newcastle upon Tine, from thence he sent Ambassadors to
Scotland, either to make a perpetual League, or, at least, a long Truce with
them; for he being a Man of great Prudence, and having experienced many
Vicissitudes of things in his Life, did judge it highly conducing to the
Establishment of his Kingdom, to make Peace with his Neighbors, and especially
with the Scots, because that, ordinarily, those Two Kingdoms did lie at catch
for Advantages against each other, and did also nourish Rebels flying thither;
yea, and entertain those which were exiled; and maintain Sedition, by giving
their Authors hope of Refuge and Supply. And as for James, he desired nothing
more, than to be free from the fear of Strangers, that so he might punish his
own disobedient Subjects, as he pleased. And therefore, he kindly received the
Ambassadors, and told them, that he desired nothing more than a Peace; but his
Opinion was, that his Subjects would not yield to it, that either there should
be a perpetual Peace, or any long Truce betwixt them; partly, because it was
forbid by an Ancient Law, lest, when all Fear of an Enemy was removed, their
Minds might languish in Idleness, and the Sinews of their Industry be remitted;
and partly, because they could not so suddenly lay down that fierceness of
Spirit, which they had acquired, by so long Use of Arms. But if they could be
brought to This, to yield to a Truce for 6 or 7 Years, he would not have them
refuse it. But as for himself, A Truce between the English and Scots for 7
Years.
he was willing to maintain a firm and inviolate Peace with them, as long as he
lived, and he would also take care, that the Truce should be renewed, before
the Date of it was quite expired; but he earnestly desired the Ambassadors, not
to divulge abroad the Discourse, which they had in secret with him, lest his
Nobility should be more backward to a Pacification, if they saw him to be
partial in the Case. When this was told Henry, who knew, in what a tumultuous
Case the Affairs of Scotland were, The Death of the Queen of Scots,
and how convenient it was for that King to have a Peace; imagining likewise,
that he spoke really, and from his Heart, he accepted of the Truce for 7 Years,
and so retired back to York. In the mean time, the Queen of Scots dyed, a Woman
of a singular Beauty and Probity too, and, by her good Graces, she was thought
sometimes to have moderated the unbridled Appetites and Efforts of her Husband:
Alexander also, the King's Brother, Dyed in France, and of Alexander the King's
Brother, who left Two Sons behind them.
leaving Two Sons behind him, Alexander, by his First Wife, the Daughter of the
Earl of the Orcades, and John by his Second, who was afterward the Regent King
of Scotland for some Years.

James, having thus settled Peace abroad, and at home being freed from Two
troublesome Interrupters of his Designs, returned to his own Nature; he
excluded almost all the Nobility, and had none but Upstarts about him, upon
them he bestowed great Honors and Preferments; the Care of all Public Affairs,
and the Ways of getting Money, were Both cast upon them, whilst he himself did
wholly immerge him^^^f in Voluptuousness. The Chief of this Court Faction; was,
John Ramsy, who was preserved at La^der, by the King's Request, and then
escaped Punishment. He was grown so insolently proud, that, not content with
the Stewardship of the Household, The King again addicts himself to Evil
Counselors, John Ramsy; etc.
(which is a Place of prime Honor amongst the Scots) which the King had given
him, and many rich Lordships besides, he obtained an Edict, That none but he,
and his Retinue, should wear a Sword, or other weapon in those places, where
the King Lodged, that so, by this means, they might strengthen themselves, and
their Retinue, against the Nobility, who kept their distinct and frequent
Meetings, by themselves, and walked up and down guarded, by reason of the
Terror of their Arms. But that Edict made People to hate Ramsy more than fear
him, for now, nothing but the Image of perfect Slavery was represented to their
Eye. In the mean time, the King meditated nothing more, than how to satisfy
himself with the Blood of those Men, who were believed to be the Authors of
Rebellion against them. And seeing he could not do it by open Force, he thought
to effect it by Subtilty, and therefore he feigned himself to be reconciled to
This, and to the Other Man, and entertained them so courteously, that 'twas
even below the Dignity of a Prince so to do; Others, who were eminent in Power,
he gave Honors and Largesses to. He made David Lindsy Earl of Craford, Duke of
Montross, endeavoring to win him by that means, being so powerful a Man in his
Country. The King labors to cajole some of the Nobles, by Honors.
As for George Earl of Angus, he had him frequently about him, and, as if he
had been wholly received into his Favor, he acquainted him with his private
Designs, yet none of his Rewards and Flatteries could persuade Men, that he was
sincere. For They, that knew his Disposition, did not at all doubt, that his
Simulation of Benevolence and Respect, tended to no other end, but that he
might either apprehend the Nobility, One by One, apart; or else, might set them
together by the Ears, one with another; which his Assembling the Chief of the
Nobility at Edinburgh made more plainly to appear. For he called Douglas to him
into the Castle, and told him, that he had now an Eminent Opportunity to
revenge himself, for if the Leaders of the Faction were apprehended, and put to
Death, the rest would be quiet; but if he omitted this Opportunity, which was
so fairly put into his hands, he could never expect the like again.

Douglas, who knew, He discovers his Design against the Nobles to Douglas.
that the Kings Mind was no more reconciled to himself than to others, did
craftily reason with him, concerning so cruel and so ruinous a Design,
alleging, that all Men would judge it to be a base and flagitious Act, ^f he
should hurry so many Noble Persons to Death, without any Hearing or Trial, to
whom he had pardoned their former Misdoings, and now they also rested secure,
in that they had the Public Faith given them for their Safety. Who dissuades
him from such Cruelty.
For the fierce Minds of his Enemies would not be broken by the Death of a Few;
but rather, if his Faith were once violated, all Hopes of Concord would be cut
off; and if once Men despair of Pardon, their Anger will be turned into Rage,
and from thence a greater Obstinacy and Contempt both of the Kings Authority,
and of their own Lives, too, will ensue. But if you will hearken to my Counsel,
(said he) I will show you a Way, whereby you may salve the Dignity of a King,
and yet revenge yourself, too. For I will gather my Friends and Clans together,
and so openly, and in the day time, I will lay hold upon them, and then you may
try them where you will, and inflict what Punishment, you please; upon them.
This Way will be more creditable, and also much more safe, than if you should
set upon them secretly and by night, for then 'twould look, as if they were
murdered by Thieves. The King thought the Earl had been real in what he spoke,
(for he knew, that he was able to perform what he had promised) and therefore
he gave him many Thanks, and more Promises of great Rewards, and so dismissed
him. He presently acquainted the Nobility with their imminent Danger, and
advised them to withdraw themselves, as he himself also did. The King,
perceiving that his secret Projects were discovered, from that day forward
would trust no Body; but after he had staid a while in the Castle of Edinburgh,
he sailed over into the Countries beyond the Forth, for they, as yet, remained
firm in their Obedience to him, and there levied a considerable Force. And the
Nobles, who, before, The Nobles Arm against the King, and choose the Kings Son
for their General.
had sought his Amendment, not his Destruction, now seeing all Hopes of any
Agreement or Concord were cut off, managed all their Counsels for his utter
Overthrow and Ruin. Only there was one difficulty which troubled them, and That
was, Who should be their General, that, after the King was subdued, might be
Regent, or Vice-King, who might be acceptable to the People; and, on the
account of the Honor of his Family, would load the Faction with as little
Envy, as might be; after many Consultations in the case, at last they pitched
upon the King's Son; He was entised thereunto by the Supervisors and Tutors of
his Childhood, and he did it out of this Fear, that, if he refused, the
Government and Command would pass over to the English, the perpetual Enemies of
their Family.

The King, by this time, had past over the Forth, and pitched his Tents by the
Castle of Blackenes, and his Sons Army was not far off, ready for the
Encounter, A Temporary Agreement.
when, lo! the matter was composed by the Intervention of the Earl of Athole,
the Kings Uncle; and Athole himself was given up as an Hostage for the Peace to
Adam Hepburn, Earl of Bothwel, with whom he remained till the Kings Death; But
Suspicions increasing on Both sides, the Concord lasted not long; however
intercourse of Messengers passed between them, and, at last, the Nobility gave
this Answer, That seeing the King did act nothing sincerely, The Nobles insist
on the Kings resigning of the Crown.
therefore a certain War was better than a treacherous Peace, there was but one
Medium left, upon which they could agree: And that was, that the King should
resign the Government, and his Son be set up in his Place; and if he would not
assent to This, 'twas in vain for him to give himself the Trouble of any more
Messages or Disputes. The King communicated this Answer to his Ambassadors
which he sent to the French and to the English, making it his Desire to them,
that they would assist him against the Fury of a Few of his Rebellious
Subjects, The King sends Ambassadors for Foreign Aid.
by their Authority; and, if need were, by some Auxiliary Forces, that so they
might be reduced to their Obedience; for they ought to look upon it as a Common
Fortune, and that the Contagion, by this Example, would quickly creep to the
Neighbour-Nations: There were also Ambassadors sent to Eugenius the Eighth,
Pope of Rome, to desire him, that, out of his Fatherly Affection to the Scottish
Name, he would send a Legate into Scotland with full Power, by Ecclesiastical
Censures, to compel his Rebellious Subjects to lay down Arms, and obey their
King. The Pope writ to Adrian of Castle, then his Legate in England, a Man of
great Learning and Prudence, to do his endeavor for the composing the Scottish
Affair; but these Remedies were too late. For the Nobles, who were not
ignorant, What the King was a doing, and knew, that he was implacable toward
them, resolved to put it to a Battle, before any more Forces came in to him.
And though they had the Kings Son with them, both to countenance their Matters
with the greater Grace amongst the Vulgar, and also to show, that they were not
Enemies to their Country, but to their Misled King, only; yet, lest the Hearts
of the People might be weakened by the Approach of Foreign Ambassadors, they
were solicitous, night and day, how to decide it by a Battle. But the Kings
Fearfulness was an hindrance to their hasty Design, who, having levied a great
Strength in the Northern Parts of the Kingdom, resolved to keep himself within
the Castle of Edinburgh, till those Aids came to him. But he was taken off from
that Counsel and Advice, though it seemed the safest for him, by the Fraud, or,
at least, the Simplicity of those about him; for, in regard of the frequent
Washes and Firths, which gave delay to those who were coming in to him, they
persuaded him to go to Sterlin, the only Place of the Kingdom fit to receive
Aids, coming from all Parts thereof. And there he might be as safe, as he was
in the Castle of Edinburgh, seeing his Enemies were unprovided of all
Materials, requisite for the Storming of Castles; and also he might have his
Fleet, which he had rigged out against all hazards, to ride in some convenient
Harbor, near adjoining. This Counsel seemed both faithful and also safe, if
James Shaw, Governor of the Castle, A Battle between the King and the Nobles,
where the King is slain.
being corrupted by the contrary Faction, had not refused to give him entrance,
so that the Enemy was almost at his Heels, and, before he knew whither to
betake himself, he was forced, with that Strength which he had, to run the
hazard of a Fight. At the beginning, they fought stoutly, and the first Ranks
of the Nobility's Army began to give ground, but the Men of Annandale and the
Neighboring Parts, inhabiting the West of Scotland, came boldly up, and having
longer Spears than their Adverse Party, they presently routed the Kings Main
Battle, he himself was weakened by the Fall of his Horse, and fled to some
Water-Mills near the place, where the Battle was fought; his Intent was (as is
supposed) to get to his Ships, which lay not far off; there he was taken, and a
few more with him, and slain; there were Three that persued close after him in
his Flight, i. e. Patrick Gray, the Head of his Family, Sterlin Car, and a
Priest named Borthwick; it is not well known, Which of them gave him his Deaths
Wound. When the News of his Death, though as yet not fully certain, was
divulged through Both Armies, it occasioned the Conquerors to press less
violently upon those who fled away, so that there were the Fewer of them slain.
For the Nobles managed the War against the King, not against their Fellow
Subjects. There was slain of the Kings Party Alexander Cuningham Earl of
Glencarn, with some Few of his Vassals and Kindred; but there were many
wounded, of Both sides. Thus James the Third came to his end, a Man not so much
of a bad Disposition by Nature, as corrupted by ill Custom and Acquaintance.
The Character of james III,
For, having at first given forth a Specimen of great and notable Ingenuity,
and of a Mind truly Royal, he degenerated by degrees, the Boyds being the first
Occasion thereof, into all manner of Licentiousness. When the Boyds were taken
off, then Persons of the Lowest Sort were his Advisers to all kind of
Wickedness; and besides, the Corruption of the Times, and the evil Examples of
his Neighbor Kings contributed not a little to his Overthrow and Ruin. And of
the Foreign Princes his Contemporaries.
For Edward the Fourth in England, Charles in Burgundy, Lewis the Eleventh in
France, John the Second in Portugal, had all laid the Foundations of Tyranny,
in their respective Kingdoms also. And Richard the Third exercised it most
highly, and cruelly, in England. His Death was also branded with this Ignominy,
that, in the next Assembly, the whole Parliament voted, that he was justly
slain, and Provision was made for all that had born Arms against him, that
neither They, nor their Posterity, should be prejudiced thereby. He died in the
Year of our Lord 1488, in the Twenty Eighth Year of his Reign, and the Thirty
Fifth of his Age.

The Thirteenth BOOK.
JAmes the Third being thus slain, near Sterlin, in or about the Month of June,
they, who were his Contrariants, being as yet uncertain what was become of Him,
retreated to Linlithgo. There, Word was brought them, that some Boats had
passed to and fro, from the Ships to the Land; and that they had carried off
the Wounded Men. Whereupon, a Suspicion arose amongst them that the King
himself also was gone a Shipboard; which occasioned them to remove their Camp
to Leith: From thence the Prince (for that is the Title of the King of Scot's
eldest Son) sent some Agents, to require the Admiral of the Fleet to come
ashore to him. His Name was Andrew Wood, he was a Knight, Andrew Wood's
Constancy to King James the 3 d.
and being mindful of the King's Kindness toward him, remained constant in his
Affection to him, even after he was dead; but he refused to come ashore, unless
Hostages were given for his safe Return. Seaton and Flemming, two Noblemen,
were appointed as Hostages: When he landed* the King's Council asked him, if he
knew where the King was? and who were they that he carried off to his Ships
after the Fight? As for the King, he told them, he knew nothing of him, but
that he and his Brothers had landed out of their Boats, that so they might
assist the King and all his good Subjects; but, having endeavored, in vain, to
preserve him, they then returned to the Fleet: He added, if the King were
alive, they resolved to obey none but him; but if he were slain, they were
ready to revenge his Death: He uttered also many reproachful Speeches against
the Rebels; yet nevertheless they sent him away in Safety to his Ships, that so
their Hostages might not suffer. When the Hostages were returned, the
Inhabitants of Leith were called up to the Council, and pressed by Promises of
great Reward, to rig out their Ships, and subdue Andrew Wood. They all in
general made answer, that he had two Ships so fitted with all Things for a
Fight, and so well furnished with valiant Seamen; and withal, that he himself
was so skilful in Naval Affairs, that no ten Ships in all Scotland were able to
cope with his Two: So that that Consultation was put off, and they went to
Edinburgh. On the Northside of Forth, 2 Miles below Sterlin.
There they were fully informed of the King's Death, and appointed a
magnificent Funeral to be made for him, at Kambus-Kenneth, a Monastery near
Sterlin, on the 25 th day of the Month of June.

JAMES the IVth, the CV'th King.
IN the Interim, an Assembly was summoned about creating a new King. There were
few which came together to perform this Service, and those were mostly of the
Party that had conspired against the former King. The new King, at his first
entrance sent an Herald to the Governor of Edinburgh-Castle, for him to
surrender it, which he did, and then he passed over to Sterlin, and that Castle
was also delivered up to him by the Garison-Souldiers. When the Vogue was up in
England, how troublesome Matters were in Scotland, five Ships were chosen out of
that King's Fleet, who entered into the Firth of Forth, and there made havoc of
the Goods of all Merchants, making many descents on both Shores, they mightily
infesting the Maritime Parts; for they expected greater Disturbances on Land,
by the sidings of the Scots one against another. For seeing the adverse Party
were rather shattered than broken in the late Fight, in regard they were not
all there, and of those that were, there were but few slain, they thought a
feircer Tempest would have arisen from Minds which yet continued to be inflamed
with Hatred and Envy, and which were elevated by confidence in their own
Strength. And it increased the Indignation, that now the power over so many
Noble and Eminent Persons was so easily fallen not into the King's, but to a
few particular Men's Hands; for, tho the King might retain the Name and Title of
a King, yet, being but a Youth of 15 Years old, he did not govern, but was
himself governed by those that killed his Father: For the whole management of
Matters would reside in Douglas, Hepburne, and Hume; and their Confidence was
the more increased, because all the Shores were infested with the two Fleets,
the Scottish and the English. To obviate this Difficulty, first of all, the new
King endeavored to reconcile the Naval Forces to himself, lest when he was
absent in the further parts of the Kingdom, to settle Matters there, they
should make some stir, or at least should make an entrance for the English, to
penetrate far into the Land, and so spoil the Mid-land Countries. Whereupon,
when the old King's Death was now publicly divulged abroad, the new One
thought, that Andrew Wood would now be more flexible, and therefore he sent for
him, giving him the public Faith for his Security. When he was ashore he told
him, what a great Dishonor, Loss, and public Shame it was to the whole
Nation, that a few English Ships should, in despite of them, ride under their
very Noses; and thereupon he drew over Andrew to his Party, Andrew Wood
reconciled to K. James the 4 th.
and set him forth, in good Equipage, against the English: Many did advise him,
that he would sail an equal number of Ships, at least, against the Enemy, whose
Vessels were more and bigger than his. No, says he, I Will have only my own Two.
And as soon as the Wind served, he made directly toward the English, who rode
before Dunbar. He fought them bravely, took, and brought them all into Leith,
and presented their Commanders to the King. Andrew was liberally rewarded by
the King, He fights the English Fleet, and overthrows them.
and his skill in Sea Fight, with the singular Valor of his Soldiers and
Seamen, was highly magnified. And yet there were not wanting some of those sort
of Creatures, who do always admire the Atchievments of Kings, whatsoever they
be, and if they be Great, yet they view them in a multiplying Glass, who
foretold that this Victory did but presage a greater. Mean while the adverse
part of the Nobility, sent Messages into all parts of the Kingdom, to persuade
the Country to rise, and not to endure the present state of Things, nor to
suffer so many valiant Men to be illuded by such public Parricides, who had
murdered one King and held Another in Bondage; yea, who accused the Defenders
of the King's Life, as Traitors, whereas they, Some of the Scots Nobility
combine against the new King's Party,
who were indeed violaters of all divine and human Laws, gave out themselves to
be the only Assertors of the Rights of their Country, and Maintainers of its
Liberty: Amongst whom the King himself was not a Freeman, in regard he was
enforced by them to take Arms against his Father, and his King too, and after
he was impiously slain, then to prosecute, by a nefarious War, those who were
his Father's Friends, and Defenders of his Life. Many such Discourses they
spread abroad amongst the Vulgar, and, to excite a greater Flame of Indignation
and Hate, Alexander Forbes, Chief of a Noble Family, carried the King's Shirt
upon a Spear (all over bloody, and torn, with the Marks of the Wounds he
received) through Aberdeen, and all the chief Towns of the adjacent Country;
and, as if it had been by a public Proclamation, he excited all Men, by the
Voice of an Herald, to rise in Arms to revenge so nefarious a Fact. And
Matthew Stewart, Earl of Lennox, a Man of great Wealth and Power, and who by an
honest kind of popularity, was equally dear to high and low, was as active in
the Countries on this side the Forth; for he raised up the Earls that were his
Neighbors, and with a good Force, endeavored to pass over the Bridge at
Sterlin, to join his Associates; but that Bridge being possessed by the King's
Forces, he sought to pass over at a Ford, not far from the Rise of the River,
at the Foot of Mount Grampias. His Design was discovered to John Drummond, by
Alexander Mac-alpin, his Vassal, who had joined himself to the Enemy, by whom
also Information was given, that all things were secure and ill-guarded in the
Enemies Camp; that every one stragled up and down, as they pleased; that they
had no Watch set in convenient places, nor used any Military Discipline at all:
Hereupon Drummond, with some Courtiers, and a few Volunteers, who purposely
came in to assist him, set upon them as they were asleep; many were killed in
their sleep, But are overthrown.
the rest run headlong away, without their Arms, and so returned from whence
they came; many were taken Prisoners, but by their Friends that knew them, a
great part of them were dismissed; they only were severely dealt with, who had
either written or spoke more contumeliously than others.

The Joy for this Victory was increased by the News of another, at the same
time, wherein Andrew Wood had prevailed in a Sea Fight against Stephen Bull.
For Edward King of England, hearing that five of his Ships were taken by two of
the Scots, and those much lesser also than his, was willing to blot out the
Infamy of the Thing, and yet could find out no just pretense for a War; yet he
called his ablest Sea-Commanders together, he offered them what Ships, and
Warlike Furniture they pleased, and so he persuaded them to revenge the
Ignominy cast on the English Name, promising them great Rewards, if they could
bring Wood to him, alive or dead: But when those, that knew the Valor of the
Man, and his prosperous Successes, made some delay in the Case, Stephen Bull, a
Knight of known Courage, undertook the Expedition; and Opportunity seemed to
favor his Design, because he knew that Wood was shortly to return out of
Flanders, and he thought it would be a matter of no great difficulty to attaque
him unawares in his Passage; thereupon he chose out three Ships of the Royal
Navy, and equipped them well in all points, and so stood for the Isle of May,
an Island uninhabited in the Off the Point of Fife.
Bay of Forth, choosing that place for the convenience of it, because in every
side of the Island there is safe riding, and Harbor for Ships; and there the
Sea also grows so narrow, that no little Vessel could pass by, without being
discovered. Whilst he rode there, he continually kept some of his skilfullest
Mariners abroad in Fisher-boats, to watch, and to discover to him his Enemies
Ships; he had not rode at Anchor there many days, when lo! Wood's Ships
appeared with full Sail making toward him. Bull knew them, and presently
weighed Anchor, and as Victor already in his Mind, he prepared himself for the
Fight: Wood staid no longer but till his Men had armed themselves, and so made
up to him. Thus did these two valiant Commanders engage, as if they had had the
Courage of mighty Armies, and they fought so obstinately, till the Night parted
the Fray, the Victory inclining to neither side: The next Morning each of them
encouraged their Party, and with renewed Strength, went to it again; The manner
of the Fight between Andr. Wood and the English Admiral.
they cast Iron Hooks (called Grapling Irons) into one another Ships, and so
fought hand to hand, as if they had been at a Land Fight, and that with so
great eagerness, that neither of them took notice of the falling back of the
Tide, till they came to the heaps of Sand at the mouth of the River Tay; there
the Water being shallower, the great Ships of the English could not be so
easily managed, but were forced to a Surrender, Wood's second Victory over the
English.
and so they were towed up against the Stream of the Tay to Dundee, where they
staid till the dead were buried, and the wounded were distributed abroad to
Surgeons for their Cure. This Battle was fought the 10 th day of August, in
the Year of our Redemption 1490.

A few days after Wood went to the King, and carried with him Stephen Bull,
with the other Commanders of the Ships, and the notedst of his Soldiers, which
he presented to him: Wood was highly commended by the King for this Exploit,
and honorably rewarded. The King freely dismissed the Prisoners and their
Ships, and sent them back to their King with an high commendation of their
Valor. For in regard they fought for Honor, not for Booty, he therefore would
show, that Valor was to be honored even in an Enemy.

King Henry, tho he was much aggrieved for the loss of his Men in this unhappy
Fight, yet he gave the King of Scots Thanks, and told him that he gratefully
accepted his Kindness, and the Greatness of his Mind.

About this time a new kind of Monster was born in Scotland; in the lower part
of its Body it resembled a Male Child, not much differing from the ordinary
shape of a humane Body newly born; A strange Monster.
but above the Navel, the Trunk of the Body and all the other Members were
double, representing both Sexes male and female. The King gave special Order
for its careful education, especially in Music, wherein it arrived to
admirable Skill; and moreover it learned several Tongues; and sometimes the two
Bodies did discover several Appetites, disagreeing one with another, and so
they would quarrel, one liking this, another that; and yet sometimes again they
would agree and consult (as it were) in common, for the good of both: This was
also memorable in it, that when the Legs and Loins were hurt below, both Bodies
were sensible of the Pain in common; but when it was pricked, or otherwise hurt
above, the sense of the pain did affect one Body only; which difference was
also more perspicuous in its Death; for one of the Bodies died many days before
the other; and that which survived, being half putrified, pined away by
degrees. This Monster lived twenty eight years, and then died, when John was
Regent of Scotland. I am the more confident in relating this Story, because
there are many honest and creditable Persons yet alive, who saw this Prodigy
with their Eyes.

When the People of the North of Scotland heard of this Naval Victory, they
gave over all thoughts of War, and returned each to his own home. This Tumult
and Broil being so easily quieted, the King applied his Mind, not only to quell
all Seditions for the present, but also to prevent all occasions of them for
the future; he summoned his First Parliament to be held at Edinburgh, K. James
the 4 th his first Parliament.
the 6th day of November; there many wholesome Laws were made for the
Establishing of public Concord; and to the end that Peoples minds might the
better agree in the general, the Fault was cast but upon a few particular
Persons, and the punishments were either very easy, or else wholly remitted.
When a Dispute arose concerning the lawfulness of the War, John Lion, Lord A
Castle lying 4 miles South off F^r^ar in Angus.
Glames, rose up, and showed several Heads of Articles, which the Nobles had
formerly sent to the King in order to a Pacification, to which James the third
had often both assented and subscribed; and that indeed he had struck up a
Peace with his Nobles upon those Terms, unless some evil Counselors had drawn
away his Mind therefrom, and so persuaded him to call in the old Enemy to fight
against his own Subjects. And by reason of this his Inconstancy, the Earls of
Huntly, Arrol, Earl of Marshal, and Lions himself, with many other noble
Persons, had forsaken him at that time, and had set up James the 4 th his Son,
as being a great Lover of the public Peace and Welfare. After a long dispute,
at last they all consented to a Decree, wherein those that were slain in the
Battle of Sterlin, were affirmed to have been cut off by their own Default, and
that their Slaughter was just; and that they who had took up Arms against the
Enemies of the Public, though covering their hidden Fraud under honest
pretenses, were guilty of no Crime, nor consequently liable to any Punishment.
All who had Votes in the Assembly, subscribed to this Decree, that so they
might give a better account of the Fact to Foreign Ambassadors, who they heard
were a coming. Many other Statutes were then also made, to restore to the Poor
what had been taken violently from them; to inflict light Mulcts on the Rich,
and to indemnify both Parties: That their taking up of Arms at that time might
never turn to the Prejudice of them or their Posterity. The Commendation of
James the 4 th.
This Moderation of Spirit was highly commended in a young King, of but fifteen
Years old, and who was also a Conqueror, and had the Command of all; but it was
further heightened by his Benignity and Faithfulness in performing his Promises;
to which may be added (which the Vulgar do most admire) that he was of a
graceful well-set Body, and also of a vivid and quick Apprehension; so that by
his using this Victory, neither with Avarice nor Cruelty, and by his real
pardoning of Offenders, in a short time there grew up a great Concord amongst
both Factions, both of them equally striving to show their Love and Duty to the
King. A few only, who were most obstinate, were mulct with a small Fine, or
with the loss of part of their Estates, but none at all were deprived of their
whole Patrimony; neither were the Fines brought into the King's Exchequer, but
expended on the Charges of the War. This his Royal Clemency was the more
grateful, His Clemency.
because Men did yet retain fresh in their Memories, upon what slight occasions
in the former King's Reign, many eminent Men were outed of All; and how much
inferior to them those were, who came in their places. Moreover, to engage the
chief Leaders of the contrary Faction to a greater Fidelity, he joined them in
Bonds of Affinity to himself; for whereas his Aunt had two Daughters, begot by
several Husbands, he married Gracina Boyd to Alexander Forbes, and Margaret
Hamilton to Matthew Stuart. Thus in a short time the Minds of all were
reconciled, and a pleasant Peace and Tranquillity did ensue; yea, as if Fortune
had submitted her self to be an Handmaid to the King's Virtues, there was so
great an increase of Grain and Fruits of the Earth, as if a Golden Spring had
suddenly started up, out of a more than Iron Age. Thus, after the King had
suppressed Robberies by Arms, His sorrowful Resentment for his Fathers Death.
and other Vices by the Severity of the Laws; lest he might seem a sharp
Avenger of others, but indulgent to himself; and withal, to make it appear,
that his Father was slain against his Will, he wore an Iron Chain about his
Waste as long as he lived, and every Year he added one Link thereunto; and tho
this Practice might seem formidable to those that were the Causers of his
Father's Death; yet they had such Confidence, either in the Gentleness of the
King's Disposition, or in their own Power, that it occasioned no Insurrection
at all.

Amidst this public Jubilee, and also the private Rejoycings of particular
Persons, about the seventh Year of the King's Reign, Peter Warbeck came into
Scotland: Peter Warbeck (some call him Perkin) comes into Scotland.
But before I declare the Cause of his coming, I must fetch things something
further back.

Margaret the Sister of Edward the fourth King of England, having married
Charles Duke of Burgundy, she endeavored all the ways she could, His Story.
if not to overthrow, yet at least to vex Henry the Seventh, the Leader of the
contrary Faction; In order whereunto she raised up one Peter Warbeck, as a
Competitor for the Kingdom; he was a Youth born of mean Parentage at A Town in
Flanders, standing on the Bank of the S^^^ld.
Tornay, a City of the A Gallo-Belgick People possessing (...).
Nervii, but of such Beauty, Ingenuity, Stature of Body, and Manliness of
Countenance, that he might easily be believed to have been descended of a Royal
Stock. And by reason of his Poverty, he had traveled up and down in several
Countries, (so that he was known but by very few of his own Relations) and
there he had learned several Languages, and had hardened himself to all kind of
bold and impudent Carriage; when Margarite (who was intent on all occasions to
disturb the Peace of England) had got this Youth, she kept him a while
privately by her, till she had informed him with what Factions England labored
at that time, what Friends and what Enemies she had there; in a word, she made
him acquainted with the whole Genealogy of the Royal Progeny, and what
Happinesses or Misfortunes had attended each of them. When things seemed thus
to be somewhat ripe, she was resolved to try Fortune, and took private order,
that he should be sent, in a decent Equipage, first into Portugal, then into
Ireland; there he had a great Concourse of People flocked about him, and was
received with huge Applause, as the Son of King Edward of England, either
because his own Disposition, assisted also by Art, was inclined to
Dissimulation; or because being there amongst wild Kerns, he was soon likely to
raise great Stirs and Tumults. When a War brake forth suddenly betwixt the
French and the English, he was called for out of Ireland by Charles the Eighth,
and had great Promises made him; so that coming to Paris, he was there
honorably received in the Garb and Equipage of a Prince, and had a Guard
appointed him; yea, the English Exiles, who were numerous at that Court, put
him in a sure hope of the Kingdom. But that Tumult being quieted, upon Terms,
he departed privately out of the Court of France, for fear lest he should have
been delivered up, and so retired to Flanders, there he was highly caressed by
Margaret, as if it were the first time that ever she had seen him, Warbeck set
up by Margaret Duchess of Burgundy.
and was diligently showed to all the Courtiers, and several times in the
hearing of many of them, he was desired to relate the Story of all his
Adventures. Margarite, as if this were the first time she had ever heard it,
did so accommodate her dissembled Affections in compliance with each part of
his Discourse, both when he related his Successes and also his Misfortunes,
that every body thought, she believed what he had spoken to be certainly true.

After a day or two, Peter was desired to go abroad in the habit of a Prince,
and had thirty Men to be his Guard, wearing a white Rose, (which is the Badg of
the York-Faction amongst the English) and so was every where declared as the
undoubted Heir of the Crown of England. When these things were divulged, first
in Flanders, afterward in England, the Minds of Men were so stirred up, that a
great concourse of People flocked in to him, not only of those who lurked in
Holes and Sanctuaries for fear of the Laws, but even of some Noblemen, whom
their present State did not please, or who desired Innovations. But when a
longer delay, which Peter hoped would bring in more Force to him, was likely to
abate his present Strength, if he were discovered to be a Counterfeit,
therefore he determined to try his Fortune in a Fight; so that, having gotten a
pretty great Party together, he landed some few of them in Kent, to try the
Affections of the Kentish-men, but in vain. All those, who landed, were taken,
so that he was forced to steer his course for Ireland; and there also he met
not with the entertainment he hoped for; so that he sailed over into Scotland,
well knowing, that Peace betwixt Scotland and England never used to continue
very long. He being admitted into the King's Presence, made a lamentable
complaint of the Ruin of the York-Family, and what miserable Calamities he
himself had suffered; and therefore he earnestly besought him, to vindicate
Royal Blood from such contumely and shame. The King bid him be of good cheer,
and promised he should shortly find, That he had not desired his help, in his
Distresses, in vain. A few days after a Council was called, where Peter made a
sad Story of his Misfortunes, That he being born of a King, the most
Flourishing of his Time, and that of the highest hopes too, was left destitute,
by the untimely death of his Father, Warbeck's feigned Harangue of himself.
and so was like to have fallen into the Tyrannical Hands of his Uncle Richard,
before he was sensible almost what Misery was. That his Elder Brother was
cruelly murdered by him, but that he himself was stolen away by his Father's
Friends, so that now he durst not live, no not a poor and precarious Life, even
in that Kingdom of which he was the lawful Heir. That he had so miserably lived
amongst Foreign Nations, that he preferred the Condition of his deceased
Brother before his own, in regard he was snatched away from all further
Calamity by a sudden and violent Death: That he himself was reserved, as the
ridicule of Fortune, and that his Sorrow had not that alleviation, that he
durst bewail his miserable State amongst Strangers, to incline them to pity
him; for after he had begun openly to profess what he was, Fortune had
assaulted him with all her Darts; and, to his former Miseries, had added a
daily fear of Treachery, for his crafty Enemy had sometimes tampered with those
who entertained him, to take away his Life; and sometimes he had privily
suborned his Subjects, under the name of Friends, to discover his secret
Designs, to corrupt his true Friends, and to find out his secret ones, and to
calumniate his Stock and Pedigree, by false Accusations amongst the Vulgar; to
reproach his Aunt Margaret, and those English Nobles that owned him; and yet
notwithstanding, that she, being supported by a good Conscience against the
revilings of Enemies, and also out of compassion to her own Blood, had
supported him in his low Estate with her Assistance. But at last, when he
perceived that he could not have Aid enough from her to recover his Kingdom,
(being a Widow, and old too) he had solicited Neighbour-Kings and Nations,
desiring them to respect the common Chances of Man's Life, and not to suffer
Royal Blood to be oppressed by Tyrannical Violence, and so himself to pine away
with Grief, Fear, and Misery; and that he, though so the present, afflicted
with great Evils, yet was not so dejected in his Mind, but that he hoped the
time would come, that being restored to his Kingdom by the Aid of his Friends,
(of whom he had many both in England and Scotland) he should be able to
consider every particular Man's Service, and reward him accordingly; especially
if the Scots would join their Forces with His, and if ever he was restored to
his Kingdom by their Arms, they should soon understand, that they had won a
fast Friend, and that at such a time too, when the trial of true Friendship is
wont to be made; for he and his Posterity would be so gratefully mindful of the
Obligation, that they would ever acknowledge, that the accession of his better
Fortune was due to them alone. Besides, he added many things in praise of the
King, part of them true, and part accommodated to their present Condition.

Having thus said, he held his Peace: but the King called him up to him, and
bid him, Take Heart, for he would refer his Demands to the Council, whose
Advice, in Grand Affairs, he must needs have; yet, however they did determine,
he promised him faithfully, That he should not repent that he made His Court
his Sanctuary. Upon this Peter quitted the Assembly, and the Matter being put
to a debate, the wiser sort, The Scots Council cajoled by Warbeck.
who had most experience in State Affairs, thought it best to reject the whole
Business, either because they judged he was a Counterfeit, or else, that they
foresaw there would be more Danger by the War, than Advantage by the Victory,
though they were sure of it. But the major part, either through unskilfulness in
Affairs, or inconstancy of Spirit, or else to gratify the King, argued that
Peter's Cause was most just, and that they greatly pitied the Man: they added
also, That now Matters were in some confusion in England, and Men's Minds were
yet fluctuating, after the Civil War, and therefore it was good to lay hold of
this Opportunity; and that which the English were wont to do to them, they
themselves ought to try for once, to make use of the Enemies Distractions for
their own Advantage; yea, they foretold a Victory, preconceived in their Minds,
before they had put on their Armor; especially, if great Forces of the English
came in to join them; nay, if they should not come in in such Numbers as they
hoped, yet one of these two things must necessarily follow, That either they
should conquer Henry, and so settle this new King on his Throne; who, in
recompense for so great a Benefit, must needs grant them all that they desired:
Or, if they could end the Matter without Blows, yet Henry, upon the quelling
Domestic Tumults, not being yet fully settled in his Throne, would submit to
what Conditions they pleased: But if he refused so to do, when War was once
begun, many advantages might offer themselves, which now were unforeseen.

This was the Opinion of the major part, and the King himself inclined to them,
and his Vote drew in the rest. And after this, he treated Peter more honorably
than before, gave him the Title of Duke of York; and, as such, showed him to
the People. K. James marries Katherine Gordon, his Kinswoman, to Warbeck, and
assists him with an Army against England.
And not contented herewith, he gave him Katharine Gordon, Daughter to the Earl
of Huntly, to Wife, a Woman of as great Beauty as Nobility of Stock, by this
Affinity erecting him to hopes of thriving, and bettering his Condition. And
therefore by Advice of his Council, he levied an Army, and marched for England;
first of all carrying it warily, and having his Troops ready to engage, if any
sudden Assault should be made upon him. But afterward, when he understood by
his Spies, that the Enemy had no Army in the Field, he sent out Parties to
Plunder, and in a short time wasted almost all Northumberland, and the
Countries thereabout. He staid some days in those Parts, and not an Englishman
stirred, in behalf of Peter: And it being told him, that an Army was levying
against him in the adjacent Counties, he thought it dangerous to venture his
Soldiers, who were laden with Booty, against the new and fresh Forces of the
English, and therefore he resolved to return into Scotland, and there to leave
their Booty; and as soon as the time of the Year would permit, to undertake a
new Expedition. Neither did he fear that the English would follow him in his
retreat, for he knew that new-raised Soldiers would not be long kept together,
neither would they make after him, if they could, through a Country so lately
harassed and desolated by the Wars; especially, having no Provisions prepared
beforehand. And besides, Peter was afraid, that in regard none of the English
came in to him, as he hoped, that if he staid any longer in his Enemies
Country, his Cheat would be discovered, so that he himself seemed to approve of
the King's Resolution, came cunningly to him, and composing his Speech and
Countenance so, as might best move Compassion, he humbly besought him, That he
would not make such Havoc in a Kingdom that was his own by Right; and that he
would not so cruelly shed so much Blood of his Subjects, for no Kingdom in the
World was of so much worth to him, as for its sake to have his Peoples Blood so
largely spilt, and his Country so wasted with Fire and Sword, to procure it.
The King began now to smell out and understand, K. James begins to smell out
Warbeck's Cheat.
whither this unseasonable Clemency did tend, and therefore told him, That he
feared he would preserve that Kingdom, in which not a Man did own him as a
Subject, much less as a King, not for himself, but for his Capital Enemy; and
so by common consent they returned Home, and the Army was disbanded.

Henry being made acquainted with the Invasion, and also the Retreat of the
Scots, appointed an Expedition against them the Year after, and in the mean
time levied a great Army; and that he might not be idle in the Wintertime, he
summons a Parliament, who approved of his Design to make War on Scotland, and
granted a small Subsidy upon the People for that end. Henry of England prepares
an Army against Scotland.
That Tax raised up a greater flame of War upon him at Home, than that which he
designed to quench Abroad. For the Commonalty complained that their Youth and
Soldiery were exhausted by so many Wars, and Impressments, which had been made
within these few Years, that their Estates were impaired, and ran very low: But
the Nobles and Counselors to the King, were so far from being moved with these
Calamities, An Insurrection in England, prevents K. Henry's Design against
Scotland at that time.
that they sought to create new Wars in a time of Peace, that so they might
impose new Taxes on them, who were already in great Want and Necessity; and
thus, whom the Sword had not consumed, Famine and Poverty would. These were the
public Complaints of all the Commons: but the Cornish were more enraged than
all the rest, for they, inhabiting a Country which is in great part barren, are
wont rather to gain than lose by Wars: And therefore, that warlike People,
having been accustomed rather to increase their Estates by Military Spoils,
than to lessen them by paying Taxes and Rates, first of all rose against the
King's Officers and Collectors, and slew them; and then, being conscious that
they had engaged themselves in so bold an Attempt, that there was no retreat,
nor hopes of Mercy, the Multitude flocking in daily more and more to them with
Arms in their hands, they began their march toward London. But it is not my
Business to prosecute the Story of this Insurrection, it is enough for my
purpose to tell you, that the King was so busied this whole Year by the
Cornish, that the Army which he had designed against Scotland, he was enforced
to employ against them.

In the mean time, James, foreseeing, That Henry would not let the Injuries of
the former Year pass unrevenged, and being also informed by his Intelligencers,
That he was raising great Forces against him, He, on the other side, levied an
Army, to the intent, That if the English invaded him first, K. James invades
England, but to little purpose.
he might be in a posture to defend himself; if not, then he himself would make
an inroad into his Enemies Country, and there so waste and destroy the
bordering Counties, that the Soil (poor enough of it self) should not afford
sufficient Necessaries, even for the very Husbandman. And hearing of the
Cornish Insurrection, he presently began his march, and entered England with a
great Army, dividing his Forces into two parts; one went toward Durham to
ravage that Country, and with the rest he besieged Norham, a strong Castle
situated on a very high Hill, by the River Tweed. But neither here nor there
was there any thing considerable done: For Richard Fox, Bishop of Durham, a
very prudent Person, foreseeing, that the Scots would not omit the Opportunity
of attempting somewhat during the civil Broils in England, had fortified some
Castles with strong Garrisons, and had taken care that the Cattle, and all other
driveable and portable things should be conveyed unto places, either safe by
Nature, or made so by the vicinity of Moors and Rivers. And moreover he sent
for the Earl of Surry, who had great Forces in Yorkshire, to assist him; and
therefore the Scots only burnt the Country, and not being able to take Norham,
which was stoutly defended by those within, raised the Siege, and without any
considerable Action returned Home. The English followed them not long after,
and demolished In the Mers on the River Aye, a mile above Aymouth.
Aytown, a small Castle, seated almost in the very Borders, and he returned out
of their Enemies Country, without any memorable performance also.

Amidst these Commotions, both foreign and domestic, Peter Hialas, a Man of
great Wisdom, and, as those Times were, not unlearned, arrived in England; he
was sent by Ferdinand and Isabel, King and Queen of Spain. The purport of his
Embassy was, An Ambassador form Spain to England.
That Katharine, their Daughter, might marry Arthur King Henry's Son, and so a
new Affinity and Friendship might be contracted betwixt them. The English did
willingly embrace the Affinity, and therefore were desirous to finish the War
with Scotland; and because Henry thought it was below his Dignity to seek Peace
at the Scots Hands, he was willing to use him as a Mediator. Who mediates a
Peace between Scotland and England.
Peter willingly undertook the Business, and came into Scotland; there he plied
James with several Arguments, and at last made him inclinable to a Peace; and
then he wrote to Henry, That he hoped a good Peace would be agreed without any
great difficulty, if he pleased to send down some Eminent Person of his
Council, to accord the Conditions. Henry, as one that had often tried the
inconstancy of Fortune, and that the Minds of his Subjects were grown fierce by
these late Tumults, as being rather irritated than wholly suppressed, commanded
Richard Fox, who resided in his Castle at Norham, to join Counsels with Hialas.
These Two had many Disputes about the Matter with the Ambassadors of Scotland,
at The chief Town in Tividale, standing on the West of the River Ied.
Iedburgh, and after many Conditions had been mutually proposed, they could
agree upon nothing. The chiefest Impediment was, The demand of Henry, that
Peter Warbeck should be given up to him, for he judged it to be a very
reasonable Proposition, in regard he was but a Counterfeit, and had been
already the Occasion of so much Mischief. James peremptorily refused so to do,
alleging, That it was not honorable in him to surrender up a Man of the Royal
Progeny, who came to him as a Suppliant; whom he had also made his Kinsman by
Marriage, against his Faith given to him, to be made a Laughing Stock by his
Enemies. And thus the Conference broke off; yet the hopes of an Agreement were
not altogether cast off, for a Truce was made for some months, till James could
dismiss Warbeck, upon Honorable Terms, according to his Promise.

For now, by the Conference with the English, and other evident Indications, it
plainly appeared, that the Tale concerning Peter's State and Kindred was a mere
Falsity, and therefore the King sent for him, and told him, what singular good
Will he had born him, and how many Courtesies he had bestowed upon him, of
which he himself was the best Witness; as first, That he had undertaken a War
against a Potent King for his sake; and had now managed it a second Year, to
the great Inconvenience of his Enemy, and the Prejudice of his own Subjects.
That he had refused an Honorable Peace, which was freely offered him, merely
because he would not surrender him up to the English; and thereby he had given
great Offense, both to his Subjects and his Enemy too; so that now, he neither
could, nor would, any longer withstand their Desires. And therefore, whatever
might ensue, whether Peace or War, he desired him to seek out some other and
fitter Place for his Banishment, for he was resolved to make Peace with the
English; and when it was once solemnly made, to observe it as religiously; and
to remove from him whatsoever might be an Impediment or Disturbance thereto:
Neither ought he to complain, That the Scots had forsaken him, seeing the
English had done so first, in confidence of whose Assistance the Scots had
begun the War: And yet, notwithstanding all these Circumstances, he was
resolved to accommodate him with Provisions, and other Necessaries, to put to
Sea.

Warbeck was mightily troubled at his unexpected dismission; yet he remitted
nothing of his dissimulated height of Spirit, but in a few days, Warbeck
dismissed out of Scotland.
sailed over into Ireland with his Wife and Family: From whence soon after he
passed into England, and there joined himself with the Relics of the Cornish
Rebels: but after many Attempts, being able to do no good, he was taken; Taken
and hanged in England.
and having confessed all the Pageantry of his former Life, he ended his days
in an Halter.

The Seminary of War between England and Scotland being almost extinguished,
and a great likelihood of Peace appearing, behold, there arose a great
Ebullition of Spirit, upon a very light occasion, which had almost broken out
into a fierce War. Some Scottish Youths went over to the Town of Norham, which
was near to the Castle, (as they were often wont to do in Times of Peace) there
to recreate themselves in Sports and Pastimes, and to junket together with
their Neighbors, as if they had been at Home, for there was but a small River,
which divided them. A War like to arise on a small Occasion betwixt England and
Scotland; but accommodated by Fox Bp. of Durham.
The Garrison in the Castle, out of the Rancour, yet lodging in their Breasts
since the former War, and being also provoked by some passionate words, accused
those Scots, as Spies, and so from Words they came to Blows; many were wounded
on both sides, and the Scots being fewer in number, were forced to return Home
with the loss of some of their Company. This Business was often canvassed in
the Meetings, between the Lords of the Marches; and at last James was very
angry, and sent an Herald to Henry, to complain of Breach of Truce, and how
unconstant the English were in keeping Covenant; and unless Satisfaction were
given, according to the just Laws, which were made by general Consent, about
restitution betwixt the Borderers, he commanded him to denounce War against
him. Henry had been exercised by the Violence of Fortune, even from his Cradle,
and therefore was more inclined to Peace: his Answer was, That whatever was
done of that kind, was against his Will, and without his Knowledge; and if the
Garison-Souldiers had offended in the Case, by their Temerity, he would take
order, That Examination should be made, and that, the Leagues being kept
inviolate, the Guilty should be punished. But this was slowly done, and James
looked upon the Answer, as dilatory, that so Punishment might be deferred, and
the Sentiment thereof worn out with Time; and therefore it rather provoked than
satisfied James. But Richard Fox, Bishop of Durham, who was owner of the
Castle, being much troubled, that an occasion of breaking the League should be
administered by any of his Tenants; to prevent it, sent several Letters to
James, full of great submission, modesty, and civility, which so inclined the
Mind of James, that he wrote him word back, that he would willingly speak with
him, not only about the late Wrongs done, but also about other Matters which
might be advantageous to both Kingdoms. Fox acquainted his King herewith, and,
by his Consent, he waited upon James at Mulross in Tiviot-dale on a bare
Promon^ory on Tweed side, three Miles below its confluence with Gala.
Mulross, where he then was. There James made a grievous Complaint of the
Injury acted at Norham; yet by the prudent and grave discourse of Fox, he was
so pacified, that for Peace-sake, of which he showed himself very desirous, he
remitted the Offense. Other things were acted privately betwixt them; but it
appeared afterward, that the Sum of them was this, That James did not only
desire a Peace, but (both before, and also now) an Affinity with Henry, and a
stricter Bond of Union: And if Henry would bestow his Daughter Margaret upon
him in Marriage, A Conference between King James and R. Fox Bp of Durham,
concerning the Marriage of King Henry's Daughter Margaret to James.
he hoped that the thing would be for the benefit of both Kingdoms; and if Fox,
whose Authority he knew to be great at home, would but do his Endeavor to
accomplish the Affinity, he did not doubt but it would be soon effected. He
freely promised his Endeavor, and coming to the Court of England, acquainted
the King with the Proposition, and thereupon gave hopes to the Scots
Ambassadors, that a Peace would easily be accorded betwixt the two Kings. Thus
at length, three Years after, which was An. 1500, even about one and the same
time Margaret, Henry's Eldest Daughter, Which took Effect.
was betrothed to James the IVth, and also Katharine, Daughter to Ferdinand of
Spain, to Arthur, Henry's Eldest Son, and their Marriages were celebrated with
great Pomp the next Year after.

After the Marriage all things were quiet, and the Court turned from the Study
of Arms to Sports and Pastimes, so that there was nothing but Masks, Shows,
Feastings, Dancings, and Balls; it was as a continued Jubilee, and, upon that
account, every day was as an Holy Day: There were also Horse-Tiltings,
frequently made, mostly according to the French Mode, betwixt which (as
Tragical Acts) there intervened the Challenges of Moss-Troopers one of another,
who were wont to live upon Spoil; which Sport the King was well pleased to
behold, because he judged that the killing of them was a Gain to him. When the
noise of these Tourneaments came to Foreign Nations, many Strangers, and
especially from France, came daily over to show their Prowess, who were all
liberally entertained by the King, and as bountifully d^smissed. Neither did he
rest in these ludicrous Exercises, but he laid out a great deal of Money upon
Building, at Sterlin, Falkland, and sundry other places, and especially in
building of Monasteries; but his Cost about Ships was greatest of all, for he
built three stately ones of a great Bulk, and many also of a middle Rate; one
of his great ones was to admiration, the biggest that ever any Man had seen
sail on the Ocean, A vast Ship built by King James.
it being also furnished with all manner of costly Accommodations; our Writers
have given a Description of it (which I pass over) and the Measure of it is
kept in some places: but the Greatness of it appeared by this, That the News
thereof stirred up Francis King of France, and Henry the 8 th King of England,
each of them to build a Ship in imitation thereof, and each endeavoring to
outvie the other; when their Ships were finished and fitted with all
necessaries for sailing, and brought to Sea, they were so big, that they stood
there like unmovable Rocks, unfit for any use.

These Works being very expensive, did exhaust James his Treasure, so that he
was forced to devise some new ways to get Money, and amongst the rest, he
pitched upon one, by the Persuasion, as it was thought, of William Elphinstone,
Bishop of Aberdeen, which was very displeasing to all the Nobility. Amongst the
Tenures of Land in Scotland, this is one kind, by which the Owner holds what he
buys, or else is given him, on these Terms, That if he dye and leave his Son
and Heir under Age, Wardship a Badg of Slavery.
The Wardship of him should belong to the King, or to some other Superior Lord;
yea and all the Revenue is to be received by him, till the Heir come to the age
of 21 Years. There is also another Badg of Slavery annexed to this Hold, that
if an Owner do sell above half his Estate, without the consent of the chief
Lord, then he is to forfeit the whole to him. This Law was introduced by
Court-Parasites, to advance the King's Exchequer: but being looked upon as
unjust, had lain dormant a long time; but the King, being informed that Money
might be got out of the Violators of it, commanded it to be put in Execution:
that Process, they call Recognition. Recognition, what?
This way of raising Money by the King, tho it outed no Man of his whole
Estate, yet was a greater Grievance to the Country, than his Father's
Covetousness had been, for the Wrong redounded to very many, and to the
worthiest People most; because under the two last Kings, by reason of their
Foreign, and also of their Civil Wars, the Memory of that Law was almost quite
abolished; and thereupon, Wardship disused.
by reason of this new Project, they were enforced either to redeem their Lands
from the Officers of the King's Exchequer, or else to relinquish part of them.
And yet the love of the Subjects toward their King was so great, that, tho
they suffered great Inconvenience thereby, his other Virtues gave him such a
Reverence amongst them, that their Indignation did not proceed to an actual
Rising in Arms.

But when the King set no bounds to his Expenses, neither were there some
Flatterers (a perpetual mischief to Courts) wanting; K. James's resolution
(...) Jerusalem.
who covered this vicious Excess under the plausible Names of Splendor and
Magnificence: Hereupon he determined to undertake a Voyage into Syria, that so
he might put an end to his vast Expense, (which he could not continue without
Ruin, nor yet give over without Shame) and so, by his Absence, to abridg it. He
made an honest Pretense for his Journey, that it was to expiate the Fault he
had committed in bearing Arms against his Father. And indeed he had given some
evidence of his Penitence (whether true, or pretended) upon this account, from
the very beginning of his Reign, (as I said before) and he would often speak of
it in his common Discourse. He had rigged a Navy for this Voyage, and had
nominated the chief of his Retinue; and had acquainted his Neighbour-Kings, by
his Ambassadors, of his Intent; and many of his Followers, as if they had
obliged themselves by the same Vow, suffered the Hairs of their Heads and
Beards to grow at length; and, it was thought he would immediately have taken
Ship, if some Hindrances had not intervened, even whilst he was most intent on
his Journey: For, at that time, The execution of it prevented, and how.
there arose a vehement Suspicion of a War like to ensue betwixt France and
England, for Henry did not like the Successes of the French in Italy; and,
besides, he was solicited by Julius the 2 d, then Pope, and by Ferdinand of
Spain, his Father-in-Law, to join with them; and with the Venetians, Swiss, and
Maximilian too (tho he did regulate his Councils ordinarily according to
Events): for it was likely, that the Conjunctions of so many Nations against
France, would almost swallow it up.

The King of England, being in the prime of his Age, and elevated much in the
sense of the Power of his Kingdoms, and also being very willing to be in
Action, was desirous to enter into this Confederacy, but wanted a fair Pretense
to fall out with France. But both of them knew one another Designs, by their
Spies, and when France could not be persuaded to desist from warring against
the Pope, who was Henry's Friend, at length an Herald was sent into France, to
demand Normandy, Aquitain, and Anjou, (as the old Possessions of the English)
in France. But in regard France was not moved by these Threats neither, to
intermit the War in Italy, hereupon Henry denounced War against him, and sent
an Army into On the North-west of Spain, in the Cantabrian Ocean.

Henry of England wars against France.


Biscay, to join his Father-in-Law Ferdinand, and he himself prepared for an
Expedition into France.

Now James of Scotland, tho he resolved to side with neither of them, yet, as
more inclinable to the French, he sent his Navy aforementioned, as a Present to
Ann Queen of France, that so it might seem rather as a mark of his Friendship,
than any real Assistance, for Military Action. And moreover, the Scots Clergy,
who were used to French Largesses, were willing to show themselves in behalf of
Lewis of France; and seeing they durst not openly do it, they sought out
occasions to alienate the King's Mind from the English.

In order hereto, Andrew Forman, then Bishop of Murray, one of their Faction,
Andrew Forman sent into England by James to pick a Quarrel.
and a Friend to Lewis, was sent into England to demand a vast Sum of Gold and
Silver, the greatest part thereof consisted in Women's Jewels and Ornaments,
which were reported to be given, by Will, by Arthur, Henry the 8 ths Elder
Brother, to his Sister Margaret, now married to James, as I related before.
Henry (as it is probable) looked upon this Demand only as a Pretense for a
Quarrel, and therefore he answered James very mildly; That if any thing were
due to him, he would not only pay it; but if he wanted a greater Sum, or any
other Assistance, he would not fail to supply him. When James received this
Answer, he resolved to assist Lewis in any other way, And from thence into
France.
but by no means to invade England; and he sent over the same Forman into
France, to acquaint Lewis therewith. Meanwhile, because he had heard that great
Naval Preparations were making on both sides, he resolved to send the Fleet
aforementioned to Ann immediately, that so it might arrive there before the War
did actually break forth; he made James Hamilton, Earl of Arran, Admiral of it,
and caused him to set sail with the first Opportunity. But Hamilton, tho a Man
good enough, yet was more skilled in the Arts of Peace than War, Hamilton sent
with a Fleet to France, but turns to Knockfergus in Ireland.
and therefore either out of fear of Danger, or else out of his habitual
backwardness, left his Voyage for France, and turned to Knockfergus, a Town in
Ireland, situate over against Galway in Scotland, which place he pillaged and
burnt; and afterward, as if he had been a mighty Conqueror, he hoisted sail for
Air (in Scotland) a Port-Town in Kyle. When the King heard of his Return, he
was very outrageous against him, and could not forbear to express his menacing
Reproaches against the Man; and he was the more enraged against him, because he
had received a Letter from Queen Ann out of France, which did endeavor to
flatter him into a War against England; and he had also other Letters from
Andrew Forman, which informed him, That he was generally upbraided with the
Promise of sending the Fleet, which they now looked upon as vain, in regard no
such thing was done. The King was willing to obviate this mischief as well as
he could, and therefore seeing Hamilton had broke off the Course, he was
commanded to run, and had destroyed a Town, that had never been an Enemy to the
Scots, and was then also in Alliance with them, and so had made War upon his
Friends, without denouncing it beforehand, therefore he cashiered him the
Admiralship, and caused him to be summoned to appear before him. Archibald
Douglas Earl of Angus was designed to succeed him in that Command, and Andrew
Wood was sent with him to take the Fleet into his Charge. But Hamilton had
notice, by his Friends before their coming, of the King's Displeasure against
him, and therefore presently hoised Sail, resolving rather to commit himself to
the wide Sea, than to an enraged King; Hamilton, at last arrives in France.
he was a long time sailing for France, his Ship being tossed with contrary
Winds and sore Storms in the Way, so that he arrived not there till the French
had laid aside the Thoughts of any Naval Preparations, and then he landed in
Little Britain lying in the Chanel on the Northwest of France.
Base-Britaine, where the Ship, which cost so much Money and Labor to build,
had her Tackle taken out, and so rotted in the Harbor of Breast.

In the interim, other causes of Discord arose at Home, which wholly alienated
James from Henry. In the Reign of Henry the 7 th, there was one Robert Carr, a
worthy Knight, so much beloved of James, for his excellent Virtues, that he
made him his chief Cupbearer, Master of his Ordnance, and Lord-Warden of the
middle-Borders or Marches. He was a severe punisher of all Robbers, which
procured him great Favor with the King, Robert Car severe against
Moss-Troopers.
but increased the Hatred of the Borderers against him. So that both English
and Scots, whose Licentiousness he restrained, by putting the Laws in Execution
against them, jointly sought all occasions to take away his Life; and, at
length, at a solemn meeting of Scots and English, which used to be kept, to
adjust and recompense Damages received, a Quarrel arose, and three Englishmen,
bold Fellows, John Hern, Lilburn, and one Starhed, set upon him, one came
behind and ran him through his Back with a Lance, and, when he was wounded, the
other two dispatched him quite. This Business was likely to create a War; but
Henry, as he was just in other Things, He is slain.
so in this was as angry as James at the foulness of the Fact, and therefore he
caused John Hern, the Brother of the other John, Lord of Standing on a Rock
above the Firth of Forth.
Foord, and Governor of the English Borders, to be delivered up to the Scots,
In Northumberland.
with Lilburne, for the other Two had made their escape. They were shut up in
Prison in Fast-Castle, and there Lilburne died. And for the expiation of so
manifest a Crime, it was decreed, That in future Assemblings of that kind, the
English should first crave the public Faith for their Security, and so enter
Scotland, and have their Meetings there; and the Ambassadors of England, by
many solemn Protestations and Ceremony of Words, should declare, That the
Public was not concerned, as guilty of that particular Murder. The other two
Murderers lurked in the inland Parts of England, till the Reign of Henry the 8
th; and yet they went not unpunished, for when they had got a Young King,
fierce, potent, and saw, that he was willing to show the greatness of his
Strength, they crept out of their Dens. Hern, by the mediation of his Kindred,
lived openly at his own House, and privately sent in Robbers to Scotland, to
disturb the Public Peace, hoping, that if a War were once begun, he should
obtain Indemnity for his old Offenses, and Impunity even with freedom to commit
new. The Murderers of Robert Carr escape not unpunished.
But Starhed got a Place to live in, about 90 Miles from the Borders, thinking
to be safe by reason of the remoteness of his Habitation; but Andrew Carr, the
Son of Robert, who saw, that the Seeds of Hatred, which would soon break out
into a War, were then sown, and fearing that if once they entered into Arms, he
should lose the avengement of his Father's Blood, persuades two of his Tenants,
of the Family of the Tates, to disguise themselves, and to kill Starhed. They
undertook to do it, and so entered his House securely in the Night; for living
so far from the Borders, he thought he needed no Watch; where they killed him,
cut off his Head, and brought it to Andrew; he, in testimony of his desired
Revenge, sends it to Edinburgh, and sets it up there upon an high and
conspicuous Place. Of Hern I shall speak in due time.

A new Fact trod on the Heels of this old Injury, which awakened the Anger of
the King of Scots, that was rather asleep than extinguished, before. At that
time, there was one Andrew Breton, a Scots Merchant, his Father had a Ship
rifled by the Portugals, and himself cruelly slain: Andrew had the Cause heard
in Flanders, (because there the Murder was committed) where the Portugals were
cast; The Story of Andrew Breton.
but they, not paying what was adjudged, neither did their King, though James
sent an Herald to him for that end, compel them so to do. Andrew hereupon
obtained Letters of Mart from James, to satisfy himself for the Damages and
Murder; and it was directed to all Princes and Cities lying near the Sea, That
they should not account him as a Pirate, or Robber, if, by open Force, he
revenged himself on the Portugals, who were such Violaters of common Right and
Equity: so that in a few Months he did much mischief to the Portugals. Their
Ambassadors, in the height of the War the French made against Pope Julius the
Second, and which was soon like to break out against the English, as siding
with Julius, came to Henry, and told him, That this bold and impudent Fellow,
Andrew, which had done them so much Mischief, who were the Ancient Allies of
the English, would assuredly be his Enemy, when he warred against France; but
now he was secure, and might easily be subdued and cut off; and if the Fact
were evil spoken of, it might be excused, under a pretense of his exercising
Piracy. This, if he would do, he might prevent the Losses of his own Subjects,
and also gratify their King, his Friend and Ally, very much. Henry was thus
easily persuaded by the Portugals to entrap Andrew: In order whereto, he sent
his Admiral, Thomas Howard, with two strong Ships of the Navy Royal,
well-appointed, to way-lay* him in the Downs, (so they call the Heaps of Sand,
which appear aloft when the Tide is out) in his return from Flanders. It was
not long before they espied him coming in a small Vessel, with a lesser one in
his Company, and set upon him; A sharp Fight between the English Admiral and
Breton, where Breton was slain.
Howard himself attaqued Andrew, between-whom there was a sharp Fight, and
although Howard had all the Advantage imaginable against him, yet he had much ado
to take the Ship; neither could he do that, till Andrew and many of his Men
were slain. This is certain, That Andrew was a Man of that Courage, even when
his Case was desperate, that, though he had several Wounds, and one of his Legs
was broken with a Cannon Bullet, yet he took a Drum and beat an Alarm, and a
Charge to his Men, to encourage them to fight valiantly; this he did, till his
Breath and Life failed him together. The lesser Ship, seeing that she was no
way able to cope with the Enemy, endeavored to save her self by flight, but
was taken with a great deal less opposition; They which were not killed in the
Fight, were cast into Prison at London; from whence they were brought to the
King, and humbly begging their Lives of him, as they were instructed to do by
the English, he, in a proud ostentation of his Mercifulness, dismissed and sent
the poor innocent Souls away. Hereupon, Ambassadors were sent into England by
James, to complain, K. James complains to Henry of Breton's Death.
That his Subjects Ships were taken in a time of Peace, and the Passengers
slain. They were answered, That the killing of Pirates was no violation of
Leagues, neither was it a justifiable Cause for a War. This Answer showed the
spite of one, that was willing to excuse a plain Murder, and seemed as if he
had sought an occasion for a War: Whereupon the English, which inhabited the
Borders, by that which was acted above-board, guessed at their King's Mind; and
being also accustomed to sow the Seeds of Dissension, in the times of the
firmest Peace; and besides, being much given to Innovation, began to prey upon
the adjacent Countries of the Scots.

At that time, there was one Alexander Hume, who had the sole command of all
the Scots Borders, which was wont to be distributed into three Men's Hands; he
was mightily beloved by James, but his Disposition was more fierce than was
expedient for the Good of those Times. The King was intent upon War, and very
solicitous how to blot out the Ignominy received by those Incursions; and Hume
promised him, That he, and some of his Kindred and Vassals, would, in a little
time, make the English repent of the Loss and Damage they had done, as being
resolved to turn their Mirth into Sadness. To make good his Word, he gathered
together about 3000 Horse, entered England, Alexander Hume marches with a Party
into England;
and spoiled the Neighboring Villages, before any Relief could come in; but,
as he was returning, his Men, being accustomed to pillaging, and then also
laden with a great deal of Booty, being impatient to stay there any longer,
divided their Spoil, even in their Enemy's Country, and went their ways
severally Home. Alexander, with a few, brought up the Rear, to see that no
assault might be made upon them in their Retreat; but perceiving none to
follow, he was the more careless, and so fell into an Ambush of 300 English,
who, But is worsted in his Retreat.
taking the opportunity, set upon them, and struck such a sudden Terror into
them, that they routed and put them to flight. In this Conflict, a great many
of the Scots were slain, and 200 taken Prisoners, amongst whom was George Hume,
Alexander's Brother, who was exchanged for the Lord Hern of Foord, who had been
kept Prisoner many Years in Scotland, for the Murder of Robert Carr: But all
the Booty came safe into Scotland, because they, who drove it, were marched on
before.

This new Offense, coming upon the King's Mind, which was not easy before, upon
the account of what I formerly related, made him unruly and headstrong; and
thereupon he called a Convention to consult concerning the War. K. James
resolves a War against England.
The wiser sort were against it; but L'amot, the Ambassador of France,
earnestly pressed it, by Entreaties and Promises: And also frequent Letters
from Andrew Forman urged the same thing; yea, the King himself inclined
thereto, so that many, to gratify him, fell in with his Opinion; the rest,
being the minor part, lest by a fruitless Opposition they might incur the
King's Displeasure, gave also their assent; so that a War was voted to be made
against England, both by Land and Sea; ('it is doubtful, whether the Counsel or
the Event was the worst), a set day was appointed for the Army to meet
together. An Herald was sent into France to Henry, who was then besieging
Tournay, to denounce War upon him. The pretended Causes of the War.
The Causes of it were rendered to be, That Satisfaction for Losses had been
required, but not given. That John Hume, the Murderer of Robert Carr, did
openly show himself; That Andrew Breton, in violation of the Leagues betwixt
the two Crowns, had been pillaged and slain, by the King's own Command: And
though he did not mention any of those Wrongs, yet he should never endure, That
the Territories of Lewis, King of France, his Ancient Ally; nor of Charles,
Duke of Gelderland, his Kinsman, should be so miserably harrassed with all the
Calamities of War; and therefore, unless he desisted therefrom, he bid him
Defiance. Henry being young, and having a flourishing and puissant Kingdom; and
besides, a general Combination of almost all Europe against France alone; these
things kindled a desire in his Mind, which was otherwise ambitious enough of
Glory, to continue his Arms; and therefore he gave the Herald an Answer more
fierce than suited with his youthful Age; That he heard nothing from him, but
what he long before had expected from such a Violator of all Divine and Human
Laws, K. Henry's Answer to King James's Herald.
and therefore he should do as he thought fit; for his part, he was resolved
not to be threatened out of his Procedure in a War, wherein he had so well
prospered hitherto; and besides, he did not value his Friendship, as having
already had sufficient proof of his Levity.

This Denunciation of War being brought into Scotland, as the King was going to
his Army, A strange Apparition, of an old Man forbidding K. James to proceed in
his War with England.
at Linlithgo whilst he was at Vespers in the Church (as the manner then was);
There entered an old Man, the Hair of his Head being Red, inclining to Yellow,
and hanging down on his Shoulders; his Forehead sleek through baldness,
bare-headed, in a long Coat of a russet Color, girt with a linen Girdle about
his Loins; in the rest of his Aspect, he was very venerable: He pressed through
the Crowd to come to the King: When he came to him, he leaned upon the Chair on
which the King sat, with a kind of rustic simplicity, and bespoke him thus; O
King, said he, I am sent to warn thee, not to proceed in thy intended Design;
which Monition if thou neglect, neither Thou nor thy Followers shall prosper. I
am also commanded to tell thee, That thou should not use the Familiarity,
Intimacy, and Counsel of Women; which if thou do, it will redound to thy
Ignominy and Loss. Having thus spoken, he withdrew himself into the Crowd; and
when the King enquired for him, after Prayers were ended, he could not be
found; which Matter seemed more strange, because none of those who stood next,
and observed him, as being desirous to put many Questions to him, were sensible
how he disappeared; Amongst them, there was David Lindsy of A place near
Cowper, in Fife.
Mont, a Man of approved Worth and Honesty, (and a great Scholar too); for in
the whole course of his Life, he abhorred Lying; and if I had not received this
Story from him as a certain Truth, I had omitted it as a Romance of the Vulgar.

But the King, notwithstanding, went forward in his March, Yet he proceeds and
enters England below Ouler in Northumberland.
and near Edinburgh mustered his Army, and a while after entered England, took
the Castles of Norham, Werk, Etel, Foord, and some others near to the Borders
of Scotland, by Storm, and demolished them, and spoiled all the adjoining part
of Northumberland; mean while, the King falls in Love with one of the Ladies he
had taken Prisoner, (she was Hern's Wife of Foord) and neglected his present
business, insomuch that, Provision beginning to grow scarce, in a not very
plentiful Country, and it being very difficult to fetch it from far, the
greatest part of his Army stole away, and left their Colors very thin; only
the Nobles, with a few of their Friends, Clients and Vassals, and those not
very well pleased neither, abode in the Camp: The major part advised him, that
he should no longer punish himself and his Men by abiding in a Country that was
wasted by War, and if it had not been so, yet was poor of it self, but rather
that he would retreat and attempt Berwick; the taking of which one Place would
turn more to account, than of all the Towns and Castles thereabouts; neither,
said they, would it be very difficult to take it in, because both Town and
Castle were unprovided for Defense. But the King thought that nothing was too
hard for his Arms, especially since the English were entangled in the War with
France, so that, some Court-Parasites soothing him up in his Vanity, he judged,
that he might easily reduce that Town, in his Retreat.

Whilst he thus lay encamped at Foord, The English challenge him to give them
Battle.
there came Heralds from the English, desiring him to appoint a Place and Time
for the Battle. Hereupon he called a Council of War, wherein the major part
were of opinion, That it was best to return home, and not to hazard the State
of the whole Kingdom with so small a Force, especially, since he had abundantly
satisfied his Credit, his Renown, and the Laws of Friendship; neither was there
any just Cause, why he should venture his small Army, and which had been also
wearied out with the taking of so many Castles, against the more numerous
Forces of the English, who had also newly received an Addition of fresh Men;
for it was reported, That at that very time Thomas Howard arrived in the Camp
with 6000 Men, sent back out of France. Besides, if he retreated, the English
Army must of necessity disband, and then they could not bring together Another,
to be levied so far off, till the next Year. But if he would needs fight, it
were better so to do in his own Country, where Place, Time, and Provision were
more at his Command. But the French Ambassador, The French Ambassador presses
James on to a Battle.
and some Courtiers whom French Largesses had wrought over to him, were of
another Mind, and easily persuaded James, who longed to fight, to abide the
Enemy in that place: In the mean time, the English came not at the Day
appointed by the Herald, and then the Scots Nobles took that opportunity to go
again to the King, and told him, that it was the Craft of the Enemy to protract
the time from one day to another, whilst their own Force increased, and the
Scots were diminished, and that therefore he should use the same Art against
them. That it was now no Dishonor for the Scots to retreat, (since the English
had not kept the designed Time) without fighting; or else, not to fight, but
when they themselves thought fit: The first of these Advices was in many
respects the more safe; but, if that did not please him, he had a fair
opportunity offered him to comply with the other. For seeing the In
Northumberland.
Till had very high Banks, and was almost no where fordable, there was no
passing for an Army over it within many Miles, but by one Bridge, where a few
Men might keep back a great Multitude; yea, if part of the English should get
over, he might so place his Ordnance as to cut off the Bridge, and so they, who
had passed over, might be destroyed, before they could be relieved by those on
the contrary side. The King approved of neither Advice, K. James resolved to
fight.
but answered resolutely, That if the English were 100000 strong, he would
fight them. All the Nobility were offended at this temerarious Answer; and
Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus, who was far superior to all the rest in Age
and Authority, Which Earl Douglas dissuaded him from in an Oration.
endeavored to appease the King's Fury by a mild Oration, and to open the
Nature and Reason of the two former Advices; You have (said he) sufficiently
satisfied your Alliance with France, in that you have called off a great part
of their Enemy's Army from them; for, by this means, they cannot run over all
France, as, by the multitude of their Forces, they hoped to do; neither can
they do any great damage to Scotland, because they cannot long keep their Army
together in a cold Country, already wasted by War, and otherwise not very
fruitful; and moreover, the Winter now approaching, which in the Northern Parts
uses to begin betimes. As for the French Ambassador (said he) I do not wonder,
that he is so earnest to press us to a Battle, for he, being a Stranger,
studies not the common good of our whole Party, but the private Advantage of
their own Nation, and therefore it is no News, if he push us on to fight, and
so be prodigal of other Men's Blood. Besides, his Demand is shameless, for he
requires that of us, which his own King, tho highly wise and prudent, does not
think fit to do, for the maintenance of his whole Kingdom and Dignity. Neither
ought the loss of this Army to be accounted small, because we are but few in
number: For that which is any ways eminent for Valor, Authority, or Counsel in
the whole Kingdom of Scotland, is here summed up in a Body: If these are lost,
the rest of the Commonalty will be but an easy Prey to the Conqueror. Besides,
to lengthen out the War, is at present more safe, and more conducive to the
main Chance. For if L'amot's Opinion be, that the English are to be either
exhausted by Expenses, or wearied out by Delays, what can be more advisable,
in the present Posture of Affairs, than to compel the Enemy to divide his
Force; so that part of them must attend us, as if we were continually likely to
invade them; and the fear thereof would take off a great stress of the War from
the French, tho with no small Toil of ours. Besides, we have consulted
sufficiently for the Glory and Splendour of our Arms, which these Men (who, I am
afraid, are more forward in Words than Actions) pretend, as a Disguise and Vail
for their Temerity: For what can be more splendid, than for the King to
demolish so many Castles, to destroy the Country with Fire and Sword, and, from
so large Devastations, to bring home so much Booty, that many Years Peace will
not restore a Country, so desolated, to its former hue? And what greater
Advantage can we expect in a War, than that, in so mighty an hurry of Arms, to
our great Honor and Renown, but the Shame and Disgrace of our Enemies, we give
our Soldiers leave to refresh themselves, Repartees between the King and
Douglas concerning a present Fight.
having gotten Estates and Glory to boot? And this kind of Victory, which is
obtained rather by Wisdom than by Arms, is most proper for a Man, especially
for a General, in regard the common Soldiers can challeng no part thereof.

All that were present assented to what he spoke, as appeared by their
Countenances: but the King had taken a solemn Oath, that he would fight the
English, and therefore he entertained his whole Discourse with great Disgust,
and bid him, Get him home again, if he were afraid. He thereupon fell a
weeping, as foreseeing the ruin of Affairs, and of the King himself, by his
Rashness; but as soon as he was able to speak, he uttered these few words; If
my former Life have not sufficiently vindicated me from any suspicion of
Cowardice and Fear, I know not what will; as long as my Body was able to
undergo Hardship, I never spared it for the Good of my Country, and to maintain
the Honor of my King. But seeing now I am useful only for Advice, and the
King's Ears are shut against it, I will leave my two Sons, which, next to my
Country, are most dear to me, with my other Kinsmen and Friends, as sure
Pledges of my Fidelity to You and my Country; and I pray God, that my Fears do
prove vain, and that I be rather accounted a false Prophet, than what I dread,
and do as it were foresee in my Mind, should come to pass.

Having thus spoken, he took his Convoy and Retinue, Earl Douglass in
discontent retires.
and so departed. The rest of the Nobles, because they could not work over the
King to their Opinion, endeavored to secure Things the best they could, and
that was, in regard they were inferior in number, (for they had Intelligence by
their Spies, that the English were 26000 fighting Men) to advantage themselves
by the opportunity of the Ground and Place, and so to encamp upon an Hill that
was near them; It was where Cheviot-Hills do gently decline into a Plain, a
small Spot, with a narrow Entrance into it, gradually sloping downwards: This
Passage they defended with their Brass-Guns; behind them were the Mountains, at
the foot of them there was a moorish piece of Ground, which secured their left
Wing; on the right, ran the River Till, whose Banks were very high, over which
there was a Bridge for passage, not far from the Camp: When the English had
intelligence, by their Scouts, that they could not attaque the Scots Camp,
without great damage, or rather certain ruin, they marched off from the River,
and made a show, as if they intended to leave the Enemy and retire toward
Berwick, and so directly into the neighboring Parts of Scotland, which was the
best part of the Country, there to damage the Scots more, than They had done
the English before. And James was most inclinable to believe, they would do so,
because there was a Rumor spread abroad, either by uncertain Report, or else
devised on purpose, by the English, that their Design lay that way, that so
they might draw the Enemy down into the plain and Champion Country. James would
not endure that, and therefore set Fire to the Straw and Huts, and removed his
Camp too. The Smoke, occasioned by the Fire, covered all the River, so that the
Scots, by means thereof, could not see the English; They marched farther from
the River, through places more unpassable; but the Scots had a level and open
march thereunto; till they both came at last to Or Floddonhill, lying between
the Town of Ouler and the River of Tweed.
Fluidon, or Floddon, a very high Hill, almost unknown one to another. There
the Ground was more level, and stretched it self out into a Campagn; and the
River was also passable by a Bridge at In Northumberland, on the North side of
the River Blico, three miles above Stannington-Bridg.
Tuisil; and there was a Ford also at Or Milfeild.
Milford. The English commanded their Forlorn, first to draw their Brass-Pieces
over the Bridge, the rest marched through the Ford, and, by the opportunity of the
Place, they set themselves in Battle Array, to stop the Enemy in their passage.
Their Numbers were so great, that they divided themselves, as it were, into two
Armies, distinct from one another, either of which did well-nigh equal the
whole Army of the Scots. In their first Brigade, Admiral Thomas Howard, who a
little before was come in with some of his Sea-Forces, Flodden Fight, and the
Manner of it described.
commanded the Main Battle; Edward Howard led on the Right Wing; and Marmaduke
Constable, the Left: Behind them, the rest were placed, as Reserves, being
divided into three Bodies; Dacres commanded the Wing in the Right; Edward
Stanly, That on the Left; and the Earl of Surry, General of the whole Army, the
Main Body. The Scots had not Men enough to divide their Army into so many
Parties, unless they would extremely weaken their Front; and therefore they
divided their Army into four Bodies, at a moderate distance one from another;
of which, three were to charge first, and the fourth was for a Reserve. The
King led on the Main Body; Alexander Gordon commanded the Right Wing, to whom
Alexander Hume and the Merch-Men were joined; Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox,
and Gillespy Cambel Earl of Argyle, led on the third Body; Adam Hepburne with
his Clans, and the rest of the Nobility of Lothian, were in the Reserves. The
Gordons began a very sharp Fight, and soon routed the left Wing of the English;
but when they returned from the Pursuit, they found almost all the rest of
their Brigades defeated; for One of them, in which was Lennox and Argyle, being
encouraged by the Success of their Fellows, brake their Ranks, and fell upon
the Enemy, in very great disorder, leaving their Colors far in their Rear.
Though L'amot, the French Resident, cried out much against it, and told them,
they would run headlong to their own destruction; for they were charged, not
only by the English, standing in Array before them, but were also set upon by
another Party in the Rear, and so almost all cut off. The King's Body, and
Hepburn's Brigade with the Lothianers, fought it out stoutly. There was a great
slaughter on both Sides, and the Dispute continued till Night; by which time
both Sides were weary. There were a great many slain of the King's main Body;
they, who reckoned the full number of the Slain, as their Names were taken,
according to the several Parish-Registers, out of which they were pressed, say,
That there were slain above 5000 of the Scots; the loss was most of the
Nobility, and of the forwardest of them too, who chose rather to die upon the
Spot, than to supervive the slaughter of their Men. It Is reported, that the
English lost as many, but that they were most Common Soldiers. This is the
famous Fight of Floddon, amongst the few Overthrows which the Scots have
received from the English, one of the most memorable, not so much for the
number of the Slain, (for they had lost more than double that Number, in former
Battles,) but for the Quality of the Persons, the King and Prime of the
Nobility falling there, so that few were left to govern the Rabble, who were
fierce by Nature, and lawless also in hope of Impunity.

And yet there were Two sorts of Men, that gained Advantage by this Calamity of
others. For the richer sort of Churchmen grew so insolent thereby, that, not
contented with their own Function, they sought to draw all the Offices of the
Kingdom into their own Hands: And the Mendicant Friars (for that sort of Monks
were then counted most superstitiously religious) had received much Money of
those that were slain, to keep for them; but it being delivered without
Witness, they were mightily enriched by this Booty, and thereupon omitted the
severity of their Ancient Discipline; yea, there were some amongst them, who
counted That Gain, as a Pious and Holy Fraud, alleging, That the Money could
never be better bestowed, than to be given to Devout Persons, that they might
pray (forsooth) for the Redemption of their Souls out of Purgatory.

The Fight was carried on so obstinately, that, toward Night, both Parties
were weary, and withdrew, almost Ignorant of one another Condition; so that
Alexander Hume, and his Soldiers, who remained untouched, gathered up a great
part of the Spoil at their pleasure. But the next day, in the Morning, Dacres
being sent out with a Party of Horse, to make discovery, when he came to the
place of Fight, and saw the Scots Brass-Guns without a Guard, and also a great
part of the Dead unstripp'd, he sent for Howard, and so gathered up the Spoil
at leisure, and celebrated the Victory with great Mirth.

Concerning the King of Scotland, there goes a double Report; The English say,
Various Reports concerning K. James's Death.
he was slain in the Battle. But the Scots affirm, That, in the Day of Battle,
there were several others clothed in the like Coat of Armor, and the Habit of
the King; which was done on purpose, on a double account; partly, that the
Enemy might principally aim at one Man, as their chief Opponent, on whose Life
the safeguard of the Army, and total ruin of the Enemy, did depend; and partly
also, if the King happened to be slain, that the Soldiers might not be
discouraged, nor sensible of his loss, as long as they saw any Man armed and
clothed like him, in the Field, and riding up and down as a Witness of their
Cowardice or Valor. And that one of these was Alexander Elphinston, who, in
Countenance and Stature, was very like the King; and many of the Nobility,
perceiving him armed in Kingly Habiliments, followed him, in a Mistake, and so
died resolutely with him; but that the King himself repassed the Tweed, and was
slain by some of Humes his Men, near the Town of Kelsoe; but it is uncertain,
whether it were done by his Command, or else by the forwardness of his
Soldiers, who were willing to gratify their Commander; for they, being
desirous of Innovation, thought, that they should escape Punishment, if he were
taken off; but if he were alive, they should be punished for their Cowardice in
the Fight. Some Conjectures are also added, as, that, the same Night, after
this unhappy Fight, the Monastery of Kelsoe was seized upon by Car, an Intimate
of Hume's, and the Abbat thereof ejected; which it was not likely he would dare
to have done, unless the King were slain; and moreover, David Galbreth, one of
the Family of the Hume's, some Years after, when John the Regent questioned the
Hume's, and was troublesome to their Family, is said to have blamed the
sluggish Cowardice of his Allys, who would suffer that Stranger to rule so
arbitrarily and imperiously over them, whereas he himself had been one of the
Six, that had put an end to the like Insolency of the King, at Kelsoe. But
these Things were so uncertain, that when Humes was afterward tried for his
Life, by James Earl of Murray, the King's Natural Son, they did not much
prejudice his Cause.

However the Truth of this Matter stands, yet I shall not conceal what I have
heard Lawrence Talifer, an Honest and a Learned Man, to report more than once.
He was then one of the King's Servants, and was a Spectator of the Fight; he
saw the King, when the Day was lost, set upon an Horse, and pass the Tweed;
many others affirmed the same thing: So that the Report went current, for many
Years after, That the King was alive, and was gone to Jerusalem, to perform a
Religious Vow he had made, but would return again in due Time: But that Rumor
was found as vain, as another of the same Batch, which was heretofore spread
abroad by the Brittons, concerning their Arthur: And, but a few Years since, by
the Burgundians, concerning Charles. This is certain, That the English found
the Body of the King, or of Alexander Elphinston, and carried it into England,
and, retaining an inexpiable Hatred against the Dead, they left it unburied, in
a Lead Coffin, (I know not, whether their Cruelty therein were more foolish, or
more barbarous,) because he had born sacrilegious Arms against Pope Julius the
Second, whom the English then sought to curry favor with; or else, as some
say, because he was perjured, as having contrary to the Oath and League between
them, taken up Arms against Henry the Eighth: Neither of which Exprobrations
ought to have been laid to his Charge; especially by such a King, who, during
his Life was not constant or tight in any one Religion; nor, by such a People,
who had took up Arms, so often, against the Bishop of Rome. Not to speak of
many of the Kings of England, whom their own Writers do accuse as guilty of
Perjury, as William Rufus, who is charged with That Crime by Polydore and
Grafton; Henry the First, by Thomas Walsingham, in his Description of Normandy.
King Stephen has the like Brand inured upon him, by Neobrigensis, Grafton, and
Polydore: Henry the Eighth, by the same Newberry, Grafton, and Polydore.
Richard the First, by Walsingham, in his Hypodigma Neustriae. Richard the
Third, by Grafton, and Walsingham: Edward the First, by Walsingham. I cull out
these few, for Example-sake, not of the First Kings of the Saxon Race, of which
I might instance in a great Many, but in Those of the Norman Family, whose
Posterity enjoy the Kingdom to this Day, and who lived in the most flourishing
Times of England's Glory; to put them in mind, not to be so bitter against
Strangers, who, with so much Indulgence, bore the Perjuries of their own Kings;
especially, since the guilt of the Crime objected lies principally on those,
who were the first Violaters of the Truce. But to return to the Matter.

Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, Howard Earl of Surrey, General against the
Scots at Flodden, falls afterward into Disgrace.
had gone off with great Renown for That Victory over the Scots, if he had used
his Success with Moderation; but being a Man, almost drunk with the Happiness
of his prosperous Success, and little mindful of the Instability of Human
Affairs, he made his Household Servants (as the English custom is) to wear a
Badg on their left Arms, which was a White Lion (his own Arms) on the top of a
Red one, and rending him with his Paws: God Almighty did seem to punish this
his insolent Ambition, for there were, in a manner, none of his Posterity, of
either side, but dyed in great Disgrace and Ignominy.

But King James, as he was dear to all whilst living, The Character of K. James
the Fourth.
so he was mightily lamented at his Death; and the Remembrance of him stuck so
fast in the Minds of Men, as the like was not known of any other King, that we
have heard or read of. It Is probable, that it happened, by making a Comparison
with the bad Kings, who preceded his Reign; or else, were likely speedily to
follow after It; considering also, his eminent Virtues; yea, his popular Vices
did easily deceive vulgar Minds, under a specious Resemblance and Affinity to
Virtue. For he was of a strong Body, just Stature, a Majestic Countenance, of
a quick Wit, but, by the default of the Times, not cultivated by Learning. He
did greedily imbibe one ancient Custom of the Nation, Scots Nobility, all
anciently had Skill in Surgery.
for he was skilful in curing of Wounds; for, in old Times, that kind of
Knowledge was common to all the Nobility, as Men continually accustomed to Arms.
The Access to his Presence was easy, his Answers were mild, he was just in
Judgment and moderate in Punishment, so that he seemed to be drawn to it
against his Will. He bore the malevolent Speeches of his Enemies, and the
Monitions of his Friends, with a Greatness of Mind, which arose in him from the
Tranquillity of a good Conscience, and the Confidence of his own Innocence;
insomuch, that he was so far from being angry, that he never returned them an
harsh Word. There were also some Vices, which crept in among these Virtues, by
reason of his two great affectation of Popularity. For, by endeavoring to
avoid the Name of a covetous Prince, which his Father had incurred, he labored
to insinuate himself into the Good will of the Vulgar, by sumptuous Buildings,
by costly Pageants, and immoderate Largesses, so that his Exchequer was very
low, and his want of Money such, that, if he had lived longer, the Merits of
his former Reign would have been extinguished, or, at least, out-ballanced by
his Imposition of new Taxes; so that his Death seemed to have happened rather
commodiously, than immaturely, to him.

JAMES the Vth, the CVIth King.
WHen James the Fourth was slain, he left his Wife Margaret and Two Sons behind
him; the Eldest of which was not yet full two Years old. James the 5 th, of
about 2 years old, proclaimed King.
The Parliament, assembled at Sterlin, proclaimed him King, according to the
Custom of the Country, on the 24 th day of February, and then they addressed
themselves to settle the public Affairs, in doing whereof they first perceived
the greatness of their Loss. For those of the Nobility, who bore any thing of
Authority and Wisdom before them, being slain, the major part of those, who
survived, by reason of their youthful Age, or incapacity of Mind, were unfit to
meddle with Matters of State, especially in so troublesome a time; and they who
were left alive, of the better sort, who had any thing of Prudence in them, by
reason of their Ambitions and Covetousness, abhorred all Counsels tending to
Peace. Alexander Hume, Lord Warden of all the Marches, had got a great Name,
and a large Estate, in the King's Lifetime; but when he was dead, he obtained
an (almost) Regal Authority in the Countries bordering upon England. The
Ambition of Alexander Hume.
He, out of a wicked Ambition, did not restrain Robbers, that so he might more
engage those bold and lewd Persons to him, thinking, thereby, to make way for
his greater Puissance: but that Design was unhappy to him, and, in the end,
pernicious. The Command of the Country, on this side the Forth, was committed
to him; the Parts beyond, to Alexander Gordon, to keep those Seditious
Provinces within the Bounds of their Duty: But the Name of Regent was in the
Queen her self. For the King had left, in his Will, which he made before he
went to fight, that, if he miscarried, as long as she remained a Widow, she
should have the Q. Margaret the first Female Regent, in Scotland.
Supreme Power. This was contrary to the Law of the Land, and the first Example
of any Woman, who ever had the Supreme Rule in Scotland; yet the want of Men
made it seem tolerable, especially to them, who were desirous of Peace and
Quietness. But her Office continued not long; for before the end of the Spring
she married Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus, She loses her Regency by her
Marriage.
one of the prime young Men of Scotland for Lineage, Beauty, and
Accomplishments in all good Arts; and before the end of that Year, the Seeds of
Discord were sown. They took their Rise from the Ecclesiastical Order; for,
after the Nobles were slain, in all public Assemblies, a great part were of
that sort of Men, and many of them did their own business amidst the public
Calamity, and got such Estates, that nothing did more hasten their Ruin, than
that inordinate Power, which they afterward as arrogantly used.

Alexander Stuart, Archbishop of St. Andrews, Three Competitors for the
Archbishopric of St. Andrews, Douglas, Hepburn and Forman.
was slain at Flodden, and there were Three which strove for that Preferment,
but upon different Interests. Gawin Douglas, upon the account of the Splendour
of his Family, and his own Personal Worth and Learning, was nominated to the
place by the Queen, and accordingly took Possession of the Castle of St.
Andrews. Andrew Hepburn, Abbat of St. Andrews, before any Archbishop was
nominated, gathered up the Revenues of the place, as a Sequestrator; and he,
being a potent, factious, and subtle Man, was chosen by his Monks to the
Vacancy (for he alleged, that the Power of electing an Archbishop, by ancient
Custom, was in Them) so that he drove out the Officers of Gawin, and placed a
strong Garrison in the Castle. Andrew Forman had obtained great Favor in the
Courts both of Rome and France, by his former Services; so that, besides the
Bishopric of Murray in Scotland, which he held from the beginning, Lewis the
12 th of France, gave him the Archbishopric of Bourges: And Pope Julius had
also dismissed him, laden with many rich Preferments, for he bestowed on him
the Archbishopric of St. Andrews, the two rich Abbeys of Dumfermling, and
Aberbrothock, and made him his Legate ( a Latere, as they call him,) besides.
But so great was the Power of the Hepburns at that time, that the Hume's being
yet at Concord with them, no Man could be found that durst proclaim the Popes
Bull, for the Election of Forman to that Dignity; until, at last, Alexander
Humes was induced by great Promises, and, besides other Gifts, with the actual
Donation of the Abbey of Lying within two Miles of Aymouth in the Merss, near
the Scottish Sea.
Coldingham to David his younger Brother, to undertake the Cause, which seemed
to be honest and just; and especially, because the Family of the Formans was in
the Clanship, or Protection, of the Hume's; so that he caused the Popes Bull to
be published at Edinburgh: And that was the Original of many Mischiefs which
ensued; for Hepburn, being a Man of a lofty Spirit, from that day forward,
studied day and night how to destroy the Family of the Hume's.

The Queen, whilst she sat at Helm, did this one thing Worthy to be remembered,
that she wrote to her Brother, that he would not make War upon Scotland, in
respect to her, and her young Children; and that he would not infest the
Dominions of his Cousin by his Foreign Arms, which, of its own accord, was
divided into so many Domestic Factions; but that he would rather defend them
against the Wrongs of others, upon the account of his Age, and the Affinity
betwixt them. Henry answered very Nobly and Prince-like, That if the Scots
desired Peace, they should have it; if War, he would make it upon them.

When the Queen, by reason of her Marriage, fell from her Regency, The Nobility
divided about choosing a Regent, in the room of Q. Margaret.
the Nobility was manifestly divided into two Factions; the Douglassian Party
endeavored, that the chief Power might reside in the Queen, and that This was
the way to have Peace with England, which was not only advantageous, but even
necessary, for them. The other Party, headed by Humes, pretended an Umbrage of
the Public Good, and that it was against the old Laws of the Land, to choose a
Woman to be Regent; as for the Queen, they would be studious of her Honor as
far as they might so do by the Law, and as far as the Public Safety would
permit, and that a sufficient Proof had been given thereof, in regard that they
hitherto submitted to her Government, (tho it were against the Law of their
Forefathers) not by any legal Compulsion, but of mere good Will, and that they
were ready to endure it longer, if any honest and equitable Pretense could be
alleged for it. But seeing she, by her Marriage, had voluntarily deposed her
self from that Dignity, she ought not to take it amiss, if they substituted
another to enjoy that Office, which she had left; and which indeed, by the Law,
she could not hold; for the Laws of Scotland do not permit Women to have the
Supreme Power, no not in times of Peace, much more in such troublesome days as
Ours, wherein the powerfullest and the prudentest Man alive could hardly find
Remedies for the many growing Evils of the Times.

Thus whilst each Faction strove pertinaciously about the Choice of a Regent,
either out of wicked Ambition, or occult Envy, they passed over All there
present, and inclined to choose John, Duke of Albany, then living with good
Repute in France; whereupon William Elphinston, Bishop of Aberdeen, is reported
to have burst forth into Tears, in bewailing the public Misfortune; and his
Speech affected many, especially when he came to that Point of reckoning up
what Men were slain in the last Fight, and how few, like Them, were left
behind, of whom none was thought fit to sit at the Helm of Government: He also
told them, how empty the Exchequer was, and how it had been exhausted by the
late King, and how great a Portion thereof was the Queen's Jointure, and how
much necessarily must be expended on the Education of the King, and then how
little part would remain to maintain public Charges; and that, tho none were
more fit for the place of Regency than the Queen, yet seeing Concord could not
be had on other terms, she was forced to yield to that Party, who were for
calling John, Duke of Albany, out of France, to take the Regency upon him, tho
he thought, that the public Misery would be rather deferred than fully healed
thereby. Alexander Hume was so violent for Albany, that he professed openly in
the Assembly, that if they all refused, yet he himself would go alone, and
bring him over into Scotland, to undertake the Government. It is thought, he
did this, not for the Love of his Country, or for any private Advantage to
himself, but merely out of This respect, that, being an ambitious Man, and
knowing that his Interest in the People was more upon the account of his Power,
than out of any real Love, therefore, himself despairing of the place, he was
afraid if the Queen should have it, the Douglasses, his Neighbors, would grow
too great, and his Power would abate; for the Men of Liddisdale and Annandale
had already withdrawn themselves, and had, by little and little, betook
themselves to the Clanship of the Douglasses: And besides, he considered, that
the Queen, by Assistanc^ from England, was easily able to obviate all his
Designs; so that most Voices carried it for John Duke of Albany, then in
France, chosen Regent.
John, and an Embassy was appointed (the chief whereof was Andrew Wood of the A
little Town in Cuningham, standing on the Firth of Clyd.
Largs, (a famous Cavaleer in those days) to call him into Scotland for the
Government, both upon the account of his own Virtue, and also by reason of his
near Consanguinity with the King, for he was the Son of Alexander, Brother to
James the Third. He being thus called to the supreme Government by the Scots;
Francis, King of France, did not think that Office unsuitable to his Interest,
and therefore he furnished him with Money and a Retinue at his Departure. Before
his Arrival, in regard there was no one Person to administer the Public
Government, there were many Murders and Rapines committed; and whilst the
richer sort made up their private Clans and Factions, the poor desolate Vulgar
were afflicted with all kind of Miseries. The chief Robber of those times was
MacRobert Stran, who committed Outrages all over Athol, and the Neighboring
Parts, at his Pleasure, having 800 Men, and sometimes more, under his Command.
At length, when he was at his Uncles John Creighton's, he was waylaid,
apprehended, and put to Death: But there was more Mischief like to arise from
the Fewd between Andrew Forman and John Hepburn; yet, the Nature of them both,
and the Discord, rather of their Manners than Minds, deferred the Mischief for
a season, which then was just a breaking out. John was profoundly covetous; and
Andrew was as great a Despiser of Money, and profuse in his Largesses. The
Designs and Purposes of Andrew were open and manifest to the view of all;
neither was there any need that he should conceal them, because his Vices were
accounted Virtues by the Vulgar, and the simplicity of his Nature did Him as
much Kindness among them, as the occult Craft of Hepburn, together with his
malicious Dissimulation, his implacable remembrance of Injuries, and his desire
of Revenge, did Him. And therefore Forman, hearing as yet no certainty of the
coming of the Duke of Albany, neither could he be put into Possession by Hume,
seeing Hepburn resided at his Castle and Monastery, which he had strongly
garrisoned, which were at a great distance from those places in which the Power
of the Hume's might be formidable, he determined, by his Friends, to try,
whether he could, with Money, either satisfy, or at least, in some degree, abate
the Avarice of the Man; so that at last they came to an Agreement upon these
Terms, That Forman should remit and forgive the Revenues of the last Year,
which John had gathered in, as a Sequestrator; that he should surrender up to
him the Bishopric of Murray, and that he should pay him yearly 3000 French
Crowns out of his Ecclesiastical Revenues, to be divided amongst his Friends.
And thus the Man's implacable Hate was a little abated, and Matters settled on
that side.

The Fourteenth BOOK.
John Duke of Albany, the new Regent, arrives in Scotland.
THIS was the State of Affairs in Scotland, when John Duke of Albany arrived at
Dunbarton, on the 20 th day of May, in the Year of our Salvation 1515, with the
exceeding gratulation of all good Men. For, under his Government, they hoped
for more quiet Times, and an equal distribution of Justice. In a full Assembly
of the Nobility, called in his Name, he had a large Revenue settled upon him;
he was made Duke of Albany, Earl of March, and Regent, till the King came to be
of Age.

Moreover, James, the Natural Son of the late King, was made Earl of Murray, a
young Man of such virtuous Endowments, that he far exceeded all the hopes Men
had conceived of him. There was also one Fact, which much enhaunsed the
estimation of John, and it was done almost in the Face of the Assembly, and
that was the punishment of Peter Muffat. Peter Muffat, a noted Robber, punished.
He was a notable Thief, who, after many cruel and nefarious Pranks, played by
him, in the Two last licentious Years, arrived at length to that audaciousness,
that he appeared openly at Court: His unexpected Punishment made such a sudden
change of Things, that Criminals began to withdraw for shelter: The Minds of
the Good were erected, and the Face of Things began soon to be changed, from a
stormy Tempest to a sudden Tranquillity.

In the mean time, Hepburn insinuates himself into the new Regent.
John Hepburn had so insinuated himself into the Regent, by the help of his
Friends, whom he had privately greased in the Fist; and afterward by his
obsequiousness, and pretense of knowing the old Customs of the Country, he got
his Ear, who of himself was ignorant of Scottish Affairs, insomuch that none was
credited, in Matters of great Moment, but He alone; He was sent abroad with
Commission, by the Regent, all over Scotland, to inquire into Their Offenses,
who oppressed the Vulgar, and made them as their Slaves. He obtained that
Office principally upon these Grounds; First of all, he acquainted the Regent,
What new Discords and old Fewds there were in every County; and also, what
Factions there were, and who were their respective Heads: Hitherto his
Relations were true, for the Things were known to all. But if any Occasion were
offered to speak of Hume, he stirred up some to complain of his Enormity; so
that by the Imputation, partly of True, and partly of Feigned, Crimes, the
Regent's Ears were shut against all Defense, he could make. But when he had
almost gone over the whole Kingdom, and expressly declared the Alliances,
Affinities, and Leagues which had interceded between each several Family; and
had persuaded the Regent, That no Man of Power, though a Criminal, could be
punished without the Offense of his Clans; and that, not so much for the Enmity
and Conspiracies of their Kindred, as, that the Punishment reaching to a few,
yet the Example would extend to a great many more; whom a similitude of Faults,
and a like fear of Punishments, out of Enemies would make Friends; so that
these great and large spreading Factions were not able to be punished by the
Force of Scotland, only; and therefore it was advisable to desire an Auxiliary
Strength from the King of France, to break this Knot of Contumacious Offenders;
and that this would be of use to France, as much as to Scotland. In the mean
time, the Heads of the Factions were to be kept under, and (if it were
possible) taken off, yet with that prudence, that they might not think too many
of them to be aimed at at once. The Heads of the Factions at present were
Three; of them, Douglas, Hume, and Forman, accused by Hepburn, as the Three
^eads of the then Factions.
Archibald Douglas was wonderfully popular, insomuch that the Vulgar doted on
him: His Name was much adored, by reason of the great Merits of his Ancestors;
besides, he was in the flower of his Youth, and relied so much on his Affinity
with England, that he bore a Spirit too big for a private Man. As for Hume, he
was formidable of himself, and yet rendered more so, because he was confirmed in
his Power by length of Time. Neither did he stop here, but made an invidious
commemoration of what the Hume's had acted against the Regent's Father and
Uncle; of all which, though the Hepburns were partakers, yet he cast the Odium
upon the Hume's only: He often mentioned his Cowardice in the last Battle
against the English; and the Talk abroad about the King's Death reflecting upon
him, together with the repairing of Norham Castle, which was done by his
connivance; these things he repeated with great earnestness before the Regent.
As for Forman, (says he) it is true, he was not to be feared upon the account of
his Kindred, or any Nobleness of Descent, yet he would make a great accession
of strength to what Party soever he inclined, because all the Wealth of the
whole Kingdom was gathered together (as it were) into one House, for he was
able to supply the present Want of the Party he sided with, with Money; or else,
by his Promises, (all Things being then in his Power) he could draw many into
the Partnership of the same Design with himself. This was Hepburn's Speech to
the Regent.

The noted Fewds, that had passed between Hepburne and Forman, were the Cause,
that Hepburne was not so much believed, in that part: And besides, his Estate
was not so much to be envied, for he rather loved to lay it out, than hord it
up; neither was he so munificent to any, as to the French that waited on the
Regent; and besides, his desire was more to join all Parties in an universal
Concord, than to addict himself to any one Faction. But the suspicion of the
Hume.
Lord of the Marches sunk deeper into the Regent's Mind, which was manifest by
the aversion of his Mind from him; and because his Countenance was not so
friendly to him, as before: So that after a few Months, Hume, in discontent,
applies himself to the Queen and Douglas.
Alexander Hume, perceiving that he was not entertained by the Regent
answerable to his hope, began to have secret Meetings with the Queen and her
Husband: In those Congresses, Hume grievously lamented the State of the
Public, that the King, in that Age wherein he could not understand his own
Misery, was fallen into the Hands of an Exile, one born and brought up in that
Condition; who, by a wicked Ambition, had endeavored to rob his Elder Brother
of the Kingdom: And, He being the next Heir, Who did not see that all his
Endeavors were, to settle other Things according to his Mind, and then to pack
the innocent Child out of the World, that He might translate the Kingdom to
himself; that so, what his Father had impiously designed, he himself might as
wickedly accomplish? There was but one Remedy in the Case, and that was, for
the Queen to retire with her Son into England, and there to put her Self and
Concerns into the Protection of her Brother.

These things being brought to the Regent's Ears, were easily believed by him;
but, being a Man of an active Spirit, and of quick dispatch in Business, Hume's
Design disappointed.
with those Forces which he had ready about him, he prevented their Design, for
he took the Castle of Sterlin, and the Queen in it; He took the Oath of
Allegiance to the King publicly, by the Decree of the Nobles; the Queen and
the Douglasses were removed, Three Governors over the young King, the Queen and
Douglas being displaced.
and Three of the Nobility, of great estimation for their Faithfulness and
Integrity, were joined with John Erskin Governor of the Castle, to preside over
the Education of the Young King; they were to succeed one another by turns, and
he allowed them a Guard for their Security; upon this, Hume, the Queen, and
Douglas, fly into England;
Hume and his Brother William fled into England. And Douglas and his Wife staid
no longer behind them, but till they knew Henry's Mind, who commanded them to
stay at Harbottle in Northumberland, till his Pleasure was further known.

John, the Regent, was very much concerned at all their departures, and
therefore he presently sent Ambassadors into England, to acquit himself before
Henry, that he had done nothing, why the Queen should fear him, or be in the
least disaffected toward him; neither had he acted any thing against those,
who accompanied her in her Flight and Departure, but that they might enjoy
their Country, their Freedom, and, if they pleased, their Estates. Thus
publicly he wrote to the King: But besides that, he did not omit secretly to
promote the return of the Hume's and Douglas, by the mediation of their
Friends; he made them many large Promises, till he had brought them over to his
Will. But, upon Reconciliation with the Regent, return home again.
Whereupon, the rest returned Home; but the Queen being big, and near the Time
of her Delivery, was constrained to stay there, where she brought forth a
Daughter named Margaret, of whom in due place: But as soon as she was able to
travel, she had a Royal Accommodation and Retinue sent from London to bring her
up thither, where she was honorably and nobly received by Henry, her Brother,
and Mary, her Sister, (who upon the death of her Husband, Lewis of France, had
a little before returned into her own Country.

And yet the Suspicions before raised in Scotland, were not much abated, either
by the departure of the Queen, or by the return of some of her Retinue: For
Gawin Douglas, Uncle to the Earl of Angus, Patrick Pantar, Secretary of State
to the former King, and John Drummond chief of his Family, were sent to several
Prisons and banished. And Alexander Hume raises an Insurrection,
Alexander Hume was summoned to appear before the Assembly of Estates, on the
12 th day of July, in the Year of Christ 1516; but he, not appearing, was
condemned, and his Goods confiscate. He was enraged at this contumelious Wrong,
(for so it was in his Eye) and to drive out one Fear by another, he either sent
in, or else encouraged, Tories, to commit great Outrages upon the
Neighborhood: Whereupon the States ordered the Regent to raise Ten thousand
Horse and Foot, to repress those Insolences, and either to take Hume, or else
drive him out of the Country. But before it came to Blows, Hume, But submits,
and is made Prisoner.
by the persuasion of his Friends, surrendered himself to the Regent, and so was
conveyed to Edinburgh, to be a Prisoner under James Hamilton Earl of Arran, his
Sister's Husband, who was to be esteemed as a Traitor, if he suffered him to
escape; but the Issue of that Matter fell out otherwise than any Body expected,
He escapes, and creates further Disturbances,
for Hume persuaded Hamilton to escape away with him, and to make a Party, and
so to enter on the Government Himself, he being the next Heir after the former
King's Children, in regard he was born of a Sister of James the Third; and
therefore it was more equitable, that he should enjoy the next Place to the
King, than John, who, it is true, was also the Son of a Brother, but born in his
Banishment; and in all other things a perfect Foreigner, one who could not so
much as speak the Scottish Language.

When the Regent heard of this, he went to take in Hamilton's Castle, and,
placing his Brass-Guns against it, had it surrendered in two Days. In the mean
time Hume made Excursions out of Merch, and pillaged the Country about, and at
length burnt down a great part of the Town of Dunbar. These were the
Transactions of that Year.

At the beginning of the Spring, John Stuart, Earl of Lennox, whose Mother was
Hamilton's Sister, joined himself, with a great many of his Friends and
Vassals, to the Rebels. These seized upon the Castle of Glasgoe, and there they
staid with Hamilton himself, expecting the Regents coming. The Regent had
called a Council of the Nobles of his Party at Edinburgh, and there raised a
sudden Force, and entered Glasgoe Castle; one Gunner, a Frenchman, was
punished as a Deserter; the rest were pardoned by the intercession of Andrew
Forman, who was then a Mediator for Peace between them. The Earl of Lennox, a
few days after, was received into Favor, and from that day forward carried it
with great Faithfulness and Observance toward the Regent. And not long after,
first Hamilton, and then the Hume's, returned to Court, and had an Amnesty for
what was past; it was granted to Hume with greater difficulty than to the rest,
because he had rebelled so often; But is quelled, with his Party.
and an express Condition was added, that if he offended another time after
that, the memory of his old Crimes should be again revived, and charged upon
him. Peace being thus settled, the Regent retired to Falkland, where he staid
some Months; but hearing of great Suspicions against Hume, he returned to
Edinburgh. And on the 24 th day of September held a Council of the Nobility,
where he endeavored, by his Friends, to draw Hume to Court. Large Promises
were made to entice him so to do; but many of his Party dissuaded him; or, if
he himself were resolved to go, yet he should leave his Brother William (who by
his Valor and Munificence had almost obtained as great, or a greater Authority
than himself) at Home, in regard the Regent would be afraid to use any high
Severity against him, as long as his Brother was alive; but he being, as it
were, hurried on by a Fatal Necessity, slighted the advice of his Friends; Both
the Hume's come to Court,
and, with his Brother William, and Andrew Car of Farnihurst, came to Court,
where presently they were all clapped up in several Prisons. And, by the advice
of the Council, a few days after, were tried, Are imprisoned,
for their Lives, after the Country Custom. And yet there was no new Fact urged
against them, Prince James, Earl of Murray, accused him for the Death of his
Father, who came alive off the Field, as many Witnesses did prove. This Fact
was strongly urged, but the Proofs were weak, so that they gave it over, and
insisted only on his private Crimes, and the many former Rebellions were
objected, of all which Alexander was either the Author, or at least Partaker in
them; and moreover, 'twas alleged, that he did not do his Duty in the Battle of
Flodden.

Hereupon, the Hume's were condemned, Alexander had his Head struck off the 11
th of October, Tried and Executed;
and his Brother, the Day after; both of their Heads were set up on an high
place, as a Terror to others, and their Estates were confiscate. This was the
end of Alexander Hume, the powerfullest Man in Scotland of his Time. He, in his
Lifetime, had raised up the Hatred and Envy of a great many Men against him;
yet, those Prejudices in time abating, his Death was variously spoke of, and so
much the more, because he fell not, for the perpetration of any new Crime, but
merely by the Calumnies (as 'twas thought) of Chiefly by the Instigation of
John Hepburn.
John Hepburn, the Abbat. For he, being a Factious Man, and eager of Revenge,
bore an implacable Hatred against Hume; because, by his Means alone, he was
disappointed of the Archbishopric of St. Andrews: So that, tho he had stifled
his old Hatred for a Time, yet, 'twas believed, he pushed on the Regent (who of
himself was suspicious enough of, and disaffected to, the Hume's) to the
greater Severity against him, by telling him, how dangerous it would be to the
King and all Scotland, if he, at his going into France, should leave so fierce
an Enemy alive behind him. For, what would he not attempt in his Absence, who
had despised his Authority when present? So that the Contumacy of the Man,
which could not be lenified by Rewards, Honors, nor by frequent Pardons, had
need be conquered by the Axe, if he would ever keep Scotland in quiet. These
and such like Insinuations, upon pretense of consulting the public Safety,
being buzzed into the Ears of a Man disaffected to them before, contributed
more to the Destruction of the Hume's, (in the Judgment of many) than any of
their Crimes. When the Hume's were put to Death, Andrew Car escapes out of
Prison.
Andrew Car obtained the Respite of one Night, to provide for his Souls Health;
but, by means of his Friends, and especially a Frenchman his Keeper, it was
suspected, upon the payment of a good Sum of Money down upon the Nail, he made
his Escape.

Alexander Hume left three Brothers behind him, who all met with various
Misfortunes in those Days; George, for a Murder he had committed, lay private,
as an Exile, in England: John, Abbat of Iedburgh, was banished beyond the Tay:
David, the youngest, Prior of Coldingham, about two Years after the Execution
of his Brothers, being called forth by James Hepburn, his Sisters Husband, upon
pretense of a Conference, fell into an Ambush, laid purposely for him, and was
slain, being much pityed by all; that an innocent young Man, of so great hopes,
should be betrayed so unworthily by one, who had little reason so to do. When
Severities and Punishments had thus ranged over the whole Family of the Hume's,
at last it fell to their Enemies share, and especially to John Hepburn's, who
had been so severe an Exactor of the unjust Punishment of others; yet the
Destruction of one Family, once so powerful, brought such a Pannick Fear upon
all the rest, that Matters were the quieter a great while after. The next
December, the Regent brought the King from Sterlin to Edinburgh, The Regent
desires leave to pass over into France.
and then he desired leave of the Nobility of Scotland to return into France;
every one, almost, was against the Motion, so that he was forced to stay, till
late in the Spring, and then took Shipping, promising speedily to return, in
case any more than ordinary Commotion should arise, which required his
Presence. For the Government of the Kingdom, in his Absence, He appoints seven
Deputies to govern, in his absence.
he left the Earls of Angus, Arran, Argyle, and Huntly, the Archbishops of St.
Andrew's and Glasgoe, to whom he added Anthony Darcy, a Frenchman, Governor
of Dunbar, who was injoined to correspond with him, and to inform him of all
Passages in his Absence. And that no Discord might arise, out of an ambitious
Principle, between such Great and Noble Personages, by reason of their Parity
in the Government, he allotted to each of them their several Provinces. Darcy,
the Frenchman, the rest condescending thereunto, had the chief Place amongst
them, Merch and Lothian being appointed to be under his Government. The other
Provinces were distributed to the rest, according to each Man's particular
Convenience. Mean while, the Queen, Q. Margaret returns to Scotland.
about a Year after she had been in England, near the end of May, returned to
Scotland, and was attended by her Husband from Berwick: But they lived not
together, so lovingly, as before.

The Regent, at his Departure, to prevent the budding and growth of Sedition in
his Absence, had carried along with him, either the Heads of the noblest
Families, or else their Sons and Kindred, (upon a pretense of doing them
Honor, but, indeed, as Pledges) into France: And he had sent others of them
into different and remote parts of the Kingdom, where they had as 'twere but a
larger Prison. He had also placed French Governors in the Castles of Dunbar,
Dunbarton, and Or Inse-Garvy, a fortified Rock lying in the middle of the
Forth, or Scottish Sea.
Garvy, yet a Commotion arose, upon a slight occasion, whence it was least
feared, or dreamt of.

Anthony Darcy had carried it with a great deal of Equity and Prudence in his
Government, especially in restraining of Robberies. The first Tumult in his
Province, which tended to any thing of a War, was made by William Cockburn,
Uncle to the Lord of A Town in the Merss, a mile west of Duns.
Langton; he had driven away the Guardians of the young Ward, and had seized
upon the Castle of Langton, relying principally on the power of David Hume of
Wederburn in the Merss.
Wederburn, whose Sister Cockburn had married. Thither Darcy marched with a
sufficient Guard, but they Within refused to surrender the Castle; and
moreover, David Hume, with some few nimble Horse, riding up to him, upbraided
him with the cruel Death of his Kinsman Alexander; the Darcy slain by David
Hunt.
Frenchman, partly distrusting his Men, and partly confiding in the Swiftness
of the Horse he rode upon, fled toward Dunbar; but, his Horse falling under
him, his Enemy overtook and slew him, and set up his Head in an eminent place
on Hume-Castle; he was slain the 20 th of September, in the Year 1517.

Whereupon, the other Governors had a Meeting, and fearing a greater
Combustion, after this terrible beginning, they made the Earl of Arran, their
President, and committed George Douglas (Brother to the Earl of Angus, upon
Suspicion of his being privy to the Murder newly committed) Prisoner to Inse
Garvy-Castle: They also sent to the Regent in France to call him back into
Scotland, as soon as ever he could. About the same time, some Seeds of Discord
were sown, between the Earl of Discord between Douglas Earl of Angus, and
Andrew Car.
Angus, and Andrew Car of Farnihurst, by reason of the Jurisdiction over some
Lands which did belong to the Earl, but Andrew alleged, he had Power to keep
Courts in them: The rest of the Family of the Car's sided with the Earl, but
the Hamilton's took part with Andrew, which they did, more out of hate to the
Douglas's, than for any Justice Car had, for his Pretensions; so that both
Parties provided themselves against the Court-day, to run a greater hazard than
the matter they strove about was worth. And John Somerval, a noble and
high-spirited young Man, of the Douglas's Faction, set upon James, the Natural
Son of the Earl of Arran, on the Way, and slew five of his Retinue, putting the
rest to flight, he also took above thirty of their Horses.

When an Assembly was summoned to be held at Edinburgh, April the 29 th, 1520.
The Hamiltons alleged, that they could not be safe in that City, where
Archibald Douglas was Governor; whereupon, Archibald Douglas surrenders up his
Government.
Douglas, that he might not impede public Business, about the end of March,
resigned up his Government, of his own accord; and Robert Long, a Citizen of
Edinburgh, was substituted in his Place. The Nobility of the The Western Nobles
conspire to apprehend the Earl of Angus.
West part of Scotland, of which there were very many, had frequent Meetings in
the House of James Beton, the Chancellor; their Design was, to apprehend the
Earl of Angus, for they alleged, that his Power was too great and formidable to
the Public; that, as long as he was at Liberty, they should have no freedom
for Debate, or Resolution. And Opportunity seemed to favor their Design; for
he, having now but a few of his Vassals about him, might be easily surprised,
before his Kindred came in to his Assistance. When he perceived what was
agitated against him, he sent his Uncle Gawin, Bishop of Dunkelden, to them, to
pacify them, whom, he said, he had provoked with no Injury, and to desire them
to manage the Dispute without force of Arms; for, if they could make out any
just Complaint against him, he was willing, in Equity, to give them all due
Satisfaction. But his Speech profited not, or being made to Men prepossessed,
fierce, puissant, and greedy of Revenge. And therefore Gawin could obtain no
good Terms from them, but returned to Angus, and acquainted him with the
Arrogance of his Enemy, and then caused his whole Family to follow the Earl; He
himself, being a Priest, and infirm too, by reason of Age, retired to his own
Lodging. Some think, he did this to upbraid the unseasonable Pride of the
Chancellor, who, when he ought to have been a Promoter of Peace, flew armed up
and down, like a Firebrand of Sedition. But he defends himself by force, and
worsts them.
Douglas, seeing there was no hopes of Agreement, exhorted his Men rather to
die valiantly, than, like Dastards, to hide themselves in their Lodgings, from
whence (to be sure) they would soon be plucked out by the Ears, to their
Deaths; for their Enemies had stopped all Avenues and Passages, so that not a
Man of them could get out of the City: All that were there present, assented to
what he had spoken; and thereupon he and his Party, being clad in their Armor,
seized upon the broadest Street in all the Town. He had about fourscore in his
Train, but all stout resolute Men and of known Valor. They divided themselves
into the most convenient places, and so set upon their Enemies as they came out
of several narrow Alleys, at once; the first they slew, and drove the rest
back, tumbling one upon another with a witness. The Earl of Arran, who
commanded the opposite Party, with his Son James, got to a Ford and made their
escape by the North-Lough; the rest ran several ways for shelter to the Convent
of the Dominicans. Whilst these things were acting, there was a mighty
Combustion all over the Town; and, in the midst of the Bustle, William, Angus's
Brother, enters the City, with a great Party of his Clan-ship. When Douglas had
got this Accession to his former Strength, tho there were abundance of his
Enemies in the Town, yet he made a Proclamation, by a Trumpeter, that none
should dare to appear in the Streets, with Arms about them, but his Friends and
Party. Those that desired Passes to depart quietly, had them easily granted;
there went out, in one Company, about 800 Horse, (besides those who had taken
their Flight, before) with greater Ignominy than Loss. For there fell not above
72, but amongst them, were Men of Note, as the Brother of the Earl of Arran and
Eglington's Son. This was done the 30 th day of April, 1520. To revenge this
Disgrace, the Hamilton's besieged Kilmarnock (a Castle in Cuningham); Robert
Boyd, a Friend of the Douglas's, commanded it, but they soon left it, without
effecting any thing. The next Year, Douglas came to Edinburgh, on the 20 th of
July, bringing with him the Hume's, which had been banished, and there he took
down the Heads of Alexander and William Hume, which had been set up on Poles.
The whole five The Regent, after 5 Years absence, returns from France.
Years, that the Regent was absent, were very full of Tumults, there was no end
of pillaging and killing, till his Return, which was October. 30. 1521. Upon his
Arrival, he resolved to abate the Power of the Douglas's, in order to the
quieting of those Seditions, which had happened in his absence. The Earl of
Angus, Head of that Family, he sent into France; he caused the Pope, to call
over his Uncle, the Bishop of Dunkelden, to Rome, to purge himself there from
some imputed Crimes; who, the Year after in his Journey to Rome, fell sick of
the Plague in London, and died: His Virtues were such, that he was very much
lamented; for, besides the splendour of his Ancestry, and the comeliness of his
Personage, he was Master of a great deal of Learning, (as for those Times) and
being also a Man of high prudence, and singular Moderation, even in troublesome
Times, he was much esteemed, in point of Faithfulness and Authority, even by
contrary Factions; he left behind him considerable Monuments of his Ingenuity
and Learning, written in his Mother Tongue The next Year after the return of
the Regent, a Parliament was held, and an Army levied, appointed to rendevouz
at Edinburgh, on a set day; whither they came accordingly, and pitched their
Tents in the Fields, near In Mid-Lothian.
Rosselin, none knowing upon what Service they were to be put; but at last an
Herald proclaimed, The Regent raise an Army against England;
that they were to march toward Annandale; a great Punishment being denounced
on those, who refused so to do. The rest of the Army marched, obediently
enough, to the River Solway, the Boundary of Scotland, only Alexander Gordon,
and his Party, staid behind three Miles, backward, further from England: When
the Regent heard of it, he came back to him the next Day, and brought him up to
the Camp: There he called the Nobles and chief Commanders together, and showed
them many great and weighty Reasons, why he invaded England, on that side. But
a great part of the Nobility, by the Instigation of Gordon, who was their
Senior, But the Nobility oppose his Design.
and of greater Authority than them all, wholly refused to set Foot on English
Ground; whether out of Disaffection to the Regent; or else, (as they pretended)
that 'twas not for the Interest of Scotland, so to do. The specious Pretenses,
cast abroad amongst the Soldiers, pleased them well enough; for if they had
levied an Army in favor of the French, lest the English might bring their
whole Strength upon them, it was sufficient for that purpose, only to make a
show of War; but, if the Interest of Scotland were considered, Matters were not
well settled at home, and their King was but a Child; so that, 'twas most
advisable for them, at that time, only to be on the Defensive, and to keep
their own Country in quiet; for, if they should march forward, the blame, even
of fortuitous Miscarriages, might be laid to their charge, and an account of
such their Misfortunes might be required at their Hands, in a very short time.
Lastly, tho they were never so willing to march forward against the Enemy, and
so to slight the common Danger, as well as to overlook their own Concerns at
Home; yet they were afraid the Scots would not be obedient to Command in an
Enemies Country; great heed therefore was to be taken, lest, by Emulation,
Envy, or late Disgusts, some notable Affront, or shameful Loss, might be
received. The Regent, perceiving it in vain to oppose, was fain to yield; yet,
that he might not seem to have acted a Pageantry only, with such vast
Preparations in marching his Army, as far as the Solway, he suborned a fit
Person, who used to traffic into England, to acquaint Dacres, then Lord Warden
of the English Marches, that some good might be done, if he did treat with John
the Regent. He willingly hearkened to the Proposal, because he was unprovided
for Defense, never imagining, that the Scots would have made an Irruption into
England on that side; nor, indeed, scarce believing, that they would have made
any such Attempt at all. Whereupon he sent an Herald of Arms, and had a
Passport to come and go, with safety, into the Camp. The next Day, Thomas
Dacres and Thomas Musgrave, with about twenty more brave Cavaliers, came to the
Regent's Tent; where they had private Discourse together, all alone, each
having their Interpreters. Dacres, being taken unprovided, Whereupon he claps
up a Truce with the English, and r^treats.
was not averse from a Peace; and the Regent, not being able to effect any
thing, without the Consent of his Army, clapped up a Truce; and thus an hopeful
Introduction to a Peace was made, and so they parted. Those of the Scots, who
were the greatest Hindrances of the Action, to avert the blame from
themselves, spread abroad Reports, that Dacres had bought a Peace from the
Regent, for a Sum of Money, of which, Part was in Hand paid, the rest promised,
but never paid. Thus they endeavored to disparage the Conference, amongst the
Vulgar.

The Regent went again, on the 25 th of October into France, The Regent, a
second time, goes into France.
but promised to return before August the First, next ensuing; yet, he kept not
his Day, because he was informed, that the English had a Fleet to intercept his
Passage; however he sent 500 Foot in the Month of June, both to encourage the
Scots, and also, as an Earnest of his speedy return; they never saw the Face of
an Enemy, in all their Voyage, till they came near the Isle of May, which is
situate in the Firth of Forth, there they fell among the English Ships, who
lay in wait, in those Straits, to stop their Passage. There they had a sharp
Fight, and the French boarded their Enemies Ships, but with the loss of their
Admiral. When he was slain, A Skirmish between the French and English Flee^^.
the Seamen would not obey the Captains of the Foot, and the Land-Souldiers,
being ignorant of Sea-Affairs, could not command the Mariners; so that, after a
great slaughter of the English, they could scarce be forced back into their own
Ships.

In the absence of the Regent, Thomas Howard, Earl of Surry, The Earl of Surry
with an Army ravages over part of Scotland.
was sent, with ten thousand Men, and a great many Volunteers, into Scotland:
His Advantage was, that the Scots were at Discord amongst themselves, their
chief Magistrates were absent, and they were under no certain Command, so that
he marched over Merch and Teviotdale, and took the Castles of both Shires, to
the great loss of the Nobles, yea, and of the Commons too (who used upon sudden
Invasions to secure themselves, and their Goods, in those Forts.) But Scotland
did then labor with such intestine Discords, that no Man thought his
Neighbors Calamity did at all belong to him; the English marched up and down,
for several Months, where they listed, without any Opposition; and when, at
length, they retreated, the adjacent Scots endeavored, in some sort, to
revenge themselves for their Losses received, and thereupon daily Incursions
were made by them into Northumberland, and great Booties gained from thence; so
that Howard was sent against them a second time, who took Iedburgh (a Town
unfortified, as the Scots Custom is,) but it cost him some toil, Iedburgh taken
by the English.

A strange Fright among the Horses of the English Army.


and loss of Men. Whilst these Things were acting in Teviotdale, the Horses of
the English Army were so terrified in the Night, ('it is not known, upon what
occasion) that about 500 of them broke their Bridles, running up and down the
Camp, and overturning all that were in the way; some of the Soldiers they
trampled down and trod upon; and then ran out into the open Field, as if they
had been mad, and so became a Prey to such of the Country Scots, as could take
them up. Hereupon, there was a great Consternation in the whole Camp, all
crying out Arm, Arm, neither could the Tumult be appeased, till the next
Morning. Three days after, the English, without making any further Attempt, The
English Army retreats.
disbanded their Army, and returned Home.

The Duke of Albany, knowing, that all the Ports on the French Shore were
waylaid, by the English, to intercept him in his Return; being inferior in
Strength, resolved to piece it out by Stratagem; whereupon, he kept not his
Navy together in any one Port, but so dispersed them into several Harbors,
(here one Ship, there another) that there was no appearance at all of any
Warlike Preparation: And besides, he quartered his Soldiers in the
Inland-Country, that no Body could imagine, he designed to ship them; so that
the Admiral of the English Fleet, who waited to disturb his Passage, till the
13 th of August, was weary to rove up and down in the Sea any longer, to no
purpose; and, understanding by his Spies, that there was neither Fleet, nor
Army, on all the French Coasts, he withdrew his Fleet, as supposing, John would
not wag, till the next Spring. The Duke of Albany, being informed of the
Departure of the English, presently drew together his Navy of 50 Ships, aboard
of which were 3000 Foot, The Regent arrives in Scotland from France, a second
time.
and an 100 Curiasiers; and so, after the Autumnal Aequinox, he set sail from
France, and by the 24 th of September made the Isle of Arran in Scotland, which
happened to be the same day, wherein the English burnt Iedburgh.

I showed before, how miserable the State of Affairs in Scotland was, the last
Summer. The Nobles were at variance one with another; the English wasted all
the Countries near them; they were Masters of the Sea, and thereby all hopes of
Foreign Aid were cut off. The Design of the Enemy herein, was, to take down the
Pride of the Scot, and, by Sufferings, to incline him to a Pacification;
neither were those Scots that were adverse to the French Faction, less addicted
thereto, for they earnestly desired a perpetual Peace with England; of which
Faction, the Queen was the Chief. For when Hume was taken off, Q. Margaret,
with her Brother Henry the 8 th of England, persuade the Scots to break with
the French, with their Arguments to enforce it.
Douglas packed away, and the other Nobles were judged rather fit to follow,
than to lead, in the Management of Matters; all those that were not Favorers
of the French Interest, applied themselves to the Queen. She, on the other
side, to gratify her Brother, and also to draw the Power into her own Hands,
dissembled her private Ambition, and exhorted them, saying, that now was the
time to free their young King, who was almost of Age, from the Bondage of a
Stranger; and also, to deliver themselves from the same Yoke; for the Queen now
labored to strengthen her Party against her Husband, whom she long before
began to disgust: Besides, the King of England sent frequent Letters, stuffed
with large Promises, to the Nobles of Scotland, desiring them, to promote his
Sisters Designs: He told them, it was not his Fault, that there was not a
perpetual Amity between the two neighboring Kingdoms; and that he, with
others, did much desire it at this time; not for any private end of his own,
but to make it appear, that he bore a respect to his Sister's Son, whom he was
resolved to support, and gratify, as much as ever he was able. And if the Scots
would be persuaded to break their League with France, and to strike in with
England, they should quickly find, his aim was not Ambition, but Love and
Concord only. That Mary, his only Daughter, being married to James, by that
Affinity, the Scots would not come over to the Government of the English, but
the English to That of the Scots. That Enmities as great as theirs, had
intervened betwixt Nations, heretofore, which, yet, by Alliances, mutual
Commerce, and interchangeable Kindnesses, had been wholly abolished and
extinct. Moreover, he reckoned up the Advantages, or Inconveniences, which
might accrue to either Nation, by this Union with each other, rather than with
the French; as, that they were one People, born in the same Island, brought up
under the same Climate, agreeable one to another in their Language, Manners,
Laws, Customs, Countenance, Color, and in the very Lineaments of their Bodies;
so that they seemed rather to be one Nation than two: But as for the French,
they differed from them, not only in Climate and Soil, but also in the whole
course of their Conversations. Besides, if France were an Enemy, she could do
no great damage to Scotland; and, if a Friend, yet she could not be highly
advantageous; as for the Assistance of England, That was near at Hand; but
French Aid, was much more remote, there was no Passage for it, but by Sea; and
therefore, it might be prevented by Enemies, or else hindered by Storms. They
were therefore desired to consider, how inconvenient it was for the management
of Affairs, and how unsafe for the Public, to hang the hopes of their, and the
Kingdoms, Safety, upon so unconstant and variable a thing, as a blast of Wind.
How much they might expect from absent Friends, against present Dangers, may be
easily perceived by the Actions of the last Summer, wherein the Scots not only
felt, but even saw with their Eyes, how the English did baffle them, being
forsaken by their Friends, and came upon them with all their Strength, ready to
devour them; but the French Aid, so long looked for, was kept back by the
English Navy, in their own Harbors.

These were the Allegations for a Peace with England: And not a few, being
convinced thereby, inclined thereunto; but Others argued to the contrary, for
there were Many in that Assembly, But the French Faction in Scotland oppose in,
with their Reasons.
whom the French had bribed; and some, who had got great Estates out of the
public Losses, for fear they should lose them, did abhor the thoughts of
Peace. There were others, who suspected the readiness and facility of the
English, in making such large Promises, especially since matters in England
were managed, for the most part, at the will and pleasure of Thomas Woolsey,
Cardinal Woolsy a self-ended and ambitious Statesman.
a Cardinal, a Man wicked and ambitious, who referred all his Designs to his
own private Advantage, and the enlargement of his Power and Authority; and
therefore he accommodated them to every turn of the Wheel of Fortune, as men
say. All these did equally favor a League with France, tho induced thereunto
on different Grounds. They alleged, that the sudden Liberality of the English
was not free and gratuitous, but done out of Design; and that This was not the
first time, that they had used such Arts to entrap the unwary Scots. For Edward
the First, (said they) when he had sworn and obliged himself, by all the Bonds
of Law and Equity, to decide the thing in Dispute, and therefore was chosen
Arbitrator by the Scots, had, most injuriously, made himself King of Scotland;
and of late Edward the 4 th had betrothed his Daughter Cicely to the Son of
James the 3 d; but when the young Lady grew up to be marriageable, and the day
of Consummation thereof almost appointed, he took the opportunity of a War,
which arose upon the account of our private Discords, and so broke off the
Match: And that the English King aimed at nothing else now, but to cast the
tempting bait of Rule before them, that so he might make them really Slaves;
and, when they were destitute of Foreign Aid, might subdue them at his
Pleasure, and unawares, with all his force. Neither was that Position a true
one, wherein the contrary party did pride themselves, That an Alliance near at
hand was better than one farther off; For causes of Dissension would never be
wanting among those which were near; which were oftentimes produced, even by
sudden chances; and sometimes, great Men would promote them, upon every light
occasion; and then the Laws of Concord will be prescribed by him, who has the
longest Sword. That there was never such a firm and sacred Bond of Friendship,
between Neighboring Kingdoms, which, upon occasions offered, or fought for,
was not often violated; neither could we hope, that the English would more
refrain now from violating such a League, than they formerly did, against so
many Kings of their own Blood; it is true, the Sanctity of Leagues, and the
Religion of an Oath for the faithful Performance of Pacts and Agreements are
firm Bonds and Engagements to good Men; but amongst those which are bad, they
are but as so many Snares and Gins, and give only opportunity to deceive; and
such an Opportunity is most visible in a Propinquity of Borders and
Habitations, in the Sameness of a Language, and in a Similitude of
Conversation. But if all these things were otherwise, yet, (proceeded they)
there are Two things to be regarded and provided for: First, that we reject not
our old Friends, even without an hearing, who have so often well deserved of us.
The other, that we do not here spend our time in Quarrels and Disputes,
especially about a Business, wherein nothing can be determined, but in an
Assembly of all the Estates of the Kingdom. Thus stood the Inclinations of
those of the French Faction; and so they obtained, that no Determination should
be made, till they received certain News of the French Supplies.

When the return of the Regent was made known, it mightily rejoiced his
Friends, strengthened the wavering, and kept back many, who favored the League
with England, from complying with it. He sent his Warlike Provisions up the
River Clyde to Glasgoe, and there mustered his Army; He also published a
Proclamation, that the Nobility should attend him at Edinburgh, where he made
an elegant Speech to them, commending their Constancy in maintaining their
ancient League, and their Prudence in rejecting the perfidious Promises of the
English: He highly extolled the Goodwill, Love, and Liberality of Francis, the
French King, toward the Scots; and exhorted them, to lay aside their private
Animosities and Fewds; and, seeing foreign Aid was come into them, to revenge
their Wrongs, and to repress the Insolence of their Enemy, by some notable
blow. Hereupon, after his Soldiers had refreshed themselves, and the Scots
Forces had joined them, he marched toward the The Regent again marches with an
Army into England,
Borders, whither he came the 22 d of October. But being about to enter England,
and having already sent part of his Forces over a Wooden Bridge, which was at
Mulross, the Scots made the same Pretenses, as they did in the former
Expedition at Solway; and refused to enter England, so that he was forced to
recall that party, which he had commanded over; and pitching his Tents a little
below, on the left side of the Tweed, endeavored to storm the Castle of
Besieges Werke-Castle, is repulsed and retreats.
Work, situated over against him, on the right side of the River. In the mean
time, the Horse that had passed over the River, beset all Passages, that no
Relief could come to the Besieged, they als^ ^aged with Fire and Sword against
all the Country thereabou^ (...) ^ he Description of Werke-Castle described.
Work Castle is this: In the inner Cour^ (...), there is a very high Tower,
well fortified, it is compassed with a double Wall; the outward Wall incloses a
large space of Groun^^ (whither the Country People were wont to fly in time of
War, and to bring their Corn and Cattle, with them, for Safeguard) the inner
Wall is narrower, but trench'd round about, and better fort^fi'd with Towers
built thereon. The French took the outward Co^rt by Storm, but the English set
Fire to the Barns, and the Straw (...) was in them, which made such a Smoke and
Flame, that they (...) them out again. For the next two days, they battered the
inner Wall with their great Guns; and after they had made a Brea^h wide enough
for Entrance, the French again attempted the matter, and valiantly stormed at
the Breach they had made; but they in the inner Castle, being yet safe, darted
down all sorts of Weapons upon them, and they lay exposed to every Blow; so
that having lost some few of their Men, they were beat back to their Army, and
so returned over the River. The Regent perceiving that the Minds of the Scots
were averse from Action; and also ^earing for certain, that the English were
coming against them with a numerous Army; their own Writers say, no less than
40000 fighting Men; and besides, that 6000 more were left to defend Berwick, a
Neighbor-town: The 11 th of November. he removed his Camp to a Nunnery, called
In the (...) near (...)-Castle.
Eccles, about six Miles distant from his present Encampment; thence at the 3 d
Watch he marched by N^ght to Lauder; both Horse and Man were much incommoded in
their March, by the sudden Fall of a great Snow. The same Storm occasioned the
English also to disband, and return home, without effecting any thing. The rest
of the Winter was quiet enough.

At Spring, the The Regent undertakes his third Voyage into France.
Regent, in an Assembly of the Nobles, told them the Causes, why he must needs
go again into France, but he promised them to return, before the 1 st of
September next following. And moreover, he desired them, that, during his
Absence, the King might remain at Sterlin, and that they would make no Peace or
Truce with the English, before his Return; as also, that they would innovate
nothing in the Government. They promised him faithfully to obey his Commands;
and thus on the 14 th of May, He, and his Retinue set Sail for France. In his
absence, the Reins were let loose, every Man's Will was his Law, and a great
deal of havoc was made, and Mischief done, without any Punishment at all;
whereupon the King, though but a Child, by the advice of his Mother, and the
Earls of Arran, Lennox, Crawford, and many other of the prime Nobility, came
from Sterlin to Edinburgh, and on the 29 th of July, by the Counsel of his
Nobles, whom he had convened at his Palace of Holy-rood-house, he took upon him
the In his absence the young King enters upon the Government;
Government of the Kingdom; and the next day, caused them all to swear Fealty
to him, a second time; and, to show that he had actually assumed the
Administration of matters into his own Hands, he discharged all public
Officers; but a few days after he restored them to their places again.

There was a great Assembly of the Nobles held on the 20 th Day of August, that
so he might And vacates the Regents Power.
vacate the Power of the Regent, which he had now taken upon himself; and so
went in great Pomp (as the manner is) into the public Hall of the Town; only
the Bishops of St. Andrews and Aberdene dissented, alleging, That they ought to
stay till the first of September, at which time the Regent had promised to
return; whereupon they were imprisoned. But they revenged themselves with their
own Church-weapons, and excommunicated all of their Diocesses. However, in
about a Month or two after, they were reconciled to the King, and restored to
the same place in his Favor, which they held before.

About the same time Archibald Douglas, Margarite's Husband, returns from
France, through England, into Scotland.
Archibald Douglas, who, as I said before, was sent into France, sent Simon
Penning, an active Man, and much trusted by him, to the King of England, to
persuade him to give him the liberty of returning home through his Dominions,
which was granted. For Henry was well enough pleased at the Diminution of the
Authority of so active a Person, as the Duke of Albany; and at the Change which
was made in Scotland, so that he entertained the Earl courteously, and
dismissed him very honorably. But his Return did variously affect the Minds of
the Scots: For seeing all public Business was transacted under the Conduct of
the Queen, and the Earl of Arran; a great part of the Nobility, the Heads
whereof were John Stuart Earl of Lennox, and Calen Cambel Earl of Argyle,
taking it in great Distaste, that they were not admitted to any part of the
public Administration, received Douglas with high Expressions of Joy, as
hoping, by his Aid, either to gain over the Power of the adverse Faction to
themselves, or, at least, to abate their Pride. On the other side, the Queen,
who, as I said before, was disaffected toward her Husband, was much troubled
at his coming, and sought by all means to undermine him. And moreover Hamilton,
out of the Relics of his old Hatred, was none of his Friend; besides, he
feared, lest Douglas, who he knew would not be content with a second place,
should mount the Saddle, and make him truckle under; so that he strove to
maintain his own Dignity, and opposed him with all his Might. They kept
themselves within the Castle of Edinburgh, and tho they knew very well, that
many of the Nobility affected Alterations; yet, trusting to the Strength of the
Place, and the Authority of the Kingly Name, (tho it were but a sorry Defense,
in those Circumstances) they thought themselves secure from Force. He, with his
Partisans, seize on the young King, and manage the Government.
The adverse Party had a great meeting of the Nobles, where they chose Three of
their own Party to be Guardians of King and Kingdom, Three Moderators of the
Kingdom, Douglas, Stuart and Cambel.
Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus; John Stuart, Earl of Lennox; and Calen
Cambel, Earl of Argyle; they made great haste in their business: First, they
passed the Forth, and caused James Beton, a prudent Man, to join with them,
who, perceiving the Strength of the Party, durst not resist. From thence they
went to Sterlin, and conferred all public Offices and Employments on the Men
of their own Faction, only; and from thence they came to Edinburgh, which they
entered without Force, for it was not fortified at all. They cast up a small
Trench against the Castle, and besiedg'd it. The Defendants had made no
Provision for a Siege, and therefore soon surrendered up both It and Themselves.
All but the King were sent away, so that now the whole weight of the Government
lay upon the Shoulders of those Three Associates; who agreed among themselves,
That they would manage it by turns, each of them attending four Months apiece
on the King. But this Conjunction was not hearty, neither did it last long.
Douglas attended the first four Months, who brought the King into the
Archbishop of St. Andrews House, and made use of all the Bishop's Household
stuff, and other Accommodations, as if they had been his own; (for he had a
little before revolted from their Faction) and to engage the King to him the
more, he suffered him to wallow in all kind of Pleasure; and yet he obtained
not his End neither, in regard the King's Domestics were corrupted by the
adverse Faction, headed by the Queen and Hamilton.

The first Grudges at Court brake forth, upon the account of distributing
Ecclesiastical Preferments; for the But Douglas soon ou^^ the other Two.
Douglasses drew all to themselves; George Creighton was translated to the
Bishopric of Dunkelden: The Abbey of Holy Rood in the Suburbs, which was left
by him, Douglas gave to his Brother William, who had now for 5 years forcibly
held That of Coldingham, about six Miles from Berwick, after the Murder of
Robert Blacketer, the former Abbat: For Robert Blacketer, Robert's
Cousin-german, had the Abbey bestowed on him by the Pope, with the Consent of
John, the Regent. He had also commenced a Suit against John Hume, an Intimate
of the Earl of Angus's, and Husband to his Sister's Daughter, about the whole
ancient Estate of the Blacketers. And therefore Patrick being unable to cope
with the Douglasses, suffered his Estate to be made a Prey to his Enemies, and
reserved himself for better times amongst his Mother's Kindred, far from those
Counties, which were obnoxious to the Faction of the Douglasses. They, on the
other side, though they did not much value Patrick, yet having the Supreme
Power in their Hands, and being unwilling to incur the Blot of invading other
Men's Rights by mere Force, made use of Friends, to proffer him some kind of
Amends and Satisfaction; he, showing himself inclinable to an Agreement, even
tho he remitted part of his Right, had thereupon a Pass, and the public Faith
given him by Douglas, to come to Edinburgh, which he did, only with a small
Retinue, and unarmed; and not far from the Gates of the City he was set upon by
John Hume, who lay in Ambush for that purpose, and slain. As soon as the Noise
of the Fact was spread over the City, many mounted their Horses, and pursued
the Murderers some Miles, in order to their apprehension; but, understanding
that George Douglas, Brother to the Earl, was in their Company, and many more
of Douglas's Faction, with the Kindred of Hume, not knowing with what intent
they came out, whether to catch, or to defend, the Murderers, they desisted
from their Pursuit; whereupon strange Reports were divulged abroad concerning
the Douglasses.

As for Calen Cambel, he had already withdrawn himself from the Triumvirate;
and the Earl of Lennox, though he followed the King, yet, in regard the
Douglasses drew all Offices of public Advantage to themselves, he gave many
Testimonies of his Dislike, and that his Mind was quite alienated from them.
But they, being confident of their Power, slighted the Reports and ill will of
others; mean while, the King, though he were used more indulgently than was
fit, that so his infirm Spirit might be the longer in Subjection to them; yet
notwithstanding, by little and little, grew weary of their Government, being
also alienated from them by his Domestics, who laid to their charge Actions,
some true, some false, and interpreted the doubtful in the worst sense;
whereupon, he held secret Cabals with such as he could trust, concerning
vindicating himself into his Freedom and Liberty: Neither was he afraid to open
the Secrets of his Heart to John Earl of Lennox, one of his Nobles; for,
besides his other Virtues of Mind and Body, he was an honest and fine-spoken
Man, and excellently composed to conciliate and win upon Men, by a natural
Sweetness of Manners and Deportment: Him he made privy to his Designs; and
whilst they were consulting concerning the Time, Place, and Manner of it is
Accomplishment, At which, the Nobility is much discontented, and endeavor to
take the King, by Force, out of his Hands.
Douglas was making many Expeditions against the Banditty, but with no great
Success; at length, about the end of July, he resolved to carry the King into
Teviotdale, as supposing, that his presence would be advantageous, by striking
a Terror into the Licentious. Thus an Assembly being held at Iedburgh, the King
called together all the Heads of the chief Families round about, and commanded
them to apprehend those Criminals, every one within his own Precinct, of which
he then gave them a List: They willingly and industriously obeyed this Command,
so that, the Heads of the Thieves were many of them put to Death, and Others
were spared in hopes of Amendment. Thus, whilst the Minds of all were very
merry and jocund; they, who had a design to free the King from the Pupillage of
the Douglasses, thought that a good opportunity to effect it, because one
Walter Scot overthrown by the Douglasses, in his Endeavors to free the King.
Walter Scot, living not far from Iedburgh, had great Clanships in the Counties
thereabouts. The manner of the accomplishing their Project was thus laid;
Walter was to invite the King to his House, and there he was to remain with his
own good liking, till greater Forces came in, at the Noise of the thing: But
their Design seemed to be discovered, either by Chance, or upon some private
Intimation. Whereupon the King was carried back to Mulross. Yet Walter was not
discouraged, but proceeded on strait in his Journey to the King: when he was but
a little way off, frightful News were brought to the Douglasses, that Walter
was at hand, well-arm'd, and a great Troop of armed Men accompanying him. So
that there was no doubt to be made, but he, being a factious Man, and withal,
good at his Weapon, did intend some Mischief; insomuch that they all presently
ran to their Arms. Douglas, tho inferior in number, yet knowing that the Men he
had of his own, were choice ones; and besides that, he had several valiant
Persons of the Family of the Carrs and Humes's in his Train, with John Hume and
Andrew Carr their Principals, resolved to put it to a Battle: In the very nick
of time, George Hume had almost spoiled all, who, when Douglas commanded him to
alight from his Horse, and manage his part in the Fight; answered, He would not
so do; no, not if the King himself commanded him. They fought eagerly and
courageously on both sides, as Men who had their King (the price of the Combat)
their Spectator. John Stuart stood near the King, without striking a Stroke,
only as a Spectator of the Fight.

After a sharp Encounter, Walter was wounded, and then his Men gave ground: but
the Joy of the Douglasses Victory was much allayed by the Loss of Andrew Carr,
who for his singular Virtues was, equally lamented by both Parties. Upon the
account of his being slain, there ensued a perpetual Feud between the Families
of the Carrs and the Scots, which was not ended without Blood. From that time
forward, John Stuart, who carried himself as a Neuter in the Fight, being before
suspected by the Douglasses, was now accounted their open Enemy, so that he
departed from the Court. These things were acted July 23. in the Year 1521.

The Douglassians, perceiving themselves subject to the Envy of many, sought to
strengthen their Faction by new Acquists; and therefore they made up the old
Breach betwixt them and the Hamiltons, a Family much abounding in Wealth, Power
and Number, but remote from Court. Them he admitted into part of the
Government. On the other side, John Stua^t, Earl of Lennox, with the King's
Privity, renews the Design of redeeming the King from the Douglasses.
John Stuart had the advantage of being highly favored by most People; and
having also privately obtained the King's Letter to the chief of the Nobility,
who, he thought, would have kept his Counsel, he mightily strengthened his
Party. And therefore in a Convention of his Faction at Sterlin, where were also
present James Beton, some other Bishops, and many Heads of the noblest
Families; he openly propounded to them the Design of asserting the King to his
Liberty. This was unanimously agreed to, and tho the Day for mustering their
Forces was not yet come; yet, hearing that the Hamiltons were gathered together
at Linlithgow to intercept their March, it was judged advisable to attack
them, before they joined with the Douglasses; and accordingly with the present
Force which he had, he marched directly toward them: But the Hamiltons having
Intelligence that John would march out of Sterlin that Day, early in the
Morning had called the Douglassians out of Edinburgh, to their Assistance,
before. But the King, besides other Obstacles, did somewhat retard them, by
pretending himself not well; so that he rose later out of his Bed that day,
than ordinary; and besides, he marched very slowly; and upon the way would
often turn aside to ease Nature, as if he had been troubled with a Lask. And
when George Douglas had in vain flattered him, to make more haste, at last he
brake forth into this menacing Expression, Sir, said he, Rather than our
Enemies should take you from us, we will lay hold on your Body; and if it be
rent in pieces, we will be sure to retain one part thereof. Those Words struck
a deeper Impression on the King's Mind, than is usual in one of his Age;
insomuch, that when the Douglasses were banished many Years after, and he had
some Inclination to recall the rest of them, he could not endure to hear any
body speak of a Reconciliation with George. The Hamiltons, betwixt fear of
their Enemy approaching, and hope of Aid at hand, had set themselves in Array
at the Bridge of the River Aven, which is about a Mile from Linlithgoe, they
placed a small Guard at the Bridge, and the rest of their Forces on the Brow of
the Hills, which they knew the Enemy must pass. Lennox, seeing that his Passage
over the Bridge was stopped, commanded his Men to pass over a small River, a
little above, by a Nunnery (called A Mile above the Bridge near Linlithgo.
Manuel) and so to beat the Hamiltonians from the Hills, before Douglas's
Forces had joined them. The Lennoxians made toward their Enemies thorough
thick and thin, as we say; but by casting down of Stones from the Hills, they
were much prejudiced; and when they came to handy Blows, the Word was given,
that the Douglasses were at hand; and indeed they, from their March, ran in
hastily into the Fight, and soon carried the Day; so that Lennox fights with
the Douglassians and Hamiltonians, is worsted and slain.
Lennox's Men were grievously wounded and put to flight. The Hamiltonians,
especially James the Bastard, used their Victory with a great deal of Cruelty;
William Cuningham, Son to the Earl of Glencarn, received many Wounds, but his
Life was saved by the Douglasses his Kinsmen. John Stuart was slain, much
lamented by the Earl of Arran, his Uncle; and also by Douglas himself, but most
of all, by the King; For he had sent Andrew Wood of the Largs, his Favorite,
before, (as soon as ever as he had heard of the Fight, by the clashing of the
Armor) to save Lennox's Life, if possible, but he came, as we say, a day after
the Fair.

After this Victory, the Douglasses, to keep down the Faction of their Enemies,
Great Severity used by the Douglasses against Lennox's Party.
and make them subject to their Will, proceeded in the Law against those who
had taken up Arms against their King, as they phrased it; so that, for fear of
a Trial, many were forced to compound with them for Money; some put themselves
into the Clanship of the Hamiltons; others, into that of the Douglasses; but
the most obstinate were called to the Bar: Amongst whom was Gilbert Earl of
Cassils, who, when he was pressed by James Hamilton the Bastard, to shrewd
himself under the Protection of the Hamiltons, out of the Greatness of his
Spirit made this Answer, That there was an old League of Friendship made
between both their Grandfathers; in which his Grandfather was always named
First, as the more honorable. And now he would not so far degenerate from the
Dignity of his Family, or the Glory of his Ancestors, as to put himself under
the Patronage (which was but one degree below plain Slavery) of that Family,
whose Chief, in an equal Alliance, was always content with the Second Place. So
that when Gilbert was called to his Answer at a Day appointed, The courageous
Answer of Hugh Kennedy, in behalf of Gilbert Earl of Cassils.
Hugh Kennedy, his Kinsman, made Answer for him, That he had not taken up Arms
against the King, but for him, for he was commanded by the King to be at that
Fight, and, if it were needful, he proffered to produce the King's Letters to
that purpose. The Hamiltons were much troubled at his Boldness: For indeed, the
King had wrote to Gilbert, when he went from Court, as well as to others, That
he should take part with John Stuart. But seeing the Battle was at hand,
insomuch that he could have no time to call together his Clanship and Kindred,
as he was upon the way, he turned aside, with those of his Family that were
with him, to Sterlin.

The Violence of the Hamiltons was somewhat abated by this Trial, but James,
the Bastard, burnt with a mortal Hatred against Kennedy; and a few days after,
as he was returning home he caused him to be murdered upon the way, by means
of Hugh Cambel Lord of Air. This Hugh, the same day the Murder was committed,
(which he had commanded his Vassals to execute, that so he might avert all
Suspicion of so horrid a fact from himself) went to John Erskin's House, whose
Wife was Sister to Gilbert Kennedy's Wife; She, as soon as ever she heard of
this cruel Murder, did not cease to upbraid him most grievously therewith, to
his very face. Thus the noble Family of the Kennedy's was almost quite
extinguished; the Son of the Earl, after his Father was slain, being but a
Child, fled to his Kinsman Archibald Douglas, who was then Lord Treasurer, and
put himself and his Family under his Protection; he lovingly received him, and
such was the great Ingenuity of his promising Years, that he designed him for
his Son-in-law. Hugh Cambel was summoned to appear, but his Crime being
manifest, he fled out of the Land Neither did the Douglasses exercise their
Revenge and Hatred less fiercely upon James Beton, for they led their Forces to
St. Andrews, seized upon, pillaged and ruined his Castle, because they counted
him the Author of all the Projects the Earl of Lennox had undertaken; but he
himself went under frequent Disguises, because no Man durst entertain him
openly, and so escaped. And with the like kind of Dissimulation and Solitude
the Queen Herself made her Retirement, that so She might not fall into the
Hands of her Husband, whom she hated.

At the beginning of the next Spring, Douglas made an Expedition into
Liddisdale, where he slew many of the Thieves, falling upon them unawares in
their Hutts, before they could gather themselves together for defense; twelve
of them he hanged up, and twelve more he kept as Hostages; but because their
Fellows did not forbear their old trade of robbing, a few Months after, he put
them to Death also. At his Entrance on that Expedition, there happened a matter
very memorable, which, for the Novelty of the thing, The bold Attempt of an
Under-Groom, to destroy James Hamilton, in Revenge of his Master's, the Earl of
Lennox his Death.
I shall not pretermit: There was an Under-Groom, or Helper, belonging to the
Stables of John Stuart, of mean Descent, and therefore used in a mean
Employment, to dress Horses; when his Lord and Master was killed by the
Hamiltons, he wandered up and down for a time, not knowing what course to take;
at last he took Heart and resolved to attempt a Fact, far superior to the rank
and condition, he had been born and brought up in. For he undertook a Journey
to Edinburgh, with an intent to revenge the Death of his Lord who was slain;
and there he casually lighted upon a Man of the same Family and Fortune with
himself; he demanded of him, whether he had seen James Hamilton the Bastard, in
the City; who answered him, he had; What, said he, Thou ungratefullest of Men,
have thou seen him, and would thou not kill him, who slew so good a Master
as we Both had; get thee gone with a witness; all Misery betide thee. And
thereupon he presently hastened on in his designed Voyage, and came directly to
Court. There were then in a large Court, which is before the Palace in the
Suburbs, about 2000 armed Men of Douglasses and Hamilton's Dependants, ready
prepared for the Expedition, I spoke of before; he, seeing them, past by all
the rest, and fixed his Eye and Mind on Hamilton only, who was then coming out
of the Courtyard in his Cloak without his Armor, when he saw him in a pretty
long Gallery, (and somewhat dark) which is over the Gate, he flew at him, and
gave him six Wounds, one of them almost pierced to his Vitals, others of them
he pretty well avoided by the Flexure of his Body, and by warding them off with
his Cloak which he held before him; and then the Groom presently mixed himself
among the Crowd; immediately a great hubbub was raised, and some of the
Hamiltons suspected, that the Douglasses had done so horrid a Fact, out of the
relics of their old Feuds; so that those two Factions had almost like to go
together by the Ears; at last, when their Fear and Surprise was allayed, they
were all commanded to stand in single ranks, by the Walls which were round
about the Courtyard; there the Murderer was discovered, as yet holding the
bloody Knife in his hand. Being demanded, what he was, and whence and for what
he came thither? he made no ready Answer; upon which he was dragged to Prison,
and put to the Rack, and then he confessed immediately, The Groom apprehended
and tortured, yet dies very resolutely.
that he had undertaken the Fact, in revenge of his good Lord and Master, and
that he was sorry for nothing, but that so famous an Attempt did not take
effect; he was tortured a long time, but discovered no Body, as privy to his
Design; at, last he was condemned and carried up and down the City, and every
part of his naked Body was nipp'd with Iron Pinchers red hot; and yet, neither
in his Speech, nor in his Countenance, did he discover the least sense of Pain;
when his right Hand was cut off, he said, that it was punished less than it had
deserved, for not sufficiently seconding the Dictates of so stout a Spirit.
Moreover the same Year, Patrick Hamilton, Son to a Sister of John Duke of
Albany, Patrick Hamilton, nobly descended, put to Death upon the account of
Religion.
and of a Brother of the Earl of Arran's, her Husband, a young Man of great
Judgment and singular Learning, by a Conspiracy of the Priests, was burnt at
St. Andrews: And not long after his Suffering, Men were much terrified at the
Death of Alexander Cambel, he was of the Order of the Dominicans; a Man also of
good Ingenuity, and accounted one of the most learned of all those, who
followed the Sect of Thomas Aquinas; Patrick had often Conference with him
concerning the meaning of the Holy Scripture, and at last he brought the Man to
confess and acknowledge, that almost all the Articles, which were then counted
Heterodox, were really true. And yet this Alexander, being more desirous to
save his Life, than to hazard it for Truths sake, was persuaded by his Friends
to prefer a public Accusation and Charge against him; Patrick, being a Man of
a zealous Spirit, could not brook this Desire of Vainglory in the ambitious
Man, but brake forth into this Expression openly: O thou vilest of Men, says
he, who art convinced, that the Tenants which thou now condemns are most
certainly true, and not long since did confess to me that they were so; I do
therefore cite thee to the Tribunal of the living God. The strange Death of
Alexander Cambel, the self-condemned Persecutor of Patrick Hamilton.
Alexander was so astonished at that word, that he was never himself from that
day forward, and not long after he died in a Fit of Madness.

All this time, and for a great part of the Year ensuing, the Douglasses, being
severally intent upon other Matters and Concerns, were secure, as to the King's
Departure from them; because they believed, that now his Mind was fully
reconciled to them by those Blandishments and immoderate Pleasures they had
indulged him in. And besides, they thought, if he had a mind to remove, there
was no Faction strong enough to oppose them, neither was there any strong
Garrison, whither to retire, but only Sterlin Castle, which was allotted to the
Queen for her Habitation; but then it was deserted for a time, by the Queen's
Officers, when she hid her self for fear of the Douglasses; and when the Tumult
was a little appeased, 'twas somewhat fortified, but rather for a Show, than
for any real Defense. The King frees himself from the Douglasses.
The King having obtained some small Relaxation, saw that this must be his only
refuge, and therefore he bargained with his Mother privately to exchange that
Castle, and the Land adjoining, for other Lands as convenient for her; and
providing all other Requisites as secretly as he could, the Douglasses not
being so intent, as formerly, in their Watch over him, he retired by Night with
a few in his Company from Or Falcoland, about the middle of Fife.
Falkland to Sterlin; whither he soon sent for some of the Nobles to come to
him, and others hearing the News, came in of their own accord; so that now he
seemed sufficiently secured against all Force: There, by the Advice of his
Nobles, he published a Proclamation, The Douglasses forbidden, by Proclamation,
to intermeddle in the Government.
that the Douglasses should abstain from all Administration of public Affairs.
And moreover, that none of their Kin, by Blood or Marriage, or of their
Dependants, should come within twelve Miles of the Court; he that did
otherwise, was to lose his Life. When the Edict was served upon the Douglasses,
as they were coming to Sterlin, many were of opinion, that they should go on in
their Journey, but the Earl and his Brother George thought it best to obey the
Edict. Thus they went back to Linlithgo, resolving to stay there, till they
heard some more News from the Court. In the mean time, the King, with great
Diligence, sent Messengers, even to the furthest parts of the Kingdom, to call
in all the Nobles, who had a Privilege of voting, to an Assembly at Edinburgh,
to be celebrated September. the 3 d. next ensuing. In the Interim, He at Sterlin,
and the Douglasses at Edinburgh, gathered Forces about them, but it was rather
to defend themselves, than offend one another. At length July the 2 d. the
Douglasses departed out of the City, and the King, with his Forces and Banners
displayed, entered in; but by the Mediation of Friends, deprecating the King,
on their Behalf, Conditions were offered to them, which were, That the Earl of
Angus should be banished beyond the Spey; That George his Brother, and
Archibald his Uncle, should be kept in hold in the Castle of Edinburgh: If they
submitted to these Terms, then there was hopes of the King's Mercy, otherwise
not. These Terms being rejected by them, they were commanded, by an Herald, to
attend the Parliament, that was to be held at Edinburgh the 3 d. of September. In
the mean time, their public Offices were taken from them, and Gawin Dunbar,
the King's Tutor, was made Chancellor instead of the Earl; He was a good and a
learned Man, but some thought him a little defective in Politics: and Robert
Carncross was made Treasurer in the place of Archibald, New Officers at Court.
one more known for his Wealth than his Virtue. The Douglasses being now driven
to their last shifts, endeavored to seize upon Edinburgh, which was void by
the King's Departure, and accordingly they sent Archibald thither, with some
Troops of Horse; their Design was to keep out the King, and so to dissolve the
Parliament: But (on the 7 th of the August 26.
Calends of September) Robert Maxwell, with his Vassals, had, by the King's
Command, prevented them, and kept them from entering the City; yea, the Guards
and Sentinels were mounted, and disposed, so carefully in all convenient
places, that things were kept there in great Tranquillity, till the
Parliament's time of Meeting. Douglas, being disappointed of this hope, retired
to his Castle of In East-Lothian, opposite to the Bass-Isle.
Tantallon, about fourteen Miles distant from the City. The same day that the
King came out of Sterlin, there fell such mighty Showers of Rain from the
Heavens, and the Brooks and Rivers did so overflow their Banks, that the King's
Retinue was scattered into many parties, so that they came much harassed, and
late in the Night, to Edinburgh: They were so mightily battered with the
Violence of the Storm, that a very few Horse, if they had charged them, might
have done them a great deal of Mischief. In that Parliament, the Earl of Angus,
George his Brother, Archibald his Uncle, and Alexander Drummond of In
Sterlingshire, not far from To^ wood.
Carnock (their intimate Friend) were outlawed, and their Goods confiscate.
This Edict or Clause was also added to their Condemnation, that whosoever did
harbor them in their Houses, or give them any other Assistance, should incur
the same Punishment. That which most of all moved the Court to condemn them,
was this, because the King had affirmed upon Oath, That as long as he was in
the Power of the Douglasses, he was afraid of his Life; he also professed, that
his Fear was heightened, and made a deeper Impression on him, after George had
given him such cutting Menaces, before mentioned. There was only one Man found
in this Assembly, by name John Bannatine, a Vassal of the Douglasses, who was
so bold as to make a public Protestation against all that was acted against
the Earl, because (as he alleged) his Nonappearance at the day limited was
occasioned by his just Fear.

A few days after, William, another Brother of the Earl's, Abbat of the
Monastery of Holy Rood, died of Sickness, trouble of Mind and Grief, for the
present Posture of Affairs. Robert Carncross, one meanly descended, but well
monyed, bought that Preferment of the King, who then wanted Money; eluding the
Law against Simony, by a new kind of Fraud. The Law was, that Ecclesiastical
Preferments should not be sold, but he laid a great Wager with the King, that
he would not bestow upon him the next Preferment, of that kind, that fell; and
by that means, lost his Wager, but got the Abbacy. Thus the The Douglasses arm
in desperation.
Douglasses, seeing that all hope of Pardon was cut off, betook themselves to
open force, and to the only Comfort they had left, which was in Revenge, for
they used great Extremity, and committed all sorts of Outrages upon the Lands
of their Enemies; they burnt In Lothian.
Cousland and About four Miles South of Dalkeith.
Cranston, and every day skirted by the Gates of Edinburgh, with their Horse;
so that the City was almost besieged, and the Poor were made to suffer for the
Offenses of the great Ones. During these Hurly Burlies, on the 11th of the
Calends of November 21.
December. A Ship called the Marina, a brave Vessel in those days and richly
laden, by stress of Weather, was forced upon the Shore of A Town lying in the
Firth or Forth in East-Lothian, four Miles South of Dunbar.
Enverwick; part of the Lading was pillaged by Douglasses Horse, who ranged up
and down in those parts; the rest was taken away by the Countrymen, who were
so ignorant of the price of it, that they thought the Cinnamon therein, to be
but a low prized Bark, and so sold it to make Fire with, yet the whole Envy of
the matter fell upon the Douglasses. Upon this change of Affairs, the Tories,
who had a long time refrained their Depredations, for fear of Punishment, came
forth out of their lurking holes, and grievously infested all the circumjacent
Countries. And though many Pranks were played by others, up and down; yet all
the Murders and Robberies, every where committed, were charged upon the score
of the Douglasses, by those Courtiers, who thought they humored the King by so
doing; that so they might make the name of that Family, otherwise popular,
invidious to the vulgar. And in the beginning of Winter, the King marched to
Tantallon-Castle besieged by the King.
Tantallon, a Castle of the Douglasses, by the Sea side, to take it in, that so
no Refuge might be left for the Exiles; and that he might take the place with
less Labor and Cost, he was supplied with Brass-Guns and Powder from Dunbar.
That Castle was distant from In the Author it is Tantallon, but, I judge it to
be a Mistake of the Transcriber for Du^bar.
Dunbar six Miles, and it was garrisoned by the Soldiers of John the Regent,
because it was part of his Patrimony; he continued the Siege for some days,
wherein some of the Besiegers were slain, others wounded; and some blown up
with Gunpowder; but none at all of the Besieged were lost, so that he raised
his Siege, and The Siege of Tantallon raised.
retreated. In his return, David Falkner, who was left behind, with some
Foot-Souldiers, to carry back the Brass-Ordnance, was set upon by Douglasses
Horse, (who were sent out to snap up the Stragglers in the Rear) and slain; his
Death did so inrage the young King, who was incensed enough before, that he
solemnly swore in his Passion, that, as long as he lived, the Douglasses should
never have the Sentence of their Banishment revoked: And as soon as he came to
Edinburgh, to straiten them the more, by the Advice of his Council, he ordered,
that a party of Soldiers should be continually kept at Within two Miles of
Eymouth, in the Moss.
Coldingham, which was to be rather an active, or flying, than a numerous one,
to prevent the pillaging of the Country by them. The charge of doing it was
commended by the King to Bothwel, one of the greatest Persons, for Authority
and Puissance, in Lothian: but he refused the Employment, either out of Fear of
the Power of the Douglasses, which, not long since, all the rest of Scotland
was not able to cope with; or else, because he would not have the Disposition
of the young King, who was eager and over-violent of his own accord, to be
inured to such Cruelty, as totally to destroy so noble a Family: And whereas
the King had no great Confidence in the Hamiltons, as being Friends to his
Enemies; and he did also disgust them upon the account of the Slaughter of John
Stuart Earl of Lennox; and besides there being none of the Nobility of the
adjacent parts, that had Power or Interest enough for that Service, at last he
resolved to send Calen Cambel, with an Army, against the Rebels, a Person
living in the furthest parts of the Kingdom, but a prudent Man, of approved
Valor; and upon the account of his Justice, very popular. The Douglasses
forced to fly into England.
The Douglassians, when the Hamiltons and the rest of their Friends failed
them, were reduced to great straits, so that they were compelled by Calen and
by George chief of the Humes, to retire, like Exiles, into England.

Ambassadors from England to piece up an Accommodation between King James and
the Douglasses.
In the Month of October, two eminent Persons came Ambassadors from the King of
England about a Peace; which tho earnestly desired by both Kings, yet they
could scarce find out the way to make it up. For Henry, being about to make War
upon Charles the Emperor, was willing to leave all safe behind his back; and
with the same labor to procure the Restitution of the Douglasses. As for
James, he did much desire to have Tantallon Castle in his Power, but his Mind
was very averse to restore the Douglasses; and for that Reason, the Matter was
canvassed to and fro, for some Days, and no Temper for Accommodation could be
found out; but at last, they came to this, That Tantallon Castle should be
surrendered to James, and a Truce be granted for five Years; and their other
Demands the King was to promise the granting of, under his Signet. The Castle
was surrendered accordingly, but the other Demands were not as punctually
performed, save only, that Alexander Drummond had leave given him to return
home, for Robert Brittain's sake: For, some Months before, James Colvill, and
Robert Carncross, upon suspicion of their favoring the Douglasses, were
removed from Court, and their Offices bestowed on Robert Britain, who then was
in high Favor at Court, and had great Command there. After this, tho Matters
were not quite settled abroad, (for the English had burnt Arn, a Town in
Teviotdale, before their Ambassadors returned) yet the rest of the Year was
more quiet; but the Insolence of the Banditti was not quite suppressed;
whereupon the King caused William Cockburn of In Twidale.
Henderland, and Adam Scot, noted Robbers, to be apprehended at Edinburgh, and
for a Terror to the rest, he put them to Death. The next Year, in the Month of
March, the King sent James Earl of Murray, and the Earl of Northumberland, meet
to settle Matters betwixt the Borderers.
James Earl of Murray, whom he had made Deputy Governor of the whole Kingdom,
to the Borders, there to have a Meeting with the Earl of Northumberland, in
order to settle a Peace, and to treat about mutual Satisfaction for Losses. But
a Contention arose betwixt them, about expiating the Murder of Robert Car. The
One pleaded, that the Process ought to be formed in Scotland, according to the
Law. The Other would have it in England. In the Interim, each of them sent
Messengers to their several Kings, to know their Minds in the Case.

On the 17 th of the Calends of April 15.
May, there was held a Council of the Nobility, where, after a long Debate,
which lasted till Night, 'twas concluded, That the Earl of Bothwel, Robert
Maxwel, Walter Scot, and Mark Carr should be committed Prisoners to Edinburgh
Castle. And that the Earls, and chief Men of Merch and Teviotdale, should be
sent Prisoners to other Places; it being supposed, That they privately
scattered abroad the Seeds of a War against England. And in July, the King
levied about 8000 Men, and marched out against the Robbers; and that with so
much speed, that he quickly pitched his Tents by the River In Teviotdale.
Ewse. Not far from thence, lived one John Armstrong chief of one Faction of
the Thieves, who had struck such a Fear to all the neighboring Parts, that
even the English themselves for many Miles about, bought their Peace, by paying
him a certain Tribute; yea, Maxwel was also afraid of his Power; and therefore
endeavored his Destruction by all possible ways. This John was enticed by the
King's Officers to make his Repair to the King, which he did, unarmed, John
Armstrong with many of his Followers hanged.
with about fifty Horse in his Company; but having forgot to obtain the King's
Pass and safe Conduct for his Security, he fell into an Ambush, who brought him
to the King, as if he had been taken Prisoner by them; so that he, and most of
his Followers, were trussed up. They, who were the Causers of his Death, gave
forth, That he had promised to bring that part of Scotland for some Miles,
under the Obedience of the English, if he himself might be well considered for
that Service: But, on the other side, the English were glad of his Death, for
they were thereby freed of a dangerous Enemy. Six of his surviving Companions,
the King kept as Hostages; but, in regard their Fellows were no way deterred
thereby, from committing the like Insolences, in a few Months they were hanged
also. And the King took new Hostages of those who staid at home; for the
Liddisdale Men left their homes, and passed over in Troops to England, making
daily Incursions, and great Spoil in the neighboring Parts.

Not long after, the King restored the noble Men to their Liberty, having first
taken Hostages from them; Of these, Walter Scot, to gratify the King, killed
Robert Iohnston, a noted Tory amongst the Thieves, which bred a deadly Feud
between the two Families, to the great loss and prejudice of them both.

The next Year, which was 1531, there happened a matter very memorable, neither
did the Obscurity of the Author, nor the Curiosity of the Time, which made a
strict Enquiry thereinto, abate any thing of Men's Admiration of the Novelty
thereof. One The strange, and (seemingly) miraculous Fast of one John Scot, for
many weeks together, with his Story.
John Scot, a Man of no Learning, nor of any great Experience in Business,
neither had he a subtle Wit of his own to impose Tricks upon Men, being
overthrown in a Lawsuit, and not having Ability to pay Damages, hid himself
some days in the Sanctuary of the Monastery of Holy-Rood-House, without eating
or drinking any thing at all. When the thing was known and related to the King,
he commanded that his Apparel should be changed and diligently searched, and so
caused him to be kept apart from all Company in the Castle of Edinburgh, where
every Day Bread and Water was set before him, but he voluntarily abstained from
all human Food for thirty two days. After that time, as if he had been
sufficiently tried, he was brought forth naked into public view, where, the
People flocking about him, he made them a long, but sorry, Speech, in which
there was nothing memorable, but that he affirmed, he was assisted by the
Virgin Mary to fast as long as he himself pleased. This Answer, savouring of
Simplicity, rather than Craft, he was released from his Imprisonment, and went
to Rome, where he was also imprisoned by Pope Clement, until he had fasted long
enough to convince him of the Truth of the Miracle: Then they clothed him with
the Habit that Priests say Mass in, and bestowed many Presents on him, and gave
him a Testimonial under the Leaden-Seal, which is of great Authority amongst
the Papists: Whereupon he went to Venice, where he also confirmed their Belief
by his miraculous Fasting; and, alleging, That he was obliged by a Vow he had
made, to visit Jerusalem, he received of them fifty Ducats of Gold for his
Charges on the way. At his Return, he brought back some Leaves of Palm Trees,
and a Bag full of Stones, which, he said, were taken out of the Pillar, which
Christ was tied to, when he was scourged. In his Return, he past through
London, and mounted the Pulpit in Paul's Churchyard, and, in a great Audience
of People, preached much about the Divorce of King Henry from his Queen, and of
his Defection from the Sea of Rome; his Words were bitter, and if he had been
looked upon of any Repute for Wisdom, he must have eaten them again; but, being
imprisoned for some time, and having wholly abstained from Food for almost
fifty days together, he was dismissed. When he came back to Scotland, he would
have joined himself to one Thomas Doughty, Thomas Doughty a great Cheat.
who about that time came from Italy, and had built a Church dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, out of the Alms the People had given him, and had got great Gain
by his feigned Miracles. But the Life of this Thomas was sufficiently known to
be very wicked; and the Cheats of his pretended Miracles were discovered, yet
no Man durst openly gainsay him, for fear of the Bishops, who, by this their
new Atlas, sought to prop up the Pile of their Purgatory, then a tottering; and
he, to requite them for their Courtesy, when any of the richer sort of Priests
came to the Place, where he was to say Mass, had still one Beggar or other
ready at hand, to counterfeit himself mad, or diseased in Body, that so
(forsooth) by his Massing, he might be recovered and healed. But Thomas
rejected John Scot, because he was not willing to admit any other into the
Society of his Gain, and thereupon he hired an obscure Cell in the Suburbs of
Edinburgh; and there, having erected an Altar, and furnished it according to
his Ability, he set up his own Daughter, who was young, but very beautiful,
with Wax-Tapers lighted about her, to be adored, instead of the Virgin Mary.
But that way of Gain not answering his Expectation, he returned to his old
course of Life, having gained nothing by all his preposterous Dissimulation of
Sanctity, but to let all Men know, that he wanted not a Will, but Ability
rather, to become an errand Cheat.

At the beginning of the following Year, which was 1532, the Earl of Bothwel
was committed Prisoner to Edinburgh-Castle, January 16, because he had taken a
private Journey into England, and there had secret Conference with the Earl of
Northumberland. John Sunderland, a Knight, by reason of the great Prudence,
Integrity and Authority, which he had amongst all good Men, even beyond his
State and Degree, was sent to Hermitage (a Castle of Liddisdale) to restrain
the Incursions of Thieves and Robbers.

Of ancient time, there had been no fixed Days, nor any set Place, appointed
for Matters of Nisi Prius, to be handled by the Judges, until John Duke of
Albany had obtained of the Pope, that a yearly Sum of Money, as much as was
sufficient to pay a Salary to a few Fifteen Judges with Salary, appointed to
decide Controversal Matters in Scotland;
Judges, should be charged on the Ecclesiastical Order, and 'twas to be levied
on every one, according to the value of his Benefice: Gawin Dunbar, Bishop of
Aberdene, hereupon made his Appeal to the Pope, in the behalf of himself and
other Priests. The Controversy held from the 11 th of March to the 24 th of
April; and then there was a College of Judges settled at Edinburgh. At their
first Sitting, But quickly disused.
they devised many advantageous Projects for the equal distribution of Justice,
yet the hoped Event did not follow. For seeing in Scotland there are almost no
Laws, but Decrees of the Estates, and many of them too made not for perpetuity,
but temporary; and the Judges hinder the enacting of Laws what they can: The
Estates of all the Subjects were committed to the Pleasure of fifteen Men, who
were to have a perpetual Power, and even a Tyrannical Government, for their
Wills were their Laws. In favor of the Pope, they were very severe against the
Lutherans; and the Pope, on the contrary, to gratify a King so well deserving
at his Hands, gave him the Tithes of all Parsonages, for the next Year
following.

This Year, the The English make War upon Scotland.
English perceived that the State of Affairs in Scotland grew every day more
quiet than other; but yet, that they were destitute of foreign Aid, because
they themselves had joined with the French against Charles the Emperor.
Hereupon they sought out an occasion for a War. In April they made an
Expedition out of Berwick, and spoiled Coldingham, Douglas, and many other
neighboring Towns, and drove away great Booty. They had no apparent
Provocation, neither did they denounce War beforehand. How eager they were
upon War, appears by that King's Proclamation soon after published, wherein
'twas said, that the Garrison of Berwick was provoked by some licentious and
contumelious Words, which the Scots had let fall. But the Words mentioned in
the Proclamation carry no Contumely in them at all. But, this Cause not seeming
just enough for a War, they demanded Upon the River Esk.
Canabie, a small Village in the Borders, with a poor Monastery in it, as if it
belonged to them, which they never pretended to, before; and likewise, that the
Douglasses might be restored. For the King of England perceiving, that his Aid
was absolutely necessary to the French King, so that he could by no means want
it; and also knowing, that he had him fast in a League, wherein the Interest of
Scotland was not considered; hereupon, he thought it no hard Matter to bring
the Scots to what Conditions he pleased: Moreover, because the Emperor was
alienated from him by the Peace with France, and the Divorce with his Aunt; and
the Pope of Rome did raise up Wars amongst all Christian Princes, he thought he
should omit a great opportunity at home for innovating of things, if he
neglected That: The King of Scots, that he might not be unprovided against this
Storm, by a public Proclamation, made all over the Kingdom, appointed his
Brother, the Earl of Murray, to be his Vicegerent; and because the Borderers of
themselves were not able to cope with the English, who had also a great number
of Auxiliaries with them, he divided the Kingdom into four Parts, and commanded
each of them to send out the ablest Men amongst them with their Clans, and
Provision for forty Days. These Forces, thus succeeding one another by turns,
made great Havoc in the Towns and Castles in those Parts; so that the King of
England was frustrated in his Expectation, seeing the War was likely to be
drawn out in length; and other Concerns were also to be cared for by him, and
therefore he was willing to hearken to a Peace, but would have it fought for at
his Hands; for he thought, it was not for his Honor, either to offer it, or to
seek it of himself. And therefore it seemed most convenient to transact the
Matter by the King of France, the common Friend to both Nations. Whereupon the
French King sent his Ambassador, The French Ambassador mediates a Peace between
the English and Scottish Kings.
Stephen D'Aix, into Scotland, to enquire, by whose Default such a War was
commenced between the two Neighbour-Kings. The King of Scots clearly acquitted
himself from being any Cause of the War; he also made a Complaint to him, how
long his Ambassadors had been detained in France, without Hearing: And, at the
Ambassador's Departure, he sent Letters by him to his Master, desiring him to
observe the ancient League, which was renewed by John the Regent at Roan; he
also sent David Beton into France, to answer the Calumnies of the English, and,
besides, to treat concerning the keeping of the old League, and to contract a
new Affinity between France and Scotland. He also sent Letters, by him, to the
Parliament of Paris, very bitter and full of Complaints, concerning those
matters, which had been transacted and agreed between Francis their King, and
John, Regent of Scotland; how that ancient Friendships, Pacts and Agreements
were slighted in behalf of Those, who were once their common Enemies. His
Ambassador Beton was commanded, if he saw that the things, he had in Command,
did not succeed well in France, to deliver those Letters to the Council of the
Judges, and presently to withdraw himself into Flanders, with an Intent (as it
might be conjectured) to make a League, Agreement and Affinity, with the
Emperor.

In the mean time, War was waged in Britain, and Disputes were managed at
New Castle, concerning the Lawfulness thereof; when the Ambassadors sent from
both Nations, could not agree on terms of Peace, Monsieur Guy Flower was sent
over by the King of France to compose matters: The Scottish King told him, that
he would gratify his Master, as far as ever he was able, and also he had some
Communication with him, as much as was seasonable at that time, concerning the
conjugal Affinity, about which he had sent Ambassadors before, which were then
in France. Flory, or Flower, being thus the Umpire for Peace; the Garrisons were
withdrawn on both sides from the Borders, and a Truce was made, which was
afterward followed with a Peace: When the Peace was settled, the King having
for some Years last past, transacted Business with the King of France, and with
the James transacts with the French King, and afterward with the Emperor,
about a Match;
Emperor by his Ambassadors, about a matrimonial Contract, now being freed from
other cares, his Thoughts were more intent that way, than ever. For, besides
the common causes which might incline him to some potent Alliance, he was
thoughtful how to perpetuate his Family by Issue of his Body, he himself being
the last Male that was left alive; insomuch that his next Heirs had already
conceived a firm hope in their Minds of the Kingdom, which did not a little
trouble Him, who was otherwise suspicious enough of himself: And indeed, things
did very much concur to raise them up to that hope; as for instance, their own
domestic Power, the Kings being a Bachelor, his Venturousness in slighting
all Danger, so that he would not only stoutly undergo all Hazards, but often
court and invite Them; for with a small party, he would march against the
fiercest Thieves, and tho they were superior in number, yet he would either
prevent them by his Speed, or else fright them by the Reverence of his Name,
and so force them to a Surrender; he would sit Night and Day on Horseback in
this Employment, and if he did take any Refreshment or Food, 'twas that which
he lighted on by chance, and but little of that neither.

These Circumstances made the Which the Hamiltons labor to hinder.
Hamiltons almost confident of the Succession, yet it seemed to them a long way
about to stay for either fortuitous or natural Dangers, and therefore they
studied to hasten his Death by Treachery. A fair Opportunity was offered them
to effect it by his Night-Walkings to his Misses, having but one or two in his
Company. But all these things not answering their Expectation, they resolved to
cut off the hope of lawful Issue, by hindering his Marriage, what they could;
although John Duke of Albany, when he was Regent, seemed to have made
sufficient Provision against that Inconvenience, for when he renewed the
ancient League between the French and Scots at The chief City of Normandy.
Roan, he had inserted one Article, that James should marry Francis's eldest
Daughter. But there were two Impediments in the way, which almost broke off,
and cut this League asunder. For Francis, being freed out of the Hand of the
Spaniard, by the Industry and Diligence principally of Henry the 8 th, had
entered into so strict a League with the English, that the Scottish League was
much entrenched upon thereby; and besides, the eldest Daughter of Francis was
deceased a while before, and therefore James desired Magdalen, his next
Daughter, to Wife, and sent Ambassadors over to that purpose; but her Father
excused the matter, alleging, that his Daughter was of so weak a Constitution
of Body, that there was little hopes of Children by her; no, nor hardly any
Likelihood of her Life it self, for any long time.

About the same time, there was an Affinity treated of with Charles the Emperor
by Ambassadors, and at length the 24 th day of April, 1534. The Emperor sent
Godscalk Ericus, that the matter might be carried with greater Secrecy, from
Toledo in Spain, through Ireland, to James. After he had declared the Commands,
he had in charge from the Emperor, concerning the Wrongs offered to his Aunt
Catharine and her Daughter, by King Henry; concerning the calling a general
Council; concerning the rooting out the Sect of the Lutherans; and concerning
contracting an Affinity. The Emperor, by his Letters, gave the King his choice
of three Marys, all of them of his Blood; they were, Mary Sister to Charles, a
Widow, Three Mary's offered by Charles the Emperor, to King James, out of which
to choose a Consort.
ever since the Death of her Husband Lewis of Hungary, who was slain in Battle
by the Turks; Mary of Portugal the Daughter of his Sister Leonora; and Mary of
England, his Niece by his Aunt Catharine: And because Charles knew, that King
James was more inclinable to this last Match, he also showed a greater
Propension thereunto, that so he might take off James from his valuing of, and
adhering to, the League with Francis, and at the same time might set him at ods
with Henry. James made answer, that the Marriage with England was indeed, in
many respects, most advantageous, if it could be obtained, but 'twas a Business
of uncertain Hope, but of great Danger and Toil, and would be encumbered with
so many Delays, that his single Life, he being the last of his Family, could
hardly bear it; and therefore of all Caesar's Neices, he told Him, that the
Daughter of Christiern King of Denmark was most convenient for him, who was
begotten upon Isabel, the Sister of Charles. A while after, Charles answered
this his Demand from Madrid, that she was already promised to another, and
though Caesar by offering Conditions seemed rather to prolong the matter, than
really to bring it to pass, yet the Treaty was not wholly laid aside. Matters
being quiet at home, James resolved to go a Shipboard to take a View of all
his Dominions round about, and to curb the stubborn Spirits of the Islanders,
and make them more obedient. King James visits the Orcades, and other Isles of
Scotland.
First, he sailed to the Orcades, where he quieted all Disorders, by
apprehending and imprisoning a few of the Nobility, he garrisoned two Castles
there, his Own and the Bishops; afterward he visited the rest of the Islands,
and sent for the chief Men to come to him; those that refused, he seized by
force; he laid a Tax on them, took Hostages, and carried away with him, those
who were most likely to be Incendiaries, and clapping some of his own Train
into their Castles, he sent the leading Men of them, some to Edinburgh, and
some to Dunbar, Prisoners: For about that time, John Duke of Albany had
surrendered up Dunbar to the King, which till then had been kept by a French
Garrison. In the next Month of August, great Severity was used against the
Lutherans severely dealt with.
Lutherans, some were compelled to make a public Recantation; others, refusing
to appear upon Summons, were banished. Two were burnt, of which one named David
Straiton was free enough from Lutheranism, but he was accused thereof, because
he was somewhat refractary in Payment of Tithes to the Collectors of them, and
so was put to Death only for a supposed Crime. In an Assembly which the King
caused to be convened at Iedburgh, in order to the suppressing of the Robbers
thereabouts; Walter Scot was condemned of high Treason, and sent Prisoner to
Edinburgh Castle, where he remained, as long as the King lived. The same Month
of August, when Francis (as I said before) had excused his Daughters Marriage
on account of her Health, but withal had offered him any other of the Blood
Royal: The King sent Ambassadors into France, James Earl of Murray, Viceroy of
the Kingdom, and William Stuart Bishop of Aberdene (those Two went by Sea) and
John Erskin by Land, because he had some Commands to deliver to Henry of
England by the way. To them be added a Fourth, i. e. Robert Reed, a good Man,
and highly prudent. There Mary of Bourbon offered by Francis as a Wife to James.
Mary of Bourbon, the Daughter of Charles Duke of Vendosme, a Lady of the Blood
was offered to them, as a fit Wife for their King: Other points were accorded
easily enough, but the Ambassadors, fearing, that this Marriage would not
please their Master, would make no Espousal, till they had acquainted him
therewith. In the mean time, Henry of England, to trouble a matter which was
upon the point of concluding, in November, sent the Bishop of St. David's into
Scotland, who brought James some English Books, containing the Theses's of the
Christian Religion, desiring James to read them, and diligently to weigh what
was written therein; but he gave them to some of his Courtiers, who were most
addicted to the Sacerdotal Order, to inspect: They, before ever they had scarce
looked on them, condemned them as Heretical; and moreover, they highly
gratulated the King, that he had not polluted his Eye (so they phrased it) with
reading such pestiferous Henry of England sends Controversal Books of Divinity
to James, by his Ambassadors.
Books. This was the cause of their Embassy, according to common Vogue, yet,
some say, that they brought some other secret Messages to James: Afterward, the
same Bishop (together with William Howard, Brother to the Duke of Norfolk,)
came so unexpectedly to Sterlin, that they almost surprised the King, before he
heard any News of their coming; their Errand was, that Henry desired James to
appoint a day of Interview, wherein they might confer together, for he had at
that meeting things of high Concernment, and of mighty Advantage to both
Nations to propound to him: In that Message, he gave great hope, if other
matters could be well accorded, that he would bestow his Daughter in Marriage
upon him, and leave him King of all Britain after his Decease; and that he
might give more credit to his Promises, he would make him for the present, Duke
of York, and Viceroy of the Kingdom of England. James willingly assented to
such large and alluring Promises, and accordingly fixed a day for the Interview:
But there were two Factions, which resolved to oppose his Journey for England.
Ambassadors sent by Henry to James, desiring an Interview, which was agreed to;
First, the Hamiltons, who secretly labored to keep the King from marrying,
that so they being the next Heirs, he might have no Children to exclude them
from the Succession. And next, the Priests also were mightily against it; and
their Pretenses were seemingly just and honest, as first, the danger he would
run, if with a small Retinue he should put himself into the Power of his old
Enemy, Tho afterward disappointed upon several pretenses.
for then he must comply with his Will, though it were never so much against
his Own: They also recited the Examples of his Ancestors, who, either by their
own Credulity; or else by the Perfidiousness of the Enemy, were drawn into a
Nouse; and from flattering Promises of Friendship, had brought home nothing but
Ignominy and Loss: They also urged the unhappy Mistake of James the First, who,
in a time of Truce, landing, as he thought, in his Friends Country, was there
kept Prisoner eighteen Years; and, at last, had such Conditions imposed upon
him, which he neither lawfully could, nor ought to have accepted; and then,
said they, he was avariciously sold to his own Subjects. Moreover, first
Malcolm, after him his Brother William, Kings of Scotland, were brought on the
Stage, who were enticed to London by Henry the 2 d. and then carried over into
France, to make a show of assisting in a War there, against the French King,
their old Ally. But (say they) if it be objected, Henry the 8 th will do none
of these things; they answered first, How shall we be assured of that? next, Is
it not a point of high Imprudence, to venture ones Fortune, Life and Dignity,
which are now in ones own Power, into the Hands of another? Besides, the
Priests saw, that all their Concerns were now at stake, and therefore they
must, now or never, stand up for them; in order whereto, they caused James
Beton, Archbishop of St. Andrews, and George Creighton, Bishop of Dunkelden,
two old decrepit Men, to come to Court, there to baul it out, That Religion
would be betrayed by this Meeting and Interview, even, That Religion, (said
they) which had been observed so many Ages by their Ancestors; and which had
all along preserved its Defenders, till now; The Ruin of which would be
attended with the total Destruction of the Kingdom, also; to forsake that
Religion, upon every light Grounds, especially in such a time, wherein the
whole World does conspire together, with Arms in their Hands, for its
Preservation, could not be done without great Danger at present, and Infamy for
future; yea, it would be a thing of great Wickedness and Impiety also. With
these Engines they battered James's Mind, which, of it self, was inclined
enough to Superstition; and moreover, they corrupted those Courtiers, who could
do most with him, desiring them, in their Names, to promise him a great Sum of
Money; so that hereby, they wholly turned away his Mind from the Thoughts of an
Interview. Henry takes the disappointment of the Interview in great disdain.
Henry took this Disappointment in great Disdain, (as indeed he had reason so
to do) and thus the Seeds of Dissension were again sown between the two Kings.

In the mean time, the King was weary of his single Life, and by reason of
foreign Embassies, and his Court-Distractions at home, was variously agitated
in his Thoughts; all pretended the public Good, but some aimed at their own
private Advantage under that Vail, and though many persuaded him to an Affinity
with Charles, in regard of the flourishing Estate of the Empire at that time,
yet he rather inclined to an Alliance with France. And therefore, seeing the
matter could not be ended by Ambassadors, King James sails over into France,
he himself resolved to sail over into France, and accordingly, rigging out a
small Navy, the best he could fit in so short a time, on the 26 th of July he
set Sail from Leith, none knowing whither he would go; many were of opinion,
that his Design was for England, to visit his Uncle, and to ask him pardon for
disappointing the Interview, agreed on the Year before. But a Tempest arising,
and being also tossed with contrary Winds, the Pilot asked him, what course he
should steer? If there be a necessity, said he, Land me any where but in
England: Then his Mind was understood. He might have returned home, but he was
willing rather to sail round Scotland, and to try the Western Ocean; there also
he had very bad Weather, and by the advice of a few of his Domestics as he was
asleep, he was carried back again; when he was awake, he took the matter in
such great Indignation, that for ever after he bore an implacable Hatred
against James Hamilton, (whom he also disgusted before, upon the account of the
killing the Earl of Lennox) neither was he well pleased with the rest of the
Authors of that Counsel, ever after; and there were some, who, in compliance
with the King's angry Humor, buzzed him in the Ears, That the Hamiltons under
a pretense of a serviceable Attendance and Duty, had accompanied him on purpose
to undermine his Voyage. However he put to Sea again with a great Train of
Nobles, September the 1 st, and in ten days arrived at Diep in Normandy; from
thence, that he might prevent the News of his Arrival, he went disguised, and
in great speed to the Town of Vendosme, where the Duke then was, and saw his
Daughter, which pleased him not, so that he presently made haste to Court; he
came unexpectedly upon Francis and the whole Court, and yet was honorably
received by him; and on the 26 th of November, almost against his Will, And
marries Magdalene, that King's Daughter;
he bestowed in Marriage his Daughter Magdalene upon him; For her Father (as I
related before) judging his eldest Daughter, by reason of her sickly temper,
unfit to bear Children, offered him his youngest, or any other Woman of the
French Nobility, for a Wife: but James and Magdalene had contracted a
Friendship by Messengers, which was confirmed by the mutual Sight, Meeting and
Discourse one with another, so that neither of them could be diverted from
their purpose. The Marriage was celebrated January the 1 st, in the Year 1537,
to the great Joy of all: and they both arrived in Scotland the 28 th of May,
being attended by a French Navy. She lived not long after, but died of an
Hectic Fever July the 7 th, Who died soo^ after.
to the great Grief of all, except the Priests, for they feared, that her Life
would have put an end to their Luxury and Ambition, because they knew, she was
educated under the Discipline of her Aunt the Queen of Navar. As for others,
they conceived such a Grief for her Death, Mourning-garments when, and upon
what occasion, first used in Scotland.

Ambassadors sent over into France to fetch Mary of the House of Guise. Earl of
Bothwel banished.


that then (as I think) Mourning Garments began first to be used in Scotland,
which yet after forty Years do scarce continue to be worn, though the public
Manners do decline, and seem to require it. Ambassadors were presently sent
into France, Cardinal David Beton, and Robert Maxwel, to bring over Mary of the
House of Guise, Widow to the Duke of Longoville; for the King, presaging the
Loss of his Wife, had cast his Eye upon her. This same Year, the Earl of
Bothwel, because he had past over secretly into England, and also had held
private Cabals with the English in Scotland, was banished out of England,
Scotland and France. Moreover, about the same time, many Persons were accused
and condemned for high Treason; John Forbes, an active young Man, the Head of a
great Family and Faction, was brought to his end, it was thought, by the
Emulation of the H^ntly's; for there was one Straughan, a Man fit for any
flagitious Enterprise, who was many Years very familiar with Forbes* and was
either privy to, or else Partaker or Author of, all his bad Actions: He, being
not as much respected by him, as he thought he deserved, deserted him, and
applied himself to his Enemy, John Forbes condemned for Treason;
Huntly; and before him, accused Forbes of Treason, or (as many think) he there
plotted the Accusation, with Huntly himself, against him) viz. That Forbes,
many Years before, had a Design to kill the King. The Crime was not
sufficiently proved against him, 'Twas thought unjustly.
nor by fit and unexceptionable Witnesses, neither was the Plot of his
Adversaries the Huntlys against his Life, hid in the Process; yet, on the 14 th
of July, the Judges, who were most of Huntly's Faction, condemned him, and he
had his Head struck off. His Punishment was the less lamented, because, though
Men believed him guiltless, as to the Crime he suffered for; yet, they counted
him worthy of Death, for the Flagitiousness of his former Life. Straughan, the
Discoverer, because he had concealed so foul an Offense so long; was banished
Scotland, and lived many Years after in France, so deboistly and filthily, that
Men thought him a fit Instrument for any wicked Prank whatsoever. The King, not
long after, as if he had repented of his Severity against Forbes, took another
Brother of the Forbes's into his Family, and another he advanced to a rich
Match, restoring to them their Estate, which had been confiscate.

A few Days after, there was another Trial, which, on the account of the Family
of the accused Parties, the Novelty of the Wickedness charged on them, and the
heinousness of the Punishment was very lamentable. Joan Douglas, Sister to the
Earl of Angus, The Lady Joan Douglas, etc. accused for conspiring to poison the
King,
and Wife to John Lions, Lord of Glames; also her Son, and later Husband,
Gilespy Cambel; John Lions, Kinsman to her former Husband, and an old Priest,
were accused for endeavoring to poison the King. All these, tho they lived
continually in the Country, far from Court, and their Friends and Servants
could not be brought to witness any thing against them, yet were put on the
Rack, to make them confess, and so were condemned, and shut up in
Edinburgh-Castle. The fifth day after Forbes was executed, Joan Douglas was
burnt alive, For which she suffers Death, being burnt alive.
with the great Commiseration of all the Spectators: The Nobleness, both of her
self and Husband, did much affect the Beholders; besides, she was in the vigor
of her Youth, much commended for her rare Beauty, and, in her very Punishment,
she showed a manlike Fortitude. But that which People were most concerned for,
was, That they thought the Enmity against her Brother, who was banished, did
her more prejudice than her own (objected) Crime: Her Husband endeavored to
escape out of the Castle of Edinburgh, but the Rope being too short, to let him
down to the Foot of the Rock, he brake almost all the Bones of his Body in the
Fall, and so ended his Days. Their Son, a young Man, and of greater innocent
Simplicity, than to have the Suspicion of such a Wickedness justly charged upon
him, was shut up Prisoner in the Castle; and, after the King's Death, was
released, and recovered the Estate, which had been taken away from his Parents.
Their Accuser was William Lions; he afterward perceiving, that so eminent a
Family was like to be ruined by his false Information, repented when it was too
late, and confessed his Offense to the King; and yet he could not prevail, to
prevent the Punishment of the Condemned, or to hinder their Estates from being
confiscate.

The next Year following, on the 12 th of June, Mary of the House of Guise,
arrives in Scotland, and is married to K. James.
Mary of the House of Guise, arrived at In the East-corner of Fife.
Balcomy, a Castle belonging to James Lord of Lermont; from whence she was
conveyed by Land to St. Andrews; and there, in a great Assembly of the
Nobility, she was married to the King. In the beginning of the Year following,
which was 1539, many Persons were apprehended, as suspected of Troubles in
Scotland about Religion.
Lutheranism: And about the End of February, five were burnt, nine recanted,
but many more were banished; amongst the Sufferers of this Class, was George
Buchanan, the Author of this History, imprisoned for the same cause, but makes
his Escape.
George Buchanan, who, when his Keepers were asleep, made his Escape out of the
Window of the Prison, to which he was committed. This Year the Queen brought
forth a Queen Mary brings forth a Son, and the next year another.
Son at St. Andrews; and the next Year, another in the same Place. Also this
Year, and the former, Matters were rather somewhat hushed than fully composed;
some Men wanting rather a Leader, than an Occasion, to rebel: For, tho many
desired it, yet no Man durst openly avow himself Head of any Insurrection. And
now the King having Heirs to succeed him, and thereby becoming more confident
of his Settledness and Establishment, began to slight the Nobility, as a
sluggish and unwarlike Generation, and not likely to attempt any thing against
him, whose Family was now rivetted and confirmed by Issue-Male: So that he
applied his Mind to sumptuous and unnecessary Buildings; he stood in need of
Money for that Work; and, in regard he was as Covetous as he was Indigent, both
Factions of Nobles and Priests were equally afraid, and each of them
endeavored to avert the Tempest from falling upon them, that it might light on
the Other. And therefore, whenever the King complained of the Lowness of his
Exchequer amongst his Friends, One Party would extol the Riches of the Other,
as if it were a Prey ready for the Seizure; and the King hearkened sometimes to
the One, and sometimes to the Other, and so kept both in Suspense, between hope
and fear: So that when Ambassadors from England, to desire an Interview at York.
Ambassadors came at that time out of England, to Court, to desire the King to
give his Uncle a Meeting at York, promising some mighty Advantages by that
Interview, and making a large Harangue concerning the Love and Good Will of
their King toward him: The Faction, which was adverse to the Priests,
persuaded him, by all means, to meet at the Time and Place appointed: When the
Sacerdotal Party heard of this, they thought their Order would be quite undone,
if they did not hinder the Meeting; and so disturb the Concord, by casting in
Seeds of Discord betwixt the King and his Nobles. And, considering of all ways
how to effect it, no Remedy seemed more ready at hand for the present Malady,
than to attempt the King's Mind, which was not able to resist Offers of Money,
by the Promises of large Subsidies; whereupon, Which the Faction of the
Ecclesiastics prevent.
they set before his Eyes the Greatness of the Danger, the doubtful and
uncertain Credit of an Enemies Promise; that he might have a great Sum of Money
at home, and more easily procurable. First of all, They promised to give him of
their own, 30000 Ducats of Gold, year by year; and all the rest of their
Estates also should be at his Service; besides, enough to obviate future
Emergencies, if any happened; and as for those, who rebelled against the
Authority of the Pope, and the King's, and so endeavored to trouble the Peace
of the Church, by new and wicked Errors; and thereby would subvert all Piety,
overthrow the Rights of Magistracy, and cancel Laws of so long standing; out of
their Estates he might get above an hundred thousand Ducats more, yearly, into
his Exchequer, by way of Confiscation, if he would permit them to nominate a
Lord-Chief-Justice in the Case, because they themselves could not, by Law, sit
in Capital Causes to condemn any Man. And that, in the managing the Process
against them, there would be no danger, nor any Delay in passing Sentence,
seeing so many thousand Men were not afraid to take the Books of the Old and
New Testament into their Hands; to discourse concerning the Power of the Pope;
to contemn the ancient Ceremonies of the Church; and to detract from that
Reverence and Observance, which was due to Religious Persons, consecrated to
God's Service. This they urged upon him with such Vehemence, that he appointed
them a Judge, according to their own Hearts, and that was James Hamilton set up
for a Judge against Lutherans;
James Hamilton, base Brother to the Earl of Arran; him they had obliged by
great Gratuities before; and besides, he was resolved to conciliate the King's
Favor, (who long since had been offended with him) with the Perpetration of
some atoning Fact, though never so cruel.

About the same time, there came into Scotland, James Hamilton, Sheriff of
Linlithgoe, and Cousin-German to the former James: He, after a long Banishment,
when he had commenced a Suit against James the Bastard, and had obtained leave
to return, for a time, to his own Country; understanding in what Danger he and
the rest of the Favorers of the Reformed Doctrine, were in, sent his Son in a
Message to the King, as he was about to pass over into Fife; and having gotten
him opportunely, before he went aboard, he filled his Head, which was naturally
suspicious, with fearful Presages, That this Commission granted to Hamilton,
would be a Capital Matter, and pernicious to the whole Kingdom, unless he did
prevent this Sophistry by another Wile. The King, who was then hastening into
Fife, sent the young Man back to Edinburgh to the Court, called the
Exchequer-Court, where he also commanded to assemble James Lermont, James
Kircaldy, and Thomas Erskin, of whom one was the Master of the Household, the
other Lord High Treasurer, neither of them averse from the Reformed Religion;
the Third was highly of the Popish Faction, and his Secretary. These were all
ordered to meet: And the King commanded them to give the same Credit to the
Messenger, as they would do to himself, if he were present; and so took the
Ring off his Finger, and sent it them as a known Token between them: They laid
their Heads together, and apprehended James just after he had dined, and had
fitted himself for his Journey, and committed him Prisoner to the Castle. But
having Intelligence by their Spies at Court, that the King was pacified, and
that he would be released, besides the public Danger, they were afraid also
for their particular selves, lest a Man, factious and potent, being released,
after he had been provoked by so great an Affront and Ignominy, But prevented
from executing his Commission;
should afterward study a cruel and bitter Revenge against them: Whereupon
they speedily hastened to Court, and informed the King of the Imminency of the
Danger, of the naughty Disposition, Fierceness and Power of the Man, all which
they augmented, to raise the greater suspicion upon him; Imprisoned,
so that they persuaded the King not to suffer so crafty, and withal so
puissant, a Person, being also provoked by this late Disgrace, to be set at
Liberty, without a legal Trial. Whereupon the King came to Edinburgh, and from
thence to Seton, where he caused James to be brought to his Trial, Tried,
and in a Court legally constituted, according to the Custom of the Country, he
was condemned, and had his Head struck off, Condemned, and put to Death.
his Body was cut up after his Execution, and his Quarters hanged up in the
public Places of the City. The Crimes objected against him, in behalf of the
King, were, That on a certain Day he had broke open the King's Bedchamber, and
had designed to kill him, and that he had driven on secret Designs with the
Douglasses, who were declared public Enemies. Few were grieved for his Death,
(because of the Wickedness of his former Life) save only his own Kindred, and
the Sacerdotal Order, who had placed all the Hopes of their Fortunes, in a
manner, upon his Life only.

From that time forward, the King increased in his Suspicions against the
Nobility; and besides, he was exercised with sundry distracting Cares, insomuch
that his unquiet Mind was much troubled with Dreams in the Night. King James
presaging Dream.
There was One more remarkable than the rest, which was much talked of, That in
his Sleep, he saw James Hamilton, running at him with his drawn Sword, and that
he, first, cut off his Right Arm, then his Left, and threatened him shortly to
come, and take away his Life, and then disappeared; when he awoke in a Fright,
and pondering many things about the Event of his Dream, at last Word was
brought him, that His two Sons depart this Life.
both of his Sons departed this Life, almost at one and the same moment of
Time, one at St. Andrews, and the other at Sterlin.

In the mean while, there was not a certain Peace, nor yet an open War, with
the King of England, who was alienated, and offended before; insomuch, that,
without any denunciation of a War, Preys were driven from the Borders of
Scotland. Neither would the English, when called upon to make Restitution, give
any favorable answer: So that all Men saw, That Henry was in an high
Indignation, Henry of England, being affronted about the Interview, prepares
War against James;
because of the frustration of the Interview at York. And James, tho he knew
that War was certainly at hand, and therefore had made Levies for that purpose,
and had appointed his Brother the Earl of Murray, to be General of all his
Forces, and had also made all necessary Preparation for a Defense, yet he sent
an Ambassador to the Enemy, if 'twere possible, to compose Matters without
Blows: In the mean time, George Gordon was sent to the Borders, with a small
Force, And sends an Army against him, commanded by Howard, his General.
to prevent the pillaging Incursions of the Enemy. The English despised the
paucity of the Gordonians, and therefore hastened to burn Iedburgh. But George
Hume, with 500 Horse, interposed and charged them briskly; and, after a short
Fight, when they saw the Gordons a coming, they were put into a Fright, and so
fled away scatteringly, to escape their Enemies; there were not many slain, but
several taken Prisoners. James Lermont, who was treating about a Peace at
New Castle, had scarce received his answer; but, that the War might be carried
on the more cunningly, he was commanded to return, in company of the English
Army: Moreover, The Nobility of Scotland refuse to fight against England; which
moves James's Passion against them.
John Erskin, and.... were sent Ambassadors from Scotland to meet the said Army
at York, where they were detained by Howard, the General, and never dismissed,
till they came to Berwick. James, being assured by his Spies, before the return
of his Ambassadors, of the marching on of the English Army, formed his Camp at
Falkirk, about 14 Miles from the Borders, but sent George Gordon before, with
ten thousand Men, to prevent the plunderings of the English; yet, he did
nothing considerable, and had not so much as a light Skirmish with the Enemy.
The King of Scotland was mighty earnest to give Battle, but the Nobility would
not hear of it, by any means; so that he was full of Wrath, and brake forth in
a Rage against them, calling them Cowards, and unworthy of their Ancestors,
ever and anon telling them, That seeing he was betrayed by them, he himself and
his own Family would do that, which they had cowardly refused to do; neither
could he be appeased, tho they came about him and told him, That he had done
enough for his Honor, That he had not only kept the English Army, which was so
long time a levying, and that had assaulted Scotland on a sudden, (and that,
with Threats to do great Matters) from wandering up and down for depredation,
but also, for the space of 8 Days, that it remained in Scotland, had so pent
them up, that they never marched above a Mile from the Borders; for after they
drew out of Berwick they went as far as Standing upon the Tweed, 14 Miles above
Berwick.
Kelso up against the Stream; and there being informed of the march of the
Scottish Army, they passed over the Ford, being so fearful to engage, that they
rushed into the River scatteringly, and in no order at all* and as every one
passed over, they left their Colors and hastn'd home, the nearest way they
could; Gordon, in the mean time, who saw this afar off, not stirring at all,
nor making any attempt upon them, in their Rear. For which, the King conceived
against him an implacable hatred. Maxwel, to appease the King's Anger, as much
as he could, promised, if he might have ten thousand Men, to march into England
by the Solwa^, and to do some considerable Service; and he would have been as
good as his Word, unless the King, being angry with his Nobles, had given
secret Letters, and a Commission, to Oliver Sinclare, Brother to the Lord of
Rosselin, K. James sends an Army into England,
which he was not to open till such a prefixed time. The Contents were, That the
whole Army should acknowledge him for their General; James's Design therein was,
That, if his Army had the better, the Glory of the Victory might not redound to
the Nobles. When they were come into their Enemies Country, and about 500
English Horse appeared on the Neighbour-Hills, Which is defeated.
Oliver Sinclare was lifted up on high by those of his Faction, and, leaning
upon two Spears, caused the King's Commission to be read; at which, the whole
Army was so offended, and especially Maxwel, that they broke their Ranks and
ran in, higly piggly, one among another: Their Enemies, tho accustomed to Wars,
yet never hoped for so great an Advantage, when, from the upper Ground, they
beheld all things in such a Confusion amongst them, ran in upon them with a
great Shout, (as their manner is) and so assaulted them as they were in a
Fright, and hovering between the design of Flying or Fighting; and thus Horse,
Foot and Baggage were all driven confusedly into the next Marshes, where many
were taken by the English, more by the Scottish Moss-Troopers, and sold to the
English. When this loss of his Army was brought to the King, who was not far
off, he was moved, beyond measure, with Indignation, Anger and Grief, insomuch,
that his Mind was distracted Two ways; sometimes, to take Revenge of the
perfidiousness of his own People, (as he called it) and sometimes to make
Preparation for a new War, and Retrieval of his Affairs. But in that almost
desperate state of things, it seemed the best way to make a Truce with the
English, and to call back Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus, on the best
Conditions he could. But his Body being worn out with Watching and Fasting, and
his Mind overwhelmed with Cares, he dyed, a few Days after, on the 13 th of
December, The overthrow of his Army breaks his Heart.
leaving his Daughter, his Heiress, a Child of about five Days old; he was
buried the 19 of January in the Monastery of Holyrood, near his first Wife
Magdalene. In his lifetime, his Countenance and the Make of his Body were very
Comely, his Stature indifferent Tall, but his Strength, above the Proportion of
his Body; his Wit was sharp, but not sufficiently cultivated with Learning, K.
James the 5 th his Character.
through the fault of the Times. His Diet was sparing, he seldom drank Wine, he
was most patient of Labor, Cold, Heat and Hunger; he would often sit on
Horseback, Night and Day, in the coldest Winter, that so he might catch the
Thieves unawares; and his Nimbleness struck such fear into them, that they
abstained from their ill Pranks, as if he had always been present amongst them:
He was so well acquainted with the Customs of his Country, that he would give
just Answers concerning weighty Matters, even on the Highway, as he rode on a
Journey, with a great deal of Readiness and Prudence: He was of easy Access,
even to the poorest. But his great Virtues were almost equalled by as many
Vices, yet they had this Alleviation, That they seemed imputable rather to the
Time he lived in, than to his own Disposition and Nature. For such an universal
Licentiousness had overrun All, that Public Discipline could not be
retrieved, but with a great deal of Severity and Strictness. That which made
him so covetous of Money, was, That, when he was under the Tutelage of others,
he was educated in great Parsimony, and as soon as ever he came to be of Age,
he entered into an empty Palace; for all his Household Stuff was embezill'd: So
that, all the Rooms of his House were to be new-furnish'd, at once; and his
Guardians had expended his own proper Patrimony on those uses, which he wholly
disapproved; besides, the Instructors of him in his Youth, made him more
inclinable to Women, because, by that means, they hoped to have him longer
under their Tuition. A great part of the Nobility did not much lament his
Death, because he had banished some of them, and kept many others in Prison,
and many, for fear of his Severity (a fresh Disgust being now added to their
former Contempt) chose rather to surrender themselves to the English King,
their Enemy, than to commit themselves to the Anger of their own King.

The Fifteenth BOOK. Mary and Henry Stuart, the CVII th Queen and King.
THE King dying in the Flower of his Age, rather of Grief than any Disease; the
Tumults of the former Times were rather hushed asleep than composed, so that
wise Men foresaw so great a Tempest impending over Scotland, as they had never
heard of the like in ancient Records, nor had themselves seen any like: The
King had not so much as ordered his own Domestic Affairs, but had left a
Daughter, born about 8 Days before his Death, Heiress to the Crown; as for
those of the Nobility, who had born any sway, either they were killed in
Battle, or else were banished, or taken Prisoners by the Enemy. And if they had
been at home, yet, by reason of private Animosities, or of Dissension on the
account of Religion, which were stifled out of fear, during the King's Life;
but now, that Restraint being taken off, were likely to break forth, they were
at Discord amongst themselves, so that they were not likely to act like sober
Men.

And besides, they had War abroad against a most Puissant King, and how he
would use his Victory, every one spoke severally according to his Hope or Fear.
He that was the second Heir, and next to the Crown, as he was not commonly
reported to have much of Virtue, even for the management of his private Life,
so he was as little noted for Counsel or Valor to manage a Kingdom. As for the
Cardinal Beton suborns a false Will of King James, therein nominating himself
with three Assessors to he Vice-geren^s of the Kingdom.
Cardinal, he thinking that, in these public Calamities, he might have an
Opportunity to greaten himself, that he might show himself Some body, both to
his own Order, and also to the French Faction, undertook an Attempt both bold
and impudent. For he hired Henry Balfore, a Mercenary Priest, to suborn a false
Will of the Kings, wherein he himself was nominated to the Supreme Authority,
with Three of the Potentest of the Nobility, to be his Assessors. He conceived
an hope, that his Project would succeed, from the Disposition of the Earl of
Arran, which was not turbulent, but rather inclinable to quietness and rest.
And besides, he was near of Kin to him, for he was Son to the Cardinal's Aunt:
And further, he was one of those Three Persons, who was assumed into a
Partnership in the Government. Moreover, the Opportunity to invade the Supreme
Power seemed to require haste, that he might prevent the return of the
Prisoners, and of those that were banished, out of England, That so they might
have no Hand in conferring of this Honor upon him, for he was afraid of their
Power and Popularity; neither did he doubt, but that their Minds were alienated
from him upon the score of a different Religion: That was the Cause, that
presently after the King's Death he published the Edict, concerning the choosing
of four Governors for the Kingdom. He also bribed some of the Nobles by
Promises and Gifts to engage them to his Faction, and especially the Queen, who
was somewhat disaffected to the adverse Party. But Hamilton, the Head of the
contrary Faction, was a Man not ambitious, Hamilton opposes the Cardinal.
but rather willing to live in quiet, (as was offered him) if his Kindred would
have suffered him, but they studying their own Humor and Interest, rather than
his Honor, Night and Day puffed up the Mind of the young Gentleman, with
strange Hopes, and advised him by no means to let slip so fair an Opportunity
put into his Hands, for they had rather have Things all in a Combustion, than
to live in a fixed and private condition of Life. And besides, the Hatred of
the Cardinal got them some Friends, and the Indignity of their Bondage under a
Mercenary Priest. They had also some appearance of hope, which, tho uncertain
in it self, yet was not inefficacious to stir up Men's Endeavors, That seeing
Hamilton was the next Heir, many of them entertained such Thoughts as these,
That a Female, so few days old, and which was the only Person betwixt him and
the Crown, might meet with many Mischances, either casually, or by the fraud of
her Supervisors, before she came to be Marriageable. Thus they laid the
Foundation of the Greatness of the Hamilton's for a long time after, yet so
that it seemed most advisable to them, not to neglect the Advantage which the
present State of Things did offer, and thus to cherish an hope of the future
Advancement of the Hamilton's, and if that hope did deceive them, yet it would
not be difficult for them to regain the Favor, or at least the Pardon, of a
new Princess, who in the beginning of her Reign would study to win the Respects
of all Men.

Whilst Things were at this pass in Scotland, the King of England, out of his
extraordinary Joy for so unexpected a Victory, sent for the chief of the
Scottish Prisoners up to London, where after they had been imprisoned in the
Tower, two Days; on St. Thomas day, which was the 20 th of December, they were
brought all through the City, where it was the longest, as if they were to be
shown as a public Spectacle to the People, and coming to Whitehal, the King's
Court, they were sharply reproved by the Chancellor, as Violators of the
League; and after he had made a large Discourse concerning the Goodness and
Clemency of his King, who had remitted much of that Rigor of Justice, he might
have used toward them, they were distributed into several Families, as to a
larger Prison. There were seven of the Nobility, and twenty four of the Gentry,
besides. But when the News came three days after, That the King of Scots was
dead, and had left one only Daughter, his Heiress. Henry thought it a fit
opportunity to conciliate and unite the Minds both of Scots and English in a
Band of Concord, by espousing his Son to their Queen. Upon this, he recalled
the Prisoners to Court, and employed some fit Persons to feel their Pulses in
the Case, where being kindly entertained, and promising to afford their
Assistance toward the Match, as far as they might, without detriment to the
Public, or their own Dishonor; on the First of January, at the beginning of
the Year 1543, they were all released and sent back toward Scotland: When they
came to Newcastle, and had given Hostages to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, as
to other matters, Scottish Prisoners and Exile. released, and dismissed at
London, and the Reason, why*
they were free, and so returned home. There returned also with them the
Douglas's, two Brothers, being restored to their Country, now fifteen Years
after their Banishment. They were all received with the Gratulation of the
major part of the People. The Cardinal, who saw that this Storm gathered
against him, as making no doubt, but the Prisoners and the Exiles would be both
his Contrariants in the Parliament, had taken care to be chosen Regent before
their coming, but he enjoyed not that Honor long; for within a few days, his
Fraud, in counterfeiting the King's Will and Testament, being discovered, he
was thrown out of his Place, and The Cardinal's Cheat discovered, and thereupon
James Hamilton, Earl of Arran, chosen Regent.
James Hamilton Earl of Arran made Regent: That which occasioned his setting
up, was, because some were willing to curry favor with him, as the next Heir
of the Crown; Others foresaw, so long before, the Cruelty of the Cardinal in
matters of Religion, and therefore provided against it, by lessening his Power.
Their Fear was increased upon this ground, that there was found amongst the
King's Papers, after his Death, a List, wherein the Names of above 300 of the
Nobility were contained as Criminals, and amongst them, He, now chosen Regent,
was first to have been questioned. Whereupon, his Election was very grateful to
the most, because it seemed the most probable Medium to ease the Grievances of
many, and to curb the Pride of the Priests. Besides, he himself did willingly
read the Books, that contained Controversies about Religion; and the Quietness
and Retirement of his former Life, far remote from Court-Ambition, made many
hope, that he would be sober and moderate in his Government. Besides, being out
of the Magistracy, he had not yet discovered any Unactiveness or Sluggishness
of Mind.

In a Parliament which was held in May, Sir Ralph Sadler sent Ambassador to
Scotland, to treat about a Match for the young Queen with King Henry's Son;
Sir Ralph Sadler came Ambassador from England, in order to a Marriage, and
settling a Peace; Some of the Nobility he put in Mind of their Promise; Others,
as Report goes, he tempted with Money. The Queen, Cardinal, and the whole
Faction of Priests, were not only against this Peace, but, by disturbing some
Members and Counselors, and corrupting others, they would not suffer it so
much as to be put to the Vote; so that, by the general consent of almost the
whole Parliament, the Cardinal was confined to his Chamber till the Question
was put; when he was removed out of the way, the Agreement was easily made as
to the Queen's Marriage, and other Articles and Hostages were promised to
Henry, to ratify the Agreement: The Cardinal, at the Instance of the
Queen Mother, was kept in a loose kind of Custody by Seton, who was persuaded,
for a certain Sum of Money, a while after, to let him go. When Peace seemed thus
to be settled, to the great Advantage of both Kingdoms, after so great a fear of
an imminent War, every Body thought it would be a lasting One; and therefore
the Merchants, who, for some Years before, had been hindered from trading, went
thick and threefold to Sea, and laded very many Ships with the best Commodities
they could procure, for the time allotted them so to do. Edinburgh sent out
twelve Ships; other Cities of that Circuit (which is the richest part of
Scotland) rigged out Ships, each according to their respective Abilities. This
Fleet, in Confidence of the Peace with England, some of them drew nearer the
Shores, than they needed to have done, and when the Wind was calm, there they
lay at Anchor: Others entered into the Ports, open to the Injuries of the
English, if any Tumult of War should arise.

About the same time, John Hamilton, Abbat of Pasley, and David Painter,
returned out of France. These Men now cast off the Vizard, wherewith before
they had disguised themselves for many Years, and returned to their true
Manners; for as if they had been educated not in the School of Piety, but of
Profaneness, they were the Ringleaders at Court, to all manner of
Flagitiousness. The Cardinal being restored to his Liberty unexpectedly, But is
affronted by the Cardinal and his Faction, upon colorable pretenses.
being also of a proud Disposition, which was aggravated by the affront he had
received, and by the Ignominy accruing on the Detection of his Fraud, sought
out all occasions whatsoever, to disturb this Concord. First of all, he
communicated the matter to the Queen Dowager; and they Both took it in great
Indignation, That the Douglasses, (who, for the many Benefits they had received
from the English, must needs be their fast Friends,) should immediately, after
so many Years Banishment, be admitted into the Parliament House, to debate the
weightiest Affairs of the Kingdom. Besides, they all jointly feared a Change of
the Established Religion, the Consequent whereof must needs be a Breach of the
League with France. Hereupon the Cardinal, by the consent of the Queen,
summoned a Convocation of Priests, and extorted from them a great Sum of Money,
as fearing the universal Ruin of the whole Papal Church. Part of this Money was
paid to some of the Nobles of the adverse Party, and many large Promises were
made them besides, to persuade them not to give any Hostages to the English;
and as for those, who were newly returned from their Imprisonment, and had left
their Children or Kindred, as Hostages for their Return, he desired them, not
to prefer those (otherwise dear) Pledges before the Laws, the public Safety,
and their ancient Religion, whose Preservation was turned upon this Hinge
alone; and that they would not run willingly into a perpetual Bondage. Besides,
he caused the Ecclesiastics to carry it proudly and disrespectfully toward
the English Ambassador, insomuch that the very Rabble did reproach and abuse
his Retinue, and what he said, or did, was all taken in the worst Sense. But
the Ambassador resolved to bear all Affronts, and to tide it out, till the day,
for delivering the Hostages, did approach, that so he might give no occasion of
a Rupture on his part. And when that Day was come, he went to the Regent, and
complained of the Affronts, which had been offered, not so much to himself, as
to his King, whom he represented, and how that the Law of Nations was violated
thereby* and moreover, he desired him to give Hostages according to the Tenor
of the League newly made, that so the Amity might be kept sacred and inviolate,
to the mutual Advantage of both Nations. The Regent, as to the Affronts
offered, excused himself, and said, he was sorry for them, and that he would
speedily search into the matter, that so the Punishment of such petulant
Offenders should be a suffient Testimony of the Love and Veneration he had for
the English Nation. But as to Hostages, he answered, that he could not obtain
them with the good Will of the States, neither was he able to compel them
without public consent. For the Government which he bore, was such, that he
received as much Law as he gave, and therefore all his Measures were disturbed
by the great Sedition, which, he saw, the Cardinal had raised; that he was, as
it were, carried down in the Stream of popular Fury, and could scarce maintain
his own Station and Dignity. The new Hostages being thus denied, there was
another thing as weighty as That, which fell under Debate, and that was,
concerning the Nobles lately taken Prisoners of War, who, upon their
Releasement, had given Hostages, and made solemn Asseverations, That, if there
were not a Peace concluded, as Henry desired, upon just and fair Terms, they
would surrender themselves Prisoners again. As for Them, the Cardinal's
Faction, and the rest of the Ecclesiastical Order, dealt with them, partly by
Reasons, and partly by Examples, not to prefer their Estates, Kindred,
Children, or any other thing, which might be dear to them, before the Love of
their Country. And moreover he threatened them with Auxiliaries from France, and
that all Europe did conspire for the Defense of their ancient Rites and
Religion; and if they acted contrary, they would betray their Country, and
thereby the Ruin of their ancient Families would be imminent and at hand. They
also desired them in so dangerous a time, not to forsake their Country, for if
That were safe, they might hope for more Kindred and Children, but if That were
overthrown, then all was gone. Moreover, they discoursed much concerning the
inexpiable Hatred betwixt the Nations, and of the Cruelty of the King, into
whose Hands they were to come, thus blending Truths and Falsehoods together.
Moreover, The Decree of the Council of Constance forbids Faith to be kept with
Heretics, as the Reformed are by them called.
they alleged the Decree of the Council of Constance, That all Pacts,
Contracts, Promises and Oaths, made with Heretics, ought to be rescinded and
made void. The greatest part of those, who were concerned in this matter, were
willing to hearken to any colorable pretense for their Fault, only there was
One of them, who, for no pecuniary Consideration whatever, could be persuaded,
no nor by any Threats deterred from keeping his Word, and that was Kennedy Earl
of Cassills, his just Resolution to return (like another Regulus) into England,
to redeem his Hostages, highly praised and rewarded by Henry of England.
Gilbert Kennedy Earl of Cassils, he had left two of his Brothers, Hostages in
England, and he openly professed, that neither for Fear nor Favor, he would
redeem his own Life with the Loss of his Brothers, but whatever came of it, he
would surrender himself back a Prisoner; and so against the Will of many, he
undertook his Journey straight to London. Henry very much commended the resolute
Faithfulness of the Young Man; and to the intent, that all might know he had an
Esteem for Virtue, he richly rewarded him, and sent him back with his two
Brothers into Scotland.

But Henry's Mind was not more pacified toward Gilbert, than his Anger was
implacable against the rest of the Scots; and thereupon he laid an Embargo upon
the Scots Ships in all English Ports and Harbors, of which there were a great
Number, as I said before, and so presently denounced War. His Threatenings were
great, as against the Violators, not only of Leagues, but even of the Law of
Nations. And yet, though Scotland stood in so dangerous a State, the Memory of
Alliances, the common Love to their Country, and the respect of the public
Safety, were so far laid aside, that the Brands of Sedition were kindled more
fiercely than ever. For the Faction of the Cardinal, and of the Queen Dowager,
who were all for the French, sent over Ambassadors thither, to tell them, That
unless they sent in Assistance, the Matter was upon the very Point, That
England and Scotland would make a Coalition into one Government; and how such a
Conjunction would concern France, the Experience of former Ages had shown. But
they made it their chief Request to the French, that they would send back
Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lennox, sent for out of France into Scotland, to
balance the Hamiltons.
Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lennox, into his own Country, who did not only emulate
the Family of the Hamiltons, but was also their deadly Enemy, being they had
slain his Father at Linlithgoe. This young Man was greatly beloved, not only
for his extraordinary Beauty and stately Garb in the very Flower of his Youth,
but chiefly upon the account of the memory of his Father, who was so popular a
Man, and also because he was a single Man, and the Extinction of such a noble
Family, now reduced to a few, was in great Hazard; besides he had many
Clanships at home, and had also Affinity with many other great Families.
Furthermore, the former King had designed him to be his next Heir and
Successor, if he himself died without Issue Male; and he would have confirmed
that his Intention by a Decree of the States, (who have the Sovereign Power to
order such public Affairs) if his Life had been prolonged. Yea, there were
some Flatterers, which did elevate his generous Mind, already raised up with
the expectation of great things, but not so well fortified against fraudulent
Adulation, to larger Hopes; for, besides the Supreme Rule for about twenty
Years, and the Domination over his old Enemies, they promised him, that he
should marry the Queen Dowager; and if the young Queen, who had the Name only
of Supreme Governess, should miscarry, then, without doubt, he would be the
next King; and not only so, but also the lawful Heir of James Hamilton, lately
deceased, seeing the Regent was a Bastard, and was so far from any just
expectation of the Kingdom, that he could not lawfully claim the Inheritance of
his own Family: Besides, they urged the Promises of the French King, who gave
hopes of great Assistance, in due time. When the plain-hearted and credulous
young Man was thus persuaded, he provided for his Voyage into Scotland.
Hamilton was not ignorant of any of these things; and to the intent that he
might gain an Accession of Strength to his own Party, by the Advice of those
Friends whom he most trusted, he resolved to take away the young Queen from
Linlithgo, where she yet was under the Power of her Mother; for if he once got
Her, then not only the Shadow of the Royal Name, which is an attractive thing
amongst the Vulgar, would be of his Side, but also he should have the Power to
bestow her in Marriage, and so make himself Arbiter of the Kingdom, to transfer
it whithersoever he pleased, which if he could obtain, then the King of England
might be persuaded, if need were, to join with him.

This Design was much approved; but, as is usual in Civil Discords, there are
Spies on both sides, who being informed thereof, acquainted the Cardinal
therewith: He, gathering together some of the Nobility, whom he had corrupted
with Money, came to Linlithgo, and, to the great Burden of the Inhabitants,
staid there some days, as a Guard to the Queen. In the mean time, Lennox
arrived out of France, and was kindly received by the Regent, each of them
dissembling their Hate; then he went to Linlithgo; there he addressed the
Cardinal, and then went to his own House, where, in a Meeting of Friends, he
discoursed at large, Why he came over, at Whose Command, by Whom sent for, and
upon What hopes; That he was promised, not only the chief Magistracy, but also
that the Heads of the Faction, with the Queen Dowager's Consent, had assured
him, that he should marry Her: And that, in order to the effecting thereof, the
King of France had encouraged him to expect Aid and Assistance from thence:
they all assented to his Speech, and advised him not to be wanting to the
Occasion, which so freely had offered it self; and thus with above four
thousand Men, he came to the Queen. Hamilton, who had levied and mustered his
Men, and with his Kinsmen about him, was resolved to issue out of Edinburgh,
and break through to the Queen, now perceiving that his Forces were too weak, by
the Advice of his Friends, and out of his own Disposition also, which was
inclinable to Peace, began to treat of an Accommodation: whereupon some prudent
Persons were chosen on both sides, who met at the Town of Kirk-Liston, lying on
the North-side of the River Annand, that divides Middle and West-Lothian.

An Agreement made between Hamilton and Lennox.


Liston, almost in the middle way between Edinburgh and Linlithgo: And an
Agreement was made betwixt them on these Terms; That the Queen should be
removed to Sterlin, and that Four of the prime Nobility, who had engaged
themselves in neither Faction, should be chosen out to inspect her Education:
And those were William Graham, John Erskin, John Lindsy, and William
Levingston, eminent Persons, and all Heads of illustrious Families. They, by
the Consent of both Parties, took the Queen, and entered upon the Road leading
to Sterlin, whilst Lennox stood in Arms with his Men, till they had traveled
far enough to be out of any Danger from the contrary Faction; and not long
after, having performed the accustomed Ceremonies, she took on her the Ensigns
of Majesty, and began her Reign at Sterlin, August 21.

The Regent, perceiving, that the Favor of the Vulgar, by reason of his
Inconstancy, was alienated from him; and that his Forces were inferior to
those of the contrary Faction, began to entertain private Conferences with them
underhand; and indeed the Cardinal, who was kin to him by the Mothers side,
intended only to frighten him, that so he might bring him over to his party,
rather than to subdue him by force of Arms: So that having weakened him before,
by taking off part of the Nobility from him, by his Largesses; and thereby
rendered him cheaper, and of less Repute amongst the English; he now, by the
Intervention of his familiar Friends, who had more regard to Money than Love to
Truth, compelled him to an unjust Combination, and persuading him to come to
Sterlin, The Regent recants his Opinions, as to the Reformed Religion.
there caused him to recant, and change his Opinion, concerning all the
controverted Points of Religion, not openly, that the Infamy of the Fact might
be lessened amongst the Vulgar, but in a Convent of the Franciscans, in the
Presence of the Queen Dowager and the chief Nobles of the Court; and for fear
of a Suit, which the Cardinal threatened to commence against him, for his whole
Estate, he was so obsequious, that he put himself wholly under his Influences,
insomuch that he only retained the shadowy Name of a Regent. And by this means,
the Cardinal obtained without Envy, what he had coveted by his suborned Will,
even to enjoy the advantage of the whole Government, and that by the
mean-spiritedness of the Regent, and the Avarice of his Kindred. There seemed
but one thing wanting to establish his Power, and that was the Removal of
Lennox, who was a great Block in the way of his Designs; At last, the Queen
Dowager and Cardinal fixed upon this Project, That, till an Answer came from
France, she should hold the young Man's Mind in Suspense, giving him some hopes
of marrying her. Lennox was promised to marry the Queen, but afterward illuded
by her and the Cardinal.
For they had written honorably of Lennox to the French King, as indeed they
could do no other; for, next to God, they were indebted to him for restoring
them to the Liberty they enjoyed; but withal they desired him, that seeing
Matters were now quieted in Scotland, by that King's Liberality and Assistance,
that he would be pleased to maintain the Courtesy he had done them, and to
confirm the Peace which he had afforded, by calling Lennox back again. For,
without that, things would never long continue in Peace, but one or other of
the Factions must be destroyed. Thus they undermined Lennox privately; but in
public he was entertained with various Divertisements by the Queen and
Cardinal, insomuch that the Court loosed the Reins to Luxury and
Lasciviousness, and was wholly given up to Plays and Feastings. The Day was
spent in Tiltings, and such kind of Manlike Exercises; the Night in Balls and
Dancing. Lennox was inclinable, by Nature, to these Recreations, and was,
besides, much accustomed to them in the French Court. But now James Hepburn,
Earl of Bothwel, started up as his Rival, and somewhat spurred up his Mind,
almost ready to languish. This James was banished by King James the Fifth, but
presently after his Death, he returned home, and aspired to the Marriage of the
Queen, by the same Arts, as Lennox did; and indeed the Indowments of Nature and
Fortune were very eminent in Both of them, insomuch that they might be said to
be rather Like than Equal. Bothwel matched him in other things; but in these
^udicrous Combats and Feats of Arms, being inferior to him, he left the Court,
and departed to his own House. Lennox, when his Rival was removed, thought now,
that all was secure on his part, and thereupon he earnestly pressed, that the
Promises made him by the Queen and Cardinal, might be performed: But perceiving
at last, that he was fraudulently dealt with, and that Hamilton, his Enemy, was
advanced by them to Honor, Authority, and the Supreme Power over all Men's
Lives and Fortunes, his youthful Mind, which was not accustomed to ill Arts,
but judged all others like himself, was so inflamed with Anger, that he brake
forth into bitter Expressions, and solemnly swore, that he would suffer Want,
Banishment, Death, yea any thing whatsoever, than such an Affront to go
unrevenged. Hereupon he retired to Dunbarton, wholly bent on Revenge, but, as
yet, uncertain what Course to take to accomplish it; there he received 30000
French Crowns from the King of France, (who had not yet certainly heard, how
Affairs stood in Scotland) to enable him to strengthen his Party; That Money did
somewhat relieve his diseased Mind, because it gave him hope that he was not
wholly forsaken by the French King. But, being commanded to distribute the Money
by the Advice of the Queen Dowager and the Cardinal, yet he distributed part of
it to his own Friends, and part he sent to the Queen. The Cardinal, who had
already devoured all that Prey in his Hope, was grievously troubled not only at
his Disappointment and Loss, but also at his (supposed) Disgrace therein, and
therefore he advised the Regent presently to levy an Army, and to march to
Glasgow, not doubting, but that he might there surprise Lennox and the Money
together. Their Design was made known to Lennox, and thereupon he speedily
levied 10000 Men, and above, Upon which he retires, and rises up in Arms, and
from Glascow marches to Leith;
all of his Friends and Vassals. That which much facilitated the completing
that Number, was, the Indignation of some of the Nobles, who, at the beginning,
out of Love to Religion, and Hatred of the Cardinal, had been the Instruments
to advance the Regent to that high Honor; but now they had changed their
former Good Will into Hatred, because he had delivered up, and, as much as in
him lay, betrayed his best-deserving Friends, with himself, into the Servitude
of their most cruel Enemy, without so much as giving them any notice thereof.

This Frame of Spirit made a new, and scarce credible, Change in the Scottish
Affairs; so that the Strength of the Parties being entire, only they were
headed by other Commanders. Hamilton and his Kin joined themselves to the Queen
Dowager and the Cardinal; but his former Friends sided with Lennox: With those
Forces levied on a sudden, Lennox came to Leith, and sent some into Edinburgh,
to tell the Cardinal, That he needed not to march to Glasgow to fight him, for
he would give him opportunity so to do, any Day when he pleased, in the Fields
between Leith and Edinburgh; The Cardinal, who had drawn the Regent to his
Party, imagined, that the Power of the adverse Party was so weakened thereby,
that he hoped none durst look him in the Face; now, unexpectedly, seeing
himself challenged by a greater Army than he had to defend him, in words did
not refuse the Combat, but only deferred the Day of Fight upon several
Pretenses and Interposals; well knowing, that Lennox could not long keep an
Army together, consisting of Volunteers, without Pay or Provision made for any
long time; in the mean time, he endeavored by Entreaties and Promises, to work
over the Minds of those, who were most inclinable, to his Party. Lennox, seeing
that the Design was to lengthen out the War, and by no means to hazard a Fight;
and being in no posture to begin a Siege, for want of Conveniences necessary
thereto; and also perceiving, that some of his Men had secret Conferences, by
Night, with the Enemy: To deliver himself out of these Straits, (his Friends,
who had made secret Provision for themselves, urging him also thereunto) was
forced to capitulate with the Regent. But was forced to capitulate with the
Regent, at present.
And thereupon he went to Edinburgh to him, and they transacted Matters some
Days together, as if they had forgot their old Hatred and Animosity.

At length, when he came to Linlithgo, Lennox was advised by his Friends, that
some hidden Mischief was brewing against him; so that, in the Nightime, he
went privily to Glasgow, and having fortified the Bishop's Castle with a
Garrison, and Sufficiency of Provisions, he went to Dunbarton; there he received
more certain Information, That the Douglasses and the Hamiltons were agreed.
And because some Suspicions and Relics of old Grudges were left betwixt the
Factions; George Douglas and Alexander Cuningham were given as Hostages, the
one for the Father, the other for the Brother, though this was done for a
pretense and disguise of a firmer Concord, and a Promise made, that they should
speedily be released, yet notwithstanding they were detained till the coming in
of the English Army. For the Hamiltons never thought themselves secure, until
those Nobles, who had any Interest or Courage, were removed; that so, by the
Terror of their Punishment, others might be restrained from Risings. Besides,
about the same time, Lennox was informed, that the King of France was alienated
from him, by the malicious Practices of his Enemies.

In the mean time, Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, and Robert Maxwel, Chief of
a noble Family, came to Glasgow, to accommodate Matters (if it were possible)
between the Regent and Lennox; But the Regent's Council persuaded him, to
apprehend the very Mediators for Peace; and thus, by a back-way, to avoid the
Tumult of the People, they were carried out, and sent Prisoners to Hamilton
Castle.

In this posture of Affairs in Scotland, when not only the English, but the
Chief of the Scots also, were angry with the Regent; Henry of England thought
it a fit opportunity for him, Henry of England makes War upon Scotland,
to punish the Violators, not only of the League, but of the Law of Nations
too; yet, before he would attack the Scots by force, he sent Letters, full of
just Complaints and Threats, to Edinburgh, blaming them for refusing his
Alliance, which he had so freely and generously offered, so arrogantly as they
did; yea, that they had not only rejected that Alliance, but, though he had
been kind to them, they scattered the Seeds of War, and had enforced him to arm
against his Will. These Letters did no good, whereupon he caused those Naval
Forces, which he had ready, with the first opportunity, to waft over against
the Boulognois, to set Sail for Scotland, and to infest Edinburgh and Leith,
(both which Towns had most affronted his Ambassadors) and the Country round
about them, with the Miseries of War. The Ships, arriving there, landed ten
thousand Foot, May the 4 th, a little above Leith, who, without any Resistance,
enter the Town; for most of the Townsmen were absent, upon the account of
Merchandising. The King and Cardinal, being then at Edinburgh, and unprovided
of all things, knew not what to do, but were so surprised, that they presently
set at Liberty those four eminent Persons, which they had in durance, (as
aforesaid) not for any regard to the public Safety, but partly fearing, lest
otherwise their Kinsmen and Tenants should refuse to fight, if not join
themselves to the Enemy; and partly also, that they might redeem the Good Will
of the People, who, they knew, were alienated from them, upon many accounts;
but they, not daring to commit themselves to the Hatred of the Citizens, and of
their Enemies too, fled to Linlithgo. The English staid three days at Leith to
land their Ordnance and Baggage, and so prepared themselves for the Encounter.
Having settled other matters, they march to Edinburgh, pillaged and burnt the
City, and then dispersed themselves to spoil the neighboring Parts, they ruined
many Villages, Burns Edinburgh, etc. and retreats.
with some Castles and Seats of Noblemen. From Edinburgh they returned to
Leith, and having a fair Wind, set fire to the Houses, and hoist Sail, and away.

About that Time, Lennox was certainly informed, That Francis, King of France,
was wholly alienated from him. For the contrary Faction, by their frequent
Letters and Messages, had persuaded him, That 'twas Lennox alone, who, by
reason of his old Enmity against his Fathers Enemies, did hinder the public
Concord of all Scotland; and that he was the Head of the Faction against the
Regent, and a Favourer of the English, and one who did rather indulge his own
private Animosities, Lennox labors to justify himself to the French King,
against the Calumnies of the Queen and Cardinal.
than promote the common Cause; and that if the King would recall him into
France, Peace would easily be made up amongst the rest. When Lennox had
received Intelligence, by his Friends, what his Enemies had informed against
him, he also writ to Francis, informing him, in what case he found the Affairs
of Scotland; and how he, and his Friends, had, with a great deal of pains,
vindicated both Queens to their Liberty, and had put them into a posture and
capacity to rule, having broken the Power of the adverse Party; and, out of a
turbulent Tempest, had brought things to a great Tranquillity, and that nothing
would be more acceptable to him, than to return into France, where he had lived
well nigh longer than in Scotland, and so to enjoy the sweet Society of his
beloved Friends: But that he returned into his own Country, not of his own
accord, but sent by the King, and that he had done nothing there, whereof his
Majesty or himself need to be ashamed; and, if he would not abridge him of his
former Favor, he would shortly answer, yea, perhaps, exceed, the hope he had
conceived of him; but, if he should call him away, in the midst of the carreer
of his Designs, then he must not only leave the Things, he had so excellently
began, unfinished, but also expose his Friends, Kindred, and Vassals, whom he
had engaged in the public Cause, and who had been almost worn out with toil
and labor, to Servitude and Torment, under an impious and cruel Tyrant; who,
as much as in him was, had sold both Queen and Kingdom to the Enemy; and, who
observed the Pacts and Promises, he made to Men, no more religiously than he
did the Duties of Piety toward God; for, within a few Years, he had changed
his Religion Three times: neither was it to be wondered at in him, who looked
upon Oaths and Promises, not as Bonds obliging to Faithfulness, but as lurking
holes to hide Perfidiousness. And therefore, he moved earnestly, That the King,
and those of his Council, would consider, whether, in so great an Affair, They
would believe him, all whose Ancestors had devoted themselves, their Lives,
Honors and Fortunes, for the increase of his Greatness; and who, indeed, had
been honored and rewarded by him with many Benefits, which yet were rather
Testimonies of their good Acceptance, than just Rewards and Compensations of
their Labors; or else a Man, who would change his Friends and Foes, at the
blast of every Wind, and who depended on the Arbitrament of Fortune alone.

Though many were not ignorant, that his Allegations were true, yet the French
King was so influenced by the Guise's, the Queen Dowager's Father and Uncle;
and, who, in all things, endeavored to promote her Concerns, that his Heart
and Ear were both shut against Lennox's Request, insomuch, that he would not
permit John Cambel, a Man of approved Virtue, sent by Lennox, to have Audience,
or, so much as to come into his Presence, but kept him in the nature of a
Prisoner, and had Spies set upon him to watch him, that so he might not write
back any thing of the Designs agitated in the French Court; yet notwithstanding
this their Caution, there were some who told him all. When Lennox heard this,
by the Dispatches which were sent him, his troubled Mind was variously hurried
betwixt Anger and Shame; he was ashamed to leave his Enterprise which he had
begun, unfinished; and the rather, because, he thought, that he was not able to
satisfy the Love of his Friends and Kindred, whom he had drawn, with him, into
the same Danger, but by the Sacrifice of his Life. As for the rest, his Anger
was highly inflamed, especially against the Queen-Dowager and the Cardinal, by
whose perfidious Contumely, he was cast into these Straits; but, he was chiefly
offended with the King of France, complaining, that he had brought him upon the
Stage, and now in the midst of his Acting, had forsaken him, and joined himself
with his Enemies. Whilst his Thoughts thus fluctuated, not knowing where to
fix, News was brought him, That all the Inhabitants on this side Mount Or,
Grampius.
Grantzbain, who were able to bear Arms, were commanded, by Proclamation, by
such a Day, to appear at Sterlin, and to bring ten Days Provision along with
them, that they might be ready to march, whithersoever the Regent should
command them, whither, accordingly they came at the Day appointed, and the
Regent marched them to Glasgow. There he besieged the Castle ten Days, Glasgow
Castle taken from Lennox, by the Regent.
and battered it with his Brass-Guns, but in vain; yet at last a Truce was
granted for a Day, and the Guards tampered with, so that the Castle was
surrendered, upon Quarter, and Indemnity to the Garison-Souldiers; yet,
notwithstanding, all of them but One or Two, were put to Death.

In the mean time, Lennox, being forsaken by the French King, and also cut off
from any hope of other Aid, made trial, by his Friends, how the King of England
stood affected toward him; and finding it fair Weather there, he resolved for
England: but, before he went, he had a great Mind to perform some notable
Exploit against the Hamiltons; and, communicating his Design to William
Cuningham, Earl of Glencarn, They two, at a Day appointed, with their Tenants
and Adherents, resolved to meet at Glasgow, and from thence to make an inroad
into the County of Clydsdale, which, almost all, belonged to the Hamiltons.
When the Regent heard of this, he resolved to be beforehand with them, and so
to seize upon Glasgow, and thereby prevent the place of meeting; but Cuningham,
with a great Party of his Men, were entered the Town before, and there expected
the coming of Lennox; but, hearing of Hamilton's coming, and of his Design, he
drew out his Men into the Fields adjoining, and according to the number of
those he had, set them in array, there were about 800 of them, part of his own
Clanship, and part of the Citizens of Glasgow, which favored his Cause; and
thus, with greater Courage than Force, he joined Battle and fought so
valiantly, that he beat the first Rank of the Enemy back upon the second; and
took the Brass-pieces they had brought with them. But whilst the Fight was hot
about the Regent's Quarter, Lennox and Cuningham worsted by Hamilton.
and the Matter was in great Hazard there, on a sudden, Robert Boyd, a valiant
and brave Man, came in with a small Party of Horse, and thrust himself into the
midst of the Fight, where the hottest Service was: He occasioned a greater Fear
and Trepidation, than so small a number need to have done; for both Armies
believed, that great Assistance was come into the Hamiltons. This Mistake quite
changed the fortune of the Day, whilst one thought the assistance was come into
his Party, the other to his Enemies. There were slain, in the Battle, about 300
on both sides; the greatest part was of the Cunningham's, and amongst them two
Sons of the Earl's, gallant Men, both: Neither was the Victory unbloody to the
Hamiltons, for they lost considerable Persons on their side too. But the
greatest Mischief fell upon the Inhabitants of Glasgow, for the Enemy, not
contented with the Blood of the Townsmen which they had killed, nor with the
Miseries of those, who survived; nor yet with the Plunder of their Houses, they
also took away the Valves and Shutters of their Gates and Windows, and their
Iron-Bars; neither did they forbear any kind of Calamity, but only the firing
of their Houses, which were so torn and deformed before. The Event of this
Battle wrought a great change in Men's Minds, so that Lennox's Friends and
Kinsmen refused to commit the Matter to the Hazard of a second Encounter; not
so much, because their Enemies Force was increased, and theirs lessened; nor
that, because, having lost so many valiant Men, they could not speedily gather
together a new supply from places so remote; as, that they were unwilling to
give any new Provocation to Hamilton, or, by too much Obstinacy, to offend him,
under whose Government, they knew, they must shortly come.

Lennox, being thus deserted by the French, Lennox flies into England, where he
marries Margaret Douglas.
and the greatest part of the Scots too, made George Sterlin Governor of the
Castle of Dunbarton; and he himself, with a few in his Company, sailed for
England, against the advice of his best Friends, who were willing, he should
have stayed some Months, in that impregnable Castle, and so waited for a change
of Affairs, which, they did not doubt, but shortly would come to pass. But he
was resolved for England, where he was honorably received by the King, who,
besides his other Respects, gave him Margaret Douglas in Marriage; she was
Sister to James, last King of Scotland, begot by the Earl of Angus, upon the
Sister of Henry King of England, a Lady in the Flower of her Age, of great
Comeliness and Beauty. In the mean time, the Queen-Dowager received into her
Protection That Scottish Faction, which, by the Departure of Lennox, was left
without an Head, and which did obstinately refuse to come under the Power of
Hamilton, (whose Levity they knew before, and now feared his Cruelty) for she
was afraid, that they might be enraged in such an hurry of Things, and so
desperately engage in some new Commotion.

The Hamiltons were glad at the departure of so potent an Enemy, but yet not
satisfied with the Punishments already inflicted, they used their Prosperity
very intemperately: For, in the next Convention held at Linlithgo, they
condemned him, and his Friends; confiscated their Goods, and banished them the
Land. A great Sum of Money was raised out of the Fines of those, who redeemed
their Estates out of the Exchequer, but not without great Disgust, and the high
Offense of all good Men. In the midst of these Domestic Seditions, The English
enter Scotland with an Army, and garrison Coldingham.
The English entered Scotland, and committed great Spoil and Desolation on
Iedburgh, Kelso, and the Country thereabout; from thence they went to
Coldingham, where they fortified the Church and the Tower, as well as they
could for the time, by making Works and leaving a Garrison, and so departed: And
the Garison-Souldiers made great havoc in all the adjacent parts; partly, out
of a greediness for Plunder; and partly, that the Country thereabouts might not
afford Provisions to the Enemy, when they besieged them. Hereupon, they, who
ruled the Roast in Scotland, the Queen-Dowager, Cardinal, and Regent, by the
advice of the Council, sent forth a Proclamation, That the Nobles, and the most
discreet and ablest of the Commons, The Regent raises an Army, but retreats
shamefully.
should come in armed, with eight Days Provision, to march whither the Regent
led them. In a short time, about 8000 met together, and in a very sharp Winter
too, who, having battered the Tower of the Church of Coldingham with their
great Guns, stood in their Arms all that Day and Night, to the great wearying
of Horse and Man. The Day after, the Regent, either out of Tenderness and
Inability to endure Military Toil, or fearing the Invasion of the Enemy, (for
he was informed from Berwick, a Neighbor-town, that the English were upon
their March) unknown to his Nobles, and with but a few in Company, mounted on
Horse back, and with full speed fled back to Dunbar. They, who endeavor to
excuse the baseness of this Flight, say, that he was afraid, lest his Army (out
of Hate preconceived on many former Accounts) would have given him up to the
English. His Departure made a great Disturbance in the whole Army, and the
rather, because the Cause of his Flight was unknown, and therefore many
thought, that 'twas the more considerable, and that they had greater Reason to
fear. Hereupon some were obstinately resolved to run home, the nearest way they
could, and leave their Guns behind them; Others, who would seem a little more
provident and stout, were for overcharging them, that so they might break in
pieces at a Discharge, and become useless to the Enemy. But Archibald Earl of
Angus withstood them all, telling them, that they should not add so foul an
Offense to their base Flight; but not being able to retain them, either by his
Authority or Entreaty, he burst out into these Words, with a loud Voice, so
that many might hear him: As for me, said he, I had rather choose a noble Death,
than to enjoy my Life, tho opulent and secure, after the admission of so foul a
Fact: You, my Friends and Fellow Soldiers, consider what you will do; as for
me, I will bring back these Guns, or else I will never return back hence alive,
my Honor and my Life shall go together. This Speech affected some Few, whose
Honor was dearer to them than their Lives, but the rest was so disheartened by
the shameful Flight of the Regent, that they broke their Ranks, and went every
one scatteringly home. Douglas sent the Guns before, and he, with his Party,
followed in good Order in the Rear, and tho he was pressed upon by the English
Horse, (whom the Tumult had excited) yet he brought the Ordnance safe to
Dunbar. This Expedition, rashly undertaken, and as basely performed,
discouraged abundance of the Scots, and raised up the English to an intolerable
height; as drawing the Cowardice of the Regent to Their Praise. And therefore
Ralph Evers and Brian Laiton, two brave English Cavaleers, overran all Merce,
Teviot, and Lauderdale, The vain boast of Evers and Laiton, two English
Cavaleers.
without any Resistance, and made the Inhabitants of those Countries submit
themselves, and if any were refractory, they wasted their Lands, and made their
Habitations desolate; yea, the undisturbed course of their Victories made them
so resolute and insolent, that they propounded the Bay of Forth to be the
Boundary of their Conquest. And with this hope they went to London, and craved
a Reward from Henry for their good Service: Their Petition was referred to the
Council; and in debate thereof, Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, who had made
many Expeditions against the Scots, and had done them much Mischief,
understanding, that, in that troublesome Posture of Affairs in Scotland, it was
no hard Matter to overrun naked and unguarded Countries, and to compel the
Commonalty, when they had no other Refuge, to take an Oath of Fealty to them;
and withal knowing the constancy of the Scots, in maintaining their Country,
and their Resolution in recovering it, when lost; upon these Considerations,
it is reported, that he advised the King, to give them all the Land, which they
could win by the Sword, and also to allow them a small Force to defend it, till
the Scots therein were inured to the English Government. This Gift they
willingly received, and the King as willingly gave, upon which, their vain
boasting being as vainly requited, they returned joyfully to the Borders,
having obtained 3000 Soldiers in pay, besides the Borderers, who are wont to
serve without any Military Stipend. Their return mightily disturbed all the
Borderers, because they had no hopes of any help from the Regent, in regard he
was influenced in all his Counsels by a Priest, especially by the Cardinal.
Hereupon, Archibald Earl of Angus being much affected with the Public
disgrace, The Regent, by the advice of Angus, raises a party to oppose the
English,
and also concerned upon the Account of his own private Losses, (for he had
large and fruitful Possessions in Merch and Teviotdale) sent to the Regent to
prevent it. The Regent deplored his own solitude, and complained, how he was
deserted by the Nobility. Douglas told him, it was his own, not the Nobilities
fault, for they were willing to spend their Lives and Fortunes for the good of
the Public, but he had slighted their Advice, and was wholly governed by a few
sorry Priests, who were Cowardly abroad and Seditious at home, for they, being
exempted from danger themselves, did abusively spend the Fruits of other Men's
Labors on their own Pleasures. This (said he) is the Fountain, from whence
Suspicions arise betwixt you and the Nobles, which, in regard you cannot trust
one another, is a great hindrance to the public Service. But if you will
communicate Counsels with them, who will not refuse to spend their Lives in
executing what shall be resolved upon, I do not despair, but we may yet perform
as noble Exploits as any of our Ancestors did, in Times equally, or, at least,
not much less troublesome, than the Days we now live in. But if, by our own
Slothfulness, we suffer the Enemy to conquer by piecemeal, he will quickly
force us to a Surrender or a Banishment, and which of the Two is more miserable
and flagitious can hardly be determined. As for us Two, I know, that I am
accused by my Enemies of Treachery, and You of Cowardice. But if you would do
that speedily, which you are not able to avoid, it is not a fine-spun Oration,
but the Field and Dint of Sword, shall wipe off both these Criminations. The
Regent told him, that he would be wholly guided by him and the Nobles,
whereupon a Council was summoned about an Expedition, and by their advice a
Proclamation was set forth to all the Neighbouring-Countries; That all the
Nobility therein should, with all the speed they could, repair to the Regent
wheresoever he should be; and they the Day after, with their present Force,
which were not above 300 Horse, marched for England. There came into them some
of the Lothianers and Merch-men, but not very many, so that when they came to
Mulross, upon Tweed, they resolved to stay there, till more Force came up to
them; but the English, who were already come as far as Iedburgh, being informed
by their Spies of the Paucity of the Enemy, marched with about 5000 Men out of
Iedburgh, directly toward Mulross, not doubting, but that they should surprise
the Regent, and his Party unawares, being but few, and they also tired with
their March.

But the Scots, being informed by their Scouts of the coming of the English,
withdrew themselves unto the next Hills, from thence, in Safety, to behold what
Course the Enemy would take. The English, being thus disappointed of their
hope, wandered up and down in the Town and Monastery of Monks, which were
pillaged a little before, being intent upon what prey they could find, and
there they staid, until break of day. As Soon as 'twas light, they were
returning to Iedburgh, and the Scots, having received a supply of almost 300 of
the Blades of Fife, under the Command of Norman Lesly, Son to the Earl of
Rothes, (a young Man, for all Accomplishments hardly to be matched again in
Scotland) grew thereby more encouraged, and so with a slow March, they retired
to the Hills, which are about the Town of Ancram: There Walter Scot, In
Teviotdale:
(of whom mention is made before,) an active and prudent Person came in to them
with but a few in his Company, excusing the Straitness of time, and telling
them, that his whole Party would be speedily with them: His advice was, that
they should send their Horse unto the next Hill, and so all of them run equal
Hazard on foot, and wait for the Enemy on the low ground, for he did not doubt,
but that their Servants, carrying up their Horse to the higher ground, would
make the English believe, that they were running away, and that would occasion
them to hasten their March. And accordingly, lest the Scots should get off
without fighting, and be again to be sought out with a great deal of Pains;
before the Night came, the English marched up to them in three Battalions; for
they The English, being overconfident, are worsted, principally by the Valor
of Norman Lesley, and Walter Scot.
hoped to end the Business with one light Skirmish, and because their hopes
were such, each one exhorted his Fellow to make haste, though they had
continued their March Night and Day before, under their heavy Arms, that so by
a short Toil they might get long Rest, Renown and Glory; These Exhortations
added to their Courage, as much as the Toil of the March abated their Strength,
so that their two first Battalions fell in amongst the Scots, who were prepared
for the Onset, as into an Ambush, yet trusting to their number, they stood to
their Arms and fought stoutly. But two things (wisely foreseen) were a great
help to the Scots, for both the Sun was almost at West, and darted with his
full Beams in the Faces of the Enemy; and also the Wind, which was somewhat
high, carried back the Smoke of the Gunpowder upon the Battalions behind,
insomuch that they could not see their way; and besides, whilst they were
panting, by reason of their March, it mightily troubled them with its noisome
Smell: The first Battalion of the English fell back upon the second, the second
on the third, where, by their Intermixtures one with another, and the pressing
of the Scots upon them, they all brake their Ranks and were driven back, so
that all were so full of Fear and Terror; that none knew his own Colors, or
his Captain; thus whilst every one provided for his own Safety, no Man
remembered the public Danger and Disgrace. The Scots followed thick after them,
so that now there was no more fighting, but slaying. At Night the Scots were
called back to their Colors, and taking a View of the slain, they lost only
two of their own; of the English, besides Commanders, there dyed about 200
Soldiers, and amongst them some of Note, there were about a thousand Prisoners
taken, and of them above 80 Gentlemen. This Victory, happening beyond all Men's
Expectation, was so much the more acceptable; the Fruit of all redounded to the
Regent, but almost all the Honor to the Douglasses.

About this time, by the Fraud, as it is thought of George Gordon Earl of
Huntly, a Contention arose, in which almost all the Family The Family of the
Frasers almost like to be quite extinguished.
of the Frasers were extinguished. There was betwixt Them, and Mac Rainald an
old Grudg, which had been often manifested to the loss of both Parties; and
Huntly was inwardly filled with Indignation, that they alone, of all the
Neighboring Families, refused to come under his Clanship. For when the
Neighbor Islanders gathered together what strength they could, against the
Earl of Argile, there was hardly any Man in all that Tract of the Country, but
bore Arms on one side or other. But the matter being composed without Blows, as
they were returning, severed from him another way, the Mac-Rainalds having
notice of it, got their Clanships together, and set upon them most furiously,
and the Frasers being fewer in number were overcome, and all slain to a Man.
And thus that numerous Family, which had often so well deserved of their Country,
had been wholly extinguished, unless, by God's good Providence, (as we have
reason to believe) 80 of the chief of the Family, had left their Wives at home
great with Child, all of which in due time brought forth Male-Children, and
they all lived to Man's Estate.

At the same time, the King of England heard, that his Army was beaten and
wasted in Scotland, and that an Ambassador was sent by the Regent to the King
of France, to acquaint him with the Victory, and to desire Aid of him, against
the Demands and Threats of the King of England, and likewise to inform against
Lennox, in Defamation of his Departure into England; as for Aid, he could
scarce obtain any, because the The French assists the Scots with some small
Force.
French knew for certain, that Henry was about passing over with great Forces
into France, only they sent 500 Horse, and 3000 Foot, not so much to defend the
Scots from the Incursions of the English, as to hold them in play, that they
might not fall with their whole Strength upon France. Henry, that Summer, did
not think it fit, to send greater Forces to the Borders of Scotland, because he
was of opinion, that the Garrisons there were sufficient to inhibit the
Excursions of the Scots; and besides, he knew well enough, that the Scots, in
such a perplexed State of their affairs, could not raise a great Army that
Year, to attack any well-fortified places.

The Scottish Ambassador in France objected some sorry matters against Lennox,
in his Absence, scarce worth the answering, as, that he had concealed the Money
sent to him; that by reason of his Dissensions with the Cardinal, the cause of
the Public was betrayed; and as for his Departure into England, That he
exaggerated, most invidiously. The King of France, who, by means of false
Rumors, had conceived such an Anger against Lennox, that he would by no means
admit of any Compurgation or Apology against those Calumnies, and who also had
imprisoned Lennox's Brother, unheard, Captain of his Guards, when the Truth
began a little to appear, as 'twere in excuse for his temerarious Fault, sought
for some color to hide it, and commanded an Examination to be made of the
Crimes objected against Lennox. And the Enquiry was committed to James
Montgomery of Lorge, Commander of the French Auxiliaries, a Man active and good
enough, but a bitter Enemy to Lennox; 'twas put into his Hands by the
Procurement of the Guises, because they were not able to separate the cause of
their Sister from the Perfidiousness of the Cardinal. Montgomery arrived with
his French Auxiliaries (lately mentioned) in Scotland, on July the 3 d, in the
Year 1545. where by showing the Letters, and declaring the good Intentions of
the King of France toward them, in the Council, he obtained, that an Army
should be levied, but only of the better sort, who were able to bear the
charges of the War, and they were to meet together upon a short day. And
accordingly at the time appointed* there met 15000 Scots Hadington a Town in
East- Lothian, twelve Miles South of Edinburgh.

The Scots marched into England with an Army,


at Hadington, and marching to the Borders, they formed their Camp over against
Work, a Castle in England. From thence, almost every other day they marched
with their Colors into England, and did obtain great Booty; the Enemy
endeavored to resist their Incursions, but in vain, they made indeed some
light Skirmishes, but unprosperously, so that the Scots wasted all the Country
for six Miles round. This they continued during ten Days, never going further
into the Enemies Country in the Daytime, than they could return back to their
Camp at Night. In the Interim, Montgomery and George Hume dealt earnestly with
the Regent, that he would remove his Camp to the other side of the Tweed, that
so they might make freer Inrodes upon the parts adjacent, and spread the terror
of their Army to a greater Distance, but their Solicitations were in vain. For
the Regent, and those of the Council about him, were against it, because they
were destitute of all Necessaries for storming of Castles; so that they
disbanded the Army, and returned home. The other took up their Winter Quarters,
But again retreat.
as every one thought fit, but Montgomery went to Sterlin to the Court, where
knowing of the Calumnies raised against Lennox by his Enemies, though he
himself did highly disgust him too, yet he grievously rebuked the Cardinal,
that, without any considerable Provocation on Lennox's part, he had laden so
noble and innocent a Person with such calumnious Imputations, and had compelled
him, even against his Will, to join himself with the Enemy.

About the same time, Inroads were made on both sides, on all parts of the
Borders with various Events. Robert Maxwel the Son of Robert, a young Man of
singular Valor, was taken Prisoner by the English; there was nothing memorable
done besides. At the beginning of the following Winter, Montgomery returned to
France, and the Cardinal carried about the Regent with him through the
Neighboring Provinces, upon pretense to reconcile and heal the Seditions and
Distempers of all Parties. First they came to Perth, where four Men were
punished for eating Flesh on a day prohibited; and also a Woman and her Infant
were both put to Death, Lutherans cruelly punished.
because she refused to call upon the Virgin Mary for Aid, in her Travel; then
they applied themselves to the Overthrow of all the Reformed, universally; they
went to Dundee, and, as themselves gave out, 'twas to punish such as read the
new Testament, for, in those days that was counted a most grievous Sin, The
ignorant Priests though^ the Book of the New Testament was written by Martin
Luther.
and such was the Blindness of those Times, that some of the Priests, being
offended at the Novelty of the Title, did contend, that That Book was lately
written by Martin Luther, and therefore they desired only the Old. There 'twas
told them, that Patrick Gray chief of a noble Family in those parts, was coming
with a great Train, and the Earl of Rothes with him: The Tumult being appeased,
the Regent commanded both of them to come to him the day after, but the
Cardinal, thinking it not safe to admit two such potent and factious Persons
with so great a Train, into that Town, which was the only one highly addicted
to the Reformed Religion, persuaded the Regent to return to Perth. The
Noblemen, when they were ready for their Journey, heard News, that the Regent
was gone for Perth; whereupon they followed him thither, and when they came in
sight of the Town, the Cardinal was so afraid, that, to gratify him, the Regent
commanded them to enter the City severally, and apart; and the next day after,
they were both committed to Prison; yet Rothes was soon released, but Gray was
delivered with more difficulty afterward, because he was more hated and feared
by them. Before they went from thence, the Cardinal thought good to abate the
Power of Or Ruthven.
Ruven, Mayor of the City; so that the Regent took away the Mayoralty from him,
and gave it to the Lord Kinfans is two Miles East of Perth, on the North of
Tay.
Kinfans, a Neighbour-Laird, Gray's Kinsman. Ruven was envied by the Cardinal,
because he favored the Reformed Religion; and as for Gray, he was not wholly
averse from the Reformed neither, nor yet any great Friend of the Cardinals:
For by this means, the Cardinal did not doubt, but, if they Two fell out, many
of the Neighboring parts would join themselves to each of them, in regard of
the Illustriousness of their Families; and so the more of them fell on either
side, the fewer Enemies he should have left alive: Thus the Mayoralty of Perth,
which for many Years had continued as Hereditary in the Family of the Ruvens,
was translated to Charters, Lord of Kinfans, with the great Indignation of the
Citizens; who took it much amiss, that their ancient Freedom of voting in their
Assemblies, was taken away; but the new Mayor was sent to compel them to
Obedience by force, if they resisted. His Design was, to assault the City in
two places, Gray, who had taken the whole matter on himself, attacked it from
the Bridge over the River Tay: The other Party were to carry their Guns up the
Stream, and so to storm the open side of the Town; but because the Tide hindered
them, they came not up in time: Gray makes his Attempt from the Bridge (from
which Ruven had purposely withdrawn his Guards into the next Houses, that so it
might seem to the Enemy, as if it were undefended,) and when he saw none in
Arms to oppose him, he boldly marched up into the Body of the Town; whereupon
Ruven issued out of the adjoining Houses on a sudden, and gave him a brisk
charge, which routed him and his whole party; but, in their Flight through
narrow Passages, the one hindered another; for the last, striving to gain the
Mouth of the Passage, gave a stop to the first: and in this confusion many were
trod under-foot, and sixty fell by the Sword. The Cardinal, when he knew that
Ruven had got the Victory, was somewhat sorry for it; yet, glad withal, that so
many of his Enemies were destroyed; for, seeing he despaired ever to make them
his Friends, he counted it a Gain to him, to see them mutually to destroy one
another. The Cardinal, having thus past over as much of Angus, as he thought
convenient at that time, brought the Regent, after the Winter-Solstice to St.
Andrews, to indear his Mind more unto him, if 'twere possible; for, though he
had his Son, the Earl of Arran, as a Pledge, yet as often as he bent his
Thoughts to the Consideration of the Fierceness of the Scottish Nobility, to the
Strength of the opposite Faction, and to the Inconstancy of the Regent, he was
afraid, that he might be persuaded by his Enemies, and so wrought over to them
with the same Levity, as he had first joined himself with him: There he
entertained him, with a small Retinue, with Sports and Pastimes twenty days at
Christmas; he gave him many Gifts at present, and promised him more for the
future; and after much Discourse together, concerning the State of the Kingdom,
he came a little more secure to Edinburgh.

There a Convocation of Ecclesiastics was held January the 12 th. The History
of George Wiseheart's Persecution by Cardinal ^eton, and his Ecclesiastics.
In that Assembly many things were canvass'd up and down concerning the
retaining of the old Liberty of the Church, and the Punishment of the enormous
Crimes of some Priests; but in the midst of their Debates, before they could
conclude of any thing, News was brought to them, that George Wiseheart, a
Preacher of the Gospel, one very acceptable to the People, was entertained at
the House of a noble Person called John Cockburn about seven Miles from the
City. Thither presently they sent a party of Horse, to demand the Offender: but
Cockburn alleged several things in excuse, on purpose to create some Delays,
that so he might have an opportunity to convey him away secretly; of which the
Cardinal being informed, made haste thither with the Regent, even in the dead
time of the Night, and beset all the Avenues of the House; and yet their
Promises, Flatteries and Threats prevailed not at all, till they sent for the
Earl of Bothwel out of the next District, he, being the chief of all the
Lothianers, did easily obtain, that George should be delivered up to Him; but
first, he past his Word, that no Harm or Damage should come to him. The Priests
having now gotten this Prey into their Hands, carried him from Edinburgh to St.
Andrews; and there about a Month after, they assembled a great Company of
Ecclesiastics, of all sorts, to determine concerning his Doctrine; this was
done to blind Men's Eyes with the pretense of a Judicatory, and a legal
Proceeding; for all Men knew, what they would determine concerning him
beforehand. By the consent of them all, The Cardinal desires a criminal Judge
against George Wiseheart.
the Cardinal by his Letters desired the Regent to give out his Mandate for a
civil Judge to sit upon the Offender, (for he himself, by the Pope's Canon Law,
could not sit upon the Life or Death of any Man) that so, he that was already
judged an Heretic by the Priests, might be also sentenced to Death by the
Secular Power. The Regent was not likely to have made any Scruple in granting
his Request, unless David Hamilton of Preston, his Kinsman, had interposed and
kept him back, But David Hamilton of Preston (a Village in East- Lothian)
persuades the Regent no^ to grant one.
who did both advise, entreat, threaten, and sometimes chid him, in order to
stop the Process against George: The Sum of his Discourse is reported to be
this, That he did very much wonder, upon what account the Regent should give
such a large Power to any Man, against the Servants of God, and, who had no
other Crime objected against them, besides the preaching the Gospel of Jesus
Christ; and especially to such, whose flagitious Lives, and brutish Cruelty,
cared not what Torments they put an innocent Man to; whose Integrity of Life,
his very Enemies were forced to confess, even against their Will, and, for his
Learning, he himself knew it to be great; that further, he himself had been
formerly a great Favourer of him, and it: 'Twas by his Commendation, that he
was advanced to the Supreme Magistracy; and also, that he had given forth
Edicts to declare his assent to his Doctrine publicly, and had undertook to
defend it; yea, he had exhorted all in general, and each Man in particular, to
read, understand, practice and exemplify it in their Hearts and Lives: Consider
therefore with your self, said he, what will Men think, what will Men say of
you, consider the Mercies God Almighty has bestowed upon you: The King, an
active Man, and your Enemy was taken away, who walked in the very same steps
you now tread. They, who brought him to ruin by their advice, do now also
endeavor to destroy you: they have opposed you from the beginning with the
Weight of all their Power; and now they seek, by Fraudulent Counsel, to ensnare
and undo you. Call to mind (Sir) the Victory given you over your Subjects
without Blood, and over your Enemies too, though having much greater Force than
your self, to your great renown, and their deserved Ignominy. Remember, for
whose sake you thus desert God, and oppose your and his Friends: Awake, I
beseech you, and dispel that Mist, which nefarious Persons have cast before
your Eyes; remember Saul King of Israel, how he was raised up from a low to a
Sovereign Estate, and how many Blessings he received from God, as long as he
was obedient to his Law; but when he slighted and turned aside from his
Commandments, how miserably was he punished? Compare the Success of your
Affairs, from the beginning to this very day, with his Prosperities; and unless
you alter the course of your Designs, expect no happy Issue, (nay, rather a
worse end, than he.) For he did design the same Projects which you now act, and
that to gratify some base Varlets, who can neither hide their open
Wickednesses, nor do not so much as endeavor to dissemble them.

The The Regent not satisfied to proceed against George;
Regent was affected at the advice of his Friend, and writ back an Answer to
the Cardinal, that he should not precipitate the Process, but let the whole
matter alone, till he came himself; for he was not willing to consent to the
Condemnation of the Man, till he had more diligently enquired into his Cause;
and if the Cardinal did otherwise, the Man's Blood should light on his Head,
for he testified by these Letters, that he himself was free therefrom.

The Cardinal was unexpectedly surprised with this Answer; he knew w^ll enough,
that, if Delays were made in the Case, the Prisoner would be delivered, as
being a popular Man; and besides, he would not suffer the thing to be brought
under a Debate, partly because the Man having been already condemned by the
Ecclesiastics, he would have no Recognition made; so that he was ragingly
angry, and persisted in the Resolution he had taken; Whereupon the Cardinal
proceeds against him, by his own Authority.
and his Reply was, That he did not write to the Regent, as if he had not
sufficient Authority independently without him, but for a specious pretense to
the Vulgar, that his Name might be to the Condemnation. Hereupon George was
brought out of Prison, and John Windram, a learned Man, and an hearty, though
secret, Favourer of the Cause of Religion, was commanded to mount a kind of
Pulpit there erected, and to preach; he took his Text out of Mat. 13. which
says, That the Good Seed is the Word of God, but the Evil Seed is Heresy: In
his Discourse, defining Heresy, he said, It was a false Opinion, evidently
repugnant to the Holy Scriptures, and maintained with Obstinacy; and that 'twas
occasioned, and also supported and fostered, by the Ignorance of the Pastors of
the Church, who did not know, how, either to convince Heretics, or to reduce
those who were gone astray, by the Spiritual Sword, which is the Word of God.
Afterward he explained the Duty of a Bishop, out of the Epistle to Timothy,
and showed, that there was only one way to find out Heresy, which was to bring
it to the Test of the Word of God. At length, when he made an end, though what
he spoke made against the Priests, who were there assembled not to refute
Heresies, but to punish those who opposed their licentious Arrogance; yet, as
if all things went well on their side, they hale forth George to a Pulpit or
Scaffold, built in the Church; that so they might observe their accustomed Form
in Judgment; over against him there was another Pulpit, which John Lauder, a
Popish Priest, mounted, and the rest stood all about him, as 'twere, to judge;
but there was not the least appearance of a Judgment, or of a free Disputation
in the Case. For the Accuser thundered out many odious and abominable Slanders,
such as are wont to be commonly forged against the Preachers of the purest
Doctrine, with great Acerbity of Words; and thus having spent some hours,
George was brought back again to the Castle, and lodged in the Governor's
Chamber, spending great part of his Time that Night in Prayer: The next
Morning, the Bishops sent two Franciscans to him, to acquaint him, that his
Death was at hand, and to know, whether they should confess him, as is usual in
such Cases? he told them, he had nothing to do with Friars, nor had any mind to
discourse them; but if they had a mind to gratify him in the thing, then he
desired to confer with that learned Man which preached yesterday. Whereupon the
Bishops gave him leave to go to the Castle, and George had a long Discourse
with Windram, who, after he had ceased weeping, (which for a while he could not
refrain) very friendly demanded of him, whether he would receive the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper? With all my heart, said George, if I may receive it under
both kinds of Bread and Wine, according to Christ's Institution: Windram
returned to the Bishops, and told them, that George did solemnly profess,
George Wiseheart's pious and Christian Leportment before his Death.
that he was innocent of the Crime of which he was accused; which he spoke, not
to deprecate his Death now at hand, but only to testify his Innocence before
Men, as 'twas before sufficiently known to God. The Cardinal was much enraged,
Ay, says he, we know well enough what you are. Being further demanded, whether
he would admit him to receive the Sacrament? he talked a little with the
Bishops, and, with their Consent, made Answer, That 'twas not fit that a
stubborn Heretic, condemned by the Church, should enjoy any Benefits of the
Church. That Answer was returned to him; and about nine of the Clock, the
Friends and Officers of the Governor of the Castle sat down to Breakfast, they
asked George, whether he would eat with them? Very willingly, said he, and much
more so than in former times, because, I perceive, that you are good Men, and
Fellow Members with me of the same Body of Christ, and because, I know, that
this is the last Meal I shall eat on Earth. And for you, (speaking to the
Governor of the Castle) I desire you in the Name of God, and for that Love
which you bear to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that you will sit down a
while with us, and vouchsafe me the Hearing, whilst I give you a short
Exhortation, and so pray over this Bread, which, as Brethren in Christ, we are
about to eat, and then I will bid you Farewell. In the Interim, the Cloth was
laid (according to Custom) and Bread set on, when George made a brief and clear
Discourse for about half an hour concerning Christ's last Supper, his
Sufferings and Death. But, above all, he exhorted them to lay aside Anger, Envy
and Malice, and to have mutual Love impressed on their Minds, that so they
might become perfect Members of Christ, who daily intercedes for us with his
Father, that our Sacrifice might be accepted by him to Eternal Life. When he
had thus spoken, he gave Thanks, and then brake the Bread, and gave to every
one a piece; and then the Wine, after he himself had drank in the same manner,
entreating them to remember the Death of Christ now in the last Sacrament with
him; as for himself, a bitterer Portion was prepared for him for no other
reason, but his preaching the Gospel; and then having again given Thanks, he
returned to his Chamber, and concluded with Prayer. A while after, two
Executioners were sent to him by the Cardinal, one of them put a black Linen
Shirt upon him, and the other bound many little Bags of Gunpowder to all the
Parts of his Body: In this Dress they brought him forth, and commanded him to
stay in the Chamber, without the Governor's. And at the same time, they
erected a Wooden Scaffold in the Court before the Castle, and made up a Pile of
Wood. The Windows and Forts of the Castle over against it, were all hung with
Tapestry and silk Hangings, with Cushions for the Cardinal, with his Train, to
behold, and take pleasure in the joyful Sight, even the Torture of an innocent
Man; thus endeavoring to curry Favor with the Vulgar, as the Author of so
notable a Prank. There was also a great Guard of Soldiers, not so much to
secure the Execution, as for a vain Ostentation of his Power; and besides,
Brass Guns were placed up and down in all convenient Places of the Castle.
Thus, whilst the Trumpets sounded, George was brought forth, mounted the
Scaffold, and was fastened with a Cord to the Stake, and, having scarce
obtained Liberty to pray for the Church of God, the Executioners fired the
Wood, which took hold of the Powder tied about him immediately, and blew it up
into Flame and Smoke. The Governor of the Castle, who stood so near that he was
singed with the Flame, exhorted him, in a few words, to be of good cheer, and
to ask Pardon of God for his Offenses: To whom he replied, George Wiseheart's
Prophecy, at his death, concerning the Cardinal's Fall.
This Flame occasions trouble to my Body indeed, but it has in no wise broken
my Spirit: But He, who now so proudly looks down upon me from yonder lofty
Place, (pointing to the Cardinal) shall 'ere long be as ignominiously thrown
down, as now he proudly lies at his Ease. Having thus spoken, they straightened
the Rope, The Martyrdom of George Wiseheart.
which was tied about his Neck, and so strangled him; his Body in a few hours
was consumed to Ashes in the Flame, and the Bishop, being yet mad with Hate and
Rage, forbad every body, upon great Penalties, to pray for the Deceased.

After this Fact, the Cardinal was highly commended by his Faction, and
extolled to the very Skies, that he alone, when others declined it, had
slighted the Authority of the Regent, and performed so noble an Exploit,
whereby he had curbed popular Insolency, and had courageously undertook, and as
happily managed the Defense of the whole Ecclesiastical Order. If the Church
had formerly had (said they) such valiant Assertors of its Liberties, it would
never have been brought to that Pass, as it is at this Day, ( i. e.) to truckle
under, but it would have given Law to all, and received it from none. This
luxuriant and superlative Joy of the Priests for their obtained Victory, did
rather irritate than discourage the Minds, not only of the promiscuous Vulgar,
but even of some great and noble Persons also: They fretted, that things were
come to that pass by their own Cowheartedness, so that now some bold thing or
other was to be attempted and hazarded, or else they were Slaves for ever.
Hereupon more Company came in to them, whose Grief enforced them to brake out
in Complaints against the Cardinal, so that they encouraged one another to rid
the Cardinal out of the way, and either to recover their Liberty, or lose their
Lives; For what hope of thriving, said they, could there be under so arrogant a
Priest, and so cruel a Tyrant, who made War against God as well as Men, and
those, not his Enemies only, as were all such as had Estates, or were any way
pious; but if he bore but a grudg against a Man, The foul Character of Cardinal
Beton.
he would hale him, as a Hog out of the Sty, to be sacrificed to his Lusts. And
besides, he was a public Encourager and Maintainer of War, both at Home and
Abroad; and in his private capacity, he mixed the Love of Harlots, with lawful
Marriages. Legitimate Wedlock he dissolved at pleasure; at Home he wallowed in
Lust among his Minions, and Abroad he ravaged to destroy the Innocent. The
Cardinal himself, though he did not distrust his own Power, yet knowing how
People stood affected toward him, and what Reports were spread up and down
concerning him, thought it his best way to strengthen his Power by some new
Accession or other. Hereupon he went to Angus, and married his eldest Daughter
to the Son of the Earl of Crawford; the Marriage was solemnized in great State,
and (almost) with a Royal Magnificence. Whilst these things were acting, he
received Intelligence by his Spies, That the King of England was making great
Naval Preparations to infest the Scottish Coasts, but especially the Inhabitants
of Fife, whom he threatened most: Whereupon he returned to St. Andrews, and
there appointed a Day for the Nobility, especially those, whose Estates lay
near to the Sea, to meet, and to consult in common, what Remedy to apply to the
present Malady. And to do it more effectually, he determined to take a View of
all the Seacoasts, together with the Owners of the Lands, and so in a manner
to circuit about all Fife, and to fortify all convenient Places, and to put
Garrisons into them. Amongst the rest of the Noble Men's Sons, who came in to the
Cardinal, Norman Lesly, Son to the Earl of Rothes, was one, of whom I have made
mention several times before: He had done great and eminent Service for the
Cardinal, but, on a time, there fell out a Dispute between them concerning a
private business, which estranged them a while, one from another; but Norman,
upon great Promises made to him, quitted his Right in the Matter contested for:
After a few Months, coming to demand of the Cardinal the performance of what
was promised him, they fell from plain Discourse to chiding, and afterward to
downright railing, uttering such reproachful words one to another, as were
seemly for neither of them; and thus they parted in a great Rage one from
another; the Cardinal fretting, that he was not treated with that Deference
which was due to his Dignity; and Norman, full of Wrath and Rage, as being
circumvented by Fraud, so that he returned home, with thoughts full of Revenge,
and inveighed openly amongst his Friends, against the intolerable Pride of the
Cardinal, insomuch that they all agreed to take away his Life: And, that the
matter might pass with the least Suspicion, Norman Lesly, with a few Partisans,
surprises the Castle of S. Andrews, and kills Cardinal Beton, accord-to George
Wistheart's Prophecy beforementioned.
Norman, with five only in his Company, came to St. Andrews, and took up his
usual Inn, that so the design of cutting him off might be concealed, by reason
of the paucity of his Attendants. There were Ten more in the Town, privy to the
Conspiracy; who all, in several Places, expected the Watchword: With this
small Company, did he undertake so great an Enterprise, and that in a Town
which was full of the Cardinal's Train, Kindred and Attendants. The Days were
then very long, as they use to be in those Countries, toward the end of the
Spring, viz. about May 7. And the Cardinal was fortifying his Castle for
Defense* in so great haste, that the Workmen continued at it almost Night and
Day; so that, when the Porter, early in the Morning, opened the Gates to let in
the Workmen, Norman had placed two of his Men in Ambush, in an House hard by,
who were to seize the Porter; and when they had made themselves Masters of the
Gate, they were to give a Sign, agreed on, to the rest: By this means they all
entered the Castle without any Noise, and sent four of their number to watch the
Cardinal's Chamber Door, that no Tidings might be carried in to him; others
were appointed to go to the Chambers of the rest of the Household, to call them
up, (for they well knew both the Men and the Place); them they roused up, being
half asleep; and calling them all by their Names, they threatened immediately to
kill them, if they made but the least Outcry; so that they led them all, in
great silence, out of the Castle, without doing them any hurt at all: When all
the rest were put out, then they alone were Masters of the Castle; whereupon,
those, who watched at the Cardinal's Door, knocked at it. They within asked
them their Names: they told them, and then they were let in; having, as some
write, past their words, that they would hurt no body; and when they were
entered, they dispatched the Cardinal with many Wounds. In the mean time, a
Noise was spread about the whole Town, that the Castle was taken, insomuch that
the Cardinal's Friends, half drunk, and half sleeping, started out of their
Beds, and cried out Arm; thus to the Castle they posted, and called out, with
minacious and opprobrious words, for Ladders; other things they also brought,
necessary for a Storm. They, who saw them out of the Castle, that they might
blunt the present Impetuousness of their Minds, and call back their mad Spirits
to consider themselves, crying out to them, demanded, why they made such a
bustle? for the Man was dead whom they sought to rescue, and with that word
they threw the dead Body out in the sight of them all, even out of that very
place, where before he had rejoicingly beheld the Execution of George Wiseheart.

Whereupon, many did revolve, within themselves, the Inconstancy of human
Affairs, and that unexpected Event; many also were affected with the Prediction
of George Wiseheart, concerning his Death, which then came into their Minds;
and many other things also, which that holy Man had foretold, not without the
special Inspiration of God's Spirit, (as we have cause to believe, and as the
Event soon after made appear.) The Cardinal's Friends and Kinsmen, being
astonished at this unexpected sight, soon sculk'd away. When the matter was
divulged all over the Kingdom, Men's Minds were variously affected, as they
either hated or loved the Cardinal; some thought it a brave, others a
nefarious, Fact. There were many also, who, being in a different way of Worship
from him, were afraid of their Lives, and others were offended at his
intolerable Arrogance; these did not only approve the Fact, but came to
gratulate the Committers of it, as the Restorers of their ancient Liberties,
and some of them ventured their Lives and Fortunes in their Quarrel. The Court
was grievously affrighted at the News, as having lost part of their Council;
but, by the advice of those which were present, they sent forth a Proclamation,
Those that slew the Cardinal, ^ thosummoned, yet refuse to appear.
that the Murderers should come in within six Days, to give Sureties to answer
matters at a Day, which was to be nominated for that purpose: But they had a
strong Castle over their Heads, and, in it, all the Cardinal's Money and
Housholdstuff; and, besides they had the Regent's eldest Son with them, who was
given in Hostage to the Cardinal, as is related before; so that they gave no
credit to the Promises of their Enemies, whose Levity and Perfidiousness they
had sufficient Experience of before, and therefore they refused to hearken to
any Conditions of Peace; whereupon they were Outlawed. Thus the matter was
protracted, partly by the Threats and vain Promises of the one party, and the
Diffidence of the other, from the Month of May till the November 5.
Nones of December; and then the Regent, by the Importunity of the
Queen Mother, and the malicious Clamors of the Priests, took Arms, and lay
three whole Months before the Castle, battering it with his Brass Guns; but, in
the fourth Month, almost at the End of Winter, he dismissed his Army, without
carrying the Place, and went to Edinburgh, to be present at the Convention of
Estates, which he had before indicted to be held in February.

They, who held the Castle, being thus freed from fear of their Enemy, did not
only make frequent Excursions into the neighboring Parts, and commit
Depredations with Fire and Sword therein; but, as if the Liberty gotten by
their Arms, were to be spent in Whoredoms, Adulteries, and such Vices, they ran
into all the Wickedness, which idle Persons are subject to; for they measured
Right and Wrong by no other Rule but their own Lust; neither could they be
reclaimed by John Knox, The Murderers of the Cardinal not reclaimed by the
preaching of John Knox.
who then came to them, and often warned them, that God would not be mocked,
but would take severe Punishments on those, who were Violators of his Laws,
even by those whom they least dreamed of; yet his Exhortations could not stop
the Course of their Flagitiousness.

Besides this domestic Mischief raging even in the very Bowels of the Kingdom,
there was an Accession made by a War with England: The English invade Scotland.
For the English had passed over the Solway with their Forces, and made People
terribly afraid; they were not contented with the Pillage and Prey, but they
fired some Places, took some Strongholds, and put Garrisons in them. Neither
were Matters quieter in the other parts of the Borders; Robert Maxwel, upon
whom the greatest part of the Storm fell, came to Edinburgh to crave Aid, when
almost all was lost; he alleged, that the Country was desolated, that their
Garrisons were taken and kept by their Enemies, that the Husbandman was driven
away from his Habitation, and forced to live, in much want, on the Charity of
his Friends, and that they suffered all this, because they would not change nor
forfeit their Fidelity to their King; but if no Course were taken for their
Relief, in some short time, their Miseries would compel them to give themselves
up to the English; and so would their Neighbors too, for fear they should
undergo the like. Hereupon, Aid was promised him to recover his Own; and the
Regent marching his Army thither, formed his Camp by the River A small River in
Ewsdale.
Meggat. There the Cardinal's Friends earnestly desired of him to call George
Lesly, Norman's Father, The Regent marches against the English.
who was then in the Camp, to his Answer, and not to carry so potent a Man with
him, as his Companion in the War, whose Faith was suspected, or rather who was
an open Enemy: The Earl, though the Time and Place did not favor it, yet was
willing immediately to put himself on the Trial; hereupon the Names of the
Judges, or Jury, were (according to Custom, which I have elsewhere mentioned,)
impannell'd, and none of them were excepted against by the adverse Party, yet,
by all their Votes he was acquitted. From thence they marched to the Castle of
Or Lang-hope, lying near the Conduence of the Rivers Esk and Ewes in Ewsdale.
Langham, from thence they drove out the English; and, as they resolved to
attempt other Forts, they were called back by a sudden Message. For News were
brought them, that a French Fleet was seen not far from the Promontory of St.
Ebbs Head on the Mouth of the Forth in Merss.
St. Ebb, wherein were one and twenty Ships. The Regent imagining what the
matter was, that they were come to besiege the Castle of St. Andrews, (as had
been agreed between them) marched joyfully home, there he discoursed Leon
Strozy, Admiral of the French Fleet, and they both agreed to lay close Siege to
the Castle, which they did, with so much Celerity, that many of the
Garison-Souldiers, which were abroad could not come in, and many Countrymen,
which had no hand in the Conspiracy, but occasionally came into the Castle,
about their private Affairs, could not get out. They planted their Brass Guns
upon the Towers of two Churches, which stood near on both sides the Castle,
which did so annoy the whole Court within the Castle-Walls, that the Defenders
could hardly stir in or out. And afterward they brought bigger pieces of
Ordnance, and played upon part of the Wall, which stood between two Towers,
which was soon battered down, because the later Buildings were not at all
compacted with the former, and so it fell down with a mighty Noise. Hereupon
they within, who before trusted to their Fortifications, and were ready to
expose themselves to stop any Breach, now began to be afraid, and calling
together a Council of War, because they feared the Cruelty of the Regent in
revenging the Death of his Kinsman, (such Sentiments making deep Impressions on
infirm Minds) they surrendered the Castle and themselves to Leon Strozy, St.
Andrews Castle taken by the Regent, with the Assistance of the French.
only upon Quarter for Life. Leon hereupon sent in his Men to pillage the
Castle, wherein was found, besides a great Quantity of Provisions of all sorts,
all the Cardinal's Money and Household Stuff, and all the Wealth of the
Garison-Souldiers, and of many others also, who had laid up their Goods there,
as in a place of Refuge; there also they found the Regent's Son, who was before
given in Hostage by his Father to the Cardinal, and, when he was slain, was
detained there. The Castle was demolished by Advice and Order of the Council;
and a few days after, Leon set Sail, with his Prisoners, for France. These
things fell out in August, 1547.

About the same time, News was brought, that the English had prepared great
Forces both by Land and Sea to invade Scotland, and to demand the Performance
of the Treaty, which was made four Years before with the Regent, concerning the
Marriage of the Queen of Scotland to the King of England's Son. This sudden
Report mightily affected the Regent, who was faint-hearted enough of himself,
for he had then no foreign Aid, neither did he much confide in his own forces:
The English enter Scotland, and repulse the Regent's Forces.
For the Papal Faction were offended at his Levity, and the Friends of exiled
Lennox having been cruelly entreated by him, retained the Seeds of their old
Hatred against him; yet, upon his Proclamation, there came in great numbers to
Edinburgh, from thence they marched to the Mouth of the River Esk, which runs
through Lothian, and there waited for the coming of the English. In the mean
time, the Scottish Horse rode up toward the Enemy in their March, and
challenged them to fight, by this means creating some trouble to them in their
Passage: But the English General, who knew that the Scots were better than his
own Men at such tumultuary Skirmishes, had given Command, that none of his
Troops should march out to encounter them. At last upon the Importunity of
Gray, Commander of the Horse, he was persuaded to send out some Troops of Horse
well-armed, and of Curiasiers, which should suddenly rush in upon them,
unprepared for Resistance; The Scots being grown fearless of the Enemy, but now
astonished at the sudden Onset, brake their Ranks, and fled for their Lives,
and about 800 of them were either slain or taken; of the English also, who
pressed too eagerly on the pursuit, several were taken Prisoners, amongst which
were some eminent Horse-Commanders. From that day forward, there was no
memorable Action performed by the Scottish Horse. The English had their Camp at
the Town of Two Miles East of Musselborough in East-Lothian.
Preston, a little more than a Mile from Them. From thence they might behold
the number of the Scottish Army from the high Ground, and perceiving them to be
more than they thought, they advised what course to take, and resolved to send
Letters to the Scots, that so, if just and equal Conditions might be agreed on,
the matter might be composed rather by Treaty than by Force. The English send
Letters to the Scots, persuasory to Peace,
The Contents of the Letters, were; They earnestly desired the Scots to
remember, that both Armies professed the Christian Religion, to whom (unless
they did renounce their Profession) nothing ought to be more dear than Peace
and Tranquillity, and nothing more to be abhorred than unjust Arms and War;
that the cause of the present War, was not Covetousness, Hatred, or Envy, but a
Desire of perpetual Peace, which could no ways so firmly coalesce as by a
Marriage, which had been already promised by the public Decree and Consent of
all the Estates, and ratified by a League, and that on such Conditions, as were
more advantageous to the Scots than the English, not to reduce them into an
Estate of Servitude, but to a joint Society of Life, and Participation, and
Communion, of all their Fortunes; which Marriage would be so much the more
beneficial to the Scots than English, because the Weaker might expect Advantage
from the Stronger, as being possessed with a greater Fear, lest he might be
wronged by him: And, at the present, in casting up accounts of things, you are
first to consider the Case, that it is very necessary your Queen should marry,
that necessity was inevitable, and that it was a difficult thing to moderate
it, and that the sole Power of choosing her an Husband was left to the Estates;
If they would choose a Family upon the account of Dignity and public Advantage,
whom could they pitch upon better, than a Neighbor King, born in the same
Island, allied in Blood, instituted in the same Laws, educated in the same
Manners and Language, and superior not in Power alone, but in all external
Ornaments and Accessions of Dignity? And besides, this Marriage would bring
with it a perpetual Concord, and an Oblivion of all old Grudges. But if they
had Thoughts to bring in a Stranger amonst them, to undertake the Kingdom, that
differed from them in Language, Laws and Customs, they should consider, how
many Inconveniences lodged in the Belly of that Design, which they might easily
foresee by the Examples of other Nations, and 'twere better so to do, than to
learn it by Trial and feeling the Smart thereof. As for themselves, if they
found the Spirits of the Scots not wholly averse from an Agreement, they were
ready to remit something of the Rigor of Law, and Right; and that they would
be content the young Queen should be educated under Scottish Supervisors, till
she came to be marriagable, and fit, by the Advice of the Nobles, to choose an
Husband for her self; and till that time came, both sides should abstain from
War and Rapine; and that the Queen should not be transported beyond Sea, nor
that any Treaty should be intertain'd by the Scots concerning her Marriage with
the French, or any other foreign Prince: If the Scots would faithfully promise
this, they would presently depart and withdraw their Forces, and as for what
Damage they had done, since they entered Scotland, they would make Restitution,
as indifferent Men should award.

These Letters were brought to the Regent, who communicated them to his Brother
John, Archbishop of St. Andrews, whom he had assumed into the Place and
Authority of the Cardinal, and to some few others: They, in hopes of a sure
Victory, gave him advice to suppress them; for they were afraid, that if the
Equity of the Proposals were made known, the Scots would be taken off, and
hearken to terms of Peace, and therefore they gave out through the whole Army,
that the English were come on purpose to take away their Queen by force, and to
reduce the Land to their own Subjection. And the Regent, being naturally
unactive, had chosen four, no more versed in Military Affairs than himself, who
did turn and wind all things at their Pleasure; those were his three Kinsmen
and Allies, John his Brother, Archbishop of St. Andrews, and Abbat of
Dumfermlin; George Dury; Alexander Beton; and the 4 th was Hugh Riggs a Lawyer,
noted more for his big Body, Corpulency, and bulky Strength, than for any
Military Skill. These Men did so puff up the Regent with a vain hope of
Victory, that, being of himself inconstant and variable in his Designs at every
blast of Wind, he shut his Ears against the advice of all others. Which being
rejected by the Regent,
Hereupon, when the Regent's Privadoes had caused the Report, which they
themselves had raised, to be spread all over the Army, they all ran hastily to
their Arms. Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus, led the Van; George Gordon, Earl
of Huntly, brought up the Rear, each of them had 10000 fighting Men, and the
Regent had about the same number in the main Battle. In this Posture, a Report
was suddenly raised, that the English were fled away, and it was not altogether
without ground; for they, wanting Provision, and not being able to fetch it
from far, nor to forage for it in the Neighborhood, which was so unfurnished
before, thought it the best way to preserve themselves, if they left their
Baggage behind them, and marched long Marches backward, but having so many
armed Men ready to engage, seeing they durst not come down into the Campagn,
nor could deceive the Enemy by going about, they waited his coming on the
higher ground. On the other side, the Regent was impatient of Delay, and sent
one to Douglas to march on with speed; but he knowing, that the English could
not long keep that ground for want of Provision, and so waited to fall on the
Rear, made no great haste, till he was stirred up by another Messenger from the
Regent, then, and not before, he past over the River. The main Battle, and the
Rear, following at a great Distance after. The English who were about to
depart, perceiving Douglas to draw toward them upon the Speed, sent out Gray,
Commander of the Horse with his whole Body to meet him, and stop his Carreer,
till the Foot had possessed themselves of a Neighbour-hill; or, if he saw
cause, he was to disturb them in their ranks; for, seeing the major part of
them were armed after the French mode, they thought the Scots would never be
able to bear the brunt of their charge: But a Brigade of the Scots marching in
close order together, He gives them Ba^^el;
holding forth their Stand of long Pikes before them, as a Fence, received the
Assault; there the Van of the English running in upon, and intangling
themselves amongst, the Pikes, the rest thought themselves ambuscado'd, and so
returned to their Body, telling them that the Scots Ranks could no more be
broken, than if they charged against a Wall: Hereupon, the English Horse were
about to leave the Foot and fly, but by the Persuasion of their Commanders, and
their mutual encouraging one another, and withal all hoping for a more
advantageous Ground to fight in, they were retained, and renewed their Ranks.
The Scots were held from marching forward to the opposite Hill, chiefly upon
this account, because they perceived Iambo a Spaniard, with some Troops of his
Countrymen, Harquebuisiers, to come down obliquely from the Hill, as if he
would fall on their Flank; and therefore, that no sudden Emergency might cause
them to divide their Brigade, and also that they might not be attacked on their
Flanks, they wheeled about leisurely from the right ascent of the Hill. The
main Battle, when they saw the Van to leave their Station, thought, that they
were running away, so that they also broke their Ranks, and betook themselves
to their Heels. The English, seeing this from the high Grounds, sent out their
Horse, But receives a great Overthrow.
and trod many of them under foot in the pursuit. During all this March from
Esk to the English Camp, the English Navy played upon the Flank of the Scots out
of their Ships, and did them much Mischief. All the Ways were strow'd with
Arms, by reason of the great Slaughter which was made, and many also were
drowned in the River. The English were most severe against the Priests and the
Monks, (for those of that Tribe, who were lusty and able to bear Arms, came
into the Field) and there were many who imputed the loss of the Day to them,
who had arrogantly refused honest Conditions of Peace, and who, if they had the
Victory, would have used it as cruelly toward their own Countrymen, as their
Enemies. In the first Charge, the English lost about 200 Horse, but of the
Scots there fell the prime of all the noblest Families, with their Relations
and Tenants, who counted it a flagitious thing to desert them; many were taken
in the Pursuit. The High-landers gathered themselves together in a round Body,
kept their Ranks, and returned safe home; for, at first, they marched through
craggy places, and inconvenient for Horse, and if they were sometimes
necessitated to descend into the Plains, yet the English Horse, who followed
the Pursuit scatter'dly, durst not attack them. This Battle, amongst a few
others, was very calamitous to the Scots, it was fought the 10 th of September,
in the Year 1547. The English having got the Victory, which was so much the
more joyful, because it was unexpected, marched five Miles further with all
their Forces, and there they staid eight days, sending out parties every day
six Miles round, who burnt and destroyed all within that Compass. They
attempted nothing considerable besides, saving the fortifying the desolate
Islands of Inch-Keith and Inch-Colm in the Bay of Forth; and in the Bay of Tay,
they took the Castle Brockty, standing on a Rock, on the A^gus-side of Tay, 2
Miles below Dundee.
Brockty; and, in their return by Land, they took by Surrender the Castles of
Fascastle and Hume, which the Garrisons out of Fear gave up; and they raised
Forts, one at Lauder, and another in the Ruins of Roxborough Castle.

Their sudden Departure gave some Relief to the Scots, and a breathing-time for
them to meet together to consult about the main chance. The Regent, presently
after the Fight, The English retreat out of Scotland.
came with that part of the Nobles which were with him to the two Queens at
Sterlin, and to the Nobility attending there; the Regent and his Brother were
very sad and dejected for the Calamity which happened by their Default, and the
Queen Dowager gave forth many outward Signs of Grief in her Speech and
Countenance, but they which knew her Heart did judge, that she was not much
troubled to see the Arrogance of the Hamiltons so curbed; but to be joyous in a
public Calamity, they who use to cover the Faults of Princes under honest
Disguises, are wont to call Greatness of Mind. Besides, the Dowager, ever since
the Death of the Cardinal, had used all ways and means to throw the Regent out
of his Office, and to invest the supreme Authority in her self, but she knew
she could never effect it, as long as They were uppermost, and had all
fortified places in their Hands: In all her Discourse, she heightened the Fear
she had from the English, and complained of the Weakness of their own domestic
Forces, and propounded the Dangers imminent from the civil Dissensions amongst
them: She communicated her Design to those, who she knew, were ill affected
toward the Hamiltons. When the Nobles were in Consultation about the grand
Affairs of the Kingdom, a Decree was made, that the Queen should retire to
Dunbarton, whilst the Nobility did debate concerning the Estate of the Kingdom:
John Erskin was made Governor of it, an unquestionable Favourer of the Queen's
Faction, and William Levingston, a Friend to the Hamiltons, was joined in
Commission with him. Ambassadors were also sent into France to demand Aid of
their King Henry against their common Enemy, according to the League made with
him: Hopes was also given them, that the Queen would come over into France, and
marry the Dolphin; but the French were intent upon their own Affairs, and
therefore their Auxiliaries were slower than the present Danger required.

In the mean time, The English again enter Scotland,
the English entered Scotland on both sides of the Borders: The Earl of Lennox,
as if he had been sent for by his Friends, came to Dumfries; for his
Father-in-Law Angus, and his old Friend Glencarne, had promised him two
thousand Horse and Foot of the neighboring Parts to assist him, if he would
leave the English, and come over to them; but when he came at the Place
appointed, there were hardly Three hundred come together, and those too of
such, who used to live on Robberies. These and some other things of the like
Nature, being very suspicious, and specially the wavering Mind of John Maxwel,
who had already given Hostages to the English, made Lennox believe that he was
betrayed, and therefore he resolved to circumvent his Enemies with the like
Fraud; he retained with him Glencarn, John Maxwel, and other chief Men of the
Scots, who had treated with him concerning his Transition and Return into his
own Country, and in the middle of the Night marched toward Drumlanerick, with
six hundred Horse, part of the English and part of the Scots, who had yielded
to them; when they came to the appointed Place, he sent out five hundred, to
commit what Spoil they could in the neighboring Parts, that so he might draw
out James Douglas, Owner of the Castle, into his Ambush; he, imagining such a
thing, kept within his Hold till 'twas Day; and then, being out of fear of
Treachery, he marched out with his Men, and passed over the River Nith, and
pressed straglingly upon the Plunderers, charging their Rear, as they were
retreating. They having got a convenient Time and Place to rally, And overtrow
a Party of Scots commanded by James Douglas.
turned back upon him with great violence, and struck such a Terror into them
in the Straits of a Ford, that they disordered their Ranks, killed some, and
took many considerable Prisoners. This light Expedition struck such a Terror
into the greatest part of Galway, that they strove which of them should yield
first to the English, partly to gratify Lennox, and partly fearing, lest, being
forsaken by their Neighbors, they should lie open to all Affronts. The Scottish
Regent fearing, lest in such a general Hurly-burly, if he did attempt nothing,
he should altogether dispirit his Men, who were discouraged enough before,
besieged the Castle of Brockty, and having laid before it almost three Months,
without performing any thing considerable, he drew off his Men, leaving only an
hundred Horse under the Command of James Halyburton, an active young Man, to
infest the neighboring Places, and to hinder any Provisions from being carried
in by Land to Brockty, or to the Garrison which the English had placed on an
Hill adjoining. These Matters passed at the End of that Year. In the beginning
of the next, which was 1548, the English fortified Hadington, a Town in Lothian
upon the Tine, and burned the Villages, and plundered the Country about, which
was the richest part of Scotland, and they formed another Garrison at Lauder.
Lennox, about the end of February having passed over the West-Border, hardly
escaped an Ambush laid for him by Part of those, who had yielded themselves;
but, returning to Carlisle, he revenged himself by punishing some of the
Hostages, especially John Maxwel, the chief Author of the Revolt, according to
the Contents of some Letters he had received from the King of England. During
these Transactions, Henry of France, who succeeded his Father Francis, sent
Forces to the Sea to be transported into Scotland, (...) of France ^ends Aid to
the Scots.
about six thousand Men, of which three thousand were German Foot, commanded by
the Rhine-grave; about two thousand French; and one thousand of diverse Nations,
all Horse; they were all commanded to obey Monsieur Dessy a French Man, who had
been a Commander in France some years, and had done good Service there. They
landed at Leith, and were ordered to quarter at Edinburgh, till they had
recovered their Sea-sickness. The Regent, and the Forces with him, marched to
Hadington, where they beset all Passages, and laid a close Siege to the Place.
He sent out a Proclamation into all Parts, in pursuance whereof, in a short
time, there came into him about eight thousand Scots. There the Nobility
assembled, and the Consultation was renewed concerning the Queen's going into
France, and marrying the Daulphin; a Council was called in a Monastery of
Monks, without Hadington, in the very Camp. In that Convention there were
various Disputes; some said, that if they sent away the Queen, they must expect
perpetual War from England, and Bondage from the French; others were of
opinion, that by reason of Agreement in Religion, and the Condition of the
present Times, it was best to embrace the Terms offered by the English, which
were a Ten Years Peace, with no bad Covenants or Obligations on the Scots. For
the whole of the League was, That, if the King of England, or Queen of
Scotland, died within ten years, all things should be, on both sides, as they
were before; and though no fortuitous Event should happen between, yet the
Kingdom might be hereby freed from its present Pressures, which had almost
broke its Strength; and the Soldiery, which were almost all lost in the late
Battle, might have time to grow up and increase in a long continued Peace; and,
that intestine Discord being laid asleep, they might more maturely consider of
the Grand Affairs, than they could do amongst Drums and Trumpets: And in such
Consultations, Delays were oftentimes of great Advantage, and rash Festination
was attended with speedy Repentance: Thus They. But all the Papists favored
the French, and some others too, whom French Bounty had either forestalled, or
else had raised up to great hopes of Advantage; amongst whom, was the Regent;
he had an yearly Revenue of 1200 French Pistols promised him, and the Command
of an 100 Curiassiers; so that the most Voices carried it, for the Queen's
going into France: The Fleet, which was to convey her, rode at Leith; and, The
Queen of Scotland sails into France.
making as if they would go away, they sailed about all Scotland, and came to
Dunbarton, where the Queen went on Shipboard, (having staid some Months for
its Arrival) in the Company of James her Brother, John Erskin, and William
Levingston: She was tossed with much foul Weather, and contrary Winds, but at
last landed in Bretaign, a Peninsule in France, and, by easy Journies, went to
Court.

In Scotland, whilst the War stopped at Hadington, yet the Common People in
several Places were not wanting to the present Occasion. For the Garrisons of
Hume and Fascastle doing great hurt to the Neighborhood, the Scots observing,
that Hume was negligently guarded by Night, got up to the Top of a Rock, Hume
and Fascastle, garrisoned by the English, are surprised by the Scots.
where the Confidence of the Unaccessibleness of the Place, made those within
less watchful, and so they killed the Sentinels, and took the Castle. And not
long after, when the Governor of Fascastle had commanded the Country
thereabouts to bring in a great quantity of Provisions into the Castle, at a
certain Day. The Country, upon this occasion, came numerously in, and unlading
their Horses, they took up the Provision on their backs, to carry them over a
Bridge, made betwixt two Rocks, into the Castle; as soon as ever they were
entered, they threw down their Burden, and upon a Sign given, slew the Guards,
and, before the rest of the English could come in, they seized on their Arms,
and placed themselves in the Avenues; and thus, setting the Gates open for
their whole Party to enter, they made themselves Masters of the Castle. In the
mean time, the Naval Force of the English was not idle; for the whole stress of
the Land-War lying upon Hadington, their Commanders thought that the
neighboring Parts were weakened and spoiled of all Defense, so that they
resolved to land in Fife. And accordingly they passed by some Sea-Towns, which
were well inhabited, and came to Standing on the Firth of Forth in Fife.
St. Minnans Kirk, a Place peopled well enough, that from thence they might
march by Land, to greater Towns, but less fortified, where the Pillage might be
more worth their Labor. James Stuart, the Queen's Brother, receiving the
Alarm, which the People of Saint Andrews, and a few of the Countrymen which
were left at home, made toward them, and in his way many of the Neighborhood
struck in with him. The English were already landed; and about 1200 of them
stood ready in their Arms for the Encounter. The great Guns which they had
landed, struck such a fear into the Countrymen, that they quickly fled; but
James, after he had a little stopped their Fear, charged the Enemy so briskly,
that though he had but a raw and tumultuous Band along with him, he soon routed
them, and drove them toward the Sea, killing many upon the Place, and many in
the pursuit; not a few of them were drowned in hastening to their Ships; one
Boat, with all its Passengers, was sunk, whilst they endeavored some in
Throngs to get on board. It Is reported, that there were 600 slain in the Fight,
and 100 taken Prisoners. Whereupon the Fleet presently sa^led to Mern, a
Country less inhabited; their Design was to surprise Monross, a Town not far
from the Mouth of the River Dee. They resolved to land in the Night; and
therefore they staid at Anchor, out of sight of Land, as long as there was any
Light in the Sky. But as they were making to Shore in the dark, they discovered
themselves by their own Imprudency, by hanging out Lights in every Boat; John
Erskin of Down, Governor of the Town, commanded his Men to arm, without
making any Noise, and he divided them into three Bodies; The English Seamen
landing in Scotland in two places, are twice repulsed.
he placed some behind an earthen Bank, which was raised on the Shore, to
hinder their landing; he, with some Archers lightly armed, made directly
toward the Enemy; and a third Band of Servants and promiscuous Vulgar, he
placed behind a Neighbor Hill, adding a few Soldiers to them, to govern the
Rabble; Matters being thus ordered, he with his Archers fell upon the Enemy in
their Descent, and maintained a sharp Dispute with them, till in a tumultuary
kind of Fight, he had drawn them on to the Banks, there he joined his other
Party, who stood ready at their Arms, and they all fell on the Enemy; yet they
had not given Ground, unless the last Body had shown themselves with Colors
flying from the next Hill; then they made such haste to their Ships, that of
about 800, which came on Shore, hardly the third part escaped to their Ships.

In the mean time, great Salleys were made about Hadington, not without loss on
either side, but most, of the English; whereupon they being in some want of
Provisions, and fearing a greater, and perceiving also, that the Relief
prepared came slowly on, and that they were so weakened, as to be hardly able to
admit of the Delay: In the Interim, two brave Soldiers, Robert Bovy and Thomas
Palmer, were commanded to march thither from Berwick, with 1000 Foot and 300
Horse, and to make all the Speed they could. These all fell into an Ambush laid
for them, and scarce a Man of them escaped alive. The English resolved to send
more Aid, but the French, discovering their Design, beset the narrow Passages,
by which they were to march; but Dessius, being deceived by one of the Enemies
Scouts which he had taken, who told him, that the English were far off, and
were marching another way to relieve the Besieged, left the Straits he had
possessed, and went to another Place; in the Interim, Hadington besieged by the
Scots, but relieved by the English.
the English marched through to their intended Post, without any hindrance. They
brought with them 300 fresh Men, Powder and Bullet, and such other Provision as
the Garrison stood in most need of.

Whilst these things were acted at Hadington, which did not at all make to the
Main of the War, News was brought, that the English had levied a complete Army
to raise the Siege: Whereupon Dessius, knowing, that he was not able to
encounter the Forces which were a coming, removed his Leaguer farther off from
the Town, and sent back his Great Guns, all but six small Fieldpieces, to
Edinburgh. Upon the Coming of the English Army, the Siege was raised, because
the Scots Commanders would not hazard the State of the Kingdom upon a single
Battle; so that the Scots marched every one the next way home; the French also,
though much pressed upon by the English, yet got well off. The French
Soldiers, A Mutiny between the French and Scots at Edinburgh.
in their Return, slew the Governor of Edinburgh, and his Son, together with
some of the Citizens who joined with them, because they refused to admit them
into the Town with all their Forces, in regard, they knew, they could scarce
keep them from plundring. Dessius in the Interim, lest the Sedition should
increase, drew off; and withal supposing, that the Enemy would be more secure
at Hadington, because of their good Success, resolved to make an Attempt to
surprise it on a sudden. Thither he marched all that Night, and by break of Day
slew the Sentinels, and came up to the Walls; they took the Fort before the
Gate, killed the Watch, some endeavored to break open the Gate; they also
seized upon the Granaries of the English. In this hurry, the Noise of those who
were breaking open the Gates, and the Huzza's of the French, crying out,
Victory, Victory, roused up the English from their Sleep, which they had newly
fallen into. In this great hurly-burly, The design of the French to surprise
Hadington, disappointed.
a Soldier set fire to a Brass Gun, placed casually against the Gate, that he
might, in a present Danger, make Trial of a doubtful Remedy. The Bullet broke
through the Gate, and made a Lane in the thick Ranks of the French, so that,
what between the Exclamations of the Soldiers crying out Victory, and the
Noise of the Gates which were broken, such a confused Clamor was carried to the
Rear, that they were surprised with Fear, not knowing the Cause, and so fled,
which occasioned the rest to follow after. The French being thus repulsed with
Loss, marched into Teviotdale, which the English had done great Damage to;
there, under the Conduct of Dessius, they drove the Enemy from Iedburgh, and
made many Inrodes into English Ground, not without considerable Advantage. At
length, when they had wasted all the Country, The French disgusted by the
Scots, for their Cruelty and Oppressions.
besides their daily Duty, they were also in great Want, and the Commonalty
pitied them the less, because of their Prank at Edinburgh, for they looked upon
that seditious Attempt as a Step to Tyranny. And from that time forward, the
French did nothing worth speaking of. The King of France was made acquainted by
Letter from the Regent, and Queen Dowager, how Dessius spent much time on light
Expeditions, and unprofitable ones, and that he was more injurious to his
Friends than Enemies, and that the French Soldiers were grown so insolent,
since the Tumult at Edinburgh, that, by reason of the intestine Discord,
Dessius Commander of the French recalled from Scotland, and Terms sent to
succeed him.
all was like to be ruined: Whereupon Dessius was called back, and Monsieur
Paul Terms, a good Soldier and prudent Commander, was sent with new Supplies
for Scotland. Dessius thought it would be for his Honor to recover the Island
Keith, which was taken a few Days before, and was begun to be fortified; so
that he got together a Fleet at Leith, and went aboard with a select Company of
Scots and French. Dessius takes the Island Keith from the English, before his
Departure.
The Queen was a Spectator of the Action, and egging them on, sometimes
particularly, sometimes all in general, after he had landed in the Island, he
drove the English into the highest Angle thereof, killed almost all their
Commanders, and compelled them to a Surrender, but not without Blood. This was
his last noble piece of Service in Britain, and then he surrendered up his Army
to Terms. Terms drew forth the Army out of their Winter Quarters, and
commanded them to march toward the Northern Shires, he himself, Dessius being
dismissed, followed soon after, and laid Siege to the Fort of Brockty, and in a
short time took it, and also the Castle adjoining, from the English, putting
almost all of both Garrisons to the Sword. When he was returned into Lothian,
his great Care was, to hinder Provisions from being carried to Hadington; when,
lo, upon a sudden, a great Army of English and Germans showed themselves ready
for the Encounter; whereupon he drew his Men backward, till he came to a Place
of greater Safety. In the Interim, the Scots Cavalry, which skirted upon the
Enemy on every side, perceiving the German Baggage to be unguarded, plundered
them in a moment. In the mean time, Provisions were carried into Hadington,
without any opposition. During these Matters, Julian Romerus, with a Troop of
Spaniards, was taken securely in his Quarters, as if all had been at Peace, and
almost all his whole Party was destroyed. Terms, when the English Forces were
marched home, resolved to return to the taking in of Hadington. They were stout
Men that defended the Town, but in regard the Country was wasted all
thereabouts, and Provisions could not be brought from far, but with great
Hazard, and sometimes certain Loss; and besides, the English were troubled with
great Seditions at home, and were further pressed upon by a War with France;
hereupon the Garrison of Hadington, Hadington deserted by the English.
having no hope of Relief, burnt the Town, and on the 1 st of October 1549,
marched away for England.

And moreover, the Garrison at Lauder was almost ready to surrender, as being in
great Distress, for want of Necessaries, when lo, An Agreement between the
French and English.
News was brought on a sudden of an Agreement made between the English and the
French, which was published in Scotland, April the first, 1550. And the May
following, all the French Soldiers were transported back into France. That
Peace, as to a Foreign War, lasted about three Years, but it was as troublesome
and pernicious as the hottest War. For they who sat at helm, the Regent, and
his Brother, the Archbishop of St. Andrews, were both extremely cruel and
avaritious, and the Archbishop very licentious in his Conversation also; for,
as if the Reins lay wholly loose on his Neck, his own Will was his Law. The
first Presage of the ensuing Tyranny, was, the suffering the Murder of William
Creighton, an eminent Person, to go unrevenged; he was slain by Robert Semple,
in the Regent's own Palace, and almost in his sight, and yet the Murderer was
exempted from Punishment, by the Intercession of the Archbishop's Concubine,
who was Daughter to Semple. This Archbishop, as long as the King lived, was one
of his Confidents, and pretended a great Zeal for the Reformed Religion; but
when the King was dead, he ran headlong into all flagitious Courses, and,
amongst the rest of his Mistresses, he took away this young Madam Semple from
her Husband, who was his Countryman and Ally, and kept her almost in the Place
of a lawful Wife, though she were not handsome, nor of good Report neither, but
only noted for Wantonness. After this, followed the Death of John Melvil, a a
Nobleman of Fife, who was a great Intimate of the last King's; Some Letters of
his were intercepted, written to a certain Englishman, in the behalf of his
Friend, a Prisoner there; and though there could be no suspicion of Treason in
the Case, yet the Author of them had his Head cut off. And that which made the
Matter more foul, was, That his Estate was given to David, the Regent's
youngest Son; the Loss, arising by these wicked Practices, reached but a few,
but the Envy of them extended to many, and the bad Example almost to all. The
Regent's Government disrelished, especially after the Martyrdom of George
Wiseheart.
This Unskilfulness of the Regent's managing the Government, together with the
Sluggishness of all his former Life, did mightily offend the Commons; so that
he every day grew more cheap than other, especially after the Suffering of
George Wiseheart; for Most did impute the following Calamities to the Death of
that Religious Man, especially they, who knew the Purity of Doctrine which
George held forth, and admired the Unblamableness of his Life; and moreover,
who looked upon him as Divinely inspired, because of the many and true
Predictions which he had made. Hereupon, the Authority of the Regent grew every
day less than other; and soon after these, followed another, and that a more
spreading, Mischief, which drew a general Complaint, not at all to be hid,
against him. There were Juridical Conventions appointed to be held throughout
the whole Kingdom, the Pretense was, to suppress Robberies, but the Event
showed, that 'twas nothing else, but to cover Oppression, under a plausible
Name. For Money was extorted from all, Good and Bad, as much from honest Men as
Thieves, and both were punished, not according to greatness of Crime, but of
Estate. Neither could he keep off his Cruelty and Avarice from the Reformed,
though he himself had formerly professed to be one of the Party, and now he had
not the Cardinal as a Blind for his Crimes; yea, the Money, thus basely got in
the Name of the Regent, was as profusely, and unadvisedly spent, by the Lust of
his Brother.

The Sixteenth BOOK.
The Queen Dowager sails for France.
MAtters being thus composed at home, the Queen Dowager took up a Resolution to
sail over into France, partly to visit her own Country, her Daughter and
Kindred; partly to secure her hopes in attaining the supreme Power, which
seemed to be freely cast upon her, and accordingly she chose those to attend
her on her Journey, who were Favorers of her Design. For the crafty and
ambitious Woman was full of hopes, that the Regent would, by his own Vices,
ruin himself, that so she might be advanced in his room; she staid with the
French King above a Year, in which time, she informed him in the state of
Affairs of Scotland, who heard her graciously, and, by means of her Brothers,
she easily obtained of him, what she desired. The King of France, the better to
bring about his Designs without any Tumult in Scotland, advanced to Honors all
those of the Scottish Nobility, each Man according to his Degree, who had
adhered to the Queen Dowager: They also which were of kin to the Regent, were
highly advanced; his Son James was made Captain over all the Scottish
Auxiliaries in France, and a yearly Pension of 12000 French Pistols promised
him. Huntly (whose Son had married his Daughter) was made Earl of Murray. Of
the Sons of Rothes, by different Mothers, who quarrelled about their Patrimony,
the youngest, who was Kin to the Hamiltons, was made Earl. The King of France,
by the Advice of the Queen Dowager, sends for Robert Carnagy, one of the
Regent's Privado's, who was lately sent over by him into France, to give that
King Thanks for his often Assistance of the Scots against the English, and also
James Painter, Ambassador for some Years in France, in behalf of the Scots,
besides Gawin Abbat of A Monastery 4 Miles North of Irwin, near the Irish Sea
in Cuningham.
Kilwinning, all firm to Hamilton's Faction. He declares to them, what he had
before treated with the Guises. The Sum whereof was, That the Regent would do
the King an acceptable piece of Service, if he would give leave to the Queen
Dowager to govern, that little time of Magistracy which was left him, which, as
'twas but a just and equal Request agreeable to their Laws; so, if he complied
with him therein, he would take care, that it should not be prejudicial to his
Interests; yea, he should find, that by this means he had procured to himself a
fast and munificent Friend in him: He wishes them to inform him, how he had at
present freely, and of his own accord, rewarded some of his Friends, by which
he might easily judge, what Courtesies to expect from him for the future. Thus
Carnagy, laden with great Promises, was dismissed home; and a while after
Painter, the Scottish Ambassador, Bishop of Ross, was bid to follow him. He, as
being a Man of great Eloquence and Authority, dealt with the Regent and his
Friends, to give up the Administration of Affairs into the Hands of the
Queen-Dowager; and, with much ado, he obtained it: So that for his Diligence
and Faithfulness in that Service, the King of France gave him an Abbey in
Poictou. The Queen, being now so secure of the Success of things in Scotland,
and having made sufficient Provision, as she thought, how to deprive the Scots
of their ancient Liberty, and to bring them Alamode-a-France, was accompanied
by Monsieur D'Osel, as Ambassador, to carry things on, a shrewd Man, whose
Counsel she was to use in all things; and so she returned home by Land through
England. The next Year after her Return, she followed the Regent, who kept
Assizes in almost all Parts of the Kingdom, and so by degrees made the Nobility
her own. In this Progress, some few Offenders were punished, the rest were
fined. The Queen could not approve such Proceedings, and yet she was willing
enough to hear them. For she judged, that what Favor the Regent lost, it all
returned upon Her. In the mean time, having won over the Nobility to her, The
Regent, by Directions from France, persuaded to resign his Government;
she used some Friends to deal with the Regent, that he would freely resign up
the Government; his Kindred, upon the view of his Strength, perceived, that his
Treasure was low, and his Friends few, and that he would have much ado to level
and clear up his Accounts; for King James the Fifth, at his Decease, had left a
great deal of Money, Arms, Ships, Horses, Brass-Guns, and abundance of
Household Stuff (all which he had lavished out amongst his Friends in a few
Years.) And that his Account would be speedily called for, the Queen being now
almost of Age. And if he would extricate himself out of all these Troubles, by
quitting the Government, it would be no great Loss; for thereby he would but
give up the Rule wholly to the French, which was entirely managed by their
Counsels before: And he would have this Advantage also, that by laying down the
invidious Title of Viceroy, or Regent, which however he could not long keep, he
would procure Safety and Security to Himself and His. This Prospect pleased, so
that an Agreement was made on these Conditions, Which he does afterward, upon
Terms.
That for what Goods of the late King's Hamilton had made use of, the French
King would see, that he should be indemnified, and also that he should be free
from any Account, on the pretense of Overseership; only he was to take an Oath
to restore what did appear not imbezill'd, yet in this he did not perform his
Promise. For about twelve years after, when his Castle of Hamilton was taken,
after the Fight at In Renfrewshire.
Langside, many things were there found, which showed his Perjury. Besides,
there were large Gifts bestowed upon him, and he was honored with the Title of
Duke of Or Chastleherault.
Castelrot, (which is a Town in Poictou, situate near the River Vien in
Daulphiny in France, having a Bridge over the Rhosne.
Vien,) and had a yearly Stipend of twelve thousand French Pistols, half of
which Sum was paid for some Years. Another Condition was also added by the
Suffrage of all the Estates; that, if the Queen died without Children, Hamilton
should be the next Heir. These were the Conditions of the Surrender, which were
sent into France, that they might there be confirmed by the Queen, and some to
be Guarrantees. The Queen, by the Advice of her Mother, makes Henry the 2 d
King of France, Francis Duke of Guise, and Cardinal Charles his Brother, the
Guarrantees; and the Regent, tho, by persuasion of Painter, he had promised to
relinquish the Government, and the time to do it was at hand, yet when it came
to the point, according to his wonted Inconstancy, he was at a great stand; for
he began to consider, how grievous a thing it would be for him, to fall down
from the Supreme Magistracy to a private Life, for then he should be obnoxious
to those, whom in his Government he had wronged: Hereupon, he began to elude
his Promise, and to frame Excuses, in regard the Queen was not yet full twelve
Years old: Thus, tho those Allegations might have been answered, yet the Queen
Dowager chose rather to retire to Sterlin, and there to expect the Expiration
of the Set-time, for the giving up his Charge, than to make any Quarrel about a
small matter, tho never so true.

In this her Retirement, the greatest part of the Nobility came in to her,
(Fortune favoring her side,) whom she sought by all means to engage in her
Faction, and those she had engaged, she fixed and confirmed, filling them all
with abundance of hopes, and making many Promises in general and in particular,
how obliging she would be to them all when she was advanced to the Government,
which they all knew should shortly follow; she prevailed so much by these
Artifices, that only two of the Nobility remained with the Regent, John his
base Brother, and Levingston his near Kinsman. All the rest past over to the
Queen. This Solitude of the Regent's Court, and the Fullness of the Queen's, was
a Signification to him, how all the Estates were alienated from him, hereupon
he repented himself, and was glad to accept of those Terms, which he rejected
before, only with this addition, That the Queen Dowager would procure them to
be ratified by the Three Estates in the next Parliament, and also by the
Guarrantees in France.

About the same time, Matters were very troublesome in England, by reason of
the Death of King Edward the 6 th, K. Edward the 6 th of England highly
commended.
a young Prince of high Expectation, by reason of his rare Ingenuity, and
Propension to all kind of Virtue, which was both connate with him, and also
cultivated by Learning and Study.

At the beginning of the next Spring, the Nobility assembled at Sterlin, where,
in a full Assembly, the Transactions with the Regent were confirmed, which the
Queen and Guarrantees had subscribed; this Addition was also made, That the
Regent should keep a Garrison at Dunbarton: and, to complete all, a Parliament
was Indicted at Edinburgh, to be held the 10 th day of April, then next
following, where all the Pacts and Agreements approved by the Guarrantees (as
has been said) were produced; and when they were read, the Regent arose, and
openly abdicated himself from the Magistracy, and gave up the Ensigns of his
Government to D'Osel, who received them in the behalf of the Queen, who was
absent; and, by command, delivered them up to her, who received them by a
general Consent; and thus being advanced into the Regent's place, The Queen
Dowager made Regent.
she was carried with great Ceremony through the City to the Palace in the
Suburbs. And the Regent, who at his Entrance into the Parliament, was attended
with a great number of the Nobility, and had the Sword, Crown and Scepter,
carried before him according to Custom, now, being degraded, mixed himself
amongst the Crowd, in the Year 1559.

This was a new Sight in Scotland, and never heard of before that day, that a
Woman should be, by the Decree of the States, advanced to the Helm of
Government. Though matters thus inclined to the French Interest, yet the Scots
would never yield, that the Castle of Edinburgh should be garrisoned by them; if
so, they feared if the Queen died without Issue, the French would then make it
the Seat of their Tyranny; so that 'twas put into the Hands of John Erskin, as
an indifferent Person, who was to surrender it to None, but by the Command of
the Estates.

After this, when the State of the Public seemed to be somewhat settled, the
Queen-Regent (as then she was called) sent out George Gordon, Earl of Huntly,
to apprehend John Murderach, chief of the Family of the Mac-Reynalds, a
notorious Robber, who had played many foul and monstrous Pranks: It Is thought,
that Gordon did not play fair in this Expedition, so that when he returned,
without doing the Business he was sent about, Huntly imprisoned,
he was kept Prisoner till the time appointed for his Answer; In the Interim,
his Kindred excused him, and laid the Blame of the Miscarriage upon the
Clanship of Catan: thus they spread false Reports amongst the Vulgar, for they
gave forth, tho untruly, that the Macintoshes had spoiled the Design, by reason
of their Animosity against the Gordons. This Hatred between these two Clans
arose upon this occasion; When the Queen prepared for her Expedition into
France, Gordon kept William chief of the Or Macintoshes.
Catan-Family, as his Prisoner, a young Man well educated by the care of James
Earl of Murray. There was no Crime proved against him, but only because he
would not put himself under his Clanship or Clientele; and besides, it turned
to his Prejudice, that he was of Kin to Murray, as being his Sister's Son.
Gordon, having thus provoked the Young Man, did not think it safe to vouchsafe
him his Liberty, and so leave him behind him, neither could he find sufficient
cause to put him to Death. And therefore he, by means of his Friends, persuades
the Young Man, who was not versant in such ill Arts, to commit his cause wholly
to him. For by this means, Gordon's Honor, and his own Safety might be
secured. Gordon, being thus made Master of the Life and Death of his Enemy,
dissembled his Anger, and deals with his Wife, to put the Young Man to Death in
his absence; for, by this means, he thought to cast off the Odium of the Fact
upon her: but it fell out quite otherwise; for all Men knew the paultry
Disposition of Gordon; and they were as well satisfied in the Integrity of his
Wife, who was a choice Woman, and had carried her self like a Regular and Noble
Matron in all the rest of her Life, so that every Body was satisfied that
Gordon was the Author of that Counsel to his Wife. Gordon being thus in Prison,
the Queen Regent's Council were of different Opinions as to his Punishment;
some were for his Banishment during some Years into France; others for putting
him to Death. But both those Opinions were rejected by Gilbert Earl of Cassils,
the chief of his Enemies. For he, foreseeing by the present State of things,
that the Peace betwixt the Scots and French would not be long-lived, was not
for his Banishment into France, for he knew a Man of so paultry a Spirit, and
so revengeful of those who did scandalize or emulate him, would in the War,
which the Insolency of the French was like speedily to occasion, be as a
Firebrand and a Commander for the Enemy. And he was more against his putting
him to Death, because he thought no private offense worthy of so great
Punishment, as to inure the French to spill the Blood of the Nobility of
Scotland. And therefore he went a middle way, that he should be fined and kept
in Prison, till he yielded up the Right, which he pretended to have over
Murray. And that he should suffer all the Royal Revenues, arising out of the
Orcades, Schetland Isles, and Mar, to be quietly gathered by such Collectours,
as the Queen-Regent did appoint, and he himself should not meddle with any of
the Public or Regal Patrimony; and likewise surrender up his Presidency over
some Juridical Courts, But released, upon Conditions.
which did bring him in great Profit. Upon these Conditions, he was dismissed,
and having thus addulc'd the Mind of the Regent, and those that could do most
with her, at last he was admitted into the Privy Council.

In the mean time, all Court-Offices, which had any thing of Gain to move
Competitorship, were, by Gordon's Advice, given to Strangers, on purpose that
he might breed a Disgust betwixt the Queen Regent, and the Nobility of
Scotland, and so take Delight, though not an honest or creditable one, in their
mutual Contest, and destroying one another; and the Earl of Cassils, who
foresaw this Tempest before it came, began now to be accounted as a Prophet.

After this, Matters were quiet till July, in the Year 1555. and the
Queen-Regent having gotten this respite from War, applied her self to rectify
the Disorders of the State: She went to Inverness, and held public Conventions
in the Nature of Assizes, in all accustomed places, wherein many Disturbers of
the public Peace were severely punished; she sent John Stuart, Earl of Athol,
against John Murderach, to effect that which Gordon, in his Expedition, had
failed in. He, besides that Fortitude and Constancy, (Virtues proper to him)
was also so prudent and successful, that he took him, his Children and whole
Family, and brought them to the Queen. But Murderach being impatient of sitting
still, or else excited by the sting of an evil Conscience, deceived his
Keepers, escaped out of Prison, and filled all places again with Blood and
Rapine. The Regent hearing of this, was forced to undertake a Voyage, sooner
than she determined, to bring him and other Malefactors to Justice; which
having done, she returned; and, in a public Assembly, restored some of those
who slew Cardinal Beton, that were popular Men, (whom the late Regent had
banished) from their Exile; by which Fact of hers, she procured not so much
applause, as she did Ill Will from the many new Taxes she devised. It was
thought, that D'Osel, Ruby, and those few French about the Regent, The Queen
Regent, by the Advice of the French, raises new Taxes,
put Her upon those new Projects to raise Money, i. e. that Men's Estates should
be surveyed and registered in Books made for that purpose, and that every one
should pay yearly a certain Sum taxed upon him out of it, into a Treasury to be
set apart for that end, as a Fund for War; for, with that Money, thus kept in a
peculiar Treasury, Mercenary Soldiers were to be raised to guard the Borders,
and so the Nobility might remain quiet at home, except some great Invasion were
made by the Enemy, which an ordinary Force could not resist. The poorer sort
were much aggrieved at this new pecuniary Imposition, and inveighed openly
against it with bitter Words; but the greatest part of the Nobles kept their
Disgust within their own Breasts, every one fearing, that if he should first
oppose the Will of the Queen Regent, the whole Envy of the Refusal would fall
upon him, alone. But the next Rank of People were as angry with the Nobles, for
betraying the public Liberty by their Silence, as they were with the Queen;
and thereupon about 300 of them met together at Edinburgh, and chose John
Sandeland of In Mid-Lothian.
Calder, and John Weems, out of their whole Body, and sent them to the
Queen-Regent, to represent to her the Ignominy in paying this Tax, But the
Commons withstand it, showing their Reasons.
and therefore they desired it might not be sessed nor levied upon them,
because of their Poverty, both public and private; and also to inform her, how
their Ancestors had not only defended themselves and their Substance against
the English, when much more powerful than now they are, but also had made often
Inrodes into England; and that themselves had not so far degenerated from their
Ancestors, but that they were willing to lay down their Lives and Fortunes for
the Good of their Country, if need required. And as for the levying of
Mercenary Auxiliaries, that 'twas a matter full of Danger, to commit the State
of Scotland to Men, without either Lands or Hopes, but who would do any thing
for Money; and, if occasion were offered, their profound Avarice would invite
them to attempt Innovations, so that their Faithfulness hung only on the Wheel
of Fortune: but suppose, they were well qualified, and had a greater Love to
the Country, than Respect to their own Condition, yet was it likely, nay, was
it not incredible, that Mercenaries should fight more valiantly, to defend the
Estates of others, than the Masters of them would do, each Man for his own? Or,
that a regard to a small Stipend or Pay, which was likely to cease in time of
Peace, would raise up greater Courage in the Minds of the Ignoble, than in the
Nobility, who sought every Man for his Fortune, Wife, Children, Religion and
Liberty? Besides, this Project (said they) concerns the very Vitals of the
Scottish Empire, and 'twas a thing of greater Consequence, than to be debated at
this time, and in this Age of our young Queen; for, if 'twere granted, it could
be effected without any Sedition, yet this new way of managing a War, is both
useless, and also much feared and suspected by the most, especially since, out
of the Tribute of the Scots, Men none of the richest, Money enough could hardly
arise to maintain a Guard of Mercenaries, for the Defense of the Borders; and
therefore 'twas to be feared, that the Event of this Counsel would be, to open
the Door of the Borders to the Enemy, not to shut it. For if the English,
living in a richer Kingdom, should erect a fuller Treasury for that use, there
was no doubt, but they might maintain Forces, double to ours with less
Grievance to their own People; and then they would break in, not only upon the
Borders, but even into the very Body of the Kingdom. The other part of their
Oration, I know not, whether it be not better to suppress in Silence, than to
declare it amongst the Vulgar: some Mutterings there were; Who will collect
this Money? What great part of it must necessarily be expended upon Distrainers
and Treasurers, as a Reward for their pains? Who will undertake that it shall
be spent for public Uses, and not on private Luxury? It Is true, the Probity
and Temperance of our noble Princess, who now rules, gives us great Hope, yea
Confidence, that no such thing will be; yet, if we consider, what has been
done by others abroad, and by our selves at home, we cannot contain or so
govern, our selves, but must needs fear, that what has once been done, may
possibly be done again. But to let these things pass, which perhaps we have no
cause to fear; let us come to that, wherein our Ancestors placed their greatest
hope of Defense, to maintain their Liberty against the Arms of an overpowring
Enemy. There was no King of Scotland ever judged wiser than Robert the first of
that Name, and all confess, he was the most valiant. He, at his Death, as he
had often done in his Life, out of a Prospect to the good of his Subjects, gave
this advice, That the Scots should never make a perpetual Peace, no nor One for
any long time, with the English. For he, out of the Wisdom of his own Nature,
and also by his long Experience, and Exercise under both Conditions, prosperous
and adverse, knew well enough, that, by Idleness and Sloth, the Minds of Men
would be broken with Delights and Blandishments of Pleasures, and their Bodies
also grow languid; for when severe Discipline and Parsimony is extinct, Luxury
and Avarice do grow up as in a Soil untilled, accompanied also with an
Impatience of Labor, and a Slothfulness, occasioned by continued Ease, averse
from and hating a military Life; by which Mischiefs, the Strength of Body and
Mind, being enervated and weakened, does abandon Virtue, which is exercised by
Sufferings, and that a short and unaccustomed Ease and Pleasure is
overballanced by some notable Calamity to ensue.

Upon which, she desists.
Upon this Oration, the Queen-Regent, fearing an Insurrection, if she had
persisted in her opinion, remitted the Tribute, and acknowledged her Error;
it is reported, she was often heard to say, that it was not Her self, but no
obscure Men of the Scots themselves, who were the Authors and Architects of
that Design: By those Words, some thought she meant Huntly, a Man fierce of his
own Disposition, and newly released from Prison, and, as it seems, more mindful
of the Injury of his Imprisonment, than of the respect showed in his
Deliverance. And therefore when he saw, that the Regent was intent upon this
one thing, to accustom the Scots to pay Tribute, fearing that thereby her Power
would increase, and the Authority of the Nobility would be weakened and
infringed; in regard she, being a Foraigner, sought to bring all things into
the Power of her own Countrymen, it was thought he gave this Counsel to her
which suited well with her Mind, as to the raising of Money, which she was then
about; for otherwise, the advice was plainly Destructive, Hostile and
Pernicious; for he knew well enough, that the Scots would not pay such great
Taxes, neither would they be as obedient Subjects, as they had been before;
some thought, that David Painter, Bishop of Ross, found out this way of Tax,
for he was a Man of a great Wit, and learned besides; he had received many
Courtesies from the Hamiltons, and was a Friend to their Family and Designs.

The next year, which was 1557, whilst the Ambassadors of Scotland were
treating about Peace at Carlisle, Ambassadors from France, desiring the Scots
to make War against England,
the King of France sent Letters to Scotland, to desire the Regent to declare
War against England, according to the League. The Cause was pretended to be,
because the Queen of England had assisted Philip of Spain her Husband, who was
engaged in a fierce War against France, by sending him Aid into Belgium. The
English Ambassadors returned, without confirming any settled Peace or War
either; whereupon the Regent called together the Nobility at the Monastry of On
the North side of South-Esk, near Dalkeith, in East-Lothian.
Newbottle, where She declared to them the many Incursions the English had made
upon Scottish Ground, what Preys they had taken, and when Restitution was
demanded, none was made, so that She desired the Scots to denounce War upon
England, both to revenge their own Wrongs, and also, by the same labor, to
assist the King of France; yet she could not prevail with the Nobility to begin
first; and therefore by the advice, as it is thought, of D'Osel, she brought
about the matter another way; She commanded a Fort to be built at the Mouth of
the River The Town of Eye-Mouth in the Merss.
Aye, against the sudden Incursions of the English, wherein also she might
safely lay up great Guns and other Necessaries for War, as in a safe Magazine;
from whence she might fetch them upon occasion, and so save labor of carrying
them from the remoter parts of the Kingdom, whereby much time would be spent;
and, besides the troublesomeness of the Carriages, opportunity of Action would
be lost. These Conveniences were visible enough, but she had another Reach in
it, she knew, that the English would do their utmost to hinder the Work, and
not suffer a Garrison to be erected under their Noses, so near Berwick: Thus the
Seeds of War (which she desired) would be sown, and the fault of taking up Arms
cast upon the Enemy: And the Event answered her Expectation. For the Scots,
being provoked by the wrongs of the English, whilst they were compelled to
defend their own Borders, easily assented to the Regent's desire, to make War
upon England; whereupon the Ambassadors sent into England, to make a Peace,
were called back, a Proclamation was made, and a Day appointed for a general
Rendezvous at Edinburgh; when the Camp was formed at In Teviotdale, on the
South side of Tweed, below Kelso.
Maxwel Heugh, and the Council had not yet decreed any thing concerning the
manner of carrying on the War, they, who were forward to gratify the Regent,
and to oblige the French, ran up and down plundering about Werk Castle,
situate in the Borders of England: D'Osel had brought some French Troops
thither, Difference between D'Osel, the French Ambassador, and the Scots
Nobility.
and some Ordnance, as many as he thought were sufficient to take in the
Castle, and he carried them over the Tweed, without staying for the Order of
the Council, which did highly incense the Scots Nobles against him; for, by his
so doing, he seemed to aim at the Vindicating the whole Honor of such an
Expedition to Himself rather than to his Master, and also to make the Scots to
be obnoxious to, and under, his Command, who were wont to have the chief
Command themselves. Thus the Scots were mightily offended, that they were so
slighted by a private Man, and a Stranger too, so as to be led by the Nose by
him, without so much as asking their Opinions, as was formerly wont to be done;
so that by doing things of his own Head, without consulting the Nobles, he had
arrogated more to himself, than ever any of their own Kings had done.

Hereupon, the matter was deliberated in Council, where it was unanimously
agreed, that they would not venture the strength of the Kingdom against an
Enemy, at the humor of every private Person; especially, seeing they were
never wont to obey their own lawful Princes in that Case, but after Matters had
been opened and seriously debated in Council, before they were resolved upon;
and therefore Osel's Imperiousness in the Case was nothing else but an Essay,
D'Osel vails Bonnet to them.
to try, how capable they were to bear the yoke of Slavery; Whereupon, they
commanded Osel to draw back the Ordnance, and if he refused, he should be
punished as a Traitor. The Queen-Regent, and Osel himself, did highly resent
this Affront; The Regent thought, that her Majesty was impaired thereby; and
the other, that his Master's Honor (whose Ambassador he was) was concerned:
but they being the weaker, were forced to yield for the present; and there
seemed no remedy to occur, but that the Queen of Scots, who was now
marriageable, should marry the Dauphin as soon as conveniently it could be
effected; for then the Wife, being in the Power of her Husband, the Authority
of the Council would be much lessened.

During that Winter, there were various Excursions made, and with different
Success, but One was most memorable at the foot of the Cheviot-hills, where a
fight was maintained a long while, between the Duke of Norfolk and Andrew Carr,
The Scots under Andrew Carr, overthrown by the Duke of Norfolk.
the Victory was a long time doubtful, but at last inclined to the English, and
Carr was taken Prisoner, many brave Men being wounded on both sides. Hereupon,
an Assembly was Indicted at Edinburgh, to be held in October, to hear the
Letters sent from the French King. In them, after a prolix Enumeration of the
ancient Leagues betwixt them, and their mutual Obligations one to another, he
desired the Scots Parliament, that a choice might be made of fit Persons, out
of all the Three Orders, with ample Commission, who, in regard his Son, the
Dolphin, about the end of December, was entering upon the Year fit for Marriage,
according to the Law, might be sent Ambassadors to conclude the Marriage, which
was almost already made, (for the Queen of Scots had been transported over into
France, upon that hope) and so the Two Nations, which were anciently
Confederate, would now coalesce into one Body; and the old Friendship, betwixt
both People, would be connected by an indissoluble Bond. This if they would do,
he made them Magnificent Promises, that whatever fruits of Benevolence they did
hope for from Allies, the same they might expect from him.

Tho all the Scots knew, to what end this haste of the French King was
directed, and that there were shortly like to be Disputes between them
concerning their Liberties, yet they all came, in great Obedience, to the
Indicted Parliament, where, without any much ado, eight Ambassadors were
chosen, to go over into France, to finish the Marriage: Three of the Nobility,
Gilbert Kennedy Earl of Cassils, George Lesly Earl of Rothes; to whom was
added, James Fleming Earl of In Lennoxshire.
Commerland, chief of his Family. Three of the Ecclesiastical Order, James
Beton Archbishop of Glasgow, Robert Read, Bishop of the Orcades, and James
Stuart, Prior of the Monast'ry of St. Andrews and the Queen's Brother, and Two
of the Commons, Ambassadors sent to France, about the Marriage of the Dolphin
with the Queen of Scots.
George Seaton, because he was Governor of Edinburgh, and John Areskin Lord
of Down or Din, Governor of A Royal Borough of Angus.
Montross, of a Knights Family, but comparable for Dignity, to any Noble Man.
After they had set Sail, and were yet on the Coast of Scotland, they were
tossed with a very high Wind; and being farther at Sea, they met with such a
grievous Tempest, that Two of the Ships were Sunk, not far from Boloign in
France, a Town of the Morini. The Earl of Rothes and the Bishop of the Orcades
were carried to Land in a Fisher-boat, and were the only Two that escaped of
all the Passengers therein. The rest of the Fleet, having long combated with
the Waves, at length arrived in other lesser Ports of France, where, when all
the Ambassadors were again met, they hastened to Court. There they began the
Treaty about the Marriage; all yielded to it, but the Guises were mighty
forward to have it hastened, both because they judged that Affinity would be a
great accession of Authority to their Family, as also because opportunity
seemed to favor their Design, in regard Annas Duke of Momorancy, who was
esteemed the wisest of all the French Nobility, and who was most likely to
oppose the Match, was a Prisoner of War. He indeed was not willing the matter
should be so precipitated, as for many other Causes, in the Judgment of many,
very just and considerable; so, because the Power of the Guises (which was
suspected by the Wise, and began to be intolerable to all) might not grow to
that height, as to be unsafe for Kings themselves. For of the five Brothers of
the Guises, the eldest was Captain General of all the Forces, which served in
France. The next was sent into Piemont and Millain.
Liguria to Succeed Charles D'Coss, Earl of Brisac.
Cosseus; The third was transported over into Scotland, with some Supplies, to
command the Army there; The fourth had the Command of the Galleys at
Marseilles. And all Mony-matters passed under the Hands of Cardinal Charles; so
that neither Soldier nor Souz could wag in all the Territorys of the French
King, without their Approbation and Good liking; some Men did commiserate the
Fortune of the best of Kings, and it brought into remembrance the Condition of
those Times, when, by reason of Court-Factions, the Kings of France have been
shut up in Monast'ries, as in places of a milder Banishment.

The Court, for some time, being transported with these nuptial Revels, when
they came to themselves, called the Scots Ambassadors into the Council, where
the Chancellor of France dealt with them to produce the Crown, and the other
Ensigns of the Kings, and that the Queen's Husband should be created King of
Scotland, according to Custom. To whom the Ambassadors answered, in short, That
they had received no Commands concerning those Matters. The Chancellor replied,
That no more was desired of them at present, than what was in their Power, viz.
That when these Matters came to be debated in the Parliament of Scotland, that
they would give their Suffrages in the Affirmative, and give it under their
Hands, that they would so do. That demand seemed to be fuller of Peremptoriness
than the former, and therefore they thought it best to reject it with great
vehemence and disgust. Insomuch that their Answer was, That their Embassy was
limited by certain Instructions and Bounds, which they neither could, nor
would, transgress, but if they had been left free from any restriction at all,
yet it was not the part of faithful Friends, to require That of them, which
they could not grant without certain Infamy and Treachery, tho there were no
danger of Life in the Case; That they were willing to gratify the French, their
old Allies, as far as the just Laws of Amity required, and therefore they
desired them to keep within the same Bounds of Modesty, in making their Demands.

Some of the Scots Ambassadors die in France, and the rest return home.
Thus the Ambassadors were dismissed the Court; and tho they hastened home,
as soon as they could; yet, before they went a Shipboard, four of the chief of
them, Gilbert Kennedy, George Lesly, Robert Reed, and James Fleming, all very
virtuous and true Patriots, departed this Life, as also did very many of their
Retinue, not without suspicion of Poison. It was thought, that James, the
Queen's Brother, had also taken the same Dose, for, although by reason of the
Strength of his Constitution and his youthful Age, he escaped Death at that
time, yet he lay under a dangerous and constant weakness of Stomach, as long as
he lived.

That Summer, Matters were at that dubious pass in Britain, that there seemed
rather to be no Peace, than a War: For there were Skirmishes on both sides,
Preys driven, and Villages burnt; Incursions were mutually made, and not
without Blood: Two of the Nobility of Scotland were carried away Prisoners by
the English, William Keith, Son to the Earl of Merch; and Patrick Gray, chief
of a Family (so called) amongst the Scots; the rest of the Military damages
fell upon mean Persons.

About the same time, The English Fleet attempts the Orcades, but are driven
off by Tempest.
the English sent a Fleet under the Command of Sir John Clare to infest the
Coasts of Scotland, they came to the Orcades, intending there to Land, and to
burn Kirkwall, a Bishops See, the only Town in that Circuit: When they had made
a descent with a good part of their Force, a fierce Tempest suddenly arose,
which carried their Ships from the Coast into the Main, where, after a long
contest with the Winds and Waves, they at length made Sail for England back
again: They which were put a Shore, were every one Slain by the Islanders.

This year, and the year before, the Cause of Religion seemed to lie Dormant,
for it being somewhat crushed by the Death of George Wiseheart, one Party
accounted themselves well satisfied, if they could worship God in their own
Tongue, in private Assemblies, and dispute soberly concerning Matters of
Divinity; and the other Party, after the Cardinal was slain, showed themselves
rather destitute of an Head, than undesirous of Revenge; For he who succeeded
in his Place, did rather covet the Money than the Blood of his Enemies, and was
seldom Cruel, but when it was to maintain his Licentiousness, and to expend on
his Pleasures.

In April, Walter Mills, a Priest, none of the most learned, was yet suspected
by the Bishops, because he left off to say Mass; whereupon he was haled to
their Court. Though he was weak by Constitution of Body, and Age, extreme Poor,
and also brought out from a nasty Prison, and lay under such high
Discouragements; yet he answered so stoutly and prudently too, that his very
Enemies could not but acknowledge, That such greatness and confidence of Spirit
in such an enfeebled Carkase, must needs have a support from on High. The
Citizens of St. Andrews were so much affected at the wrong done him, that there
was none found who would sit as Judge upon him, and all the Tradesmen shut up
their Shops, that they might sell no Materials toward his Execution, which was
the Cause of his Reprieve, for one day more than was intended. At last one
Alexander Somerval, a Friend of the Archbishop's, was found out, a naughty
Fellow, Walter Mills martyred, to the great regret of the Citizens of St.
Andrews.
who undertook to sit as Judge* upon him, for that Day. This is certain, the
Commonalty took his Death so hainously, that they heaped up a great Pile of
Stones in the Place, where he was Burnt, that so the Memory of his Death might
not end with his Life. The Priests took Order, to have it thrown down for some
Days, but still as they dissipated it one Day, it was raised up the next, till
at last the Papists conveyed the Stones away to build Houses with, about the
Town. July the 20 th, was the day appointed by the Bishops for Paul Or,
Meth^e^. Paul Meffen troubled, upon the account of Religion.
Meffen, an eminent Preacher of God's Word in those days, to come to his
Answer. There was a great Assembly of the Nobles at the time, so that the
Matter seemed to tend toward a Tumult; whereupon the Process was deferred to
another time, several were condemned, but it was of those which were Absent;
who, that they might not be terrified with the severity of the Punishment, were
commanded to come in by the 1 st of September, and pardon was promised them, if
they recanted.

The same 1 st of September was St. Giles day, whom the Inhabitants of
Edinburgh do venerate as their Tutelar God, carousing to him in great Goblets,
and making high Entertainments for their Neighbors and Guests. The Regent,
fearing, lest in such a confused Rabble, some Tumult should arise, was willing
to be present her self at the Wake. The Papists were very glad of her Coming,
and easily persuaded her to see the Show and Pageant, wherein St. Giles was to
be carried about the City; St. Giles's Show, the Tutelar of Edinburgh, foully
spoiled.
but St. Giles, alas! did not appear, for he was stolen out of his Shrine by
some body or other. However, that St. Giles might not want a Pageant, nor the
Citizens a Show upon such a Festival Day, there was another young Gilesling
(forsooth) set up in his room. After the Regent had accompanied him through the
greatest part of the Town, and saw no danger of any Insurrection, she retired,
weary as she was, into an Inn to repose her self. But presently, the
City-Youths plucked down the Picture of Giles from the Shoulders of those who
carried him, threw him into the dirt, and spoiled the Glory of the whole
Pageantry. The Priests and Friars, running several ways for fear, created a
belief of a greater Tumult; but when they had understood, that there was more
Fear than Danger in the thing, and that the whole Matter was transacted without
Blood, they crept again out of their holes, and gathered themselves together to
consult about the main Chance; where, though they were quite out of hopes to
recover their ancient Repute, yet they dissembled Confidence, as if their
former Power had remained: And to try how to retrieve their Affairs in so
desperate a Case, they sought to strike Fears into their Enemies, and appointed
a Convocation to be held at Edinburgh, November 8. When the Day of their
Convening came, the Priests met in the Church of the Dominicans, and there
cited Paul Meffen by Name, whom in a former Assembly they had commanded to
appear; Paul Meffen banished by the Papists, but yet harbor'd by the
Inhabitants of Dundee.
he, not appearing, was banished, and a grievous Punishment denounced on those,
who should receive him into their Houses, or supply him with any Necessaries,
to support his Life. But that Commination did not terrify the Inhabitants of
Dundee from doing their Duty, for they supplied him with Provision, and
harbor'd him from one House to another; yea, and they dealt with the Regent, by
some Men who were gracious at Court, that his Banishment might be remitted; but
all the Priests mightily withstood it, and besides, they offered a great Sum of
Money to hinder it, so that nothing could be done.

Whilst these things were acting, some eminent Persons, especially of Fife and
Angus, and some chief Burgers of several Towns, traveled over all the Shires
of Scotland, exhorting all the People to love the sincere preaching of the
Word, and not to suffer themselves, and their Friends of the same Opinion in
Religion with themselves, to be oppressed and destroyed by a small and weak
Faction, alleging, if their Enemies would transact the Matter by Law, they
should easily cast them; but if they chose Force rather, they were not inferior
to them. And they had Schedules, or writing Tables, ready, for those who were
pleased therewith to subscribe their Names: The first Congregation of the
Reformed, in Scotland.
These first assumed the Name of a Congregation, which was made more famous
afterward by Those, who joined themselves thereto.

These Assertors of the purer and Reformed Religion, foreseeing that Matters
would soon come to some Extremity, by joint Consent determined to send some
Demands to the Queen, which unless they were granted, there was likely to be no
Face of a Church; neither could the Multitude be restrained from Insurrection.
They chose Sir James Sandeland of Or Cader, in Mid-Lothian.
Calder, a worthy Knight, venerable both for his Age, and for his well-spent
Life, to carry their Desires to the Regent, who opened to her the necessity of
sending such a Message, and requested, in the Name of all who stood for the
Reformation of Religion, The just Proposals of the Reformers to the
Queen-Regent,
That all public Prayers and the Administration of the Sacraments should be
celebrated by Ministers in their Mother Tongue, that all People might
understand them; That the Election of Ministers, according to the ancient
Custom of the Church, should be made by the People; and That they who presided
over that Election, should enquire diligently into the Lives and Doctrines of
all that were to be admitted; and, if by the negligence of former Times,
unlearned and flagitious Persons had crept into Ecclesiastical Dignities, That
they might be removed out of the Ministry, and fit Persons substituted in their
places. The Priests were even mad, and stormed mightily, that any Man durst to
appear and own so impudent a Fact, as they called it; but when their Heat was a
little allayed, they answered, that they would refer the Matter to a public
Disputation; and indeed, what danger could there be in That, when they
themselves were to be Judges in their own Case? On the other side, the
Sticklers for the Reformation alleged, That the Matter ought not to be
determined by the Wills of Men, but by the plain Words of Holy Scripture. The
Priests propounded also other Terms of Agreement, but such ridiculous ones,
that they are not worthy of an Answer, as, If the Reformers would keep up the
Mass in its ancient Honor, if they would acknowledge Purgatory after this Life,
if they would yield to pray to Saints, and for the Dead, that then they would
also yield, that they should pray in their Mother Tongue, and celebrate the
Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, in the same. The Reformers pressed
the Regent, (as before) that, in so just a Cause, she would please to gratify
them with an Answer, agreeable to Equity and Reason. The Regent favored the
Cause of the Priests, and secretly promised them her Assistance, as soon as
opportunity was offered. And she commanded the adverse Faction to use Prayer,
celebrate the Sacraments, and perform other Religious Exercises in their
Mother Tongue, but without Tumult, only their Teachers were not to make any
public Sermons to the People at Edinburgh or Leith. Though this Condition was
carefully observed by them, yet many Testimonies, that her Affection was
alienated from them, did daily appear; and the Papists at Edinburgh used almost
the same Answers to the Demands which were brought in by the Nobility, only
this they added farther, That as to the Point of electing Ministers, in such
kind of Questions, they were to stand to the Canon Law, or to the Decrees of
the Council of Trent. Neither did they, in that Assembly, determine any thing
in their own Matters, only they commanded the Bishops to send secret Informers
into all Parishes of their Diocesses, who were to take the Names of all the
Violators of the Papistical Laws, and bring them in to them; and though they
plainly perceived, that their Threats were little esteemed, yet, trusting to
the public Authority which was on their side, and having Confidence in the
Arms of France, Which the Priests, by the Encouragement of the Queen-Regent,
oppose.
they insulted over their Inferiors as imperiously, as ever they did before.
To mitigate their Minds in some sort, and to deprecate their severe and bitter
Sentence against the Preachers of the Gospel, John Erskin, Lord of Down, a Man
learned, good and courteous, was sent to them; he entreated them, out of that
Piety, which we all owe to God, and Charity toward Men, that they would not
think it much, at least, to tolerate People to pray to God in their
Mother Tongue, when they were met together for that Service, for That was
according to Scripture-Command. They were so far from granting his Request,
that they used him with more bitter and arrogant Words than formerly, adding
also more cruel Threatenings and Reproaches; and, lest they might seem to have
acted nothing in that Assembly, they caused some threadbare Popish Laws to be
printed, and fastened upon the Doors of Churches, which, because they were
commonly sold for a Groat, The Quadrantary, or Triobolar, Faith, what?
the Common People called them the Quadrantary, and sometimes the Triobolar,
Faith.

Moreover, they, who the Year before, had performed the Embassy in France, came
into the Assembly, and easily obtained, That their Transactions should be
ratified: And after that, the French Ambassador was introduced, who, after he
had made a long Oration concerning the ancient and long-continued good Will of
the French Kings toward all the Scottish Nation, did earnestly desire of them
all, both singly and jointly, that they would set the Crown (which he, by a new
and monstrous Name, called Matrimonial) upon the Head of the Queen's Husband,
alleging, that he would gain but an empty Name, without any accession of Power
or Profit; he also used many other flattering Words, not necessary here to be
repeated, which, the more accurate they were in a trifling business, by so much
the more they were suspected, as Coverts of concealed Fraud; yet the
Ambassador, partly by immoderate Promises, and partly by earnest Entreaties,
The Scottish Crown ordered to be sent to the Daulphin of France, who had married
the Queen.
and partly by the Favor of some, who collogued with the future Power, gained
the Point, that the Crown was ordered for the Daulphin; and Gilespy Cambel,
Earl of Argyle, and James the Queen's Brother, were chosen to carry it to him.
These Persons, perceiving, that they were sent abroad to their own Ruin, in
regard the French Ambition hung as a Storm ready to fall upon all their Heads,
made no great haste to fit up their Equipage, but deferred their Preparation
from day to day, until they had pondered all things, and taken surer measures
of what was likely to ensue, especially since now a nearer and eminenter degree
of Honor offered it self. For Mary, Queen of England, being dead, the Queen of
Scots carried her self as her Heir, and bore the Arms and Ensigns of England,
engraving the same on all her Housholdstuff, and domestic Furniture; and
though France was at that time miserably distressed in asserting their Power
and Dominion over Milain, Naples and Flanders, yet, The Queen of Scots, upon
the Death of Mary of England, assumes the Royal Arms of England.
she added to the rest of her Miseries this Mock-Title of England. The wiser
sort of the French saw this well enough, but they were forced to comply with
the Guises, who then could do all at Court, for by this vain kind of Splendour,
they thought to add much to the French Name.

Besides, the Regent having received the Decree concerning a Matrimonial Crown,
seemed to have put on a new Disposition, for she turned her ancient Affability,
which was acceptable to all, into an Imperious Arrogance; and instead of gentle
Answers, wherewith before she did addulce both Factions, as, That it was not
long of her, but of the Times, that she could not promise so largely as she
desired, before that Decree was past; now she thought her self cocksure, and
therefore used another kind of Language and Deportment. A Parliament was
summoned to be held at Sterlin, May 9. and whereas she had often said, that now
she was free from other Cares, she would not suffer the Majesty of the
Government to be debased, but that she would endeavor to restore it to its
ancient Veneration, by some eminent Example. These Words portended a Storm
ensuing, and therefore many applied to her for her Favor, and, amongst the
rest, to make their Request more exorable, upon the account of the Dignity of
the Messengers, Alexander Cuningham, Earl of Glencarn, and Hugh Cambel Sheriff
of Air, a worthy Knight, were sent to her. When they came, she could not
contain her self, but must needs utter this Speech, The imperious Answers of
the Queen-Regent to the Agents of the Reformed, with their tart Reply.
as a Witness of her Impiety, Do you, and your Ministers, what you will or can,
yea, though they preach never so sincerely, yet they shall be banished the
Land. They replied, in great Humility, That she would call to mind what she
often promised them: She answered, That the Promises of Princes were no further
to be urged upon them for performance, than it stood with their Convenience:
Whereupon they rejoined, That then they renounced all Allegiance and Subjection
to her, and advised her to consider, what Inconvenience was likely to ensue
hereupon; she was unexpectedly struck with this Answer, and said, She would
think upon it. And when the fierceness of her Anger seemed somewhat to abate,
it was again kindled much more fiercely, as by a new Firebrand, when she heard,
that the Inhabitants of St. Iohnstons had publicly embraced the Reformed
Religion; whereupon, she turned to Patrick Ruthen, Mayor of the Town,
commanding him to suppress all those Tumults for innovating of Religion; his
Answer was, Magistrates have power over Men's Bodies and Estates, not their
Consciences.
That he had Power over their Bodies and Estates, and those he would take care
should do no hurt, but that he had no Dominion over their Consciences: At which
Answer, she was so enraged, that she said, she hoped none would think it
strange, if he were shortly made to repent his stubborn Audacity; she also
commanded James Haliburton Sheriff of Dundee, to send Paul Meffen Prisoner to
her, but he was advised thereof by the Sheriff, and so gave way to the Time,
and slipped out of the Town; she wrote also to the Neighbour-Assemblies to keep
the Easter following after the Popish Manner; but when none obeyed her therein,
she was so enraged, that she cited all the Ministers of the Churches of the
whole Kingdom to Sterlin, to appear there on the 10 th of May ensuing.

When that Matter came to be noised abroad, the Evangelicks exhorted one
another, that they and their Ministers would also appear at the Meeting, so
that there was a great Multitude of those that were likely to be at that
Assembly, which though they came unarmed, yet the Regent feared, that things
would not go well on her side; whereupon she sent for John Erskin of Down, who
happened to be in Town at that time, and dealt with him to cause the
unnecessary concourse of the People to withdraw, which would not be very
difficult for him to do, because of the great Authority he had amongst them,
and, in the mean time, she promised, she would act nothing against the Men of
that Persuasion. Many there were, who being made acquainted with this Promise
of the Regent, changed their purpose of going thither, and returned home, yet
nevertheless, she, on the day appointed for the Assembly, called over the Names
of These, who were summoned, and such as did not answer to their Names, she
outlawed: Erskin, seeing what little Credit was to be given to her Promises,
and fearing to be seized on by Force, had withdrawn himself, and found the
Nobles of Strathearn, Angus and Merns, yet in a Body, though doubting of the
Faith of the Queen: They, finding by his Discourse, (what they suspected
before) that the Queen's Rage was unappeaseable, and that the Matter could no
longer be dissembled, prepared themselves against open Force.

John Knox preaches at Perth, upon which, the Commonalty destroy the Idols and
Shrines for Popish Worship.
Matters standing in this ticklish Posture, Knox assembled the Multitude at
Perth, and made such an excellent Sermon to them, that he set their Minds,
already moved, all in a Flame. After Sermon, the greatest part of the Audience
went home to Dinner, but a few of the meaner sort, such as were also enraged
with Anger and Indignation, staid behind in the Church. Amongst them a poor
Priest, thinking to try, how they stood affected, prepared himself to say Mass,
and drew out a large Frame, or rather Idol-case, in which was contained the
History of many Saints, curiously engraven. A Young Man standing by, cried out,
That what he did, was intolerable, upon which the Priest gave him a Box on the
Ear, the Youth took up a Stone, and thinking to hit the Priest, the Blow
lighted on the Frame, and brake one of the Pictures; the rest of the Multitude,
being in a Rage, some fell upon the Priest and his Frame, others upon the rest
of the Shrines and Altars, and thus, as 'twere in a Moment of time, they
demolished all the Monuments of superstitious, or profane, Worship.

These things were done by the meaner sort, while the richer were at Dinner;
with the same furious Violence, they ran several ways to the Monastery of the
Friars, the rest of the common People still flocking in to them: And though the
Friars had provided some Aid against such Assaults, yet no force was able to
resist the rash Violence of the Multitude. The first assault was made upon the
Idols and the Furniture for their Worship, and then the poorer sort ran into
the Prey. The Franciscans were furnished with Housholdstuff, not only plentiful
but stately, more than would serve ten times as many, as they were. The
Dominicans, though not so opulent as they, yet had enough to evince their
Profession of Begging to be a very vain one, so that one wittily called them
not Friars Mendicants, called Friars Manducants.
Friars Mendicants, but Friars Manducants. The poor seized on all the Wealth,
for they, who had Estates, did so stave off and prevent all Suspicion of
Covetousness from themselves, that they suffered some of the Monks, and
especially the Prior of the Carthusians, to depart away laden with Gold and
Silver; yea, the Abstinence of the military Men from Plunder was as incredible,
as their Celerity in demolishing the Buildings was admirable. For those large
Houses of the Carthusians were so hastily overthrown, yea, and the Stones
carried away, that, within two days time, there was hardly the Sign of any
Foundation left. When the Tidings of these Matters were brought to the Queen,
with some Exaggerations, they so inflamed her lofty Spirit, that she solemnly
swore, That she would expiate this nefarious Wickedness with the Blood of the
Citizens, and with the burning of the City. The Inhabitants of Cowper in Fife,
hearing of the Procedure of Affairs at Perth, they also, by general consent,
either broke the Images, or threw them out of the Church, and thus cleansed
their Temple: At which the Parson of the Parish was so grieved, that, the Night
following, he laid violent Hands on himself. The Regent was amazed to hear this
News, and sent for Hamilton, the Earls of Argyle and Athol, with their Allies
and Clanships, to come to her; and though she desired, by her hasty Proceeding,
to prevent the Preparations of her Enemies, The Regent disgusts the Carriages
of the Reformed, and prepares Force against them.
yet the Carriage of the Brass-Ordnance was so tedious, that it was about the
18 th Day of May, before they came to the parts adjoining to that City. When
the Nobles that were at Perth, heard of the Preparations that the Regent had
made against them, they also sent Messengers to their Friends, and to the
Reformed all about, not to desert them in this last Extremity of Life and
Fortune. Whereupon, all the Commonalty thereabout came zealously and speedily
in, and some also out of Lothian, that they might not be wanting to the common
Danger. But Alexander Cuningham, Cuningham, Earl of Glencarn, stands up stoutly
for the Reformation.
Earl of Glencarn, exceeded them all in his Force and Festination, for he,
hearing, how things stood, gathered together 2500 Men, part Foot, part Horse,
and led them on Night and Day, through rough and uncouth places, till he came
to Perth. James Stuart, natural Son of the last King, and Gilespy Cambel, Earl
of Argyle, were as yet in the Army of the Regent. For, though they were the
chief Authors of Reforming Religion, yet because all hopes of Concord were not
quite lost, they staid there: That so, if Peace might be made on just Terms,
they might do some Service to their Friends; but, if the Minds of the Papists
were wholly averse from Peace, then they resolved to run the same hazard with
the rest, at Perth.

The Regent, being before informed by her Spies, that the Enemy were above 7000
strong, all very hearty, and resolved to fight, though she had with her almost
an equal number of Scots, besides the French Auxiliaries, yet was loath to
venture all upon a Battle. And therefore she sent James Stuart, and Gilespy
Cambel, (whom I named before) to treat with the Enemy; They, on their part,
chose out Alexander Cuningham, and John Erskin of Down, to treat with them. The
Queen was now somewhat more placable, because she heard, that Glencarn had also
joined his Forces with the rest of the Oppugners of Idolatry. A Temporary
Agreement made between the Regent, and the Reformed,
Whereupon the four Commissioners made an Agreement, That all military Men of
the Scots should be disbanded on both sides, and the Regent should have Liberty
to enter the Town, and stay there with her Retinue for a few days, till she had
refreshed her self from the Toil of her Journey; yet so, that they were not to
injure any of the Townsmen in the least; as for the French, none of them were
to enter, or to come within three Miles of the Town; all the other Differences
were referred to the Decision of the next Parliament. Thus the present
Insurrection being quieted without Blood, the Assertors of the Reformation
departed joyfully, for they desired not to make a War, but only to defend
themselves; and thereupon they gave God Thanks, who had given an unbloody end
to the War. The Earl of Argyle, and James Stuart, left the Regent at Perth, and
went to St. Andrews, there to refresh themselves after their former Toiles. But
she, the Volunteers being disbanded on both sides, having entered the place with
a small Retinue, was honorably received, according to the Ability of the
Citizens. The French Mercenaries passing by the House of Patrick Murray, an
honest and worthy Towns-man, six of them, all levied their Pieces against a
Balcony, out of which his whole Family looked to behold the Sight; upon the
Discharge, they killed only Patrick's Son, a Youth of thirteen Years of Age:
The Body was brought to the Queen, and when she heard of what Family he was,
she said, that the chance was to be lamented, and so much the rather, because
it lighted on the Son, not on the Father; but that she could not prevent, nor
help, such casual Acccidents. This her Speech gave all to understand, that she
would no longer stand to her Agreements, but till she had Force great enough to
her Mind, and her Deeds confirmed the Truth of the Suspicion: For, within three
days after, she began to turn all things topsy-turvy; some of the Citizens she
fined, others she banished, and changed their Magistrates, without any judicial
Proceedings; and, going to Sterlin, she left some mercenary Scots, under French
Pay, in the Town to garrison it; whereby she pretended, she had not broken her
Word, which was, that the City should be left free, and no French Man enter
into it. When 'twas objected to her, that, by the Agreement, all those were to
be accounted French, who had sworn Fealty to the French King, then she had
recourse to that common Refuge of the Papists, Which the Regent eludes, what
she can, by undue Pretenses.
That Promises were not to be kept with Heretics, but her excuse would have
been as honest, if she told them, that she had no Obligation lay on her
Conscience, but that she might lawfully take away both Life and Goods, from
such a sort of People as they were; and moreover, That Princes were not to be
so eagerly pressed for the Performance of their Promises.

These things sufficiently declared, that the Concord was no^ like to be
lasting; and besides, the things which followed gave further occasion to
conceive a sinister Opinion of her: For she prosecuted James Stuart, and
Gilespy Cambel, with threatening Letters, and Commands, denouncing the extremity
of the Law against them, unless they came in to Her: As for the Army of the
adverse Faction, she disregarded That, because she knew, it was made up of
Volunteers, and such as fought without Pay, and when they were dismissed, they
would not easily be brought together again. After she had restored the Mass,
and settled other things, as well as she could, she left a Garrison in the Town,
as I said before, and went toward Sterlin: she was very desirous to have the
Possession of that Perth.
Place, in regard 'twas situate almost in the Middle of the whole Kingdom, and
was the only walled Town therein; and besides, the neighboring Nobility was
averse from the Papists, and therefore she desired to put this Curb upon them.
Moreover, it had many conveniences, and especially for conveyance of Land or
Sea-Forces, for the Tide comes up thither by the River Tay, which washes the
Walls thereof, and so it affords passage for Commerce with foreign Nations, and
it is almost the only Town, to which access may be had by Land, even from the
utmost bound of the Kingdom: As for other Towns, the passages to them are
impeded and intercepted by long Bays, running in from the Sea, and the passage
is slower through them, by reason they have not that Number of Ships as to
carry a great multitude at once; so that ofttimes Passengers are stopped many
days by contrary Winds, or by the violence of Tempests.

For these Reasons, Perth is accounted the most convenient Place, for holding
Assemblies, and also for gathering Forces from all Parts of the Kingdom. But at
that time, the Regent got not so much advantage by the commodious Situation of
the Place, as she reaped Envy, by violating her Faith, in breaking her
Capitulations; for that was the Last day of her Felicity, and the First,
wherein she was publicly contemned. For when the matter came to be divulged,
it gave occasion of many Insurrections in all parts of the Kingdom. For the
Earl of Argyle, and James Stuart, perceiving, that their Credit was cracked by
the Violation of that Truce, which they were the Authors of, convocated the
Neighbour-Nobility at St. Andrews, and joined themselves to the Reformed, and
wrote to their Confederates of the same Sect, that the Regent was at Falcoland
with French Forces, and that she was intent on the taking of Cowper and St.
Andrews, and unless help were presently sent, all the Churches in Fife would be
in great danger. Whereupon, Argyle, and James Stuart, join themselves with the
Reformed, against the Regent, because of her breach of Promise.
a great multitude came presently in to them from the neighboring Parts,
mightily enraged against the Queen and her Forces. They thought themselves to
wage a War against a faithless and barbarous People, that had no respect to
Equity, Right, Faith, Promises, or the Religion of an Oath, but esteemed so
lightly of them, that they would say and unsay, do and undo, at every waving
blast of hope, and uncertain gale of smiling Fortune; and therefore, for the
future, no Conditions or Articles of Peace were to be hearkened to, unless one
Party were extinguished, or, at least, Strangers were driven out of the
Kingdom, so that they prepared themselves to overcome, or die.

By these and such like Speeches, The Resolution of the Reformers,
the Minds of all present were so inflamed, that first of all they made an
assault on Carail, a Town situate in the furthest Angle of Fife, where they
overthrew the Altars, broke down the Images, and spoiled all the Apparatus of
the Mass-Trade, and that which was almost incredible in the Case, Anger
prevailed more in the Minds of the Vulgar, than Avarice. From thence they went
to St. Andrews, where they spoiled the Temples of the other Saints, and
levelled the Monast'ries of the Franciscan and Dominican Friars to the Ground.
And though all this was done, almost under the Nose of the Archbishop, who had
a sufficient Number of Horse, which were able, as his hopes were, to defend the
Town; yet, seeing the eagerness of the People, and such a numerous concourse of
Volunteers, he withdrew himself and his Followers from the Fury of the
Multitude, and went to Falk-land to his Kindred and Clans. The Regent was so
enraged at the hearing hereof, that, without any further Deliberation, she
commanded a March the next day, and sent Quarter Masters before, to assign
Quarters for the French at Cowper; she also sent abroad her Commands to all
Places, that all who were able to bear Arms should follow her to Cowper;
besides, she gave a Watchword to the present Force of the French, and the
Hamiltons, that they should be all ready to be in Arms, on sound of Trumpet.
This Design of hers was made known to the Reformers, by their Spies and Scouts;
whereupon, their Friends and Acquaintance were summoned to repair to those, who
were already Assembled; and to prevent the Design of the Regent, they marched
presently toward Cowper; and at the same Instant, the Inhabitants of Dundee,
and the Nobles of the adjacent Country, to the Number of about 1000 Men, upon
the same Alarm, joined themselves with them. That night they abode there, but
the next Morning early, they drew their Forces out of the Town, and stood in
Array in the adjoining Fields, expecting the Army of the Papists, and gathering
up their own Forces, as they came gradually and stragglingly in. In the Camp of
the Regent, there were 2000 French, under the Command of D'Osel, and a 1000
Scots, led by James Hamilton, Duke of In Poictou in France.
Chastel-herault, as he was then called. These sent their Guns before them in
the 2 d Watch, and marching early in the Morning, came all so near, as to see
the Enemy, and to be seen by them. There was a small River between them, where,
at convenient Posts; The Queen marches against them, and they prepare to defend
themselves,
their great Guns were Planted; 500 Horse were sent before, to make light
Skirmishes with the Enemy, and also to hinder their passage over the River, if
they should attempt it. The alacrity of these Men gave some stop to the French,
which was further increased by the coming in of Patrick Lermont, Mayor of St.
Andrews, with 500 Citizens in Arms, who, for the convenience of their March,
being stretched out in length, made a Show of a far greater Number, than they
were: This kept them from discovering the Number and Order of their Enemies,
which they much desired to know; neither could they discover, the Commanders
were at hand, that so they might give Notice to their Fellows, as they were
commanded. And therefore, some of the French went to the top of an high hill
adjoining, that so they might have as full a view of the Enemy, as they could,
from such a distance; from thence they discovered many Bodies of Horse and
Foot, with small distances betwixt them, and behind them a great number of
Baggagers and Waggon-men, which made a long Show, at the edg of a certain
Valley; so that they thought, That that whole numerous Party was laid in Ambush
for them; and this News they carried to their Fellows, aggravating all things
beyond what they were, indeed. Whereupon, the Commanders of the Army, by the
advice of the Council, sent to the Regent, who staid behind at Falkland, to
acquaint Her, how Matters stood, that the Scots seemed more numerous than they
expected, and more ready to fight; and, on the contrary, their own Men did
grumble; and some of them did publicly give forth, That they scorned, for the
sake of a few Strangers, to be led to an Engagement against their own
Countrymen, Friends and Kindred; Whereupon, by the assent of the Queen, Three
Ambassadors of the Nobles were sent from Hamilton, such as had some Friends, or
Sons, in the Enemies Army. These Ambassadors could not clap up a Peace, because
the Reformers, having been so often deluded by vain Promises, gave no credit to
their Concessions; and the Regent, at that time, had not any other Voucher to
make good her Stipulation; and if she had, she thought it to be below her
Dignity to produce it. Besides, there was another difficulty in the Case, which
was the expulsion of Foreigners out of the Kingdom, (a thing principally
insisted upon) and that she could not do, without acquainting the French King;
so that only dilatory Truces were made, not to incline their Minds to Peace, as
they had often experienced before, but to procure foreign Aid; only this was
accorded betwixt them, That the French Forces should be transported into
Lothian, and a Truce should be made for 8 Days, till the Regent sent some
Pacificators of her own to St. Andrews, to propound equal Conditions of Peace
to both Parties. But the Reformers, plainly perceiving, that the Regent did but
protract Time, till she passed her Army over the next Firth, because then she
could not compose things to her own Advantage, the Earl of Argyle, and James
Stuart, The Reformers, under the command of Argyle and Stuart, take Perth,
Cowper, Linlithgo and Edinburgh, and purge them from monuments of Idolatry.
dealt with her by Letters, that she would withdraw the Garrison out of Perth,
and leave the City to its own Laws, as she promised, when she was admitted into
it, and that the envy of her breach of Covenant was cast upon them, who were
the Authors of the Agreement. The Regent, giving no Answer to these Letters,
they turned their Ensigns toward Perth, from whence miserable Complaints and
Groans for Relief were daily brought them. For the Lord of Kinfans, a
neighboring Lord, whom the Regent, at her Departure, had made Governor of the
Town, to show his Officiousness, did mightily vex the Citizens; for taking the
opportunity of his Command over them, he indulged his own private Passions, and
revenged the old Grudges, which he had with many of them, even to extremity,
banishing some, and spoiling others, on the account of Religion; and he also
allowed the like Liberty to his Soldiers.

The Forces, which were at Cowper, understanding of these Injuries, done to
their Friends and Partners in the Reformation, beat up a March thither, very
early in the Morning, they besieged the Town, which, after a few days, was
Surrendered to them; Kinfans was outed of his Governorship, and Patrick Ruven,
the old Governor, substituted in his Place; afterward they burnt Scone, an old
and unpeopled Town, because, contrary to their Faith given, they had slain one
of their Number.

By their Spies they were informed, that the Regent was sending a Garrison of
French to Sterlin, that so they, who were beyond the Forth, might be cut off
from the rest. To prevent this Design, Gilespy Cambel, and James Stuart, late
in the Night, with great silence, removed from Perth, and entered Sterlin,
where they presently overthrew the Monast'ry of the Friars. They also purged
the other Churches about the City, from all Monuments of Idolatry; and thus,
after 3 Days, they marched toward Edinburgh, and destroyed the superstitious
Relics at Linlithgo, a Town in the Midway; and though they were but a very few
in Number, the Common Soldiers, as if the War had been ended, slipping home to
to their domestic Affairs, yet they cut the Combs of the Papists in so many
Towns; yea, so great a Terror did seize upon the mercenary Troops of the Scots
and French, that they fled, with all their Baggage, which they could draw after
them, to Dunbar. The Scots Nobles, who were the Leaders of the Reformation,
staid there several days to order Matters; For, besides cleansing of the
Temples from all the Massifying Trade, they appointed Preachers to expound the
Word of God, purely and sincerely, to the People.

In the mean time, word was brought from France, that King Henry the 2 d was
dead, which News increased the Joy, but lessened the Industry, of the Scots;
for many now betook themselves to their private Affairs, as if all the Danger
had been over. On the other side, the Regent, fearing lest She, and the French,
should be expelled out of all Scotland, was highly vigilant and intent upon all
Occasions. First, she sent forth Scouts to Edinburgh, to fish out the Enemies
Designs, by whom being informed, that the Common Soldiers had dispersed
themselves, and that the few, which remained, kept no Military Discipline nor
Watch, she thought not fit to omit such an Opportunity, but marched with the
Forces, which she had, directly to Edinburgh. Duke James Hamilton, and James
Douglas, Earl of Morton, very dutifully met Her, but they not being able to
compose Matters, only got this Point, That the Conflict should not begin that
Day. At length, after many Conditions had been canvass'd on both sides, on the
24 th of July, in the Year 1559, a Truce was made to last till the 10 th of
January; The sum of the Terms, A Truce between the Regent, and the Reformers.
were, That no Man should be compelled in matters of Religion; That no Garrison
should be placed in Edinburgh; That the Priests should not be hindered from
receiving the Fruits of their Lands, Tithes, Pensions, or other Incomes,
freely; That none should demolish Churches, Temples, Monastries and other
Places, made for the use of Priests, or should transfer them to other uses; And
that the day after, the Mint, for coining Money, and the Royal Palace, with all
the Furniture they found there, should be restored to the Regent.

She was more careful to keep the Articles of this Truce, in appearance,
because She had shown so much distasteful Levity, in keeping the Pacts, made in
former times; yet notwithstanding, She, underhand, by Men of her own Faction,
caused the Scots to be irritated, who were by Nature inclinable to Passion, and
so gave occasion of harassing the miserable Vulgar. But having no color for
her Project, sufficient to disguise her Cruelty, under the pretense of Law, she
caused false Reports to be spread abroad, That Religion was but made a pretense
for Rebellion, but the true Cause of rising in Arms, was, that, the lawful Line
being Extinct, the Kingdom might be transferred to James, the late King's
Bastard-Son. When she perceived, that the Minds of Men were somewhat possessed
by those, and such other kind of lying, Reports, she sent some Letters to the
said James, pretending, that they came from Francis and Mary, King and Queen of
France, wherein he was upbraided with the Commemoration of the pretended
Courtesies he had received, and withal was grievously threatened, if he did not
lay aside his Design of Revolting, and return to his Duty. James answered
thereunto, That he was not conscious to himself, either in word or deed, of any
Offense, either against King, Regent, or Laws; but, in regard the Nobility had
undertaken the Cause of reforming Religion, which was decayed, or rather had
joined themselves to those who were first therein, he was willing to bear the
envy of those Things, if any did arise, which were acted in Common by himself
and others, they aiming at nothing therein, but the Glory of God; neither was
it just for him to desert that Cause, which had Christ himself for its Head,
Favourer and Defender, whom unless they would voluntarily deny, they could not
surcease their enterprise. Setting that Cause aside, he and others, who were
branded with the invidious Name of Rebels, would be most obsequious and Loyal
in all other Things. This Answer was given to the Regent, to be sent into
France, where 'twas looked upon as proud and contumacious, whereas some
esteemed it modest enough, and within compass, especially, as to the Point of
upbraiding him which Courtesies, whereas, in Truth, he had received none,
unless such as were common to all Strangers.

Amidst these things, French Auxiliaries arrive, to strengthen the Regent,
a thousand French Mercenaries arrived at Leith, and also the Earl of Arran,
Son to James Hamilton, late Governor, came to the Convention of the Nobles,
which were held at Sterlin. The Regent became now cock-sure, upon the Arrival
of the French, and began openly to apply her Mind to subdue all Scotland by
Force. But the Cause of the Earl of Arran's Return, was this, He was more Eager
and Zealous in the Cause of Reformation, than was safe for him in those Times,
and therefore he was designed to be put to Death, by the Guises, who were the
Favorites of Francis the Younger, for the Terror of the inferior Orders of Men;
yea, the Cardinal of Lorrain was so bold in a Speech, which he made in the
Parliament of Paris, inveighing against the Cause of Reformation, that, he
said, they should shortly see some eminent Man suffer upon that Account, who
was little inferior to a Prince. He, being made acquainted therewith, and
withal calling to Mind, that he had, a little before, been free in his
Discourse with the Duke of Guise, upon that Head, by the Advice of his Friends,
provided for his Safety by a secret Flight; and, contrary to all Men's
Expectation, came home in the midst of his Countries Tumults, joined himself
with the part of the Reformers, procured his Father also to join with them, and
so he reconciled many to him, who had been his Enemies before, upon old Grudges.

The chief of the Party, there present, being informed, That, for certain, some
Auxiliaries were arrived, and others were levying to be speedily sent over to
Leith, which was strongly fortified to be made a Magazine for Provisions and
Ammunition for War; and, That the French intended to make use of that Town, as
a Place to secure their Retreat, Which disgusts the Reformed.
if they were distressed; and as a Port to receive their Friends, if they
prosper'd. Hereupon the Scots gathered their Forces together, and endeavored
to besiege Leith, but in vain. For the Regent and the Governor of Edinburgh
Castle, who had not yet joined himself with the Reformers and Vindicators of
public Freedom, had the Possession of almost all the Brass-Guns in Scotland;
and besides, the Party had not strength enough, to shut up a Town in a formal
Siege, which had the Sea on one side, and was also divided by a River.

In the mean time, the King of France, being informed, how Matters stood in
Scotland, sent thither L'abros, a Knight of the Order of the Or, of St. Michael.
Cochle, with 2000 Foot, to assist the Queen in the maintenance of the Popish
Religion; There were also sent with him the Bishop of Amiens, and 3 Doctors of
the Sorbon, to dispute matters Controverted, by Arguments, if need were; The
arrival of them did so raise up the dejected Spirit of the Regent, Ambassadors
from France.
that she solemnly Swore, she would now be speedily revenged of God's Enemies
and the King's. There were then 12 of the chief Nobility assembled at
Edinburgh, which gave answer to Mr. D'Labros and the Bishop, Their Demands
answered by the Reformed.
who alleged, they were sent over Ambassadors, and therefore desired a day to
propound their Demands, viz. That they did not seek Peace, as they pretended,
but that they threatened War; otherwise, if it were only to Dispute, to what
purpose was it to bring so many armed Forces? As for themselves, they were not
so imprudent, as to commit themselves to a Dispute, where they must be forced
to accept what Conditions, their Enemies pleased. But if a Pacification might
be acceptable to them, they also would take Care, that they might not seem to
be compelled by Force, but overcome by Reason; and if they did really aim at
what they pretended, they should send back the Foreign Soldiers, and meet
unarmed, as they had done before; that so the Matter might be determined by
Equity and Right, not by Force of Arms: This they said to the Ambassadors. As
to the fortifying Leith, they wrote back the Regent, to this purpose;

That they did much admire, the Regent had, without any Provocation, so soon
forgot, and receded from her Agreements, as, by driving out the ancient
Inhabitants of Leith, and placing a Colony of Strangers there, and so erecting
a Fort over all their Heads to the ruin of their Laws and Liberties, she had
done; and therefore, they earnestly desired her, to desist from so pernicious a
Counsel, which was temerariously undertaken by her against the Faith of her
Promises, against the public Utility, Law and Liberty; lest otherwise, they
should be compelled to call for the aid of all the People, in the Case.

About a Month after, The Reformers expostulate with the Regent.
they sent an Answer from a Convention at Edinburgh, to the same Purpose,
withal adding This to their former Requests, That She would demolish all the
new Fortifications, and send away all Strangers, and Mercenaries, that so the
Town might be free for Traffic and mutual Commerce, which if She refused to
do, they would look upon it as a sure Argument, that she was resolved to bring
the Kingdom into Slavery, which Mischief they would do all they could to
prevent.

The Regent, three days after, sent Robert Forman, Principal Herald, (King of
Arms as they call him) giving him these Commands, in answer to them. First of
all, you shall declare to them, The Regents answers to their Demands.
that I am mightily surpised, and look upon it as an unexpected thing, that
any other Man should claim any Power here, besides my Son in Law and Daughter,
on whom all my Authority depends. The former Actings of the Nobles, and these
their present Postulations, or rather Commands, do sufficiently declare, that
they acknowledge no Authority, Superior to themselves. That their Petition, or
rather their Threats, though gilded over with smooth Words, were not at all
new to Her. Next, you shall require the Duke of Castle-herault, to call to
Mind, what he promised to me, by word of Mouth, and to the King by Letters,
that he would not only be Loyal to the King, but also would take effectual
Care, that his Son, the Earl of Arran, should not mix himself in these Tumults
of his Country; you shall ask him, Whether his present Actings do correspond
with those Promises? To their Letters you shall Answer, That, for the sake of
the public Tranquillity, I will do, and so I promise, whatsoever is not
contrary to Piety toward God, or Duty toward the King; as for the destruction
of Law and Liberty, it never entered into her Heart, much less to subdue the
Kingdom by Force. For whom, said She, should I conquer it, seeing my Daughter
does now, as lawful Heiress, possess it. As to the Fortification at Leith, you
shall ask, Whether ever She attempted any thing therein, before they, in many
Conventions, and at length, by a mutual Conspiracy, had openly declared, That
they rejected the Government, set over them by Law; and, without her Advice or
Notice, though She held the Place and Authothority of a chief Magistrate, had
broke the public Peace, at their Pleasure; and had strengthened their Party by
taking of Towns, and had treated with old Enemies for establishing a League;
yea, that now many of them kept English in their Houses; so that, to omit other
Arguments, What Reason have they to judge it lawful for themselves to keep up an
Army at Edinburgh, to invade those who are in Possession of the Government; and
yet it must not be lawful for me to have some Forces about me at Leith, for my
own Defense? Their aim is principally This, to compel Me, by often shifting of
Places, to avoid their Fury, as I have hitherto done: Is there any mention in
their Letters about Obedience to lawful Magistrates? Do they discover any Way
to renew Peace and Concord? By what Indication do they manifest, that they are
willing, that these Tumults should be appeased, and all things reduced to their
former State? Let them color and guild their Pretensions how they please, with
the show of public Good, yet, it is plain, that they mind nothing less; for if
that one thing were a Remora to Concord, I have often showed the Way that leads
thereto. They themselves are not ignorant, that the French, at the Command of
their own King, had long since quitted Scotland, if their Actings had not
occasioned their longer Stay. And therefore, if now they will offer any honest
Conditions, which may afford a probable ground of hope, that the Majesty of the
Government may be preserved, and that they will, with Modesty, obey their
Superiors, I shall refuse no Way of renewing Peace, nor omit any thing
relating to the Public Good; neither am I only thus affected toward them, but
the French King is of the same mind too, who has sent over an Illustrious
Knight of the Order of St. Michael, and another prime Ecclesiastical Person,
with Letters and Commands to that purpose, whom yet they had so slighted, as
not to vouchsafe them an Answer, no, nor Audience neither. And therefore you
shall require the Duke, the other Nobles, and Countrymen of all sorts,
presently to separate themselves, otherwise they shall be proclaimed Traitors.

To this Letter, the Nobles sent an Answer the day after, which was October 23.
to this purpose; The Rejoinder of the Reformed Nobility, to the Regent's Answer.
We plainly perceive, by your Letters and Commands, sent us by your Herald,
how you persist in your Disaffection to God's true Worship, to the Public Good
of the whole Country, and to the Common Liberty of us all; which, that we may
perserve according to our Duty, we do, in the Name of our King and Queen,
suspend and inhibit that public Administration, which you usurp under their
Names, as being fully persuaded, that your Acting^ are quite contrary to their
Inclinations, and against the Public Good of the Kingdom: And as you do not
esteem us a Senate and public Council, who are the lawful Inhabitants of this
Kingdom and Country; so we do not acknowledge you as Regent, in supreme
Authority over us, especially since your Government (if you have any such
entrusted to you, by our Princes) is, for weighty and just Reasons, abrogated
by us, and that in the Name of those Kings, to whom we are born Counselors,
especially in such Things as concern the Safety of the whole Commonwealth. And
though we are determined to undergo the utmost Hazard for the freeing of that
Town, wherein you have a Garrison, from foreign Mercenaries, which you have
hired against us; yet, for the Reverence and due Respect we bear you, as the
Mother of our Queen, we earnestly entreat you, to withdraw your self, whilst
Necessity compels us to reduce that Town by Force, which we often endeavored to
gain by fair Means. And withal we desire, that, within the space of twenty four
hours, you would withdraw likewise Those, who challenge the Name of
Ambassadors to themselves, and forbid them either to decide Controversies, or
to manage Civil and Martial Affairs; and also, that all Mercenary Soldiers in
that Town would retire likewise, for we would willingly spare their Lives, and
consult their Safety, both by reason of that ancient Amity, which has
interceded betwixt the Kings of Scotland and France; and also, by reason of the
Marriage of their King with our Queen, which does equitably engage us, rather
to increase our Union, than diminish it.

The same Day, the Herald also related, that, the Day before, in a full
Assembly of Nobles and Commons, it was voted, That all the Regent's Words,
Deeds and Designs tended only to Tyranny, and therefore a Decree was made to
abrogate her Authority, They abrogate the Regent's Power.
to which all of them subscribed, as most just: Moreover, they did inhibit the
Trust her Son-in-Law and Daughter had committed to her; they also forbad her to
execute any Act of public Government, till a general Convention of the
Estates, which they determined to summon, as soon as conveniently they could.
The 25 th day, the Nobles sent an Herald to Leith, to warn all the Scots to
depart out of the Town within the space of twenty four hours, and to separate
themselves from the Destroyers of public Liberty. After these Threats,
Horsemen made Excursions on both sides, and the War began, yet without any
considerable Slaughter. In the beginning of this Action, there fell so great
and sudden a Terror upon the Cause of the Reformed, which did mightily disturb
them for the present, and also cut off all hopes of Success for the future. For
the Regent, partly by Threats, and partly by Promises, had wrought off many,
who had given in their Names to the Reformers, from the Faction of the Nobles;
and besides, their Camp was full of Spies, who discovered both their Words and
Actions, yea, those which they thought were concerned to be kept most secret,
to the Regent; and when James Balfure's Servant was taken, carrying Letters to
Leith, the Suspicion lighted on a great many, and the Fear diffused it self
over the whole Body: And moreover, the Mercenary Soldiers mutinied, because
they had not their Pay down upon the Nail; and if any one endeavored to
appease them, he was grievously threatened by them. But Men did less admire the
Sedition of such Men, who had neither Religion nor Honesty, than they did the
Imbecility and Faintheartedness of the Duke of Castle-herault, who was so
amazed at the Fear of his Neighbors, that his Terror discouraged the Minds of
many. Those, who were most courageous, endeavored to apply Remedies to these
Miseries; and their first Consultation was, to appease the Mercenaries: And,
seeing the Nobles, which remained, could not make up a Sum sufficient to quiet
and pay them, some declining through Covetousness, others pleading Inability;
at last, they agreed to melt down all their Silver-Plate; and when the
Say-masters were ready to assist therein, the Mints or Stamps, I know not by
whose Fraud, were taken away.

The only ground of Hope was from England, which was adjudg'd too slow. At
last, they resolved to try the Fidelity of their private Friends, and thereupon
they sent John Cockburn of In East-Lothian.
Ormiston to Sir Ralph Sadler, and Sir James Croft, two Knights of known
Valor, (who, at that time, were Officers at Berwick) to obtain of them a small
Sum of Money, The Reformers meet with great discouragements, by the prevailing
of the French, and desire Aid from England.
to serve their present Occasion. This their Design, though they kept it as
private as they could, was yet discovered to the Regent, who commanded the Earl
of Bothwel to waylay him in his Return. He, though in a few days before, he had
taken a solemn Oath, that he would not prejudice the Cause of the Nobles in the
least; yea, though he had given them hopes, that he would join himself to their
Party, yet nevertheless lay in Ambush for Ormiston, assaulted him unawares,
wounded and took him Prisoner, and so became Master of all the Money, that he
brought: When the noise of this Exploit was brought to Edinburgh, it alarmed
the Earl of Arran, and James Stuart, and almost all the Horse to draw out, not
so much for desire of Revenge, as to free Ormiston, (if he were alive) or, at
least, to put a stop to their March, that he might not be conveyed to the
Regent. But Bothwel, having notice thereof by a Spy, prevented their coming by
his Flight.

The same Day, the Governor of Dundee, with the Townsmen thereof, and a few
Volunteers, marched toward Leith, and placed their Ordnance on an adjoining
Hill. The French, who were informed by their Scouts, that almost all the
Enemies Horse were absent, drew forth some Troops, to cut off those few Foot,
whose Paucity they saw. The Dundeans stood a while in hope of Relief, but in
regard those few Mercenaries which followed them, turned their backs almost at
the first Charge, they also retired, leaving their Guns behind them, until at
length a Noise was raised in the Rear, that the French were gone another way
toward the Gates of the City, to seize them, and so to keep them out; upon
this bruit, there was such an universal Perturbation, that every one shifted
for himself, the best he could; and whilst each Man endeavored to save one,
the Weak were trodden under foot by the Strong; so every body looked to his own
Particular, and there was no Provision made in common for them all. The
Papists, on this Emergency, crept out of their lurking Holes, and did openly
reproach them. Insomuch, that they, who ever pretended great Zeal for the
Reformatition, began partly to withdraw themselves secretly, and partly they
consulted, how to desert the whole business.

On the 5 th Day of November, when News were brought, that the French were
marched out to intercept some Provisions, coming toward Edinburgh; besides the
Disagreement of the Reformed amongst themselves, the Mercenaries could scarce
be got out of the Town, to oppose them. The Earl of Arran, and James Stuart,
and their Friends went out first against them, with whom there joined many
worthy and valiant Persons. They charged the French more fiercely than
prudently, so that they were near upon the point, to have been shut out from
Edinburgh, and so to have paid for their Rashness. For the Marshes on the one
side, and the adjacent Wall of an Orchard, left them but a narrow space for
their March, and That also open to the French Musketeers; so that they were
trodden under foot, partly by their own Men, and partly by the Enemies Horse.
In this Trepidation, they had been all certainly cut off, unless the
Commanders, leaping from their Horses, had put themselves into equal Danger
with the rest; some of the common Soldiers, seeing this, stopped for Shame,
amongst whom was Alexander Haliburton, a Captain, a stout young Man, and very
forward in the Cause of Religion, he was grievously wounded, taken Prisoner,
and soon after died of his Wounds.

After this Conflict, in which there fell about twenty five, many withdrew
themselves, and others were upon the point of Desperation; but the Earl of
Arran, and James Stuart, promised to continue their Endeavors, if but a small
Company of them would keep together; when all, in a manner, refused so to do,
the next Consultation was, to leave the City, and, as the Nobles had decreed,
in the second Watch, they began their March, and the Day after came to Sterlin.
John Knox's encouraging Sermon.
There John Knox made an excellent Sermon to them, wherein he erected the Minds
of many, into an assured hope of a speedy Deliverance out of these Distresses.
Here it was agreed upon, in a Convention, that, because the French were
continualally strengthened and increased with new Supplies, they also would
strengthen their Party, by foreign Aid; and in order thereunto, William
Maitland was sent into England, a young Man of great Prudence and Learning; he
was to inform the Queen, what eminent Danger would accrue to England, if the
French were suffered to fortify Places, and plant Garrisons in Scotland, in
regard they sought the Destruction, not of Religion only, but of Laws and
Liberties too; and if the Scots were overcome by Force or Fraud, yea, if they
were reduced to Servitude by unjust Conditions, they would have an easier step
to infringe the Power of the English.

The English, after a long Debate of the Matter, at length, England resolves to
send Aid to the Reformers in Scotland.
gave some hopes of Assistance: Whereupon, the Noblemen, who were the Assertors
of Liberty, divided themselves into two Parties; Some abode at Glascow, that
they might command the Neighboring Provinces, and defend their Partners in the
Reformation from Wrong; Others were sent into Fife. The French did what
Mischief they could to their Enemies; but, being troubled to hear of the
English Supplies, they endeavored to subdue the Relics of the contrary
Faction, before their Coming; and first, they marched against that Party which
was in Fife: First, in their March they plundered Linlithgo, and the Estates of
the Hamiltons; from thence they marched to Sterlin, where they staid no longer,
but till they could pillage the Townsmen, and then passed over the Bridge, and
led their Army along the Shore of the River, which was full of Towns and
Villages, well inhabited. They ransacked all they met with, and at last, came
to A Borough Royal in Fife.
Kinghorn. The Scots, to stop their Career, put a small Garrison into a Town,
called Dysert: Here the French made light Skirmishes for twenty Days together;
and because they could not wreek their Fury upon the Masters, they did it upon
the bare Walls of their Houses, and razed a Village, called Grange, belonging
to William Kircaldy, from the very Foundation. He, knowing that the French were
wont to make often Excursions from thence to plunder the Country People, a
little before day, placed himself in Ambush, and observing Captain L'abast, a
Savoyard, to march out with his Company, he kept himself close so long, till
the French were above a Mile from their Garrison, and then his Horse started up,
and intercepted them from their Fellows. The French had but one way for it, in
those Circumstances, and that was to enter a Country-Village near at hand, and
so to endeavor to defend themselves behind Walls and Hedges. The Scots, being
irritated by the former Cruelty of the French, were utterly unmindful of their
own Safety, while they were intent to attend their Enemies, (though they had no
Arms, but Horsemens Lances) yet broke down all which was in their way, and
rushed in upon them; the Captain, who refused to take Quarter, and fifty of his
Men, were slain, the rest they sent Prisoners to Dundee.

They who were at Dysert, as in a settled Post, met at Cowper; out of them and
others, that were at Glasgow, there were some Persons chosen to be sent to
Berwick, to agree the Terms of the League with the English. The chief Articles
were these, That if any Strangers should enter Britain in a Warlike manner,
each of them should aid and assist one another; That the Queen of England
should pay the Scots in England, and also the English Auxiliaries in Scotland;
That the Prey taken from the Enemy should belong to the English, but the Towns
and Castles should presently be restored to the right Owners; That the Scots
should give Hostages, which were to remain in England, during the Marriage of
the French King with the Q. of Scots, and if that Marriage were disanull'd, one
year after.

These Transactions past at Berwick, February 27, 1570. One thing the English
gave strict warning of to the Scots, which was, that they should not join in a
set Battle, and so hazard all, before the Aids of their Friends came; for the
English Nobles were much afraid, that the over-eager Spirits of the Scots would
precipitate the whole matter into an irrecoverable Mistake.

In the mean time, the French, having plundered Dysert and Weemes, had a Debate
among themselves, Whether they should march directly toward the Enemy, or else
go all along the Shore to S. Andrews, and so to Cowper. This later opinion
prevailed, because, by reason of the great Snow, which had fallen, all the
Highways were so clogged, that the Horse, without great Inconvenience, could
not march through the Mid-land Countries; wherefore passing along a little by the
Sea, when they came to the Promontory, called In Fife.
Kincraige, (i. e. the Head or end of a Rock,) some of them got thereupon,
where there was a large Prospect into the Sea, and they came down in great Joy,
and told their Fellows, that they discovered eight great Ships, of the first
Rate, at Sea; whereupon the French did certainly conclude, that those Vessels
had brought them over Aid, which they had long before expected; and therefore
they saluted them, as the Custom is, with the Discharge of their great Guns,
and congratulated one another, invited them on Shore, resolving to pass that
day in a great deal of Mirth and Jollity; not long after, one or two Boats
landed from the contrary Shore of Lothian, they (haivng, A Fleet of English
appear, to aid the Scots Reformers, which terrifies the French.
in their passage, had some Discourse with the Passengers, in those Foreign
Ships) made a Discovery, that it was a Fleet of English; and withal, that the
Report was, that the Landforces of the English were not far from the Borders
of Scotland. Hereupon, there was a sudden change of Spirit among them, and
their unseasonable Laughter was turned into Fear and Trembling; so that
presently they caught up their Colors, and retreated, part of them to
Kinghorn, others to Dumfermlin, many of them leaving their Dinners behind them,
for very haste; for they were afraid* lest the Garrison, which they had left at
Leith, might be cut off, and they themselves exposed to the Fury of the Enemy,
who lay about them in all Quarters, before they could gather all their Strength
into a Body.

During this whole March, they plundered more of the Papists, who came in thick
to them, than of their Enemies. For of them, the richer sort had withdrawn a
great part of their Estates into remote places of Safeguard; as for those, who
had not thus secured their Estates, the French Commanders being lifted up with
their present Success, and also with the hopes of Aid from France, which was
every day expected, in Confidence whereof they hoped to be perpetual Lords of
those Countries; hereupon, they reserved the richest Farms and Villages, which
most abounded with all kind of Provisions, unplundered, as a peculiar Prey for
themselves. But the Papists were either exhausted by the frequent Invitations
of the principal Commanders, to feast at their Houses, under a Pretense of
Friendship; or else, were privately pillaged by the common Soldiers; or, at
least, in their Retreat, were openly spoiled by the French, who were in great
want of Provisions, and that not without bitter Exprobrations of their
Cowardice in Fighting, and their Avarice, in not relieving their Friends, which
things (said they) we leave to you to judge, how near akin they are to plain
Perfidiousness. This contumelious Pride, The French lose the hearts even of the
Scottish Papists themselves, by their Insolences and Plunderings.
joined with the Rapacity of the French Faction, quite turned the Hearts of
many from them; and not long after, the Fife Men, being compelled, partly by
Fear of their Enemies, and partly by the Wrongs received by their own
Partisans, joined themselves to the Reformers; and, at last, the remote
Countries did universally revolt from the Outlandish, and showed themselves as
eager in repressing the Tyranny of the French, as the other Scots did in
asserting their Religion.

The Spring was now at hand, and both Parties hastened to draw their Forces
together into one place. The Earl of Martigues, a stout and noble Young Man,
landed from France in two Ships, French Aid arrives in Scotland, to assist the
Regent;
bringing with him about 1000 Foot, and a few Horse; he and his Soldiers
presently went on Shore, but the Ships were taken in the Night by the Scots.
About the same time, the Marquess of Elbeuff, Brother to the Regent, who was
bringing Aid of Men and Money in eight Ships, returned back into the Haven,
whence he set Sail, partly for Fear, because the Sea was full of English Ships,
and partly excusing himself, for the Badness of the Weather. Moreover, a new
Fleet of English was sent in to second the former, who flew up and down the
whole Chanel, and held Keith-Island besieged, stopping all manner of Provision
from passing by Sea into Leith.

In the mean time, the chief of the Assertors of Liberty, who commanded in
Fife, went to Perth, and after three Days Conference there with Huntly, they
won over all that Northern part of Scotland to their Party; and Order was soon
after given, that they should all assemble and rendevouz at the end of March.
About the same time, all the chief Reformers had a Meeting at Linlithgo; from
thence they went to Hadington, and, on the first of April, So does an English
Army, to aid the Reformers.
they joined the English; there were in the English Army above 6000 Foot, and
2000 Horse: The next Night, they pitched their Tents at Preston. The same day,
the Regent, to withdraw her self from the Danger now nearly approaching, and to
avoid the uncertain Hazard of War, retired, with some few of her Domestics,
into the Castle of Edinburgh; John Erskin was Governor thereof, a Man of
approved Piety and Carefulness, he had received the Command of it, by a Decree
of the public Council, as has been before related, but upon this Condition,
That he should render it up to none, unless by the Command of the same Council.
The French saw, that the Possession of this Castle was of huge Advantage to
their Affairs, and therefore they used great Endeavors to obtain it by
Treachery. The Governor, though he were not ignorant of their Intentions
toward him, and had so fortified the Castle, and made such other diligent
Provision, that 'twas secure, either from Force or Fraud; yet, was not willing
to exclude the Regent, at such a time; but, in receiving her into the Castle,
he took great care, that both she and the Castle might be still under his
Command. The Nobles, who were the Assertors of public Liberty, though before
they had often found, that her Mind was obstinately averse against the Cause,
which they had undertaken, yet thought it advisable not to pretermit the
present Occasion, as hoping, that the Fear of the War, approaching nearer to
her, and the Uncertainty of Aid from a remote Country, might incline her Mind
to peaceable Counsels. Whereupon, the chief of the Party had a Meeting at
Dalkeith, from whence they wrote to her to this purpose;

We have oft-times heretofore earnestly entreated you, both by Letters and
Messengers, The Reformers last Letter to the Regent.
to send away the French Soldiers, who do yet, another Year, grievously
oppress the poor Country People; yea, they raise up a just Fear in the
Commonalty, that they shall be reduced into miserable Bondage; from which Fear,
we have many times requested you to free us, but when our just Entreaties
prevailed nothing with you, we were enforced to represent our deplorable Estate
to the Queen of England, as the nearest Princess to our Borders, and to desire
Aid of her, to expel the Strangers, who threatened to make us Slaves, out of our
Kingdom, and that by Force of Arms, if it could not otherwise be done; and
though, she, out of a sense of our Calamities, has undertaken our Cause; yet,
that we might perform our Duty toward the Mother of our Queen, and might
prevent the Effusion of Christian Blood, as much as is possible, and might then
have Recourse to Force of Arms, when we have tried all other Ways to obtain
Right without Success, do as yet deem it a part of our Modesty, again to pray
you, to command the French Soldiers, with their Commanders and Officers, to
depart immediately out of the Land. In order to the Accomplishment whereof, the
Queen of England will not only afford them a safe Passage through her Kingdom,
but will also assist with her Fleet to transport them. If this Condition be
rejected, we call God and Man to Witness, that we take up Arms, not out of
Hatred, or any wicked Intent, but enforced thereto by mere Necessity, that so
we may try the Extremity of Remedies, that the Commonwealth, our Selves, our
Estates, and Posterities, might not be precipitated into utter Ruin. And yet
notwithstanding, though we, at present, suffer very heavy Pressures, and
heavier ones are near at hand, no Danger whatsoever shall ever enforce us to
depart from our Duty toward our Queen, or from the King her Husband, in the
least tittle, wherein the Destruction of our ancient Liberty, and the Ruin of
our Selves, and our Posterity, is not concerned. As for you, most benign
Princess, we beseech you again, that, weighing the Equity of our Demands, the
Inconveniences attending War, and how necessary Peace is to this your
Daughter's Kingdom, so miserably harrassed, you would afford a favorable Ear
to our just Requests; which if you shall do, you will leave a grateful and
pleasant Memory of your Moderation amongst all Nations, and will also provide
for the Security of the greatest part of Christians. Farewell. Dated at
Dalkeith, the 4 th of April, in the Year 1560.

The 6 th Day of April, when the English drew near by the Seaside, about 1300
French marched out of Leith, and possessed a little rising Hill, at the end of
the Plain, because they thought that the English would pitch their Tents there.
There was a sharp Fight for above five Hours, for the recovering and keeping
the Place, with no small Loss on both sides; at last, the Scotch Horse, with
great Violence, rushed in amongst the thickest Band of the French, and drove
them back in great Astonishment into the Town; and if the English Horse had
come in sooner than they did, as 'twas agreed, they had been all excluded from
their Fellows, and so cut off.

After this Onset, there were Conferences managed between the Parties, but in
vain, for the English did despise all Truce, and ever and anon made some light
Excursions, yet not without Blood; Skirmishes between the English, and the
French.
it is not necessary to recount them. On the 22 d of April, John Monluck, Bishop
of Vallence in Savoy, was first carried into the English Camp, then into the
Castle of Edinburgh, to the Regent, where he had a Conference with her three
Days, and then returned to the Scottish Nobles; the Terms of Concord could not,
then neither, be agreed on, because the Scots persisted peremptorily in their
Demand, that the foreign Soldiers should return home. Hereupon, the English,
because the distance between their Camp and the Town was too great for their
Ordnance to do any Execution, so that their Batteries signified little or
nothing, removed their Camp on the other side Leith-River, near the Town, where
they might more certainly annoy the Enemy, and also have frequent Skirmishes
with him, Hand to Hand. On the last day of April, about two Hours before
Sunset, a casual Fire seized upon part of the Town, which, being assisted by
the Violence of the Winds, burnt fiercely till the next Morning, destroying
many Houses, and making a great Devastation, yea, it took part of the public
Granary, and consumed a great deal of Provisions. In this hurly-burly, the
English were not wanting to the occasion, for they turned their great Guns upon
that part, and played so hot upon the People, that they durst not come to quench
the Fire; yea, they entered the Trenches, and in some places measured the
height of the Walls, so that if the French, at the beginning of the Combustion,
fearing some Treachery, had not run thick to the Walls, and thereby prevented
their loss in such a general Consternation, that very day had put an end to the
War.

On the 4 th of May, the English set fire to the Water-Mills, which were near
the Town; one of them they burnt down before day, the other, the next day
after; the French, in vain endeavoring to quench the Flames. On the 7 th of
May, the Besiegers set Ladders to the Walls to make an Assault, but the Ladders
were too short, so that they were beaten off, many wounded, and 160 slain: The
three following days, the French were employed, with great Labor and Hazard,
in repairing the Walls, the English continually playing upon them where they
saw the greatest Numbers. The Papists were extremely puffed up with this Success,
so that now they promised to themselves, that the English would depart, the
Siege would be raised, and the War be finished. But the English and Scots were
nothing discouraged by this Blow, but exhorted one another to Constancy, and
the English promised to stay, till they heard their Queen's pleasure from her
Court. In the mean time, Letters came from the Duke of Norfolk, which did
mightily encourage all their Spirits. For he wrote to Gray, the chief
Commander, wishing him to continue the Siege, and that he should not want
Soldiers, as long as there was a Man able to bear Arms in his Province, (which
was very large, reaching from Trent to Tweed) and, if need were, he himself
would come in Person into the Camp, and, as a sure Pledge thereof, he caused
his own Tent to be erected in the Camp; and, in a few days, sent in 2000
Auxiliaries; so that the Memory of the former loss was quite worn out, and,
with great alacrity they renewed the War; and from that day forward, though the
French made frequent Sallies, yet hardly one of them was prosperous to their
Party.

In the mean time, the Queen of England sent William Cecil, a learned and
prudent Person, Ambassadors from England.
who was then the chief Manager of Affairs in England, and Nicholas Wotton,
Dean of York, into Scotland, to treat about a Peace; they were commanded to
confer Counsels with Randan and Monluck of the French Party, concerning
Conditions of Peace. For the Kings of France thought it a thing below their
Dignity, to enter into an equal dispute with their own Subjects. The fame of
this Conference was the Cause, that, as if all Controversies had been already
decided, a Convention was Indicted to be held in July. In the mean time, the
Queen Dowager died in the Castle of Edinburgh, The Queen-Regent's death, with
her Character.
June 11, worn out with Sickness, and with Grief. Her Death did variously
affect the minds of Men, for some of them who fought against Her, did yet
bewail her Death, for she was endowed with a singular Wit, and had also a Mind
very propense to Equity; she had quieted the fiercest Highlanders, and the
furthest Inhabitants of the Isles, by her Wisdom and Valor; some believed,
that she would never have had any War with the Scots, if she had been left free
to her own Disposition; for She so accommodated her self to their Manners, that
she seemed able to accomplish all things without Force; but the Misery was,
Though the Name of Governess resided in Her, neither did she want Virtues,
worthy of so great a Dignity, yet she did, as it were, rule precariously,
because, in all Matters of Moment, she was to receive Answers, like so many
Oracles, from France. For the Guises, who were then the powerfull'st in the
French Court, had designed the Kingdom of Scotland, as a Peculiar to their
Family; and accordingly, they advised their Sister, to be more severe in
asserting the Papal Religion, than either her own Disposition, or those Times,
could well bear. This she gave some evident hints of; for she has been heard
to say, that if Matters were left to her own Arbitrament, she did not despair,
but to compose them upon no unequal Conditions. Some others were of opinion,
that she alleged those things rather popularly than really, as her Mind was,
and that not only with an intent to avert the fault or envy of
Mal-administration from her Self; but also, that, under a pretext of asking
Advice, she might spin out the time in delay, whilst She sent for foreign Aid;
and so, by yielding, she might blunt the vehement edg of the Scots; and, in
time, suffer their angry mood to abate, in regard, she was of Opinion, that the
Scots Troops, being Volunteers, after one or two Disbandings, could not again
be easily got together, because they were made up of Men, who were not under
Pay, nor under any certain Command. And the Inconstancy of the Queen, in
keeping her Promises, was no obscure evidence of this her Dissimulation, for
She did not expect the end of a Truce, which, by Conditions, she was obliged to
do, in renewing a War; but if any specious Advantage were offered, she would
adventure to do it, Arbitrarily, of her own Head. Others there were, who cast
the blame of all things, which were avariciously or cruelly acted, or which
were attempted by Fraud or Calumny, upon those who were her Counselors, in
managing Affairs. For when She undertook the Regency, at the very First, some
French Counselors were joined to her Assistance, as Osel, Ambassador of the
King of France, a Man quickly, and vehemently, passionate, The Character of the
French Ambassadors, in Scotland.
otherwise a good Man, and well-skill'd in the Arts, both of Peace and War; he
was one that directed his Counsel rather by the Rule of Equity, than the Will
and Pleasure of the Guises. One Monsieur de Ruby was joined to him, as his
Companion, a Lawyer of Paris, who was to dispute Matters of Law, if any such
did occur; He, in his public Administration, conformed all things, as much as
he could, to the Manners and Laws of France, (as if That alone were the right
Way to govern a Commonwealth) by which means he raised a suspicion of
Innovation upon him; and though others might share the Guilt of the same Crime
with him, yet he alone, in a manner, bore the blame and envy of it. But these
Two committed no Offense, which was remediless and uncurable.

Three French Generals in Scotland, with their respective Characters.
Toward the end of the War, there were three French Generals, having distinct
limits allotted them, who managed Military Affairs in Scotland; viz, The Count
Martigues, of the House of Luxemburgh, who was afterward made Duke of
D'Estames; L'abros, of a Noble, or Equestrian Family, highly experienced in
Military Matters; and a Third was the Bishop of Amiens, accompanied with some
Doctors of the Sorbon, as if the Matter were to be determined by the Pen, not
the Sword. All the Counsels of these Three did tend to open Tyranny. Martigues
his Advice was, to destroy all the Country near to Leith, by Fire and Sword,
that so the desolateness of the Country, and the want of Necessaries, might
compel the Scots to raise the Siege. But if that Counsel had took Effect, many
peaceable Persons, poor besides, and, for the most part, Papists too, would
have been destroyed, and the Besieged would have had no benefit neither; for
the Sea being open, Provisions might easily have been brought by Ships, from
all the Maritim places of Scotland and England, into the Leaguer of the
Besiegers, and the devastation of the Land and Soil would have redounded as
much on the Papists, as on the Embracers of the True Religion.

L'abros was of opinion, That all the Nobility of Scotland were to be cut off,
without distinction, and that a thousand French Curiassiers were to be
garrisoned on their Lands, who were to keep under the common Sort, as Vassals.
This his Design was discovered by some Letters of his, intercepted, which were
going for France; and it is scarce credible, how the Hatred against the French,
begun upon other Causes, was increased thereby.

As for the Bishop of Amiens, he would have had all Those to be seized on, and
put to Death, without pleading in their own Defense, whom he thought not so
favorable to the Pope's Cause, as he would have them; yea, all Those, who were
not so forward to assist the French Party, as he expected; and he mightily
blamed the French Soldiers, for suffering those, who were disaffected to their
King, to strut it openly up and down; One he particularly aimed at, viz. Mr.
William Maitland, a Noble and learned Man, whom, because the Sorbonists could
not refute by their Reasons, the Bishop designed to take off by the Sword; yea,
he upbraided the French Soldiers for permitting him to live, and advised them
to kill him; which he having notice of, took his opportunity to withdraw
himself from the French, and so escaped into the Scots Camp.

The Seventeenth BOOK.
A Few days after the Death of the Regent, a Truce was made for a short time,
to hear the Ambassadors, After the Regent's death, Peace concluded between the
Parties, by which the French were to leave Scotland; a point the Regent would
never yield to in her Lifetime, though often pressed thereto.
who were come to treat of Peace out of both Nations, France, and England.
Hereupon, the Nobles assembled; These could not effect any thing; the greatest
obstacle to an agreement, was, That the French, who, the Winter before, had
obtained great Booties out of the neighboring Parts, refused to depart, unless
they carried their Baggage, and plunder, along with them. This was denied them;
Whereupon, Irruptions were made more fierce than ever, though not so prosperous
to the French. At length, when both sides were weary of the War, and the
Inclinations to Peace could no longer be dissembled, the Ambassadors, on both
sides, met again in a Conference: The things, which most inclined all to Peace
were these; The French had no hopes of any relief, and their Provisions grew
daily scant, and were not likely to hold out long, so that their Condition was
almost wholly desperate. And for the English, they were wearied out with the
long Siege, and wanted Necessaries as well as the French, so that They likewise
desired an end of the War. And the Scots too, receiving no Pay, could hardly be
kept from running away; So that they easily hearkened to a Capitulation. Thus,
by the joint Consent of all Parties, on the 8 th day of July, in the Year of
our Lord 1559, Peace was Proclaimed on these Conditions, That the French should
Sail away in 20 days, with their Bag and Baggage; and seeing they had not Ships
enough to transport them all over at present, they were to hire some from the
English, leaving Hostages, till they were safely returned; That Leith should be
rendered up to the Scots, and the Walls thereof demolished; That the
Fortifications lately made by the French at Dunbar, should be slighted; That
these Articles, being performed, the English should immediately reduce their
Forces; That Mary Queen of Scots, by the consent of her Husband Francis, should
grant an Oblivion, of all that the Scottish Nobility had done or attempted, from
the 10 th day of March 1559, till the 1 st of August, 1560. And that a Law
should be made to that purpose, to be confirmed in the next Parliament there,
(which was appointed to be in August.) And Francis and Mary were to give their
Consent to the holding that Assembly. That 60 of the French should keep the
Island of Keith, and the Castle of Dunbar, that so, the Queen might not seem to
be ejected out of the Possession of the whole Kingdom at once. After this
departure of the foreign Soldiers, there was a great Tranquillity, and
Cessation from Arms, till the Queen's Return. The Assembly of the Estates were
kept at Edinburgh, wherein the greatest Debate was, about promoting the
Reformed Religion. The Statutes made were sent into France, for the Queen to
give her consent to, and subscribe. This was done, rather to sound her Mind,
than out of any hope to obtain any thing from Her. Ambassadors also were
dispatched for England, to give them thanks for their Assistance so seasonably
afforded.

Sandeland, Ambassador from Scotland to France.
Not long after, James Sandeland, Knight of Rhodes, came unto the French Court,
a Man as yet free from the Discords of the Faction; his business was, to excuse
things past, and to pacify the the Grudges remaining since the former Wars, and
so to try all ways to establish Peace and Concord. But his arrival happened to be
in very troublesome times, for the whole Conduct of the French Affairs was then
in the Hands of the Guises; who, when they perceived, that neither Threatenings
nor Flatteries did prevail, endeavored to oppress the contrary Faction by
force of Arms; and when they could lay no other plausible Crime against their
Contrariants, they accused them of High Treason, for betraying the Kingdom.
Hereupon, the King of Navarr, was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment; and his
Brother, the Prince of Conde, sentenced to Death; Annas, Duke of Momorancy, and
the two Sons of his Sister, Jasper and Francis Colignes, and their Kinsman the
A Vidam, in France, is a Baron, holding of a Bishop.
Vidam of Charters, were destined to the Slaughter; and besides those, above
7000 more were put into the black List of Criminals. Moreover, all means were
used to terrify the People. The City of Orleans was full of Foot-Souldiers,
Guards of Horse were posted all up and down the Country; A Massacre designed in
France, by the Guises.
all the Highways were beset by them; Sentence was past, by a few Men in the
Court, concerning the Lives, Fortunes and good Names of the honestest Men; all
the Steeples of Churches and Towers round about the Walls, had their Windows
shut up, and their Gates and Doors fortified, being designed for Prisons;
Criminal Judges were called together out of the whole Kingdom; The manner of
Punishment was thus designed, That as soon as the Frost broke, and the River
Loir was navigable, the King should go to Chinon in Poictou, at the Mouth of
the River Vien; and then the Guises, with a few of their Partisans, at the
Command of the Court-Cabal, (of which They were the chief) should perform the
Execution. Mean while, Sandeland came to Court, not so much humbly to desire
Pardon for what was past, as to excuse his Countrymen, laying all the blame of
the Tumults upon the French. The Guises received him very coursly, blaming him,
that he, being a Man dedicated to the Holy War, had undertaken to manage the
Commands of the Rebels, upon the Account of that execrable Heresy, which the
Consent of all Nations had highly condemned, in the Council of Trent; yea, many
of them did admire, not at the Folly, but even Madness, of the Scots, that
they, being but a few, and disagreeing amongst themselves; and besides,
destitute of Money, and other Warlike Preparations, should dare to provoke so
potent a King, who was now at quiet from any foreign Enemy. Between these
fretful Indignations and Threatenings, the King fell suddenly Sick. The
Ambassador was dismissed without any Answer; but the Message of the Kings Death
reached him at Paris, December 5.
in the Nones of December, whence he made haste home, hoping for better things
for future.

The News of the King's Death, being divulged, did not so much erect the Minds
of the Scots, being in great Suspense, by reason of their imminent Dangers, as
it filled all France with Faction, The Death of Francis, the French King.
and the Poison of domestic Discords; James, the Queen's Brother, Scotland
being now freed from the Domination of the French, by the Death of Francis,
made what haste he could to the Queen; who, when her Husband was dead, went to
Lorrain to her Uncles, either as a Recess to her Grief, or else out of womanly
Emulation, that she might not be near her Mother-in-Law, who, by reason of the
Slothfulness of Anthony Burbon, King of Navar, did, by degrees, derive the
whole Administration of Affairs into her own Hands. There James, the Queen's
Brother, having settled things in Scotland for a Season, found her; and, after
much Discourse, the Queen told him, she had a mind to return to Scotland, and
fixed a Day, The Queen of Scots resolves to return from France.
by which they might expect her, her Uncles being also of the same Opinion:
For, before James's Coming, there had been great Consultation about the Matter,
some alleging the Difficulty of the Voyage, especially the Queen of England
being nothing favorable; besides, she was to go to a barbarous People, and
naturally seditious, who were hardly kept in quiet by the Government of Men.
Moreover, she had fresh Examples, before her Eyes, of her Father and Mother,
whom, when they could not, or durst not, openly oppress, by sundry Artifices
they drove them to Despair; so that she would be in daily peril, either of her
Honor, or of her Life, amongst them. On the other side, they who were skilled
in the Affairs of Scotland, did urge, that the Seditions, arising there, were
occasioned oftener by default of the Princes than the People, in that they
endeavored to reduce that Kingdom to an Arbitrary and boundless Rule, which,
time out of mind, had been circumscribed and managed within due Bounds of Law;
and That such a Nation, which was more warlike than opulent, could never
endure. But all those Kings, who never attempted to infringe the Liberties of
the People, were not only free from private Enemies, and popular Tumults, but
also reigned, much beloved of their Subjects, famous Abroad, and unconquered by
their Enemies: But the best, and almost only Way at present to quiet things,
was, to attempt no Alteration in the State of Religion, as then established.
These were the Debates, as publicly bruited on both sides. But there were
other more prevailing Causes with her Uncles; for they, in the Troubles of
France, cherishing rather great, than honest Hopes, thought, if the Queen were
absent, she would be more in their Power, than if she staid in France; and that
Neighbour-Princes, in hopes to carry her for a Wife, would seek their
Friendships, and use them, as Mediators. In the mean time, one or other of
their Faction would preside over the Management of Affairs in Scotland.
Besides, the Queen's Resolution swayed much in the Case, who was determined to
return into her own Country; for her Husband was dead; and her Mother-in-Law,
(who managed Matters of State) being something alienated from her, she saw, she
should be cheap at that Court; and tho she had been but a little used to
Government, yet a Woman, young, of a flourishing Age, and a lofty Spirit too,
could not endure to truckle under another; she had rather have any Fortune in a
Kingdom, than the richest without one; neither could she hope, that her
Condition would be very honorable, the Power of the Guises being weakened by
the adverse Party, at the first brush: Besides, the Persuasions and Promises of
her Brother James served much to weigh down the Balance; for he assured her,
she would find all Quiet at home, especially seeing he was a Man, to whose
Faith she might safely commit her self, being her natural Brother, and who,
from his Youth, had performed many noble and brave Exploits, and so had got
great Credit and Renown amongst all Men. An Ambassador from France, with his
Demands, and the Answers of the Scottish Nobility thereunto.
Whilst the Queen was intent on these Matters, Noal, a Senator of Bourdeaux,
who was sent out of France, came into Scotland, a little after the end of the
public Convention, and was put off till the next Assembly, which, in order to
the settling public Matters, was Indicted to be held at Edinburgh, May the 21
st; yet the Nobles, who met there at the time, in great abundance, did not sit,
because they were as yet uncertain of the Queen's Will and Pleasure. In the
mean time, James Stuart returned from France, and brought a Commission from the
Queen, giving them Liberty to sit, and enact Laws for the Good of the Public:
Then the French Ambassador had Audience; the Heads of his Embassy were, That
the ancient League with the French should be renewed, and the new one with the
English, broke; That Priests should be restored to their Estates and Dignities,
whence they had been ejected. To which Answer was given; As to the French
League, that they were not conscious to themselves, that they had broken it in
the least; but that it had been many ways infringed by the French themselves,
and especially of late, in their opposing the public Liberty, and endeavoring
to bring a miserable Yoke of Bondage upon a People, which were their Allies,
and giving no occasion on their part. As for the League with England, they
could not dissolve it, without a brand of the greatest Ingratitude imaginable,
in recompensing so great a Courtesy with the highest Injury, as to join against
those, who had been the Deliverers of their Country. As for the Restitution of
Priests, they told him, That those he called Priests, they knew no use or need
of their Office in the Church. In that Parliament, The Scots Parliament
demolishes all Monasteries.
a Statute was made to demolish all the Monasteries of the Monks, and Men were
presently sent abroad into all Parts of the Land, to put it in Execution.

Matters being prepared in France for the Queen's Journey, her intimate Friends,
who governed her Counsels, advised her, for the present, wholly to pretermit
and pass over Matters about Religion, though some gave her rash Counsel, to arm
on that account, and kill all that opposed. The chief of which were Dury, the
Abbat of Dumfermling, and John Sinclare, lately designed Bishop of A Town built
on the River South-Esk, in Angus.
Brechin; and she her self was by Nature, as also by the persuasion of her
Kindred, so inclinable to their Counsel, that sometimes Threats broke out from
her, as if it were against her Will, which were caught up at Court, and spread
amongst the Vulgar: And she would diverse times boast, among her Familiars, that
she would follow the Example of her Kinswoman, Mary, Queen of England.
Wherefore the Main of her Counsels tended to this, to feed the Men of her own
Faction with hopes at present, and to suppress the opposite Party by degrees;
and when she was well settled in her Power, then to declare her mind. And this
seemed not hard to do, seeing the Council of Trent was lately begun, on
pretense to restore the decayed Manners of the Church, but indeed, to extirpate
the Professors of the true Religion, as, by the Decrees of that Cabal, was
afterward declared. Besides, her Uncles did mightily animate the Queen, by
showing her the Power of the Papal Faction, whose Head, by the Decree of the
Council, Francis, the eldest Brother of the Guises, was to be. In the mean
time, Charles the Cardinal, amidst so many public Cares, was mindful of
himself, and advised the Queen, not to carry her Housholdstuff and Furniture,
which were of great value, as 'twere, into another World, but to leave them
with him, till she might be assured of the Event of her Journey. She knew the
Man and his Craft well enough, and therefore answered him, That seeing she
ventured her self, she might as well trust her Goods as her Person. When all
was resolved upon, they sent into England, to try, how that Queen stood
affected to the Voyage; D'Osel, the Envoy, was well entertained there, and sent
back presently into France, to tell the Queen of Scots, that if she pleased to
pass through England, she should have all the Respect, which she could desire
from a Kinswoman and an Ally; and that she would take it as a great Favor,
besides; but if she shunned her Interview, she would look upon it as an
Affront. For the English Queen had prepared a great Fleet, the pretense was, to
scour the Sea of Pirates; but some thought that 'twas to intercept the Queen of
Scots, if she adventured to pass against her Will. They took one Ship, wherein
the Earl of Eglington was, and brought her to London, but dismissed her again
in a little time. But, whatever the Design was, in providing a Fleet, if any
Danger was intended, Providence did prevent it; for, when the French Galleys
came upon the Main, a Mist followed them for several days, till they came into
Scotland, the 21 st day of August.

The News of the Queen's Arrival being divulged abroad, The Queen arrives in
Scotland, with various Descants thereupon.
the Nobility, from all parts of the Kingdom, came hastily in, as to a public
Show, partly to congratulate her Return; some also came, to put her in mind of
the Services they did her, in her absence, that so they might preoccupate her
Favor, and prevent the Cavils of their Enemies: Others came, to give a guess
of her future Regiment, by her first Entrance into the Kingdom: upon these
different Grounds, all did equally desire to see their Queen, which was so
unexpectedly cast upon them, after such various Events of changeable
Providence. They considered, that she was born amidst the cruel Tempests of
War, and lost her Father in about six days after her Birth; that she was well
educated, by the great care of her Mother, the choicest of Women; but between
Domestic Seditions and Foreign Wars, she was left, as a Prey to the strongest
side; and even almost before she had a sense of Misery, was exposed to all the
Perils of enraged Fortune: That she left her Country, being as 'twere, sent
into Banishment, where, between the Fury of Arms, and the Violence of the
Waves, she was hardly preserved. It Is true, Her Fortune somewhat smiled upon
her, and advanced her to an Illustrious Marriage, but her Joy was not lasting,
but transitory; for, her Mother and Husband dying, she was cast into a Mourning
Widowed Estate, having the new Kingdom she received, and her old one too,
standing on very ticklish Terms. Furthermore, besides the Variety of her
Dangers, the excellent Mien of her Beauty, the Vigor of her adult Age, and the
Elegancy of her Wit, did much commend her. These Accomplishments, her courtly
Education had either much increased, or, at least, made them more acceptable,
by a false Disguise of Virtue, not sincere, but adumbrated only to a kind of
Similitude thereof, which made the Goodness of her Nature, by her desire to
please and ingratiate her self, less acceptable, and so nipp'd the Seeds of
Virtue, by the Blandishments of Pleasure, that they might not come to bring
forth any ripe Fruit in their Season. As these things were grateful to the
Vulgar, so the more Intelligent saw through them; yet, they hoped, that her
soft and tender Age might be easily bettered and amended, by Experience. Amidst
these Gratulations, there was a light Offense happened, but it struck deep into
the Minds of either Faction. The Nobility had agreed with the Queen, that no
Alteration should be made, in point of the Religion received, only she and her
Family were to have Mass, and that in private, too. But while the Furniture for
it was carrying through the Court into the Chapel, one of the Company caught
the Torches out of his Hands that carried them, and broke them; and unless some
moderate Men had come in, and prevented it, all the rest of the Apparatus had
been spoiled too. That Action was differently interpreted amongst the Vulgar;
some blamed it, as a Fact too audacious; some said, 'twas to try Men's Patience,
how far it would bear; others affirmed, and spoke it publicly, that the
Priests ought to be punished with the Punishment, appointed in the Scriptures,
against Idolatry. But this Commotion was nipp'd in the very bud by James the
Queen's Brother, to the great, but hidden Indignation of George Gordon, who was
willing to lay hold on all occasions of Disturbance: And here, thinking an
Opportunity was open to curry Favor, he went to the Queen's Uncles, then
present, and promised them to reduce all the Country, beyond Dunkelden, to the
old Religion. But they suspected the matter, as having heard enough of the
Disposition of the Man, and fearing, lest he should raise a new Storm to no
purpose, communicated the matter to James, the Queen's Brother. The rest of the
Year was spent in Balls and Feastings, and in sending away the French, who, out
of Civility, had attended the Queen, and were then honorably dismissed, only
one of her Uncles, the Marquess of Elbeuff, staid behind. Amidst these Matters,
William Maitland junior was sent Ambassador into England, Maitland sent
Ambassador into England;
to complement that Queen, as the Custom is, and to acquaint her, how highly
she stood affected toward her, and how much she desired to maintain Peace and
Concord with her: He also carried to her Letters from the Nobility, in which
was mentioned a Friendly Commemoration of former Courtesies and Obligations;
but one thing they earnestly desired of her, and That was, that, both publicly
and privately, she would show her self friendly and courteous toward their
Queen; and that being provoked by good Offices, she would not only persevere in
her ancient Friendship, but add daily stronger Obligations (if possible)
hereunto. As for their part, it should be their earnest Study and Desire, to
pretermit no occasion of perpetuating the Peace betwixt the two
Neighbour-Kingdoms. That there was but One sure way, to induce an Amnesty of
all past Differences, and to stop the Spring of them for ever, if the Queen of
England would declare, by an Act of Parliament, firmed by the Royal Assent,
That the Queen of Scots was Heiress to the Kingdom of England, next after her
Self and her Children, (if ever she had any.) After the Ambassador had asserted
the Equity of such a Statute, and how beneficial it would be to all Britain, by
many Arguments, he added in the close, That she, being her nearest Kinswoman,
ought to be more intent and diligent than others, in having such an Act made,
and that the Queen did expect that Testimony of Good Will, and the Respect from
her. To which the Queen of England answered in these Words, I expected another
kind of Embassy from your Queen; I wonder she has forgot, how that, before her
Departure out of France, after much urging, she at last promised, that the
League, made at Leith, should be confirmed, Who persuades Queen Elizabeth, by
many Arguments, to declare the Queen of Scots, her Successor.
she having promised me faithfully it should be so, as soon as ever she
returned into her own Country. I have been put off with Words long enough; now
it is time, (if she have any respect to her Honor) that her Deeds should answer
her Words. To which the Ambassador answered, That he was sent in this Embassy,
but a very few days after the Queen's Arrival, before she had entered upon the
Administration of any public Affairs; That she had been hitherto taken up in
treating the Nobility, many of whom she had never seen before, who came from
diverse parts to perform their dutiful Salutations to her; but she was chiefly
employed about settling the State of Religion, which, how difficult and
troublesome a thing it is, (said he) you your self are not ignorant: Hence, (he
proceeded) your Majesty may easily understand, that the Queen of Scots had no
vacant time at all before my Departure; neither had she as yet called fit Men
to her Council, to consult about various Affairs; especially, since the
Nobility, that lived in the furthest parts toward the North, had not been yet
to attend her, before his Coming, without whose advice, Matters of such public
Moment, could not, nor ought not, to be transacted. Upon which the English
Queen was something moved, and said, What need had your Queen to make any
Consultation about doing that, which she has obliged her self to under her
Hand and Seal? He replied, I can give no other Answer at present, for I
received nothing in command about it, neither did our Queen expect, that an
account thereof would now be required of me; and you may easily consider with
your self, what just causes of Delay, she, at present, lies under. After some
Words had past betwixt them, upon these matters, the Queen returned to the main
Point, I observe, said she, what you most insist upon, in behalf of your Queen,
and in seconding the Requests of the Nobles, you put me in Mind, that your
Queen is descended from the Blood of the Kings of England, and that I am bound
to love her by a natural Obligation, as being my near Kinswoman, which I
neither can, or will, deny; I have also made it evident to the whole World,
that, in all my Actions, I never attempted any thing against the Weal and
Tranquillity of her self and her Kingdom: Those, who are acquainted with my
inward Thoughts and Inclinations, are conscious, that though I had just cause
of Offense given, by her using my Arms, and claiming a Title to the Kingdom,
yet I could never be persuaded, but that these Seeds of Hatred came from
others, not from her self. However the case stands, I hope, she will not take
away my Crown whilst I am alive, nor hinder my Children (if I have any) to
succeed me in the Kingdom: But if any Casualty should happen to me before, she
shall never find, that I have done any thing, which may, in the least,
prejudice the Right she pretends to have to the Kingdom of England; what that
Right is, I never thought my self obliged to make a strict Disquisition into,
and I am of the same Mind still, I leave it to those who are skilful in the Law
to determine. As for your Queen, she may expect this confidently of me, that if
her Cause be just, I shall not prejudice it in the least; I call God to
witness, that next to my self, I know none that I would prefer before her; or
if the matter come to a Dispute, that can exclude her: Thou know, says she,
who are the Competitors: By what Assistance, or in hopes of what Force, can
such poor Creatures, attempt such a mighty thing? After some further Discourse,
the Conclusion was short, That it was a matter of great Weight and Moment, and
that this was the first time, she had entertained any serious Thoughts about
it, and therefore she had need of longer time to dispatch it. A few days after,
she sent for the Ambassador again; and told him,

That she extremely wondered, Why the Nobles should demand such a thing of her,
upon the first Arrival of the Queen, especially, knowing, that the Causes of
former Offenses were not yet taken away: But what, pray, do they require? That
I, having been so much wronged, should, before any Satisfaction received,
gratify her in so great a matter. This Demand is not far from a Threat: If they
proceed on in this way, let them know, that I have Force at home, and Friends
abroad, as well as They, who will defend my just Right. To which he answered,
That he had shown clearly, at first, how that the Nobility had insisted on this
hopeful Medium of Concord, partly out of Duty to their Queen, in a Prospect to
maintain her Weal, and increase her Dignity; partly out of a Desire, to
conciliate and settle public Peace and Amity. And, that they deal more plainly
with you, than with any other Prince, in this Cause, proceeds from your known
and experienced Good Will toward them, and also upon the account of their own
Safety; for, they knew they must venture Life and Fortune, if any Body did
oppose the Right of the Queen, or any War should arise betwixt the Nations, on
that ground. And therefore their Desires did not seem unwarrantable or unjust,
as tending to the eradicating the Seeds of all Discords, and the settling a
firm and solid Peace. She rejoined, If I had acted any thing which might
diminish your (...) Right, then your Demand might have been just, that (...)
was amiss might be amended: Which she absolutely refuses to do, with her
Reasons for it.
But this Postulation is wi^^out ^n Example, that I should wrap my self up in
my Winding (...) while I am alive; neither was the like ever asked of any
(...). However, I take not the good Intention of your Nobility (...), and the
rather, because it is an Evidence to me, that they have a Desire to promote the
Interest and Honor of their Queen; and I do put as great Value on their
Prudence, in providing for their own Security, and in being tender of shedding
Christian Blood, which could not be avoided, if any Faction should arise to
challenge the Kingdom; But what such Party can there be, or where should they
have Force? But to let these Considerations pass, suppose me inclinable to
assent to their Demands, do you think, I would do it, rather at the Request of
the Nobles, than of the Queen her self?

But there are many other things, which avert me from such a Transaction.
First, I am not ignorant, how dangerous a thing it is, to venture on the
Dispute. The Disceptation concerning the Right of the Kingdom, I have always
mightily avoided; for the Controversy has been already so much canvass'd in
the Mouths of many, concerning a just and lawful Marriage, and what Children
were Bastards, and what Legitimate, according as every one is addicted to this
or that Party, that, by reason of these Disputes, I have hitherto been more
backward in marrying. Once, when I took the Crown publicly upon me, I married
my self to the Kingdom, and I wear the Ring, I then put on my Finger, as a Badg
thereof; however, my Resolution stands, I will be Queen of England, as long as
I live. And when I am dead, let that Person succeed in my place, which has
most Right to it; and if That chance to be your Queen, I will put no Obstacle
in her way; but if another has a better Title, 'twere unjust to require of me,
to make a public Edict to his Prejudice. If there be any Law against your
Queen, it is unknown to me, and I have no great Delight to sift into it; but if
there should be any such Law, I was sworn at my Coronation, that I would not
change my Subjects Laws. As for your second Allegation, That the Declaration of
my Successor will knit a stricter Bond of Amity betwixt us, I am afraid rather,
it will be a Seminary of Hatred and Discontent; What, do you think I am willing
to have my Grave-Clothes always before my Eyes? Kings have this Peculiarity,
that they have some kind of Sentiments against the^^ own Children, who are born
lawful Heirs to succeed them. Thus Charles the 7 th of France somewhat
disgusted Lewis the 11 th; and Lewis the 3 d, Charles the 8 th; and of late,
Francis ill-resented Henry. And, how is it likely, I should stand affected
toward my Kinswoman, if she be once declared my Heir? Just as Charles the 7 th
was toward Lewis the 11 th. Besides, and that which weighs most with me, I
know the Inconstancy of this People; I know, how they loath the present State
of things; I know, how intent their Eyes are upon a Successor. It Is natural for
all Men, as the Proverb is, to worship rather the rising, than the setting Sun:
I have learned, That from my own Times, to omit other Examples; when my Sister
Mary sat at Helm, how eagerly did some Men desire to see Me placed in the
Throne? how Solicitous were they in advancing Me thereto: I am not Ignorant,
what Danger they would have undergone, to bring their Design to an Issue, if my
Will had concurred with their Desires: Now, perhaps, the same Men are otherwise
minded; just like Children, when they dream of Apples in their Sleep, they are
very joyful; but, waking in the Morning, and finding themselves frustrate of
their hopes, their Mirth is turned into Mourning. Thus I am dealt with by
Those, who, whilst yet I was a private Woman, wished Me so well: If I looked
upon any of Them a little more pleasantly than ordinary, they thought presently
with themselves, that, as soon as ever I came to the Throne, they should be
rewarded rather at the Rate of their own Desires, Courtiers unstable, and
selfish, in their Affections to their Prince.
than of the Service they performed for Me; but now, seeing the Event has not
answered Expectation, some of them do gape after a new change of Things, in
hope of a better Fortune. For the Wealth of a Prince, though never so great,
cannot satisfy the unsatiable desires of all Men. But if the Good Will of my
Subjects do flag toward Me; or, if their Minds are changed, because I am not
profuse enough in my Largesses; or, for some other trivial Cause, what will be
the Event, when the Malevolent shall have a Successor named, to whom they may
make their Grievances known, and, in their Anger and Pet, betake themselves?
What danger shall I then be in, when so powerful a Neighbour-Prince is my
Successor? The more Strength I add to her in ascertaining her Succession, the
more I detract from my own Security; This Danger cannot be avoided by any
Precautions, or by any Bonds of Law; yea, those Princes, who have hope of a
Kingdom offered them, will hardly contain themselves within the Bounds either
of Law or Equity. For my part, if my Successor were publicly declared to the
World, I should think my Affairs to be far from being settled and secure.

This was the Sum of what was truly acted at that Conference.

A few days after, the Ambassador asked the Queen, Whether she would return any
Answer to the Letter of the Scottish Nobility? I have nothing, said She, at
present to Answer, only I commend their Sedulity and Love to their Prince; but
the Matter is of such great weight, that I cannot so soon give a plain and
express Answer thereunto; but, when your Queen shall have done her Duty, in
confirming the ^eague she obliged her Self to ratify, then 'twill be
seasonable, to try my Affection toward Her. In the mean time, I cannot gratify
her in her Request, without diminution of my own Dignity. The Ambassador
replied, He had no Command about that Affair, nor ever had any discourse, with
his Mistress concerning it, neither did he then propound the Queen's Judgment
concerning the Right of Succession, but his Own, and had brought Reasons to
enforce it; but, as for the Confirmation of the League by her Husband, 'twas
enforced from the Queen of Scots, without the consent of Those, whom the
ratifying or disanulling thereof, did much concern; neither was it a thing of
such Consequence, as therefore to exclude Her, and her Posterity, from the
Inheritance of England; I do not inquire, said he, by Whom, When, How, by What
Authority, and for What Reason, that League was made, seeing I had no Command
to speak of any such Matter. But this I dare affirm, That though 'twere
confirmed by Her, in compliance with her Husband's desire, yet, so great a
stress depending on it, his Queen, in time, would find out some Reason or
other, why it should, and ought, to be dissolved; I speak not this (said he) in
the Name of the Queen, but my intent is to show, that our Nobility have cause
for what they do, that so, all Controversies being plucked up by the Roots, a
firm and sure Peace may be established betwixt us.

After much discourse, Pro and Con, about the League, the Queen was brought to
this, That Ambassadors should be chosen on both sides to review it, and to
regulate it, according to this Form, That the Queen of Scots should abstain
from using the Arms of England, and from the Titles of England and Ireland, The
Queen of Scots not to use the English Arms, in Queen Elizabeth's time.
as long as the Queen of England, or any of her Children, were alive. On the
other side, the Queen of England was to do nothing, neither by her Self, nor
her Posterity, which might prejudice the Queen of Scots, or impair her Right of
Succession. These were the Affairs transacted in this Embassy; which, while
they were treated of abroad, in order to settle Peace, Sedition had almost
broke out at home. There was Mass allowed to the Queen and her Family, (as I
said before) concerning which, when the Edict was published, there was one of
the Nobility which opposed it, viz. the Earl of Arran; the Queen being much
offended thereat, tho she dissembled her Anger. The next offense was, against
the Edinburgers, they use ordinarily to choose their Magistrates, September 29;
at that time, Archibald Douglas, the Sheriff, according to Custom, Proclaimed,
That no Adulterer, Fornicator, Drunkard, Mass-Monger, yea, or obstinate
Papists, after the First of September, should stay in the Town, great Penalties
being denounced against the Disobeyers thereof. When the Queen was informed
hereof, she committed the Magistrates to Prison, without hearing them, and
commanded the Citizens to choose new Magistrates, injoining them to set the
Gates open to all her good Subjects, not without the secret Indignation, and
Laughter, of some, that Flagitious Persons should be accounted such good
Subjects, and her most faithful Ministers and Servants. The Queen, finding,
that the Citizens took this Matter more patiently than she expected, by degrees
attempted greater Matters. Her Mass was before but privately celebrated,
without any great Solemnity; but, on the 1 st of October, she added all the
gaudry of Popish Offices to it. The Reformed Ministers of the Gospel took this
very grievously, and complained much of it in their Pulpits, putting the
Nobility in mind of their Duty. Hereupon, A Question stated, whether a chief
Magistrate might be compelled to do his Duty, with variou^ Opinions thereupon.
a Dispute was agitated betwixt a Few in a private House, Whether 'twere lawful
to restrain Idolatry, which was likely to spread and ruin all? or, Whether they
might, by Force, reduce the chief Magistrate to the Bounds of the Law, who set
no limits to his own Arbitrariness? The Reformed Ministers persisted constantly
in their Opinion, which had been approved in former times, That a Magistrate
might be compelled by Force to do his Duty. The Nobles were more unstedfast in
their Resolutions, either to curry favor with the Queen, or, out of hopes of
Honor and Reward; yet 'twas decreed for Them, being Superior in Number and
Greatness.

In the mean time, the Court was drowned in Vice, and loosed the Reins to all
Luxury; neither was it awakened by the News of the Moss-Troops, inhabiting the
English Borders, who, as if by permission, did freely plunder, and killed all
that opposed them. James, the Queen's Brother, was sent, with a delegated
Power, to suppress them, not so much, as many thought, to honor him, as to
expose him to danger. For, as his Power was distasteful to the Queen, so his
innocent Carriage was more offensive in reproving her for her Faults, and
stopping her Carreer to Tyranny. But God, beyond all Men's hope, prosper'd his
just endeavors; he hanged 28 of the Robbers, the rest he suppressed, either by
the sole Terror of his Name, or else, by making them give Hostages for their
good Behavior. The Queen seemed to her Self to have got some Liberty by his
Absence, for she was not well pleased with the present state of Things; partly,
by reason of the Controversies in Religion; and partly, because Matters were
managed more strictly than a young Woman, who had been educated in the
corruptest of all Courts, (as interpreting lawful Domination to be unseemly for
Princes, as if the Slavery of others was their Liberty) could well endure; so
that sometimes she was heard to speak some high discontented Words; yea, the
Foundation of Tyranny seemed to be laid: for, whereas all former Kings
entrusted their Safety only to the Nobility, she determined to have a Guard for
her Body; but could find no pretense to bring it about, The Queen designs to
have a Guard for her Body, alamode of France.
neither could she give any reasonable color for her desire, but only vain
courtly Magnificence, and the Usage of foreign Princes. The Deportment of her
Brother, the more unblameable it was, troubled her the more, in regard it cut
off any opportunity to feign Crimes, or fasten Suspicions on him; as also,
because she knew he would not endure her loose living; besides, the People were
so affected, that they would take a Guard for her Body, as a manifest Omen of
Tyranny: whereupon, her restless Mind, determining by any means whatsoever, to
effect, what she had once resolved upon, devised this Stratagem; She had a
Brother named John, an ambitious Man, and not so strictly conversationed, as
James was; he was easily persuaded to be obsequious to the Queen, and thereupon
was dearer to Her, as a fitter Instrument to raise Tumults. She communicates
her Design to him, in the absence of James, about raising a Guard; The Plot was
laid thus, There was a noise of a Tumult to be bruited abroad in the Night, as
if James Hamilton, Earl of Arran, would have surpised the Queen, who had but a
few Men to guard Her, and so have carried her to his Castle, 14 Miles off. This
story, they thought, would take with the Vulgar, both because the Queen was
averse from him, and he extremely in Love with Her, both which were publicly
known; This Tumult was made as the Plot was, and Horsemen scouted about the
Neighbour-fields, a good part of the Night; and, in the Morning, a Guard was
set at the Court-gate, some fretting, others smiling thereat; The Authors of
this project, though they knew themselves that they were not believed, yet were
mightily pleased, as secure of Men's opinions, and knowing, that none, there
present, durst oppose them. Upon this beginning, the Court ran headlong into
Wantonness and Luxury; notwithstanding, as yet, Justice was equally
administered, and Offenses punished; for the chief management of Affairs was in
James, the Queen's Brother, who, for his Equity and Valor, was dear to all; He
used, as his chief Counselor, William Maitland, a young Man of a great
Judgment, having already given large Experiments thereof, and raised up higher
Expectations, for the future. Their joint virtuous Counsels kept things quiet
at Home and Abroad, and 'twas as well, as good Men could wish; As for the
Factious, they could rather fret, than complain justly.

Amidst these things, a Debate arose in the Court, which held them play three
whole Months. They, who had been Kings or Regents in former times, had
exhausted the public Treasure, The Queen raises her Revenues out of Estates of
Ecclesiastics.
(which was never great in Scotland) the Queen was immoderately expenceful; The
Estates of the Nobility and Commonalty, in the late Tumults, were mightily
wasted; so that now, nothing remained to maintain Court-expences, but the
Ecclesiastical Revenues. Whereupon, the chief of the Clergy were sent for to
Court, and some of the prime Nobility were added to that Number, that could
either cajole them by Persuasion, or compel them by Force. After a long
Dispute, the Ecclesiastics, being overcome rather with the sense of their own
Weakness, than the weight of any Reason, the Conclusion was, That a 3 d part
should be taken off from Ecclesiastical Revenues, wherewith the Queen should
maintain Orthodox Ministers, and reserve the rest for her own use. This
Conclusion was pleasing to none: The rich Ecclesiastics grudged, that any of
their old Revenues should be pared away; and the Reformed Ministers expected no
good from the Queen: yet indeed, though a great show was made, she got no great
matter by it; For many of the old Possessors had their 3 ds forgiven; many,
both Men and Women, had the Wages for their household Service, and Expense, paid
out of it, for many Years; many got Pensions and Supports for their old Age.
That Winter, the Queen created her Brother James, Earl of Mar, with the great
assent of all good Men; For giving Honor to Virtue, James, the Queen's
Brother, made Earl of Mar, afterward of Murray.
all did praise Her; that she allowed some Grains to propinquity in Blood, none
did dispraise Her; and many thought, she had done well for the Public, in
advancing a Person to Honor, who was of an Illustrious Stock, and had so
highly deserved of his Country, that so he might preside over public Affairs,
with the greater Authority; yea, some thought, that this Favor of the Queen's
was intended to reconcile him to Her, who, she knew, was offended at the
Carriage of the Court, in his absence. Besides, he had a Wife provided for him,
Agnes Keith, Daughter of the Earl of Merch, at which Marriage, there was such
magnificent Feasting, or, rather, such immoderate Luxury, that the Minds of his
Friends were grievously offended, and his Enemies took occasion of exclaiming
and envying; and the more, because he had been so temperate, all the former
part of his Life. Not long after, Murray was bestowed upon him, instead of Mar
(which was found the ancient Right of John Erskin. Gordon an Enemy to Murray.
) Gordon, being deprived, first of Mar, then of Murray, over which Country he
had been long Governor, looked upon himself as robbed of his Patrimony, and
therefore levelled all his Designs at the Overthrow of his Corrival. And
besides, he had many other Motives thereunto. For, being far the richest Man in
all Scotland, by reason of the Rewards his Ancestors had received, for their
Service to the Crown, and also himself had augmented the Power of his Family by
ill Arts. First, he overthrew John Forbes, (as I said before) by false
Witnesses: Next, when James Stuart, Brother of James the Fifth, died without
Children, he obtained of them, who sat at Helm, the Stewardship of Murray,
whereby he carried himself as Heir, and arrived at such a pitch of Greatness,
that all his Neighbors laid down their Emulation, and and rested quietly under
his Authority, I had almost said, his Vassalages.

But whilst others submitted to him, either for fear of Danger, or Patience to
bear the Yoke, he was much troubled with the Disregard of one Man, or, as he
called it, Pride; and that was of James Macintosh, chief of a great Family
amongst the old Scots; he was born, and brought up, amongst the brute
Highlanders, used to the Prey; but yet, whether 'twere by a secret instinct of
Nature, or else by good Instructors, he arrived at that degree of Courtesy,
Modesty, and decent Behavior, that he might vie with those, who had the
greatest care used in their virtuous Education. Gordon suspected this
young-Man's Power, for, he knew, he could not use so good a Disposition, as an
Instrument for his wicked Purposes; and therefore, on a sudden, he laid Hands
on him, and cast him into Prison; but, not able to find any Crime in him worthy
of Death, it is reported, he suborned some of his Friends to persuade him, to
submit himself and his Cause to him, for That, they told him, was the only Way
to be delivered honorably out of Prison, and also to have the Friendship of so
powerful a Man, as Gordon. Thus the simple and plain-hearted Man was cheated
into his own Destruction; yet Gordon, being willing to avoid the Envy of his
Death, dealt with his Wife to bear the blame of it; she being a Woman of a
stern manly Courage, presently undertook the Matter; James Macintosh unjustly
put to death by Gordon and his Wife.
and, in the absence of her Husband, the poor innocent betrayed Young Man had
his Head cut off. His Neighbors were either so astonished at this Man's
Punishment, or else were so atoned with Gifts, that the whole Country, beyond
the Caledonians, was under his Jurisdiction alone; so that, being a Man
ambitious of Power and Glory, he took it very ill, that James, Earl of Murray,
was set up, as his Rival; and, being impatient of the present State of things,
he took all occasions to promote Disturbances, and did daily calumniate his
Proceedings in public; yea, he gave a Book, written with his own Hand, to the
Queen, wherein he accused him to affect Tyranny, but he backed it with very
slender Arguments.

On the other side of the Country, and at the same time, James Hepburn, Earl of
Bothwel, being much in debt, and very deboist, Bothwel endeavors to supplant
Murray.
was thereby excited to attempt against the said Earl of Murray; for, having
spent his Youth wantonly amongst Whores and Bauds, he was reduced to that pass,
as either to raise up a Civil War, or else to support his Poverty by some
audacious Fact: When he had considered all ways to compass his Design of
disturbing the Public Peace, he thought it his best course to set Murray and
the Hamiltons together by the Ears; his Hope seemed sure to destroy one of the
Parties thereby, no matter which. First then, he goes to Murray, and endeavors
to persuade him, to root out the Hamiltons, a Family distasteful and obnoxious
to the Queen, the whole Kingdom, and especially to himself; and he offered him
his Assistance therein, alleging, that the thing would not be unacceptable to
the Queen, in regard, besides the common ground of Hatred, that Princes bear
against their Kindred, as desirous of their Ruin, the Queen had also some
particular and just Causes of Offense; either because of his Affection to the
Evangelical Doctrine and Discipline, of which Arran was the only Assertor, for
which also he had incurred the Hatred of the Guises in France; or else, for the
hard Words he had lately given to one of the Queen's Uncles, the Marquess of
Elbeuf, then in Scotland. But Murray, being an honest conscientious Man,
scorned to commit so base a Fact. Whereupon, Hepburn went to the Hamiltons, and
offered his Service to them, to destroy Murray, whose Power they could not well
brook; he told them, That he was the only Man, who was an Obstacle to their
hopes, and an Impeder of their Concerns; if he were taken away, the Queen must
needs be in their power, whether she would or no; and the Means were facile and
easy. The Queen was then at Falkland, a Castle seated in a Town of the same
Name: There is a small Wood in the Neighborhood, wherein Deer, of the nature
of Stags (mistakenly called Fallow-Deer, by the Country) were kept and fed. The
Queen might be easily surpised, as she went thither, every day, or to any
neighbour-place, with a small Retinue, at which time, 'twere very easy to
destroy Murray, being unarmed, and suspecting no such thing, and to get the
Queen's Person into their Hands: he quickly persuaded the rest; and a time was
appointed to perform the Enterprise; only the Earl of Arran did execrate the
Wickedness, and sent Letters privately to Murray, acquainting him with the
Series of the whole Plot: Murray writes back to him, by the same Messenger; but
Arran being casually absent, the Letters were given to his Father: Whereupon, a
Consultation being held, Arran was shut up a close Prisoner, by his Father,
from whence, making his Escape by Night, he went toward Falkland: As his
Escape was made known, Horsemen were sent after him, all over the Country, to
fetch him back again, but he hid himself in a Wood, and frustrated their
Expectation, for that Night; and in the Morning, came to Falkland, where he
discovered the whole Order of the treasonable Design. Not long after, Bothwel,
and Gawin Hamilton, who had undertaken, with a Party of Men, to commit the
Fact, followed him, and, by the Queen's Command, had a Guard set upon them, as
Prisoners, in the Castle of Falkland. A Design against the Regent discovered,
by a Mistake in delivering of Letters, and the Conspirators imprisoned.
When the whole Design was thus laid open, and the Spies brought word, that the
Officers were met at the Time and Place mentioned by Arran, and that many
Horsemen were seen there; Arran, being asked to explain the Order of the Plot,
was a little disturbed in his Mind; for he mightily doted on the Queen, and was
also a great Friend of Murrays, and was desirous to gratify them: On the other
side, his Father was no bad Man, only was easily drawn into great and difficult
Projects, and he had a mind to exempt him from the Conspiracy. That Night, when
he was alone, his Mind was so divided between Piety and Love, that he was
almost besides himself; his Countenance and Speech gave evident signs of some
Perturbation of Spirit; besides, there were other Causes, which might affect
the young Man's Mind. For, whereas he had been brought up magnificently, till
that very Day, according to the Greatness of his Family; his Father, being a
covetous Man, by the persuasion of some Counselors, who nourished that Vice in
him, reduced him only to one Servant, who, before, had many Attendants. They,
who attempted the Exploit, were sent to diverse Prisons; Bothwel to
Edinburgh-Castle, Gawin to Sterlin, till their Cause was tried; Arran was sent
to St. Andrews, whither the Queen was going, to be there kept in the
Archbishop's Castle; there, in his lucid Intervals, he wrote such wise and
prudent Letters to the Queen, concerning himself and others, that many were
suspicious, he had counterfeited himself mad, only to free his Father from the
Treason: As for the rest, he constantly and sharply accused them; insomuch,
that when he was brought to the Council, and so private a Conspiracy could not
be proved by other Testimonies, he proffered to fight with Bothwel, himself.
About the same time, James Hamilton, Arran's Father, first wrote, and after
that came, to St. Andrews to the Queen, earnestly desiring her to take Surety
for his Son, Bothwel, and Gawin Hamilton, and leave them to him, but he could
not be heard. At the same time also, the Queen took Dunbarton-Castle, the
strongest in all Scotland, which Hamilton had held, Dunbarton-Castle taken by
the Queen.
ever since he was Regent. George Gordon, being an Enemy to Murray, was now
grown to a far greater hate of Hamilton, his Son's Father-in-Law, who was
accused of so manifest a Crime, and almost convicted thereof; he thought now,
he had a good opportunity to rid his Enemy out of the way, especially when Two
such noble Families were joined to his side. And first, he caused a Tumult to
be raised in the Town, then but thin of Company, by his own Friends, hoping,
that Murray would come out from the Court, to appease it by his Authority; and
then, being unarmed, he might be easily slain in the Crowd. This Project did
not succeed, as he would have it; Gordon's Plot to kill Murray, prevented.
and therefore he sent some of his Septarm'd into the Court, to do the Fact;
they entered in the Evening, and were to kill Murray, as he was returning to his
Lodging from the Queen, who was wont to keep him late at Night; that time
seemed fittest, both to commit the Fact, and to escape after it was committed.
When the Matter was discovered to Murray, he would not have believed it, unless
he had seen it with his Eyes; and therefore he got some few of his faithfullest
Friends, (to prevent all Suspicion) and took one or two of the Gordons in their
Armor, as he grop'd with his Hand in the Passage. The Matter being brought to
the Queen, Gordon was sent for, who pretended, that some of his Retinue, that
were about to go home, had armed themselves, but, upon some occasion or other,
were detained; this Excuse was rather received than approved of; and so they
departed, for that time. That Summer, by the Mediation of Ambassadors on both
sides, it was proposed, An Interview designed between the Queens of England and
Scotland at York, but disappointed.
That the Queens of Scotland and England should have an Interview at York,
there to debate many Controversies; but when they were almost ready for their
Journey, the Matter was put off till another time. The Cause of deferring the
Conference, was vulgarly bruited, because the Duke D'Aumale, one of the
Brothers of the Guises, had intercepted and opened the Letters of the English
Ambassador, then at the French Court; and that by his means principally, the
English Ship, which carried another Ambassador, was taken and plundered. For
these Wrongs and Injuries, Matters being likely to incline to a War with
France, the Queen went from St. Andrews to Edinburgh, and sent Arran thither
too, clapping him up Prisoner in the Castle. In the mean time, James, her
Brother, went to In Te^iotdale.
Hawick, a great Market Town in those Parts, and there he surpised fifty of
the chief Banditty, which were met together, not dreaming of his coming, which
struck such a Terror into the rest, throughout all that Tract, The Regent
destined to ruin, by the Popish Faction in Scotland, and the Guises in France,
for adhering to the Reformation.
that the whole Country was quieter for some time after. But, as that Fact did
procure him the Love and Reverence of good Men, so it did daily more and more
excite the Minds of the Envious to his Destruction; for, whereas Three very
potent Families had plotted his Ruin, so the Accession of the Guises made a
Fourth; for they, being willing to restore the old Popish Religion, and
knowing, they could never effect it, as long as Murray was alive, employed
their utmost Endeavors to remove him out of the way; many concurrent
Circumstances did contribute to the seeming Feasibility of the Attempt;
especially because the French, who had accompanied the Queen to Scotland, being
returned home, had related, what great Interest and Power Gordon had, how
unquiet his Mind was, and what Promises of Assistance he had made, to introduce
the Mass: All these things they aggravated in their Discourse, to the height.
Whereupon, the Matter was debated by the Papists, in the French Court; and This
Way of effecting it resolved upon; They write to the Queen, to cherish the mad
Spirit of Gordon, by large Promises, That she should rather pretend than
promise, to marry John, his Son; That so, being hoodwinked with that Hope, they
might lead him whither they pleased; and also, they gave her the Names of those
in a List, whom they would have destroyed and slain. Besides, Letters from the
Pope, and the Cardinal, were sent to her, to the same Effect; For, whereas her
Revenue was not sufficient to maintain that immoderate Luxury, to which she had
used her self, she craved some pecuniary Aid of the Pope, as if it were to
manage a War against those, who had revolted from the Roman Church: The Pope
wrote something obscurely; but the Cardinal plainly, That she should not want
Money for that War, yet so, that Those must be first slain, whose Names were
given her in a Scrole.

The Queen showed these Letters to Murray, and to the rest designed for the
Slaughter; either, because, she thought, they would have some notice of it
another way; or else, to make them believe, she was sincere toward them, as
not hiding from them any of her secret Counsels. Thereupon, all other things
being fitted for the Attempt, the Queen pretended a great desire to visit the
Parts of Scotland, which lie Northwards; and Gordon promoted her Desire, by his
forward Invitation. At last, when she came to Aberdeen, August 13. Gordon's
Wife, a Woman of a manly Spirit, and cunning, used all her Art to sift out the
Queen's Mind, both to know her secret thoughts, and also to incline them to her
own Party; she knew well enough, that the Designs of Princes are alterable by
small Moments, many times; neither was she ignorant, how the Queen stood
affected a little before, toward both of them, Murray and Gordon, too; for
She, hating them both, had sometimes deliberated privately with her self, which
of them she should destroy: First, she could not away with the Innocence of
Murray, as being a Curb to her Licentiousness; and as for Gordon, she had
experimented his Perfidiousness against her Father, Gordon (incited by the
Pope's Letters) undertakes to destroy Murray, the Regent.
first, then her Mother; and besides, she feared his Power; but the Letters of
her Uncles and the Pope, urged her rather to destroy Murray. Gordon was not
ignorant hereof; and therefore, to cast the Balance, he promised, by his Wife,
to restore the Roman Religion: The Queen was glad of that; yet there was one
Impediment, and that no great one, which kept her from assenting to him, and
that was, that she did not think it to stand with her Honor, to be reconciled
to John, his Son, (who, a few days before, had been committed to Prison for a
Tumult raised at Edinburgh, but had made his Escape,) unless he returned to
Sterlin, to be there a Prisoner of State, at least, for a few days. The Queen
insisted upon this, not so much for that Cause, which was pretended, as that
she might have her way clear, when Murray was killed, and might not be
compelled to marry, when her Lover was absent: Gordon was willing to satisfy
the Queen, yet made some scruple to give up his Son, as a Pledge, into the Hands
of a Man, who was the most adverse, of all others, to his Designs, (and that
was John, Earl of Mar, Murray's Uncle, Governor of Sterlin-Castle) especially
being uncertain, how the Queen would take the Murder, when it was committed.
Whilst these cunning Wits endeavored to impose one upon another, and were
mutually suspicious, the Queen affirming, that the Delay was not in her part,
that the Matter was not dispatched; and yet she used no Expedition, neither.
John Gordon, to show himself officious, and to watch all Events, had got
together about a Thousand of his Friends and Tenants well-arm'd, and had
quartered them in the Vicinage, near the Town. But Murray, though not guarded,
as he would, yet saw, that all these things were prepared for his Ruin, for so
he had been advertised by his Friends, both from the French and English Courts;
neither was he much confident of the Queen, yet, in the daytime, he performed
his accustomed Services in the Court; and at Night, had only one or two of his
Servants to watch in his Chamber; and being often informed of the Plots of his
Enemies against him, yet, by the Help of his Friends, he disappointed all their
Purposes, without any Noise.

About the same time, Bothwel escapes out of Prison.
Bothwel was let down by a Rope out of a Window, and so escaped from the Castle
of Edinburgh. Matters stood at a stay at Aberdeen, by reason of the
Dissimulation on both sides. And the Queen, intending to make a further
Progress, was invited by John Lesly, a Noble Man, and Client of Gordons, to his
House, about twelve Miles off; that being a lonesome Place, seemed fit to the
Gordons, to commit the Murder: But Lesly, who knew their secret Design,
interposed and dissuaded them from it, not to put that brand of Infamy on
himself and his Family, that he should betray the Queen's chief Brother, a Man
not otherwise bad, against whom he had no private Grudg, to the Slaughter. The
next night, they passed over quietly enough at Rothymay, a Town of the
Abrenethies, because, the day after, they determined to lodge at Or, Strathbogy.
Strabog, a Castle of the Gordons; so that they deferred the Murder till that
time, because there All would be in their power. In their Journey, Gordon had a
long Discourse with the Queen, and at last, he came to this, plainly to desire
the Queen to pardon his Son John, that, being a young Man, and ignorant of the
Laws, he had made his Escape out of Prison, into which he was cast for no
heinous Offense, only for a Commotion, which was not raised by him, neither.
But the Queen urged, that her Authority would be vilified, unless his Son did
return, at least for some days, into another Prison, though a larger one; that
so, his former Fault being, as 'twere, expiated, he might more creditably be
dismissed: Though it were but a slight Command, yet Gordon, who was willing to
omit no opportunity of committing the designed Fact, did obstinately refuse to
comply with it, either, because he might cast the blame of the Murder upon his
Son, if the Queen did not approve it, when 'twas done; or, because, if the
thing should be done in the Absence of his Son, though she were not unwilling
thereto, yet he should be kept as an Hostage. The Queen was so much offended at
this Stubbornness of Gordon, that, when she was almost in sight of his House,
she turned aside another way; so that the whole Plot, so wisely contrived, as
they thought, was now quite cast off the hinges, till they came to Inverness.
For there, besides Gordon's being Lord President for the Administration of
Justice, he also commanded the Queen's Castle, which was seated on an high
Hill, and commanded the Town; and besides, the whole Country thereabouts were
his Vassals. The Queen determined to lodge in the Castle, Gordon's bold Attempt
against the Queen her self,
but was not suffered by the Guards; being thus excluded, she began to fear, in
regard she was to lodge all Night in an unfortified Town; and in the mean time,
Huntly's Son had about a Thousand choice Horse now in Arms, besides a
promiscuous Multitude of the Parts adjacent. But the Queen, taking Counsel from
her present Circumstances, set a Watch at all Avenues into the Town; she
commanded the Ships, which had brought her Provisions, to ride ready in the
River, that if her Guards were beaten off, she might have a Retreat to Them. In
the midst of the Night, some Scouts was sent out by Huntly; and the first Watch
let them pass on purpose, till they came to a narrow Passage, there they were
all surrounded and taken; and, of the Highlanders, the Macintoshes Tribe, as
soon as they understood they were to fight against the Queen, forsook Huntly,
and came to her, the day after, into the Town. A great Multitude of the
Highlanders, when they heard of the Danger of their Prince, part by Persuasion,
part of their own Accord, came in, and especially the Frazers and Monroes,
valiant Families in those Countries: The Queen, now being secure against any
Force, began to besiege the Castle: The Besieged were not enough for Number,
neither was it well fortified or prepared to endure a Siege, so that it was
surrendered to her; the chief Defendants were put to Death, the rest were sent
to their own homes. The Nobility came in on all parts; upon the coming of some,
Disappointed.
others were permitted to go home; so, on the 4 th day after, with a Guard
strong enough, she returned to Aberdeen. There, being freed from Fear, she was
mightily inflamed with Hatred against Gordon, and being eager to be revenged,
she again received her Brother, outwardly, into her Favor, pretending, that
her Dependence was wholly on him: Yea, she endeavored to persuade others, that
her Safety was bound up in his Life. Hereupon, Gordon, perceiving, that the
whole Face of the Court was altered; that the Earl of Murray, lately designed
for the Slaughter, was now in great Favor; and that himself was fallen from
the top of his Hopes, into a mortal Hatred; and perceiving, he was gone
further, than would admit a Retreat and Pardon, betook himself to desperate
Counsels; he thought no Remedy better for his present Danger, than, by all
means, to get the Queen into his Power; and though, he knew, he should
grievously offend her at present by the Attempt, yet he did not despair, but
her womanly Heart might be made flexible, by Observance, Flattery, and the
Marriage of his Son, of which her Uncles were supposed to be Contrivers.

This Design he communicated to his Friends, and resolved, by some means or
other, Gordon's design against Murray's Life.
to remove Murray out of the way; for if that were done, there was none
besides, to whom the Queen would commit the Government; or, who was able to
manage it. His Spies gave him hope of the Feasibility of the thing; and amongst
others, George Gordon, Earl of Sutherland, who was a daily Attendant at Court,
and, pretending good Will to the Queen, did fish out all her Counsels, and, by
fit Messengers, acquainted Huntly therewith; yea, he did not only observe the
opportunities of Time and Place, but also promised his Assistance to effect it.
Besides, the Town was open on every side, and fit for any private Attempt; the
Inhabitants, either by Largesses won, or by Alliances joined, or with Fear
terrified, would attempt nothing to the contrary. The High-landers were
dismissed with the Earl of Murray; there were but a few, and they came too from
remote parts, whom he did not much fear to disoblige: And seeing all the
Neighbour-Countries were in his Power, the matter might be transacted without
Blood, only one Man's Death might put the Queen into his Hands, the other
Wounds might be easily cured: These things drove him on to attempt the Matter,
and when the Way to accomplish it was now fixed, some Letters of the Earl of
Sutherland and John Lesly were intercepted, which discovered the whole
Intrigue. Sutherland, upon the Discovery, fled for it, but Lesly acknowledged
his Fault, and obtained his Pardon, and ever after, as long as he lived,
performed true and faithful Service, first to the Queen, then to the King.
Huntly, who, with a great Body of Men, waited the Event of his Design, in a
place almost inaccessible by reason of the circumjacent Marshes, by the advice
of his Friends, determined to retreat to the Mountains; but many of the
Neighbor Nobility then with the Queen, being his Friends, he trusted to their
Promises, and therefore altered his Resolution, and determined to abide the
Success of a Battle in that advantageous Place; Murray had scarce an 100 Horse,
in which he could confide; but there followed him of the Nobles, then present,
James Douglas, Earl of Morton, and Patrick Lindsy; with these, he marched forth
against the Enemy, the rest were Countrymen of the Neighborhood, gathered
together, about 800, whom Huntly, for the most part, had corrupted before, and
were more likely to draw on Murray's Party to their Ruin, than give them any
Aid; yet they made mighty Boastings in words, promising, That they themselves,
without any other help, would subdue the Enemy; Others should but look on, and
be Spectators only. Some Horsemen were sent before, to keep all Passages about
the Marish, that Huntly might not escape; the rest marched softly after, and
though, the Night before, many of the Gordonians had slipped away, yet he had
still with him above 300 Men, maintaining themselves in their Posts. When
Murray came thither, he stood with his Party, in Order and Rank, on a small
Hill, where he overlooked all the Marish; the rest, as they were advancing
toward the Enemy, gave evident Tokens of Treachery, putting Boughs of Heath on
their Helmets, (for that Plant grows in abundance in those Parts) that they
might be known by the Enemy. When they came near, the Huntleans, secure of the
Success, hasten to them, and seeing the adverse Army disordered, by the
Traitors, and put to Flight, that they might more nimbly pursue them, they cast
away their Lances, and, with their drawn Swords, to terrify those Ranks that
stood, they cried out Treason, Treason, and made with great Violence at the
Enemy. The Traitors, thinking, that they should also put to Flight the standing
Party, made haste toward it; But Murray, perceiving no hope in Flight, and
that nothing remained, but to dye nobly, cried out to his Party, to hold out
their Lances, and not to let those that were running away, come in amongst
them: They, being thus unexpectedly excluded from both Wings, passed by in
great Disorder. But the Huntleans, Wonderfully (...)*
who now thought the matter ended, and the Victory sure, when they saw a Party,
though but small, standing in a terrible manner, with their Pikes forward;
they, who were making toward them, dispersedly and out of order; and could not
come to handy-strokes, by reason of the length of their Spears, being struck
with a sudden Terror, fled as swiftly, as they had pursued before. The
Revolters perceiving this change of Fortune, pressed upon them in their Flight,
and, as if willing to expiate their former Fault, what Slaughter was made that
Day, 'twas They that did it. There were 120 of the Huntleans slain, and 100
taken Prisoners; of the other Army, not a Man was lost. Amongst the Prisoners,
was The Gordons taken Prisoners.
Huntly himself, and his two Sons, John and Adam; the Father being an old Man,
corpulent and pussy, dyed under the Hands of those that took him. The rest,
late at Night, were brought to Aberdeen. Murray had appointed a Minister of the
Gospel to wait for his Return, where, in the first place, he gave Thanks to The
Regent gives solemn Thanks to Almighty God, the sole Author of his unexpected
Deliverance.
God Almighty, who, out of his Mercy, alone, beyond all Men's Expectation,
without any Strength or Wisdom of his own, had delivered him and his Men out of
so imminent a Danger; afterward, he went to the Court, where, though many did
highly congratulate him, yet the Queen gave no Sign of Joy at all, either in
Speech or Countenance.

A few days after, John Gordon was put to Death, not without the Trouble of
many, John Gordon put to Death.
for he was a manly Youth, very beautiful, and entering on the prime of his Age,
not so much designed for the Royal Bed, as deceived by the Pretense thereof;
and that which moved no less Indignation than Pity, was, that he was beheaded
by an unskilful Headsman. The Queen beheld his Death with many Tears, but, as
she was prone to conceal and counterfeit Affections, so, various Descants were
made upon her Grief and Passion; and the rather, because many knew, that her
Brother was as much hated by her, as Huntly: She pardoned Adam, because he was
but young; George the eldest Son, in this desperate case, fled from his House
to his Father-in-Law James Hamilton, there to shelter himself; or else, by his
Mediation to obtain his Pardon. As for Gordon's Followers, according to the
Degrees of their Offenses, some were fined, others banished the Land; many sent
packing into remote parts of the Kingdom, that they might make no more
Commotions at home: Those, who lighted upon powerful Intercessors, were
remitted their Offense, and taken into former Grace and Favor: Matters being
thus settled, or, at least, appeased for the present, the rest of the Winter
was spent in Peace.

The 26 th day of November, Bothwel outlawed.
Bothwel, who had escaped out of Prison, was, by a Proclamation, commanded to
render himself again, and in Default thereof, he not obeying, was declared a
public Enemy. When the Queen was returned from Aberdene to St. Iohnston's,
James Hamilton came to her, to beg Pardon for George Gordon, his Son-in-Law; he
received an Answer not wholly severe, yet was forced to deliver up his
Son-in-Law, who was sent Prisoner to Dunbar, and, the next Year after, which
was 1563, on the 7 th of the Calends January 26.
of February was brought to Edinburgh, there condemned for Treason, and sent
back to Dunbar.

'Twas about this time, that there came forth a Proclamation, under a pecuniary
Mulct, That Lent observed on a Politic, not Religious, Account.
no Flesh should be eaten in Lent; The pretense was, not any thing of Religion,
but civil Advantage only: The Archbishop of St. Andrews, because he did not
forbear to hear, and say, Mass, after the Edict made at the coming in of the
Queen, was committed Prisoner to the Castle of Edinburgh; Others, guilty of the
same Fault were punished, but slightly, yet were threatened to be more severely
treated, if they offended in the like sort, again.

Now the time of the Parliament drew near, which was summoned to be held the 20
th day of May, where the Queen, with the Crown on her Head, and her Royal
Robes, went in great Pomp to the Parliament House, a new Spectacle to many, but
that Men had been accustomed to bear the Government of Women in her Mother's
and Grandmother's Days. In that Assembly, some Statutes were made in Favor of
the Reformed, and some Coyners were punished; the rest of the Summer the Queen
spent in Athol, in the Sport of Hunting.

At the end of Autumn, Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lennox, return^ out of France,
after twenty two Years Exile.
Matthew Stuart Earl of Lennox, by the Queen's Leave, returned to Scotland,
having been unworthily deserted by the King of France, the 22 d Year after his
Departure, as I said before: And the next Year, which was 1564, in the Month of
January, at a Convention of the Estates, held almost on purpose for that very
thing, his Banishment was remitted, and his Goods restored, the Queen seconding
that Remission with many favorable Words, and repeating the many great
Services the Earl had done her in her very Infancy, she having been delivered
out of her Enemies Hand, and advanced to her Throne, by his Means. Afterward,
Henry Stuart his Son, comes out of England, and is in great Favor with the
Queen.
Henry, his Son, came out of England into Scotland, on the 12 th of February,
having there obtained a Convoy for three Months. This Young Man, being of an
high Lineage, and very beautiful, the Son of her Aunt, the Queen of Scots
received very courteously, and delighting daily in his Society, the common
Speech was, That she would marry him; neither was the Nobility against it,
because they saw many advantages might redound to Britain, by that Marriage, if
it might be made by the Queen of England's Consent. Both of them were in an
equal Degree of Consanguinity from her, and she was so far from being against
it, that she was willing rather to seem the Author of it, and so to lay some
Obligation upon her, in making the Match; besides, she thought it for her
Advantage, to humble the Power of her Kinswoman, by this condescending
Marriage, that it might not swell beyond what was safe and fit for Neighbors.
But when all was concluded on, there fell out a Business which retarded all,
and turned every thing, as it were, upside down; to make it plain, I must fetch
the Original Story, a little higher.

There was one The Story of David Rize.
David Rize, born at Turein in Savoy, his Father being honest, but poor, got a
mean Livelihood for himself and Family, by teaching the Elements of Music;
and, having no other Patrimony to leave his Children, he made them all, of both
Sexes, skilful Musicians. David was one of them, who, being in the prime of his
Youth, and having a sweet Voice, was, by his Skill in Music, erected to the
hope of a better Fortune; he went to In Pr^vence, situated on the
Mediterranean-Sea, at the foot of the Alps, which divides France from Italy,
near Villa-Franca.
Nice, to the Court of the Duke of Savoy, which Place that Duke had newly
obtained; but, meeting with no Entertainment there, answerable to his hopes,
contriving every way how to relieve himself in his Penury, he light upon
Morettius, who, by the Dukes Command, was then preparing for a Voyage to
Scotland; him he followed into Scotland; but, Morettius being a Man of no great
Estate, and looking upon his Service as unnecessary and useless, he resolved to
stay in Scotland, and try his Fortune there, especially because he had heard,
that the Queen was delighted in Music, and was not ignorant of the Grounds of
it, her self. Whereupon, to make way to her Presence, he first dealt with her
Musicians, of which many were French, to admit him into their Society, which
they did; and having played his part once or twice, was liked very well,
whereupon he was made one of their Set and Company, and he so complied with the
Queen's Humor, that, partly by flattering her, and partly by undermining
others, he grew into high Favor with her, and into the extreme Hate of his
Fellows; neither was he content with this favorable blast of Fortune, but he
despised his Equals too, and, by sundry Criminations, worm'd them out of their
Places; then he rose higher, and began to treat about Matters of State, and, by
degrees, was made Secretary; and, by that means, had opportunity of private
Converse with the Queen, apart from others.

The sudden advance of this Man, from a low, and almost beggarly, Estate, to
such a Power, Wealth and Dignity, afforded Matter of Discourse to the People;
His Fortune was above his Virtue; and his Arrogance, Contempt of his Equals,
and Contention with his Superiors, were above his Fortune. This Vanity and
Madness of the Man was much increased and nourished by the Flattery of the
Nobility; who sought his Friendship, courted him, admired his Judgment, walked
before his Lodgings, observing his Ingress and Egress: But Murray alone, who
had no Dissimulation in his Heart, was so far from fauning on him, that he gave
him many a sour look, which troubled the Queen, as much as David himself; But
he, on the other side, to uphold himself in his Station against the Hatred of
the Nobles, did apply himself, with great Adulation, to the young Rize his
Politic Court to Henry Stuart, Lord Darnly.
Gentleman, who was to be the Queen's Husband; so that he came to be so
familiar with him, as to be admitted to his Chamber and Bedside, and to secret
Conference with him; where he persuaded him, out of his unwary Credulity and
Forwardness to compass his Desires, that he was the chief occasion to make the
Queen to cast her Eye upon him: Besides, he cast in Seeds of Discord betwixt
him and Murray, every day, as knowing, that if he were removed, he should pass
the residue of his Life without Affront or Disturbance.

There was now much talk abroad, not only of the Queen's Marriage with Henry,
and his secret recourse to her; but also of the too great Familiarity betwixt
her and David Rize: Murray, who, by his plain downright advice to his Sister,
got nothing, but her Hatred, resolved to leave the Court, that so he might not
be thought the Author of what was acted there. And the Queen was willing
enough, that so severe a Supervisor of her Actions should withdraw, especially
in a Season, whilst she was strengthening the contrary Faction: For she recalled
those which were banished, Bothwel, from France; George Gordon, Earl of
Sutherland, from Flanders; the other George Gordon, Son to the Earl of Huntly,
she delivered out of Prison, and restored to his former Place and Dignity. When
Bothwel was returned from France, Murray accuses him of the Treasonable
Practices he had lately committed against him: Some of those Noblemen, and
Gentlemen, who were his Familiars in France, were Witnesses against him. The
Matter was clear, foul, and heinous. A Day was appointed for the Trial, but the
Queen first dealt earnestly with her Brother, to desist from the Prosecution;
which he refused, judging his Credit to be much at stake, which way soever the
balance did incline, in the Case. What did the Queen do next, but wrote Letters
to many of the Nobility, not to appear at the time appointed? and as Alexander,
Earl of Glencarn, Murrays intimate Friend, was passing by Sterlin, she sent for
him, out of the way, to her; yet all good Men were so well agreed in the Case,
that Bothwel, Bothwel avoids his Trial.
being precondemn'd in his own Conscience, and moved with the general
detestation of the wicked Attempt, durst not abide the Trial. This favor of
the People to Murray, did so inrage the Queen's Mind against him, that she
hastened his, long before designed, End, and the Manner to accomplish it, was
This: Murray was to be sent for to Perth, where the Queen was with a few
Attendants, there Darnly was to discourse him, and, in the Conference, they all
knew, he would speak his mind freely; and then a Quarrel would arise, upon
which David Rize was to give him the first blow, then the rest were to Wound
him to Death. Murray was made acquainted with this Conspiracy by his Friends at
Court, yet, come what would, he resolved to go; but, as he was on his Journey,
being again advised by Patrick Ruven, he turned aside to his Mother's house,
near Loch Levin, and, being troubled with a Lask, excused himself and staid
there. Thither some of his Friends came to visit him, upon which, a Report was
presently spread, that he staid there, to intercept the Queen and Darnly in
their Return to Edinburgh; whereupon Horsemen were sent out, but they
discovered no Men in Arms, or sign of any Force, yet the Queen made such haste,
and was so fearful in this Journey, as if some great Danger had been at hand.

The Marriage was now at hand, and a great part of the Nobility called together
at Sterlin, That so the Queen might countenance her Will and Pleasure with some
pretense of Public Consent. Most of those, they sent for, were such, as, they
knew, would easily give their Assent; or else, that durst not oppose: Many of
those, so congregated, assented to the Motion, Provided always, that no
Alteration should be made in the then established Religion; but the Most did it
to gratify the Queen, only Andrew Stuart, of Ochiltry, openly professed, that he
would never give his Consent to the admission of a Popish King. As for Murray,
he was not averse from the Marriage, (for he was the first Adviser, that the
young Man should be called out of England) but he foresaw, what Tumults it
would occasion, if it were celebrated without the consent of the Queen of
England; besides, he promised to procure her Consent, that so all things might
go on favorably, Provision being made about Religion; but, perceiving, that
there would be no freedom of Debate in that Convention, he chose rather to be
absent, than to declare his Opinion, which might prove destructive to himself,
and no way advantageous to the Commonwealth.

Moreover, there was a Question started and discoursed, amongst the Vulgar,
Various Disputes concerning the Queen's marriage with Darnly.
Whether the Queen, upon her Husbands death, might not marry any other Man,
whom she pleased? Some were of Opinion, That a Queen might have the same
freedom, as Men, even of the Commonalty, have; Others, on the contrary,
affirming, That the Case was different, in reference to Heirs of Kingdoms,
where at once, an Husband was to be taken to a Wife, and a King to be given to
the People; and That it was far more Equitable, that the People should provide
an Husband for one young Queen, than that a young Queen should choose a King for
all the People.

In the Month of July, came an Ambassador from England, who declared, That his
Mistress did much admire, That, seeing they were both equally allied to Her,
they should precipitate so great an Affair without acquainting her therewith;
and therefore She earnestly desired, that they would stay a while, and weigh
the thing a little more seriously, to the great Advantage, probably, of both
Kingdoms. This Embassy effected nothing. Whereupon Sir Nicholas Throgmorton was
sent by the Queen of England to tell Lennox and his Son, that they had a Convoy
from her, to return at a set Day, and that Day was now past; and therefore, she
commanded them to return, which if they did not, they were to be banished, and
their Goods Confiscate. They were not at all terrified with the Commination;
but persisted in their purpose. In the mean time, the Queen being sensible,
that it would seem a very incongruous Match, if She, who was lately the Wife of
a Great King, and besides, the Heir of an Illustrious Kingdom, should marry a
private young Man, who had no Title of Honor conferred upon him, she made an
Edict, proclaiming Darnly Duke of Rothsea, and Earl of Ross. Moreover, the
Predictions of wizardly Women, in both Kingdoms, did contribute much to hasten
the Marriage, who prophesied, that, if it were Consummate before the end of
July, it foretold much future Advantage to them Both; if not, much Reproach and
Ignominy. Besides, Rumors were spread abroad of the Death of the Queen of
England, and the Day mentioned, before which she should die. Which Prediction
seemed not so much to divine things, as to declare a Conspiracy of her Subjects
against her. This also added much to the Queen's haste, she knew, her Uncles
would be averse from the Marriage; and, if it were longer delayed, she feared,
they would cast in some Remora, to disturb the Thing, now almost finished.

For, when the secret Decree and Resolution was made, to carry on the Holy War
through all Christendom, and Guise was appointed General of the League to
extirpate the Reformed Religion, hereupon he nourished high and ambitious
Hopes, and therefore determined, by his Sisters Daughter, so to trouble Britain
with domestic Tumults, that they should not be able to Aid their Friends beyond
Sea. And David, who could then do most with the Queen, urged, That the Marriage
would be highly advantageous to all Christendom, because Henry Darnly, and his
Father, were stiff Maintainers of the Popish Religion, were very Gracious in
both Kingdoms, allied to great Families, and had large Clanships under them.
This, being long debated, was at last carried; For, he knew, That if the
Marriage were made by the Consent of the Queen of England, and the Nobility of
Scotland, that he should lose two great Points; One, that he should be no ways
ingratiated, as before; and the Other, that Viz. Reformed.
Religion would be secured. But if the Queen adhered to the Council of Trent,
then he promised Honors, Ecclesiastical Dignities, heaps of Money, and
unrivaled Power, to himself; So that, turning every Stone, He at last
procured, that the Marriage should be hastened. The Scots not being much for
it, and the English very much against it.

Note, That the Name of Henry is joined with Mary, in the Title, tho before
their Marriage, is accounted for at the Close of the Catalogue of the Scottish
Kings, prefixed before the Body of this History.

Mary and Henry Stuart, the CVIIth Queen and King. HEnry Stuart was married to
Mary Stuart, July 28 th; The Queen actually Marries Henry, Lord Darnly.
and O Yes being made, Proclamation thereof was publicly read, with the
applause of the Multitude, God Save Henry and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland,
and, the day after, they were proclaimed in like Manner, by an Herald at
Edinburgh. This Matter did grievously offend the Nobility, and the Commons
also; yea, some fretted and openly stormed, That 'twas a thing of the worst
Example, that ever was. For, To what purpose was it, to call a Council about
making a King; and never to ask their Advice; nor to comply with their
Authority, but to set up an Herald instead of a Senate; and a Proclamation for
a Statute of Parliament, or Order of Council? so that it was not (said they) a
Consultation, but an Essay rather, how the Scots would bear the yoke of
Tyranny. The absence of so many Nobles increased the Suspicion: The chief
Nobility were away, James Duke of Castle-herault, Which disgusts many of the
Nobility.
Gilespy Earl of Argyle, James Earl of Murray, Alexander Earl of Glencarn,
Andrew Earl of Rothes, and many others of Rich and Noble Families. Heralds
were sent to them to command them to come in, which they not doing, were
banished, and went most of them into Argyle, and their Enemies were recalled to
Court. The King and Queen having got as much Force together, as they thought
were sufficient to subdue the Rebels, with 4000 Men came to Glasgow. The Rebels
kept themselves at Pasley, where various Consultations were held, according to
the Disposition of the Parties. The King and Queen sent an Herald at Arms to
have the Castle of Hamilton surrendered to them; which not being done, they
prepare themselves for the Fight. The contrary Faction was at variance one with
another, and divided into several Opinions. The Hamiltons, who had the greatest
Power in those Parts, were of Opinion, That no firm Peace could be made, till
the King and Queen were Both taken out of the way; as long as they were safe,
nothing could be expected, but new Wars, continual Plots, and a counterfeit
Peace, worse than an open War, private Men, (said they) may forget Injuries
offered them, being weary of prosecuting them; yea, sometimes they were
recompensed with great Advantages; but the Wrath of Princes was not to be
quenched, but by Death only. But Murray and Glencarn, who understood, that
their discourse was not founded on the Good of the Public, but their own
private Advantage, (for, upon the Queen's death, they were the next Heirs to
the Crown) did equally abhor the Princes death, and Hamiltons Government too,
which they had lately experienced, to be Avaritious and Cruel; so that, They
were for milder Counsels, and, in regard, 'twas a civil Dissension, wherein, as
yet, there was no blood shed; the Dispute having been hitherto managed by Votes
not Arms, they thought it fit, if possible, to end it by an honest Agreement.
Hereunto, they thought, many in the King's Army would hearken, as being
desirous of Peace, and would not be wanting to plead for Those, that, in
Defense of their Liberties, were enforced to take up Arms. As for the King and
Queen, They, being yet young, might not perhaps be so Provident; and, for their
Parts, they had not yet so far transgrest, as to endanger the Commonwealth; as
for smaller Injuries, which affected their Names and Reputations only, 'twas
fitter they were cured by other Remedies, than Death. For, they remembered,
'twas an old Caution transmitted from their Ancestors, A Politic Maxim, both
Prudent, and also Equitable.
for Imitation, That, in the Lives and Manners of Princes, their hidden Vices
ought to be concealed; their doubtful Ones taken in the best sense; and their
open Ones, so far born with, as they did not endanger the Ruin of the Public.
This Opinion pleased the most, and the rest of the Hamiltons acquiesced
therein, and resolved to be quiet, only James, chief of their Family, with 16
Horse, remained with the Nobility; who, being lessened by the recess of the
Hamiltons, were not able to give Battle to the Enemy, nor yet to break through,
each to his own Clan, and therefore they yielded to the Times, and came that
Night to A Town standing on the West Side of Clyde, 2 Miles above Bothwel-Bridg.
Hamilton, and the next Day to Edinburgh, to consult how to manage the War:
But, in regard the Castle which commanded the Town, continually played upon
them, and their Friends could not come in so soon from remote Parts, as was
requisite; and moreover, the King and Queen were reported to be near them with
their Forces, by the great Persuasions and Promises of John Maxwel of Herreis,
they directed their Course toward Dumfreiz. The King and Queen returned back
to Glascow, and left the Earl of Lennox, their Lieutenant, in the Country
toward the South-West, they themselves went afterward to Sterlin, and thence
into the middle of Fife. They made the greatest part of the Nobility take an
Oath, That if any Commotion arose from England, they would faithfully oppose
it; the rest were punished, some by Fine, some by Banishment. The Goods of
those, who fled into England, wherever they could find them, were seized upon,
and they appointed Commissions of Oyer and Terminer to be held in all Counties,
The Nobles, that rose up in Arms, are quelled.
to enquire into the Remains of the Rebellion.

On the 9 th of October, they drew forth their Army out of Edinburgh, and
marched toward Dumfriez. Maxwel, who, till that time, had pretended to be
highly of the Party, which was against the King, thinking it now a fit
opportunity to cater for himself, went forth to meet them, as if he would have
interceded for Pardon, for the whole Party. He dealt with them, to have part of
his Father-in-Laws Estate, which he had a great mind to have bestowed upon him;
they looked upon him, as an active subtle Man, fit for Counsel and Business,
and granted his Request; whereupon, he returned to the Rebels, and told them,
he could do them no good; and therefore they must all shift for themselves:
England was near at hand, if they would retire thither, after he had settled
his Affairs at home, he would follow them, and live and die with the Party; In
the interim, he got a thousand Pounds from Murray; upon the account of Money,
which, he alleged, he had expended in listing some Horse; For, being commanded
to raise some few Troops of Horse, he caused all his Domestics to appear as if
they had been Soldiers, formally listed. The Rebels were terrified at the
coming of the King and Queen, and at Maxwels revolt from them; So that the King
and Queen, hereupon, did what they pleased; They drove away most of the Leaders
of the Faction, and the rest were intent on the Event of their Danger, so that
about the end of October they returned to Edinburgh, and all things were quiet
in Scotland, till the beginning of the next Spring.

A Convention of all the Estates of the Kingdom was Indicted to be held in
March, that so the Goods of those who were banished might be Confiscate, Rize
persuades the Queen to cut off some of the Scottish Nobility, and to entertain
Foreigners, as a Guard to her Person.
their Names struck out of the Roll of the Nobility, and their Armorial
Ensigns torn in Pieces; neither of which the Kings of Scotland can lawfully
do, without an Act of Parliament. In the interim, David, perceiving the Court
to be empty of Nobility, and thinking it an opportunity to show and declare the
Excessiveness of his Power, did suggest severe Counsel to the Queen, daily
pressing her to cut off some of the chief of the Faction; if a few of them
(said he) were executed, the rest would be quiet; and in regard, he thought,
the Queen's Guard, being Scots-men, would not easily consent to the cruel
Murder of the Nobility, he was very intent to have them thrown out of their
Places, and to introduce Foreigners into their Rooms, (a Project, that is wont
to be the beginning of all Tyranny;) first, Mention was made of sending for
some Germans over for that Service; because that Nation were highly faithful to
their Princes: But, when David had considered seriously with himself, he
thought it more conducive to his Interest to have Italians; first, because,
being his Countrymen, he presumed, they would be more at his Devotion; next,
that being Men of no Religion, they would be fitter to make Disturbances, so
that, he thought, they might easily be induced to venture upon any Design,
Right or Wrong; for, being wicked and indigent Persons, born and bred up under
Tyrants, used to War, and being far from their own home, they cared not what
became of Britain, and therefore seemed most Proper to attempt Innovations.
Hereupon, Soldiers of Fortune were privately sent for out of Flanders and
other Countries of the Continent; but they were to come in by Piecemeal, as
'twere, One by One, and at several times, too, that the Design might not be
discovered: It would be more dangerous (said he) to offend any one of those
Ruffians, than the Queen her Self.

The Queen, after her hasty Marriage, is as soon alienated from the King, who,
at the instigation of Rize, is plausibly dismissed from Court.
But, as David's Power and Authority, with the Queen, did daily increase, so the
King grew Cheaper with her every Day; for, as She had been rashly precipitate
in making the Marriage, so She as soon repented, and gave manifest Tokens of
her alienated Mind. For, as presently after the Marriage was celebrated, she
had publicly Proclaimed him King by an Herald, without the consent of the
States, and afterward, in all her Mandates till that time, the King and Queens
Name were expressed, now she changed the Order, keeping both Names in, but
setting her own, First. At length, the Queen, to deprive her Husband of all
opportunity to do Courtesies for any, found fault with him; that, whilst he was
busy in Hawking and Hunting, many State-Matters were acted unseasonably; or
else, were wholly omitted; and therefore it would be better, that She might
subscribe her Name for them Both; and, by this means, he might enjoy his
Pleasure, and yet no public Business be retarded. He was willing to gratify
her in every thing, and yielded to be dismissed upon such frivolous Grounds, that
so, being remote from the Council and Privity of public Affairs, the
Obligation for all Boons might rebound to the Queen her self. For, she thought
thus with her self, that if her Husband's Favor could do no good Offices for
any, and his Anger were formidable to none, he would, by Degrees, grow to be
despised by all; and to increase the Indignity, David was substituted, with an
Iron Seal, to impress the King's Name on Proclamations. He, thus fraudulently
cheated out of public Business, lest he might also prove an Interrupter of
their private Pleasures, in a very sharp Winter, was sent away to Or, Pebils.
Pebly, with a small retinue, far beneath the Dignity of some private Persons,
for a Prey rather than Recreation. At the same time, there fell such a quantity
of Snow, that, the Place not being very Plentiful, and besides, troubled with
Thieves; He, that was always bred up at Court, and used to a liberal Diet, was
in great hazard of wanting Necessaries, unless the Bishop of the Orcades had
casually come thither; for he, knowing the scarcity of the Place, brought him
some Wine, and other Provisions, for his use.

The Queen was not content to advance David, and, as 'twere, to show him to the
People, from such an obscure Original, on the account before mentioned; but she
advised another way, how to cloth him with domestic Honor: For, whereas the
Queen had, for some Months before, permitted more Company than was usual to sit
with her at her Table; that so, in the Crowd, David's place might be less
envied; by this show of Popularity, she thought, to gain the point, that the
unaccustomedness of the Sight would, by the Multitude of Guests and daily
Usage, be somewhat alleviated; and so Men's high Stomachs, by degrees, be inured
to bear any thing. At last it came to this, That but he and one or two more fat
at Meat with Her; and, that the straitness of the Room might take off something
from the envy of the thing, sometimes she would eat her Junkets in a small
Parlor, sometimes at David's own Lodgings. But the Way she thus took to abate,
did but increase, the Reflections, for it maintained Suspicions, and gave
occasion to odd Discourses. Men's Thoughts were now inclined to the worst, and
it served to inflame them, That in Housholdstuff, in Apparel, and in the Number
of brave and stately Horses, he exceeded even the King himself; and it made the
matter look the worse, that all this Ornament did not credit his Face, but
rather his Face spoiled all this Ornament.

But the Queen, not being able to amend the Faults of Nature, endeavored, by
heaping Wealth and Honor upon him, to raise him up to the degree of the
Nobles, that she might cover the Meanness of his Birth, and the Defects of his
Body too, with the Vail of his lofty Promotions. But he was to be advanced by
degrees, lest he might seem to be but a poor Mercenary Senator. The first
Attempt was made, on the account of a piece of Land near Edinburgh, the Scots
call it A Castle on North-Esk, two Miles above Dalk^ith in Mid-Lothian, with
the demesnes thereof.
Malvil: The Owner of the Land, his Father-in-Law, and others, that were best
able to persuade him, were sent for, and the Queen deals with the present
Owner, to part with his Possessions; and she desired his Father-in-Law, and
Friends, to persuade him to it: But this Matter not succeeding, the Queen took
the Repulse, as an Affront to her; and, which was worse, David took it very
heinously, also. These Things being noised abroad, the Commonalty did bewail
the sad State of Affairs, and expected that things would grow worse, if Men,
eminent for their Families, Estates and Credits, should be outed of their
ancient Patrimonies, to gratify the Lust of a beggarly Varlet; yea, many of the
elder Sort called to mind, and told others of that time, when Cockburn wickedly
slew the King's Brother; and, of a Stone-cutter, was made Earl of Mar, which
raised up such a Fire of Civil War, that could not be extinguished, but by the
Death of the King, and almost the Destruction of the Kingdom. These things were
spoken openly, but Men in private did mutter much more, (as it uses to be in
Matters not very creditable): Yet the King would never be persuaded to believe
it, unless he saw it with his own Eyes; so that, one time, hearing, The King,
being (...) made sensible of Rizes scandalous Familiarity with the Queen,
resolves to destroy him.
that David was gone into the Queen's Bedchamber, he came to a little Door, of
which he always carried the Key about him, and found it bolted in the inside,
which it never used to be; he knocked, no body answered; whereupon, conceiving
great Wrath and Indignation in his Heart, that Night he could not sleep. From
that time forward, he consulted with some few of his Servants, (for he durst
trust but a few, many of them having been corrupted by the Queen, and put upon
him, rather as Spies of his Actions, than Attendants on his Person) how to rid
David out of the way; they approved his Design, but could not find out a
probable Way to effect it; that Consultation had been managed for some days,
when other of his Servants, who were not of the Privacy, suspected the matter,
and there being evident signs of it, they acquainted the Queen therewith, and
told her, They would bring her to the place where they were, and they were as
good as their Words; they observed and watched the opportunity, when others
were shut out, and the King had only his Confidents with him; the Queen, as if
she were passing through his Chamber to her own, surprised him, with his
Partisans; whereupon, she inveighed against him most bitterly, and highly
threatened his Domestics, telling them, all their Plots were in vain, she knew
all their Minds and Actions, and would remedy them well enough, in time.

Matters being brought to this pass, the King acquaints his Father with his sad
Condition; they both concluded, That the only Remedy for the present Malady,
was, to reconcile that part of the Nobility which were present, and to recall
those that were absent; but great haste was required in the thing, because the
Day was near at hand, wherein the Queen resolved to condemn the Nobles that
were absent, she having Indicted a Convention of the Estates for that purpose,
against the Wills of the French and English Ambassadors, who interceded in the
Case: For they knew, that the Accused had committed no such heinous Offense;
and besides, they foresaw the Danger that would ensue.

About the same time, the Queen of England sent her a very large and obliging
Letter, full of prudent Advice, in reference to the present Estate of Scotland,
endeavoring to incline her Kinswoman, from a wrathful, to a reconcilable
Temper. The Nobility knew, that such Letters were come, and they guessed at
What the Contents were; and thereupon, the Queen counterfeited a civiller
Respect to them than ordinary, and began to read them in the presence of many
of them; The Peremptoriness of Rize.
when she was in the middle, David stood up, and bid her, Read no more, she had
read enough, she should stop; that Carriage of his seemed to them rather
arrogant than new, for they knew, how imperiously he had carried it toward her
heretofore, yea, and sometimes he would reprove her more sharply, than her own
Husband ever durst do.

At that time, the Cause of the Banished was hotly disputed in the
Parliament House; some, to gratify the Queen, would have the Punishment, due to
Traitors, to be passed upon them; others contended, that they had done nothing
worthy to be so severely treated. In the mean time, David went about to all of
them, one by one, to feel their pulses, what each ones Vote would be concerning
the Exiles, if he was chosen Or, President.
Speaker, by the rest of the Convention; he told them plainly, the Queen was
resolved to have them condemned, and 'twas in vain for any of them to contend
against it; and besides, he would be sure to incur the Queen's Displeasure
thereby. His Design in this, was, partly to confound the weaker Spirits betwixt
Hope and Fear, and partly to exclude the more resolved out of the number of the
Judges select, or Lords of the Articles; or, at least, that the major Part
might be of such a Gizard, as would please the Queen. This audacious Improbity
of so mean a Fellow, was feared by some, and hated by all. Whereupon, the King,
by his Father's Advice, sent for James Douglas, and Patrick Lindsy, his
Kinsmen, one by the Father, the other by the Mother's side; they advise with
Patrick Ruven, an able Man both for Advice and Execution, but he was so weakened
with a lasting Disease, that, for some Months, he could not rise out of his
Bed; however, they were willing to trust him, amongst some few others, in a
matter of so great Concernment, both by reason of his great Prudence, and also
because his Children were Cousin-Germans to the King. The King was told by
them, what a great Error he had committed before, in suffering his Kinsmen and
Friends to be driven from Court, in favor of such a base Rascal, as Rize; yea,
he himself did, in effect, thrust them out from the Court with his own Hands,
and so had advanced such a contemptible Mushroom, that now he himself was
despised by him; they had also much other Discourse concerning the State of the
Public: The King was quickly brought to acknowledge his Fault, and to promise
to act nothing for the future, without the Consent of the Nobility.

But those wise and experienced Counselors thought it not safe to trust the
verbal Promises of an Uxorious young Man, as believing, that he might, in time,
be enticed by his Wife, to deny this Capitulation, to their certain Ruin; and
therefore they drew up the Heads of their Contract in Writing, to which he
willingly and forwardly subscribed: The Heads were, For the establishing
Religion, Articles of Agreement betwixt the King and the Nobles, for the
destruction of Rize, etc.
as 'twas provided for at the Queen's Return to Scotland; To reduce the
Persons, lately banished, because their Country could not well want their
Service; To destroy David, for as long as he was alive, the King could not
maintain his Dignity, nor the Nobility be in Safety. They all set their Hands
to this Schedule, wherein the King professing himself the Author of the
Homicide, they resolved presently to attempt the Fact, both to prevent the
Condemnation of the absent Nobles, and also, lest Delay might discover their
Design. And therefore, when the Queen was at Supper, in a narrow private Room,
the Earl of Argyle's Wife and David sitting with her, as they were wont, and
there were but a few Attendants, for the Room would not hold many, James
Douglas, Earl of Morton, with a great number of his Friends, were walking in an
outward Chamber, their faithful Friends and Vassals were commanded to stay
below in the Yard, to quiet the Tumult, if any should be. The King comes out of
his own Chamber, which was below the Queen's, and goes up to her by a narrow
pair of Stairs, which were open to none, but himself; Patrick Ruven followed
him armed, with but four or five Companions, at most; they entered into the
Closet, where they were at Supper, and the Queen, being something moved at that
unusual Appearance of armed Men, and also perceiving Ruven, in an uncouth
posture, and lean by reason of his late Disease, and yet in his Armor, asked
him, What was the matter? for the Spectators thought, that his Fever had
disturbed his Head, and put him besides himself. He commanded David to rise,
and come forth, for the Place, he sat in, was not fit for him; the Queen
presently rose, and sought to defend him by the interposal of her Body, but the
King took her in his Arms, and bid her to be of good cheer, they would do her
no hurt, only the Death of that Villain was resolved on; they haled David out
into the next, Rize haled from the Table, as he was at Supper with the Queen,
and slain.
then, into the outer Chamber; there those that waited with Douglas, made an
end of him with many Wounds, which was against the Mind of all those who
conspired his Death, for they resolved to hang him up publicly, as knowing, it
would be a grateful Spectacle to all the People.

Damiot's warning to Rize, to get him packing out of Scotland, which he
scornfully rejected.
There went a constant Report, that one John Damiot, a French Priest, counted a
Conjurer, told David once or twice, that, now he had feathered his Nest, he
should be gone, and withdraw himself from the Envy of the Nobles, who would be
too hard for him: And that he should answer, The Scots were greater Threatners
than Fighters; he was also told a little before his Death, that he should take
heed of a Bastard; to which he replied, That as long as he lived, no Bastard
should have so much Power in Scotland, as that he need fear it; for, he
thought, his Danger was predicted from Murray, but the Prophecy was either
fulfilled, or eluded, by George Douglas's giving him his first Blow, who was
the base-begotten Son to the Earl of Angus; after he had began, then every one
rushed in, to strike him, either to revenge their own particular Grief, or the
public Concern. Hereupon, a Tumult arose all over the House, and the Earls of
Huntly, Athol, and Bothwel, who were at Supper in another part of the Palace,
were rushing out, but they were kept within their Chamber, by those who guarded
the Courts below, and had no harm done them. Ruven went out of that Privy-room
into the Queen's Bedchamber, where, not being able to stand, he sat down, and
called for something to drink; Whereupon, the Queen fell upon him, with such
Words, as her present Grief and Fury suggested to her, calling him a Perfidious
Traitor, and asked him, How he durst be so bold, as to speak to her, sitting,
whereas she her self stood; he excused it, as not done out of Pride, but
Weakness of Body; Ruven's memorable Speech to the Queen, on the occasion of
Rize's Death.
but advised her, That in managing the Affairs of the Kingdom, she would rather
consult the Nobility, who had a Concern in the Public, than vagrant Rascals,
who could give no Pledge for their Faithfulness, and who had nothing to lose,
either in Estate or Credit; neither was the Fact, then committed, without a
Precedent: That Scotland was a Kingdom bounded by Laws, and was never wont to
be governed by the Will and Pleasure of one Man, but by the Rule of the Law,
and the Consent of the Nobility; and if any former King had done otherwise, he
had smarted severely for it: Neither were the Scots at present so far
degenerated from their Ancestors, as to bear not only the Government, but even
the Servitude, of a Stranger, who was scarce worthy to be their Slave. The
Queen was more enraged at this Speech, than before: Whereupon, they departed,
having placed Guards in all convenient Places, that no Tumult might arise.

In the mean time, the News was carried all over the Town, and as every ones
Disposition was, right or wrong, they took Arms, and went to the Palace: There
the King showed himself to them out of a Window, and told the Multitude, That
He, and the Queen were safe, The King takes Rize's Death upon himself.
and there was no cause for their tumultuous Assembly; What was done, was by
his Command, and what that was, they should know in time, and therefore, at
present, every one should go to his own House: Upon which Command they
withdrew, except some few, that staid to keep Guard. The next day in the
Morning, the Nobles that returned from England, offered themselves to the The
banished Nobles offer themselves to their Trial.
Trial in the Town Hall, being ready to plead their Cause, for That was the day
appointed; but no body appearing against them, they there openly protested,
That it was not their Fault, for they were ready to submit to a Legal Trial,
and so every one returned to his own Lodging. The Queen sent for her Brother,
and, after a long Conference with him, she gave him hopes, That, ever after,
she would commit her self to the Nobles. Hereupon, the Guards were slackn'd;
though many thought, this her Clemency did presage no Good to the Public, for
she gathered together the Soldiers of her old Guard, and went through a back
Gate by Night, with George Seton, who attended with 200 Horse, first to his
Castle, then to Dunbar; she carried also the King along with her, who, for fear
of his Life, was forced to obey. There she gathered a Force together, and,
pretending a Reconcilement to those who were lately returned from Banishment,
she turned her Fury upon the Murderers of David, but they, yiedling to the
time, shifted for themselves, and so, having settled Matters, she returned to
her old Disposition. First of all, she caused Rize's Body buried, by the
Queen's Order, in the Sepulchers of the Kings of Scotland.
David's Body which was buried before the Door of a Neighbour-Church, to be
removed in the Night, and to be placed in the Sepulcher of the late King and
his Children: Which gave occasion to illfavour'd Reports, being, amongst a few
others, a bad thing, for what greater Confession of Adultery with him could she
well make, than, as far as she was able, to equal such an obscure Fellow, who
was neither liberally brought up, nor had deserved well of the Public, in his
last Funerals, with her Father and Brothers? and, to increase the Indignity of
the thing, she put the Varlet almost into the Arms of Magdalene Vallois, late
Queen. As for her Husband, she threatened him, and obliquely in her Discourses
scoffed at him, doing her Endeavor to take away all Power from him, and to
render him as contemptible, as she could.

At this time, the Process was very severe against David's A Proclamati^^
against David Rize's Murderers.
Murderers, many of the Accused were banished, some to one place, some to
another; some were fined; some (but the most innocent, and therefore secure)
put to Death; for the prime Contrivers of the Fact were fled, some to England,
others to the High-lands: Those, who were but the least suspected to have an
hand in it, had their Offices and Employments taken from them, and bestowed
upon their Enemies: And a Proclamation was made by an Herald, (in such a
public Sorrow, not without Laughter,) That no Man should say, The King was a
Partaker in, or so much as privy to, David's Slaughter: This Commotion, being a
little settled, after the 15 th of April, the Earl of Argyle and Murray were
received into Favor, and she her self, drawing near the time of her Delivery,
retired into Edinburgh Castle, and on the 19 th day of June, a little after
nine a Clock at Night, was brought The Queen delivered of King James the Sixth.
to Bed of a Son, afterward called, James the Sixth.

The Eighteenth BOOK.
THE Queen, after her Delivery, received all other Visitants with Kindness
enough, suitable to the occasion of a public Joy; but when her Husband came,
she and her Attendants did so comport themselves, both in Speech and
Countenance, as if they were afraid of nothing more, than that he should not
understand, that his Presence was disdainful, and his Company unacceptable to
them all; but on the contrary; The Queen disgusts her Husband, and favors
Bothwel.
Bothwel alone was the Man, he managed all Affairs: The Queen was so inclined
to him, that she would have it understood, no Suit would be obtained from her,
but by his Mediation: And, as if she were afraid her Favors to him were but
mean and not sufficiently known, on a certain day, she took one or two with
her, and went down to the Haven called New Haven, and, her Attendants not
knowing whither she intended, she went aboard a small Vessel, prepared there
for her; William and Edmond Blacater, Edward Robertson, and Thomas Dickson, all
Bothwels Creatures, and Pirates of known Rapacity, had fitted the Ship, before;
with this Guard of Robbers, to the great Admiration of all good Men, she
ventured to Sea, taking none of her honest Servants along with her: She landed
at In Clackmannan-shire, on the North side of the Forth, below Sterlin.
Alloway, a Castle of the Earl of Marrs, where she so demeaned her self for
some time, as if she had forgot not only the Dignity of a Queen, but even the
Modesty of a Matron.

The King, when he heard of the Queen's sudden Departure, followed her, as fast
as he could, by Land, his Design and Hopes were, to be with her, and to enjoy
mutual Society, as Man and Wife: but He, as an importunate Disturber of her
Pleasures, was bid go back whence he came, and had hardly time allowed him for
his Servants to refresh themselves. A few days after, the Queen returned to
Edinburgh, and because, it seems, she would avoid the Crowd of People, she went
not to her own Palace, but to the House of a private Man in the Vicinage: From
thence she went to another, where the annual Convention, called the
Exchequer-Court, was then held, not so much for the Largeness of the House, or
the Pleasure of the Gardens, as, that one David Chalmers, a Creature of
Bothwel's, had an house near it, whose Backdoor was contiguous to the Queen's
Garden, by which Bothwel might pass in and out to her, as often as he pleased.
In the mean time, the King finding no place for Favor with his Wife, is sent
away with In^uries and Chidings, and having often tried her Spirit, yet, by no
Offices of Observance, could he obtain to be admitted to conjugal Familiarity,
as heretofore; whereupon, he retired in Discontent to Sterlin. A while after,
the Queen appointed to go to Iedburgh, to hold a Convention. About the
beginning of October, Bothwel prepared an Expedition into Liddisdale, and
carrying himself there, neither according to the Place which he held, nor the
Dignity of his Family, nor the Expectation of any Man, Bothwel wounded by an
High-way-Pad.
he was wounded by a mean Padder, whom he had taken, and unawares almost
dispatched with a Leaden Bullet, and so he was carried to In Liddisdale.
Hermitage-Castle, in great Danger of his Life. When the News was brought to
the Queen at A Castle in Mid-Lothian.
Borthwick, though the Winter was very sharp, she flew in haste first to
Mulross, then to Iedburgh; there, though she received certain Intelligence,
that Bothwel was alive, yet, being impatient of Delay, and not able to forbear,
though in such a bad time of the Year, notwithstanding the Difficulty of the
Way, and the Danger of Robbers, she put her self on her Journey, with such an
Attendance, as hardly any honest Man, though he were but of a mean Condition,
would trust his Life and Fortune to. From thence she returned again to
Iedburgh, and there made great and diligent Preparation, that Bothwel should be
brought thither, whither when he came, their Conversation together was little
for the Credit of either of them: There the The Queen falls sick, yet continues
to flight the Applications of her Husband to her;
Queen, either by reason of her continual toil, Day and Night; or else, by the
secret Providence of God, fell into such a sore and dangerous Disease, that no
body almost thought she could have lived. When the King heard of it, he went in
great haste to Iedburgh, both to give her a Visit, and to testify his
Observance by all the good Offices he could; and also to incline her to a
better course of Life, hoping, she might repent of what she had done; as, in
great Dangers, Persons are wont to do: She, on the contrary, gave not the least
Evidence of a reconciled Mind, but charged, that no body should rise up, or
salute him, as he came in, or give him Entertainment, so much as one Night: But
she, suspecting the Disposition of Murray, as courteous and civil, dealt with
his Wife to make haste now, to fain her self sick, and go immediately to Bed,
that so, by the pretense of Sickness, the King might be excluded from thence;
yea, she made it her business, to enforce him to be gone for want of Lodging;
which he had done, unless one of the Family of the Humes, for very shame, had
pretended a sudden cause for his Departure, and so left his Lodging free for
the King.

The next day in the Morning, She returned again to Sterlin, her Return was the
more reflected on, because, at the very same time, Bothwel was carried out of
the place where he lodged, to the Queen's Lodgings, in the face of all the
People, and though neither of them were well recovered, She from her Disease,
He from his Wounds, yet they journyed first to Kelso, then to Coldingham; next,
to Cragmiller, (a Castle two Miles from Edinburgh) not caring for the Reports
that were spread of them by the way. The Queen, in all her Discourse, professed,
that She could never live, unless She were divorced from the King; and if She
might not be so, She would lay violent Hands on her self. She would, ever and
anon, speak of a She meditates a Divorce.
Divorce, and would say, it might easily be done, if the Popes Bull were
recalled, whereby leave was given to contract Marriages against the Papal Laws;
but, seeing this matter was not like to go, as She expected, (for these things
were acted in the Presence of many of the Nobility) She left off other Methods,
and applied Her Mind only to his Murder.

A little before Winter, when the Ambassadors from France and England came to
be Witnesses at the Baptism of the Prince, the Queen strove, both by pecuniary,
and all other industrious, ways, That Bothwel should appear the most
magnificent amongst all her Subjects and Guests at the Entertainment, whereas
her lawful Husband, Strange Disrespect to the King, at the Baptism of his own
Son.
at the Baptism, was not allowed Necessaries; yea, was forbid to come in sight
of the Ambassadors, his Servants also, appointed for his daily Attendants, were
taken from him, and the Nobility forbid to observe him: But this Carriage, and
her Comportment in former times, the more implacable she was toward him, made
them more to pity him, in seeing a young and harmless Person reproachfully
used; and yet not only to bear it patiently, but even to endeavor to appease
her Rage by the servilest Offices, he could perform; that so he might win some
Degree of her Favor. As for his Apparel and Dress, she put the Fault upon the
Embroiderers, Goldsmiths and other Tradesmen, though 'twas but a false
shameless Pretense, for, every body knew, it was her own occasion; whereas for
Bothwel's Ornaments, she wrought many of them with her own Hands. Besides,
Foreign Ambassadors were advised, not to enter into Discourse with the King,
though they were in the same Castle together, the most part of the Day.

The young Gentleman, being thus uncourteously treated, exposed to the Contempt
of all, and his Rival honored before his Face, Thereupon he withdraws from
Court;
resolved to go to his Father, to Glasgow, who, as some thought, had sent for
him. The Queen showed her accustomed Hatred at his Departure, she took away all
the Silver Plate, which he had used ever since he was married, and put Pewter
in their stead; besides, she gave him Poison before his Departure, that so the
Evil might be more secret, Is poisoned, but
if he died, when absent from Court. But the Poison wrought sooner, than those,
who gave it, supposed it would; for, before he was gone a Mile from Sterlin, he
had such a grievous Pain all over his Body, that 'twas very apparent, his
Disease was not casual, but fraudulently designed; but, as soon as he came to
Glasgow, the Mischief did manifestly discover it self; blew Pustules arose all
over his Body, with so much Pain and Torment, that there was little hope of his
Life; James Abernethy, an able, faithful and experienced, Physician, being
consulted about his Disease, answered presently, That he had taken Poison: He
sent for the Queen's Domestic Physician, but the Queen would not suffer him to
go, fearing, left his Skill might cure him, and also she was not willing, that
Many should know of his being poisoned. When the Ceremonies of the Baptism were
over, and the Company, by degrees, gone home; the Queen was private with
Bothwel, scarce any body besides at Drummond and Tillibardin, a Noble-Man's
House, where she spent two days about the beginning of January, and so returned
to Sterlin, and pretended daily to go to Glasgow, but expecting to hear every
day of the King's Death; to prevent the worst, she resolved to have her Son in
her own Power; and, that her Design might occasion no Suspicion, they began to
find fault, That the House, wherein he was kept, was inconvenient; That in such
a moist and cold place, he might be subject to Rheums, but the true cause was
far otherwise of his Removal, for, 'twas very plain, That the Place, whither he
was carried, was far more obnoxious, upon the foresaid Accounts, in being
situate in a low Marish Soil, having a Mountain betwixt it and the Sunrising;
whereupon the Child, being scarce seven Months old, was brought in a very sharp
Winter to Edinburgh; when she there heard that the King was recovered, as
having overcome the Poison, by the Vigor of his Youth, overcomes (...) by the
Vigor of his Youth.
and the Strength of his Natural Constitution, she renewed her Plot to destroy
him, acquainting also some of the Nobility therewith. In the mean time, News
was brought her, that the King designed to fly to France or Spain, and that he
had spoke about it with the Master of an English Ship, which was then in the
Firth of Clyde; hereupon, some thought, That an occasion was offered her to
send for him, and if he refused to come, to kill him out of the way; yea, The
Story of the Infernal Design to destroy Henry Stuart, King of Scotland,
agitated and complotted, with the Series of its Procedure.
some offered to be Agents in the thing; all of them advised, That the Fact
should be privately committed, and That it should be hastened, before he was
perfectly recovered: The Queen, having already gotten her Son, that she might
also have her Husband, in her Power, though not as yet agreed in the Design,
how he should be dispatched, resolved to go to Glasgow, having, as she thought,
sufficiently cleared her self from his former Suspicions by many kind Letters
she had lately sent him: But her Words and Deeds did not agree; for, she took
almost none with her in her Retinue, but the Hamiltons, and other Hereditary
Enemies of the King. In the mean time, she intrusts Bothwel with doing What was
contributory to the Design at Edinburgh, for that Place seemed most convenient
to them, both to commit, and also to conceal, so great a Wickedness; for there
being a great Assembly of the Nobles, the Suspicion might be put off from one
to the other, and so divided between Many. When the Queen had tried all the
ways she could, to dissemble her Hatred: At last, by many Chidings, Complaints
and Lamentations, past betwixt them, she could yet scarce make him believe,
that she was reconciled to him. The King, hardly yet recovered from his
Disease, was brought in a Litter to Edinburgh, to the Place designed for his
Murder, which Bothwel, in the Queen's Absence, had undertook to provide, and
That was, an House uninhabited for some Years before, near the Walls of the
City, in a lonesome solitary place, between the Ruins of two Churches, where no
Noise or Outcry could be heard; thither he was thrust with a few Attendants
only, for the most of them (being such, as the Queen had put upon him, rather
as Spies than Servants) were departed, as foreknowing the Danger at hand; and
Those that remained, could not get the Keys of the Door from the Harbingers,
that provided the Lodgings.

The Queen was most intent on this One thing, to avert all Suspicion from her
self; and her Dissimulation had proceeded so far, That the King was fully
persuaded, there was a firm Reconcilement betwixt them: So that he wrote
Letters to his Father, who staid behind, sick at Glasgow, giving him great
Hopes and Assurance, That the Queen was now sincerely His, and, commemorating
her many good Offices toward him, now he promised to himself, That there would
be a Change of all things for the better. As he was writing these Letters, the
Queen came in on a sudden, and, reading them, she gave him many Embraces and
Kisses, telling him, that Sight mightily pleased her, that now she saw, there
was no Cloud of Suspicion hovering over his Mind.

Things being thus well secured on that side, her next care was, to contrive,
as much as possible, to cast the Guilt upon Another, and therefore she sent for
her Brother Murray, who had lately obtained leave, and was going to St.
Andrews, to visit his Wife, who lay there (as he heard) dangerously sick. For,
besides the Danger of Childbearing, she had Pustles, that rose all over her
Body, with a violent Fever; the Cause of her detaining him, she pretended to
be, that she might honorably dismiss the Duke of Savoy's Ambassador, who came
too late to the Prince's Baptism; though this seemed a mean pretense to take
him off from so just and necessary a Duty, yet he obeyed. In the Interim, the
Queen every day made her Visits to the King, and reconciled him to Bothwel,
whom, she, by all means, desired to be out of Gunshot of any Suspicion: She
made him large Promises of her Affection for the time to come, which
over-officious Carriage, though suspected by all, yet no Man was so bold as to
advise the King of his Danger, in regard he was wont to tell the Queen,
whatever he heard, to insinuate the more into her Favor; only Robert, the
Queen's Brother, moved either with the Horridness of the Fact, or with Pity to
the young Man, took the Confidence to acquaint him of his Wives Plot against
him, but on this condition, That he would keep it to himself, and provide for
his Safety, the best he could. The King, notwithstanding, revealed it to the
Queen, according to his custom; whereupon Robert was called for, and he stoutly
denied it, so that, they gave one another the Lie, and were laying their Hands
on their Swords. The Queen was glad to see, That her Designs were likely to
have so good a Conclusion, and that so near at hand, without her Trouble, and
therefore she calls for her other Brother, James, as if he were to decide the
Controversy; but the Truth was, That he also might, on that occasion, be cut
off; there was no body present but Bothwel, who was so far from keeping them
from fighting, that he would rather have killed him, that had the worst of the
Combat himself, as plainly appeared, when he said, There was no reason, James
should be sent for in such haste, to keep those from Duelling, who, whatsoever
they pretended, had no such Maw to it. This stir being quieted, the Queen and
Bothwel were wholly intent, how to perpetrate the Murder; and how to do it,
with all imaginable Privacy, too. The Queen, to dissemble both Love to her
Husband, and an Amnesty of old Offenses, causes her Bed to be brought, from the
Palace, into a Chamber below the King's, where she lay, after she had sat late
up with him, in Discourse, for some Nights.

In the mean time, she devises all manner of ways, to cast the Odium of the
Fact, when committed, upon her Brother James, and the Earl of Morton; for, she
thought, if those Two, whose Authority and Esteem was much feared and hated by
her, were taken out of the way, all things else would fall in of themselves:
She was also incited thereunto, by Letters from the Pope, and from Charles,
Cardinal of Lorrain. For, the Summer before, having, by her Uncle, desired a
Sum of Money from the Pope, for levying an Army to disturb the State of Religion
in Britain, and the Pope more cunningly, but the Cardinal plainly, had advised
her to destroy those, who were the greatest Hindrances to the Restitution of
Popery, and especially Those two Earls by Name; if they were once taken off,
they promised a Mass of Money for the War. Some Inckling hereof, the Queen
thought, was come to the Ears of the Nobility; and therefore, to clear her self
from any Suspicion, or the least Inclination to such a thing, she showed them
the Letters. But these Designs, so subtly laid, as they thought, were
somewhat disturbed by often Messages from Murray's Wife, how that she had
miscarried, and that there were small hopes of her Life. This Message was
brought him on the Lord's Day, as he was going to Sermon; whereupon, he
returned back to the Queen, and desired leave of her to be gone; she very much
urged him, to stay one day longer, to hear certainer News, alleging, That if he
made never so much haste, his Coming would do her no good; but, if her Disease
did abate, to morrow would be time enough; but he was fully bent on his Journey,
and went his way. The Queen had deferred the Murder till that Night, and would
seem to be so jocund and dissolute, as to celebrate the Marriage of Sebastian,
one of her Music, in the very Palace, and when the Evening was past in Mirth
and Jollity, then she went with a numerous Attendance, to see her Husband; she
spent some hours with him, and was merrier than formerly, often kissing him,
and giving him a Ring, as a Token of her Love. After the Queen's Departure, the
King, with the few Servants that were about him, recollecting the Proceedings
of the Day past, amongst some comfortable Speeches given him by the Queen, he
was much troubled at the remembrance of a few Words; for she, whether, not
being able to contain her Joy, arising from the Hope, that the Murder would be
now acted; or, whether it fell from her by chance, cast out a word, That David
Rize was slain the last Year, just about that time. This unseasonable mention
of his Death, tho none of them liked it, yet, because much of the Night was
past, and the next Morning was designed for Sports and Pastimes, they went
speedily to Bed. In the mean time, Gunpowder was placed in the Room below, to
blow up the House; other things were cautiously and craftily enough transacted,
yet, in a small matter, they lest a track, whereby to be discovered. For the
Bed, in which the Queen used sometimes to lie, was taken from thence, and a
worse put in its place, as if, though they were prodigal enough of their
Credit, yet they would spare a little Money. In the mean time, one Paris, a
French Man, a Partisan in the Conspiracy, entered into the King's Bedchamber,
and there stood still, yet so, that the Queen might see him, That was the Sign
agreed on betwixt them, that all things were in a readiness. As soon as she saw
Paris, as if Sebastian's Marriage came into her Mind, she began to blame her
self, that she had bin so negligent, as not to dance that night at the Wedding,
(as 'twas agreed) and to put the Bride to Bed, as the manner is; whereupon, she
presently started up, and went home. Being returned to the Palace, she had a
pretty deal of Discourse with Bothwel, who being, at length, dismissed, went to
his Chamber, changed his Apparel, put on a Soldier's Coat, and, with a few in
his Company, passed through the Guards into the Town; Two other Parties, of the
Conspirators, came several ways to the appointed Place, and a few of them
entered into the King's Bedchamber, of which they had the Keys, (as I said
before) and whilst he was fast asleep, they took him by the Throat, and
strangled him, and one also of his Servants, The King strangled,
who lay near him: When they were slain, they carried their Bodies through a
little Gate, which they had made on purpose, in the Walls of the City, into a
Garden near hand; And then the House, wherein he was, blown up with Gunpowder.
then they set fire to the Gunpowder, which blew up the House from the very
Foundation, and made such a Noise, that it shook some of the neighboring
Houses; yea, those, that were sound asleep in the furthest parts of the City,
were awakened, and frighted at the Noise. When the Deed was done, Bothwel was
let out by the Ruins of the City-Walls, and so returned to the Palace, through
the Guard, another way, than that he came. This was the common Report about the
King's Death, which held some Days. The Queen had sat up that Night, to wait
for the Event, and, hearing of the Tumult, called together those of the
Nobility, who were at Court, and amongst the rest, Bothwel; and, by their
Advice, sent out to know, What was the matter, as if she had been ignorant of
all that was done; some went to inspect the Body, the King had only a linen
Shirt on the upper part of his Body, the rest of it lay naked; his other
Apparel, and his Shoes, lay near him: The Common People came, in great
Multitudes, to see him, and many Conjectures there were, yet they all agreed,
(sorely against Bothwel's Mind) That he could never be thrown out of the House,
by the Force of the Gunpowder, for there was no part broken, bruised, or black
and blew, about his Body, which, in a Ruin by Gunpowder, would have been;
besides, his Apparel lying near him, was not singed with the Flame, or covered
with any Ashes; so that, it could not be thrown thither, by any Casualty, but
placed there on purpose, by some bodies Hand. Bothwel returned home, and, as if
he had been in great Admiration, brought the News to the Queen, whereupon she
went to Bed, and lay secure, soundly asleep, a great part of the next Day.

In the mean time, Reports were spread abroad by the Parricides, and carried
into the Borders of England before day, That the King was Murdered by the
design of Murray and Morton; yet every Body thought, privately within himself,
That the Queen must needs be the Author of the Murder. Neither was the The
Bishop of St. Andrews shrewdly suspected about the King's Death.
Bishop of St. Andrews free from Suspicion, There were shrewd Conjectures
against him, as the high and cruel Enmities betwixt the Families; neither was
the Bishop, ever well reconciled to the Queen, before she designed that
Wickedness in her Mind; and, of late, when he accompanied her to Glasgow, he
was made acquainted with the utmost of her Projects. It increast Men's
suspicions of him, because, at that time, he had retired to the House of his
Brother, the Earl of Arran, which was near to the House, where the King was
slain: Whereas, before, he always used to live in some Eminent part of the
City; where he might conveniently receive Visits, and curry Favor with the
People, by Feasting them; and besides, Lights were seen in his House, and a
Watch all the Night, from the upper part of the City, and when the designed
Powder-Clap was, then the Lights were put out, and his Vassals, The Assassi^^
do falsely impute the King's Murder to Murray, and Morton.
many of whom watched in their Arms, were forbidden to go out of Doors: But the
true Story of the matter of Fact, which broke out, after some Months, gave
occasion to People to look upon those things as certain Indications, which
before were but Suspicions only.

When the Murder was committed, presently Messengers were sent into England,
who were to Report, That the King of Scots was cruelly Murdered by his
Subjects, by the contrivance, especially, of Murray and Morton. The News was
presently brought to Court, The English inflamed against the Scots, upon
hearing the horrid Murder of their King.
which so inflamed all the English to the hatred of the whole Nation, that, for
some days, no Scots Man durst walk abroad, without Danger of his Life; and, tho
many Letters past to and fro, discovering the secret Contrivances of the
Design, yet they could hardly be appeased. The King's Body, having been left a
while as a Spectacle to be gazed upon, and a great Concourse of People
continually stockt thither, the Queen ordered, That it should be laid on a Form
or Bier turned upside down, and brought by Porters into the Palace. There she
her Self viewed the Body, the fairest of that Age, and yet her Countenance
discovered not the secrets of her Mind, neither one way or other. The Nobles
there present Decreed, that a Royal and Magnificent Funeral should be made for
him: But the Queen caused him to be carried forth by Bearers in the Night, to
be buried in no manner of State; and that which increased the Indignity the
more, was, that his Grave was made near David Rizes; as if she designed to
Sacrifice the Life of her Husband to the Ghost of that filthy Varlet.

There were Two Prodigies happening at that time, Prodigies accompanying the
King's death.
which are worth the while to relate: One of them a little preceded the Murder,
it was This; One James Londin, a Gentleman of Fife, having been long Sick of a
Fever, the day before the King was killed, about Noon, lifted up himself a
little out of his Bed, and, as if he had been astonished, cried out to those
that stood by him, with a loud Voice, to go help the King, for the Parricides
was just now Murdering him; and a while after, he called out with a mournful
Tone, Now it is too late to help, he is already Slain: and he himself lived not
long after he had uttered those Words. The Other did accompany the Murder it
self. Three of the familiar Friends of the Earl of Athol's, the King's Cousin,
Men of Reputation for Valor and Estate, had their Lodgings, not far from the
King's; when they were asleep about Midnight, there was a certain Man seemed to
come to Dugal Stuart, who lay next the Wall, and to draw his Hand gently over
his Beard and Cheek, so to awake him, saying, Arise, they are offering Violence
to us. He presently awaked, and considering the Apparition within himself:
Another of them cries out presently in the same Bed, Who kicks me? Dugal
answered, perhaps, it is a Cat, which used to walk about in the Night;
whereupon, the 3 d which was not yet awake, rose presently out of his Bed, and
was going to run away, demanding, Who it was that had given him a box on the
Ear? as soon as he had spoken it, one seemed to go out of the House by the
Door, not without some Noise. Whilst they were descanting on what they had
heard and seen, The noise of the King's House, that was blown up, drove them
all into a great Fright. He that took the Murder most heinously, was, John
Stuart Earl of Athol, as for other Reasons, so, because he was the chief Maker
of the Match between the Queen and him. The Night after the Murder, armed
Guards watched the Palace at Night, as in such sudden Consternations is usual,
and they hearing the outside Wall of the Earl of Athols Lodging make a Noise or
Crack, as if some were gently digging at the Foundation, they raised the
Family, which went no more to Bed, that Night: The day after, the Earl went
into the Town, and a little after that, went home, for fear of his Life. The
Earl of Murray, at his return to Court from St. Andrews, was not without danger
neither, for armed Men walked about his House at Night; but he not being well,
and his Servants thereupon using to watch with him all Night, the Villains
could not attempt any thing privately against him, and openly they durst not.
At length Bothwel (who would willingly have been freed from such a trouble)
resolved to perform the wicked Fact, Bothwel designs to destroy Murray.
with his own Hands. And therefore about Midnight, he asked his Domestics, how
Murray did? They told him, he was grievously troubled with the Gout: What, said
he, if we should go see him? and presently he rose up, and was hastening to his
House. As he was going, he was informed by his Domestics, that he was gone to
his Brother Roberts, to be at more Freedom and Ease, out of the Noise of the
Court, whereupon he held his Peace, stood still, grieving, that he had lost so
fair an Opportunity, and so returned home. The Queen, mean while, looked very
demurely, and, dissembling great Sorrow, thought That way to reconcile the
People to her; but that speeded as ill with her, as the rest of the Conspiracy.
For, whereas it was the Custom, time out of Mind, for Queens, after their
Husbands Death, to abstain several Days, not only from the sight of Men, but
even from seeing the Light, she indeed personated a feigned Grief, but her Joy
did so exceed it, that, tho the Doors were shut, yet the Windows were open, and
casting off her mourning Weeds, in 4 days, she could well enough bear the sight
of the Sun and Air: And before 12 days were over, her Mind was hardened against
the talks of the People, and she went to Seton, about 7 Miles from the Town,
Bothwel never departing from her side; there her Carriage was such, that she
seemed somewhat changed in the Apparel of her Body, but nothing at all in the
habit of her Mind. The Place was full of the Nobility, and she went daily
abroad to the accustomed Sports, tho some of them were not so fit for the
Female Sex: But the coming of Mr. D'Crocke, The Assassination of the Scots King
odious to all Nations.
a Frenchman, (who had often before been Ambassador in Scotland) did somewhat
disturb their Measures; for, he telling them how infamous the Matter was
amongst Strangers, they returned to Edinburgh: But Seton (I perceive) had so
many Conveniences, that, the with the further hazard of her Credit, she must
needs return thither again. There the main head of the Consultation, was, How
Bothwel might be acquitted of the King's Murder. There was a Design, before, to
try and acquit him; for, presently upon the King's Death, Bothwel, and some of
his Accomplices, came to the Marquess of Argyle, who was the Hereditary Capital
Judge in Criminal Causes. First, Bothwels Mock-Trial for the King's Murder,
before the Earl of Argyle.
they pretended they were wholly ignorant of what was done, and wondered at it,
as a new, unheard of, and incredible, Thing; then, they proceeded to the
Examination of it; they summon in some poor Women out of the Neighborhood, but
they stuck betwixt Hope and Fear, being uncertain, Whether they should speak,
or hold their Peace; but, tho they were very cautious in their Words, yet,
uttering more than was expected, they were sent away, as having spoken nothing
upon any certain ground; and, as for their Testimony, it was easy enough to
despise it: Whereupon, some of the King's Servants were sent for, whom the Fire
had not destroyed; They, being asked concerning the Ingress of the
Assassinates? replied, That the Keys were not in their Power; it being urged
upon them again, In whose, then? They answered, The Queens; Whereupon, the
further Examination was put off, as they pretended; but, indeed, was quite
suppressed, for they were afraid, if they went any further, the Court-Secrets
would have been all publicly known.

And yet, to set a Gloss on the Matter, A Proclamation published, for a Blind,
to discover the King's Murderers.
a Proclamation was published, and a pecuniary Reward offered to the
Discoverers of the King's Murder. But, Who dared be so bold as to impeach
Bothwel, seeing he was to be the Impleaded, the Judge, the Examiner, and the
Exactor of the punishment, too? Yet this fear, which stopped the Mouths of diverse
single Persons, could not bridle the Multitude. For Libels were published,
Pictures made, and Night-haukings and Cries were uttered, whereby the
Parricides might easily understand, That their whole Design was discovered, Who
designed the Wickedness, and Who assisted in the Execution thereof: And the
Commonalty, the more they were forbidden, the more did their Grief make them
speak. Though the Conspirators seemed to despise these things, yet they were so
inwardly pricked and gripped, that they could not dissemble their sorrow: And
therefore omitting the Examination about the King's Death, they fell upon
another Guest, more severe; and That was, against the Authors of Libels, or,
(as they worded it) the Calumniators of Bothwel, and this was so severely
prosecuted, that no Pains nor Cost were spared therein; all the Painters and
Writing-Masters were called in, that so they might discover the Pictures and
Libels, by those that drew or wrote them; they further added a Clause, suitable
enough to the Edict, which made it Capital, not only to sell, but even to read
them, when they were Sold. But they, who endeavored to bridle the Discourse of
the People, by threatening Capital Punishment, to them, were not satisfied with
the King's Death, but retained their hatred against him, though in his grave.
The Queen gave her Husband's Goods, his Arms, Horses, Apparel, and other
Housholdstuff, either to his Father's Enemies, or to the Murderers themselves,
as if they had been forfeited into her Exchequer. As these Matters were acted
openly, so many did as publicly inveigh against them: The bold Speech of a
Tailor.
So that one Tailor, who was about to fit some of the King's Clothes for
Bothwel's Body, was so bold, as to say; Now he saw the old Country-Custom
verified: That the Executioner had the Apparel of those, that suffered by his
Hand.

There was also another Care troubled them, How they might get the Castle of
Edinburgh into the Queen's Hands; John, Earl of Mar, was Governor of it, upon
Condition, that he should render it to none, but by Order of the Estates; and
though such a Convention was to be the Month after, The Queen solicitous to
procure the Government of Edinburgh-Castle into her own Hands.
yet the Queen was so earnest, that every small delay seemed very tedious to
Her. And therefore she dealt with the Earl's Friends and Kindred, (for he
himself lay then very sick at Sterlin) to surrender the Castle to Her;
pretending This as the chief Cause, That the Commons of Edinburgh were so
tumultuous, (there being then a Commotion amongst them) That she could not keep
them within the Bounds of their Duty, unless she had that Fort in her Hands;
and that thereupon, as an Earnest of her great Affection to John, she would put
her only Son, the Heir of the Kingdom, into his Hands, to be educated by him;
which Office of Guardianship, his Ancestors had discharged to their great
Commendation, as in so many other Princes, of late Times, in her Mother and
Grandfathers Education. Tho the Earl understood, whither her Promises and
Flatteries did tend, yet he complied with her Request. The Queen, finding him
more facile than she hoped, essays next to be possessed of the Castle, as soon as
it was convenient; and yet to keep her Son too: When he would not hearken to
that, she sets upon him by another Wile, propounding to him to come to
Linlithgo, (in the Midway between Edinburgh and Sterlin) and there, on an
appointed Day, to receive the Prince, and to surrender the Castle. But this
Project being suspected of Fraud, at last it was agreed, That he should be
delivered to Erskin at Sterlin, and That he, in the interim, should give the
chief of his Family in Hostage, for the rendering of the Castle.

These things were some trouble to the Parricides, but they were most of all
troubled with the daily complaints of the Earl of Lennox; The Earl of Lennox
first publicly accuses Bothwel of the King's Murder.
He would not adventure to come to Court, by reason of Bothwel's Power,
accompanied with the highest Luxury; but he earnestly solicited the Queen by
Letters, That she would commit Bothwel to Prison, who, without doubt, was the
Author of the King's Murder, till a Day might be appointed to bring him to his
Trial. She, though eluding his desire by many Stratagems, yet, seeing the
Examination of so heinous a Fact could not be avoided, designed to have it
carried on, thus.

The Assembly of the Estates, on the Ides of April. 15.
April, was near at hand; before that time, she was willing to have the matter
tried, that so Bothwel, being absolved by the Votes of the Judges, might be
further cleared by the Suffrages of the whole Parliament. This haste was the
cause, that nothing was carried on orderly, or according to ancient Custom, in
that judiciary Process. For, the Accusers (as is usual) ought to have been
Cited, Whereupon a Court is hastily summoned;
with their Kindred, as Wife, Father, Mother, Son, either to appear Personally,
or, by Proxy, within 40 Days, for that is the time limited by the Law. Here,
the Father was only summoned to appear, April 13 th, without summoning any of
his Friends, only his own Family, which, at that Time, was in a low Estate, and
reduced but to a Few; Whereas, in the mean time, Bothwel flew up and down the
Town, with a great many Troops at his heels; The Earl of Lennox thought it best
for him not to come into a City full of his Enemies, where he had no Friends
nor Vassals to secure him; and besides, if there were no Danger of Life, yet
there could be no freedom of Debate. Bothwel appears at the Day appointed, and
comes into the Town Hall, being both Plaintiff and Defendant too. The Judges of
the Nobility were called over, most of them his Friends, none daring to appear
on the other side to except against any one of them; only Robert Cuningham, one
of Lennox's Family, gave a small stop to the Proceedings; He, having Liberty to
speak openly, declared, That the Process was not according to Law, nor Custom,
where the accused Person was so powerful, that he could not be brought to
Punishment, and the Accuser was absent for fear of his Life. And therefore,
Whatsoever should be determined there, as being against Law and Right, was
Null and Void; yet, they persisted in their Design, notwithstanding. Moreover,
Gilbert Earl of Cassils, being chosen one of the Judges, rather for Forms sake,
than that he thought he should do any Good, desired to be excused, and offered
also to pay the Forfeiture, usually taken of those who decline Sitting; when
presently a Messenger brought him a Ring from the Queen, with a Command, that
he should sit as one of the Judges, or else, she threatened to commit him to
Prison. When that did not prevail, she sent another Messenger, who told him,
he should be punished as a Traitor, if he refused; so that, by such kind of
Terrors, they were enforced to sit, and the Issue was; They declared, By which
Bothwel is acquitted, tho but Conditionally.
they saw no Reason to find Bothwel Guilty; yet, if any Man hereafter could
lawfully accuse him, they gave a Caution, That this Judgment should be no
hindrance to him. Some thought, the Issue was vvisely given in by them. For
the Indictment was conceived in such Words, That the severest Judges could
never have found Bothwel Guilty, for it was laid against a Murder committed
the 9 th of February, whereas the King was slain the Tenth.

Thus Bothwel was acquitted of the Fact, but not of the Infamy of it.
Suspicions did increase upon him, and his Punishment seemed only to be
deferred; but any Pretense whatsoever, though a shameless one, seemed good
enough to the Queen, who made haste to marry him. As a Surplusage to his
Absolution, there was a Chartel, Bothwel challenges his Accusers.
or Challenge, posted on the eminentest part of the Court, declaring, That
though Bothwel was lawfully acquitted of the King's Murder, yet, to make his
Innocence more appear, he was ready to decide the matter in a Duel against any
Gentleman, or Person of Honor, that should dare lay it to his charge. The
Morrow after, there was one, which did, as manfully, post up an Answer to his
Challenge, provided the place of Combat were appointed, wherein, without
Danger, he might declare his Name. Though these things succeeded reasonably
well, yet the Queen, in that Parliament, was more rugged, than formerly; for,
whereas before, she pretended Civility in her Carriage, now, she plainly
discovered a Desire of Tyranny; for what she promised at Sterlin, in Matters of
Religion, she now flatly denied; and That was, That the Laws, established under
Popish Tyranny, should be abrogated in the first Parliament, and the Reformed
Religion should be strengthened by new Laws. And, when besides her Promise, Two
Edicts, signed with her own hand, were produced; being caught here, she
boggled, and commanded the Commissioners of the Kirk, to attend her another
Time; and, after that, she never gave them opportunity to appear before her
again; and those Acts of the Estates, which were Published before her coming
into Scotland, by the consent of Francis her Husband, those, she alleged, did
fall under the Act of Oblivion: That Speech seemed to all a manifest Profession
of Tyranny. For, whereas the Scots had no Laws, besides Acts of Parliament,
they entertained such private Thoughts in their Breasts, What kind of Life they
were like to live, under a Prince, whose Will was a Law, and whose Word and
Promise were not to be believed. This was done about the end of the Convention.
At the same time, the Queen was very earnest to hasten her Marriage, and yet
withal she desired by any means, to procure the public Consent, that she might
seem to act nothing, but by the Suffrage of the Nobles. And Bothwel too,
Bothwel procures a Schedule from some of the unwary Nobility, encouraging his
Marriage with the Queen,
to credit the Marriage with the Pretense of public Authority, devised this
Stratagem: He invited all the Nobility of the highest Rank, which were then in
Town (as there were many) to Supper, and when they were jocund and merry, he
desired them to show that Respect to him for the future, which they had always
done heretofore. At present, he only desired, that, whereas he was a Suitor to
the Queen, they would subscribe to a Schedule, which he had made, about that
matter, and that would be a Means to procure him Favor with the Queen, and
Honor with all the People. They were all amazed at so sudden and unexpected a
Proposal, and could not dissemble their Sorrow, neither yet durst they refuse
or deny him; Whereupon, a few, that knew the Queen's Mind, began first, and the
rest, not foreseeing, that there were so great a number of Flatterers present,
suspected one another, and at last, all subscribed. The Day after, when they
recollected what they had done, some of them as ingenuously professed, they
would never have given their consent, unless they had thought the thing had
been acceptable to the Queen; Which some of them afterward retract.
for, besides that it carried no great show of Honesty, and was prejudicial to
the Public too; so, there was danger, if any Discord should arise (as it
happened between her and her former Husband) between her and Bothwel, also; and
he were rejected, it might be laid in their Dishes, That they had betrayed the
Queen to a dishonorable Marriage; and therefore, before they had gone too far,
they resolved to try her Mind, and to procure a Writing under her hand, to this
Sense; That she did approve of what they had done, in reference to her
Marriage. This Scrole was easily obtained, and, by the consent of them all,
given to the Earl of Argyle to keep. The next day, all the Bishops in Town were
called to Court, that they also might subscribe. This care being over, there
succeeded another, which was, How the Queen should get her Son into her Power,
for Bothwel did not think it safe for him, to have a young Child brought up,
which, in time, might revenge his Father's Murder; neither was he willing, That
any other should come between his Children and the Crown. Whereupon the Queen,
who could now deny him nothing, undertook the Task her self, to bring the Child
to Edinburgh; she had also another Pretense to visit Sterlin, of which I shall
speak anon; when she came thither, the Earl of Mar suspected, what was a
brewing, and therefore showed her the Prince; but would not let him be in her
Power: The Queen, seeing her Fraud detected, and not able to cope with him by
Force, pretended another cause for her Journey, and prepared to return; In her
Journey, either by reason of her overmuch Toil; or, for Anger, that her Designs,
which the Authors thought craftily laid, were unsuccessful, she was taken with
a sudden Illness, and was forced to retire into a poor House about four Miles
from Sterlin, The Queen to be s^emingly surprised by Bothwel, in order to her
Marriage with him.
where her Pain something abating, she proceeded in her Journey, and came that
Night to Linlithgo; from thence she wrote to Bothwel by Paris, what she would
have him to do, about her Surprise; for, before she departed from Edinburgh,
she had agreed with him, that, at the Bridge of Almon, he should surprise her in
her Return, and carry her, whither he would, as 'twere against her Will. The
Water of Almond divides Mid-lothian from West-lothian, in Linlithgo-shire.
The common People put this Interpretation on the matter; That she could not
altogether conceal her Familiarity with Bothwel, nor yet could well want It;
nor could she openly enjoy it, as she desired, without the loss of her
Reputation: It was too tedious to expect his Divorce from his former Wife; and
she was willing to consult her Honor, which, she pretended, to have a great
regard to, yet she would provide for her Lust, too; of which she was very
impatient, and therefore the device was thought to be very pretty, That Bothwel
should redeem the Queen's Infamy, with his own great Crime; the Punishment
whereof yet he did not at all fear. But there was a deeper reach in the
Project, as was after understood. For, whereas the People did every where point
at, and curse, the King's Murderers: They, to provide for their own Security,
by the Persuasion, as it is thought, of John Lesly, Bishop of Ross, devised this
Attempt upon the Queen. It Is the manner in Scotland, when the King grants a
Pardon for Offenses, he, that sues it out, expresses his great Offense by
Name, and the rest of his Crimes are added, in general Words; accordingly, the
King's Murderers determined to ask Pardon for this Surprise of the Queen by
Name, and then to add in their Pardons, by way of Overplus, All other wicked
Facts: In which clause, they persuaded themselves, That the King's Murder would
be included, because, 'twas not safe for them to name themselves the Authors of
it, in the Pardon; nor, was it creditable for the Queen so to grant it; neither
could it well be added in the Grant of Pardon, as an Appendix to a lesser
Crime: Another Offense, less invidious, but liable to the same Punishment, was
to be devised, under the Shadow whereof the Kings Murder might be disguised and
pardoned, and no other did occur to them, but this simulated force put upon the
Queen, whereby her Pleasure might be satisfied, and Bothwel's Security provided
for, too; and therefore he, accompanied with 600 Horse, vvaited her Coming at
Almon Bridge, and took her, by her own consent, Bothwel actually surprises the
Queen;
to Dunbar: There they had free Converse one with another, and a Divorce was
made betwixt Bothwel and his former Wife, and that in Two Courts: First, she
was cited before Judges publicly appointed to decide such kind of
Controversies; and next, before the Officials, or Bishop's Courts, though they
were forbid, by a public Statute, to exercise any part of Magistracy; or, to
meddle with any public Business; Madam Gordon, Bothwel's Wife, was compelled
to commence a Suit of Divorce, in a double Court, And is divorced from his
former Wife, for Adultery.
before the Queen's Judges; she accuses him of Adultery, which was the only
just cause of a Divorce amongst them; and before the Papal Judges, who, though
forbidden by the Law, yet were impovvered by the Archbishop of St. Andrews,
to determine the Controversy: She alleged against him, that, before their
Marriage, he had had too much unlawful, or incestuous, Familiarity with her
Kinsvvoman: The Witnesses and Judges made no Delay in the Case. The Suit was
commenced, prosecuted, adjudg'd, and ended, in ten Days.

On these Emergencies, a great many of the honest Nobles met at Sterlin, and
sent to the Queen; desiring to know of her, Whether she were kept, where she
was, willingly or against her Will? if this later, they would levy an Army
for her Deliverance. She received the Message, not without smiling, and
answered them, That, 'twas true, she was brought thither against her Will, but
was so kindly treated since, that she had little cause to complain of the
former Injury. Thus was the Messenger eluded; but, though they made haste to
take off the Reflection of the force by a lawful Marriage, there were two
Remora's yet in the way; One was, That if she married, whilst a Prisoner, the
Marriage might not be accounted good, and so easily dissolved. The Other, How
to have the usual Ceremonies observed, That the Bans should be published, three
Lord's Days in the public Congregations, Of a Marriage intended between James
Hepburn, and Mary Stuart; so that, if any one knew a lawful Impediment, why
they might not be joined together in Matrimony, they should declare it, that so
it might be decided by the Church. To accomplish this, Bothwel gathers his
Friends and Dependents together, resolving to bring back the Queen to
Edinburgh, that so, under a vain show of her Liberty, he might determine of
their Marriage, at his Pleasure. His Companions were all armed, and, as they
were on their Journey, a fear seized on some of them, lest, one time or other,
it might turn to their Prejudice, to hold the Queen as yet a Prisoner; and if
there were no other ground for it, yet this was enough, That they accompanied
her in an armed Posture, when things were otherwise in Peace and Quietness:
Upon this Scruple, they threw away their Arms, and so, in a seeming more
peaceable Posture, they brought her to the Castle of Edinburgh, which was then
in Bothwel's Power.

The next Day, they accompanied her into the City, and into the Courts of
Justice, where she affirmed before the Judges, that she was wholly free, and
under no Restraint at all. Ecclesiastics backward to publish the Bans, or to
celebrate the Marriage, between the Queen and Bothwel:
But as to publishing the Marriage in the Church, the Reader, whose Office it
was, did wholly refuse it: Whereupon, the elder Deacons and Ecclesiastics
assembled, as not daring to resist, and commanded the Reader to publish the
Bans according to Custom; he so far was obedient, as to tell them, That he
himself knew a lawful Impediment, and was ready to declare it to the Queen, or
to Bothwel, when they pleased to command him: Whereupon, he was sent for to the
Castle, and the Queen remitted him to Bothwel, who, neither by Fear nor Favor,
could make him alter his Purpose, nor yet durst he commit the Matter to a
Dispute; yet he went on to hasten the Marriage: There was none found, besides
the Bishop of Orkney, to celebrate the Marriage; he alone preferred
Court-Favour before Truth, the rest being utterly against it, and producing
Reasons, Why it could be no lawful Marriage with one, that had two Wives yet
living, and had lately confessed his own Adultery, and had been also divorced
from a Third; yet, though all good Men did loath it, the Commonalty cursed it,
his Kindred, by Letters, dissuaded from it, whilst prosecuted, and abhorred it,
Yet, at last, the Bishop of Orkney marries them.
when done; There were some public Ceremonies dissemblingly performed, and
Married they were. Those of the Nobility, there present, (being very few, and
those Bothwel's Friends, and Creatures too, the rest being gone to their Homes)
were invited to Supper; and so was Crocke, the French Ambassador; but he, The
French Ambassador refuses to come to the Wedding:
though he were of the Guisian Faction, and, besides, dwelt near the Place, yet
peremptorily refused to come; he thought, it suited not with the Dignity of
that Person, which he represented, to countenance that Marriage by his
Presence, which, he heard, the Common People did abominate and curse; and
besides, the Queen's Kindred did, by no means, approve it, neither whilst 'twas
prosecuting, nor yet, when finished. And the King of France, and Queen of
England, did, by their Ambassadors, declare against the Turpitude of the thing:
Though that was troublesome to her, yet the silent Sadness of the People did so
much the more increase the fierce Disposition of the Queen, as things seen do
pierce deeper, than things only heard. As they both went through the City,
none saluted them with wonted Acclamations, only one said, and that but once,
God Save the Queen; whereupon, another Woman near her, spoke aloud, Even the
Vulgar dislike the Queen's Marriage.
once or twice, so that the Standers-by might hear her, Let every one have what
his Desert is: That Matter mightily inflamed her Mind against the Edinburghers,
with whom she was angry before. When she saw, how disaffected People were to
her, both at Home and Abroad, she took Advice with her Cabal, How she might
establish her Power, and quell any Insurrection for the future. First of all,
she determined to send an Ambassador into France, to reconcile those Princes,
and the Guises, to her, who, she knew, were offended with her precipitate
Marriage: William, Bishop of Dunblane, was chosen for that Service; his
Instructions were given him, almost in these very Words:

Politic Instructions to the Bishop of Dunblan^, to excuse the Queen's hasty
Marriage, at the French Court.
First, You shall excuse me to Those Princes, and to my Uncle, That they heard
of the Consummation of my Marriage, by vulgar Report, before ever I had
acquainted them with my purpose therein, by Messengers of my own. This Excuse
is built, as upon a Foundation, on the true Narration of his Life, and
especially of the good Offices, which the Duke of the Orcades has done me,
even to that very Day, wherein I thought good to make him my Husband: You shall
begin the Declaration of that Story, as the Truth is, taking your Rise from his
very Youth. As Soon as ever he came to be of Age, after the Death of his Father,
one of the prime Noblemen of the Kingdom, he wholly addicted himself to the
Service of the Princes of this Land, being otherwise of a very noble Family,
both by reason of its Antiquity, and also the high Offices it held in the
Kingdom, as by Hereditary Right: At that time, he principally addicted himself
to the Service of my Mother, who then held the Scepter, and was so constant an
Adherent to her, that though, in a very short time, a great many of the
Nobility, and many Towns also, had revolted from her, on the account of
Religion, yet he never faultred in his Loyalty; neither could he be induced, by
any Proffers, Promises, or Threats, nor by any Loss of his particular Estate,
to make a Defection, in the least, from her Authority; nay, rather than neglect
her Service, he suffered his House, the Mansion House of the Family, and all
his Goods, which were many and precious, to be plundered, and his Estate made a
Prey to his Enemies: At last, being destitute of my Aid, and all other besides,
an English Army was brought in by domestic Enemies, into the very Bowels of
the Kingdom, on purpose to enforce my Husband (then Earl of Bothwel) to leave
his Estate and Country, and to retire to France; where he observed me with all
Respect, till my Return to Scotland. Neither must his Military Exploits against
the English be forgotten, a little before my Return, wherein he gave such
Proofs of his manly Valor, and great Prudence too, that he was thought worthy,
though a young Man, to command his Superiors in Age; so that he was chosen
chief General of the Army of his Countrymen, and my Lieutenant, which Office
he discharged so well, That, by many valiant Performances, he left a noble
Memorial of his Fortitude, both amongst his Enemies, and also his own
Countrymen. After my Return, he employed all his Endeavors for the
Enlargement of my Authority; he spared no Danger in subduing the Rebels upon
the Borders of England; where having reduced things to great Tranquillity, he
resolved to do the same in other Parts of the Kingdom: But, as Envy is always
the Companion of Virtue, the Scots still desiring Innovations, and some of
them, willing to lessen my Favor toward him, did so ill interpret his good
Services, that they caused me to commit him to Prison; which I did, partly to
gratify some, who envied the Growth of his increasing Greatness; and partly to
allay the seditious Commotions, which were then ready to break out, to the
Destruction of the whole Kingdom. He made his Escape out of Prison, and, that
he might yield to the Power of his Emulators, he retired into France, and there
he abode almost Two years; in which time, the Authors of the former Seditions,
forgetting my Lenity toward them, and their Duty toward me, took up Arms, and
led an Army against me. Thereupon, I commanded him to return, I restored him to
his Honor and Estate, and made him General over all my Forces, by whose
Conduct my Authority was again so restored, that all the Rebels were quickly
enforced to seek Shelter in England, until a great part of them, upon their own
Request, were again received by me into Favor. How perfidiously I was treated
by those Exiles which returned, and by those, whom I had obliged with greater
Courtesies, than they deserved, my Uncle is not ignorant of, and therefore I
need say little of it; yet, I must not pretermit in silence, with how great
diligence he freed me from the Hands of Those, who held me Prisoner; and how
speedily, by his singular Conduct, I escaped out of Prison; and, the whole
Faction of Conspirators being dissipated, I recovered my former Authority. On
this Head, I must acknowledge, that his Services were so grateful, that I could
never suffer them to slip out of my Memory: These things are Great in
themselves, yet he has made such an Accession to them, by his anxious Sedulity
and Diligence, that I could never expect greater Observance or Faithfulness in
any Man, than I have found in him, even until after the Decease of my late
Husband: Since that time, as his Thoughts seemed to aim higher, so his Actions
were a little more insolent; and though the Matter was come to that pass, that
I must take all things in the best part, yet I was much offended with his
Arrogance, in thinking I had ability to requite his Services no otherwise, than
by giving up my self to him, as their Guerdon and Reward; besides, I did
dislike his secret Designs against, and, at length, his open Contempt of Me,
and the Force used to get me into his Power, lest otherwise he might be
frustrated in his Purpose. In the mean time, the whole Course of his Life was
so ordered, that it may be an Example, how Men, that undertake great Designs,
can craftily conceal their Purposes, till they obtain their Ends. For, I
thought, that his Sedulity and Diligence, in his speedy Obedience to all my
Commands, proceeded from no other Fountain, than his Loyal Desire to please me;
neither did I ever imagine, that he had any higher Wish or Design; neither did
I think, those more gracious Countenances, which I sometimes show toward my
Nobles, to engage them more readily to obey my Commands, would have exalted his
Mind, to promise to himself the Hope of a more extraordinary Courtesy from me;
yet he, turning even fortuitous things to his own Advantage, maintained Designs
unknown to me; and, by his wonted Observance, nourished his ancient Love; as
also by currying Favor with the Nobility, he was privily ambitious of a new
Favor, and he was so sedulous therein, that though I knew nothing of it, yet
when the Convention of the Estates was celebrated, he obtained a Chart from all
the Nobility, subscribed with their Hands, to make it more Authentic, wherein
they declared their Assent to the Marriage betwixt Me and Him, and promised to
expose their Lives and Fortunes to bring it to pass, and to be Enemies to all
those that should oppose it. And more easily to obtain the Assent of the
Nobles, he persuaded each of them, that all these things were managed by my
Consent. This Writing being once obtained, next, by degrees, he most humbly
sought for my Consent; but my Answer not suiting with his Desire, he began to
propound such things to himself, which are wont to occur in such great
Undertakings, as, the outward Demonstrations of my Good Will, the Ways by which
my Friends, or his Enemies, might hinder his Design; and, lest any of those,
who had subscribed, should withdraw their Assent, and many other things, which
were cast in, or came freely, to hinder his Purpose. At length, he determined
with himself, to pursue the Favor of his present Fortune, and to cast the
whole Business, with his Life and Hope, on the hazard of one Moment; so that,
being resolved to execute his Design to purpose, after he had waited 4 days, as
I was returning from visiting my Dear Son, he watched a convenient Place and
Time, and, on the way, seized me, with a strong Party of Men, and carried me
speedily to Dunbar. How I took the Fact, especially from him, of whom, amongst
all my Subjects, I expected no such thing, every one may easily judge. There I
upbraided him with my Favors toward him, and how honorably I had always
spoken before of his Manners and Behavior, and how ungratefully he had carried
it toward me: Other things I spoke, to free my self out of his Hands; his
Usage, indeed, was somewhat course, but his Words were fair and smooth, as,
that he would use me with all Honor and Observance, and would do his utmost
not to offend me in any thing; but for carrying me against my Will, into one of
my own Castles, for so bold an Attempt, he craved my Pardon, alleging, he was
forced, by the Power of Love, so to do, forgetting the Reverence and
Allegiance, which, as a Subject, he owed to me. He said further, That he was
compelled to go thither for fear of his Life. Then he began to rehearse to me
the whole Course of his Life, and lamented his Misfortune, that those, whom he
had never offended, were his bitter Enemies, and whose Malice had devised all
unjust ways to do him a Mischief; what envious Reflections were made upon him,
for the King's Death, and how unable he was to bear up against the hidden
Conspiracy of those of his Enemies, whom he knew not, because they pretended
Good Will toward him both in Speech and Behavior; neither was he able to
prevent those Treacheries, which he did know. Their Malice against him was so
great, that, at no Time or Place, he could live a quiet Life, unless he was
assured of my unchangeable Favor toward him: And to assure that, he knew but
one way, and that was, That I would vouchsafe to make him my Husband; withal,
he solemnly swore, that he did not seek Pre-eminence therein, or the Top and
Height of Dignity, but this one Thing, That he might be able to serve and obey
me, as hitherto he had done, all the Days of his Life. This his Oration, he
decked with that Eloquence, as his Cause required. But when he saw, I could not
be wrought upon, neither by Prayers nor Promises, at length, he showed me the
Transactions of the Nobility, and all the Estates, and what they had promised
under their Hands. This being produced before me on a sudden, and beyond my
Expectation, I leave it to the King, Queen, my Uncle, and the rest of my
Friends, Whether it might not administer a just Cause of Amazement to me:
Whereupon, when I saw my self in another Man's Power, separate from those, who
were wont to give me Counsel; yea, when I saw those Persons, on whose
Faithfulness and Prudence, I had cast my self, whose Power must confirm my
Authority, that otherwise would be little or none at all; I say, when I saw
such Men to have devoted themselves to gratify his Will and Desire, and I left
alone, as his Prey; I pondered many things in my Mind, but could not find a Way
how to extricate my self; neither did he give me any long time to consider of
the matter, but did press his Purpose with great eagerness: At last, when I saw
I had no hope to escape, and that there was not a Man in the Kingdom, that
would stir for my Deliverance, for I easily perceived by the Roll he showed me,
and by the great Silence of the Time, that All were drawn to his Party: When my
Anger was a little abated, I applied my Mind to consider his Request; Then I
began to set before my Eyes his Services in former Times, and the great Hopes I
had, he would constantly persist in the same for the future; And again, how
hardly my Subjects would endure a foreign Prince, who was unacquainted with
their Laws, That they would not suffer me to be a Widow, long; That a People,
prone to Tumults, could not be kept within the Bounds of their Duty, unless my
Authority was upheld and exercised by a Man, who was able to undergo the Toil
of governing the Commonwealth, and so to bridle the Insolence of the
Rebellious; that my Strength was weakened with the Weight of those things, ever
since I came into Scotland, and almost broke to nothing; insomuch, that I could
no longer bear the daily Tumults and Rebellions, that arose. Furthermore, by
reason of these Seditions, I was forced to create Four, or more, Lieutenants,
in diverse Parts of the Kingdom; most of which, under color of the Authority
granted by me, caused my Subjects to take Arms against me. For these Reasons,
when I saw, That, if I would support my Imperial State, I must incline my Heart
to Marriage; and, that my Subjects would not bear a foreign King; And, that
amongst my Subjects, there was none for Splendour of Family, for Prudence and
Valor, and other Endowments of Body and Mind, could exceed, or so much as bear
a comparison with, him, whom I have now married; I prevailed with my self to
comply with the universal Decree of my Estates, of which I spoke before. After
my Constancy was battered by these Reasons, partly by Force, partly by
Flattery, he obtained a Promise from me to marry him; which having done, I
could not obtain from him, (who feared, lest my Mind should change,) to put off
the Celebration of it, that so I might have had time to communicate the Matter
to the King and Queen of France, and to my other Friends beyond Sea; but, as he
audaciously began, so, that he might arrive at the top of his Desires, he never
gave over to solicit me by Arguments and earnest Entreaties, until at last he
compelled Me, not without Force, to put an end to the Matter begun, and that at
such a Time and Way, as seemed to him most convenient to his Purpose. And upon
this head, I cannot dissemble, but must needs say, that I was treated by him
otherwise, than I would, or than I had deserved of him; for he was more
solicitous to satisfy them, by whose Consent, tho extorted from them at the
beginning, he judges himself to have accomplished his Desires, (he having
deceived Them, as well as my self) than to gratify Me, by considering, what was
fit and creditable for me to do, who had been always brought up in the Rites
and Institutions of our Religion, from which, he, nor no Man living, shall ever
divert Me. In this Point, I confess, tho I acknowledge my Error, yet, I much
desire, that the King, the Queen, his Mother, my Uncle, nor other Friends of
mine, would not expostulate with him, or rub up old Sores. For now Matters
being so completed, that they cannot be undone, I take all things in the best
part; and, as he is indeed my Husband, I resolve now to look upon him, as one
that hereafter I will Love and Reverence; and they who profess themselves my
Friends, must needs carry the same Respects to him, since now we are joined in
the indissoluble Bond of Matrimony. Tho, in some things, he has carried
himself something negligently, and almost rashly, yet I impute it to his
immoderate Love toward Me, and do therefore entreat the King, Queen, my Uncle,
and other Friends, to respect him as much, as if all had been managed by their
Advice, even to this very Day; and, on the other side, We promise, in his
behalf, that he will gratify them in all things, which they shall desire.

This was the Remedy provided against the bad Reports of the World abroad; but
against Domestic Tumults they provided, after they had fixed those, by Gifts
at present, and Promises for the future, who were either Perpetrators or
Partisans in the King's Murder, The Queen frames an Association for the
Nobility to subscribe,
To make a Combination of the greater part of the Nobility; if that were done,
they might undervalue the rest; or, if they remained obstinate, cut them off.
Whereupon, they assembled many of the Nobility, and propounded to them the
Heads of the Capitulations, they were to swear: The sum was, That they should
maintain the Queen and Bothwel, and all their Actings; and on the other side,
They were to Favor and Countenance the Concerns of Those of the Confederates,
there present. A great many were persuaded before, and so subscribed; the rest,
perceiving it was bad to conspire, and as dangerous to refuse, they subscribed,
too. Murray was sent for, that his Authority (which was great, for his Virtue)
might give some Countenance to the thing. As he was on his Journey, he was
advised by his Friends, to consult his own Safety, and not to lie in Seton
House, where the Queen and the chief Conspirators were, but rather to lodge in
some Friends House in a Village hard by. Which the Earl of Murray refused to do,
He answered, That was not in his Power, but, come what would, he would never
assent to any flagitious Act, the rest he left to God. To the Courtiers, who
were appointed by the Queen, to debate with him about subscribing the League,
He answered, That he could not justly nor honestly make this League with the
Queen, (whom in all things, else it was his Duty to obey); That he was reconciled
to Bothwel, by the Queens Mediation: Whatever he had then promised, he would
observe to a tittle; neither was it Equitable, or Good for the Commonwealth,
that he should make another League or Combination with him, or any other Man.
The Queen accosted him more kindly than ordinary for some Days, and promised to
tell him her Mind in all things, yet she could not speak out for Shame, and
therefore tried his Mind by her Friends; They also, perceiving his Constancy in
that which was Right, openly confessed, what 'twas they desired: And seeing they
did no good by their underhand Ways, at length Bothwel set upon him, and after
much Discourse, told him, That he did that Fact not willingly, nor for himself
alone. His Countenance frowned at that Word; whereupon Bothwel, having
sometimes by serious Discourse, sometimes by terms near to railing, driven the
nail, as far as it would go, at last endeavored to cast in Seeds of Discord,
and to urge him to a Quarrel. He, on the contrary, answered moderately, gave no
just occasion for a Combat, yet kept himself upright, and did not depart, in
the least, from his Resolution. When Murray was versant in these straits for
some Days, he asked leave of the Queen, that, seeing there was no great need of
him at Court, he might have Liberty to retire to St. Andrews, or into Murray;
for he was willing to go out of the Way, That he might not be suspected to be
the Author of the Tumults, which, he foresaw, would arise. When he could not
obtain that, nor yet remain at Court without great and apparent Danger, He, at
last, got leave to travel, And therefore departs the Land.
but upon Condition, not to stay in England, but to pass either through
Flanders into Germany, or whither else he pleased. To go to Flanders, was all
one as to cast himself into Evident Danger, and therefore, with much ado, he
obtained leave to pass through England into France, and from thence, whither he
pleased himself. The Queen, being thus freed of a Free-hearted and popular
Person, endeavors to remove the other Obstacles to her Tyranny, and Those were
such, as would not willingly subscribe to her Wickedness; or, were not like
easily to acquiesce in her Designs. But she had a special hatred against those,
who, perceiving her to be no better affected toward her Son, than toward her
former Husband, made an Association at Sterlin, for no wicked Design, A
contrary Association entered into by several of the Nobility, to preserve the
young King.
but only to Defend the young Prince, which his Mother desired to have under
the Power of his Father-in-Law. As for him, every Body knew, that he would make
away with the Child, as soon as ever he had Opportunity so to do, that so he
might not Live to be a Revenger of his Fathers death, nor to prevent his
Children from the Crown. The chief of that Combination, were, the Earls of
Argyle, Morton, Mar, Athol and Glencarn; besides others of the same Order, but
inferior, and next in Degree, as Patrick Linsey, and Robert Boyd, with their
Friends and Partners, who had adjoin'd themselves to them. But Argyle, with the
same Levity, that he came in to them, in a Day or Two, discovered their Designs
to the Queen; and Boyd, was, by large Promises, wrought over to the contrary
Party. Next to these, she suspected the Families of the Humes, the Carrs, and
the Scots, living by the Borders of England, whose Power she sought, by all
means, to lessen, and for that there seemed a just occasion to be offered. For,
when Bothwel was preparing an Expedition into Liddisdale, to make amends for
the disgrace, he had received there the Autumn before; and also, to get some
Credit by his Arms, to take off the envy of the King's Death, all the chief of
the Families in Teviotdale were commanded by the Queen, to come in to the
Castle of Edinburgh, that there, for some short time, they might be secure, as
in free Custody; upon pretense, that they might not be led into an Expedition,
which did not seem likely to be successfully accomplished, against their Wills;
and they also, if at Liberty, might disturb the design, out of Envy; and, in
their Absence, she might inure the Clans to the Government of others; and so,
by degrees, wear off the Love of their old Patrons and Masters. But they,
imagining, that there was some deeper Project hid under that Command, went home
in the Night, all except Andrew Carr, who was commonly thought not ignorant of
the Parricide, and Walter Carr of Sesford, a Man, that, by reason of his
Innocent Life, suspected nothing. Hume, being often summoned by Bothwel to come
to Court, refused so to do; as knowing the King's thoughts toward him, yet
notwithstanding the design for the Expedition proceeds, and the Queen staid at
Borthwick Castle, about 8 Miles from Edinburgh. In the mean time, they, who had
united to defend the King, being not ignorant of Bothwels intention toward
him, thought it necessary to proceed to Action, not only for their own
Security, but also, that, by demanding Justice upon the Author of the King's
Murder, they might acquit the Scottish Name from the Infamy, under which it lay
amongst foreign Nations. And therefore, supposing the common People would
follow their Motions, they privately levied about 2000 Horse: So that the Queen
knew nothing of what was Acted, till Hume came to Borthwick Castle, with part
of the Army, and besieged Her, and Bothwel, together. But the other Part of the
Conspirators, not coming in at the time appointed, and he having not force
enough, to stop all Passages; and was not so active neither, as he might have
been, because the rest had neglected their Parts; The Queen escapes from the
associated Nobles, in Man's Apparel.
First, Bothwel, made his escape, and after him, the Queen in Man's apparel, and
went directly to Dunbar. Athol was the occasion, why his Associates came not in
seasonably enough; For he, either amazed at the Greatness of the Undertaking;
or, detained by his own sluggish Temper, kept the rest at Sterlin, until the
Opportunity of the Service was lost; yet, that they might seem to have done
something, a great part of them were sent to besiege Edinburgh. James Balfure
was Governor of the Castle there, put in by Bothwel, as being a Partner in the
Parricide, and Author of, or else Privy to, all his Designs; but when he saw he
had no Pay for his Service, and was not so well respected by the Tyrants as
he expected, for they had endeavored to take away the Command from him, he
drove out Those of the contrary Faction, and brought the Castle under his sole
Power; he then promised the public Vindicators of the Parricide, That he would
do them no hurt, and was creating of Conditions, how to deliver it up. There
were then in the Town, the Principal of the Queen's Faction, John Hamilton, the
Archbishop of St. Andrews; George Gordon, Earl of Huntly, and John Lesly,
Bishop of Ross: They understanding, that their Enemies were received into the
Town, flew to the Townhouse, and there offered themselves Captains to the
Multitude, to drive them out; but very few coming in to them, they were driven
back to the Castle; they were received into it by Balfure, and a few days after
were sent away safe, a by-way: For Balfure, having not yet fully agreed with
the other Side, would not then cut off all his Hopes of Pardon from those of
his Party: The Town easily came into the Combination, for it had been burdened
a little before with new Taxes from the Queen; and, in the public Necessity,
they expected no Moderation from her Party, and were unanimously offended with
her Tyranny; yea, as often as they had Liberty to express their Sentiments, they
cursed the Court-Wickedness with most grievous Execrations.

Matters being thus slowly carried by the Faction of the Nobles at Borthwick,
the Queen and Bothwel, by the neglect of the Guards, escaped by Night, and with
a small Retinue came to Dunbar, where they had a well-fortify'd Castle to
secure themselves in; Thereupon, there followed so great a change of things,
that they, who were lately in great Despair, now, by the flocking in of those
to them, who either were Partners in their Evils, or else followed the Shadow
of the Royal Name, grew strong enough, as they thought, to cope with and subdue
their Adversaries. On the other side, the Vindicators of Liberty were driven to
great Straits; for, to their great Disappointment, there were but a few came in
to so renowned an Undertaking; the Heat of the Vulgar, as is usual, quickly
abating, and a great part of the Nobility being very averse, or at least
standing aloof off, expecting the Issue of the others Danger; besides, though
they were superior in Number, yet they wanted Artillery to take in Castles:
Seeing then no Issue of their Counsels at present, Necessity in a manner
compelling them, they thought to return without effecting any thing: But the
Queen decided their Doubts, for she, And arms against them.
taking Courage from the Numbers she had, resolved with them to march for
Leith, to try her Fortune near at hand, imagining also, That at her Coming,
greater Concourse would have been made to her; and That her Boldness would
strike Terror into her Enemies; Besides, the Success of former times had so
elated her Spirit, That she thought now hardly any Man would stand to look her
in the Face. This her Confidence was much heightened by her Flatterers, and
especially by Edmond Hayes, a Lawyer; he told her, That all things were
pervious to her Valor, That her Enemies wanted Force, and were at their Wits
end, and, at the very Noise of her Coming, would be packing away: Whereas,
indeed, the matter was far otherwise, and in the present Circumstances, nothing
had been better for her, than Delay; for, if she had kept her self in the
Castle of Dunbar, but three Days longer, the Vindicators of Liberty, being
destitute of all Preparation for War, as having attempted their Liberty in
vain, must have been forced to depart every one to his own House. However, she
marched from Dunbar, being excited by bad Counsel, and by vain hopes; yet she
marched slowly, because she distributed Arms to the Countrymen, that she
gathered up by the way. At length a little before Night, they came to Seton,
and because they could not be quartered there, they divided their Number into
two Neighboring Villages, both called Preston: From thence a fearful Alarm was
brought to Edinburgh before Midnight, and presently the Word was given, To your
Arms; They rose out of their Beds, and made all the haste they could into the
Fields adjoining, and there having gathered a good Body together by Sunrising,
they set them in Battel-array; thence they marched to Musselburgh, to pass the
River Esk, before the Bridge and Ford were possessed by the Enemy, (that Village
is but two Miles from Preston) but meeting no body, and perceiving no Noise at
all, they placed Guards and Sentinels, and went to refresh themselves with
Food. In the mean time, the Scouts which were sent for Espial, seeing a few
Horsemen, drove them into the Village, but did not dare to follow them
further, for fear of an Ambush; so that, they brought back no certain News of
the Army, only that the Enemy was a marching: Whereupon the Vindicators of
Liberty, marching out of Musselburgh, saw the Enemy standing in Battel-array,
upon the brow of an Hill over against them, and that they kept their Ground.
The Hill being so steep, that they could not come at them, without Prejudice,
they drew a little to the right, both to have the Sun on their Backs, as also
to gain an easier Ascent, and to fight upon a more advantageous Ground; that
Design of theirs deceived the Queen, for she thought, they had fled, and were
marching to Dalkeith, a Neighbor-town of the Earl of Morton's; she was fully
persuaded, that the Terror of her Royal Name was so great, that they durst not
stand; A State Maxim, irrefragably true.
but she quickly found, That Authority, as it is gotten by good Arts, so may be
quickly lost by bad; and that Majesty destitute of Virtue, is soon brought to
nothing. In their March, the Dalkeithians brought them forth all manner of
Provisions in Abundance. When they had refreshed themselves, and quenched their
Thirst, which much annoyed them before, as soon as ever they got a convenient
place, they divided their Army into two Bodies, Morton commanded the first,
assisted by Alexander Hume and his Vassals: The second was led on by the Earls
of Glencarn, Both Armies ready to engage.
Mar, and Athol; when they were thus ready to charge, Crock the French
Ambassador came to them, Monsieur Crock, the French Ambassador mediates for a
Peace.
he prefaced to them, by an Interpreter, how he had always studied the Good and
Tranquillity of the Scots, and that he was now of the same Mind, and therefore
he earnestly desired, if possible, that the Controversy might be decided to the
Satisfaction of both Parties, without Force or Bloodshed, wherein he offered
his Service, alleging, That the Queen also was not averse from Peace; and, to
incline them to believe it, he told them, she would give a present Pardon, and
Oblivion of what was done, and she faithfully promised, That they should all be
indemnified, for taking up Arms against the Supreme Magistrate. When Mr.
Crock's Interpreter had thus spoken, Morton answered, They had not took up Arms
against the Queen, but against the Murderer of the late King, whom, if she
would deliver up to Punishment, or sever her self from him, then she should
understand, They and their Fellow Subjects desired nothing more, than to
persist in their Duty to Her: Otherwise, no Agreement could be made. Glencarn
added, That they came not thither to receive Pardon for taking up Arms, but to
give it. Crock, seeing their Resolution, and knowing well, That what they spoke
was true, But not prevailing, he withdraws himself.
and what they desired was just, craved leave to depart, and so went to
Edinburgh. In the mean time, the Queen's Army kept it self within the ancient
Camp-Bounds of the English; it was a Place naturally higher than the rest; and
besides, fortified with a Work and Ditch; from whence Bothwel showed himself,
mounted on a brave Steed, and proclaimed, by an Herald, that he was ready to
fight a Duel with any one of the adverse Party. James Murray, a noble Young
Man, Bothwel's daring Challenge answered:
offered himself from the other Army; he had done the same before by a Chartel,
but suppressed his Name; (as I said before,) Bothwel refused him, alleging,
That he was not a fit Match for him, neither in Dignity nor Estate; Then came
forth William Murray, James's elder Brother, affirming, that if Mony-Matters
were subducted, he was as powerful as Bothwel, but in Antiquity of Family and
Integrity of Repute, his Superior: He also was refused, as being but lately
made a Knight, and of the second Rank; many of the first Rank offered
themselves, especially Patrick Lindsy, he desired it as the only Reward of all
his Labors, which he had undergone to maintain the Honor of Scotland, that he
might be permitted to fight with Bothwel: Bothwel excepted against him, too;
and not knowing how creditably to come off, the Queen interposed her Authority,
and, forbidding him to fight, ended the Controversy: But the Queen forbids the
Duel.
Then marching through the Army on Horseback, she tried how they all stood
affected. Bothwel's Kindred and Friends desired to fight; but the rest told
her, that there were many brave Soldiers in the adverse Army, who being well
exercised in Arms, the Hazard of a Fight was dangerous; As for themselves, they
were ready, but the Commonalty, of which they had a great many, were averse
from the Cause; and therefore 'twas much fitter, The Queen's Army refuses to
fight;
that Bothwel himself should maintain his own Cause in a Duel, than that he
should expose so many brave Men, and especially the Queen her self, to so great
Hazard; but if she were fully resolved to fight, yet 'twas best to defer it,
till to Morrow: For, 'twas said, that the Hamiltons were a coming with 500
Horse, and that they were not far off; with the Conjunction of their Forces,
they might then more safely advise about the main; for at that time, the Earl
of Huntly, and John Hamilton, Archbishop of St. Andrews, had gathered their
Clans together to Hamilton, and the day after were coming to the Queen;
whereupon she gnash'd her Teeth, and fell a Weeping, casting out many
Reproaches against the Nobles, and, by a Messenger, desires of the contrary
Army, that they would send William Kircade of In Fife.
Grange to Her, that she would speak with him, about Conditions of Peace, in
the Interim the Army should not advance; neither did the Army of the
Vindicators proceed, but they stood near, and in a low place, so that the
Enemies Ordnance might not annoy them. Whilst the Queen was conferring with
Kircade, Whereupon Bothwel flies, and the Queen is taken Prisoner.
Bothwel was bid to shift for himself, (for that was it which she aimed at, by
pretending a Conference) who made such fearful haste to Dunbar, that he
commanded two Horsemen, that accompanied him, to return back again. Such a
Load of Guilt lay upon his Mind, that he could hardly trust his own Friends.
The Queen, when she thought he was out of Danger, articled with Kircade, that
the rest of her Army should pass quietly home, and so she came with him to the
Nobles, clothed only with a Tunicle, and that a mean and threadbare one too,
reaching but a little below her Knees: Of the Van of the Army, she was
received, not without Demonstration of their former Reverence; but when she
desired, that they would dismiss her to meet the Hamiltons, who were said to be
coming on, promising to return again, and commanded Morton to undertake for
her, (for she hoped, by fair Promises, to do what she would) when she could not
obtain it, she brake forth into Bitterness of Language, and upbraided the
Commanders with what she had done for them; they also heard her with Silence:
But when she came to the second Body, there was an unanimous Cry from them all;
Burn the Whore, burn the Parricide. King Henry was painted in one of the
Banners, dead, and his little Son by him, craving Vengeance of God for the
Murder; that Banner two Soldiers stretched out betwixt two Pikes, and set
before her Eyes, whithersoever she went; at this Sight she swooned; and could
scarce be kept upon her Horse; but, recovering her self, she remitted nothing
of her former Fierceness, uttering Threats and Reproaches, shedding Tears, and
manifesting other Appendexes to Women's Griefs. In her March, she made what
Delay she could, expecting, if any Aid might come from elsewhere; but one of
the Company cried out, There was no reason she should expect the Hamiltons, for
there was not an armed Man, in many Miles of the place: At last a little before
Night, she entered Edinburgh, her Face being covered with Dust and Tears, as if
Dirt had been cast upon it, all the People running out to see the Spectacle,
she past through a great part of the City in great Silence, the Multitude
leaving her so narrow a Passage, that scarce one could go a breast; when she
was going up to her Lodging, one Woman of the Company prayed for her; but she
turning to the People, told them, besides other threatening Words, That she
would burn the City, and quench the Fire with the Blood of the perfidious
Citizens. When she showed her self weeping out of the Window, and a great
Concourse of People was made, amongst whom, some did commiserate her sudden
change of Fortune: The former Banner was held out to her, whereupon she shut
the Window, and flung in. When she had staid there two days, she was sent
Prisoner, by the Order of the Nobles, to a Castle situated in Lough-Levin; for
Edinburgh-Castle was yet held by Balfure, who, though he favored the
Vindicators, yet he had not made any Conditions for the Surrender of the Castle.

In the mean time, the Bishop of Dunblane, The Bishop of Dunblane chouzed in
his Embassy to France.
who was sent Ambassador into France, to excuse the Queen's Marriage, being
ignorant of all that was done in Scotland, after his Departure, came to that
Court, at the time, whilst these last Transactions were on foot, and obtained a
Day for Audience. The very same day, there came 2 Letters to the King and his
Mother, one from Crock, his Ambassador, another from Ninian Cockerburn, a Scot,
who had served, as Captain of Horse, some years in France; both of them
discovered the present Posture of Affairs in Scotland. The Scots Ambassador,
being admitted to the King's Presence, made a long and accurate Speech, partly
to excuse the Queen's Marriage, without the Advice of her Friends; partly, to
commend Bothwel to the Skies, beyond all Right and Reason. The Queen of France
interrupted the vain Man, and showed him the Letters she had received from
Scotland; how that the Queen was a Prisoner, and Bothwel was fled; whereupon,
he was astonished at the sudden ill News, and held his Peace: They who were
present, did partly jeer, and partly smile at, this unlook'd-for Accident;
there were none of them all, but thought, she suffered deservedly.

About the same time, Wondrous Discoveries concerning the King's Murder, in
Bothwels Cabinet of Letters.
Bothwel sent one of his faithfullest Servants into the Castle of Edinburgh, to
bring him a silver Cabinet, which had been sometimes Francis's, King of France,
as appeared by the Cyphres on the outside, wherein were Letters writ, almost
all, with the Queen's own Hand, in which the King's Murder, and the things
which followed, were clearly discovered, and 'twas written in almost all of
them, that, as soon as he had read them, he should burn them. But Bothwel,
knowing the Queen's Inconstancy, as having had many evident Examples of it in a
few Years, had preserved the Letters; that so, if any Difference should arise
betwixt him and her, he might use them as a Testimony for himself, and thereby
declare, That he was not the Author, but only a Party, in the King's Murder.
Balfure delivered this Cabinet to Bothwel's Servant, but vvithal, he informed
the Chiefs of the adverse Party, What he had sent, Whither, and by Whom;
vvhereupon, they took him, and found, in the Letters, great and mighty Matters
contained, which, though before shrewdly suspected, yet could never so clearly
be made forth; but here the whole wicked Plot was visibly exposed to view:
Bothwel, not speeding in any of his Affairs, and being destitute of all Help or
Hope to recover the Kingdom, fled, first to the Orcades, then to the Schetland
Isles; and there, being driven to great Want, he exercised Piracy. In the
Interim, many dealt with, and desired, the Queen to separate her Cause from
Bothwel's; (for, if he was punished, she might easily be restored with the
Good Will of all her Subjects:) But the fierce Woman, bearing, as yet, the
Spirit of her former Fortune, and in^ag'd with her present Troubles, answered,
That she would rather live with him in the utmost Adversity, than without him
in the Royalest Condition. But amongst the Nobles, there were great Thoughts of
Heart; the Revengers of the Parricide hoped, that at the noise of so famous a
Business, the Approbation of the Better Part, if not All, would have concurred
with them; but it fell out far otherwise, for popular Envy, being abated,
partly by space of Time, and partly by the consideration of the Uncertainty of
human Affairs, was turned into Commiseration; yea, some of the Nobility, did
then no less bewail the Queen's Calamity, The Queen pitied in her Distress.
than heretofore they had execrated her Cruelty; Both which they did, rather by
Inconstancy of Mind, than by any propense Affection to either side: So that it
evidently appeared, that, in such troubled Waters, they did not seek the
Public Peace, but rather fish for their own private Advantage; many also
desired Quietness, and they weighed within themselves, which Party was
strongest, and so were inclined to side with the most Powerful. Their Faction
was thought to be the strongest, who, either consented to the Murder, or, when
the thing was done, in obsequiousness to the Queen, subscribed to that
sceleratious Fact: The chief of them came in to Hamilton, and being very
strong, would receive neither Letters, The Hamiltons stir in her behalf.
nor Messengers, from the contrary Party, in order to a Settlement; neither did
they spare to reproach them with all kind of calumniating Language; and they
were so much the more enraged, because the greatest part of the Nobles, who
respected rather the Blasts of Fortune, than the Equity of the Cause, did not
come in to the Vindicators; for they that were not against them, they concluded
were for them. Moreover, they esteemed it a piece of Vainglory, that the
Vindicators should enter before them into the Metropolis of the Kingdom, and
from thence send for them, who were the greater Number, and more powerful. The
other Party, though they had not imperiously commanded them, but only humbly
desired; yet, to prescinde any Show of imputable Arrogance, they prevailed with
the Ministers of the Churches, to write jointly to them all, and severally to
each in particular, That, in so dangerous a time, they should not be wanting to
the Public Peace; but, setting aside private Animosities, they should consult,
What was most expedient for the Public Good. These Letters did no more Good
with the contrary Faction, than Those of the Nobles before; they all making the
same Excuses, as if it had been so agreed purposely between them. Afterward,
the Queen's Faction met together in diverse Places, and, finding no means to
accomplish their Designs, they all slipped off, and dispersed several ways. In
the Interim, the Vindicators of the public Parricide dealt with the Queen,
(whom they could not separate from the Concerns of the Murderers) to resign up
her Government, upon pretense of Sickness, or any other specious Allegation,
and to commit the Care of her Son, and the Administration of Public Affairs,
to which of the Nobles, Governors appoinetd for the young King, by the Queen
her self.
she pleased. At last, with much ado, she appointed, as Governors to the
Child, James, Earl of Murray, if, upon his Return home, he did not refuse the
Charge; James, Duke of Castle-herault; Matthew, Earl of Lennox; Gilespy, Earl
of Argyle; John, Earl of Athol; James, Earl of Morton; Alexander, Earl of
Glencarn; and John, Earl of Mar. Moreover, they sent Proxies to see the King
placed in his Royal Throne, and so to enter on the Government, either at
Sterlin, or any other Place, if they thought fit. These things were acted, July
the 25 th, in the Year of our Lord, 1567. A little before, James, Earl of
Murray, hearing how Matters went at home, returned through France, and was
pretty nobly entertained at Court; yet so, that Hamilton (whose Faction, the
Guises knew, were more intimately affected toward them) was far better
received, which was occasioned chiefly by the Guises, who were averse to all
Murray's Designs. After he was dismissed, the Archbishop of Glasgow, who called
himself the Queen of Scots Ambassador, told the Court, That James, though
absent, yet was the Chief of the Faction; and, as in former times, all things
were acted by his Influence, so now he was sent for, as an Head to the Body of
them. Hereupon, some were sent after to bring him back; but he, being
forewarned by his Friends, had set Sail from the Haven of Deip, where he was,
before the King's Letters came, and arriving in England, The Earl of Murray
returns from Travel.
was honorably entertained by all Orders of Men, and so sent home. There he
was received with the high Gratulation and Joy of all the People, especially of
the Vindicators; and they all earnestly desired him to undertake the
Government, whilst the King, his Sister's Son, was yet a Child: for he alone
was able to manage that great Trust, with the least Envy, because of his
Propinquity in Blood, his known Valor in many Dangers, his great Popularity
grounded on his Deserts; and moreover, the Queen desired it, too. He, tho
knowing, what they had spoke was true, yet, desired a few Days of Deliberation,
before he gave in his Answer. In the mean time, he writes earnestly to the
Heads of the other Faction, and chiefly to Argyle, as being his Kinsman, and
one, whom, by reason of ancient Acquaintance, he was loath to offend; he told
him, in what posture things were, and what the Infant-King's Party did desire
of him, and therefore he entreated him, by their Nearness of Blood, by their
ancient Friendship, and by the common Safety of their Country, that he would
give him opportunity to speak with him, that so, by his Assistance, himself and
their Country might be delivered out of the present Difficulties. He also wrote
to the rest, according to every ones Place and Interest; and, in general, he
desired of them all, that, seeing Matters were in such Confusion, there was no
likelihood of a Settlement, without a chief Magistrate; That they should all
agree, to meet together, as soon as might be, in a Place they should judge most
convenient, and so, by common Consent, to settle Matters. At length, being not
able to obtain a Meeting from the One Faction, nor any longer delay of a
Convention from the Other, with the unanimous Consent of all, there present, he
was elected REGENT. And is chosen Regent.


JAMES the VIth, the CVIIIth King.
John Knox preaches a Sermon at the Coronation of K. James the 6 th. The
Coronation Oath taken by Proxies, by reason of the King's Minority.
ON the 29 th of August, after an excellent Sermon made by John Knox, James, the
Sixth of that Name, began his Reign; James, Earl of Morton, and Alexander Hume,
took the Oath for him, that he would observe the Laws; they also promised, in
his Name, that he would observe that Doctrine, and those Rites of Religion,
which were then publicly taught and practiced, and oppose the contrary. A few
days after, Hamilton's Partisans murmured, That a few Persons, and those none
of the powerfullest neither, had, without their Consent, and contrary to their
Expectation, grasped all things into their own Hands: When they had tried all
the Nobility one by one, they found few of their Opinion, besides those who
first came in to them, for many were rather Spectators than Actors of what was
done. At length, they wrote to the Royalists, That Argyle was ready to give a
Meeting, to confer with the Earl of Murray. These Letters being directed to the
Earl of Murray, without any other Title of Honor, were, by the Council's
Advice, rejected, and the Messenger dismissed, in effect, without an Answer.
But Argyle, knowing what had offended in superscribing his Letters, and,
trusting to the Faithfulness of the Regent, with a few of the chief of his
Faction, came to Edinburgh, where having received Satisfaction, That 'twas not
out of any slighting of those Nobles that were absent, but mere Necessity so
requiring, that had caused them to make such haste, in settling a chief
Magistrate: A few Days after, he came to the public Convention of the Estates.

The Nineteenth BOOK.
WHEN the King was set up, and the Power of the Regent almost settled, there
was Quietness from Force and Arms, but the Peace was but Ticklish, Men's minds
were yet in a Fermentation, and their Indignation, which they could not hide,
did seem to portend some sudden Mischief. In this great uncertainty of Affairs,
all Men's thoughts and Eyes were fixed upon, what the ensuing Parliament would
do; The time of its Sitting was the 25 th of August, where the Assembly was so
Numerous, that no Man, ever before, remembered the like Concourse. Therein the
Authority of the Regent was confirmed; but, about the Queen, they differed in
their Opinions; for, it appearing by many Testimonies and Proofs, especially by
her own Letters to Bothwel, that the whole Plot of the bloody Fact was laid by
Her; Some being moved with the Heinousness of the thing, and Others being
afterward made acquainted therewith by Her, lest They themselves should be
punished, as Accessories to so odious a Crime, to remove her Testimony out of
the way, Voted, That she should suffer the utmost extremity of the Law; but the
Major part Sentenced Her only to be kept in Prison. After the Parliament rose,
The Winter was spent in settling Judicatories, and punishing Delinquents. The
Ambassadors of the French and English had Audience, they Both desired to see
the Queen; but, she being a Prisoner on a public Account, 'twas denied them:
None but Bothwel was then in Arms; Whereupon some were sent with a Navy, to
catch him as he was exercising Piracy near the Orcades and the Isles of
Schetland. The public Stock was then so low, that they were forced to borrow
Money of James Douglas, Earl of Morton, to rig and fit the Navy; so that his
private Purse, at that Time, bore the Burden of the public Charge. Bothwel was
there, in a manner, secure, both because of the fierceness of Winter-Tempests,
then raging in those Seas, which made them inaccessible for a Fleet; as also,
because he knew the Treasury, which he himself had exhausted, could not afford
Money to set out One; so that by the sudden coming of William Kircade, of
Grange, who commanded the Fleet, he was almost surpised, some of his Company
were taken, Bothwel flies to the Northern Isles, and from thence to Denmark.
but he himself escaped, with a few in Company, by the contrary side of the
Island amongst the Shallows and Fords, where great Ships could not follow, and
so sailed to Denmark: Where giving no good Account, Whence he came, nor Whither
he was Bound, he was put in Ward; and afterward, being known by some Merchants,
Where he is imprisoned, and dies, Distracted.
he was clapped up close Prisoner; where, after ten Years nasty Imprisonment, and
other Miseries, at last he grew Mad, and came to a Death, suitable to his base
and wicked Life.

At the beginning of the next Spring, the Regent determined to make a Progress
over the whole Kingdom, to settle Courts of Justice there, that so he might
repair and amend what was Amiss, or else shrewdly Shaken, by the Tumults of the
former Years. Which Proceeding of his was variously interpreted, according to
Men's several Humors and Dispositions; The adverse Faction declaimed every
where against the Regent's Severity; or, as they phras'd it, Cruelty, which was
formidable to them, who, by reason of the greatness of their Offenses, could
not endure to be regulated by the Law, in regard they had been used to
Licentiousness in former Times: But, if the Queen were set at Liberty, some of
them had Rewards; Others, Impunity, in their Eye, by which means many were
drawn in to the contrary Faction; yea, some of those too, who had been
Instruments in her Apprehension.

Maitland was as great an Enemy to Bothwel, (whom he looked upon, as a vile and
naughty Person, and one that would have cut his Throat,) as he was a Favourer
of the Queen's Affairs, and because he was out of hope to overthrow him, as
long as the Queen was alive, therefore he inclined, in the Parliament, to that
side that would have had her punished according to Law. James Balfure was in
the like Circumstances, as imagining Bothwel to be his implacable Enemy, tho
neither of them was thought innocent in the matter of the King's Death. But
when Bothwel was taken, and kept Prisoner in Denmark, they then applied their
Thoughts wholly to the Deliverance of the Queen; not only, because they hoped
for an impunity of their common Crime more easily from her; but also, because,
they thought, She, that had made away her Husband, would do but little better
with her Son, whose Infancy and Shadow of Royal Name was That alone, which kept
her from the Throne; but besides, they judged it also for their own Security,
lest the Son should come to the Kingdom to be a Revenger of his Father's Death.
Moreover, they were no obscure Conjectures, That the Queen's mind was not much
abhorrent from such an Attempt; For she was often heard to say, The Child was
not long-lived, for a skilful Astrologer had told her at Paris, that her first
Child would not live above a Year, and (it is thought) that she her Self came
once to Sterlin, in the same Hope, intending to bring the Child with her to
Edinburgh, which Suspicion caused John Erskin, Governor of the Castle, not to
suffer the Child to be taken from him; it also made a great part of the
Nobility, then met at Sterlin, to associate themselves, by Oath, to maintain
the said young Prince in Safety.

Moreover, the Hamiltons, were, might and main, for freeing the Queen; The
Queen's Party, of which the Hamiltons were the chief, design Her Deliverance,
out of Durance.
because, if her Son were removed, by her means, They were one degree nearer to
the Crown, and after that, 'twere no hard task to take her off also, because,
she was hated of all for her Crimes; and having once been stopped in her
Tyranny, would afterward let forth the Reins looser, and more impetuously, to
Cruelty. Argyle and Huntly, of which one had a Mother, the other a Wife, of the
Family of the Hamiltons, did cherish their hopes, and wished them good Success,
but they had also proper Reasons of their own to incline them so to do;
because, neither of them was judged to be wholly ignorant, or guiltless, of the
Queen's Crimes; Besides, William Murray of In Strath^arn.
Tillibarden, being alienated, both by Reason of his different Opinion, in
point of Religion, and bearing also a private Grudg against the Regent, tho he
had been highly serviceable in taking the Queen; yet, did not only revolt from
the Royal Party himself, but also drew a great many of his Friends along with
him, upon proposal of no small Rewards to them. These were the Principals in
delivering the Queen, there were many others also that fell in with their
Party, whom either domestic Necessity, private Grudges, desire of Revenge,
Hope of bett'ring their Fortune, or else Propinquity or Obligation to those
above named, did draw in and engage.

In this troublesome state of Affairs, the Regent was equally unmovable
against the Entreaties of his Friends, and the Threats of his Enemies, tho he
knew, by the public Libels, which they posted up and down, the Cause of their
hatred, and their desire of Revenge: And tho some Astrologers, not unacquainted
with the Plots designed against him, did foretell, he should not live beyond
such a Day; yet he persisted in his purpose, often saying, The Regent
remarkable Speech and Resolu^io^*
That he knew well enough, he must die one time or other; and that he could
never part with his Life more nobly or creditably, than by procuring the
public Tranquillity of his Native Country. And therefore, first, he summoned a
Convention of the Estates at Glasgow, whither the Lennox Men, the Renfroans and
the Men of Clydsdale, were commanded to come, and whilst he was busied there,
in the Administration of Justice, and in the punishment of Offenders, the Plot,
so long agitated, for the Deliverance of the Queen, took effect. The manner of
it was This. In the Castle, that the Queen was kept in, in Lough-Levin, there
was the Regent's Mother, and his 3 Brother's by another Father, with abundance
of other Women; yet, none were admitted to visit the Queen, but such as were
well known; or else, that came by the Regents Order. Of these domestic
Attendants, the Queen made choice of George Douglas, as fittest for her
Purpose; He was the Regent's youngest Brother, a young Man, ingenious enough,
and, by reason of his Age, apt to be imposed upon by female Inticements; He,
being something familiar with Her, on pretense to attend her in such Sports, as
Courts, at idle times, refresh themselves withal, undertook to corrupt some of
the common Servants of the Castle, by Gifts and Promises; and She, having
entrusted him therein, would not deny any thing to such a Person, from whom she
expected her Liberty; George then, having a promise of Indemnity from her for
himself, and his Partisans, and being excited with the hopes of great Wealth
and Power for the future, not without the Consent of his Mother, (as was verily
thought) acted all that ever he could to bring the thing about. And tho some
Persons did smell the Design, and acquainted the Regent therewith, yet he put
such a confidence in Those he had placed there, that he changed none of the old
Guard, only George himself was commanded out of the Island; whereupon, he
departed to the next Village, on the edge of the Lough; where, having before
corrupted the Officers of the Castle with Money, he had, in a manner, a freer
Communication with the Queen, by Letters, than before; whereupon, there were
not only those Scots admitted to a partnership in the Plot, who were
discontented at the present State of things, but the French were associated
too, by James Hamilton, who had been Regent some Years before; and by James
Beton, Archbishop of Glasgow; the Scots were to do the Work, and the French to
pay the Wages.

About the end of April, an Ambassador came from France, and, in the Name of
his King, An Ambassador from France.
desired leave to visit the Queen, which, if he did not obtain, he pretended,
he would presently depart. The Regent told him, 'twas not in his Power, That
the Queen was not made Prisoner by him, neither could he determine any thing in
the Case, without advising with Those who had first committed Her, and with
Others who had afterward confirmed by an Act of Parliament, what was done;
Nevertheless he would gratify his Sister, and the King his Ally, in what he
could, and would call an Assembly of the Nobles, the 20 th of the next Month in
order to that End. With that Answer the Ambassador was somewhat pacified, and
the Regent went on in his Judicatories; Whereupon the Queen, The Queen escapes
out of Prison, and gathers Forces against the Regent.
having bribed the Master of a Vessel, Her other Companions being sent about
sleeveless Errands, was brought out of the Lough; Her escape being told to
those that were then at Dinner in the Castle, they made a great stir, but to
little purpose, for all the Boats were haled a Shore, and their Loop-holes, to
put out their Oars, were all stopped up, so that no speedy Pursuit could be made.
There were Horsemen expecting the Queen on the other side the Lough, who
carried her to the several Houses of the Partisans in the Design, and the Day
after, which was May the 3 d, she came to Hamilton, a Town 8 Miles distant from
Glasgow; when the thing was noised abroad, many came in to Her, some
distrusting the King's Party, which they looked upon as not very strong; Others
in hope of Favor from the Queen; and some, in confidence of a Reward for their
old Services, in this Tumult, discovered their Minds; and part of them, having
obtained Pardon for what was past, expecting the Event of Fortune, were but
loose Adherents to the Regent. The Defection of others, was not so much wondered
at, but the revolt of Robert Boyd, who, till that very Day, had obtained a
great opinion for his Constancy, afforded matter of Discourse; He, being
brought up on the ruins of a Noble Family (as I said before, in the life of
King James the 3 d,) parsimoniously and meanly under his Father, a valiant Man,
and emulous of the ancient Frugality, followed the same course of Life, as the
rest of his Kin did, viz. by applying himself to richer Families to make way to
repair his own, lately flourishing, but now decaying one, to their ancient
Estate and Dignity. Whereupon, his Father and He first applied themselves to
the Hamiltons, who were than uppermost. And when their Regentship was laid
down, and the chief Magistracy settled in the Queen Dowager; and Controversies
about Religion began to arise, he joined himself to the Reformers, to which his
Father was most averse. That Faction was accounted the most potent, to That he
adhered, till the Queen's coming out of France; yea, he grew very renowned for
his Constancy, Fortitude and Prudence; So that Gilespy, Earl of Argyle, was so
taken with him, that he did almost nothing without his Advice. But, when some
of the Nobles had associated at Sterlin, not for any Treasonable Project, but
only to defend the King, he, indeed, subscribed the League too; but, with great
Levity, both himself, and Argyle, who was guided by his Counsel, discovered the
whole Intrigue to the Queen. From that time forward, Boyd sided with the Queen,
in all her Designs against his old Friends, being well reputed of on that side;
but by those, he deserted, he was accounted a Turn-coat, and an inconstant
Person. When the Queen was committed to Prison, Boyd applied himself to Murray
the Regent, and was so well respected by him, for his industrious Ingenuity,
that he was admitted into his Cabinet-Council; and tho several Opinions past
upon him by others, yet he was in high Favor with the Regent at Glasgow in his
Juridical Processes; but when he perceived it was like to come to Blows, he
went off privately to the Queen, and from thence sent a Letter to the Earl of
Morton, by his Son, excusing his Departure, and alleging, he might probably do
the Royalists as much Service, there, as if he had staid with them. His revolt,
by reason of the good Opinion many had of his Conversation and Manners, gave
great occasion of Discourse.

In the mean time, the Regent had an hot Debate in Council, Whether they should
stay, where they were, or else, go to the King at Sterlin? A great many were of
opinion, that 'twas better to depart, and they urged Arguments for it; as, that
Hamilton was a Town near them, full of People, and all the Clanships of that
Family lay round about it: Besides, the Queen had with her 500 Horse, and it
was reported, many more were making toward her from remoter Parts; whereas,
with the Regent there were only a few of his own Friends, the rest having ran
away to the Queen, or gone privately home, about their own Affairs, as if all
things had been quiet; and, tho the Citizens of Glasgow were faithful enough,
as being provoked by the many and great Injuries they had received from the
Hamiltons, when in Power; yet the Town it self was large, not very Populous,
and every way approachable. On the contrary, Others reasoned, That all depended
on the first Beginning of things; That his departure would be Dishonorable,
and look like running away; That all Suspicion of fear was then principally to
be avoided, for they should heighten their Enemies thereby, and discourage
their Friends. On the one side, there were the Cuninghams and the Semples,
potent Families; On the other side, Lennox, the King's peculiar Patrimony, from
whence the next Neighbors might presently come in, in a few Hours; the rest,
the next, or, at furthest, the Day after; In the interim, till further Aid
came, they had strength enough, especially being assisted by the Townsmen. This
advice prevailed in Council.

The French Ambassador posted betwixt both Parties, The French Ambassador busy
betwixt the Parties,
rather as a Spy, than a Peacemaker, which yet he pretended to be; for,
perceiving, that there was but a small Force at Glasgow at first, and an
Appearance of a great Multitude at Hamilton, he earnestly excited the Queen to
put it to a Battle, presently. The Regent had gathered a party from the
Neighborhood, and expected those further off from Merch and Lothian; there
came in about 600 Horse, choice and resolute Men; he gave them one day to
refresh themselves in, and then determined to march out to Hamilton, and to
engage the Enemy immediately; for he believed, Delay was dangerous for him, and
advantageous to the Enemy, whom the remote Parts of the Kingdom favored most.
Two days after, he was informed, That, about the third Watch, the Enemy was
drawing together from all places, where they quartered; they trusted to their
Number, being about 6500 fighting Men, and they knew the Regent had scarce
4000; but they resolved to march by Glasgow, and to leave the Queen in
Dunbarton-Castle, and so either to fight, or lengthen out the War, as they
pleased; or, if the Regent should be so bold as to stop their Passage, which
they believed he durst not do, they would then fight, and were confident they
should beat Him. But he, having determined to urge them to fight before, as
soon as ever he could, drew out his Men into the open Field before the Town,
the way that he thought the Enemy would come, and there waited for them in
Battel-array, for some Hours: But when he saw their Troops pass by the other
side of the River, he presently understood their Design, and commanded his Foot
to pass over the Bridge, and his Horse to ford over the River, which they might
do, it being low Water, and so to march to Two Miles South of Glasgow.
Langside, which was a Village by the River Carth, where the Enemies were to
pass, situated in the Foot of an Hill, respecting the South-West; on the East
and North, the Passage was steep, but on the other side, there was a gentle
Descent into a Plain, thither they hastened with such Speed, that the Royalists
had near possessed the Hill, before the Enemy, who aimed at the same place,
understood their Design, though they marched thither by a nearer Cut; But the
Royalists met with Two Advantages, which was a great Discouragement to their
Enemies; One, that Gilespy Cambel, Earl of Argyle, who commanded in chief, fell
suddenly down from his Horse sick, and by his Fall, much delayed the March of
his Party. The Other, that their Forces being placed here and there, in little
Valleys, could never see all the Royalists at once, whose Paucity (as indeed,
they were not many) made the Enemy to despise them, and the Disadvantage of the
place, too. At last, when the Queen's Forces drew nigh, and saw the Ground
which they aimed at, possessed by the Enemy, they went to another little Hill
over against them, and there divided their Party into two Bodies: Their chief
Strength they placed in the First; if they had overthrown their adverse Party
there, they knew, the rest would be dismayed at their Flight, and so they should
overcome them without Fighting. The King's Party also divided themselves into
Two Wings; James Douglas Earl of Morton, A Fight between the Royalists* and the
Queen's Forces.
Robert Semple, Alexander Hume, Patrick Lindsy, each with his Clanship, were
placed in the Right. In the left, stood John Earl of Mar, Alexander Earl of
Glencarn, William Earl of Menteith, and the Citizens of Glasgow. The
Musketeers were in the Village and Gardens below, near the high Way. Both
Armies thus placed in Battel-array, The Queens Cannoneers and Foot were driven
from their Posts by the King's Forces; on the other side, the King's Horse
being fewer in Number, were beat back by the Enemy; after they had performed
that Service, they endeavored also to break the Battalions of Foot, in order
whereunto, they charged directly up the Hill, but were beat back by the King's
Archers, and by some of those, who after their Rout, had rallied again, and
joined with the rest of their Body: In the mean time, the left Wing of the
Enemy marched by the Highway, where there was a rising Ground, lower down into
the Valley, where, though they were galled by the King's Musketeers, yet
passing by those Straits, they opened and ranged their Body; there 'twas, that
the two Battailions held out a thick Stand of Pikes, as a Brest-work, before
them, and fought desperately for half an Hour, without giving Ground on either
side; insomuch that they, whose long Pikes were broke, threw Daggers, Stones,
Pieces of Pikes or Lances; yea, whatsoever they could come by, into their
Enemies Faces: But some of the hindermost Ranks of the King's Forces, being
flying away, (whether for Fear or Treachery is uncertain) no doubt, their
Flight had much disordered those who stood to it, unless the Ranks had been so
thick, that the foremost well knew not, what the hindmost did: Then they, which
were in the second Battailion, taking notice of the Danger, and perceiving no
Enemy coming to charge them, sent some whole Troops to wheel to the Right, and
to join with the first; whereupon, the adverse Party could not bear their
Charge, but were wholly routed and put to Flight; many were so enraged with
Wrath and Hatred against them, that there had been a notable Slaughter in the
Pursuit, unless the Regent had sent out Horse several ways, to forbid the
Execution: The second Squadron of the Royalists stood so long, till they saw
the Enemy scattering and flying in a disorderly manner; then they also brake
their Ranks and pursued. The Queen stood about a Mile from the Place, to behold
the Fight; and, after the Discomfiture, fled with some Horsemen of her Party,
who had escaped out of the Battle, toward England; the rest ran away as they
could, Wherein the Queen is overthrown, and flies for England.
each to his own home: There were but few slain in the Field, but more fell in
the Pursuit, being wearied and wounded, all along the Highways and Fields. The
Number of the Slain, was about 300, but there were more taken Prisoners. Of the
King's Forces, there were not many wounded, of the chief Commanders, none but
Alexander Hume and Andrew Stuart, only one Man was slain; the rest of the Army,
besides a few Horsemen, who followed the Pursuit very far, returned joyfully
into the Town; where, after giving Thanks to Almighty God, for prospering their
just Cause against a double Number of their Enemies, and for giving them, in a
manner, an unbloody Victory, mutually gratulating one another, they went to
Dinner. This Battle was fought May the 13 th, eleven Days after the Queen's
Escape out of Prison.

The French Ambassador expected the Event of the Fight, The French Ambassador
sculks away, after the Fight.
and promised himself a sure Victory on the Queen's side; but being thus
disappointed of his Hope, he put off his Vizard, and without taking his Leave
of the Regent, to whom he pretended he was sent, got a Party of Horse to guide
him; and, with what Speed he could, made for England. In the way he was robbed
by Moss-Troopers; but James Douglas Lord of Drumlanerick, though he knew he
was of the Enemies Party, yet deferred so much to the Honor and Name of an
Ambassador, that he caused his Goods to be restored to him. The Regent spent
the rest of the Day of Battle, in taking a List of the Prisoners; some he
discharged gratis; others, upon Sureties; the chief Commanders were retained,
especially of the Hamilton's Family, and sent to Prison. The Day after, knowing
how much that Sept was envied in the Neighborhood, he took only 500 Horse,
commanding the rest of the Army to abide in their Quarters, and went into the
Vale of Clydisdale, where he found all Places naked and desolate, the
Inhabitants being run away, as rather conscious to themselves what they had
deserved, than confiding in the Regents Clemency, of which yet they had
Experience before, he took in the Castles of Hamilton and In Clydsdal^.
Draffin, which were naked Places, only in Hamilton-Castle, some of the
Household Stuff of King James the 5 th was found. The same Fear and Terror drove
the Queen into England too, either because she thought no Place in that Part of
Scotland safe enough for her; or else, because she durst not trust John Maxwel
of Herreis.

When the Regent had settled all things, as well as he could at present, he
summoned an Assembly of the Estates to be held at Edinburgh in the Month
of..... The adverse Party plotted many Ways to hinder it: Rumors were spread
abroad of Aid from France, neither were they altogether without Ground: For
some Troops were drawn down to the Seaside, under the Command of the Earl of
Martigues, a stout Man of the Luxemburgh's Family, to be transported with all
Speed into Scotland; and they had been so, unless the Civil Wars had on a
sudden broke forth in France. But that Assistance would not have been so
prejudicial to the Regent, as his Enemies thought, for it would have alienated
England from them, and engaged It to him. Moreover, Argyle with 600 of his
Clanship came to Glasgow, there he had a Conference with the Hamiltonians, and
other Leaders of the Faction, to hinder the Convention, but finding no way to
do it, they went every Man severally home. Huntly also had gathered together a
thousand Foot, against the Day of the Parliaments Sitting, he came as far as
Perth, and there perceiving that the Fords of the River Tay, were guarded by
William Ruven and the Neighboring Nobility, who remained Loyal to the King, he
retired without doing any thing to Purpose.

About the same time, there came also Letters from the Queen of England,
obtained by the Intercession of the adverse Party, to the Regent, Queen
Elizabeth of England does in part adopt the cause of the Scots Queen.
to put off the Parliament; she desired, that Judgment might not be hastened
concerning the Rebels, till she were made acquainted with the whole Cause; for
she could not well bear the Injury and Affront, which the Queen, her Neighbor,
and near Kinswoman, did pretend she had received from her Subjects. Tho the
Request was but small in it self, yet, if it should have been granted, at the
Instance of the Rebels, they might have thought to have carried all; either
because such a Trifling and Delay seemed to hearten them, and weaken their
Enemy, especially seeing it might argue a Fear in the Royalists; and also, that
they, in the mean time, resolved to Indict a Convention in the Name of the
Queen. But the Regent, being sensible of what great Consequence it was, to have
the Parliament to sit; yea, though all the Force of the Enemy had combined
against it, resolved to keep his Day: In that Parliament, there was a great
Debate, Whether all those who had took Arms against the King, and afterward had
not obtained their Pardon, should be condemned as Traitors, and have their
Goods confiscate. But William Maitland, who favored the Rebels, but covertly,
obtained, that only a few of them should be condemned at present, as a Terror
to the rest; and a Door of Clemency should be opened to others, if they
repented. That Procedure did wonderfully encourage the Conspirators, and
increased their Obstinacy, in regard, they saw, their Punishment was deferred,
and they were verily persuaded, that the Queen of England being their Queen's
Neighbor and Kinswoman, nor the Guises, who then were very powerful in the
French Court, nor the French King himself would suffer such an Encroachment to
be made on the Royal Authority; yea, if they should be deserted by them, yet
they were not so weak of themselves, as not to be able to maintain their Cause
without foreign Aid, as being superior in Number and Power; so that nothing was
wanting to the Victory, but the empty Shadow of the Royal Name, which was (said
they) usurped by Force.

In the mean time, the Regent minded only the public Peace; some of the
Neighboring Offenders he fined in small Sums, and so took them into Favor;
the Earl of Rothes, by his Friends Intercession, was banished for three Years;
as for the rest, he daily, by Correspondents, solicited them to repent and come
in; but perceiving, That many of them were obstinate, and inclined to Revenge,
he levied an Army, and marched into Annandale, Niddisdale, and lower Galway,
where he took some Castles, and put Garrisons into them; others, whose Owners
were more refractary, he demolished, and in a short time, he would have ran
over the whole Country, unless Letters from the Queen of England had
interrupted the course of his Victories. She was persuaded by the Exiles, That
the Queen of Scots had received much Wrong; That her ill-affected Subjects had
laid unjust Imputations on her, and That she would not suffer the Royal Name to
grow so cheap, or Majesty to be so contumeliously used, as to be exposed to the
Wills of seditious Persons. That the Wrong of this great Wickedness redounded
only to One, but the Example to All, and therefore, she desired, they would
apply some speedy Remedy, that the Contagion of dethroning Princes might not
spread further. Having made a great Harangue in her Letters to this purpose,
against the Avengers of the King's Murder; she desired of the Regent, That he
would send Commissioners to her, to inform her in the State of the whole
Matter, and to make Answer to those, either Crimes or Reproaches, which were
cast upon, and alleged against himself. This Demand seemed very grievous and
offensive, That things, already judged, should be called again in Question, to
a new and hazardous Trial, and that before foreign Princes, who are oft-times
emulous, if not Enemies, and their Minds already prepossessed by Adversaries;
yea, for a Man, as it were to plead for his own Life, before a foreign
Judicature, though the Case was dangerous and hard, yet many Arguments induced
him to accept of the Proposal, though never so unequal. Whereupon the Regent,
with some others, meet the Queen of England's Commissioners at York to debate
Matters.
Abroad, the Cardinal of Lorrain, the Queen's Uncle, rul^d all in France; and
at home, a great part of the Nobility conspired in behalf of the Queen; and if
the Queen of England were disobliged too, then he should have no Force to
withstand so great Difficulties. Being thus resolved to send Ambassadors, he
could not tell, Whom to pitch upon: The chief Nobles declining the Employment:
At last, the Regent himself resolved to go, and choose Companions to accompany
him, amongst whom was William Maitland, though much against his Will; but the
Regent, knowing him to be a factious Man, and inclinable to the Queen's Party,
did not think it safe to leave him behind, whilst things were in such a
doubtful Posture at home; and therefore he persuaded him, by great Promises and
Rewards, to accompany him, not doubting but to overcome his avaritious Mind
with Largesses and Gifts; the rest went willingly along: The chief were, James
Douglas, and Patrick Lindsy of the Nobles; of the Clergy, the Bishop of the
Orcades, and the Abbat of Dumfermlin; of Lawyers, James Macgil, and Henry
Balnavey; to whom he added a Ninth, viz. George Buchanan. Though these
difficult Circumstances did attend him, George Buchanan accompanies the Regent
into England.
yet Two things relieved his Thoughts, One was, the Equity of his Cause; the
Other, the last Letters he received from the Queen of England, gave him
Assurance, that, if the Crimes objected against the Queen of Scots were true,
she held her unworthy to hold that Scepter any longer. The Regent was a little
heartned by those Letters, and with above a 100 Horse in his Company, he began
his Journey, though he had certain Intelligence brought him, that the Earl of
Westmorland, at the Command of the Duke of Norfolk, watched to intercept him,
before he got to York; yet October 4. he came to York, the Place appointed for
the Conference, and, the same Day, and almost hour, A Plot to cu^ off the
Regent in his Journey.
Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, entered the City, also. The reason, why an
Ambush was laid for the Regent, was, because the Duke, by secret
Correspondents, was dealing with the Queen of Scots to marry her; and
therefore, that the Suspicion of the King's Murder might be more easily taken
away, she resolved, if the Regent were slain, to return home; and also to take
and suppress the Letters she had wrote to Bothwel, containing a manifest
Discovery of the Plot: but, because the Duke was so near, she could not so
accomplish it, as that he also might not be aspersed with the Infamy of so
cruel a Murder; and therefore the Plot was deferred till another time. Besides
Norfolk, there were appointed Two other Commissioners by the Queen of England,
to determine the Controversies of the Scots, the Earl of Sussex, who inclined
to Howard's Party, as 'twas commonly reported, and Sir Ralph Sadler, an
indifferent and equal Person. Within a few days, there came Messengers from the
Queen of Scots, to complain of her disobedient Subjects, and also to desire
leave of the Queen of England, to return home, without Delay; they had their
Hearing apart from the Regent, and his Attendants: First, they Protested, that
they came not before them as Judges, that had a lawful Superiority over them;
then they made a long Harangue, What Wrong the Queen had received from her
Subjects; and after, desired of the Queen of England, that either she would
persuade her ungrateful Subjects to admit their Prince; or, if they refused,
then she would supply her with an Army, to force them so to do. After some few
Hours, the Regent was heard; He stood upon the Equity of his Cause, before
indifferent Judges; He pleaded, that the Royalists had done nothing, but
according to the ancient Laws and Customs of their Nation, and that, in full
Parliament, ratified and approved; and that he being a single Person, with
those few with him, could not abrogate any thing which had been enacted by
common Consent of all the Estates in Parliament. But when the English
Commissioners told them, they could not be satisfied with those Statutes made
at their Parliaments at home, and now produced, unless withal they produced the
Reasons, which moved the Nobles to such a severe Judgment against the Queen:
The Regent was unwilling, as much avoiding to divulge the foul Offenses of the
Queen, being his Sister also, and that amongst Foreigners, who were forward
enough to hear them, and therefore denied to do it, unless upon these Terms,
That, Disputes between the Commissioners of both Sides.
if he made good the Charge against the Queen, that she killed her Husband,
then the Queen of England should stipulate and promise to defend the young
King's Cause, and take him as 'twere into her Protection. But when the English
Ambassadors told them, that they had only a Commission to hear the Demands of
both Sides, and so to lay the whole Matter before the Queen. The Regent again
urged them to obtain such a Promise from their Queen, or else that they
themselves should get a Commission, fully to decide the Controversy; if they
would do That, he promised, that unless he did evidently make it appear, that
the King was slain by his Wives Means, he would not deprecate the Punishment
due to the most heinous Offense. The Commissioners wrote to the Queen to know
her Mind herein; who returned Answer, Upon their Disagreement, Queen Elizabeth
avokes the Cause to London.
That the Scots of the Royal Party should send one or more of their Number to
her Court, who might fully acquaint her with the Merits of their Cause, and
then she would consult, what was fit for her to do. Whereupon the Regent sent
William Maitland, on whom many sinister Opinions did daily arise, and James
Macgil, not so much to be his Assistant in public Business, as to observe,
what his Actions were. The Causes which made Maitland suspected were These,
amongst many others: Before his Journey into England, though he mightily
endeavored to conceal his Designs, Commissioners sent to London by the Regent.
yet by his Words and Actions, and further, by his great Familiarity with the
Men of the adverse Party; but more clearly yet, by Letters, he sent to the
Queen, which were intercepted, they could not be hid. In those Letters he
endeavored to persuade the Queen, that his Service might yet be useful to her,
using the Example of the Lion, as it is in the Fable, who, being taken in a Net,
was freed by such mean Animals as Rats. And after he came to York, Maitland not
true to the Regent.
there was scarce a Night, wherein he did not meet with the chief Ambassadors
of the adverse Party, compared Notes with them, and acquainted them with the
Designs of the Regent. The Regent did not forbid those Meetings, knowing, he
should do no Good thereby, only then they would meet more secretly. Though
these were manifest Evidences of his Treachery, yet casually there happened an
undeniable Demonstration thereof. Norfolk, and He, went abroad, pretendedly to
hunt, where they had much Discourse concerning the whole Affair, and came to
this Agreement amongst themselves, to spin out the matter, if 'twas possible,
and so to delay it, that, at last, nothing might be done, and yet the Cause not
seem wholly deserted, neither. For, by this means, the Regent must depart,
without effecting what he came for; or else, some Commotion at home would
enforce him so to do, and then other Remedies might emerge, in time: For
Norfolk was then designing a Civil War, how to take off the One Queen, and to
marry the Other. Maitland informed John Lesly, Bishop of Ross, herewith, one
intimately acquainted with all the Queen's Affairs, who accordingly informed
his Mistress, by Letter, how the Duke would have her write to Court, what
Course to steer for the future; and tho her Cause went but slowly on, yet that
Delay should not hinder her from expecting a good Issue thereof. The Queen
having read those Letters, laid them by, as loose Papers, so that they came to
be read by diverse others; and, from hand to hand, were, at last, brought to
the Regent, who, by them, discovered the main of his Adversaries Design against
him; as for Maitland, he had experimented his Perfidiousness many times before.

When the Ambassadors, beforementioned, came to the Queen at London, She, and
her Council, thought it best, that the Regent himself should come up, and so
dispute the Controversy, by word of Mouth: The Regent himself comes to London.
Whereupon, he dismissed part of his Retinue, and, with the rest, went to
London; but there he met with the same Difficulty as he had done at York; for
he refused to enter upon the Accusation of the Queen, and his Sister too,
unless, if he proved her Guilty, the Queen of England would take the Scots
King's Party into her Protection; if she would do That, he would begin the
Accusation immediately, upon the same Terms, as he had propounded to the
Delegates at York. Whilst these things were acting in London, the Queen of
Scots, The Queen of Scots endeavors to raise Commotions in Scotland, in the
Regent's Absence.
by means of James Balfure, endeavored to raise Commotions in Scotland; and
that she might more easily accomplish her Designs, she wrote Letters to all the
Exiles, and to Bothwel's Friends, to contribute all their Endeavors to infest
the contrary Faction by Force of Arms: And, besides, she created Lieutenants
through all the Kingdom, to whom she gave even Kingly Power. And moreover, she
caused Rumors to be spread abroad, That the Regent, and his Companions, were
committed Prisoners to the Tower of London; and foreseeing, that Lie could not
be long believed, she devised another, ( i. e.) That the Regent had promised to
subject Scotland to the Crown of England; and, That he was to give up the King,
as a Pledge thereof. It Is thought, her Design herein, was, That, whereas she had
promised the same things by her Commissioners; and the English looked upon it,
as a Vanity in her, seeing She had no power to perform it; yet she was willing
to possess the Minds of the Vulgar with an Untruth, and so to raise up Envy
against the Regent; and, if she could not avert the whole Reproach from her
self, yet, at least, she would have her Adversaries bear a Part with her,
therein.

When the Regent saw himself in these Straits, he resolved to end the Matter,
as well as he could, and so to return home: The Regent manages his Accusation
against the Queen and her Party,
Whereupon, at the earnest Solicitation of the English, who desired to know
the Causes of the Proceedings in Scotland, (without which they could determine
nothing;) he also, being desirous to satisfy the Queen of England at that time,
whom he could nor offend, without great prejudice to his Cause; and, being
willing also to return home to extinguish the Civil War, then appearing in its
first Rise, neither of which he could well do, unless the Queen of England was
his Friend, or, at least, not his Adversary; induced by these Motives, He first
protested before the Council of England, That 'twas not willingly, but by the
importunity of his Enemies, that he was compelled to accuse his Queen, and she
his Sister's Son too, of so horrid a Crime; that he did not do it out of a
wanton humor to accuse, but out of necessity to clear himself; for he was very
unwilling to discover those things, which he wished, if possible, might be
covered in perpetual Oblivion; and therefore, if any Reflection were made on
what he did, the Envy ought deservedly to light upon Those, who would not
suffer him to be like Himself, that is, to obey his Prince cheerfully, when
Good; and to reprove Him, or Her, against his Will, when she was Evil; only he
desire one Thing, That the Queen's Proxies, who had enforced him to that
Dispute, might be present to hear the Crimes objected; that so, if they were
false, they might disprove them before the Council; and that he himself, in
many weighty Matters, might also make use of their Testimonies. The Queen's
Commissioners refused this, as putting little Confidence in their own Cause,
and insisted only on this one thing, That the Queen, who was, by Force of Arms,
ejected, might be restored: Whereupon, a Day was appointed for the Regent to
show Cause, why the Revengers of the King's Murder had taken up Arms, (for he
himself was then in France,) and had ejected the Queen from her Government, and
acted other things, as, till that time, they had done. When the Time came, he
declared the Order of all Things, as they had been acted, and the Testimonies
of the Partisans of the King's Murder, made before their Deaths; and also the
Statute of Parliament, to which many of the Regent's Accusers had subscribed:
And when the Silver Cabinet was produced, which the Queen had given her from
her former Husband Francis, and had bestowed on Bothwel, in which were Letters
to Bothwel, writ in French, with the Queen's own Hand, and also a French Poem,
not unelegantly composed by her; and also the Manner of the King's Death, and,
after his Death, her Surprise, and three Contracts of Marriage with him, the
One before the Parricide, written with her own Hand, wherein, as by a Bill, she
promises to marry him, as soon as ever she was freed from her former Husband:
The Other was, before the Divorce from his former Wife, writ by Huntly's Hand:
The Third was openly made, a little before the Marriage. When all this was
produced, seen, and read before the Council: The whole Fact was so plainly
exposed, that now no Doubt could be made, Who was the Author of it. Though the
Queen of England could not but believe these Discoveries, To the convincement
of the Queen of England, and her Privy Council.
yet she did fluctuate in her Mind; on the one side, there was Emulation,
Queens mutually hating one another; there were also such great Crimes, and such
evident Proofs, that the Queen thought her Kinswoman of Scotland deserved no
Assistance to restore her: And, though her Mind did incline to that which was
right, yet 'twas shaken, and did hesitate, upon the remembrance of her former
State, not without a Commiseration; and besides, the Majesty of Kingly Honor,
and a Fea^, lest the Example of driving out Princes might creep into the
Neighbour-Kingdoms, wrought much upon her: Besides, she was afraid of France,
for the Peace with them was not very sure or firm; and then especially, the
French Ambassador did plead the Cause of the banished Queen daily. The Spanish
Ambassador was desired also to interpose his Mediation; but the foulness of the
Crimes did so deter him, that he refused to meddle therewith. Whereupon, the
Queen of England, that she might leave a Door for Repentance, if Matters should
succeed amiss in France, and not cut off all occasion of gratifying them, gave
a middle Answer, so tempering it, that at present she said, She saw no cause to
the contrary, but that all things had been acted according to Law and Justice
in Scotland; yet, as if she deferred the complete Decision till another time,
she desired, that seeing intestine Tumults did recall the Regent, he would leave
here one of his Retinue in his Place, to make Answer to those Crimes, which
might be objected against him in his Absence. But the Regent, who saw the
Matter to be so put off, that That Queen might take her Measures to give
Sentence for her own Advantage, and the Event of foreign Affairs, left no Stone
unturned, that he might have the Cause fully determined, now; and therefore he
desired, as most just and equitable, that if his Enemies, who had long studied
beforehand to accuse him, had any thing to allege, they would now produce it,
and not watch an Opportunity to calumniate him in his Absence, seeing they
refused to cope with him face to face; he was not ignorant, what Rumors his
Enemies would cause to be spread amongst the People, and what they had already
said to some of the Council, and to the French Ambassador; and therefore, he
earnestly desired of the Council, to command them not to mutter privately, but
to declare openly, what they had to say; and that he would not make such haste
home, but that, though it were much to his own Damage, and the Publicks, yet he
would willingly purge himself there, in presence. Whereupon, the Commissioners
of the banished Queen were sent for, and demanded, If they had any thing to
allege against the Regent or his Companions, in reference to the King's Murder,
they should produce it. Their Answer was, They had nothing at present, but they
would accuse them, when they were commanded by their Queen. The Regent
answered, That he was always ready to give an account of all the Actions
performed by him; neither would he shun either Time or Place so to do; ye^,
seeing the Queen began that Accusation of him, he desired of his Accusers,
there present, That if any of them had the least Objection against him, they
would then declare it; for 'twas much more noble and handsome to produce it,
before so illustrious an Assembly, than, in private Cabals, to nibble at his
Fame, in his Absence: They also refused This. Whereupon, the whole Council
cried out upon them, and, in a manner, reproached them, so that they were
compelled, singly and severally, to confess, (...) acquitted from Guilt, by the
Queen of Scots's Commissioners themselves.
That they knew nothing of themselves, why Murray, or any of his, should be
accused of the King's Murder. Then, after a long Dispute, pro and con, the
Council was dismissed, and from that time, there was never any more mention
made of accusing the Regent, or any of his Companions.

Whilst the Regent was thus necessarily detained in England, on a public
Account, the Queen's Faction turned every Stone, both at Home and Abroad, to
make Disturbances, but without effect. James Hamilton, who had been Regent some
Years before, James Hamilton returns from France, and labors to embroil things
in Scotland, hoping thereby to get the Regency from M^rray.
seeing that Things went not according to his Mind at Home, had gone long
before into France; there he had but a few Companions, but lay privately, with
a Servant or Two, to attend him, free from the hurry of all Public Business;
but when the Queen of Scots was escaped out of Prison, overcome in Battle, and
then fled for England; The French, knowing that Murray was called Home, into
his own Country, and, in his Passage through France, not being able to work him
over to their Party, in regard they could not send Men, or Money, to Scotland,
to raise Disturbance there, by reason of their own Commotions at Home; they
therefore thought it most advisable, to set up Hamilton, in an emulating
competition with him, especially at that Time, when the Regent, with part of
the Nobility, were absent, and out of the way. He was therefore drawn out of
his Privacy, and accommodated with some few Pistols, and larger Promises. In
his return through England, his Friends persuaded him, That, in regard the Queen
of Scots, with her Faction, favored him, and the Queen of England was not
averse from it, he would deal with her, to persuade Murray, by her Authority,
to resign his Regency to him, in regard, that Office, by the Law, and Consent
of almost all Nations, and especially by the Custom of their own Country, was
due to him, as the next in Blood and Heirship: Neither (said he) was there any
great need to make a laborious search into the Records of Ancient Times, for
This; wherein they might easily find, That Governors were always appointed to
their Princes, when under Age, out of the next of Kin; as when James the 3 d
died, in the absence of James the 1 st, his Uncle Robert managed the
Government, and his Son Murdac succeeded Robert: And of late Times, John, Duke
of Albany, was made Governor to King James the 5 th, whilst he was under Age:
Yea, The Queen of England tampered with by the Hamiltonians, to make Hami^ton
Regent.
Hamilton himself had been Regent, some few Years, before Mary, now Queen, was
of Age, fit to Govern, or Marry; and how he was not excluded from that Office,
by any lawful Suffrages, but unjustly by the Rebellious; and that which
increased the Indignity, was, That it was done in Contempt of the Blood Royal,
and a Bastard set up in his Room; but if the Honor were restored to him, in a
very short Time, all Domestic Tumults would be quieted; and the Queen, even
without Blood, would recover her Crown and Dignity, again. Whereunto the King's
Ambassadors answered, The Royalists answer their Reasons, in a large discourse.
That Hamilton desired a Thing, not only contrary to the Laws and Customs of
their Ancestors, but, if the consideration of the Law were omitted, yet 'twas
very unjust in it self; for our Ancestors (said they) by reason of the
Slaughters of their Princes by their Kindred, for 1300 Years ago, did wholy
change the Method of their Assemblies in making a King: For, as before, in the
Family of Fergus, our first King, after the King's Death, it was not the next
of Blood, but he, that was most fit, was chosen King, by Suffrage: So, Kenneth
the 3 d, that he might take away all Plots against Princes, by those of their
Blood, and also might prevent the cruel and bloody Emulations of their Kindred
amongst themselves, made this Decree of Succession, that now is, for the next
of Blood to inherit. And Men, by Experience, finding, that in so great an
Inconstancy of Fortune, 'twas scarce possible, but that sometimes the Right of
Chief Magistracy should fall on a Child, or else, on one unable to govern;
therefore they decreed, That he, who preceded others in Power and Wisdom,
should undergo the Administration of the Government, in the mean time; and our
Ancestors, observing this Course for almost 600 Years, have transmitted down a
Kingdom safe to us: Thus, when Robert Bruce died, there succeeded Regents
chosen by most Voices, Thomas Randolf, Earl of Murray; Donald, Earl of Mar;
Andrew Murray, John Randolf, Robert Stuart; sometimes particular Persons,
sometimes more than one, were chosen, by our public Conventions, to that
Office: So, when James the Second was a Child, Alexander Levingston was
appointed his Governor, who was no way related to that King in Blood, no, nor
a Noble Man neither, but a Knight only, more eminent for his Wisdom than his
Family. And if any say, That was for want of some of the King's Line; the
Excuse will not hold; for, at that very time, there was John Kennedy, chief of
his Family, his Nephew, by the Sister of James the First, a Man both wise and
virtuous; there were also his Uncles, James Kennedy, Archbishop of St. Andrews,
the eminentest Person for Virtue in the whole Kingdom; and also his Brothers,
the Son of the King's Aunt, Douglas, Earl of Angus; Archibald also, Earl of
Douglas, was not excluded from the King's Line, but in Power was almost equal
to him; to be sure, he was superior to all others; yet none ever complained of
the Injustice of our Assemblies in so doing. And not long after, James the
Third had four Tutors or Guardians assigned him, not taken on the account of
Alliance, but chosen by Vote. And of late, John, Duke of Albany, was sent for
by the Nobility out of France, to govern Scotland, in the Minority of James the
4 th; and when he came, he was settled in the Regency, by a public Statute,
enacted in a Convention of the Estates, which was not done on the account of
Proximity in Blood; for he had Alexander, an elder Brother, one perhaps
inferior to him, yet far more virtuous than James Hamilton, who, for a season,
affected that Dignity: But, in the Absence of James the Fifth, Robert, his
Uncle, managed the Kingdom. I pray, by what Right? Was he assumed into that
Office for Propinquity of Blood? No: Was he elected by the People? No, nor that
neither? How was he then created? I Will tell you, how; When King Robert the
Third was neither, in Body nor Mind, fit to manage the Kingly Office, he set up
Robert, his Brother, in his stead, and commended his Children to his Care;
David, The Cruelty of Robert against his Brother's Children.
his eldest Son, he starved to Death; James, the younger, had been also slain,
unless he had saved his Life by Flight: And, being thus settled in the
Possession of the Government, his Brother dying for Grief, he kept it, without
the Consent of the People in Parliament, and delivered it down by Hand, to his
Son Mordacus. How Robert the King, that died last, stood affected toward his
Brother, is very plain; for, as when he was a dying, he abominated and cursed
him, as the Executioner of his Children; so, certainly if he had been alive,
and in Health, he would not have designed him Guardian to his Children. We are
so put in mind of that time, wherein, after the Death of James the Fifth, he
himself was made Regent; (as if any thing at all was legally acted, since that
time.) When Cardinal Beton endeavored, by Fraud, to invade the chief
Magistracy, he crept into the vacant Office, rather out of Peoples Hatred to
Beton, than Love to Him; being got into it, he ruled with great Cruelty and
Avarice; and, not many years ago, he sold that Magistracy, which he got by
Force, and the Queen too, then committed to his Care; therein was manifested,
what Affection the People bare to him, when they preferred the Government of a
Woman-Stranger before that bitter Slavery they suffered under him. You see
then, I suppose, how this Request of Hamilton's is contrary to the Laws of our
Country, and the Institutions of our Ancestors; yea, so contrary, that for want
of Arguments to maintain it, he bolsters it up only with Lies: And if there
were any Custom of this kind, all Men see, how unjust it is: For what can be
more unequal, than to commit the innocent and weak Age of the Prince to his
Care, who either daily expects, or wishes for, the Death of his Pupil? All
whose Family has born, and does bear, great and lasting Enmity with the Family
of the King, that now reigns. What Safeguard can there be here, in Nearness of
Blood, against ancient Hatred, griping Avarice, and the precipitate Force of
forestalled Tyranny? Laodice, Laodice's Unnaturalness toward her own Children.
Queen of the Cappadocians, is reported to have slain her Sons, as they came to
Age, thus buying out, or, as it were, redeeming a small Stay in the Government,
with the innocent Blood of her own Children. If a Mother destroyed the Fruit of
her own Womb, only to reign a little longer, What, shall we think, will old
Enemies attempt; or rather, What will they not attempt, being inflamed to
Cruelty, by the Stings of Avarice, against a Child, who is the only Remora to
their Hopes of the Kingdom? And if this Example seem old, obscure, and
far-fetched, I will add some more Illustrious Ones, nearer hand; Who is
ignorant of what was lately acted, how that Galeacius Sforza was slain by his
Uncle Lewis, Galeacius Sfor^a's Murder, with its Consequents.
though he was of Age, and married, and the Son-in-Law, too, of a most powerful
Prince? Who does not know the Calamities, that followed upon that cruel
Parricide? The brave fertile Country of Italy was almost made a Wilderness,
thereby; The Family of the Sforza's, from whence so many valiant Men proceeded,
was extinguished; and the Barbarians were introduced into the pleasant Country,
about the Po; whose Avarice and Cruelty spoiled all. Besides, who is there, of
the Inhabitants of Great Britain, that has not heard of the Cruelty of Richard
the 3 d, King of England, against his Brother's Children? And with how much
Blood, was that Parricide expiated? If Men that were otherwise prudent, did not
fear to commit such things against their nearest in Blood, excited only by the
desire of the Crown, What can be expected from him, whose Inconstancy is well
known to all, and whose ill management of the Government has already cost us
so much Blood? Whose Family, not content with the Murder of this King's Great
Grandfather, did always work Treachery against his Grandfather by the Mother's
side, as long as he lived; and, as for his Grandfather by his Father's side,
when he could not kill him, he drove him, poor, out of the Kingdom; his Father
he brought forth as a Sacrifice to be slain; his Mother and the Kingdom, when
they could not enjoy it themselves, they sold it to Strangers, and after, by
the Providence of God, she was delivered from that Bondage, they cast her into
those Straits, wherein she now is. What Judgment the Subjects made of these
things, may appear by this, That Men seemed to themselves delivered from the
Prison of a most miserable Bondage, and to taste the sweetness of Liberty, when
they sold the Government, which they themselves, were not able to manage, to a
Woman-Stranger.

Upon the hearing of this Oration, the Queen told Hamilton, That his Demand was
unjust, The Queen of England declares against Hamiltons design for the Regency.
and, That she would not assist him therein; but That she was desired by the
King's Ambassadors, not to suffer him to depart, (in regard he plotted nothing
but Sedition) till they likewise went, themselves; which, she looked upon, as a
just thing, and therefore had promised them so to do, and thereupon she charged
him, not to depart before that time. Moreover, the banished Queen encouraged
her Friends with the hopes of her speedy Return; for some Letters of hers were
intercepted, wherein she advised them, to seize upon as many Castles and
fortified Places as they could; and so to disperse the War abroad, as far as
ever they were able: Neither need they fear the noise of a Truce, or
Accommodation, for, if Matters were ended that way, all the Offenses of former
times would be covered, and forgiven, under the umbrage of Peace: But, if it
should brake forth into open War, the more Garrisons they had, the greater
opportunity would be put into their Hands, to hurt the Enemy.

When the Regent had settled Matters, as well as he could, in England, and had
leave to return, some Letters were produced, lately intercepted, from the Queen
of Scots, wherein she complains, That she was otherwise treated by the Queen of
England, than she her self first expected; or, as was promised her, and that
was done by some Courtiers, who were the Cause, That she was not sent back with
an Army, as, she affirmed, A Marriage designed between the Queens of Scots and
Howard.
the Queen of England had promised Her; but she did hope, shortly, to obtain a
good issue another Way, (for Messengers often had passed betwixt Her, and
Howard, about a Marriage between them) and therefore, she wished them not to be
discouraged, but to increase the strength of their Party, to make a general
Disturbance, and, by all the Arts they could, to hinder the Regent's return
into Scotland. These Letters, being divulged, did affect People, severally. The
Queen of England took it ill, That she was accused of breach of Promise; as
also, That the Conditions of the Truce, made by her means, were not kept: and
therefore, being very angry and enraged, she remitted much of her ancient
Favor to the Scot's Queen, and was more inclined to Equity, than before. The
English, who wished well to the Regent, Buds of discontent between the Queens
of England, and Scotland.
were afraid that his Enemies would way-lay him to do him a mischief in his
Journey; for in the Countries, which he was to pass through, there were either, for
the most part, Papists, or else Thieves, inhabiting the Borders of both
Kingdoms, who were all excited to hope for a sudden Change; and 'twas plain,
they were dealt with to intercept him in his Return, and therefore abundance of
the English Courtiers offered him their assistance to secure his Passage; but
he was contented only with his own Retinue, and about the 13 th of January,
began his Journey: But the Queen of England, The Regent honorably dismis^ from
England, and arrives in Scotland.
judging it to be for her own Credit and Honor, that he should return in
Safety, had of her own accord written to the Commanders and the Warden of the
Marches, That, when he came to places suspected, or noted for Robbery; They
should take care, that he might not be circumvented; And they were very careful
therein, for strong Guards of Horse and Foot were placed about the Way, so that
he came safe to Berwick, and, the day after, which was the 2 d of February, he
was conducted home to Edinburgh, to the great joy of his Friends; who, in great
Numbers, were there Assembled. His Enemies did hardly believe his coming at
first, because false Reports had been causelessly spread, that he was shut up
Prisoner in the Tower of London; But when it was certainly known, that he was
at Edinburgh: Those, who had beset the Highways to intercept Passengers, let
go their Prisoners, and slipped away Home; So that, immediately from a turbulent
Tempest, there grew a great Calm.

A few Days after, The Transactions of the Regent with the Queen of England,
confirmed by the Nobility of Scotland.
the Nobles of the King's Party had a great Meeting at Sterlin, there the
Transactions with the Queen of England were opened and highly approved, by the
consent of all there Present. About the same time, James Hamilton, chief of his
Family, came out of England, who, by a new, and unheard of, Pretense and
Arrogance, was adopted, as a Father, by the Queen of Scots, and made Lieutenant
of the Kingdom. He declared his Commission, and forbad the People to obey any,
but Those substituted by him; Whereupon, the Royalists disburst Sums of Money to
raise Forces, and to prepare to fight, if need were: And accordingly, at an
appointed Day, they met at Glasgow, but seeing the Country came not in to
Hamilton, according to his Expectation, by the Mediation of his Friends,
Hamilton forced to submit to the Regent;
Terms of Agreement were propounded, whereupon Hamilton was commanded to come
to Glasgow, to acknowledge the King, as chief Magistrate: If he did That, the
rest would be easily accorded; if he refused, it was in vain for him to come.
He, by the advice of his Friends that were with him, being forsaken by his
Clanships, and terrified by the near approach of his Enemies Army, resolved to
comply with Necessity, and to promise all that was desired; but when the Forces
of the Royalists were disbanded, then he would consult his Advantage, at
leisure. When they came to Glasgow, a Day was appointed, wherein they and their
Friends should profess their Allegiance to the King, and so recover their old
Estates and Honors; In the mean time, they were to remain in Prison, or, to
give in Hostages, of their Kindred, for their forthcoming. This also was added
to the Conditions, That all of the same Party might come in, if they pleased,
on the same Terms. Argyle and Huntly refused to subscribe to those Articles,
either out of anger to Hamilton, So is Argyle.
that he had given up himself to his Enemies Hands, without asking their
Advice; or else, because they thought to obtain for themselves more easy Terms
of Peace, in regard of their Power; or else, being encouraged by frequent
Letters from England, they were easily inclined to That, they had most mind to.
For, whilst these things were acted in Scotland, Letters came from the exiled
Queen, containing large Promises, and willing them not to be terrified with
vain Threats, for she should shortly be with them, with a great Army. Their
Minds were ready to receive this News; and so much the rather, because the
Queen was kept with a looser Guard than ordinary; and there was daily talk of
her Marriage with Howard. When Hamilton was come to Edinburgh, Hamilton's
Tergiversation;
at the Day appointed, he eluded his Promise, by various Postulations and
Pretenses, making many Delays; as, that the rest of his Party should come
together, and so be all comprehended at once in one Agreement: And also, that
they might send to the Queen to know her Mind; and to this end he desired to
defer the Matter, till the 10 th day of May. To this his plain Mockery, they
answered, That 'twas to no purpose for him to expect Argyle and Huntly, for
they had declared, they would manage their Concerns apart. As for the Queen,
'twas demanded, if she did not approve the Capitulation, what they would do.
Then Hamilton answered ingenuously enough, but not so prudently for the time,
That he was compelled to those Conditions, by the Force and Terror of an Army,
and that if he were left free to himself, he would not subscribe any thing
thereof; This their Baffle being openly discovered, For which he is imprisoned.
The Regent committed Hamilton and Maxwel to Edinburgh Castle. The rest of the
Dispute was about Argyle and Huntly. For Argyle, whilst the Regent was in
England, came to Glasgow, to consult about public Affairs, with about 1500 Men
in his Company; Thither also came many of the neighbor Countries of the same
Faction; where they differed in their Opinions, and agreed in nothing, but only
to disturb the Public Peace. The Hamiltonians desired of Argyle, That, in
regard the Inhabitants of Lennox were firm to the King's Cause, he would vex
them, by driving away Preys from them, that so he might draw them, tho
unwilling, to his Party; or else, might so impoverish them, that they might not
much advantage their own Party. When Argyle had communicated the thing to the
Council of his Friends, not one of them favored his Design; For they
remembered, That for many Years, the Lennoxians had been much addicted to
Argyle, and that there were many Alliances, between them. Moreover, said they,
Why are the Argyle Men nearer to the Lennoxians, than the Hamiltonians, seeing
they lie in the middle betwixt them Both? why then should they put a Service,
so full of odium, upon him? Seeing it was their own Affair, principally; let
them appear first in it, and then Argyle would not be wanting; He would be a
Companion, not a Leader, in such a plundering Expedition. When that Assembly
had held some Days, it was dissolved, without doing any thing, and Argyle
returned, through Lennox, which was his nearest way, without doing them any hurt;
which Moderation of his did indear him, even to the chief of the opposite
Faction, and made his Pardon more easily obtainable.

But Huntly had endeavored to break through Mern, Angus, and Strath-^arn, in the
Regents absence, having plundered the Country, and preyed their Castle, and,
ranging over the neighbor Places, had appointed Crawford and Ogilby his
Lieutenants about Dee; Usurping also all the Power of a King. That Carriage of
his made his Reconciliation the more difficult. These two Men, seeing their
Concerns were several, had a Council assigned, to meet at St. Andrews. Thither
Argyle came first: He was easily reconciled; for, that Year, and the Former, he
had committed no hostile Act; and besides, he was the Regent's Kinsman, and,
from his Childhood, his great Acquaintance, and familiar Friend; So that all he
required of him, was, an Oath to be Faithful to the King for the future; which
if he were not, besides the usual punishment of the Law, he did not deprecate,
but that he was to be accounted the basest Person living; the rest also were
admitted into Favor, upon the same Oath, but on far different Conditions. But
Huntly's Case, before his Arrival, Various Disputes about admitting Huntly to a
Reconciliation, with Arguments Pro and Con.
was long debated in Council. For, whereas in England, the Marriage of the
Exile Queen with Howard was carried on, and their coming into Scotland was
privately designed; their Faction there did, by degrees, take heart, and
encourage the Rebellious to Disobedience: For, if Matters were put into a
Confusion, they thought, the new King would have an easier entrance to possess
the Kingdom; Wherefore, when they knew, That the Regent would not be persuaded
to betray the King, as being his Guardian and Uncle, they endeavored, by all
means, to abridg his Power. For, besides Those, that openly took Arms against
the King, a great part of the Counselors, did not now, as heretofore, favor
Huntly in secret, but openly; they pleaded for him, might and main, That he
should be indemnified for what was past; for that was the readiest and safest
way to Agreement; yea, 'twas more creditable for the State, to heal civil
Breaches without Violence, and not to proceed to forfeiture of Goods or loss of
Life; and, by this means, Peace might be obtained at Home and Renown Abroad.
But if a military Course were taken, they must fight with a Man, who, by reason
of his ancient Power, his great Alliance; and by his many Clanships, was very
formidable; and if he were overcome, (which yet was uncertain) yet he might fly
to the Highlands and Mountainous Deserts, or to foreign Kings; where, out of a
small spark of Disgust, a mighty flame of War might, in time, be kindled. On
the other side, 'twas alleged, That the War would not be so formidable, as some
imagined. For his Father, tho he had the Report of a very prudent Man, even
whilst his Force was entire, was yet easily subdued; and therefore, this young
Man, whose Power was not yet established, and besides, was discouraged by the
recent calamity of his Family, was never able to bear up against all the Power
of the Kingdom, and the Majesty of the Kingly Name too; and, if he were
overcome in fight; or, if distrusting his Forces, he fled to the Mountains,
there were Those, who, by the same Largesses, as he had firm'd them for his
Service, or by greater, might be induced either to kill him, or to betray him
to the Regent. For the Faith of Mercenaries is changed with Fortune, they
follow the Prosperous, and forsake the Afflicted. As for foreign Kings,
Sententious Maxims in Policy.
They esteemed Men, according to their Power, neither were they concerned for
another Misery, but respected only their own Advantage. But if any King of
another Kidney should be so Courteous and Merciful, as to entertain a Fugitive,
and a Beggar too; yet now, the Times were such as did cancel that fear. For
England, alone, of all Europe, was the Country, which enjoyed a flourishing
Peace, and That favored the King's Cause; but other neighbor Kingdoms were so
busied with domestic Dissensions, that they had no time to look Abroad; And if
they had leisure so to do, yet there was some ground of Hope, That Equity would
prevail more with them, than Mercy toward Exiles, who were Rebels to their own
Kings, and Faithless to the Kings of other Nations; As for the Indemnity,
which, they say, will declare our Clemency; it will rather be an Argument of
our Negligence, in regard, a just Combat being declined through Fear, a War is
imprudently nourished under a pretense of Peace, and that an unjust pretense
too, which would encourage the crest-fallen Spirits of the Rebels, and weaken
the cheerful endeavors of the King's best Friends. For, how do you think, will
both Parties stand affected; When the one side sees, That all is lawful for
them, without present punishment, and so they hope it will be for the future?
And the other sees perfidious Enemies to enjoy the Rewards of their wicked
Crimes, themselves robbed of all their Goods, and vexed with all the Calamities
of War; and whereas they expected a Reward for their Faithfulness and
Constancy, instead thereof to be punished for their Love to their King and
Country; And therefore, who can doubt, but that, if Matters hereafter come to
Arms, (which of necessity they must do, unless this Fire be now quenched,
before it break forth) who, I say, can doubt, but that Party will be strongest,
which thrives by its Wickedness, and who may do all things with Impunity,
rather than the other, who must suffer all injuries offered to them forcibly,
gratis? And if those Inconveniences did not attend this vain show of Clemency;
yet, neither the Regent, nor the King himself, could lawfully so Pardon, as to
give away the Goods of the Robbed to their Plunderers: If they should do that,
They must lay down the Persons of Rulers, and take upon them the habit of
Spoilers, too; if such a Condition should be granted, it were much more Cruel,
for People to be despoiled of their Estates by Kings, the Granters of
Indemnity, than by their very Enemies, and Toryes themselves, that robbed them.
Many things having been alternately canvas'd, and alleged, to this purpose, on
either side: Those which were for his Indemnity were out-voted, by a few
Voices. The Regent declared, That, for Peace-sake, he was very willing to
Pardon the private wrongs done to himself and the King; but, Yet, at last the
Regent pardons him, upon Terms.
for the Injuries offered to particular Persons, he neither could, nor would,
Pardon them: But if Huntly and those Friends of his, who followed his Party,
could make some Terms of Agreement with those they had plundered, he was very
willing, by the Consent of both Parties, to appoint Arbitrators, who might
adjust the value of the Losses.

Peace, as 'twas thought, being settled on these Conditions, there was another
Dispute arose, seemingly small, but managed with greater eagerness, than
before; The Controversy was, Whether Pardon were to be given to all of Huntly's
Party, promiscuously? or, Whether every Man's Cause and Desert should be
considered, apart? Some were of Opinion, that, because they thought Huntly was
dealt hardly with in being enforced to pay D^mages to the Sufferers, that it
was equitable to indulge him here, and not to press so severely, as to
disoblige his Followers, also: On the other side, 'twas alleged, That the chief
aim, in such kind of Wars, was, to dissolve Factions, and that could not be
done easily, any otherwise, than if the judgment of Pardon or Punishment did
reside in the Breast of the Prince alone: All Men understand, how unjust it is,
to impose an equal Fine on Those, whose Offenses are unequal; and that the
adjusting of the Punishment, should be left to Huntly himself, was, by no
means, fit, for he ('it was probable) would exact the lightest Mulct from the
greatest Offenders; and would lay almost the whole Burden upon such as were
least Nocent; in regard, in imposing Punishment, he would not weigh each Man's
Merit, but rather his Propensity to his Service; and as any Man had been more
fierce and cruel in the War, so he would obtain from him an higher Place in his
Favor. On the other side, the lightest Offenders would have the sorest
Punishment, and they, which were less active in Wickedness, should be fined for
their Moderation, and Favor, toward the King. These Reasons so prevailed with
the Council, that they decreed to weigh every Man's Case apart; and yet, that
they might seem to gratify Huntly in some thing, his Domestics were exempted,
he was to lay a Fine on them himself, as he pleased; But that which he most
desired, that the Regent should not come with an Army into the North-parts, was
absolutely refused him.

Things being thus settled with Huntly at St. Andrews; the Regent, with two
Bands of Soldiers, and a great Number of his Friends, went first to Aberdeen,
then to Elgin, at last to Inverness: The Inhabitants near the Town were
commanded to appear, they obeyed the Summons, some paid down their Money,
imposed as a Fine on them, others gave Sureties: Huntly, and the chief of his
Septs and Clanships, put in Hostages. Thus having settled the Country toward
the North, being highly gratulated by all good Men, through all his March, he
returned to St. Iohnston's; there an Assembly of the Nobility was Indicted, by
reason of Letters, which Robert Boyd had brought out of England to the Regent
at Elgin; some of them were public, some were private; the private ones were
from some Courtiers in England, containing a Relation of Howard's Conspiracy,
Letters from England, declaring the Intrigues between the Q. of Scots and
Howard.
which was so strong and cunningly laid, that they thought no Force or Policy
could withstand it, no, not if all the remaining Power of Britain were united
together: Therein his Friends exhorted him not to mingle his own flourishing
Fortune with the desperate Estate of others, but to provide for himself and his
Concerns, yet unimpair'd, apart.

The State of Affairs in England compels me here a little to digress; because,
at that time, the Good and Ill of both Kingdoms were so conjoined, that the one
cannot well be explained without the other. The Scots, a few Years before, were
delivered out of the Slavery of the French by the Assistance of the English,
and thereupon they observed and subscribed to the same Rites in Religion, in
common with the English; that sudden Change of things seemed to promise an
universal Quietness to all Britain, free from all domestic Tumults: But
presently thereupon, the Pope of Rome, with the Kings of France and Spain
threatened a War, and privately managed Designs to alter things. The Pope was
not wanting, by his Exhortations and Promises, to stir up their Minds already
enraged; but the Kings were not sufficiently agreed amongst themselves; and
their Forces were so exhausted, that they rather desired a War, than were able
to make it. Besides, there was an Emulation betwixt them, one could not well
bear, that the other should have so great an Accession as England, if it were
conquered, to his Dominions. Moreover, some Disputes arose betwixt Them and
their Subjects, which diverted their Thoughts from foreign Affairs, though the
Novelty of a Woman's Reign, and she a young Woman too, without an Husband, gave
Encouragement thereto, (especially since those who were ill affected to her,
said she was born to Henry the 8 th in an unlawful Marriage) and also the
former Differences about the Kingdom, and about Religion, were rather stifled
than extinguished; yea, the Sparks of Discontent did glow in Men's Minds, which
in a short time were likely to break forth into a great Flame.

In the mean time, the English Papists had made many Attempts, but in vain, for
they were soon quelled; and though their Designs never succeeded, yet,
Foreigners still feeding them only with blooming Hopes, not with real Supplies,
they still persisted in the same resolute Design, wanting rather a Commander
for their Numbers, than Power or Courage to come together. The Common People of
that Sect had taken a View of all the Nobility, and they found none fit enough,
to whom they might commit their Lives and Fortunes; many of the most stirring,
had been consumed in the Civil Wars; many had past over to the other Party;
some were so old, that they were unfit for public Business; or else, the Vigor
of their Minds, as well as the Strength of their Bodies, was so debilitated,
that they desired Peace, if it were but a tolerable one. There was only one
Man, who for Courage and Power seemed fit to undertake so great a Business, and
that was Thomas Howard, who though he was of himself inclinable to Quietness,
yet there were some Causes which moved him to study Innovations; For his Father
and Grandfather, though they had been highly eminent, both in War and Peace,
yet, in the Storms of an unstable Court, they had been so tossed, that their
highest Glory was balanced with as great Disgrace. His Father was condemned
for Treason, and publicly beheaded; and Two Queens, his Kinswomen, had been
also put to Death; He in those Difficulties was liberally brought up, and so
preserved his Family from being quite extinguished, and blown up: In his very
Youth, he gave a Specimen of great Prudence, and in a few Years, by the Death
of his Wives, and by new Marriages, he grew so rich, that, next to the Queen,
he was the most potent of the English; for Wealth and Prudence, the rest of the
Nobility yielded to him; but as for his Skill in Military Matters he had yet
given no Proof of his Valor; but in the Controversies of Religion, he carried
himself so swimmingly and ambiguously, that, tho he favored Popery in his
Heart, yet he was such a Fosterer of the contrary Party, that Many of them made
sure of him, in their Thoughts, as their Own.

Amids these things, the Queen of Scots was overcome in Battle and fled to
England, whence she wrote Letters to that Queen, concerning the cause of her
coming; she was bid by her to retire to the House of the Lord Scroop, Warden of
the Marches, till she did consider of her Demands in Council; Queen of Scots
confined to the Lord Scroop's House, in the North of England.
Scroop's Wife was Howard's Sister, and, by her Means, the Treaty of Marriage
was secretly begun betwixt the Queen and Howard, and the Opportunity seemed to
be offered by God himself, seeing Howard's third Wife was lately dead, and he
was then a Widower. The Design was concealed, as being entrusted but to a few,
yet 'twas whispered abroad among the Common People; For narrow Spirits cannot
conceal great Hopes, but Joy gives them Vent, and so they fly abroad. The
Matter was so far advanced, That the Fire of a Civil War seemed ready to break
out, yea, some were so confident of Success, after they had considered the
Strength of the Parties, that they thought Howard might easily do what he
pleased, without using any Force.

Things were in this Posture, when the Scots Nobles had a great Meeting at
Perth, to hear the Demands of both Queen's, Letters from both Queens to the
Scots Nobles, read and debated.
both of them having wrote to them. The Queen of England's Letters proposed one
of these Three Conditions. The first was absolute, That the Queen might be
restored to her Throne and Dignity, as formerly. But if that could not be
granted, Then, that she might reign jointly with her Son, that so she might
enjoy Princely Honor in Letters and public Acts; in the mean time, the
Regency should be in the Hands of the present Regent, till the King came to the
Age of seventeen. If neither of those could be obtained, then the third
Condition, was, (if the Queen could be persuaded to accept of it) That she
should live privately at home, being content with those Honors, which, saving
the Authority and Majesty of the King, might be granted to her. This last
Request was easily assented to, if the Queen would accept it; But the other Two
were peremptorily refused. For the better and more incorrupt Part of the
Nobility were resolute in this, That they neither could, nor ought, to
determine any thing, which did diminish the King's Authority, especially being
lawfully enthroned; but the two former Heads did take off from the King's
Honor, yea, it exposed his Life too, being a Pupil, unless it could be
thought, that his Mother, who was known to be cruel toward her Husband, and
was not well affected toward her Son neither, being exasperated by her
Banishment besides, should be no more kind to him, than she had been ever
before. Also the Letters from the exiled Queen were read, wherein she desired,
That some Judges might be appointed to consider of her Marriage with Bothwel;
and if 'twas found contrary to Law, that she might be divorced from him. Those
Letters did highly incense the King's Party, because she wrote her self as
Queen, and commanded them as Subjects: Yea, some would not have had them
answered at all, because they endeavored to abridg the King of his Power, and
to instate the Rule in the sole Power of an exiled Queen; but that Part of the
Council which was for the Queen, alleged, that they wondered much, why those
who had formerly, the last Year, much desired, that she would separate her
Cause from Bothwel's; now when it was freely offered to them, should hinder it
as eagerly, (or rather more) as they had before earnestly desired it; if a Word
or two in the Letters did displease them, that Fault might easily be amended;
yea, some there were, who undertook (provided the Matter of the Divorce might
be handled in the mean time) to procure a Commission from her, in what
Expressions they themselves would have it: On the contrary, the adverse Party
urged, That they saw no new Cause of such great haste, 60 days was but a lawful
time for Bothwel, who was out of the Kingdom, to appear; within which time a
new Commission might be sent: Neither ought that Delay to seem long, especially
to her, who had past over so great a Matter in Silence, now two Years; and now
also she had sent Letters, which were of themselves an Hindrance, why those who
were willing to gratify her, could not comply with them; but if she desired a
Divorce, 'twas easy to be obtained; let her but write to the King of Denmark,
desiring him to punish the Murderer of her former Husband; if he were dead,
though they all were unwilling, yet she might marry where and whom she pleased;
but if she refused This, then 'twas plain, she spoke not sincerely and from her
Heart, but made a counterfeit Pretense of Divorce, that, if she married again,
she might also live in a disputable and uncertain Matrimony, even with her next
Husband, too: And hereof there was a shrewd Suspicion, because she desired such
Judges to determine of the Divorce, who had no Power in the Case. For what
Power could the Regent have over Exiles, with whom he had nothing at all to do,
who, unless they themselves pleased, might refuse to stand to his Judgment; or,
how should they submit to another Judgment, who were under the Power and
Dominion of other Princes; but, seeing that there seemed to be some hidden
Fraud in the Case, a Decision was not to be hastily made, but the Queen of
England was to be acquainted therewith, in whose Power it was, either to
promote or hinder it. Hereupon, a Young Nobleman of the Regent's Friends was
sent to the Queen of England, to acquaint her with the Acts of the Convention.
Some may perhaps wonder, That seeing greater Matters were transacted with less
Dispute, there should be such ado made about the Divorce: But this was the
cause of it; Howard had privately transacted by his Friends, concerning his
marrying the Queen of Scots; and the Conspiracy was so strong both at home and
abroad, That 'twas bruited among the Vulgar, the Design was, to take away both
of the lawful Princes, and so to seize on the two Kingdoms, for themselves; the
Place, Time, and the Whole of the Design was so ordered, that all things seemed
to be secure against any Force whatsoever. The Conspirators did most insist on
This, To remove what might hinder the Marriage: If that were done, they seemed
secure, that all the rest should fall in of it self. On the contrary, They
which were for the King, made it their chief Business to cast in Rubbs to delay
it; for, in the Interim, many secret Designs might in time be discovered, and
the Conspiracy prevented by the Care of both Princes.

In this Posture of Affairs, the Decree of the Scots Council was brought to the
Queen of England; but she, alleging, she was not satisfied with that Answer,
and the Messenger did not seem to her a fit Person with whom she might confer,
in so dangerous a time, and about such weighty Matters, The Scots answer Q.
Elizabeth's Letter.
desired to be better informed by the Scots of those Matters. Whereupon there
was another Assembly of the Nobility Indicted at Sterlin, where they drew up
this Answer, That, as for the last of her Requests it might admit a
Consultation, in order to an Agreement; but the second was of that kind, that
no Consultation at all could be admitted, on that Head, without manifest
Impiety, in regard it would not only diminish, but even extirpate, the Royal
Authority: For, besides that all Partnership in Supreme Magistracy is
dangerous; how can Two be equally joined in Government, whereof One was a
Youth, scarce out of his Infancy; the Other a Woman in the prime of her Age, of
a crafty Disposition, having past through Variety of Fortunes, who, as soon as
ever she can creep into Part of the Government, will, by the Strength of that
Faction, which, though she was removed by a public Decree from the
Administration thereof, do yet labor to introduce her, not by Entreaties, but
Threats; or else by corrupting the King's Enemies; or, lastly, by foreign
Soldiers, whom she is now busy to procure, soon derive the whole Authority to
her self? How will she endure, that an Infant should be equaled with her, who
would not be matched even with her Husband? Besides, if she should marry some
potent Man, (such a Matter being now on Foot) her Strength would be doubled,
and her Husband (as of Necessity he must) be admitted into Part of the
Government; perhaps, he would not willingly suffer, that his Children should be
prevented in the Succession by a Son-in-Law; and then, in what a Case would the
Child be? What if his Friends (as all Men are inconstant) should prefer a
present Largess, before their future Hope, and so side with the strongest? What
can attend the Child, being now thrust down into the second, and anon into the
third Place, but utter Ruin? As for other things, they had rather leave them to
her private Thoughts to meditate upon, than to make a previous Conjecture, What
an angry Woman having Power in her Hands, prompted by the Imperious Counsels of
her Uncles, having evidenced her Cruelty toward her Husband, being also
exasperated by her Banishment, would attempt against a Child, especially when
stripped of all Aid of Nature and Providence, and exposed as a Sacrifice to her
Rage? And what Life would his Friends live, by whom she thought she was so
grievously wronged? Besides, what would the State of Religion be, when she
could vent that Rage, which in former time her Fear had concealed, especially
if an Husband, of known Arrogance, should further excite her innate Cruelty?
How easily might his Friends be destroyed, when the young King was slain; or
else, how soon might the King be subverted, when he had lost his Friends? For
these Reasons, the Queen could not be assumed into a Part of the Government,
without evident Destruction to the King's Affairs. Matters standing thus, there
was no need to speak any thing to the first Head of her Demands.

Petcarn sent Ambassador into England, to satisfy Q. Elizabeth.
Robert Petcarn was sent to carry this Answer into England, a Man of no less
Prudence than Loyalty; and he came to that Court in the very nick of time, when
the Conspiracy to kill the Queen, and to seize on both Kingdoms, was discovered
and made known. The Plot was so strongly laid, That the Queen of England began
to be afraid of her self, and after she had imprisoned Howard in the Tower of
London, she durst not proceed to punish the Queen of Scots, but was consulting
to send her, by Sea, to the Regent of Scotland; but when the Storm was a little
over, that Design did not hold.

In the mean time, the Regent, in regard the Power of the adverse Faction did
mightily increase, sends for William Maitland, who was a great Incendiary to
the Conspiracy, from Perth to Sterlin; he, being conscious of his Guilt, though
he had experienced the Regent's Lenity to all his Friends, even in the greatest
Offenses, yet made no great haste to come; till having before sifted out, by
his Friends, if any Design were formed against him; he dealt also with the Earl
of Athol, to go with him, that, if need were, he might use him as his
Intercessor: As he was sitting in Council at Sterlin, Thomas Crawford, a
Dependant of the Earl of Lennox's, accused him of having an hand in the King's
Murder: Whereupon, he was commanded to be kept close Prisoner in a Chamber in
the Castle; whilst others were sent to apprehend James Balfure, who was absent.
The wiser sort would have had them both proceeded against according to Law, as
having been the Authors of all the Tumults, that had happened for some Years;
and, as they were privy to the Murder of the last King, The Regent's Lenity,
his own Overthrow.
so they were Leaders of the Faction against her Son: But the Lenity of the
Regent overcame all Consideration of Public Good; so that it proved calamitous
to his Country, and fatal to Himself: Balfure, by his Friends Mediation,
obtained Pardon for his Conspiracy, though lately entered into; and Maitland was
brought to Edinburgh, into a Lodging not far from the Castle, some Horsemen
were appointed to guard him, under the Command of Alexander Hume, a Young and
active Nobleman; but William Kircade, Governor of the Castle, about ten a
Clock at Night, brought counterfeit Letters to Alexander, (as if they had been
the Handwriting of the Earl of Murray,) which commanded him to deliver
Maitland into his Custody: He, knowing in how great Favor Kircade was with
Murray, readily obeyed, and thus Maitland was carried into the Castle by the
Governor, who, even till then, had privily been of the Enemies Party; the
Nobility much storming at it; and almost doubting, Whether they should impute
so great an Offense to Kircade, or to the Regent himself, as one not ignorant
of his Audacity; and the matter had come to a Sedition, if the Sanctity of his
whole Life had not outballanc'd all Imputations of Reproach: It Is true, Kircade
was a valiant Man, and accounted, till that time, a faithful Observer of
Friendship, and as he had received many other Courtesies from the Regent, so he
had been lately preferred by him to the Government of the Castle, before his
other Friends and Kindred; though the Prudenter sort did, even then, suspect
him; but such was the Indulgence of the Regent, toward those whom he once
loved, That he could not be severe to them, though caught in the very Act of
Offending. Kircade, the next day, was sent for by the Regent, but refused to
come; and 'twas an unlucky Opportunity, for then Howard and the Queen were
daily expected; and thereupon, the Spirits of the adverse Faction encouraged;
The Regent deserted by his intimate Friends*
ugly Reports were commonly spread abroad, That the Regent was forsaken by his
intimate Friends, in such a doubtful time; and so the Castle being held against
him, he was left to his Enemies Will, others being likely to follow so leading
an Example very shortly; when their Governor was taken away, the innocent King
and his Favorers would be delivered up to those Punishments, which the
cruelest Tyrants could devise; yet, the Regent was not moved by their Speeches,
but, the next Day, went to the Castle, and spoke to the Governor with an
unchanged Countenance, as if he had been reconciled to him, and so returned to
the Expedition, he had undertaken against the Robbers. In his Passage through
Merch, he turned aside, as he was wont familiarly to do, to Alexander Hume, the
chief of that Clanship; there also ( Hume himself being covetous, and having
been drawn off by great Promises to the contrary Faction) he found no
benevolous Reception from Hume's Wife, but she, being an arrogant Woman, did
even mock at him to his Face; so that he departed to Teviotdale; coming thither
with a small Retinue, and little more than his ordinary Guard, the Thieves
admiring his Valor and Constancy, in that Solitude of his Friends, having
received the Public Faith for their Return, came in such Numbers to him, that
their Multitude equalled, yea sometimes exceeded, those of his Attendants; yet
he remitted nothing of his former Greatness of Mind, but answered them as
became the Dignity of the Public and his Own too; and, without doubt, he had
quieted them without Force, unless some of the Neighbour-Nobility, affected to
Howard, and now ready to take Arms, had impeded his Design. His Friends came in
to him at the time appointed, and then he marched into the Territory of the
Thieves, though some of the Neighborhood endeavored to dissuade him, by
telling him of the Difficulty and Danger of the Expedition; he past with his
Army through Liddisdale, Ewsdale and Eskdale, and received Hostages, not only
from them, but from those beyond them; only some, who, by reason of the
Greatness of their Offenses, despaired of Pardon, were outlawed by him. This
Expedition procured him not only the Favor of the People for settling them in
Security, but raised their Admiration also, That a Man forsaken by his intimate
Friends, and extremely unprovided of Necessaries, should accomplish That in a
few Days, which the most potent of our Kings, in full Peace, and with great
Forces, could hardly effect in a long time.

Whilst these things were acting, he was made acquainted, That the English
Conspiracy was detected, Howard imprisoned.
Howard committed to Prison, and the Scots Queen more strictly guarded, than
before; and that Robert Petcarn had performed his Embassy with good Success,
and was returned; he informed him, That his Proceedings were very acceptable to
the Queen of England, That he had quieted the Borders; The Regent receives an
encouraging Message from the Queen of England.
That he had imprisoned the Earl of Northumberland, one of the Conspirators,
who was fled into Scotland; That he was pursuing all the rest, as Enemies; That
he had sent to the Governor of Berwick, to offer him Assistance freely on all
Occasions. These Courtesies she promised to remember, and that she would not be
wanting to him in his Dangers, but all the Force of England should be at his
Service, if need were.

All the time of this Expedition, the Regent had daily Information brought him
by his faithful Friends, of a great Conspiracy against him, entered into at
home. And, in all the Letters, the Governor of the Castle was still accused;
whereupon, the Regent's old Courtesies and ancient Acquaintance not being yet
quite cancelled out of his Memory, he wrote to him plainly, and sent him a Copy
of all his Accusations. He answered so coldly to the Crimes objected, That he
became now more suspected, than before: He denied, that any Man could show his
Subscription to any Pact, relating to that Conspiracy.

In the mean time, the Day for Maitland's Trial drew near; for, after he was
carried to the Castle, to put a bold Face on a bad Matter, he expressly desired
to be brought to his Trial; for he was fully persuaded, That the Power of the
Conspirators was so great in England, and also in Scotland, (of which he was
one of the chief) that nothing could be orderly or lawfully determined: For in
Trials of Life and Death, there use to be great Flockings together of Friends
and Vassals, according to the Faction, Favor or Nobility of the Accused, as it
happened also, at that time. The chief of the Faction adverse to the King, viz.
the Earls of Hamilton, Gordon, and Argyle, gathered all their Force, against
that Day; hoping, that if the Judgment were disturbed by force, (as 'twas easy
so to do) that they might quietly end the Conflict at one Skirmish, as being
Superior in Number of Men, Opportunity of the Place, and also better provided
for War. The Regent expected not a vying in Force, but in Law, and therefore
had made no preparation on the other side; and so, being unwilling to put
things to the utmost Hazard, before he needs must; and also, lest the Majesty
of the Government might be lessened by contending with his Inferiors, he put
off the Day of Trial, and so He, a Day after, about January 1 st, having sent
the Earl of Northumberland to a Prison in Lough-Levin, went to Sterlin.

The adverse Faction, thus again disappointed, and perceiving the Authority and
Power of the Regent to increase, and that, besides his Popularity at home, he
was also supported by the English, being stirred up, partly by Emulation;
partly by the large Promises from the Queen of Scots, who by Letters informed
them, that the French and Spanish Aid would be presently with them, proceeded
to accomplish that which they had long designed, even the cuting off the
Regent. As long as he was alive, they knew, their Projects could not take
effect, and therefore they sent Messengers, through all Countries to the chief of
their Faction, to enter into a League to that purpose. To this League, the
Hamiltons subscribed, and Those, who either themselves, or their Children, were
Prisoners in the Castle of Edinburgh. The Governor himself was thought to be
privy to it, and That which followed, did increase the Suspicion of him; James
Hamilton, Son of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's Sister, promised his
Assistance, and endeavored to find a fit Time and Place to commit the Murder.
It happened, that, at the same time, some hopes were given to the Regent, That
Dunbarton would be surrendered upon Conditions; thither he went, but returned
without his Errand. Hamilton, being intent on all Occasions, his Ambushes not
succeeding well first at Glasgow, then at Sterlin, appoints Linlithgo to be the
Place fittest to execute his Purpose, because that Town was in the Clanship of
the Hamiltons, and the Archbishop, his Uncle, had an house there, not far from
the House where the Regent used to lodge; in that House, being appointed for
the Murder, he secretly hid himself. The Regent too negligent of his fore
warned Danger.
The Regent was made acquainted with the Plot, both before, and also, that very
Day, before it was light; the Discoverer, for more surety, added, that the
Murderer lay hid in 3 or 4 Houses from his Lodging; that, if he would send a
small Party with him, he would pluck him out of his hole, and so discover the
whole Design, and Order of the secret Plot; yet, the Regent would not alter his
former purpose; only he designed to go out of the Town through the same Gate he
entered in, and then turn about and proceed in his Journey; nor did he keep to
this Resolution, neither; either because he did undervalue such Dangers, as
believing his Life to be in God's Hand, to whom he was willing to render it,
when 'twas called for; or else, because the Multitude of Horse, waiting for
him, stopped up the way. When he was mounted on Horseback, he thought to ride
swiftly by the suspected Places, and so to avoid the Danger; but, the Multitude
of the People crouding in, hindered his Design, so that the Murderer, out of a
wooden Balcony, which he had purposely covered with Linen, as if 'twere for
another use, The Regent shot out of a Balcony, at the Instigation of the
Hamiltons,
shot him with a Lead-bullet, a little below the Navil, and it came out almost
by his Reins, and also killed the Horse of James Douglas, which was beyond him;
he himself escaped, by a back Door, or Passage, of the Garden, which he had
plucked down on purpose; and so mounted a swift Horse, set on purpose, to carry
him off, after he had committed the Fact, by James Hamilton, Abbat of
Aber-Brothwick, and so he went to Hamilton, with the great Gratulation of
Those, who waited to hear the Event of his audacious Enterprise; when they
heard, he had effected it, they commended him highly, and rewarded him as if
now the Kingship had been actually translated into their own Family.

In the mean time, at Linlithgo, the rest were startled at the suddenness of
the Crack, and the Regent told them, he was Wounded, and, as if he had not felt
it, he leaped from his Horse, and went, on foot, to his lodging: They, which
were sent for to Cure the Wound, at first said, 'Twas not Mortal; but, his Pain
increasing, tho his Mind was not disturbed, he began seriously to think of
Death. Those which were about him, often told him, that This was the fruit of
his own Lenity, in sparing too many notorious Offenders; and, amongst the rest,
his own Murderer, who had been condemned for Treason. Whereto he returned a
mild Answer, according to his Custom, Saying, Your importunity shall never make
me to Repent of my Clemency. Then, having settled his houshold-Affairs, Of
which Wound he died.
he commended the King to the Nobles there present, and, without speaking a
reproachful Word of any Man, he departed this Life before Midnight, about
January 23, in the Year of our Salvation 1571. His Death was lamented by all
Good Men, especially by the Commons; who loved him, Alive, and lamented him,
Dead, as the public Father of his Country; For, besides his many other noble
Achievements, they called to Mind, that, not a Year before, he had so quieted
all the troublesome Parts of the Kingdom, That a Man was as safe on the Road,
or at his Inn, as in his own House; and, Envy dying with him, They, who were
disaffected to him, when alive, did really Praise him, when dead. They admired
his Valor in War, which yet was always accompanied with a great desire of
Peace; The Pious and Laudable Character of the Regent.
his Celerity in Business was always so successful, that an especial Providence
of God seemed to shine on all his Actions; besides, his Clemency was great in
moderately punishing; and his Equity as great in his Legal Decisions: When he
had any spare time from War, he would sit, all day long in the College of
Judges; so that, his Presence struck such a Reverence into them, that the Poor
were not oppressed by false Accusations, neither were they tired out by long
Attendances, in regard their Causes were not put off to gratify the Rich. His
house, like an Holy Temple, was free, not only from flagitious Deeds, but even
from wanton Words; after Dinner and Supper, he always caused a Chapter out of
the Holy Bible to be read; and tho he had still a learned Man to interpret it;
yet, if there were any eminent Scholars there, (as there were often Many, and
such were still well respected by him,) he would ask their Opinions; which he
did, not out of a vain Ambition, but out of a desire to conform himself to the
Rule thereof. He was, in a manner, too liberal; he gave to Many, and often,
too; and his Alacrity in giving commended the Gift. To a great many, who were
modest in receiving, he presented privately with his own Hand. In a word, He
was honest and plain-hearted to his Friends and Domestics; for if any of them
did amiss, he reproved them more sharply, than he did Strangers. By these his
Manners, Deportment and Innocence of Life, he was dear and venerable, not only
to his Countrymen, but even to Foreigners, especially to the English, to whom,
in all the vicissitudes of Providence, in his Life, his Virtues were more
known, than to any other Nation.

The Twentieth BOOK.
ALL that Time, which immediately followed the Death of the last Regent,
although it were free from Bloodshed, yet, was embroyled with the various
Attempts of the Factions. Before the Murder, the Hamiltons, in great Numbers,
had met at Edinburgh, under the Pretense of prevailing with the Regent, to
release James Hamilton, the Head of their Kin or Tribe, who was yet kept
Prisoner in the Castle: But, after the Murder was perpetrated, they sent some,
from amongst them, to the rest of the Hamiltons, who were to dissuade the other
Clans, (for so they would have made People believe) from joining with, or
protecting, the public Parricides: But, as very many suspected, it was to bid
them, be prepared, and ready, for all Occasions. For, the next Night after the
Murder, Walter Scot, and Thomas Carr of Farnihest, entering into England, did
ravage over all Places with Fire and Sword; and that, with somewhat more
Cruelty than was used in former times. Neither was it so much the Desire of
Prey, or Revenge, which moved them to this unusual Cruelty, as, that it was
long before resolved by the Bishop of Saint Andrews, and the rest of the Heads
of the Faction, to incense the English against the Scots: And, if they could
provoke them, no other way, to take up Arms; then, by Injuries to draw them,
tho unwillingly, into a War. The Governor of the Castle, although convinced by
many Evidences, so that all Men's Eyes and Discourse were upon him by way of
Reflection, as yet continued in his former counterfeited Loyalty to the King;
'Twas upon his account, that William Maitland was delivered out of Prison; For,
when he had, in many Words, pleaded his Innocence before the Council, the
Nobles, then present, attesting, That it did not, with any certainty, appear to
them, That he was guilty of those Crimes which were laid to his Charge, (for he
was accused to have been privy to the King's and Regent's Murders, and also to
be the Author of the Civil War that was lately raised in England) he was at
last dismissed, yet so, that the Matter seemed to be deferred till Another
time, rather than absolutely to be decided at That: He also, protesting his
Innocence upon Oath, did promise to appear, whenever the King's Kindred would
set a Day for his Trial. Afterward, when, upon consulting about the State of
the Kingdom, they had almost agreed, That of those, whom the Queen, before she
abjured her Government, had nominated Tutors to the King, he that would
undertake it, provided he had not afterward revolted to the adverse Faction,
should have the chief Administration of Affairs. Maitland, now contriving the
Disturbance of Matters, brought it so about, that it should be again signified
to the absent Lords, that they might, if they pleased, be present in the
Parliament of the Regent, to be assembled at a set Day, lest they might
afterward complain, That so great an Affair was hastily rash'd up in their
Absence. Bandyings in Scotland, upon the Regent's Murder.
Athol, with a few others, consented; neither did the rest refuse it, more that
they would take away all occasion of Detraction and Calumny from their
Adversaries, than that they had any Hopes, that this Delay of the Parliament
would bring any Profit to the Public.

After these Things, Thomas Randolph, the English Ambassador, had Audience; for
That Queen, the Regent being yet alive, had sent her Ambassadors, to demand
those English Exiles, who, after Howard's Conspiracy was detected, and he
punished, for fear of Punishment, had escaped thither: The Regent, giving these
Ambassadors Audience at Sterlin, put them off till his Arrival at Edinburgh:
and, after his Death, Things being in Confusion, they departed without an
Answer. But, when they convened about choosing a Regent, Randolph, (who, for
some years, had been in Scotland) for that he was thought to be well read in
the Affairs, and in the Men, of that Nation; and that his former Embassies had
been also advantageous to both Nations, was in dear Esteem of all that were
good, like himself. He, being introduced into the Council, having declared,
Randolph's (Queen Elizabeth's Ambassador,) sober Speech to the Scots.
How great his Queen's Good Will had always been toward the Scots; That, as
she had not formerly been wanting to them in their Disturbances, so she would
not fail them now. Then he rehearsed their Incursions into England, the
Slaughters, Rapines, Burnings, of late Days committed: Adding, That she knew
well enough, That none of these Things were acted by the Public Council;
therefore, that, at present, her Kindness and Friendship toward them, was the
same it ever was: So that, although she had been grievously, and, without any
Cause, provoked; yet she did not, as she might justly do, repeat Matters, nor
publicly require Reparation; nor, for the Fault of a Few, seek Punishment of
All: That indeed she was not ignorant, what a great Disturbance in Affairs was
risen of late; yet, she was not doubtful of the Good Will of honest Men toward
her: That, in Favor of them, she did not only free the Public from any Guilt,
but if, by reason of domestic Troubles, they could not compel the Disturbers
of the Peace, to resettle Matters, that she would join her Forces with theirs,
that so, by common Consent, they might exact Punishment of those Violators of
Leagues and Truces: But, if they were not able to do That, that then she would
revenge their Injuries with her own Soldiers: That her Army should pass
peaceably through the Country, without the least Damage to it; That none, that
had not been guilty of the Crimes, should be concerned in the Punishment. The
remaining Heads of his Embassy contained Admonitions, ever profitable in all
Legal Assemblies, but now, as the present Posture of Affairs was, very
necessary, viz. That they should first of all, with all Care and Vigilance,
have regard to Religion, which alone teaches us our Duty, both toward God, and
toward Man: That, seeing no Commonwealth, at Discord within itself, can long
subsist, they should bend their chiefest Endeavors, and strive, with their
utmost Force, that, at Home, among Fellow Subjects, and Countrymen, Peace and
Concord might be religiously observed; and seeing God, the Framer of the
Universe, had indulged Them with a Kingly Government, it was just for them to
honor and obey their Kings, and to yield all Observance and Obedience to them:
That Peace, Concord, and Friendship with all Men, as much as possible, are most
acceptable to God, and quench, or, at least, lessen, the Thirst of shedding
human Blood, (which Wickedness God especially detests): That they increase the
Riches of All in general, and render a People more formidable to their Enemies:
That Justice is the Preserver of the Public Safety, of which, the chief Part
now to be made use of, is, The Punishment of Offenders: Seeing that Treason is
most hateful to every lawful Government, its Abettors, to what part of the
Earth soever they retreated, should have neither Mercy, Favor, nor Indulgence,
showed them. Thus far Randolph; whose Advice seemed both pious, wholesome, and
reasonable. But, because none was yet chosen Regent, he could not have any
certain Answer, and therefore was put off till the first of May. Last of all,
William and Robert Douglas, Brothers, by the Mother's Side, The Douglasses
Petition against the Murderers of the Regent, which occasions several Debates.
to the late murdered Regent, petitioned, That the villainous Death of their
Brother, suffered upon no Private, but the Commonwealth's, Account, should be
revenged. Herein, the Opinions were various, although all agreed, That the
Murderers were to be punished: Some thought fit, That a Day should be set for
those, suspected of the Murder, to appear, (and many of their Names were given
in): Others were of Opinion, That Court-Days were not to be waited for against
those, who were now in Arms, to maintain, by Force, that Fact, which they had
wickedly committed: And, that it was fit, not only to take up Arms forthwith
against them, but likewise against all those, who were sentenced by the last
Parliament. To this Opinion the Or, Commissioners.
Knights of Shires were most inclined, yet they could not obtain their Purpose,
by the dissuasion chiefly of Athol, who said, They ought to expect a more
numerous Assembly of Nobles; and of Morton, who thought, That, should they join
more Crimes together, the Revenge of the Regent's Death would miscarry, and a
Civil War break out; because all those, who dreaded the Peace, would join with
the Murderers. Therefore, that their Crimes should be separated, and Affairs,
if possible, acted by Law, and nothing innovated, before the first of May,
(which was the Day appointed for their Meeting.) And so that Session was
dissolved; most part of the People condemning this Delay of the Nobility,
because (said they) all things are acted, as the King's Enemies please, who had
occasioned these Delays purposely, that, in length of Time, the Odium of the
Murder might diminish, and the opposite Faction, that while, gain Strength.
This Opinion of the Peoples was confirmed, not only by some preceding
Accidents, but also by very many, which followed: For presently, when the
Regent's Murder was yet hardly divulged, James Hamilton, upon a Mortgage of his
Lands, procures Money of John Somerval, of A Barony on the East Side of Clyde.
Camnethen, which, together with another Sum, borrowed of his Friends, he sent
to his Accomplices to hire Soldiers with, having warned them before, to be ready
for all Essays, because of the sudden Alteration which had happened, upon their
having rid themselves of their capital Enemy. And after that, the Queen's Party
ceased not to have Meetings, in many and distant Places. About the 15 th of
February, almost all the Chiefs of the Rebellious Faction met together at
Glasgow; whence Argyle and Boyd wrote to Morton, That they, because, as yet,
they knew not Who were the Actors in, or privy to, the Regent's Murder, would
willingly communicate their Counsel with the rest of the Nobility, as well for
the Discovery, as Punishment, of that Murder; but, that they would not come to
Edinburgh; but if the King's Party would be persuaded to meet them at
Linlithgo, at Falkirk, or at Sterlin, they would, without Delay, come thither.
This Business, being communicated to Maitland by Morton, (for so the Letter
requested) came to nothing. About the same time, Thomas Car wrote to his
Father-in-Law, the Governor of the Castle, from Linlithgo, That, if the Queen
of England would be prevailed withal, to lay by her Resentment of the late
Incursions, he would endeavor, that, for the future, the Borders should be
quieted, and kept in due Order; but that, if she should refuse these Offers, he
would continue in the Design he had begun; not doubting, but that his honest
Countrymen, who yet retained their Fealty to their Queen, would join with him,
and that the French Auxiliaries would speedily come, also.

About the third of March, the Hamiltons, with Argyle and Boyd, met at
Linlithgo; but the killing of one common Soldier, begetting a Tumult,
disturbed all their Counsels; which made the Archbishop of St. Andrews carry
home the Hamiltons with him. The rest of the Rebels, chiefly Huntly, Athol,
Crawford, Ogilby; also, of those on this side Forth, Hume, Seton and Maitland,
met at Edinburgh; in which City Morton was, accompanied but with few, till the
Earls of Glencarn and Mar, with their Followers, came to him. About the fourth
of March, A Convention of the Nobles, with various Opinions about choosing a
Regent;
the Heads of the Factions met to consult about the Main, but this Consultation
went but slowly on, by reason of Argyle's Abs^nce, whose Power and Authority
was then very great. Huntly goes to him, undertaking to persuade him to join
with the rest of the Faction, but returns without Success, by the Treachery of
Maitland, (as most Men thought) who desired to drill on Affairs, that, amidst
the Confusions of the Kingdom, he might have the fitter Opportunity for
Innovations. Argyle also, in all his Undertakings, had another Impediment,
which hindered, That his Power was not now so great, as it was found to be
formerly, which was, That, though he himself was a most eager Favourer of the
Queen's Cause, yet his Friends and Clients, no, nor his very Brother, could not
be prevailed with to follow him against the King. The Night following, a sudden
Terror, without any apparent Cause, did so seize upon all the Factious, that
they watched in their Armor, till it was Daylight; and, in the Morning, they
as fearfully departed from Edinburgh. All the Time of this Convention, the
chief Thing controverted, was, By what Authority the Scots might, at that time,
choose a Regent? Some, according to the Queen's Letters Patent, by which she
had designed Eight of the Nobility, that, out of them, one, or more, as should
be thought fit, might be nominated as Tutors to her Son, would have one of that
number placed at the Helm. Others were of Opinion, That those Letters were now
useless, since that a Regent was already chosen, according to their
Appointment; and that all Thoughts of them should be laid aside, as being not
made to be always in Force, but for that one Juncture of Time, only. Some there
were, who would have the whole Affair deferred, until the General Convention of
the Nobility, but These were mostly of Maitland's Faction, which expected, That
a great Distraction in Affairs would follow, which, in a great Multitude,
without a Governor, is easily raised, but not so easily laid. The Third
Opinion condemned both the Others: The First, for that now there ought less
Account to be made of the Queen's Letters-Patent, since (if the Matter of Law
were considered) they were, from their beginning, of little or no force: The
Other, But is dissolved, re infecta.
for that a Prorogation would both draw much Danger along with it, and also a
greater Delay, than the present Condition of Affairs could well permit; and
therefore they would have all those to meet, who, at first, had advised the
King to enter upon the Government, and had constantly adhered to him, ever
since: These, according to the sense of this Party, were to take the best Care
they could for the Publick-Weal, and speedily appoint such a Regent, who was
both able and willing to provide for the Safety of King and Kingdom, both. But
this Opinion was rejected also, and so, before any thing was concluded upon,
the Convention was broke up.

So many Meetings having been tried in vain, the Rebels again return to the old
Seminary of the English War, thereby to draw the Populacy to their Faction; and
send out the same Captains of the Freebooters, which were sent before, who left
nothing of Cruelty uncommitted, even to the utmost extremity. And, in the mean
time, the Heads of their Faction bespatter the Queen of England with all manner
of Reproaches: And also, they maliciously accuse the Scottish Nobles, as
Pensioners to the English, commonly giving out, in a way of Threatening, That if
their Adversaries did call in the English to their Aid, they would have
recourse to the French and Spanish Succors. About this time, Mr. Le Verac, one
of the King of France's Bed-Chamber-Men, came from France to Dumbritton, who,
with his large Promises, somewhat raised up their Courages. Hereupon, the
Hamiltons appointed a Meeting of their People, to be held the 9 th of April, at
Linlithgo; Where, when the Queen's Faction was gathered together in great
Numbers, They began openly to treat of That, which they had long before
meditated in their private Cabals, That, if a War against the English could be
made, thereby private Injuries and Actions, either about the King's or Regent's
Murder, in that universal Disturbance of Affairs, would either grow out of
Remembrance, or, at least, the Resentment of them much abate. These Things
having been transacted at Linlithgo, by the Associates of the Conspiracy only,
who having not yet plainly unmasked their Intentions, The Hamiltons, and others
of the Queen's Party, meet at Edinburgh.
that they might have more Show of Authority, they determine to meet at
Edinburgh, on the 11 th of April, and thereby, besides the other Conveniences
which the Place would afford them, draw the Citizens, of whom they always made
great account, either way, to their Party. This seemed no hard Matter, since
they had already gained William Kircady, the Governor both of the City and
Castle, to their Side: But, because they understood, that Watch and Ward was
kept there, and that the Common People were more inclined to their Adversaries,
they thought fit to send to the Citizens, first, to know, Whether or no it was
their Pleasure, they should meet there? The Citizens Answer was, That they
would exclude no Person, that was desirous of the Public Peace, and obedient
to the King; but that they would admit neither the English Exiles, nor the
Hamiltons, into their City, lest they should either highly displease the Queen
of England, in whose Kingdom they had great Traffic, or seem to join in
Counsel with those that were guilty of that horrid Murder; nor likewise, would
they endure the Proposal of any New Edicts, which might tend to the lessening
of the Regal Authority; or, that their Soldiery should be forced (as the
Custom was) to run to their Arms by sound of Drum. Upon these Conditions, how
hard soever they seemed, they notwithstanding came into the City, in hopes, by
degrees, to gain upon the unwary Multitude, and, by soothing them up with fair
Speeches, The Edinburghers much courted to side with them, but in vain.
at last, to bring them all to their beck; but, for all this, they could not
prevail with the Citizens to deliver up their Keys to them, or to cease their
usual Watch, though Kircady, Governor of the Castle and City, joined his
utmost Endeavors with them, that they should do so.

All that time, they visited Maitland (who (if he did not dissemble deeply,)
was troubled with the Gout) every day, and in such Numbers, that his House was
commonly named a School, and he a Schoolmaster: Athol, the whilst, incessantly
passing from one Place to another, that he might draw those of the contrary
Faction to this Meeting at Edinburgh; but they all, with one accord, refused to
come before May 1. (which was the Day generally agreed on by all) unless they
were satisfied of the necessity of coming, before; if any thing of moment had
happened, which would admit of no Delay, they would have them acquaint the Earl
of Morton with it, who was at his House but four Miles off, and he would tell
the rest of it. Athol, at last, appoints a Day, on which, some of either
Faction should meet at Morton-Hall, which is in Dalkeith; but this Place did
not please the Queen's Faction, not that they dreaded any Treachery, but out of
a Conceit, That it would be an undervaluing to their Authority, if they should
come to Morton, rather than He come to Them. Therefore, after many Attempts,
and that nothing proceeded to their Satisfaction, they were forced to break up
the Meeting; for seeing, that, being desirous to rid the City of their
Adversaries, they could not prevail with the Citizens to join with them; in
order to it, they resolved to call in a greater Number of their Friends
dwelling nearest, that, in spite of the Inhabitants, they might get all Things
into their own Power. The Governor of the Castle facilitated This very much,
who set at Liberty those Persons whom he had in Custody, (and they were well
nigh All the Heads of the Queen's Faction.) But a sudden Rumor, That the
English Army was come to Berwick, startled all their Resolutions: Alexander
Hume, and John Maxwel, lately let out of Prison, without any Public Authority,
betook themselves to their own Homes, to look to their own Concerns: And Hume
had part of the Money (gathered for raising of Soldiers) given him, to fortify
his own Castle, Hume. Thomas Carr, and Walter Scot, who, by the Instigation
chiefly of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, had made Incursions into England,
foreseeing, That, from this beginning, a War would be kindled between the Two
Kingdoms, being deserted by their Neighbors, and doubtful of their own
Strength, send to the Heads of their Faction for Aid; or, if that could not be
done, that, at least, they would come as far as Lauder, (a neighboring Town),
and from thence make a Show of War. Therefore, when they could neither obtain
their Request in This, nor yet the least Portion of their common Stock, for the
Public Advantage; and, being highly incensed to be thus betrayed and forsaken
by those very Men, that had put them upon the War, every one of them betakes
himself to take care for his own Safety, their Hopes, for the time to come,
being all blasted: So that, so many cross Accidents, unexpectedly falling out
at one and the same time, quite and clean disturbed all their Plots and
Machinations; An English Army coming into Scotland, puts the Queen's Faction to
a stand.
but the sudden Approach of the English Army, was It, which most surprised
them; and therefore, to see if they could put a stop to it, they make use of
two Embassies into England; the One to Thomas, Earl of Sussex, to desire a
Truce, till such time, as they had laid open the State of their Affairs to the
Queen of England: The Other Ambassador carried Letters to the Queen, containing
many things, as well for their own Cause, as against the King's Faction;
especially, by making their Brags of greater Forces than they had in reality,
and vilifying Those of their Adversaries, thereby covertly threatening the
English with a War: For Maitland had made them believe, That that Queen, a
Woman naturally timorous, would do any thing rather than be brought to a War,
at a time when both the French and Spaniard were, for many Reasons, at Emmity
with her, and her own Affairs at home were scarce settled; The Rebels desired,
that, by the English Queens Arbitrament, all the Ordinances of the last Two
Years should be called in, although many amongst them had subscribed them; and
that all things, being, as it were, acted de novo, a new Ordinance should, by a
general Consent, be made: And that they might better set forth the Potency of
their Faction, their Letter had all the great Men's Names, that were of their
Party, subscribed to It; and also, for the greater Ostentation of their
Multitude, they set to it the Names of Many as well of the adverse Faction, The
Queen's Party send Ambassadors into England.
as of those that were Neuters; in Hopes, that the English (by Reason of the
great Distance, and their Ignorance of things done so far off; and that their
Letters to the Queen, would be exposed to the View but of few Persons) would
hardly be able to detect their Fraud.

About that time, an Accident happened, as they thought, very advantageous to
their Affairs, as hoping, that it would both make the English less forward, and
also terrify the Scotch Populacie; viz. the Arrival of a certain Frenchman,
St. Lewis de Galais, Ld. of Lansach in France.
however of a mean Condition, who, as being Lansack's Menial Servant, was, for
his Master's sake, entertained at that Court. This Man brought a great many
Letters, all of the same Purport, from the French King, not only to the Heads
of the Queen's Faction, An Ambassador from France to the Queen's Party.
but likewise to Many, who had not declared themselves for either Faction, in
which great Thanks were given to every one of them, for their having hitherto
taken the Queen's Part; the King desiring them constantly to persist in so
doing, and he would send them Aid, even greater than they had desired of him,
as soon as ever he could do it with Conveniencie. He also that brought the
Letters, adds, as from himself, That all things were now at quiet in France,
Iaspar Colligny and the other Rebels being reduced to such Terms, as to promise
to depart from France, lest their Presence should be a Hindrance to the Public
Peace: And that he doubted not, but that the Soldiers which were to be sent to
assist them, would all be raised, before his Return. The Wiser sort, although
they knew, that these things were mostly nothing but vain Reports, yet
permitted the common Sort to be deluded by them. When therefore the Minds of
many People became, by these Means, to be erected, their Joy was lessened by
the unsuccessful Return of their Ambassadors: For Sussex could not, by any
Conditions they could offer him, be induced, to think it to be for the English
Interest, either to maintain an Army only to idle their Time away in Truces;
or, wholly to desist from the War. And the Queen having, after Perusal, caused
their Letter to be sealed up again, and sent back to the King's Party in
Scotland; Q. Elizabeth rejects the Embassy of the Queen's Party in Scotland.
which was done, that the Expectation of an Answer from her should cause Delay
in Affairs, and thereby their Fraud be easily found out. And, for that their
Letter contained nothing but vain Boasting, and that the English were not
ignorant of any thing that had been transacted in Scotland, their Ambassadors,
grievously abashed with Reproaches, were forced to return. Therefore being
disappointed of that Hope, and affrightned by the so sudden drawing near of the
English Army to their very Borders, and those who were to have assisted them,
being gone to defend their own Homes; having also small Confidence in the
Citizens, and knowing, that their Enemies would come to Edinburgh on the first
of May: They therefore departed thence, and went to Linlithgo, holding that
Place to be very commodious for the sending for those of their Party from the
most distant Places of the Kingdom; as also for the hindering the Journies of
the others that were going to the Assembly; and for bringing about of those
other things, which were lately discussed at their Consultations. From this
Place, the Hamiltons, with their Friends and Vassals, made the whole Road
leading to Edinburgh, very unsafe for Passengers; and knowing, that John
Erskin, Earl of Mar, was to come that Way, they placed themselves on the
Neighboring Hills to hinder his Journey; but he, knowing how the Way was beset,
passed the River, about two Miles above; and so April 29, in the Evening, he
came safe to Edinburgh. After that Day, the King's Party abode at Edinburgh,
and the Queen's at Linlithgo, mutually charging and criminating one another, as
the Causes and Rise of these Civil Combustions. The Queen's Party at Linlithgo,
the King's at Edinburgh.
But those at Edinburgh informed their Contrariants, That they were willing to
come to an easy Agreement upon other Heads, as, that if they had done any Man
wrong, they would give him just Satisfaction, as indifferent Arbitrators should
award; provided always, That this King's Authority might be secured, and that
both Parties might join to revenge the Murder of the last King, and of the
Regent. To this Proposal, they at Linlithgo gave no satisfactory Answer, but,
instead thereof, made an Edict, That all Subjects should obey the Queen's
Commissioners; and the three Earls, of Arran, Argyle and Huntly, Indicted an
Assembly to be held at Linlithgo, August 3. Whereupon the other Party sent
Robert Petcarn their Ambassador to the Queen of England, Petcarn, an Ambassador
from the Royalists in Scotland to Q, Elizabeth.
to treat with her about suppressing the Common Enemy; and to show, how
well-affected the Scots stood toward her, he was to inform her, That they
would choose such a Regent, as she should please to recommend, or approve.

Thus, whilst each Party was crossing one another's Design, the English enter
Teviotdale, and spoil the Towns and Villages belonging to the Families of the
Cars, and of the Scots, (who had violated the Peace, by making Excursions into
England, and giving Harbor to such English Fugitives, as fled to them for
Shelter) wasting and burning their Country. The Earl of Sussex, their General,
besieged Hume-Castle, where the Owner of it had laid up much Provision, The
English Army under Sussex, ravage over a great Part of Scotland.
and all the Neighborhood had brought in their best Goods to that Fort, as
into a Place of Safety. It was valiantly defended by the Garrison within, and
the English, the next day after, were about to raise the Siege; when, lo!
Letters were brought to the Garison-Souldiers, written a while before by
Alexander, Owner of the Castle, which disturbed all their Measures. For therein
he commanded them to obey the Orders of William Drury, an English Knight, and
to do what he commanded them, without any Dispute. Drury acquainted Sussex
herewith, whereupon the Castle was surrendered and plundered, and Sussex placing
a Garrison of English therein, with a great Booty, returned to Berwick. Thus
Hume, who was so far from being afraid of the English, that rather he thought
them his very Friends, as knowing that Drury and Sussex Both did secretly
favor Howard's Affairs, did almost undo himself by his own Credulity; for, at
last, being forsaken of all his Friends and Kindred, who were mostly Royalists,
he came with One or Two in his Company to Edinburgh, and shut up himself, as a
Recluse, in the Castle there.

Lord Scroop enters Scotland with another English Army.
On the other Side of the Borders, Scroop, an English Commander, entered
Annandale, and ransacked the Lands of one Iohnston, (who also had made
Incursions into England) but Iohnston himself, with a few of his Companions,
being well acquainted with the Passes of the Country, made a Shift to escape
from the Horse, that pursued him. John Maxwel, who had gathered together 3000
Men, out of the Neighborhood, yet durst not adventure to come in to his Aid,
but only stood upon his own Guard. A while after, the English that were at
Berwick, having received Hostages, and thinking that Matters would have been
carried with Fidelity toward them, sent in 300 Horse, and a 1000 Foot, under
the Command of Drury against the common Enemy. Upon the Bruit of their March,
the Hamiltonians went to Glasgow, resolving to demolish the Castle of the
Archbishop there, that it might not be a Receptacle to the Earl of Lennox,
then returned out of England, and so that Country be made the Seat of War. They
knew, that it was kept but by a few raw Soldiers; that the Governor was
absent; and that it was unprovided of Necessaries, so that they thought to
surprise it by their sudden Approach; for they flew into the Town in such
Haste, that they shut out a good part of the Garison-Souldiers from entering the
Castle; but, being disappointed of their Hope, they began to batter and storm
violently, and were as valiantly repulsed, for the Garrison Soldiers (which
were but 24) did so warmly receive them for several Days, that they slew more
of the Assailants, than they themselves were; and the rest they beat off,
sorely wounded: of their Own, they lost but one Man, and none of the rest
received so much as a Wound. But the Hamiltonians, hearing, that the English
were already at Edinburgh, and that John Erskin was come to Sterlin, with a
Design speedily to relieve the Castle, though they had received some additional
Force, even from the remote Parts of the Kingdom; yet, toward Evening, they
raised their Seige, and in great fear packed away: Hamilton and Argyle himself
posted into Argyle's Country: The Hamiltonians depart from Glasgow.
Huntly went home, over the, almost, impassable Mountains; the rest shifted for
themselves, and ran several Ways, to save their Lives.

But the English, two Days after they came to Edinburgh, went to Glasgow, and,
in their Passage through Clydsdale, they wasted all the Lands of the Hamiltons,
and any others that had consented to the Death of the Regent; as also of those,
who had harbored the English Fugitives, and drove great Preys from them,
making havoc in all the Country; when the Engines to beat down the Castle,
that was situated near a Village called Hamilton, were bringing to Sterlin.
Drury, who privately favored the English Rebels, had almost rendered the whole
Expedition fruitless; for he was so far from quieting the English, who
mutinied, because their Pay was not paid them at the Day; (whereupon, they
threatened immediately to lay down their Arms) That, 'twas thought by many, he
himself was the Author of the Mutiny: But the Soldiers were appeased, upon the
receiving their Pay down upon the nail; and the great Guns being planted, and
playing against it, the Castle was surrendered in a few Hours. Amongst the
Booty, Hamilton-Castle taken.
some there were, that knew the Apparel, and other Household Stuff of King James
the 5 th; that the Owner of the Castle, when he resigned up his Regency, had so
solemnly sworn, he had none of. The Castle was left half demolished; and the
Town, together with the stately Mansion of the Hamiltons therein, the wild
common Soldiers burnt to the Ground, against the Will of their Commanders.
Whereupon the Army marched back, the English to Berwick, and the Scots each to
their own home; Drury interceded for the Garrison, that they should march away
in Safety, who, being dismissed, took Robert Semple Prisoner, the chief of his
Family, out of the House of his Son-in-Law, who was quietly returning home, as
if the Service had been ended; which Passage greatly increased the Suspicion on
Drury.

These Matters were scarce finished, Petcarn's Answer from the Q* of England.
before Petcarn returned from his Embassy out of England, and brought this
Answer, That the Queen wondered, they never made her acquainted with the ^tate
of their Affairs, till now, four Months after the Death of the Regent; and, by
reason of this delay, she was uncertain in her Hopes, concerning them; In the
mean time, that she had been often solicited by the Importunity of the French
and Spanish Ambassadors in the Name of their Kings, and that she was even tired
out with the daily complaints of the Scots Queen, that she had promised them
Audience, but upon Condition, that the Queen of Scots should write to her Party
for a Cessation of Arms, till the Conference was ended; That those Innovations,
which they had attempted by their public Edicts, they should revoke by other
Edicts contrary to the former, and so suffer things to stand as they were, when
the Regent was slain; That the English Exiles should be given up without fraud;
and if, upon the Conference, Matters were accorded betwixt them, Hostages and
other Pledges should be given on Both sides, for the faithful performance of
Agreements. Upon these Conditions, a Conference was promised, and having
obliged her self in such Circumstances, she could not join with them in their
Design in making a new Regent, lest she might seem to condemn their Queen,
without hearing Her; But in general, she said, That she had a great Affection
for them, and their Affairs. In the mean time, She desired, that they would
abstain from Arms, and from making a Regent, and she would take care, that such
a small delay should be no damage to them. This Answer, being reported to the
Scots, did variously affect them. On the one hand, the Necessity of the time
required them to steer their Counsels, so as they might be pleasing to the
Queen of England; And on the other, they knew of what Concernment it was to the
Public, That one chief Magistrate should be set up, to whom all Complaints
might be made; and, for want of creating One some Months already past, the
Enemy had improved the delay to gather Forces, to make new Courts of Justice,
daily to set forth new Edicts, and to usurp all the Offices of a King. On the
other side, the Royalists were dejected, and a Multitude, without one certain
Person, whom to obey, could not be long kept in Obedience. After the
Ambassadors Return, News came, That there was a new Insurrection in England,
and that, in London, the Popes Bull was fastened on the Church Doors, to exhort
the English, partly to cast off the unjust Yoke of the Queen's Government, and
partly, to return to the Popish Religion; and it was thought, that the Hand of
the Queen of Scots was in all This.

These things, tho kept private, yet came to be known by Letters from the Earl
of Sussex; and also, the same Thomas Randolph had, in presence, confirmed it,
yet they could hardly be restrained from choosing a Regent. But at last, a
middle Way prevailed, That they might have an appearance of a chief Magistrate,
to set up an Inferior Regent, or Deputy Governor, to continue till the 12 th
of July, in which time, they might be further informed of the Queen of
England's Mind; they judged, That she was not averse from their Undertaking,
especially upon This ground, That she had put it into the Articles of
Capitulation, That the Rebels should give up all the exiled English: If that
were done, they might easily understand, that the Spirits of all the Papists
about England were alienated from the Queen of Scots: If it were denied, then
the Conference, or Treaty, would break off, and the Suspicions, which made the
Commonalty averse, would daily increase. For, they saw, that other things would
not easily be agreed upon, when a greater Danger was imminent over the English,
than the Scots, upon the Deliverance of their Queen; and if other things were
accorded, yet the Queen of England would never let her go, without giving
Hostages; neither was she able to give any such, who could make a sufficient
Warranty. These Considerations gave them some Encouragement, so that they
proceeded to create Matthew Stuart, Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lennox, created
Viceroy; and then, Regent.
Earl of Lennox, the King's Grandfather, to be Vicegerent, for the time.

Whilst this new Viceroy, by the advice of his Council, was busied in
rectifying things, which had been disordered in the late Tumults; Letters came
opportunely from the Queen of England, July the 10 th, wherein she spoke much
of her Affection to the King and Kingdom of Scotland, and freely offered them
her Assistance; withal, she deprecated the naming of a Regent, which was a
Title invidious of it self, and of no good Example to them; only, if they asked
her Advice, she thought, none was to be preferred to that high Office, before
the King's Grandfather; none being of greater Faithfulness to the King, yet a
Pupil; and, who now for the same Reasons was made Deputy Governor of the
Kingdom. These Letters encouraged them, by the joint Suffrages of all the
Estates, of a Viceroy to make him Regent. As Soon as ever he was created
Regent, and had taken an Oath (according to Custom) to observe the Laws and
Customs of his Country; First of all, he commanded, that All, which were able
to bear Arms, should appear at Linlithgo, August the 2 d, to hinder the
Convention, which the Seditious had there Indicted in the Name of the Queen;
then, he himself summoned a Parliament, in the Name of the King, to be held the
10 th day of October; he also sent to the Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh,
(who, as yet, pretended great Friendship to the King's Party, tho his Words and
Actions did very much disagree) to send him some Brass-Guns, Carriages, and
other Apparatus for the managing of them; This he did, rather to try them, than
in hopes to obtain his desires. He promised very fair at first, but when the
Day was coming on, that the Parliament was to Meet, when he was desired to
perform his Promise, he peremptorily refused, alleging, That his Service should
be always ready to make up an Agreement between, but not to shed the Blood of,
his Countrymen. Nevertheless, the Regent came at the Day appointed to
Linlithgo with 5000 armed Men in his Company; but hearing, that the Enemy did
not stir, only that Huntly had placed 160 Soldiers at Brechin, and had sent
out an Order, commanding the Brechinians, Huntly garison^ Brechin,
to get in Provision for some Thousands of Men by the 2 d of August. The
Garrison, there placed by him, did rob not only the Inhabitants, but all
Travelers also, when they were wearied with their Journey: Whereupon, the
Regent, by the advice of his Council, resolved to march thither, and to seize
on the Place, which would be of great advantage to him, before Huntly's coming;
and, if occasion were offered, there to fight him, before his Partners came up
with their Force, and so to overthrow that Party of Musketeers, which was All
he had; and, by that means, he might catch some of the Leaders of the Faction,
as the Earl of Crawford, James Ogilby, and James Balfure, who, he heard, were
there. Whereupon, he commanded Patrick Lindsy, and William Ruven, chief
Officers, and James Haliburton, Governor of Dundee, to take what Soldiers
they could raise at Dundee, and St. Iohnstons, and to make haste thither to
prevent the News of their coming: They made all the speed that ever they were
able, the next Night horsing their Foot for greater Expedition; yet, as they
drew near the Place, they marched slowly, that they might get some Refreshment,
before they charged the Enemy: so that, the Alarm was taken at Brechin, that
the Enemy was a coming; whereupon Ogilby and Balfure, who chanced to be there,
got the Soldiers presently together; and encouraging them, as well as they
could for the time, They told them, that They and Huntly would return again in
3 Days; and so they got an Horseback, and made haste away, over the Mountains;
The Soldiers, that were left, caught up what was next at hand, and about 20
of them got to the Tower of a Church, that was near: The rest fled into the
House of the Earl of Mar, which was seated on a Hill near thereto, it was like
a Castle, and commanded the Town. James Douglas, Earl of Morton, with 800
Horse, went a further March about, and came not in, till the Day after; The
Regent sent home the Lennoxians and the Renfroans, to guard their own Country,
if Argyle should attempt any thing against it; But he himself, in 3 Days,
overtook those, whom he had sent before to Brechin. At the noise of his coming,
the neighbor Nobility came in, so that now he mustered 7000 Men, effective:
Whereupon they, who were in the Church Tower, presently surrendered themselves.
The rest, having stoutly defended themselves for a few Days, Killing and
Wounding some, who were unwary in their Approaches, at last hearing, That
Brass-Guns were planted against them, Which is taken by the Regent.
and that Huntly had forsaken them, surrendered also at Mercy to the Regent. He
hanged up 30 of the obstinatest of them, many of them, having been taken and
released before; the rest, being very feeble, he dismissed. Huntly was then about
20 Miles off, endeavoring to gather more Force, but in vain, (for most Men,
when they had free liberty to declare themselves, did abhor so foul a Cause);
Whereupon he was forced, in fear, to provide for his Safety, and with a small
Party retired into the remote Countries.

Whereupon, the Regent returned to Edinburgh, to be present at the Parliament
there Summoned; and, by the advice thereof, to settle the present Disturbances.
The Rebels perceiving, that, by the Agreement of all the Estates, there was no
Hope left them; especially They, who were Guilty of the King's Murder, and of
the Death of the Regent, dealt with the Queen of England, that, because she had
promised the French and Spanish Ambassadors, Queen Elizabeth made Arbiter
betwixt both Parties in Scotland.
that she would hear both Parties, and compose Things, if she could, that
therefore no new Decree should be made, in the mean time. This Delay being
obtained, (for nothing was done, in that Assembly, only the Election of the
Regent was confirmed) the Rebels never ceased to solicit the French and
Spaniard, to send Aid into Britain, to restore the Queen; and because they
affirmed, That the Restitution of the Popes, or the old, Religion, depended on
Her, therefore they made means to the Pope also, that, tho he were far remote,
yet he might help them with Money. Whereupon he sent an Agent into Scotland, to
enquire into the present State of things there, who giving him an Account, that
the Popish Party there was very weak; and that all the Rebels, neither, were
not unanimous in the restoring of Popery, he refused to intermeddle in the
Business; but, in the mean time, he endeavored to raise up some Commotion in
England, by his Execrations and Curses hung upon Church doors by Night; by his
Indulgences; and by his promise of Indemnity for what was past; for there, he
thought, his Faction was the strongest. The Regent, having appointed the
Parliament to be held the 25 th of January, (for, within that time, he hoped to
satisfy all foreign Ambassadors) to compose things Legally and Judicially, as
well as he could, returned to Edinburgh. The Rebels, having renewed the Truce,
by means of the Queen of England, till the Ambassadors of both Parties had been
heard, before her; yet, contrary to the Peace desired by themselves, were very
busy to attempt Alterations, encouraged (as it is thought) by the favor of the
Earl of Sussex, who then commanded the Army of the English in Northumberland.
For he, either not altogether despairing of the Business of the Duke of
Norfolk; or else, induced by the Promises of the Exiled Queen, of whose Return
he had some Hopes, was somewhat inclinable to the Rebels; which the Scots
taking notice of, were more sparing in communicating Counsels with him. The
Winter being thus spent in the reviving of the Truce; the Parliament Summoned
on the 25 th of January, was deferred till May. In the mean time, the
Hamiltons, having, in vain, suborned many Men to kill the Regent, at last
seized upon the Tower of Pasley, driving out the Garison-Souldiers therein,
thinking they might do such a thing with Impunity, whilst Men's Minds were
employed in greater Matters. The Regent appointed the Earl of Morton, Robert
Petcarn, and James Macgil, his Ambassadors to England, to reason the Matter
with the Ambassadors of other Princes, and sent them away February the 5 th,
and he himself marched to Pasley, The Regent sends Ambassadors into England.
where he summoned in the neighbour-Nobility, that were of his Party, and
attempted the Castle. The Besieged, he having cut off their Water, were forced
to a Surrender. Afterward, when Gilbert Kennedy infested the Royalists with
his plundering Incursions in Carrick, he went to Air; and as soon as Kennedy
heard of the Approach of a few Troops, being also afraid of his Clanships, who
had been always Loyal to the King and his Party, he gave in his only Brother
for an Hostage, and appointed a Day to come to Sterlin, and subscribe to the
Capitulation, agreed on. Hugh Montgomery, Earl of Eglington, and Robert Boyd,
followed his Example; and surrendering themselves to the Regent, were by him
received into Favor. During all this time, that the Regent was quelling the
Seditious, and Morton was absent in his Embassy in England; They that hold
Edinburgh Castle; being freed from the fear of their Enemies near at hand,
ceased not to list Soldiers, to put Garrisons in the most convenient Places of
the City, to take away Provisions, which Merchants had brought to Leith, and to
provide all things necessary to endure a Siege, till their expected Relief,
from foreign Parts, might come.

The Regent was sorely bruised by a fall from his Horse, The Regent hurt by a
Fall from his Horse.
and therefore returned to Glasgow, where a common Soldier came to him, and
gave him some hopes of surp^izing Dunbarton; he had been a Garison-Souldier in
the Castle there, and his Wife coming often to visit him, had been accused, and
whipped for Theft, by Flemming the Governor. Her Husband, being an uxorious Man,
and judging his Wife to have been wrongfully punished, departed from the
Castle; and from that Day forward, employed all his thoughts, how he might do
Flemming a mischief: Whereupon, he breaks the business to Robert Douglas,
Kinsman to the Regent; A notable Design of the Reg^nts, to surprise Dunbarton
Castle, with the occasion of it, and the manner of carrying it on.
and promises him, That if he would assign a small Party to follow him, he
would shortly make him Master of that Castle. Robert acquainted John Cuningham
with the Design, who was to enquire diligently of him, How so great an Attempt
could be accomplished? He, being a blunt rude Soldier, perceiving, that they
boggled at him, because he could not well make out, How to accomplish, what he
had promised. Since, said he, you do not believe my Words; I Will go on my self,
the first Man in the Service; if you will follow me, I will make you Masters of
the Place; but, if you be Dastards and Scoundrels, then let it alone. When his
Speech was told to the Regent, though the thing it self, being great, had
somewhat excited their Minds, and made them willing enough to have it done, yet
the Author (though they judged him faithful) seemed not a fit Instrument to
effect so great a Matter: Whereupon Thomas Crawford, a valiant Man, and a good
Soldier, was made acquainted with the Project, and 'twas agreed betwixt them,
rather to try the Hazard of so great and casual a Proffer, than slothfully to
neglect such an Opportunity. Whereupon, a few Days were allotted to provide
Ladders, and other Necessaries, and the Plot was to be executed on the first of
April, for then the Truce granted to the Rebels, by the Mediation of the Queen
of England, would expire. In the mean time, no Talk at all was to be made about
it.

Before I declare the Event of this Piece of Service, give me leave to tell you
the Nature and Situation of the Castle of Dunbarton. The Situation of the
Castle, and Town, of Dunbarton, described punctually by our Author, who was
born there.
From the Confluence of the Rivers Clyde and Levin, there is a plain Champaign
of about a Mile, extended to the Foot of the adjoining Mountains; and in the
very Angle, where the two Rivers meet, there stands a Rock with Two Cops or
Heads. The one Branch, or Cop, which is the highest, respects the West; and in
the very Top of it there is a Watchtower, from whence there is a large
Prospect to all Parts thereabouts. The other Cop is lower, and looks toward
the East; between the two Cops, that Side that turns toward the North and the
Fields, has Stairs ascending obliquely by the Rock, cut out by Men's Hands,
where hardly a single Man can go up at once. For the Rock is very hard, and
scarce malleable by any Iron-Tool; but if any Part of it be broken off by
Force, or falls down of it self, it emits a Smell far and near, like Sulphur.
In the upper Part of the Castle, there is an huge Stony Rock, of the Nature of
a Lodestone, but so closely cemented, and fastened to the rest of the Rock,
that no Joint at all, or Commissure, does appear; Where the River Clyde runs by
to the South, the Rock (naturally steep in other Parts,) is somewhat bending;
and stretching out its Arms on both Sides, takes in some firm Land, which is so
enclosed, partly by the Nature of the Place, and partly by human Industry,
that, in the overthwart or transverse Sides thereof, it affords Place for many
Houses; and also, in the River, a Road for Ships, very safe for the
Inhabitants, by playing Brass-Guns from thence; but unsafe for an Enemy; and
small Boats therein may come up, almost to the very Castle Gate. The middle
Part of the Rock, by which you go up, being full of Buildings, makes, as it
were, another Castle, distinct and secluded from the higher one: Besides the
Natural Fortification of the Rock, the two Rivers, Levin to the West, and Clyde
to the South, make a kind of Graff and Trench about it; on the East Side, when
the Tide is in, the Sea washes the very Foot of the Rock; when it is out, that
Place is not sandy (as usually Shores are) but muddy; the fat Soil being
dissolved into Dirt. This Strand is also intercepted and cut by many Torrents
of Water, which tumble down from the Mountain, adjacent. The other side turns
toward a plain Field, full of Grass. The Castle has three Fountains in it,
always running; besides Springs of fresh Water in many other Places. The
ancient Britains, as Bede says, called the Place Alcuith; but the Scots, which
were heretofore severed from the Britains by the River Levin, because that Fort
was built on the Borders of the Britains, called it Dumbritton, now Dunbarton.
Dumbritton, why so called.
There is a little Town hard by, of the same Name, upon the Bank of the River
of Levin, about a Mile distant from the meeting of the Rivers.

This Castle was accounted impregnable, and, in all foreign and civil Wars, was
of great Advantage to them that held it, and as prejudicial to their Enemy. At
that time, John Flemming was Governor of it, by Commission from the banished
Queen; he, though he consented not to the King's Murder; yet, having not a
Force sufficient to defend himself against the Royalists, sided with the
Parricides, and for four Years last past, John Fleming, Governor of Dunbarton.
had kept up the Garrison at the Charge of the King of France, (whom he had
persuaded, That almost all the Scots had secretly confederated with the Queen
of England;) yea, he had made a Boast to him, like a Bragadochio as he was,
That he did, as it were, hold the Fetters of Scotland in his own Hands; and
when ever the French had leisure from other Wars, if they would but send him a
little Assistance, he would easily clap them on, and bring all Scotland under
their Power: And the French King was as vain, in feeding his senseless Humor,
for he sent him some Military Provisions by one Monsieur Verack, whom he
commanded to stay there, and to give him an Account of all Scottish Affairs.
Besides, the Insolency of the Governor was increased by the Treachery of the
Garison-Souldiers of Edinburgh-Castle, who had lately revolted from the King;
and also, he was somewhat animated by the Sickness of the Regent, who was
almost killed with a Fall from his Horse, and had now the Gout also; and
moreover he was encouraged by the Truce, which the Queen of England had
obtained for them till the End of March. These things made him and his
Garison-Souldiers so secure and negligent, that they went often to be merry
into the Town, and would lie there all Night, as if they had been lulled in the
very Bosom of Peace.

Matters standing in this Posture, and Preparation being made for the
Expedition, as much as the present Haste would permit; John Cuningham was sent
before with some Horse, to stop all Passengers; that so the Enemy might have no
Intelligence of their Coming. Thomas Crawford followed after with the Foot;
they were appointed to meet together at In Lennox.
Dumbeck, an Hill about a Mile or two from the Castle, about Midnight. At that
Place Crawford (as he was commanded) told the Soldiers, What the Design was,
they were to go upon, and How they were to effect it; he showed them, who was
to lead them on, and had promised to scale the Walls, first; and then he, and
those Commanders that would be noticed for their Valor, were to follow. The
Soldiers were easily persuaded to follow their Leaders; whereupon the Ladders
were carried, and other things, to storm the Castle; and the Foot, a little
before Day, marched on toward it. The Horse were commanded to stay in the same
Place, to expect the Issue, whether good or bad. As they were approaching the
Castle, they met with two Rubs or Checks; One was, That the Bridge over the
Brook, that runs between the Fields, was broken; and Next, A Fire, appearing
suddenly near it, occasioned a Suspicion, lest the Bridge was broken on Purpose
to stop the Enemy; and the Fire kindled by the Garison-Souldiers, to discover
and prevent the Enemies Approach: But this Fear was soon dispelled, by their
repairing the Bridge, as well as they could, in such haste, and making it
passable for the Foot; and also the Scouts were sent out to the Place, where
the Fire was seen, and they could find no Sign of any Fire at all; Ignis
Fatuus; Country People call it, Jack with a Lanthorn, or Will with a Wisp.
so that the Fire was of a Meteorous Nature, like those Fires which are bred in
the Air, and sometimes pitch on the Ground, and presently vanish away; but they
had a greater Cause of Fear, lest the Heaven which was all bespangled with
Stars, and the Approach of the Day, should discover them to the Sentinels, that
watched above; but, behold! on a sudden, a thick Mist covered the Heavens, yet
so that it reached not beyond the middle Rock of the Castle, but the upper Part
of it was so dark, that the Guards in the Castle could see nothing of what was
done below. But as the Mist came seasonably, so there was another Misfortune,
which fell out very unluckily, and had almost marred the whole Business: For,
many Ladders being required to get up that high Rock, and the first were
unmanageable, by reason of their Length; they, being over-loaden with the
Weight of those who went hastily up, and being not well fastened at Foot in a
slippery Soil, fell suddenly down with those that were upon them: That Accident
cast them into a great Consternation at present; but when they found, that no
Body was hurt in the Fall, they recollected their Spirits, which were almost
desponding; and, as if God Almighty had favored their Design, they went on,
upon that dangerous Service, with greater Alacrity, so that they set the
Ladders up again, more cautiously; and when they came to the middle of the
Rock, there was a Place reasonably convenient, where they might stand, and
there they found an Ash Shrub, casually growing amongst the Stones, which did
them great Service, for they tied Ropes to it, and let them down; by which
means, they lifted up their Fellows, that were left below; so that, at one and
the same time, some were drawn up by the Ropes to the middle of the Rock; and
others, by setting other Ladders, got up to the Top thereof. There also they
met with a new and unexpected Misfortune, which had almost spoiled all their
Measures; for one of the Soldiers, as he was in the middle of the Ladder, was
suddenly taken with a kind of Fit of an Apoplexy, so that he stuck fast to the
Ladder, and could not be plucked therefrom, but stopped the Way to those that
would ascend. This Danger was also overcome by the Diligence and Alacrity of
the Soldiers, for they bound him to the Ladder, so that when he recovered out
of his Fit, he could not fall; and then in great Silence, turning the Ladder,
the rest easily ascended; when they came to the Top of the Rock, there was a
Wall built by Hand, to which they were to put their third Ladders, to get over
it. Alexander Ramsy, with two Files of Musketeers, got upon it; the Sentinel
presently spied him, gave the Alarm, and cast down Stones upon him, and his
Men; Alexander being assaulted with this unusual kind of Fight, as having
neither Stones to throw again, nor an Helmet to defend him, yet leaped down
from the Wall into the Castle, and there was set upon by Three of the Guard; he
fought it out valiantly with them, till his Fellow Soldiers, being more
solicitous for his Danger, than their own, leapt down after him, and presently
dispatched the three Sentinels. In the mean time, the rest made what haste they
could, so that the Wall being old, loose, and overcharged with the Weight of
those who made haste to get over it, fell down to the Ground; and by its Fall,
as there was a Breach made for the rest to enter, so the Ruins made the Descent
more easy through the Rock, that was very high and rugged within the Castle;
whereupon, they entered in a Body, crying out with a great Noise; For God and
the King; and often proclaiming the Name of the Regent also; so that the Guards
were amazed, and forgot to fight, but fled every one to shift for himself, as
well as he could; some kept themselves within Doors, till the first brunt of
the Soldiers Fury was over. Flemming escaped the Danger, by slipping down
through the oblique Rock, having but one in his Company, who was knocked down,
and fell, but he, descending a by-way, was let out at the Gate, and so got into
a Vessel on the River, which, by reason of the Tides being in, came up to the
Walls of the Castle, and so fled into Argyle. The Sentinels of the lower
Castle, and twenty five more of the Garison-Souldiers, Dumbarton-Castle taken
by Surprise.
who had been Drinking and Whoring in the Town all Night, taking the Alarm,
never offered to fight, but fled every one which way he could. There were taken
in the Castle John Hamilton Archbishop of S. Andrews; John Flemming of Bogal;
a young English Gentleman, that had fled from the last Insurrection in England;
Verac the French Man, who, a good while before, had been sent to them with some
Warlike Furniture and Provisions, and staid there in the Name of his King, to
acquaint the French King with the State of Scottish Affairs: Alexander, the Son
of William Levingston, endeavored to escape by changing his Habit, but was
discovered, and brought back. The Regent being informed of the taking the
Castle, before Noon came thither: 1 st. He highly commended the Soldiers, then
he comforted Flemming's Wife, The Regent's Clemency to Flemming the Governor's
Wife.
and gave her not only her own Furniture, Plate, and all her Household Stuff,
and Utensils, but also assigned an Estate, part of her Husband's, which had
long before been forfeited into the King's Exchequer, to maintain her Self and
Children: The rest of the Booty was allowed the Soldiers. Having settled things
thus, he had Leisure to take a View of the Castle; and coming to the Rock, by
which the Soldiers got up, it seemed so difficult an Ascent to them all, that
the Soldiers themselves confessed, if they had foreseen the Danger of the
Service, no Reward whatsoever should have hired them to undertake it. Verac was
accused by the Merchants, that, whereas they came into the Bay of Clyde, he had
robbed them in an Hostile Manner: Whereupon, many of the Council were of
Opinion, he should have been Indicted as a Pirate or Robber; but the empty Name
of an Ambassador prevailed more with the Regent, which yet he himself had
violated by his flagitious Actions: Wherefore, that the despoiled Persons might
be kept in some Hope (at least) of Satisfaction from him; he was kept seemingly
for a Trial, and lodged in an House at St. Andrews, whose Owner was inclined to
the Rebels; whence he was taken away, as 'twere by Force, which was the thing
aimed at, and so he speedily departed. The Englishman, though many Suspicions
were fixed upon him; and besides, the Commendatory Letters of John Lesly Bishop
of Ross to Flemming, which were found after the Castle was taken, did convict
him, yet he was sent home; but, after he was gone, 'twas found, that he was
suborned by the Norfolkians to poison the King of Scots: Bogal was kept
Prisoner. There was one Prisoner more, which the Governor most desired to have
punished, That was the Bishop of St. Andrews: He, in former times, while his
Brother was Regent, had advised him to many cruel and avaricious Practices; and
under the Queen also, he bore the Blame of all Miscarriages. The Regent feared,
if he should delay his Punishment, the Queen of England would intercede for
him, and the Archbishop's Friends were in great Hopes of it; and, lest
Straitness of time should prevent them, the Archbishop earnestly desired, he
might be tried by the Legal Way of the Country, for that would occasion some,
though not much Delay. But these Interposals were overruled, it being alleged,
That there was no need of any new Process, in the Archbishops case, for it had
been already judged in the Parliament. Wherefore he, being plainly convicted as
guilty of the King's Murder, and of the last Regents also, was hanged at
Sterlin. There was then new Evidence brought in against him, The Archbishop of
St. Andrews executed as guilty of the King's and Regent's Murders, with
Evidences proving the same.
for, the greatest Part thereof had been discovered, but lately. The
Archbishop of St. Andrews, who lodged in the next House, when the Proposition
of killing the King was made to him, willingly undertook it, both by Reason of
old Feuds between their Families, and also an Hope thereby to bring the Kingdom
nearer to his Family; whereupon, he chooses out six or eight of the most
flagitious of his Vassals, and commended the Matter to them, giving them the
Keys of the King's Lodgings; they then enter very silently into his Chamber,
and strangle him, when he was asleep; and when they had so done, they carried
out his Body through a little Gate, (of which I spoke before) into an Orchard
adjoining to the Walls; and then a Sign was given to blow up the House. The
Discovery of this Wickedness was made by John Hamilton, who was a chief Actor
therein, upon this Occasion: He was much troubled in his Mind, Day and Night,
his Conscience tormenting him for the Guilt of the Fact, and not only so, but,
as if the Contagion reached to his Body too, That also was miserably pained and
consumed by degrees; endeavoring all ways to ease himself, at last he
remembered, That there was a Schoolmaster at Pasley, no bad Man, who was yet a
Papist; to him he confesses the whole Plot, (...) an Actor in the King's
Murder, in trou^le o^ Conscience accuses himself, and the Ar^h-bishop of St.
And^ews, o^ that horrid Crime
and the Names of those who joined with him in perpetrating the Murder: The
Priest comforted him, what he could, and put him in mind of the Mercy of God;
yet, because the Disease had taken deeper root, than to be expiable by such
slight Remedies, within a few days, he was overwhelmed with Grief, and died.
The Priest was not so silent in the thing, but that some inkling of it came to
the King's Friends. They, many Months after the Murder was committed, when
Matthew, Earl of Lennox, was Regent, and when Dunbarton was taken, and the
Bishop brought to Sterlin, caused the Priest to be sent for, thither: He then
justified, what he had spoken before, about the King's Murder; whereupon, being
asked by Hamilton, How he came to know it? Whether 'twere revealed to him in
Auricular Confession? He told him, Yes; then said Hamilton, You are not
ignorant of the Punishment due to those, who reveal the Secrets of Confessions,
and made no other Answer to the Crime. After fifteen Months or more, the same
Priest was taken, saying Mass the third time; and, as the Law appointed, was
led out to suffer; then also he publicly declared all, that he had before
affirmed in the thing, in plainer and fuller words, which were so openly
divulged, that now Hamilton's Vassals fell out amongst themselves, and one of
them charged another with the King's Death.

In the mean while, the Rebels had procured some small matter of Money from
France, by means of the Brother of him, who commanded Edinburgh-Castle. And
moreover, The Regent's Ambassadors, Morton, etc. return from England, with an
ample account of their Negotiations there, and the grounds alleged by them, to
justify the late Actions in Scotland, against their Queen.
Morton was returned from his English Embassy, and, in a Convention of the
Nobles held at Sterlin, declared the Effect thereof, in these Words;

When we came to London, February 20. we were put over to a Council, chosen out
for that purpose; who, after much Dispute betwixt us, at last, insisted upon
two Points, First, That we would produce the clearest and best Arguments we
had, to evidence the Justness of those Actions, which had passed in Scotland,
both formerly and now, that so the Queen might be satisfied in the Equity of
them, and thereby know how to answer those, who demanded a Reason for them: If
we could not do That, yet the Queen would omit nothing which might conduce to
our Safety. In Answer to which, we gave in a Memorial to Them, to this effect;
The Crimes, wherewith, at first, our King's Mother alleged, that she was falsely
charged with, have been so clearly proved by the Earl of Murray, and his
Associates in that Embassy, That both the Queen her self, and those, who were
delegated by her, to hear the Cause, could not be ignorant of the Author of the
King's Murder, which was the Source of all our other Miseries: To repeat them
again before the Queen, who, we doubt not, is therein sufficiently satisfied
already, we think it not necessary; and besides, we our selves are unwillingly
drawn into the Task of repeating the Memory of so great a Wickedness. But they,
who cannot deny, that this Fact was cruelly and flagitiously perpetrated, yet
do calumniate the Resignation of the Kingdom, and the Translation of the
Government from the Mother to the Son, to be a new and grievous thing, extorted
from her by mere Force. First, as for the Matter of Fact, in punishing our
Princes, the old Custom of our Ancestors will not suffer it to be called new;
neither can the Moderateness of the Punishment make it invidious: It Is not
needful for us to reckon up the many Kings, whom our Forefathers have chastis'd
by Imprisonment, Banishment, yea, Death it self; much less need we confirm our
Practice by foreign Examples, of which there are abundance in old Histories.
The Original of Kingly Government in Scotland.
The Nation of the Scots being at first free, by the common Suffrage of the
People, set up Kings over them, conditionally, That, if need were, they might
take away the Government by the same Suffrages that gave it: The Footsteps of
this Law remain to this very Day, for, in the circumjacent Islands, and in many
Places of the Continent too, which have retained the ancient Speech and Customs
of our Forefathers to this Day; the same Course is yet observed, in creating
their Magistrates. Moreover, those Ceremonies, which are used in the
Inauguration of our Kings themselves, have an express Representation of this
Law, Kingly Government, What?
by which it easily appears, That Kingly Government is nothing else, but a
mutual Stipulation betwixt King and People; and the same is most clearly
evidenced by the inoffensive Tenor of the Old Law, which has been observed
ever since there was a King in Scotland, even unto this present time, no Man
having ever attempted to abrogate, abate, or diminish this Law, in the least.
It Is too long to enumerate, How many Kings our Ancestors have put by their
Kingdoms, have banished, have imprisoned, have put to Death; neither is there
the least mention made of the Severity of this Law, or the abrogating thereof,
and that on good Grounds: For it is not of the Nature of such Sanctions, which
are subject to the Mutations of Time; but, in the very Original of Mankind,
'twas engraven in Men's Hearts, approved by the mutual Consent of almost all
Nations, and, together with Nature it self, was to remain inviolate and
sempiternal; so that these Laws are not subject to the Empire of any Men, but
all Men subject to the Dominion and Power of Them. This Law prescribes to us in
all our Actions, it is always before our Eyes and Minds, whether we will or no;
it dwells in us: Our Ancestors followed it, in repressing the Violence of
Tyrants by armed Force. It Is a Law, not proper to the Scots only, but common to
all Nations and People in well-instituted Governments. To pass by the famous
Cities of Athens, Sparta, Rome, Venice, who never suffered this Right to be
taken from them, but with their Liberty it self: Even in those Times, wherein
Oppression and Tyranny were most triumphant in the Roman Government, if any
good Man were chosen Emperor, he counted it his Glory, to confess himself
inferior to the whole Body of the People, and to be subject to the Law. Trajan
and Theodosius, their memorable Speeches.
For Trajan, when he delivered a Sword to the Governor of a certain City,
(according to Custom) is reported to say, Use it either for me, or against me,
as I deserve: Yea, Theodosius, a good Emperor in bad Times, would have it left
recorded amongst his Sanctions and Laws, as a Speech worthy of an Emperor,
yea, greater than his Empire it self, to confess, That he was inferior to the
Laws: Yea, the most barbarous Nations, such as were most remote from all
Civility, had a Sense and Knowledge hereof, as the History of all Nations, and
common Observation, shows. But, not to insist on obsolete Examples, I will
produce Two in our own Memory; Of late, Christiern of Denmark, for his Cruelty,
Christiern, of Denmark, deposed.
was driven out of the Kingdom, with all his Lineage, a greater Punishment than
ever our People exacted from any of their Kings, for they never punished the
Sins of the Fathers upon their Children. As for him, he was deservedly
punished, after a singular manner, as the Monster of his Age, for all kind of
Wickedness. But what did the Mother of the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, do, as
to deserve perpetual Imprisonment? She was a Woman in her flourishing Age, and
her Husband died young, even in the Prime of his Age; it was reported, She had
a mind to marry again, she was not accused for any Wickedness, but for a
certain allowable Intemperance, (as the severe Cato's of the Age speak); and,
as the public Manners now are, of an honest Copulation, approved by God's and
Man's Law, both. If the Calamity of our Queen be compared with Christiern's of
Denmark, she is not less an Offender, (to say no more,) but she has been more
moderately proceeded against and punished: But, if she be compared with Joan of
Austria, Charles his Mother, what did that poor Lady do, but desire, as far as
lawfully she might, a Pleasure allowed by the Law, and a Remedy necessary for
her Age? Yet, being an innocent Woman, she suffered that Punishment, of which
our Queen, convict of the highest Wickedness, does now complain: The Murder of
her lawful Husband, and her unlawful Marriage with a public Parricide, have
now those same Deprecators, who, in killing the King, did inflict the
Punishment, due to wicked Men, on the Innocent. But here they remember not,
what the Examples of their Ancestors do prompt them to do; neither are they
mindful of that eternal Law, which our noble Progenitors, even from the first
beginnings of Kingdoms, having followed, have thereby restrained the Violence
of Tyrants. And, in our present Case, what have we done more, than trod in the
Steps of so many Kingdoms and free Nations, and so bridled that Arbitrariness,
which claimed a Power above Law? And yet, we have not done it with that
Severity neither, as our Ancestors have used in the like kind; for they would
never have suffered any one, who had been found guilty of such a notorious
Crime, to escape the Punishment of the Law. If we had imitated Them, we had
been free from fear of Danger, and also from the Trouble of Calumniators; and,
that may be easily known by the Postulations of our Adversaries. How often have
they criminated and arraigned us before our Neighbour-Princes? What Nations do
they not solicit, and stir up against us? What do they desire by this
Importunity? Is it only. That the Controversy may be decided by Law and Equity?
We never refused That Condition; and they would never accept of It, though
'twere often offered them. What then do they desire? Even This, That we should
arm Tyrants, by Public Authority, who are manifestly guilty of the most
notorious Wickedness, who are stuffed with the Spoils of their Subjects,
besmeared with the Blood of Kings, and aim at the Destruction of all good Men?
Shall we set them up over our Lives, who are found Actors in the Parricide, and
shrewdly suspected to be the Designers of it, without acquitting themselves in
a Judiciary way? And yet, we have gratified their Request, more than the Custom
of our Country, the Severity of the Law, or the Distribution of equal Justice
would allow. There is nothing more frequently celebrated, nor more diligently
handled, by the Writers of our History, than our Punishment of evil Kings. And
amongst so many peccant Governors, who ever felt the like Lenity of angry
Subjects, in inflicting Punishment, as we have used in punishing our King's
Mother, though evidently guilty of a most atrocious Crime? What Ruler, standing
convict of Murder, had ever power given to substitute a Son, or Kinsman in his,
or her, place: To whom, in such Circumstances, also was the Liberty ever
granted, to appoint what Guardians they pleased, to the succeeding King? And in
the very Abjuration of the Kingdom, Who can complain of any hard Usage? A young
Woman, unable to undergo the Burden, and tossed by the Storms of unsettled
Affairs, sent Letters to the Nobility, to free her from That Government, which
was as burdensome to her, as it was honorable: It was granted her: She desired
the Government might be transferred from her to her Son; her Request was
assented to: She also desired to have the Naming of the Guardians, who might
manage the Government, till her Son came to be of Age; it was done, as she
desired: And, that the thing might have more Authority, the whole Matter was
referred to the Estates in Parliament, who Voted, That all was rightly done,
and in good order, and they confirmed it by an Act, than which there cannot be
a more sacred and a firmer Obligation. But it is alleged, What was done in
Prison, is to be taken, not as done willingly, but forced by Durance, for fear
of Death; and so many other things, which Men are enforced to do for fear, are
wont, as they ought, to go for Nothing. Indeed, this Excuse of Fear, as
sometimes it is, not without reason, admitted by the Judges, so it does not
always infer a just Cause for abolishing a public Act, once made, in a Suit of
Law; if a Man strike a Fear into his Adversary for ones own Advantage, and so
the Plaintiff extorts more from the Defendant, than he could ever obtain by the
Equity of the Law: Those Remedies are most rightfully and deservedly provided
against such, as are either terrified by Compulsion, or enforced by Fear, to do
what is prejudicial to themselves. But it is otherwise, If a guilty Conscience
creates a Fear to it self, out of an Expectation of a deserved Punishment, to
avoid which, he assents to some certain Conditions: This Fear carries with it
no just Cause to rescind public Acts; for otherwise, the wickeder a Person is,
so much the easier Retreat he might have to the Sanctuary of the Law; and then,
the Remedies found out for the Relief of the Innocent, would be transferred to
indemnify the Nocent. And the Laws themselves, the Avengers of Wrongs, would
not be a Refuge to good Men, when vexed by the Improbity of the Bad; but an
unjust Shelter to the Evil, when they fear deserved Punishment. But that Fear,
let it be what it will, wherein has it made the Condition of the Queen, the
worse? The Title of Kingly Dignity, and the Power of Government, was long since
taken from Her by Parliament; and being reduced to her Privacy, she lived a
precarious Life, upon the account of the Peoples Mercy, not her own Innocence;
When therefore she was put by the Kingdom, what did she lose by her fear? Her
Dominion was ended before, she only cast away the empty Name of Ruler, and that
which might lawfully have been extorted from her against her Will, she parted
with of her own accord, and so redeemed the residue of her Life, the Sentiment
of her Infamy, the perpetual Fear of imminent Death, which is worse than Death
it self, only by the laying down the Shadow of a mere Title and Name. And
therefore, I wonder, that, on this Head, no Body discovers the Prevarication of
the Queen's Delegates, and of her Ambassadors. For they, who desire, That what
was done in Prison, by the Queen, may be undone, ask this also, That she may be
restored to that Place, from which, she complains, she was ejected, through
Fear. And what is that Place, to which they so earnestly desire, she should be
restored? She was removed from governing the Kingdom before, all public
Administration was taken away from her, and she was left to the Punishment of
the Law. Now these goodly Advocates, forsooth, would have her restored to that
Place, as to plead for her self in a Cause which is as manifest, as it is foul
and detestable; or, rather, it being already proved, that she should suffer
just Punishment for the same. And whereas, now she injoys some ease in the
Compassion of her Kindred, and, in so foul an Offense, is not in any of the
worst Cases, they would again cast her into the tempestuous Hurry of a new
Judgment; She having no better hope of her Safety, than she can gather from the
Condemnation of so many former Kings, who have been called before Judges to
answer for themselves. But, because our Adversaries do seditiously boast, to
trouble the Minds of the simpler Sort, That the Majesty of good Kings is
impaired and their Authority almost vilifi'd, if Tyrants be punished, let us
see, what Weight there is in this Pretense. We may rather contrarily judge,
That there is nothing more honorable for the Societies and Assemblies of the
Good, than if they are freed from the Contagion of the Bad. Who ever thought,
that the Senate of Rome incurred any Guilt, by the Punishment of Lentulus,
Cethegus, or Catiline: And Valerius Asiaticus, Valerius Asiaticus, his bold and
confident Speech.
when the Soldiers Mutined for the Slaughter of Caligula, and cried out, to
know, Who was the Author of so audacious a Fact. He answered from an high and
lofty Place, where he stood, I wish, I could truly say, I did it; So much
Majesty there was in that free Speech of one private Man, He is said to have
slain his own Sons; Who would have brought back Kingly Government into Rome.
That the wild common Soldiers were presently dissipated and quieted thereby.
When Iunius Brutus overthrew the Conspiracy, made for bringing back Kings into
the City, he did not think that his Family was stained by a nefarious
Slaughter; but that, by the Blood of his Children, the stain was rather wiped
away from the Roman Nobility. Did the Imprisonment of Christiern of Denmark
detract any thing from the Commendation of Christiern, the next King? What
hindered, but that he might have been accounted the best of Kings, in his time;
For a noble Mind, that is supported by his own Virtue, does neither increase by
the Glory, nor is lessened by the Infamy, of another. But to let these things
pass, let us return to the Proof of the Crime. I think, we have abundantly
satisfied the Queen's Request; her desire was, That we should show her such
strengthening and convincing Proofs, for what we have done, that she might be
satisfied in the justness of our Cause; and also, be able to inform Others, who
desired to hear, what we could say for our Selves. As for the King's Murder;
the Author, the Method, and the Causes thereof, have been so fully declared by
the Earl of Murray and his Fellows in that Embassy, that they must needs be
clear to the exact Judgments of the Queen, and those Others, delegated by her
to hear that Affair. As for what is objected to us, as blameworthy, after that
time, we have shown, That it is consentaneous to the Divine Law, and also to the
Law of Nature, which too is, in a sort, Divine; Moreover, it is consonant to our
own Country-Laws and Customs; Neither is it different from the Usage of other
Nations, who have the Face of any Good and just Government amongst them; Seeing
then, that our Cause is justified by all the Interpreters of Divine and Human
Laws; seeing the Examples of so many Ages, the Judgments of so many People, and
the Punishments of Tyrants do confirm it, we see no such Novelty (not to say,
Injustice) in our Cause, but that the Queen her self might readily subscribe to
it; yea, and persuade others, that, in this Matter, they should be no otherwise
opinionated of us, but that we have carried our Selves like good Subjects and
Christians, too.

These were the Allegations, which, we thought fit, to make to justify our
Cause, which we committed to writing, and read them the last day of February,
before those grave and learned Persons, whom the Queen had appointed to confer
with us, on this Subject; and the next Day, which was March the first, We again
went, in the Morning, to Court, to learn, how she relished our Answer, and what
Judgment she made of the whole Cause; but, because she, that Day, was going to
her Country House, called Greenwich, about three Miles below London, we had no
Opportunity to speak with her; What was Next to that, we went to the Chief of
the Council, who, at first, were appointed to hear and transact with us; They
told us, That the Queen (though she had very little spare time, in regard of
the Journey, and other Business, yet) had read our Memorial: But she was not yet
so fully persuaded, that our Cause was so just, that She could approve it
without Scruple; and therefore, she desired us to go to the Second thing, at
first proposed by us, which was, To find out some Way, whereby this Dispute
might be ended, upon some moderate or handsome Conditions. Whereunto we replied,
That we were not sent from home with an unbounded Commission, but One
circumscribed within certain Limits; so that we had no Freedom to enter into
any Debate at all, of what might in the least diminish the Authority of our
King; and if such a Liberty had been offered us, yet we should have been
unwilling to accept it; or to make use of it, if accepted.

Matters standing thus; the Queen being at Greenwich, and we at London, we sent
some of our Number to her, to know, Whether she had any thing more to say to
us? if not, that we might have Liberty to depart home, there to consult, what
we could, the Good of our Country, and our own private Concerns: And if there
were any thing, we might gratify her Majesty in; We were willing to show our
Obsequiousness and Respect therein; yea, we should take more Opportunity to
show it at home, than we could have now in another Dominions. This Demand
procured us a Summons to appear at Court, the 5 th of March: When we were come
into her Presence, she mightily blamed our stifness in maintaining our
conceived Opinion, and that we did so pertinaciously shun a Dispute, or rather
a Consultation, about a Matter so much concerning our Security; She also added
a large Declaration of her Mind and Will anent the King, and Those who
maintained his Cause. We urged, that the Justness of our Cause had been clearly
enough declared, before. She answered, that she was not satisfied in her Mind,
with the Examples and Arguments produced by us; neither, said she, am I wholly
ignorant of such Disputes, as having spent some of my former time in the Study
of the Law: But, says she, if you be fully determined to make no other Proposal
for your King's Safety, and your Own; yet, I would have you, at least, enter
upon another Conference, with the Chief of my Council, who treated with you
about these things, before. We answered, That we were not at all so stiffly
wedded to our own Opinions, as not to be willing to hear any good Expedient,
that might be offered by her, or her Counselors; always with this Proviso,
That no Alteration be made in the present State of the Kingdom; nor any
Diminution at all of the King's Authority: For, upon those Two Heads, we
neither could, or would, admit the least Consultation or Debate. The Day after,
we went down again to the Queen's Palace, (as we agreed) and entered into a
Conference with her Counselors, where many Proposals were made by them to
decide the Controversy, between Mother and Son, concerning the Title to the
Government; We, because the Reasons were many, and concerning Matters of such
great Moment on both sides, desired, That we might have them given to us in
writing, and Time allowed us, to consider of Things of such great Consequence.
They were very ready to do it, having first consulted the Queen. When we had
ran Them all over in order, the Matters proposed seemed so difficult to us, and
also so derogatory to the Power of the King; and withal, so exceeding the
Bounds of our Embassy and Commission, that we neither would, could, nor durst,
touch upon them. The Day after, Robert Petcarn was sent to Court with this
Answer, That such Matters did belong to the Decision of all the Estates, and
were not to be disputed by so small a Number of Persons as we were. He also
carried our Answer to Them, who the Day before, viz. the 4 th of March, had
desired to have all in writing. Further, he earnestly desired the Queen, that,
seeing they had executed all the points within the Bounds of their Commission;
They might have leave to return home. Ten Days after, we had liberty to attend
the Queen: The Delegates of the Council, who, from our first coming, were
appointed to treat with us, were very urgent, That we would yet treat with
them, about finding out some Remedies, to compose Things; They used many
Arguments to that purpose, telling us, That if War from abroad should be added
to our Troubles at home, our Labors, Dangers and Difficulties would be
doubled, especially, being not able to extricate our selves by our own Forces.
But we persisted in our Resolution, and would hearken to no Model of
Accommodation, which lessened the King's Authority, and so that Day ended. The
next Day, which was the 20 th of March, we were sent for again to Court, and
being commanded to come to the Queen, she spoke to us to this purpose; That
she, and her Council, had weighed our Answers, by which she understood, That
none but a Supreme Council, or Parliament of Scotland, consisting of all the
Estates, could give a certain Answer to her Demands; and thereupon, she had
found out a Way, how to leave the matter entire, as she found it, and with an
honest Pretense too. She was informed, that there was shortly to be a
Convention of all the Estates in Scotland, thither we should go, and God speed
us well, and therein we should endeavor, that an equal Number of both Factions
should be chosen to examine the Grounds of the Difference betwixt them; and
that she also would send her Ambassadors thither, which should join Endeavors
with Those, to promote a Peace; In the mean time, she desired, That the
Pacification might be renewed, till the Matter was brought to some Issue. She
said also, That she would confer with the Queen of Scots Ambassadors, and
persuade them, if she could, to the same. But when 'twas moved to Them, they
excused themselves, saying, That they could determine nothing on that head,
without consulting the Queen; but, that they would write to her to know her
Pleasure in the Case. Yet we pressed hard to have our Convoy to return, as was
promised us, but were desired to have a little Patience, till an Answer was
returned from the Scots Queen to the Bishop of Ross, and the rest of her
Ambassadors, and then we should have our Dismission. We urged our Return still,
but without effect, though we told her, we had nothing to do with the Bishop of
Ross, neither was our Embassy to him, we had ended what we came for, and did
much wonder, why the Bishop of Ross should retard our Journey, especially, since
so many Tumults were raised in our Absence, to the great Inconvenience of the
King's Party: But though our Importunity was almost Shameless, yet we could not
prevail, for the Matter was deferred from Day to Day, till the last of March,
and then the Queen returned to London. The Things which were acted in
Parliament, for 3 Days after, did so take up the Queen, that she had no leisure
to debate foreign Matters. But the 4 th of April, she sent for us, and excused
the Delay; She told us, That our King's Mother had by her Letters grievously
chid her Ambassadors for their Presumptuous Confidence in descending to debate
her Cause after that Fashion, and therefore, says the Queen, seeing they are
so averse from the Way of Concord, which I propose, I will detain you no
longer; but if she hereafter repent of her present Sentiment, (of which I have
some hope) and take the Course chalkt out by me, I do not doubt, but you, for
your part, will perform your Duty. Thus we were lovingly and kindly Dismissed,
and, the 8 th Day of April, began our Journey toward our own Country.

This Account was given at Sterlin by the Ambassadors before the Convention of
the Estates. Whereupon, the Care and Diligence of the Ambassadors were
unanimously approved. Other Matters they referred to the first of May, a
Parliament being summoned against that time. In the mean time, both Parties
bestir themselves, one to promote, the other to hinder, the Assembling thereof.
The wisest Senators were of opinion, That the Queen of England would never let
the Scot's Queen depart; as foreseeing, how dangerous her Deliverance would be
to all Britain. In the interim, Mention was made by some, of demanding the
Scot's King, as an Hostage for his Mother, rather in hopes to hinder a Concord,
than to establish it; Some of Q. Elizabeth's Counselors desire the Scots King
to be sent into England.
for she was well assured, that the Scots would never yield to it; but there
were some potent Men in her Council, who did secretly favor the Duke of
Norfolk's Faction; These were desirous, that the Queen of Scots should be
delivered, and thereby the adverse Faction might, in tract of time, be broken
and diminished, that so, they might obtain that Point from her by Necessity,
which, they saw, they could not otherwise do; neither did they doubt, but the
Matter would come to that Pass, if the R^bels were assisted with Money and other
Furniture for War from France, and the Royalists had their Eye only on the
Queen of England; who had, at the beginning, largely promised them, upon
understanding the flagitious Act of the Queen, that she would take a special
care of the King and Kingdom of Scotland. Neither could the French King well
compass his Designs. He was willing, the Scot's Queen should be delivered, but
not that the King should be put into English Hands; and hearing, how strong the
Norfolk Faction was, which was all for Innovations, he did not despair, but
that the Scot's Queen might, in time, escape out of Prison privately, or be
delivered by his Means. Thus stood the State of Britain, at that time.

Morton, having given a laudable Account of his Embassy to the Convention at
Sterlin, returned to his own House about 4 Miles from Edinburgh; he had a
Company of 100 Foot, and a few Horse to guard his House, and to defen^ himself,
if the Townsmen should attempt to make any Excursion, till more Forces might
come in. In the mean time, the Queen's Faction were Masters of the Town, The
Queen's Faction garisoned Edinburgh.
and set Guards in all convenient Places; and levelled all their Designs to
exclude the Regent, and to hinder the Parliament, which was Indicted to be held
at Edinburgh. Whereupon Morton was commanded, by the Regent, with 20 Horse and
about 70 Foot (for the rest had Passes to go abroad for Forage) to march to
Leith; who was to make a public Proclamation there, (for they had garrisoned
Edinburgh already) That no Man should assist the Rebels by Land or Sea, either
with Provision, Arms, or any other warlike Furniture; they that did so, were to
undergo the same Punishment with them. They, knowing themselves to be inferior
to the Town-Souldiers, Morton comes to Leith, and publishes a Proclamation
against Them.
sent their Foot another Way about, which was covered by an Hill from the Sight
of the City, (commonly called Arthur's Seat) and the Horse past near the Walls
and Gates of the City, not a Man of the Enemy stiring out. When they had done,
what they were commanded to do at Leith, they had not the same Fortune at their
Return, for the Foot refused to march back the same Way that they came, but
returned, against the will of the Horse, near the Gates of the City, and so
passed with them, under the Walls, with an intent to try, what Metal themselves
were made of, and their Enemies, The Garrison of Edinburgh sallies out upon him
in his retreat.
too; when, lo, on a sudden, a Sally was made out against them from Two of the
Gates. At first, they fought Manfully, so that the Oppidans were driven back in
disorder into the Town, with no great loss, it is true, yet, it easily appeared,
that they were Inferior in Valor, though Superior in Number. The Regent,
having nothing in readiness to assault the Town, and having no time neither,
Edinburgh, How seated?
by reason of the sudden Sitting of the Parliament, to bring any great Guns
thither, thought it better to desist from Force, and to hold the Parliament
without the Gate of Edinburgh; A Convention of the Estates held at one end of
the City of Edinburgh, because the Enemy possessed the Castle.
For that City being stretched out mostly in Length, they, who first compassed
it with a Wall, left a great Part of it in the Suburbs; yet so, that the
Inhabitants of that Part had the full privilege of Citizens, as well as those
within the Walls. There the Convention was held, for the Lawyers gave their
Opinions, That 'twas no great Matter, in what Part soever of the City, it met.
In this Parliament, These were declared Traitors, viz. The chief of Them who
held out the Castle, especially those, who, out of Consciousness of their guilt
of the King's and Regent's Murders, had avoided Trial. The Rebels being thus
condemned by an Act of Parliament (The Judgment of which Court is of very great
Authority,) lest the Commonalty, which ordinarily is at the beck of the
Nobility, should be alienated from them, They also, of the Number which they
had there, made up a Convention, such as it was. Few appeared there, who had
any lawful right to Vote; and of them, some came not into the Assembly at all;
some presented themselves, but as Spectators only, abstaining from all
Judiciary Actings; so that they, having neither a just Number of Voices, nor
were they assembled, either in due Time, or according to ancient Custom; yet,
that they might make show of a lawful sufficient Number, Two Bishops, and some
Others which were absent (a thing never heard of before) sent in their Votes,
The Castle plays upon the Conventioners with Cannon, but does them no hurt.
in writing, at hap-hazard, as being doubtful of the Event of that Assembly. At
this time, the Castle continually played with great Guns upon the Place, where
the Nobles were Assembled, and though the Bullets often fell amongst crowds of
People, yet they neither hurt, nor killed, so much as one Man. There were but
few condemned in either Convention; and both Parties appointed another
Convention to be held in August, one at Sterlin, the other at Edinburgh. When
the Assembly was dismissed, neither Party issued out one upon other, Two
Anti-Assemblies Indicted.
so that there was a kind of Truce between them. Thereupon the greatest part of
the Soldiers, that were with Morton, being pressed Men, slipped away to their
own homes. They, who kept the Town, knew, That Morton had but a small Party for
his Guard, and being willing also to cry quits for their former ignominious
Repulse, they sent out 220 Musketeers, and a 100 Horse; they carried two Brass
Fieldpieces along with them, intending either to burn the Town of Dalkeith,
where Morton then was; or, if That succeeded not, to frighten the Enemy, and
keep him within the Town; and if they could thus put him into a Fright, they
intended to make their Braggs thereof all over the Country. They showed
themselves, well accoutred, on an Hill over against Dalkeith; Whereupon, they
at Dalkeith, being alarmed, cried presently, Arm, Arm. A Sally out of
Edinburgh, against Morton, at Dalkeith,
The Mortonians drew out immediately, being 200 Foot, and about 60 Horse, and
mounted a little an opposite Hill, and then again descending into the Valley and
Plain, they stood over against them, ready to fight: Some Archers picquered and
skirmished on both Sides, and there was a light Onset; but the Rebels, who
expected to find their Enemies unprepared, being disappointed of their Hope,
marched back, in as entire a Body as they could, to recover the City; and thus
some pressing upon Others, in the Eagerness of their Retreat, they came to
Cragmiller-Castle, Near two (...) from Edinburgh, wherein both Parties ^^ceive
some Checks.
situate almost in the Midway between Edinburgh and Dalkeith. There a few of
Morton's Foot, which past by the Castle privately on the other side, rose from
their Ambush, and assaulted the Enemies Body, in the strait Passage of the Way,
which was between them, and so disordered their Ranks, and put them to Flight:
They, who kept Garrison in the Castle of Edinburgh, perceiving from the higher
Ground, that their Men were flying toward them, sent out 80 Horse, and 30 Foot,
to relieve them; with this Supply, they charged again, and the King's Horse,
being fewer in Number by half, and not able to endure the brunt, fled back in
as much haste as they had pursued before. The Foot was in a manner useless on
both sides, because of a great Shower that fell suddenly from the Clouds. In
the Pursuit of the Mortonians, there were but Two slain, more were wounded, and
about 26 taken Prisoners: Of the Rebels, there were more slain, but fewer
Prisoners taken. But one Accident did almost equal the Loss of both Parties:
They which came from Edinburgh, brought with them a Barrel of Gunpowder, and
as the Soldiers, in haste and carelessly, went to take out some Powder, a Spark
of Fire light into it, and blew it up, insomuch that the Horse which carried
it, James Melvil, the Commander of the Foot, and many other Soldiers, were so
scorched and burnt, that the most Part of them, in a few Days after, died.

Whilst these things were acting about Edinburgh, Victory inclining to neither
Side, one Troop of the Scots, who, some Years before, had served in Denmark,
under Michael Weems, a noble, A Scotch Troop from Denmark, comes to help the
Royalists.
virtuous, and learned young Man, returned into their own Country, and offered
their Service to the King, against the Desires of the Townsmen, who would
willingly have drawn them over to their Party. They had a little Time allowed
them to visit their Friends; and coming together at the Day appointed, they
were imform'd, That some Ships were manned out by the Rebels, to intercept
them. Morton himself was aware of the Plot, and therefore taking what Force he
could, on a sudden, make, without acquainting any Body with his Design, he came
so hastily to Leith, that he had almost caught them, before they went a
Ship-bord, sixteen of the Loiterers, who did not make such haste to lanch out
their Boat, he took Prisoners, on the Shore. The next Day, he provided Ships,
either to follow them, (he could not do it sooner, because of the Tide) or, to
intercept them in their Return. The Regent also was made acquainted with it the
same Night, who, speedily gathering some Tumultuary Force, hastened to the left
Shore of the Fort, to set upon the Rebels, when they landed: But the Speed of
the Danish Soldiers rendered those Endeavors needless, for the greatest Part
of them got aboard a large Vessel, and so past safely over. The rest, who were
in a smaller Skiff, were taken, not far from Leith, and, being about twenty
six, were brought Prisoners to the Castle. After this Action, the Regent
returned to Sterlin: Morton, being overladen with Labor and Watching, and
troubled with the Cholick too, fell sick at Leith. Drury, the Englishman, who
had transacted for a Truce between the Factions for so many Days, Morton falls
sick at Leith.
could, finally, effect nothing; for the Regent would yield to no other Terms,
Drury intercedes in vain between the Parties.
but that the Places, which were seized on, during the former Truce, should be
restored. When Drury was about to depart, the Rebels, as 'twere in Testimony of
Respect and Complement to him, drew forth all the Strength that ever they could
make, supposing, That whilst Morton was sick, they should either put their
Enemies into a terrible Fright, The Rebels sally out against Morton at Leith;
who were inferior in Number to themselves; or else, if they durst fight, with
the Force they had, without their General, they might do some considerable
Execution upon them, toward the ending of the War. Morton being imform'd
hereof, by his Guard of Horse, rose presently out of his Bed, and buckles on
his Armor, and brings up all his Men into a Neighbour-hill, where he kept them
ready for the Onset, about 400 Paces from the Enemy. Drury rode between both
Armies, and earnestly desired both to return home, and not to brake off all
Hope of Accommodation, by over-rash and hasty Counsels; Whereupon, they both
agreed to retreat, only the Dispute was, who should turn about their Colors,
first. Drury endeavored to compound this Difference also, and desired of Both,
that when he, standing in the middle between both Armies, gave a Sign, they
should Both retreat, in one and the same Moment. Morton was willing, but the
Rebels threatened, That unless he retreated first of his own Accord, they would
beat him shamefully out of the Field; and indeed, they could hardly be kept
from advancing their Bodies toward him. When Morton heard this Answer, he
supposed he had satisfied Drury and the English, whom at this time he was
unwilling to offend, but would rather have them Witnesses of his Moderation;
whereupon, he presently drew forth against the Enemy; first, the Horse made a
brisk Charge, and routed the Enemies Wings; the Foot attempted to charge, but
were routed also; when the Gate of the next Street, being narrow, could not
admit so many at once in their thick and hasty Flight, many were there slain,
many trodden under Foot; many taken, But are repulsed with ^oss.
none making any Resistance, but only a Party of Foot, who, having the
Advantage of the next Churchyard, rallied again; and yet, at the first Charge,
were a second time put to Flight. Their Flight into the City was so confused,
that the Guard left the Gates, and all fled into the Castle; so that, if the
Enemy that pursued, had not been intent on the Prey, they might have entered
also the Town Pell-mell with them, as being unguarded. About 50 of the Rebels
were slain, and about 150 taken. Alexander Hume had a slight Wound with a Fall
from his Horse, and was taken: Gawen Hamilton was killed: James Culen, Huntly's
Kinsman, a Commander of Foot, hid himself in a poor Woman's Pantry, but was
discovered, and brought to Leith. The Common People, when they saw him, made
such a Shout, that it plainly appeared, they would not be satisfied, James
Culen, a cruel Am^odexter, justly punished.
but by his Death; for, in the former Civil Wars, he had been a cruel and
avaritious Plunderer. He was infamous in his Military Employment in France;
and, when the Kings of Denmark and Sweden were at odds, he promised to serve
them Both, and accordingly had Money to raise Soldiers from either, but
cozened them Both. And he, being thus taken, at length (as I said) to the
great Joy of all, was led forth to his Execution.

After a few Days Rest, the Townsmen recruited their Forces, and then showed
themselves again in Arms; after that, there were light Skirmishes past betwixt
the Parties almost every Day, with various Events. The King's Party were more
valorous, but the Rebels had Places more convenient for Ambushes; and besides,
they had an high Castle, from whence they might see all the Motions of their
Enemies, neither would they ordinarily venture an Onset any further, than their
Ordnance out of the Castle could command. The Regent kept himself at Leith,
watching all their Sallies, and stopping all Provisions by Sea, for he could
not do it by Land, by reason of the Largeness of the City, and Inconvenience of
the adjacent Places, in the surrounding whereof many Opportunities of Service
were lost. Whilst these things were acting about the City, a French Ship was
taken, that brought Gunpowder, Iron Bullets, small Brass-Guns, and some Money
to the Rebels. A Ship from France, taken by the Regent.
The Money went to pay the Soldiers, but the Bullets, Powder, and Part of the
Guns, being sent with little or no Guard to Sterlin against the Tide, the
Rebels, having Intelligence thereof, procured some Vessels from other Havens,
and surprised them; but not being able to carry their Booty to the Castle, they
sunk it in the River. About the same time, another Ship was also taken, in
which there was little else but Letters and large Promises of Assistance,
speedily to be sent from France. For, during the Two whole last past Years,
wherein, at times, there was War in Scotland: The Queen of England, on behalf
of the Royalists; the King of France, The Queen of England, and King of France,
censured for their slow Supplies to their several Parties in Scotland.
and the English Papists, on behalf of the Rebels, did send in some small
Dribblets of Money, but loaded them with more Promises, as rather studying, that
their side might not be conquered, rather than conquer, respectively; Both of
them were willing, Matters should be brought to that Pinch of Necessity: The
Queen of England's Design was, That the Scots, being worn out by their
Divisions, might be willing to send their King into England, and so seem to
depend wholly on her: The French did it, That the Rebels might surrender
Dunbarton and Edinburgh to him, and, by those Two commanding Garrisons from both
Seas, he would keep the Scots always in fear of his Arms. But, despairing of
the Queen's Delivery, and Dunbarton Castle being lost, he moved but slowly in
the Cause of the Rebels; his Aim only was, That, the Kingdom being exhausted
with domestic Sedition, he might not undertake a new and unnecessary War, for
the sake of one Castle only; it was enough, he thought, at present, if it did
not fall into the Enemies Hands.

The Scots were fully resolved not to give up their King to the English, The
Scots refuse to send their young King into England, with their Reasons, why.
upon the account of old Controversies; and also, because the English Papists
were so strong, who placed all their Hopes in his Death. For, if he were taken
out of the way, the Queen of England would not only seem weaker, seeing it was
the Life of one King only, that delayed their Hopes; but also, the Queen of
Scots was the undoubted Heir of the whole Kingdom, who, by he^ Marriage, might
gratify whom she pleased with the Realm, and so bear a great Figure in the
Change of the State of Religion through all Europe. And in the English Court
there were some, no mean Men, who preferred the Hope of Novelty before ancient
Courtesies; yet if, as long as the King of Scots was alive, they should cut off
Elizabeth, many of those of the Queen's Privy Council feared, lest the known
Wickedness of the Scots Queen might diminish her Authority, and increase her
Son's Power, and so, for fear of Tyranny, endear him more to the English:
Whereupon, the English Rebels were willing to destroy the Queen of England, and
King of Scots, Both; and, not succeeding in doing it openly, they resolved upon
Poison.

Matters standing thus in Scotland, Both Factions prepared themselves against
the approaching Sitting of the Parliament. The Rebels had only Three of the
Lords voting with them, of which Two were the Proctors, The Rebels Convention
at Edinburgh.
or Commissioners, to the Convention, to be held in the Queen's Name. The
Third, Alexander Hume, was the only Man who had Right to vote: And of the
Ecclesiastical Order, Two Bishops, the One banished thither a few Months before
by the Regent, and, the State of the City being changed, not daring to depart
without a Convoy, he staid there against his Will: The Other was a Bankrupt,
who, having spent his Estate, was driven thither by necessity. By their Votes,
above 200 were condemned, some of them being Children under Age. Moreover, the
malapert Soldiers, as if they had already got the Victory, divided other Men's
Patrimonies among themselves, and so put many quiet and innocent Persons (and,
by that means, more liable to Injuries,) into the Roll of the Confiscate.

The Regent went to Sterlin, where he had a great Convention of the Nobles: The
Regent's Convention at Sterlin.
Therein, about Thirty of the obstinatest of the Queen's Party were condemned,
the rest were put off, in hopes of Pardon. The Rebels thought this a fit
Opportunity for them, to attempt something in the absence of the Nobility; and
thereupon, they drew all their Forces out of the City, and, to make a greater
Show, the Townsmen with them; they set them in Battel-array, that so, as in
former times, by light Skirmishes, they might draw the King's Forces out of
Leith. In the mean time, while the Enemy were kept in play by them, they
resolved to send the rest privately to march about, and when the Garrison was
drawn out, to enter in at the opposite Gate, and so burn the Town. The Rebels
assault Leith, but are repulsed.
Patrick Lindsy was Governor of Leith, a wise and valiant Person; he drew
forth his Forces, having sufficiently provided against their Treachery, and
marched directly toward the Enemy; they fought stoutly at first, at last, he
gave the Rebels a round Salvo, and so beat them back, yet not without Loss, to
the Gates of the Town; a great many Prisoners were brought off, but the most
part of them were Townsmen. Alexander Hume was taken once, but relieved again
by his own side. In the Evening, as the King's Party were retreating, joyous
for the Victory, James Haliburton, a good Man, James Haliburton taken Prisoner
by the Rebels, by a Mistake.
and a skilful Soldier, who commanded all the Foot, being too far from his
Body, was taken by a Troop of Horse in the Twilight, when he could not discern
of whose Party they were in the Highway, and so carried Prisoner into the
City. Upon this Loss, the Rebels took heart, to make another Attempt, as full
of Danger and Boldness, so more likely, if it had succeeded, to put an End to
the whole War. For, having received Intelligence by their Spies, That the
Nobility of the contrary Faction at Sterlin were so careless and remiss, that,
in an open Town, they had not so much as a Night-guard, as if it had been a
time of perfect Peace, they took 300 Foot, and 200 Horse, and marched thither;
to ease the Foot, who were hastily called forth, they took away all the
Country-mens Horses, who came to Market the Day before; and if they
occasionally lighted on any other Horses by the way, they took them also. The
Captains, The bold Attempt of the Rebels to surprise Sterlin, and the Nobles of
the Convention there assembled:
in that Expedition, were George Gordon, Claud Hamilton, and Walter Scot, they
were much encouraged to the Undertaking by George Bell, an Ensign of a
Foot-Company, who was born at Sterlin, he knew all the convenient Passages and
Accesses into the Town, and was made acquainted, in Writing, with all the Noble
Men's Lodgings; he gave them assured Hopes, That they would quickly master all,
insomuch, that they were so confident of Success in their March, as to appoint
Whom to kill, and Whom to save alive. They came to the Town early in the
Morning, and found things in profound Security, not so much as a Dog opened his
Mouth against them; so they silently entered the Town, and, without any
resistance, went up to the Marketplace; they set Guards at all the Passes
thither, and then went to the Noblemens Lodgings; the rest were easily taken,
only James Douglas, Earl of Morton, Which, in part, took Effect.
put some stop to them in his Lodging; when they could not break in upon him by
Force, they set fire to the House; one or two of his Servants, who stoutly
defended the Passes, were slain, and he himself, when all was a fire, hardly
escaping out of the Flames, surrendered himself to Walter Scot, his Kinsman,
then near at hand. Moreover, the Regent was taken Prisoner at the same time;
his Men did not stand it out valiantly in his Defense, but he was forced to
defend himself alone, and, at last, was taken Prisoner. Alexander, Earl of
Glencarn, and Hugh, Earl of Eglington, were reserved, under a Guard, for
Execution: For Claud Hamilton told his Men, They should kill all the Nobles of
the contrary Faction, as soon as ever they passed out of the Gates, without any
distinction. All Things thus succeeding, beyond Expectation, the common
Soldiers scattered themselves all over the Town to get Plunder. Thereupon,
John Erskin, Governor of the Castle, who had before tried to break through the
Enemy in the Marketplace, but in vain, they were so strongly posted, sent a
Party of Musketeers into his own new House, which was then a building, and not
quite finished, from whence there was a Prospect into the whole Marketplace.
This House, because it was uninhabited, and not completed, was neglected by
the Enemy, and afforded a safe Post to the Royalists, whence to play on their
Enemies: The Rebels beaten again out of Sterlin, by the Valor of John Erskin,
Governor of the Castle.
When the Rebels saw, that they were shot at from an high Place, garrisoned
against them, with unequal Weapons, they presently turned their backs, and ran
away in such Fear, that, when they came to the narrow Way leading to the Gate,
they trod down one another: That which saved them, was, There were but few to
pursue, for they who had driven them out of the Marketplace, could come out
but one by one, through the Gate of the new House, which was but one neither,
and that half-shut too, toward the Town; and but a few came forth from other
Houses, where they stood armed, ready for all Events. Thus the whole Soldiery,
which, the Day before, had attempted so desperate a piece of Service, and had
almost successfully finished it, were driven out of the Town, in such Fear and
Confusion, that they left their Prisoners, and every one shifted for himself.
In this Onset, there was only one Man of Note slain, and that was George Ruven,
a young Gentleman of great Hopes, who, pressing too eagerly upon the thickest
of the Enemies, lost his Life. And Alexander Stuart of Gairlice, when he was
led away Prisoner, was killed; it is not known, whether by his own Men, or the
Enemy. In this great Trepidation and Affrightment, they, who before kept within
their own Doors for fear, now came abroad. They, who had taken James Douglas,
and Alexander Cuningham, Prisoners, seeing no hopes to escape, surrendered
themselves up to their Captives. David Spence, Captain of Horse amongst the
Rebels, was leading away the Regent; he knew, that many lay in wait for his
Life, and therefore he defended him with all the Care he could; The Regent
slain in this Scuffle, with Capt. Spence, who endeavored to save him.
insomuch, that when the Ruffians aimed at and shot the Regent, they hit him
too, and he died the same Day, to the great grief of both Parties, for he was
an accomplished young Man, in all Endowments both of Body and Mind, and
inferior to no Man of his Age in Scotland. After his Decease, the Enemies
Horse never did any memorable Service. Two of the Regent's Murderers For
killing him, after he had Quarter given him.
were put to Death, not being able to escape: The rest fled in such Fear, that
the Prisoners, whom they had taken, escaped out of their Hands. For certain,
the Whole of the Enemies Party might have been destroyed, if there had been
Troops enough of Horse to have pursued: But the Tories of Teviotdale, at their
first Entrance into the Town, had plundered all the Horses, That saved them. The
slain of Both sides were almost equal: Of the Royalists, not a Man was carried
away Prisoner; of the other side, many; most of which were intent upon the
Prey, and so were taken in the Houses which they were a rifling: The Regent
died the same Day of his Wounds. His Funerals were celebrated in haste, as well
as they could, in such an Hurry, and then the Nobles, which were there,
Assembled, to create another Regent to succeed him. Three Competitors for the
Regency.
They chose Three out of their own Number; having first given them an Oath, to
stand to the Decision of the Nobility, and thus, as Candidates, they were to
expect the Issue of the next Assembly. The Three were, Gilespy Cambel, Earl of
Argyle; James Douglas, Earl of Morton; and John Erskin, Earl of Mar. John
Erskin, Earl of Mar, chosen Regent.
All the Votes pitched on John Erskin. His first attempt, was, to assault
Edinburgh, there having been an Army appointed to be levied by the former
Regent against the first of October, but this sudden change of Affairs made it
to be deferred till the 15 th of the same Month; that Delay was a great
hindrance to Business, for it gave liberty to the Townsmen, who wrought Night
and Day, to perfect their Works; so that the early Winter, the long Nights, the
bad Weather, in those cold Countries, He assaults Edinburgh, but without effect.
the Difficulty of conveying Provisions, and his want of Military
Accommodations, caused him to return, without carrying the Place.

For some Months succeeding, Sallies were made, but of no great Advantage to
either side. For the Prospect of the Castle, being free and open to all Parts,
gave Opportunity to the Rebels, that they would never come to handy-Blows, nor
yet fall into any Ambush; for, by a Signal given from an high Place in the
Castle, they were easily warned, to retreat in time; yet once, when all the
Horse and Foot issued out of the Town, to intercept a few of the Royalists, and
they pressed upon them, who pretended hastily to fly away: When they in the
Castle saw the Colors of some Companies start up, from a neighbour-Valley,
presently they sounded a Retreat to them. Whereupon the Rebels, before they
came to the Place of Ambush, retreated back in great Fear, and their flight was
so much the more confused, because, though they were advised of their Danger
beforehand, yet they did not know, What, or from Whence, it was, nor could
they so much as suspect it; Those few Horsemen, which before counterfeited to
fly away, did so press upon their Rear, that they caused the Foot to break
their Ranks, and every One ran to the City as fast as ever he could; many were
wounded and taken, and, amongst them, some Captains, and Cornets of Horse.

Whilst Matters were thus slowly carried on about the City, in the Country
toward the North, there was a great Loss received upon this Occasion; There
were two Families, of great Power in those Parts, The Gordons and the Forbes's;
The Gordons lived in great Concord amongst themselves, and, by the King's
Commission, The Royalists receive a loss in the North, with the manner of it.
had for many Years presided over the neighboring Counties, and and so
increased their ancient Power and Authority; On the other side, the Forbes's
were always at Difference, and continually weakened one another; but neither of
them, had now, for many Years, made any Attempt upon the other, there being
rather a secret Emulation, than an open Breach, betwixt them. In the Family of
the Forbes's, Deadly fewds between the Gordons and the Forbes's.
there was one Arthur, a witty and an active Man, and who, from the beginning
of the falling out, had always been on the King's side; he thought, 'twas then
time for him to set up his own Name and his Families, and also to advance the
Power of the Party, which he followed. He first then endeavored to reconcile
All of his own Family; if he could effect that, he feared not any Power, that
could be raised against him in those Parts; when a Day was appointed for that
purpose, Adam Gordon, Brother to the Earl of Huntly, by all means, endeavored
to hinder it, and therefore giving private Notice to his Friends and Vassals,
there came a great Number of them to the Place. There were Two Troops of the
Forbes's in sight, but, before they could join, he set upon One of them, and
killed Arthur presently; at his Fall, the rest were scattered, and put to
flight; some eminent Men were slain, many were taken, the rest, some Days
after, dared not stir, for Fear, lest those, they had taken Prisoners, should
suffer for it. And their Fear was increased by the burning of Alexander
Forbes's House, with his Wife, great with Child, The Cruelty of the Gordons
against the Forbes's.
his Children and Servants, in it. Arthur Forbes's Elder Brother, who was the
Chief of the Sept, after his House was taken and plundered, hardly escapt and
came to Court; there, tho they were somewhat straightened themselves, yet there
were 200 Foot granted to him, and to the Nobles that followed his Party; and
withal, Letters were written to the neighbour-Nobility to join with him: When
they were thus joined with the rest of the Forbes's, and some near Families,
they thought themselves secure enough from Force, but they wanted a Chief
Commander over them, for the Heads of the Families were most young Men, and
there was scarce One more eminent than another amongst them: So that, they
being unresolved in their Counsels, John Keith, with 500 Horse went home to his
own House, which was not far distant. Alexander Forbes, and his Vassals, with
200 Foot marched to Aberdeen to drive Adam Gordon from thence, and to refresh
his Men after their March. Adam receiving intelligence, that his Enemy was
advancing with but a small Party, draws his Men out of the Town, and, to make a
show of a greater Multitude, compelled the Townsmen to draw forth with them, so
that there was a sharp Conflict in the Field near the Town. The King's Foot,
out of eagerness to fight, followed the Gordonians too far, and, having no
Reserves, were repulsed and put to flight, The King's Party overthrown.
principally by the Archers, there were not many of them killed, because the
fight lasted till dark Night, but several were taken, and, amongst them,
Alexander Forbes himself, after he had stoutly defended himself against them, a
long time.

This Success in the North did mightily encourage the Rebels, to attempt
greater Matters: Whereupon, in a different Part of the Country, they resolved
to attaque The chief Town of Teviotdale standing on the River Ied, near where
it falls into the River Teviot.
Iedburgh, a Town, as the Country Custom was, unfortifi'd; but the Inhabitants
were very Valiant, and, some Years before, had stoutly resisted the Rebels;
Thomas Carr of Farnihest, and Thomas Scot, lived near the Town; They, besides
their old Clans, which were Numerous enough, had associated to them, the Three
neighbor Countries, Liddisdale, Ewesdale, and Eskdale, Places always given to
Robbery; but then, in regard of the Licentiousness of the Civil War, they
ranged for Booty, uncontrolably, even a great way off. And besides, in
Teviotdale it self, there were some great Families noted for Robbing and
Pillaging, either, being infected by their Neighbors; or, because they had
been customably used to drive Preys out of their Enemies Country; neither did
They only come in, but some of the neighboring English, in hopes of Booty,
joined themselves with them; and besides, they sent for 120 Musketeers from
Edinburgh, select Men, out of all the Foot Companies. The Iedburgians knew, The
Rebels attempt Iedburgh,
that They were aimed at, and therefore they sent in haste to the Regent, to
acquaint him with their Danger; they only desired a few light harnassed
Soldiers from him; In the mean time, they were not wanting to do their best.
They sent for Walter Carr of Sesford, and levied a reasonable Number of
Soldiers out of the Neighborhood, and fortified their Town, as the time would
permit: Both Parties were also informed, at the same time, that William Ruven
was come as far as An Abbey in Teviotdale,
Driburgh, with 120 Horse and Foot, Part of which he had brought with him, and
Part he raised in the neighbour-County of Merch. But the Rebels, being
confident of their Number, as being 3000 Men, marched to the Town early in the
Morning, to prevent the Coming in of their Relief; Ruven suspected, they would
do so, and therefore marched speedily after them, and made some Attempts upon
their Rear. And moreover, Walter Carr joined the Townsmen to his Soldiers, and
drew forth directly toward the Enemy. They, seeing This, that they might not
be enclosed before and behind, too, presently retreated to Places of greater
Advantage. The Robbers, or Tories, But are driven back to Hawick where they are
Routed.
who came in for Hopes of plunder, seeing the Town fortified, and the Royalists
ready for the Encounter, returned the nearest Way they could to their
Own-homes; and the Rebels, with their Vassals, and a Company of Foot, retreat
to A Town in Teviotdale.
Hawick, never thinking, that the Enemy would, in the least, attempt any thing
against them, there; and their Hopes were increased by the Winter-season, which
was sharper than ordinary by reason of a great Quantity of Snow lately fallen,
which covered all the Ground. But Ruven intended to make use of the
Opportunity, and, in the third Watch, drew out his Party, and marched so
speedily toward Hawick, that he was in a Mile of it, before the Enemy took the
Alarm; They at Hawick were so amazed, that there was no room for Counsel left,
but Foot and Horse were immediately drawn out, and following the Current of the
next River, endeavored to retreat to a Place of more Safety. But the Swiftness
of their Pursuers prevented them; the Horse knew the Country, and made a shift
to escape, but the Foot were left for a Prey; they possessed themselves of a
small Wood on a Rock, near the River, there they were surrounded by the Horse,
and not adventuring to stay till the Foot came up, they all surrendered
themselves at Mercy; But seeing that other Dangers were to be prevented, and
they could not be carried up and down in so sharp a Winter, having past their
Words to return at an appointed Day, and leaving some Hostages to that purpose,
they were sent home, without their Arms: When they were discharged, Kircade
made sleeveless Pretenses, to elude their Promises, and so hindered them from
returning, at the time appointed.

The rest of the Winter, and the following Spring, was wholly spent in light
Skirmishes, wherein Few fell, but more of the Rebels than Royalists; For the
Rebels, when they saw an Advantage, would draw out on the Hills near the City,
and, before they had scarce begun a skirmish, would retire, sometimes, again in
to the City. In the interim, frequent Embassies came from England, to reconcile
the Factions, but without effect; For the Queen of England, tho she most
favored the King's Party, yet she was willing so to make Peace, as to engage
both Parties to her; but the French were wholly inclined to the Queen's Cause,
and therefore, by large Promises, hindered Peace, and advised to continue the
War: Some Money they sent at present, not enough to do the Business, but only to
feed Hope, and a great Part of what was sent was still nibbled away by those
that brought it. In the mean time, light Skirmishes past for some Months
betwixt the Parties, but not at all contributing to the main Chance. Neither
were other Parts of the Kingdom free from Plunderings, A Barony upon the Water
of Bervy in Angus.
and Firings: Adam Gordon gathered a Party, and, entering Angus, besieged
Douglas's House of Glembervy; and, finding that himself was absent, they
miserably Burnt and Destroyed all that he left behind, which struck such a Fear
into those of Dundee, that they called in the Garrisons from the adjoining Parts
of Fife, to their Assistance; they were Enemies to the Gordonians, as having
been highly Faithful, The Dundeans Enemies to the Gordons.
continually, to the King's Cause. About this time, A Castle on a Rock, lying
in the Firth of Forth, above Abercorn.

The Regent straitens Edinburgh.

Archibald Douglas apprehended, upon Suspicion of his Tampering with the Enemy.


Blackness was betrayed by the Governor thereof to the Hamiltons. It Is a Castle
that hinders commerce betwixt Leith and Sterlin. The Regent broke down all the
Mills about Edinburgh, he also garrisoned all the Noble Men's Houses about it,
and stopped all Passages into the City; many Prisoners were taken on both sides.
Archibald Douglas, one of Morton's familiar Friends, was apprehended on
Suspicion, which was increased upon him, by the Baseness of his former Life;
and also, by some Letters found about him; yea, even after he was taken,
intercourse of Letters past betwixt him and the Enemy; which evidenced, that he
had assisted the Rebels, by Advice and Action, too; as having transmitted to
them, both Money and Arms.

THE END.
An ALPHABETICAL TABLE of the Principal Matters contained in the foregoing
HISTORY.
NB. FOR the Reader's Ease and Convenience, in the speedy finding out of the
Quotations in the following Table, (as also in the Catalogue of the Scottish
Kings, preceding this History) he is desired to take notice, That, whereas a
new Alphabet and Folio, does begin at the later Part of this History, viz. at
Book 13. and so continues to the End; all the Quotations marked between
Parentheses's, do belong to the Folio's and Pages of the said later Part only:
The rest do all belong to the former Part.

A
Page ABercorn-Castle, 22 Aberdeen, 19 Famous for Salmon-Fishing, ibid.
Aberdone, ibid. Aberbrothock, or Abrinca, ibid. Abernethy, wherein was the old
Palace of the Picts Kings, 16, 18 Abria, or Abyr, a Country or Shire, the
Etymology thereof, 19 Abridic, or Erisbach-Isle, 25 Abthane, an old Name of
Magistracy and Dignity amongst the Scots, See Thane. 187, 206 Achaius King of
Scotland, 164 He makes a defensive War against the Irish, ibid. The First of
the Scottish Kings that ever made a League with France, 165 Achnar-Isle, 26
Acho, King of Norwey, lands in Air with a great Fleet, 241 Is overthrown, and
dies of Grief, ibid. Achmode-Isles: See Aebudae* Adams Isle, 30 Adamannus, 161
Adam Huntly taken Prisoner by the Earl of Murray, (170) Ado Viennensis quoted
and corrected, 87 Adrian passes out of France into Britain, 112 His Wall, ibid.
Adrian, the Pope's Legate, in England, 433 Advatici, Who? 10 Aebudae Islands,
22 Their Number, ibid. Aelius Pertinax in Britain, 117 Aelius Spartianus
quoted, 118 Aemodae Isles, the same with Aebudae. Aeneia, 18, 170 Air, 14
Aestions spoke the British Language, 50 They inhabited Prussia, 77 Aetius, the
Britains crave Aid of him, 93 Afulla Isle, 31 Agnes Keith, Daughter of the Earl
of Merch, married to James Earl of Murray, (161) Agathyrsi painted their
Bodies, 53 Aidan, King of Scots, invested in that Dignity by Columb, 155
Ailmer, Edward of England's General, overthrows Bruce, 12, 61 Air County, 20
Alan of Lorn, keeps his Brother Prisoner, 407, 408 He is imprisoned himself,
ibid. Albanact Son of Brute, from him the Scots called Albani, 42 Albinick, the
Scots so called, 11 Albium, or Albion Isle, retains the Name of Britanny, 1
More Islands than one anciently so called, ibid. Its Etymology, 11, 12 Album,
or White, the Name of Height, as well as of Color; whence many Words are
derived, as Albingaunum, Albula, Albici, Albini, etc. 11 Alcluyth, 92 Alexander
I. King of Scots, 221, 222 Why Surnamed Acer, ibid. His Justice to a poor
Woman, 222 He is relieved by Hermites, ibid. Alexander II. 237 Enters England,
and takes Carlisle, ibid. He and his Queen visit Henry of England, 239 His Queen
dies at London, 239 He marries a French Lady, ibid. Alexander III. 240 The
Nobles combine against him, 241 He has an Interview with Henry of England, 240
Is made Knight by him, and espouses Margarite his Daughter, ibid. Assists the
King of England, 243 He and his Queen present at the Coronation of King Edward
I. He marries Joleta a French Lady, 244 He forbids Traffic by Sea, ibid. He
reduces the Train of his Nobles in Traveling, ibid. His violent and untimely
Death, ibid. His Character, ibid. Alexander, Duke of Albany, Brother of James
III. taken by the English, 407 But soon released, ibid. Committed Prisoner to
Edinburgh Castle, 421 Whence he craftily made his Escape, ibid. And coming to
the King of England, solicits him to take Arms, 425 He is recalled by the
Scots, and has the chief Government bestowed upon him, 427 He restores his
Brother James to the free Possession of the Kingdom, ibid. He falls again into
Disgrace, and dies in France, 430 Alexander, the Son of Alexander of Albany,
ibid. Alexander Boyd abuses and wounds John Kennedy, 410 His is tried for his
Life, 414 Beheaded, ibid. Alexander Bruce surrenders himself to Baliol, 287
Slain in a Fight with the English, 290 Alexander, Earl of Buchan, base-born Son
to Robert II. 307 Alexander Cambel, a Dominican, the Notoriety of his End, (53)
Alexander Cuningham slain (with King James III.) in his Army, 433 Alexander
Cuningham brings Aid to the Reformers, (129) Being taken Prisoner, he takes him
Prisoner, whose Captive he was, before, (282) Alexander Elphinston slain in
Fight, (26) Alexander Forbes marries Graecina Boyd, (6) Alexander Forbes taken
by Adam Gordon, (284) Alexander, Earl of Crawford, deserts Douglas, and submits
to the King, 388 Alexander, Earl of Glencarn, banished, (175) A General in the
King's Army, (220) Alexander Gordon beats the Earl of Crawford, 387 Alexander
Hume marches into England, (19) He brings his Squadron off safe from Flodden
Field, (25) His great Authority, (28) Accused by Hepburn, (33) Sides with the
Queen, (34) Goes for England, is reconciled to the Regent, and returns, ibid.
He raises an Insurrection, (35) His Goods confiscate, he is taken and beheaded,
(36) Alexander Hume, as a Proxy, takes the Coronation Oath for James VI. yet a
Child, (214) He is General of the King's Army, (220) Wounded, (221) Revolts to
the Queen's Party, (243) His Castle taken and rifled by the English, (256) He
is chief in the Council of the Rebels, (280) Taken Prisoner, but by the coming
in of his Friends released, (281) Alexander Haliburton wounded, and dies, (141)
Alexander Levingston made Supreme Governor, or Regent, 357 He puts the Queen
in Prison, 364 Disagrees with Creighton the Chancellor, 360, 364 The King
taken out of his Hands, 365 Reconciled to the Chancellor, 366, 368 Lays down
his Office, 372 Is brought to his Trial, and remanded to Prison, 375 Alexander,
the Son of William Levingston, taken Prisoner, (265) Alexander, the Islander,
gathers together a Band of Free-booters, 341 But is forced to submit to the
King, 342 Alexander Lindsy overcomes Alexander Ogilby, 273, 274 Alexander
Macrory, Captain of Thieves, executed, 341 Alexander, Earl of Mar, the Son of
Alexander, 348, 349 Alexander Ramsay, a brave Soldier, 299 His House the
School of War, ibid. He takes Roxburgh, 300 Wounded, and starved to Death, by
Douglas, 301 Alexander Ramsay's cheerful Forwardness in surprising Dumbarton
Castle, (265) Alexander Seton sent to Berwick, (287) Having no hopes of Relief,
he surrenders up the Town to the English, (290) Alexander Stuart, Archbishop
of St. Andrews, slain at Flodden-Fight, (29) Alexander Stuart's Encounter with
the King of Norway, 242 Allectus, a Roman, slain, 124 Alfrid, King of
Northumberland, 161 Alnwick Castle taken, 398 Alsa, or Ailze Isle, 24 Alpa, for
Alba, 11 Alps, whence so called? ibid. Alpin, King of Scots, 166 Slain by the
Picts, ibid. Altissidorus, i. e. Auxerre in France, 68 Alured, King of England,
makes Peace with the Scots, 177 Amberkeleth King of Scots, 162 Slain, ibid.
Ammianus Marcellinus quoted, 88, 89 Amiens, the Bishop thereof in Scotland, his
Cruelty, (148) St. Andrews, 18 Its University, when erected, 333 Andreae Fanum;
and Fanum Reguli, i. e. St. Andrews, why so called? 16 Andrews, a great
Astrologer, 420 Andrew, the Apostle, Tutelary of Scotland, 218 Andrew Briton,
or Breton, his Story, (18) Slain by Thomas Howard, the English Admiral, (19)
Andrew Berclay beheaded for Treason, 273 Andrew Car escapes out of Prison, (36)
He disagrees with Douglas, (38) Andrew Car revenges his Father's Death, (18)
Andrew Car beaten by the Duke of Norfolk, (120) Andrew Forman sent into England
and France by James IV. (16) He has a great many Church-Preferments, (29) Sent
again into England, (26) He is accused by Hepburn, (33) Mediates for Peace,
(35) Andrew Murray, Bruce's Sister's Son, Regent, 296 Taken by the English, 288
Ransomed, 294 His Faithfulness and Death, 297 Andrew, Earl of Rothes, banished,
175 Andrew Wood faithful to King James III. (1) Admiral of the Scots Navy, (1)
Reconciled to James IV. (2) Overcomes the English in one Sea Fight, ibid. And
also in a second, (4) Andrew Stuart, Chancellor, 413 His Freedom of Speech
against a Popish King, (173) He is wounded in Fight, (222) Angus, 18 Angus, or
Aeneas, raised an Insurrection in Galway, 230 Angusianus, King of Scotland, 126
Slain by the Picts, ibid. Annandale, so called from the River Annand, 13, 14
Anna Momorancy suspects the Power of the Guises in France, not without Cause,
(121) Anselm, the Norman, Archbishop of Canterbury, 219 Anti-Assemblies in
Scotland, two, (276, 280) Anthony Darcy slain by David Hume, (38) Apparition to
King Kenneth III. upon his Murder of Malcolm, 195 Apparition to King James IV.
dissuading him from a War with England, (20, 21) Apoceanitae, Who? 10 Apology
of the Scots Nobles to the Queen of England, (267, etc. 272, etc.) Apostasy
punished by God, 159 Arran, or Arren, Island, 24 Arborary, or Tree Isle, 25
Archibald Douglas created Regent, 288 He is slain by the English, 290
Archibald, Earl of Douglas, surnamed the Austere, his Feuds with Geo. Dunbar,
325 He dies, 326 Archibald, his Son, succeeds him, who is taken Prisoner by the
English, 329 Released, ibid. Made Duke of Turein by the Dolphin of France, 336
Slain by the English there, ibid. Archibald Douglas his great Power, 359 His
affronting Answer to the Chancellor, 362 His Death, 363 Archibald Douglas his
Oration to the Nobles against the King's Evil Counselors, 423 With the Effects
thereof, 424 Archibald Douglas his Speech to King James IV. dissuading him to
fight the English, (22) At which the King is offended, and Douglas retires in
Discontent, (23) He marries the Widow of James IV. (29) Accused by Hepburn,
(33) Takes Edinburgh, but resigns up the Government thereof, (38) Flies into
England, (34) Returns from France and England into Scotland, (46) Opposed by
his Wife, (46) Chosen one of the Governors of King and Kingdom, (47)
Overthrows Lennox, (50) Forbid to meddle with the Government, (53) Outlawed and
banished, (56) Returns after fifteen Years Exile, (75) Coming to compose
Controversies, he is detained by Hamilton, (82) His memorable Speech and Fact,
(87) He persuades the Regent to break with the Cardinal, and to side with the
Nobles, (88) He beats the English, (89) Archbishop of St. Andrews (with the
Bishop of Aberdene) imprisoned, (46) Archbishop of St. Andrews executed as
Accessory to the King and Regent's Murders, (266) Ardan Rider, or the High Isle
of the Horseman, 28 Ardiescar Isle, 25 Aremorici, or Armorici, Who? 7, 8
Argadius, Regent, 115 Being accused, he repents, and supplicates for Pardon,
ibid. Whereupon, he is continued in his Government, ibid. And prevails against
the Islanders, 116 Argyle Country, 17 Argyle, Earl, joins with the Reformers,
(131) Arren, see Arran. Arrii painted their Bodies, 53 Arrogance, the usual
Companion of Power, 412 Arthur Uterson's begotten in Adultery, King of the
Britains, 150 His Character, 154 He overcomes the Saxons, and takes London and
York from them, ibid. He is slain, 151, 152 Arthur, the Son of Henry VIII. of
England, marries Katherine the Infanta of Spain, (11, 14) Arthur Forbes slain,
(284) Arve^ni, Who? 46 Asclepiodotus, a Roman Lieutenant General, kills
Allectus in Britain, 124 Askerme Isle, 29 Assassination of King Henry odious to
all Nations, (192) Assassins of King Henry labor to impute the Parricide to
Murray and Morton, (191) Astrological Predictions, Courtiers much addicted to
them, 418 Asyle Isle. See Flavannae, 30 Athelstan, King of England, fights the
Picts, 165 He is slain at a Place, since called Athelstan's Ford, 165
Athelstan, base Son of Edward King of England, overcomes the Danes and Scots in
Battle, 179, 180 Recovers Dunbritton from the Scots, ibid. Athircus, or
Athirco, King of Scotland, 119 He reigns vitiously, and kills himself, 120
Athol, a fruitful Country, 18 It abounds with Witches, 357 Atrebates, Who? 56
Aven, 15 Aven and Avon, What they signify? 70 Avon Laggan, 26 Avona Isle, its
Etymology, 25 Auresius Ambrosius his Original, 146, 147 Aureliacum (i. e.)
Orilhach, 60 Austin, a Monk, comes into England, and calls himself Archbishop
of all Britain, 157 He promotes Superstition rather than true Religion, ibid.
Authority, got by good Arts, is lost by bad, (208) Avus, or Aw, a Loch or
River, 17 Auxerre; see Altissidorus.
B
BACA Isle, 27 Badenach County, 19 Balta Isle, 37 Baliol (Edward) lands in
Scotland, 285 Overthrows Seton and the Regent, ibid. Declared King, 286 Worsted
in Scotland, 287 Edward of England espouses his Cause, 288 Bandying betwixt him
and the Nobles, 291, 292 Ball, a Priest, stirs up the Commons of England to an
Insurrection, 309 Bancho, a Scots General, 208 Overthrows the Danes, 210 Slain
by Mackbeth, 211 Baptism celebrated but once a Year, and sometimes by Parents
themselves, 30 Bards, Who? 39, 57 They committed nothing to writing, 35 Barnera
Island, 29, 30 Barodunum, or Dunbar, whence so called, 170 Baronia, (i. e.)
Renfrew, 14 Barra Isle, 29 Bas-Alpin, the Place where Alpin was slain, 167
Bassianus, a Roman General in Britain, 124 Slain there by Allectus, ibid.
Bassinets, or Monk-Fishes, ominous, 175 Batavians, or Hollanders, their Fleet
returning from Dantzick, spoiled by Alexander Earl of Mar, 349 Beath Island,
25 Beatrix, leaving her Husband James Douglas, asks Pardon of the King, 391 She
marries John Earl of Athol, the King's Natural Brother, ibid. Bedford, the Earl
thereof, King Henry's General in France, carries James, of Scotland, along with
him thither, 336 Bid quoted, 91, 92, 93 Beds made of Heath, 23 Bei, what it
signifies, 22 Belhac Isles, 25 Bellach Isles, 25 Belus, King of the Orcades,
kills himself, 106 Bergh, in German, signifies High, 12 Bergion, the Name of a
Giant, 11 Berlings, What? 32 Bernera, an Island, 25 The Great and the Small,
29, 30 Berth, a great Part of it destroyed by an Inundation, 236 Berton for
Breton, 5 Berwick taken from the English by Robert Bruce, 269 Besieged by
Edward of England, 370 Rendered to the English, 397 Its Castle taken by Ramsay,
but regained by Percy, 308 Bethic Isle, 26 Betubium, or Dungisby Head, a
Promontory, 21 Bigga Isle, 37 Bishops of England not true to Maud their Queen,
224 Bishops in Scotland holy Monks, 165 Chosen heretofore by their Canons, 417
Anciently not Diocesans, 171 Bishop of Dunblane sent into France to excuse the
Queen's Marriage with Bothwel, ( 200, etc.) He is chouzed in his Embassy, (209)
Bishoprics, six in Scotland, 218 Four others added to them and endowed, 223
Bishop of Caithness had his Eyes and Tongue plucked out, 235 Another burnt, 236
Bishop of Caledonia, or Dunkel, commanded, when the English Navy was worsted in
the Forth, 270 Whereupon called the King's Bishop, ibid. Bishop of Dunkel
commended, (40) Bishop of Durham comes too late to assist Percy, 317, 319 His
Army terrified with the Noise of Horses, 320 Bishop of St. David's sent by the
English King to the Scots, (63) Bishop of the Orcades prefers Court-Favour
before Truth, (199) Bizets, a Family in Ireland, anciently from Scotland, 240
Blackmoney, What? 425 Blackness betrayed to the Hamiltons, (286) Blandium, an
old Drink amongst the Scots, 23 Blair of Athol, 18 Blood rained for seven days
over all Britain, 261 Also Milk, etc. turned into Blood, ibid. Bogia, or
Strabogy, 140 Boadicea; see Voadicea. Bodotria, (i. e.) the Scottish Sea, 100
Boids creep into Favor at Court, 409 Their Faction against the Kennedies, 410
They carry the King to Edinburgh, and strengthen themselves by getting the
King's Pardon, 411 Their Greatness occasions their Ruin, 412 Boin Country, 20
Bote, or Boot, Isle, 24 Bracara, or Braga, 47 Braid Albin, 17 Brasa Isle, 37
Brecantia, a Town, 65 Bredius overthrown by Ederus, 106 Brendinus slain in
Battle, 156 Brennus's, Two, 79 Brettish Isles, 4 Bria, Brica, Briga, signify a
City, with the Names of several Cities so ending, 63, 64, 65 Bridi Isle, 26
Brien-Loch, 31 Brigantes and Brigiani, 65 Brigantium, ibid. Brigidan Isle, 26
Brigids, or Brides, Church burnt, 408 Britanny, its Description, 1, etc.
Several Islands anciently so called, ibid. Mentioned by Aristotle and
Lucretius, 3 It has diverse Acceptations, 8 Its Original and Description out of
Caesar, Tacitus, etc. 81, 82 Inhabited by three Nations, 70, 71 Several Limits
of it anciently, 180 Britains, their fabulous Original, 41 They praised God in
five Tongues, 33 Britains and Gauls of one Religion, 56 They painted their
Bodies, 76 Made no difference of Sex in Government, 85 Vexed by the Scots and
Picts, 139 They ask Aid of the Romans, 93, 135, 136 Make Peace with Scots and
Picts, 139 Enter Scotland, 100 Foment Divisions betwixt Scots and Picts, 95
Overthrown by Scots and Picts, 142 Their woeful Complaints to Aetius, 93, 143
Have hard Conditions of Peace imposed upon them, 141 What sort of Weapons they
used in War, 50 They were five hundred Years under the Roman Government, 70
Overthrown by Scots and Picts, 156 Subdued by the Saxons, 70 Revolt from the
Romans, and after twelve Years return to their Obedience, 124 Britton and
Britain, all one, 9 Their Origin, 50 Britto, with a double t, 5 First mentioned
by Martial, 9 Brix, a diminutive Word in Scotch, Brixac, 60 Bruce and Cumins
formally agree, 259 Like to suffer for Treason in England, but escapes by
shooing his Horse backward, 260 Kills Cumins for betraying of him, ibid. Bruce
(David) sent for France, 286 Bruce (Edward) drives the English out of Ulster in
Ireland, 270 He is afterward overthrown there by the English, ibid. Bruce
(Robert) the Kingdom confirmed to him, 269 He is desired to accept the Crown of
Ireland also, ibid. He calls for the Deeds of Men's Lands, 271 And receives an
Affront thereupon, ibid. A Conspiracy discovered against him, ibid. He agrees
with Baliol, then in France, 274 His Army enters England, 275 His last Will and
Testament, 279 His three Counsels to his Nobles, ibid. He would have his Heart
buried at Jerusalem, 280 His Death and Praise, 281 Brudeus, King of the Picts,
156 Brudus, King of the Picts, slain, 166, 167 Brutus, his Story, 41 to 44
Buchan, 19 Its Etymology, 139 Buchan, the Earl thereof made Lord High-Constable
of France, 335 Bull's Head put upon a Man's, heretofore a sign of Death in
Scotland, 370 Burgundus from Burgus, 63 Bullock, an English Man, turns to the
Scots, 298 Put to Death, 301 Burgh, a Danish Name, 201 Burra Isle, 35, 36, 37
Buthroti, Who? 46 Buiia Isles, great and small, 29, 30, 70
C
CAdvallus made Vice-King, 105 He dies of Grief, 106 Caithness, 21, 133
Caithness Men cruel against their Bishop, and are punished for it, 239 Calaman
Isle, 26 Calden in Scotch is an Hasel, 56 Caledonia, a Town, (i. e.) Dunkel, 18
Caledones, Who? ibid. Caledonian Woods, whence so called? 56 Caledonians, Picts
and Scots, sometimes all called Britains, 74 Calen Cambel, with two others,
chosen Governor of the King and Kingdom, (47) He is sent against the
Douglasses, (56) Calfa Isle, 27 Calthrops, politic Engines in War, what? 266
Camber, Son of Brute, 42 Cambri, ibid. Why so called, 61 Camus, the Dane, slain
by the Scots, 202 Ca^a Isle, 26, 28 Cantire Promontory, 17 Canutus, a Danish
General in Scotland, 202 Makes Peace with the Scots, 203 Caprary, or Goat,
Isle, 25 Cara Isle, 25 Carail Town, 18 Purged from Monuments of Idolatry, (131)
Caratacus, King of Scotland, 107 The Orcades not subdued by Claudius Caesar in
his Time, 108 Carausius, a Roman, composes the Differences betwixt Scots and
Picts, 124 He seizes on Britain for himself, ibid. Carausius, Brother of King
Findocus, causes him to be slain, 122 Cardorus unjustly put to death by
Dardanus, 188 Carick, 14 Carniburgh's, two Islands, 27 Carron-water, 15 Carron,
why surnamed Schrimger, 218 Cave, an unusual one, turning Water into Stone, 20
Cassivelannus his Town, (i. e.) Verulam, taken by Caesar, 82 Cecily, Edward of
England's Daughter, promised in Marriage to the Son of James III. 422 The
intended Marriage nulled, and the Dowry repaid, 427 Celestine, Pope, sends
Palladius into Scotland, 145 Cells, so the ancient Scots called their Temples,
125 Celts, Who? 58 Celtiberi, so called from the Celts and Iberians, 49
Celuinus, or Cialine, King of the East Saxons, 156 Slain by the Scots, 157
Charles, the Dolphin of France, seeks Aid of the Scots, 334 Charles of Burgundy
slain at Nants, 420 He lays the Foundation of Tyranny in his Country, 434
Charles the Fifth sends to Scotland, to join in Affinity with them, (63) Why
his Mother was committed to perpetual Imprisonment, (269) Charles Guise
Cardinal, Guarantee for the Kingdom of Scotland. (114) Charn Islands, 27
Chourna Isle, ibid. Childeric, a Saxon Commander, wounded, 152 Christian
Religion promoted in Scotland, 125 Christ's Birthday profaned, 151 Christians
join in League against the Danes, 176 Christiern of Denmark, with all his
Male-Stock, cast out of the Kingdom, (269) Chualsa Isle, 73 Cicero quoted about
Britain, 86 Church, its woeful State, 417 Cimbri, so the French and Germans call
Thieves, 77, 78 Cities Names in Bria, Brica, Briga, 63, 64, 65 In Dunum, 65,
66, 67 In Durum, 68 In Magus, 69 Clacman Prefecture, or Stewarty, 18 Clarence,
Duke of it slain in France by the Scots, 335 Clarshacks, What? 24 Claudian, a
Verse in him corrected by Joseph Scaliger, 76 Cleirach Isle, 31 Cloich Isle, 25
Clydsdale, 13, 14 Cluyth, 92 Cnapdale, 17 Cockburn Forest, or Path, 13
Cockrane, one of King James the IIId's Evil Counselors, put to Death, 425
Coemeteries for the Kings of three Nations, 27 Coilus, King of the Britains,
slain by the Scots, 96 Colca, a rare kind of Bird, 32 Colgernus, a Saxon
Commander, killed, 152 Coll Isle, 27 Collonsa Isle, 26 Colman, an holy Bishop,
160 Columb, the Saint, his Monastery, 26 His great Authority, 155 He tells of a
Victory at a very great distance, 155, 156 His Death, 157 Columb Isle* see
Icolumbkill, Colvansa Isle, 27 Colurn, (i. e.) Chourna, or Hasel Isle, 26 Comes
Stabuli, Who? 247 Commodus, the Emperor, in Britain, 117 Common^lty usually
comply with the Humor of their Prince, 188 Affect Innovations, 413 Competitors
for the Crown of Scotland, with their several Pretensions, 248 The Controversy
not decided in Scotland, but referred to Edward of England, ibid. The Case, as
stated by Edward, and propounded to Lawyers, 249 Bruce refuses the Kingdom
offered him on ignoble Terms, 250 Edward decides for Baliol, ibid. Competitors
for the Regency, (283) Conanus elected Viceroy, 101 Conanus persuades to
Peace, but is seditiously slain by the Britains his Countrymen, 141 Conarus,
King of Scotland, joins in a Conspiracy against his Father, 113 He demands
large Subsidies, but is denied, 114 He wars against the Britains, 113 Ends his
Life in Prison, 115 Confidence sometimes praised for Constancy, 358 Congal I.
King of Scotland, 147 Congal II. enriches Priests, 159 Congal III. 166
Conscience guilty gives no Rest, 195 Constantine Chlorus in Britain, 124 Chosen
General by the Brittons, 125 Made their King, 143 Slain by Vortigern, ibid.
Constantine, the Emperor, born, 124 Constantine I. King of Scots, 145 Reigns
wickedly, ibid. His violent Death, 146 Constantine II. 174 Renews public
Discipline, ibid. Slain by the Picts, 175 Constantine III. 179 Makes a League
with the Danes, ibid. Invades the Subjects Right, ibid. Abjures the Kingly
Office, 172 And retires into a Monastery, 180 Constantine IV. surnamed Calvus,
196 Canvasses for the Crown, ibid. Inveighs against the Law of Kenneth, about
Hereditary Succession, 197 (...), the Decree of its Council seasonable for
Perjured Persons, (77) Controversy between the Baliols and the Bruces
concerning the Crown of Scotland, 245, etc. Convention of the Nobles to choose
a Regent after Murray's Death, (251) Cony Isle, 25, 30 See Sigrama. Corbred I.
King of Scots, 108 Corbred II. surnamed Galdus, 109 He first fought with the
Romans, ibid. And beat them out of Caledonia, 111 Cornavii, 22 They are in
Scotland and England too, 60 Cornish rise against Henry VII. of Enggland, (10,
11) Cornovallia, or Cornuvallia, whence derived? 60 Corshera Isle, 26 Coval, 17
Covihaslop; see Round Isle. Council of Constance send Ambassadors to Scotland,
334 They deny Faith to be kept with those they call Heretics, (77) Count of
Rothes committed to Prison, (92) Coupins-oy, 36 Courtesy to Prisoners, 319
Courts many times prefer Honor before Honesty, 333 Cowper, a Town, 18
Cracoviac; see Kirkwal. Craford (Earl of it) takes part with the Douglasses,
384 But afterward deserts them, 389 And is received into Pavour by the King,
ibid. Crackles, (i. e.) little jangling Bells, terrify Horses, 307
Crathilinthus King of Scots, 123 Much addicted to hunting, 124 Crathilinthus
kills his Grandfather, 192 He rises in Arms, but is suppressed, 193 Cree River,
14 Cressingham, an English General, slain by the Scots, 255 Creighton sent
Ambassador into France, 376 Croke, the French Ambassador, dislikes the Queen's
Marriage with Bothwel, (199) He mediates a Peace, (208, 209) Crowling Isle, 28
Cruelty, an Example thereof, 329 Culbrenin Isle, 25 Culdees, a kind of Monks,
18, 125 Worshippers of God. 18 Culen, King of Scots, an incestuous Person, 184,
185 He is slain by a Strumpet, 187 Cull, 196 Culross, whence so called? 170
Cumbra Isles, the greater and the lesser, 25 Cumbri and Cumri, 75 Cumins, their
Faction powerful, 240 Cumins overthrows Gilespy, 239 Cumins (John) overthrown
by Bruce, 264 Cumins (William) poisoned by his Wife, 241 Cuningham, 14
Cuningham's overcome by the Hamiltons, (85) Cup of St. Magnus; see Magnus.
Curia, a Parish Church, 26 Curry, a Mercha^t, an Instrument in surprising
Edinburgh ^^stle, 299 Cutberectus, 161
D
DAal, what it signifies in Old Scottish, 100 Dalkeith, 13 Dalreudini, why the
Scots so called? 100 Danes enter England, 71 Invade Scotland, 174 Fight a
bloody Battle with the English, 178 Turn Christians, ibid. Land in Scotland,
182 Are overthrown, ibid. Danish Fleet lands again in Scotland, 190 Stupefied
by an inebriating Drink, and overcome by the Scots, 209 Swear never to return
to invade Scotland any more, 210 Dangers make Men sagacious, 26 Dardanus, King
of Scots, 108 His cruel Reign, and violent Death, ibid. David I. King of Scots,
212 Profuse toward Monasteries, 223 Maintains the Cause of Maud, his
Kinswoman, against Stephen of England, 224 Accuses him of Perjury, ibid. Makes
two Accords with Stephen, 225, 226 Henry, Heir of England, made Knight by him,
226 Loses his hopeful Son, yet comforts himself and his Nobles, in a Christian
Discourse thereupon, 226 He erects new Bishoprics, 223 His extraordinary
Character for Piety and Virtue, 227 David, King William's Brother, accompanies
Richard, of England, to the Holy War, 235 He is shipwrack'd, and taken
Prisoner, yet at last returns, ibid. David II. anointed King of Scotland, 282
Sent into France, when he was a Child, 286 Returns to Scotland, 300 Taken
Prisoner in a Fight by the English, 302 Ransomed, 304 His Death and Character,
305, 306 David Cumins appointed Ruler over Scotland by the English, 293 He and
Douglas disagree, 294 Forced to take an Oath to Bruce, ibid. Makes large
Promises to Edward of Enggland, 295 Follows the good Success of the English,
ibid. Left by the English King as Regent of Scotland, where his Army is
overthrown, and he himself slain, 296 David, the Son of Robert III* imprisoned,
and starved to Death by his Uncle, who was his Governor, 328, 329 David Beton,
the Cardinal, (73) Chosen Regent by a pretended Will, but, the Fraud being
discovered, he is displaced and imprisoned, (75) He endeavors to avert the
imminent Ruin of Popery, (76) He chouzes Lennox with vain Hopes of marrying the
Queen, (80) He grieves to be deprived of a rich Morsel, which he had swallowed
in his Hopes, (81) He is sharply reproved by Montgomery, (91) His Cruelty
against Protestants, (93) He espouses his Daughter to the Earl of Craford's
Son, (97) He is slain in his Castle, with the manner thereof, (98) His foul
Character, (99) David Douglas, with his Brother William, beheaded* 370 David
Hamilton defends the Cause of the Gospel, (93) David Panater, or Painter,
Bishop of Ross, made an Abbat by the King of France, (113) David Rize, a
Musician, his Story, (171) He persuades the Queen to cut off the Scottish
Nobility, (177) His Court-Preferments, Familiarity with the Queen of Scots,
violent Death and Burial, (179 to 183) David Spence slain, (282) David
Straiton, or Straton, burnt for a Lutheran, (63) Death better than a miserable
Life, (12) Dee, a River in England, 13 Three of that Name in Scotland, 14, 70
Deidonum, i. e. Dundee, 18 Deiri, Who? 159 Delators, or Informers, appointed by
Evenus, 13 Denmark, the King thereof bargains with the Ambassador of Scotland
to quit his Right to the Islands about Scotland, 413 Derivative Words show the
Affinity of a Language, 6^ Dessius, General of the French Forces in Scotland,
(106) Called home by the King of France, (110) Descants on the Law about
Hereditary Succession of the Crown, 205 Descants on over-severe Executions of
Criminals, 358 Deucaledonian Sea, What? 21 Diana's Oracle counterfeited by a
Monk, 44, 45 Dicaledones, rather to be read Duncaledones, in Marcellinus, 56
Dioclesian, a supposed King of Syria, 41 Dionethus gives himself forth to be
King of the Brittons, 136 Dion quoted concerning Britain, 90, 91, 118 Dona
River, 20 Donachs, or Duncans, Bay, 22 Donald I. King of Scots, 117 He first
received the Christian Religion, ibid. Donald II. 122 Overthrown by Donald the
Islander, and dies, ibid. Donald, Brother of Malcolm III. yields up the
Possession of the Islands to the King of Norwey, 23 Donald III. 123 Reigns
Tyrannically, and is slain by Crathilinthus, ibid. Donald IV. (or Donebald)
sends Christian Doctors into England, and interprets pious Sermons to the
People, himself, 159 Donald V. Brother of Kenneth, 172 Reigns licentiously, and
is put in Prison, 173 Donald VI. Son of Constantine II. 178 Donald VII. or
Duncan, 204 Donald, Murderer of King Duffus, taken and executed, 185 Donald
Bane calls himself King of the Aebudae, 164 He is slain, ibid. Donald VIII. or
Banus, 220 He promises the Islands to Magnus, King of Norwey, ibid. Donald of
Athol, 154 Donald Baloc overthrows Alexander, and Alan, Stuarts, 343 He is
taken in Ireland, and his Head is sent to the King, 344 Donald, Lord of the
Aebudae, rises in Arms, 333 With the Earl of Ross and Douglas, he fig^^s with
the King's Forces, ibid. He is left by his Wife, 391 Sends Agents to make his
Peace with the King, 392 After the King's Death, he plays Rex again, 408 He
takes the Earl of Athol Prisoner, and burns St. Bride's Church, ibid. He is
shipwrack'd, and falls distracted, 409 Donald Monro commended, 22 He traveled
over the Islands of Scotland, and described them, 31 Dongal, King of Scots, 168
He is drowned, ibid. Dongard, King of Scots, 144 Opposes the Pelagian Heresy,
145 Dornadilla, King of Scots, 98 Dorstologus slain, 166 Dorus flies for fear
of Nathalocus, 120 Dovallus kills King Nothatus, 99 He himself is slain in
Battle, 100 Douglas River, 14 Douglas Dale, 140 Douglas made Duke of Turein,
336 Douglas slain by the Moors, 280 Douglas (William) takes Dundalk in Ireland,
314 Douglas (William) pardoned, 301 Douglas breaks in upon the English Army,
278 Douglasses their Power intolerable, 372, 377 Their Power broken, (53)
Drinach Isle, 25 Drix, 60 Druides, Who? 56 Drumalbin, 17 Drummilaw Sands, 209
Drunkenness punished with Death, 174 Druskins, King of the Picts, and all his
Nobility, slain, 169 Drury intercedes for Peace between the Parties in
Scotland, (278) Duffa, or Dow, Isle, 25 Duffus, King of Scots, 181 Witchcraft
practiced upon his Body, 183 He is slain, 184 Dukes, when the Name first
brought into Scotland, 325 Duke of York overthrown and slain by the Queen of
England, 396 Dulcitius in Britain, 89 Dunacus, and Domnacus, 68 Dunbar, whence
so called? 13, 14 Its Siege raised, 297 Fortified by Alexander against the
King, but deserted by him, 421 Again possessed by him, and delivered to the
English, 427 Retaken by the Scots, 429 Dunbritton, 17 The Castle surrendered to
Robert Bruce, 268 Twice surprised, 371 Taken by the Queen, (164) Retaken by the
Regent by Surprise, with the Manner, how? (260) Its Situation, and why so
called? (262,) (263) Duncan, King of Scots, 229 He is slain. ibid. Duncan, Earl
of Mar, Regent, 284 Slain in Battle, 285 Duncan Stuart, rising in Arms, is
suppressed, 323 Duncaledon, rather than Deucaledon, to be read in Ptolemy, 56
Dunchonel Isle, 25 Dundee, 18 Dundeans, Enemies to the Gordons, (286) Dunedin,
by the ancient Scots, now Edinburgh, 171 Dungisby Head, 22 See Betubium. Duni
pacis, what? 15, 119 Dunkelden, 18 Duno, or Dunum, Words so beginning or ending
are the Names of Places, 65, 66, 67 Dunoter, 19 Dunsinnan Hill and Castle, 212
Dunstafnage, 20 Duodecemvirate in Scotland, 253 Dur, the Names of some Places
derived therefrom, 68 Durstus, King of Scots, 102 He invites the Nobility to a
Supper, and there treacherously kills them, ibid. He is slain, 103 Durstus made
King of the Picts, 132 Slain in Battle, 137
E
EAnfrid, 159 Easdale Isle, 25 Easter Day, a Dispute about it raised by Austin
the Monk, 157 Eboracum, i. e. York, whence derived, 60 Ecclesiastics their
Power over Kings, 237 Their Avarice, 238, 243 They are reformed by Constantine
II. are superstit^ous, 195 Eder preserved by his Nurse, 104 Educated by
Cadvallus, 105 Created King of Scots, 106 Edgar, then in Scotland, demanded by
William the Norman, 216 Returns to England, 217 Made King of the S^ots, 221
Builds Coldingham Abbey, ibid. Edifice, a strange one, 15 Edinburgh, (or Edinum)
whence so called, 171 Its several Names, 175 How seated, (276) A Convention
held at one End, when the Enemy had the Castle at the other, ibid. Edinburghers
would not admit the English Exiles, nor Hamilton, to enter their City, (252)
Edmund, King of England, his Story, 215 He gives Cumberland and Westmoreland to
Malcolm, King of Scots, 181 Edward I. King of England, takes away all Scottish
Monuments, 119 Endeavors to bring Scotland under his Dominion, 249 Enters
Scotland with a great Army, 264, 265 Overcomes the Scots, and forces them to
swear ^ealty to him, 259 Appoints Magistrates all over Scotland, ibid. Desires
Margarite of Norwey, Heiress of Scotland, a Wife for his Son, but she dies
before her Marriage, 245 Edward II. succeeding his Father in the Kingdom of
England, 263 Besieges Berwick, makes a Truce with the Scots, and retreats, 270,
271 Worsted in Scotland, 272 Is cast into Prison by his Wife and his Son, and
there put to a cruel Death, 274 Edward III. King of England, makes Peace with
the Scots, 300 Baliol tak^^ into his Protection, 288 H^s Cruelty to Alexander
Seton's Children, 289 (...) Berwick, 288 Has three Kings his Prisoners at
once, 304 He overthrows the Scots, 290 Takes Berwick, 290 Enters Scotland once
or twice, but retreats again, 293, 296 His Death, 308 Edward, Duke of York,
calls himself King of England, 396 Edward IV. of England, makes Peace with the
Scots, 416 He dies, 428 He laid the Foundation of Tyranny, 434 Edward VI. of
England, an hopeful Prince, his Death, (114) Edward Bruce called to be King in
Ireland, 269 Assists his Brother Robert, 265 Edward Baliol with a numerous
Fleet in the Bay of Forth, 284 He overcomes the Scots, 285 Enters on the
Kingdom, 286 Swears Fealty to the King of England, 288 His supposititious Son,
(7) Education at Court, what? (160) Egfrid, King of Northumberland, slain by
the Picts, 161 Edwyn, of Northumberland, 159 Eels taken in abundance, 14 Egg
Isle, See Rum. 28 Eglish, or Church Isle, 25 Eglisa, or Eglish-oy Isle, 36
Elbeouf, Marquess of it, stays with the Queen in Scotland, (154) Elgin, a Town,
20 Eliot's Authority disallowed, 4 Elizabeth, Queen of England, sends Aid to
the Reformers of Religion in Scotland, (141, 144) Her grave Oration to the
Ambassador of the Queen of Scots, ( 155, 156, etc.) She, in part, adopts the
Cause of the Queen of Scots, (222) Her Letters to the Regent to defer the
Convention of the Estates, ibid. Her other Letters to him, which break off the
Course of his Victories, (223) She is informed by the Regent, that the Cause of
their Queen's deposing, was the Murder of her Husband, (227, 228) She sends
Letters to the Nobles of Scotland to receive their Queen again, (239, etc.)
Their Answer to her Letters, (241) Howard's Conspiracy against her detected,
(244) She demands the English Fugitives to be given up to her by the Scots,
(284) She is made Arbiter between the Parties in Scotland, (260) Some of her
Council would have King James sent into England, (275) Which the Scots refuse
to do, (280) She favors the King's Cause most, yet is (politickly) slow in her
Aid, (279, 286) Ella, an English King, 172 Ambassadors from France desire the
Scots to make War upon England, (119) Ambassadors from France and England to
Scotland, 352 England divided by four Rivers, 13 The King thereof the Pope's
Feudatary, 237 Its King makes Peace, or Truce, with the Scots, 249, 250 Enecus,
General of the Danes, 200 Slain by the Scots, 201 Enemies not to be
undervalued, 174, 291 Their sudden Liberality to be suspected, (43) English,
how said to rule over all Britain, 180 Incommoded in their March in Scotland,
276 Their Army worsted, 270 Quit their Claim to any Part of Scotland, 234
Regain a great Part of Scotland, 303 Drawn into an Ambush, 304 Their Army of
60000 Men, 274 Driven out of all Scotland, except Berwick, 300 English
Soldiers less rapacious than the French, 313 Worsted in Scotland, 391
Overthrown by the Scots at Sea, 379 Ask Aid of the Scots against their own
King, 392 English, their Horses frightened in Scotland, (42) Make War on
Scotland, (59) Enter Scotland again, (86) Are worsted, (89) Again enter, (100)
And give the Regent a great Overthrow, (104) Enter Scotland again, (105) And
prevail against James Douglas, (106) English Fleet attempts the Orcades, (123)
English called Deliverers of Scotland, (152) Send Aid to the Reformers in
Scotland, (143) Assist the Vindicators of King and Regent's Murderers against
the Queen's Faction, (253, etc. 256, 257) Their Queen Elizabeth designed to be
destroyed, and the King of Scots, too, (280) Enner, what it signifies, 106
Ennerlute, or Ennerlochy, a Mart-Town, 20 Ennerness, a Mart-Town, 106 Eorsa
Isle, 27 Eoy Isle, 29 Ericaean, or Heath Isle, 26 Erisbach Isle; see Abridic.
Eriscaia, or Erisay, Isle, 30 Erin Isle, ibid. Erra Isle, 26 Esk River, 13
South and North, 19 Thence the Country called Eskdale, 13 Etfin, King of Scots,
163 Ethelfrid, King of Northumberland, 156 Routs the Scots, 157 Marches into
Galway, ibid. Ethodius I. King of Scots, makes Laws about Hunting, 112
Overcomes the Islanders, ibid. Slain by Night in his Bedchamber, by his Harper,
ibid. Ethodius II. rules by his Deputies, 119 Is slain, ibid. Ethus, King of
Scots, 171 Eu Island, 31 Eubonia, or Man, Isle, 24 Evenus I. King of Scots, 103
Aids the Picts against the Brittons, ibid. The first that required an Oath of
Allegiance of his Subjects* ibid. First settles Itinerary Judges in Scotland,
ibid. Evenus II. 105 Overthrows the Orkney Men, 106 Evenus III. noted for
Obscenity, 107 He makes a Law for Polygamy, ibid. Is slain, ibid. Eugenius I.
or Evenus, King of Scots, 127 Slain by the Romans, 128 Evenus, an Islander, put
to Death, 174 Eugenius II. 138 His Character, 144 In his time the Romans leave
Britain, ibid. Eugenius III. Brother of Congal, King of Scots, 154 Assists
against the Saxons, ibid. Eugenius IV. Brother of Aidanus, 158 Brought up under
Columb, ibid. He harbors the fugitive Saxons, ibid. Eugenius V. 161 Eugenius
VI. ibid. Learned in Theology, ibid. In his Time it rained Blood, ibid.
Eugenius VII. causes the memorable Facts of Kings to be recorded, 162 He is
suspected for the Murder of his Queen, but causlesly, ibid. Eugenius VIII.
slain in an Assembly of the Nobles, 163 Evonia Castle, 20 Eusdale County so
called from the River Ewes, 13, 140 Examples of Princes more influential on
Subjects than their Laws, 155 Exchequer Officers defend sometimes most unjust
Laws, 113 Exchequer Profits, sometimes Disprofits, 35 Excommunication, unjustly
pronounced, affects not the Excommunicated, 272 Exile more tolerable than
Servitude, 132
F
FAbilla, or Fable, Isle, 30 Fair, or Fara, Isle, 36 Faith, or Fidelity,
toward wicked Persons unsteadfast, 105, 107 Sacred among Soldiers, 319, 330
Not to be kept with Heretics, as Papists say, (130) Falamgal Isle; see
Finlagan, Falcons, in the Isle of Muick, 28 Famine breaks stout Spirits, 140
Famine and Pestilence in Scotland, 388 Fara Isle, 29 Farrow-head, 21 Faunus's
Oracle, 43 Fenella commands Kenneth to be slain, 169 Feraia Isle, 29 Ferchard
I. King of Scots, 158 Endeavors to introduce Tyranny, ibid. Maliciously
nourishes Factions amongst his Nobles, and is guilty of the Pelagian Heresy,
159 He kills himself, ibid. Ferchard II. wickedly kills his Wife, and abuses his
Daughters, 160 He is excommunicated, reproved by Coleman, and repouts at his
Death, ibid. Feredeth, King of the Picts, 166 Ferelay Island, 30 Fergus I. King
of Scots, sent for out of Ireland, 95 The Kingdom settled on him by Common
Consent, 96 Drowned at Carickfergus in Ireland, 97 Came first into Albium, when
Alexander the Great took Babylon, ibid. Fergus II. whilst a Child, flies by
Sea, with his Parents, into Scandia, is recalled from thence, and made King,
133, 134 He is slain in Fight, 137 His Praise, with a Comparison between him
and Fergus I. ibid. He is deservedly called, The second Founder of the Scottish
Kingdom, ibid. Fergus III. poisoned by his Wife for his Adulteries, 163 She
owns the Fact, and kills her self, 164 Fergus of Galway's Children disagree
after his Death, 246 Feritharis, King of Scots, 97 An old Law concerning
Succession to the Crown, made in his Time, ibid. Ferlegus, Son of Fergus,
conspires against his Uncle, for which he is condemned, 97, 98 Fethelmach, King
of Scots, 127 Fiddler, or Harper, One kills King Ethodius I. 116 Another assists
to destroy Fethelmach, 127 Fifteen Judges appointed in Scotland, but soon
disused, (59) Fife County, 18 So called from Fifus, 170 Fights memorable
between Scots and English, 355 At Bannock, 267 At Otterborn, 317, 318, 319 Fish
shapeless, 29 A strange sort, ibid. Fincormachus, King of Scots, 125 Findochus,
King of Scots, 121 Overcomes Donald, ibid. Is slain by means of his Brother
Caransius, 122 Finelaw, or Finlaw, Bishop, Author of ill Counsels, 339 Finlagan
Isle, 26 Finnanus, King of Scots, 102 Fiole Isle, 25 Flada Isle, 24, 28, 29, 30
Flanders, Artificers sent for from thence into Scotland, 347 Flata Island, 36
Flattery, the Pest of great Families, 363, 380 Flavanae Isles, 30 Fordun, 19
Forestia, ibid. Forth, or Scottish Sea, 13 Fortune, an Example of its
Inconstancy, 375 Fotlar Isle, 37 Francs, Who? 46 Francis I. King of France, by
the help of the King of England, restored to liberty out of the Hands of the
Spaniards, (62) He sends the Earl of Lennox into Scotland, (78) Is alienated
from Lennox, (83) Sends Montgomery into Scotland, (91) Francis II. of France,
sends La'bross into Scotland, (136) He is influenced by, and is under the Power
of, the Guises, (150) His Death, ibid. Francis, Duke of Guise, Curator of the
Kingdom of Scotland, (114) Appointed General of the Popish Faction, (153, 174)
Franciscans, or begging Friars, their Wealth, (128) France, its miserable
State, (151) Its King Francis promises to aid the Scots of the Queen's Faction,
(254) And the Scots Rebels, (279, 280) Upon what Grounds he did it, ibid.
Frazer's Family almost extinct, (89) Frederethu^ slain, 166 Friend betrays
Friend, 332 Their Injuries the most grievous, 314 Our Father's Friends not to
be neglected, 101 Friendship with Princes far off, sometimes safer than with
Those nearer home, (44) French, Gauls, Fran^s, their Original, 46 They receive
Characters of Letters from the Massilian Greeks, 38 Their Communion with the
Brittons, 61 When French and Scots Alliance first began, 165 They send Aid to
the Scots, (90, 106) Their Soldiers very licentious, 313 Their Army leaves
Scotland, 314 Their unjust Demand, 312 What Good the Scots got by their
Alliance, 322 Their King distracted, 334 They ask Aid of the Scots, ibid. They
renew their League with the Scots, 240, 251, 273 French and Scots Soldiers
mutiny, (109) Their Auxiliaries in Scotland cannot forbear their wonted
Plundering, (314) They hinder an Alliance with England by Bribes, as much as
they can, (43, 44) Assault Werk Castle, (45) Their Soldiers kill the Governor
of Edinburgh, with some of the Citizens, (209) They design to surprise
Hadington, ibid. They are disgusted by the Scots, (110) French and English in
Scotland agree, (111) French transported into their own Country, (112) French
King sends Auxiliaries to strengthen the Queen Regent, (135, 143) French
Ambassadors Demands from the Reformed, (136, 152) French their contumelious
Pride against some of the Scots, (143, 144) Their Design to establish Tyranny,
ibid. French Ambassador busy between the Queen and the Royalists, (218, 219)
Upon the Queen's Overthrow he sculks away, (221) French to leave Scotland by
Consent, (149) French Ship sent with Provision and Ammunition into Scotland,
taken by the Royalists, (279) French Tongue heretofore not much different from
the British, 58 Friars Mendicants Mercenaries to Parish Priests and Curats,
(345, 346) Their Opinions; and why Manducants rather than Mendicants, (129)
Fuda Isle, 29
G
GA Letter commonly used by the French for V, 60, 61 Gaga Isle, 25 Gald, Gael,
Galle, 62 Galdus, the Surname of Corbred, what it signifies, 109 Galeatius
Sforza slain by his Uncle, (231) Gallovid, in Old Scottish signifies a Gaul, 14
Galo, Cardinal, the Pope's Legate in England, 237 He excommunicates the Scots,
238 A wicked and avaritious Man, ibid. Galvinus, Son of Lothus, 151 Galway, why
so called, 14, 61, 139 Garalinga Isle, 29 Garaard, King of the Picts, 162
Garvae Isles, three, 25 Garvillan Isles, 30 Gavin Isle, 25 Gauls sent Colonies
into Spain, 48 Into Italy, 49 Into Germany, ibid. Into Britain, 50 Into
Ireland, 51 Gathelus, a Prince, feigned by some to be the Founder of the Scots
Nation, 46 Gawin Dunbar, the King's Tutor, made Chancellor, (54) Gawin Douglas
called Archbishop of St. Andrews, (29) Committed to Prison, (164) Genrach Isle,
26 Geoffry of Monmouth, a Writer of British Affairs, 8 Geldrians come to help
the English against the Scots, 295 Geloni, painted their Bodies, 53 Genistery,
or Broom, Isle, 25 George Buchanan, imprisoned for Religion, escapes out of his
Chamber-Window whilst his Keepers were asleep, (67) He is sent in Embassy, with
others, into England, (224) His ingenuous Speech concerning Himself, 71 George,
Brother to the Earl of Douglas, made Earl of Ormond, 377 Commands the Forces
against England, 378 Extolled for his Victory over them, 380 Declared a public
Enemy, 387 Beheaded, 390 George Douglas, Earl of Angus, 377 His memorable Fact,
398 He is against the Queen Mother, 399 His bold and unworthy Speech to the
King, (50) George Douglas, the Regent's youngest Brother, (217) Delivers the
Queen out of Prison, (218) George Dunbar, Earl of Merch, espouses his Daughter
to David, King Robert's Son, 325 Which Marriage not taking effect, he joins
with Percy of England against the Scots, 326 Proclaimed a public Enemy, ibid.
Percy and he overthrow the Scots, 307 Takes Douglas Prisoner in Fight, 327
Ioins with Percy against the King of England, is wounded, and taken Prisoner,
329 Being reconciled to the Regent, returns into Scotland, 332 George Gordon
sent with an Army against England, (70) The King's Hatred against him, (71)
Accused and imprisoned, (115) Released, (116) Studies to raise Commotions,
(154) Privy to the Conspiracy against Murray, (168) Condemned for Treason,
(170) Restored by the Queen to his former Dignity, (173) Chief of the Queen's
Faction, (209) George Lesly, Earl of Rothes, sent Ambassador into France, (121)
There poisoned, as 'twas believed, (122) George Ruven slain, (282) George
Wiseheart, Preacher of the Gospel, (93) Persecuted by Cardinal Beton, against
the Regent's Mind, (94) Foretells the Death of Cardinal Beton, (97) His pious
and Christian Deportment before, and at, his Martyrdom, (95, 96, 97) Gerlock
Isle, 28 Gerlock Bay, See Loch-ger. 17 Gersa, or Gress-oy, Isle, 37 Gernich, or
Gaxnico, 22 Germany, whence so called, 42 Germ^n^, their fabulous Original, 45
Ingenious in relating the Origin of their Nation, 38, 39 German Navy lands on
the Coast of Scotland, 94 Gessoriaci, i. e. People living about Calais, 10
Getes, painted their Bodies, 53 Gethus, King of the Picts, 97 Slain, 100
Getini, and Getae, whence? 49 Geurasdil Isle, 25 Gigaia, or Gega, Isle, ibid.
Gigamena Isle, ibid. Giles, Tutelary God of Edinburgh, his Show affronted,
(124) Gilbert Kennedy slain by the Command of James Douglas, (57) A Man of a
great Spirit, ibid. Gilbert Kennedy's Constancy in keeping his Word, ^77)
Gilbert Kennedy, Earl of Cassils, sent Ambassador into France, (121) He dies
there, not without the suspicion of Poison, (127) Gilbert, his Son, chosen Judge
in Bothwel^s Case, but excuses himself, (195) Gilchrist kills his Wife, the
King's Sister, for her Adultery, 234 King William's General, 230 Banished, but
received again into Favor, 234 Gilcolumb slain, 164 Gildas quoted concerning
Britain, 93 He wrote 400 Years after Tacitus, 38 Favored by Aurelius
Ambrosius, 148 A good Man, and died at Glastenbury in Somersetshire; the
Prophecies that go under his Name, not genuine, ibid. Gildominick, and the
Murray Men, suppressed, 230 Gilespy Cambel, an Actor in the Reformation, (129)
Recalled by threatening Letters, by the Queen Regent, (130) Gilespy, Earl of
Argyle, banished, (175) His Levity, (206) Privy to the Queen's Wickedness,
(216) General of her Army, (220) Refuses to own himself a Subject to the King,
(234) The Regent receives him into Favor, and he is in great Authority, (235,
251) Gillan Isle, 30 Gillo, Commander of the exiled Scots, 129 Gillus, the
Bastard, King of Scots, 104 Flies into Ireland, 105 Slain by Cadvallus, 106
Glascow, 14 The Bishop thereof frightened by a Voice from Heaven, 376 Glass
Isle, 28 Glenluce, 14 Glotta River, i. e. Clyde, 14 Glottiana; see Clydsdale.
Goat Isle, 25 God's Favor attends the Good, 213 Gom^dra Isle, 27 Goran, King
of Scots, 148 Persuades the Kings of the Picts and Brittons to join with the
Scots against the Saxons, 148 He is treacherously slain by his Subjects, 154
His Wife and Children fly into Ireland, ibid. But are recalled by Congal II.
155 Gordons at Feud with the Forbes's, (284) Gordon an Enemy to Murray, (162)
He labors to destroy him, (164, 166) His Design against him, at one time,
wonderfully prevented, (168, 169) Gordon's bold Attempt against the Queen her
self, (167) Gorlois wickedly slain by Uter, 149 Goropius reproved, 10 Goths,
Who? 33 Gothunni, and Gothini, who? 49 Grafton censured, 252 Graham, or Grame,
135 Appointed Tutor to Eugenius, 137 Recals Christian Pastors into Scotland,
140 Graham's Dike, 138 Grampian Hills, or Mountains, 17 Gramry Isle, 25 Granisa
Isle, 36 Gray has the chief Command in Scotland against the French, (146)
Gregory, King of Scots, his famous Achievements against the Picts, Danes and
Brittons, 175, 176 He takes several Cities in Ireland, 177 Green Isle, 25, 28
Grevan River, 14 Gria Isle, 30 Griffin slain in Fight, 156 Grime, King of
Scotland, 198 Makes an Agreement with Malcolm, ibid. Which he afterward
breaks, is overthrown, and made Prisoner, 199 And dies, 200 Groom in a Stable,
his bold Attempt on James Hamilton, in revenge of his Master's Death, (52) For
which he is put to Death, ibid. Gruinorta Isle, 31 Guidi, 15, 92 Guises, their
Desire to hasten the Marriage of Mary with the Dolphin, (221) Their overgreat
Power suspected, (122) They design Scotland, as a Peculiar, for their Family,
(151) They seek to destroy James, Earl of Murray, as an Enemy to Popery, (165)
Gun Isle, 27 Guns, i. e. Great Ordnance of Iron, when first began to be used in
Scotland, 394
H
HAdington, 13 Deserted by the English, (111) Hago, a Danish Admiral, 181 Haie,
or Hea, Isle, 30 Hakerset Isle, 29 Hamiltons, the Original of their Family, 273
Hamilton leaves the Party of the Douglasses, 390 Hamiltonians willing to free
the Queen out of Prison, (216) Overthrown in Battle, and some of them taken
Prisoners, (221, 222) They meet at Edinburgh in behalf of Queen Mary, (252)
Hara Isle, 37 Harald, Earl of Caithness, punished for his Cruelty, 235 Haraya,
or Harray, Isle, 31 Harpers, of old, used to lie in the Bedchamber of the King,
and of the Nobles, in Scotland, 116 Harrick Isle, 30, 31 Havatere, or Havere,
Isle, 30 Havelschire Isle, 29 Haura Isles, the great and the less, 31 Hay, and
his two Sons, fight for their Country, 191 Has a Coat of Arms assigned to his
Family, 192 The Name almost extinguished, 286 Heath Isle, 21 Heath, its Nature,
23 Good to make Beds to lie on, ibid. Hebrides Isles; see Aebudae. Hector
Boethius blamed, 13 Mistaken, 76 Compared with Lud, 80 Helena, Mother of
Constantine, 124 Hellisay Isle, 29 Helscher vetularum Isle, ibid. Helricus, a
Danish Admiral, 181 Hengist, Captain of Pirates, has Lands given to him in
Britain, by Vo^tigern, 144 Henry I. of England, never laughed after the
dr^wning of most of his Children, 224 He settles the Succession on his Daughter
Maud, ibid. Henry II. Son of Stephen, King of England, seeks occasion for a War
against Scotland, 224 Malcolm of Scotland acknowledges himself his Feudatary,
ibid. Henry IV. of England, 326 His Death, 333 Succeeded by Henry V. ibid.
Henry V. takes James I. King of Scots, with him into France, 336 Henry VI.
undervalues the Nobility, and advances Vpstarts, 392 A Conspiracy against him
by the Nobles of England, ibid. He is taken by the Duke of York, and brought to
London, 396 He flies into Scotland, 397 Ioins Battle with Edward IV. and is
overcome, 398 Returns privately to England, and is taken, ib. Henry VII.
succeeds Richard III. who was slain in Battle, 429 He denounces War against
France, (16) Desires to make a perpetual League with the Scots, 430 Marries his
Daughter Margarite to James IV. (14) War denounced against him by James, as he
was besieging Tournay, (20) His Magnanimous and Kingly Answer to the Heralds,
ibid. He eases the Commonalty of some old Burdens, 71 Henry VIII. desires the
exiled Douglasses may be restored, (60) By the French Ambassador he desires a
Peace with the Scots, ibid. He sends Controversal Books of Divinity to James V.
(62) Complains the Scots had violated the Law of Nations, wars upon them, takes
Leith, and burns Edinburgh, (82, 83) His Forces are worsted, (89) His General
persuades the Scots to Peace, (102) Gives the Scots a great Overthrow, (104)
Henry of France sends some German Foot into Scotland, (106) He displaces the
Regent by Subtilty, (113) Henry Percy invades Scotland, 306 His Horse
affrightned with rattling Instruments* 307 His Duel with James Douglas* 317
Henry Percy, the younger, overthrows the Scots at Homeldon, 327 Conspires
against his own King, 329 Henry Stuart comes out of England into Scotland,
(171) Made Duke of Rothsay, and Earl of Ross, by the Queen of Scots, (174) At
which many of the Nobles are disgusted, (175) He marries the Queen, ibid.
Strangely disrespected at the Baptism of his own Son, (186) He withdraws from
Court, ibid. Is poisoned, but overcomes it by the strength of his Youth, (186,
187) A Design to destroy him, (187, 188) Is actually murdered, (190) Heralds
slain against the Law of Arms, 230 Hergustus, King of the Picts, 127, 131
Hepburn (John) insinuates himself into the new Regent, (32) Heris hanged by
James Douglas, 384 H^rmodra Isle, 30 Herodian quoted, 76 Heruli, who? 89
Hethland Isles; see Schetland. High Isle, 25 Hirta Isle, 30 Historians, their
flattering Dispositions, 46 Hoia Promontory, 21 Hollanders Fleet spoiled by
Alexander Earl of Mar, 349 Holland Horse sent for over into England, 275
Holmes, i. e. Plains full of Grass, 35 Holy Isle, or Lindisfarm, 398 Honnega
Isle, 37 Horestia, 18 Parted between two Brothers, 170 Horses Isle, or Naich,
28 Hugh Kennedy, his courageous Answer, (51) Huilin Isle, 30 Hulmena, 31 Humber
River, 13 Humble Isle, or Ishol, 25 Hume Castle surprised by the Scots, (107)
Hungus, the Pict, fights prosperously against Athelstan, 165 He prays to God,
and is encouraged by a Vision, ibid. He offers Tithes to St. Andrew, ibid. His
Death, 166 Hunting Laws made by King Dornadilla, 89 And by King Ethodius, 116
Huntly overthrown by James Earl of Murray, taken and pardoned, (235, 237)
Hypoconistical, i. e. Diminutive, 6
I
JAmes I. Son of Robert III. sailing for France, is taken by the English, 330
Where he is educated and married, 331, 338 His Return to Scotland, upon a
Ransom, 398 Crowned King, ibid. Renews a League with France, 340, 352 Punishes
the Captains of Thieves, 341, 343 Twins born to him, 344 He rectifies Weights
and Measures, ibid. Reforms the Ecclesiastical Estate, and erects public
Schools, 345 Invites Tradesmen from beyond the Seas, 347 Perfidiousness imputed
to him, answered, 353, 354 Is cruelly murdered, 356 His Character, 356, 357
James II. King of Scots, 359 Carried out of the Castle of Edinburgh, in a
Chest, by his Mother, 361 Taken again by the Chancellor, and brought to
Edinburgh, 365 Enters on the Government, 371 Marries Mary, Daughter to the Duke
of Guelderland, 380 He kills William Douglas, 386 Marches to assist the English
Nobles, 391, 392 Deceived by a counterfeit Ambassador from Rome, suborned by
the English, 393 Takes Roxburgh Town, ibid. His casual Death in his Camp, 394
His Queen encourages the Soldiers, and takes Roxburgh Castle, ibid. His
Character, 395 James III. begins his Reign at seven Years old, 396 Six Regents
of the Kingdom in his Minority, 407 His Mother's Death, ibid. In his Time a
Truce made with England for five Years, 407 Marries Margarite, the King of
Denmark's Daughter, 413, 415 His Death foretold, 420 He degenerates into
Tyranny, ibid. Addicts himself to Evil Counselors, 231 The Nobles arm against
him, 432 Is slain by them in Fight, 433 His Character, 434 James IV. (1) Chosen
General by the Nobles against his Father, 432 His first Parliament, which
justifies taking Arms against his Father, (5) His Clemency and sorrowful
Resentment for his Father's Death, (6) He leads an Army into England, (11)
Marries Margarite, Henry VII. of Enggland's Daughter, (14) Builds a vast Ship,
and is prof^se in other Buildings, ibid. Resolves to go to Jerusalem, but
prevented, (15) Sends Forman into England, to pick a Quarrel, (16) Denounces
War against England, (20) Resolute in his Opinion, (22) Fights with the English
at Flodden, where he is overthrown and slain, (24, 25) Doubtful Reports
concerning his Death, (26) Some Aspersions cast upon him, endeavored to be
wiped off, (27) His Character, (27, 28) James V. (28) Enters upon the
Government, (46) He and his Mother in the Power of the Douglasses, (47) He
frees himself from them, (53) He is an Enemy to their Faction, (50) Inclinable
to a French Alliance, (65) Three Mary's offered to him, (62) Treats with the
Emperor about a Match, (61) Visits the Orcades, (62) And other Isles of
Scotland, ibid. Receives Controversal Books of Divinity from Henry of England,
(63) Agrees to an Interview with Henry, which is disappointed, (64) Sails to
France, and marries Magdalen, Daughter to their King Francis, who soon dies,
(65) He accuses his Nobility as Dastards, (70) He marries Mary of the House of
Guise, (66, 67) His presaging Dream, (69) He dies with Grief for the Loss of
his Army, (71) His Character, (71, 72) James VI. his Birth, (183) His Mother
endeavors to get him under the Power of Bothwel, (205) Enters on the
Government, (214, 215) James Abernethy, a skilful Physician, (186) James, Earl
of Arran, Son to James, returning from France, sides with the Reformers, (135)
Goes to his Sister Mary the Queen, (151) Hardly persuaded to allow the
admission of the Mass in the Queen's Chapel, (159) Made Earl of Mar, and
afterward of Murray, (161) James Balfure, Governor of Edinburgh Castle for
the Queen, (206, 207) He raises Insurrections, (226) James Culen taken and
executed for his Crimes, (279) James, the first Earl of Douglas, 308 James
Douglas joins with Bruce, 263 He marches with great Forces into England, 275
James, surnamed Crassus, the Douglasses being dead, succeeds to the Right of
the Earldom, 370 He dies, ibid. James Douglas marries Eufemia, Daughter to
Robert II. 306 His Duel with Henry Percy, 316 Is slain, fighting valiantly, 318
His three last dying Requests, ibid. James Douglas made Earl, when William
Douglas, his Father, was slain, 386 He accuses the King and Nobles of
Perfidiousness, ibid. Proclaimed a public Enemy, 387 Marries Beatrix, his
Brother's Widow, 388 Persuaded to a Reconciliation with the King, which he
refuses, ibid. Being forsaken by his Friends, he applies to England for Aid,
389 And to Donald the Islander, 390 Forsaken by his Wife, ibid. James Douglas,
Earl of Morton, and Alexander Hume, take the Coronation Oath for King James VI.
in his Minority, (214) He provides for the Commonwealth at his private Charge,
(215) Commands the King's Army against the Queen, (220) Goes into England with
the Regent, (224) Sent Ambassador into England, (261) His Cheerfulness to
encounter the Enemy, (278) Taken Prisoner, and then takes him Prisoner, whose
Captive he was, before, (282) James Haliburton taken Prisoner, (281) James
Hamilton, Earl of Arran, Admiral of a Navy under James IV. (16) He plunders
Knockfergus in Ireland, ibid. At last sails for France, (17) Is chosen Regent,
(75) Opposes Archibald Douglas, after his Return from France, (39) Highly
disgusted by King James V. (65) Compelled to change his Opinion concerning the
Controverted Points of Religion, (79, 80) His shameful Flight, Vanity and
Inconstancy, (84, 86) Remiss in the Case of George Wiseheart, (111) Corrupted
by Avarice, (112) Put from his Regency, and made Duke of Chastle-herault, (113,
114) James Hamilton returns from France, (229) Endeavors to engage Queen
Elizabeth of England, to make him Regent, ibid. But without Success, (232) He
submits to the Regent, (234) James Hamilton, Son of the Archbishop of St.
Andrews's Sister, treacherously shoots Murray, and kills him, (245, 246) James
Hamilton, a Bastard, Brother to the Earl of Arran, chosen Judge against the
Lutherans, (68) He is tried, condemned, and executed, (69) James Hepburn, Earl
of Bothwel, committed to Prison, (163, 164) But escapes, (167) Banished, (66) A
Rival to the Earl of Lennox, (80) Called out of France by the Queen, (171, 172)
Endeavors to supplant Murray, (163) Divorced from his former Wife, (198)
Procures a Schedule from the Nobility about his Marriage with the Queen, (196)
Surprises and marries the Queen, (199) Outlawed, (173) Accused of the King's
Murder, (194) His Mock-Trial, (173, 193, 195) Wounded by an Highway Pad, (184)
Designs to destroy Murray, (192) His Challenge answered, (209) He flies, (210)
And dies distracted in Denmark, (215) James Kennedy, Archbishop, an Adversary
to the Douglasses, 373 Retires from a corrupt Court, 376 Disallows the Faction
of the Queen Mother, 399 His Oration, that Women ought not to govern, 401, etc.
His Praise, Death and Character, 409, 410 James Kennedy builds a vast Ship, 420
James Levingston put to Death by the Douglassian Faction, 375, 376 James
Lindsy's Obstinacy in following his Enemies, 319 James Macgil sent, with
others, Ambassador into England, (224, 261) James Macintosh unjustly put to
Death, (160) James, the Son of Murdo, burns Dumbarton, 339 James, Earl of
Murray, appointed Vicegerent, (60) Settles the Borders, (57) Sent into France,
(63) James, Earl of Murray, refuses to associate with the Queen and Bothwel,
(204) But chooses rather to leave the Land, (205) He returns from Travel, and is
made Regent, (213) His resolute Speech, (217) He meets the Queen of England's
Ambassadors at York, (224) Waylayed by his Enemies in his Iourny, ibid. Goes to
London, (226) Where he manages the Accusation against the Queen, (227) Whence
honorably dismissed, and his Transactions there approved in Scotland, (233) He
is deserted by his Friends, (243) Too c^^eless of himself, (245) Killed by one
of the Hamiltons, (246) His laudable Character, (246, 247) James Murray offers
to encounter Bothwel, hand to hand, (209) James Sandiland, Ambassador from
Scotland to France, (150) James Sandiland sent against the Thieves, (59)
Carries Propositions from the Reformers to the Queen Regent, (125) James Stuart
marries Joan, the Widow of James I. 364 Is banished, 375 James Stuart, the
Queen's Brother, puts the English to a Retreat, (108) Has threatening Letters
sent him by the Queen, (130) An Actor in reforming Religion, (131) Made Earl of
Mar and Murray, (161) Iceni, and Icium, 10 Icolumbkil, 26 Idleness, the Source
of Mischief, 345 Idlers Isle, or, of the Otiosi, 25 Ierna, i. e. Ireland, 69
Jews imitated by the Romanists, 381 Issurt, or Issert, Isle, 30 Igerne,
vitiated by Uter, yet he afterward marries her, 149 Ignis Fatuus, what? (264)
Ila Isle; see Yla. Ilan na Covihaslop, 26 Images demolished at Perth, (128)
Immersi Isle, 26 Impostors, notorious ones, 393, (6, 7, etc. 58) Indigenae,
who? 42, 50 Indulfus, King of Scots, 181 Casually slain by the Danes, 182
Indulgence, overmuch to Children, punished, 337 Informers, though sometimes
allowed, yet dangerous Instruments in a State, 148 Inhumanity to Prisoners, 297
Innerlochy, 20 Innerness, 20 Interregnum in Scotland, after Alexander the
IIId's Death, 245 Inundation of the River Tay at Perth, 236 And great Ones in
Lothian, 305 John Annins writes the Original of the Brittons in Verse, 42
Johannes Scotus sent for by Charles the Great, 165 John's, or Jeans, Isle, 26
John Baliol his Genealogy, 246, 247, 248 More solicitous for a Kingdom than a
Good Name, 250 Made King, and surrenders himself and Kingdom to the King of
England, ibid. He confesses his Fault for so doing, 251 Disgusts Edward of
England, 252 Overthrown by Edward, made Prisoner, and released, 251, 252, 253
John, King of England, meditates a War against Scotland, 235 Makes diverse
Leagues with the Scots, 236 Enters Scotland, 237 The Pope's Beneficiary, ibid.
Poisoned by a Monk, 238 John, Son of Alexander, Brother to James III. Duke of
Albany, declared Regent, when in France, (31) He arrives in Scotland, (32) Gets
the Queen Mother into his Power, (34) Goes into France, appointing Governors
in his Absence, (37) Returns to Scotland, (39) Raises an Army against England,
but makes a Truce, (40, 41) Goes again into France, whence he returns with a
great Navy, (41, 42) Marches into England, and assaults Werk-Castle, (45) Goes
the third time into France, and his Power is vacated in his Absence, (46) John
Erskin sent Ambassador into France, (63) Of the Queen's Faction, (105) Made
Governor of Edinburgh Castle, (115) Sent Ambassador into France, (121) John,
Brother to King James III. put to death, 421 John Erskin favors the
Reformation, (126) Afraid of the Queen Regent, (128) Beats the Rebels out of
Sterlin, (282) Chosen Regent, (283) Straitens Edinburgh, (286) John Armstrong,
Captain of Thieves, executed, (57) John, Earl of Athol, marries Beatrix
Douglas, 301 He and his Wife taken Prisoners by Donald, 408 John, Earl of
Buchan, aids the French King's Son, 334 Made Lord High Constable of France, 335
Slain there by the English, 336 John Cumins marches into England, and wastes
Northumberland, 253 His Treachery against Robert Bruce, 2^0 Which cost him his
Life, ibid. John, Earl of Carick, base Son to Robert II. 307 John Cockburn of
Ormiston, wounded, and taken by Bothwel, (140) John Cuningham employed in
surprising Dumbarton-Castle, (263) John, Earl Douglas's Brother, made Baron of
Balvany, 377 Proclaimed a public Enemy, 387 John Damiot, a Conjurer, foretells
David Rize's Death, (182) John Forb^s condemned and beheaded, (6^) John Fordon,
Author of the History, called, Scoto-Chronicon, 146 John Fleming, the Queen's
Governor of Dumbritton Castle, when it was surprised, (263) He escapes, but
his Wife is well treated by the Regent, (265) John Fleming of Bogal taken
there, ibid. John Herris undeservedly put to Death by the Douglasses, 384 John
Hepburn powerful and factious, (31) His Feud with the Hume's, (32, 33) He
insinuates himself into John the Regent, (31) Accuses Douglas, Hume, and
Forman, (3^) John Gordon, ^arl of Huntly, taken by Murray, and put to Death,
170 John Hamilton, Archbishop of St. Andrews, (103) A de^o^st Man* (111) John
Hamilton, troubled in Conscience for the King's Murder, discovers his
Accomplices, (267) John Kennedy made one of the King's Guardians or Tutors, 407
John Knox preaches to reclaim those that killed Card^nal Beton, (100) His
Sermon to the People of Perth, for the Reformation, (128) (...) which they
destroy Popish Shrines, ibid. His encouraging Sermon to the Reformers at
S^erlin, (141) Hi^ Sermon at King James VI. his Inaugurati^n, (^14) John II.
lays the Foundation of Tyranny in Portugal, 434 John Lesly pr^vy to the
Conspiracy against James Earl of Murray, (167, 169) John Mac-Arthur, Captain of
To^ies, executed, 341 John Melvil put to Death, (11^) John, Earl of Mar,
Brother to James III. put to Death by opening a Vein till he expired, 421 John
Murdera^h taken, (116) John Monlu^, Bishop of Valence, in Scotland, (14^) John
Maxwel of Herris revolts from the Reformers, (176, 177) The Queen puts little
Trust in him, (222) Made Prisoner by the Regent, but released without public
Authority (253) John, Earl of Mar, a Commander in the King's Army, (220) John
Randolph sent into France, 287 Made Regent, 294 Taken Prisoner by the English,
295 Slain in Fight, 322 John Scot, his wonderful Abstinence from Food, (^8)
John Duns Scotus, where b^rn, 306 John Ramsy preserved by the King, 425 Proves
an Evil Counselor to James III. 431 John Stuart, Earl of Lennox, revolts from
the Regent, (35) But is again received into Favor, ibid. He endeavors to take
the King from the Douglasses, and is slain, (50) John Stuart, Earl of Athol,
sent against John Murderach, (116) A Pro^urer of the Match between Henry and
Mary Queen of Scotland, (192) He loses h^s Opportunity, (206) John Vien,
Admiral of the French Navy in Scotland, 311 John Windram secretly favors the
Cause of True Religion, (65) Joan Douglas, and her Husband, their miserable
Ends, (66, 67) Joan, the Wife of James I. her manly Fact, 360 Put in Prison
with her Husband, 364 Her Death, 395 Joseph Scaliger amends a Place in Seneca,
76 Jos^^a, King of Scots, 101 A Lover of Surgery, 102 Ireland's ancient
Inhabitants called Scots, 73 Irish break in on Galway in Scotland, 177 And are
overthrown by King Gregory, ibid. Irish Scots make Peace with the Romans, 130,
131 Irish Air temperate, 2, 51 Colonies of Gauls sent into Ireland, 51
Description of Ireland out of Solinus, 85 Irwin River, 14 Island in Shape like
a Man, 26 Islands encompassing Scotland, their Order and threefold Division, 22
Islanders parsimonious, 33 Healthful and long-lived, 37 Prone to rebel, 207
Islanders, Western, their Manner of Living at Home and Abroad, 23, etc. Isa, or
Ishol, Isle, 29, 30 Issidorus, i. e. Issoir, a City in France, Judgments and
Trials of Nobles, how anciently managed in Scotland, 340 Jule-tide, or
Christmas, as it is called, licentiously observed, 151 Julian Romer taken,
(110) Julius Agricola's Exploits in Britain, 109, 110 Recalled from thence, 111
Junius Brutus, (271) Julius Caesar, the first Roman that entered Britain with an
Army, 84 Julius Frontinus in Britain, 86, 109 Jura Isle, 25 Justice can do more
than Terror of Arms, 180, 189 The most popular thing, 348 Juverna, Ireland so
called, 69
K
KArrera Isle, 25 Katharine Medices, after her Son's Death, undertakes the
Government, (151) Keames Castle, 25 Kebercurning, 22 Kedwalla, King of the
Brittons, 159 Keligire Island, 30 Kellasa Isle, ibid. Kelvin River, 16 Ken
River, 14 Kenneth I. King of Scots, 158 Kenneth II. 167 Compared with Fergus
II. persuades the Nobility to war with the Picts, and overcomes them in Battle,
169 He may be called the third Founder of the Scottish Kingdom, 170 Kenneth III.
187 Circumvents his Nobles by a Wile, 188 Causes Malcolm to be poisoned, 193
Troubled in Conscience for it, 195 Makes new Laws concerning the Succession of
the Kingdom, 193, 194 Worsted at first by the Danes, yet afterward overthrows
them, 190, 191 Slain by Fenella, 196 Kenneth, King of the Picts, 167 Kentigern,
145 Keniburgh Islands, the Great and the Small, 27 Kernici, who? 22
Kernicovalli, ibid. Kingly Government, what? (268) Its Origin, ibid. Kings,
their Distress moves Pity, 213 Kings in Scotland not to do any public Affairs
without advising with their Nobles, or Estates of the Realm, 102, 230, 251 They
used to ride the Circuits themselves, for the Administration of Justice, before
Itinerary Judges were appointed, 103, 123 Their Wives anciently not called
Queens, 402 Not in their Power alone to make Peace or War in Scotland, 322 They
are inferior to the Laws, (269) How their public Revenue, if spent, may be
increased, 114 A Law for their successive inheriting the Crown, confirmed, 194,
195 Kings, if young, their Favors slippery, 416 Subjects apt to degenerate
into their Manners, 111 King, desiring to be revenged on his Nobles, endeavors
to set them one against another, 431 Kings-Cross, or Re-cross, in Stanmore,
what? 238 Kinnatel, King of Scots, 155 Kinross, 170 Its Sheriffwick, 18 Kinloss
Abbey, 184 Kinthern; see Cantire. Kirkwal, the chief Town in the Island Pomonae,
or Mainland, 35 Kirta Isle, 30 Knapdale, 17 Kyle, 14
L
L'Abross, a French General, would have all the Nobility of Scotland destroyed,
(148) Laia River; see Avonlagan. Lambs Isle, 30 Lamlach Isle, 24 Lamot, the
French King's Ambassador in Scotland, (20) He moves the Scots to war against
England, ibid. etc. Lamyrian, or Lamormoor, Mountains, 13 Lanarch, or Lanerick,
14 Lancaster (Duke) Ambassador in Scotland, 309 Afterward invades it, 310
Langside Fight, (220) Laodice (Queen) her Cruelty to her own Children, (231)
Largesses immoderate occasion Want, 203 Lauderdale, so called of the Town
Lauder, 13 Laurence Twine persuades Baliol to go for Scotland, 284 Law about
Succession to the Kingdom of Scotland, 97 New Ones made, 194 Confirmed, 200
Whether profitable to the Public* or not, 196, 197 Law (too severe) to
confiscate the whole Estates of Condemned Persons, without any Allowance to
their innocent Wife and Children, 113 Laws against Theft, 282 Laws about
Hunting, their Authors; see Hunting Laws. Laws, in Scotland, few, besides
Decrees of the Estates, (59) Laxa Isle, 30 Lead, White and Black, found in
Pomona, 35 Legate, a counterfeit Roman one, 387 Leith River, 13 Leland quoted,
61 Lenity, overmuch, brings Contempt, 381, 385, 392 Lennox, or Levin, so
called from the River Levin, 140 Lent observed on a politic Account only,
(170) Leon Strozy, Admiral of the French Galleys in Scotland, to revenge the
Cardinal's Death, (101) Lewis Isle, 30 Many Whales taken there, 32 Lewis XI.
espouses Margarite, the King of Scots's Daughter, 340 He lays the Foundation of
Tyranny, 434 Lewis de Galais, Ambassador from France to the Queen's Party,
(254) Liddisdale, so called from the River Lidal, 13, 140 Liguria, 11 Lilborn
worsted by the Scots, 306 Linga Isle, 30, 37 Lingaia Isle, 39 Lindil Isle, 29
Linlithgo, 30 Lindsay's and Ogilby's Fight, 373 The Lindsays prevail, 374
Lismore Isle, 25 Loch-Abyr, 19, 20 Loch-Aw, 17 Loch-Brien, 31 Loch-Earn, ibid.
Loch-Fin, 17 Loch-Ger, ibid. Loch-Long, ibid. Loch-Lomund, ibid. Loch-Loubrun,
21 Loch-Louch, 20 Loch-Maban, 300 The Castle in it taken by the Scots, 309
Loch-Ness, 20 Whose Water never freezeth, ibid. Loch-Ryan, 14 Loch-Spey, 140
Loch-Tee, 20 Lochindores Castle, 296 Locrine, Son of Brute, 42 Loegria, an old
Name for England, ibid. Lollius Urbicus in Britain, 113 London, anciently
called Augusta, 89 Longay Isle, 25 Lords of the Articles, who? 305 Lorn County,
17 Lothian, so called from Lothus King of the Picts, 13 Lothus, King of the
Picts, 13 He joins with the Scots against the Saxons, 148 Complains that his
Sons were deprived of the Kingdom of Britain, ibid. He is commended, ibid. Lox,
or Lossy, River, 20 Luctacus, King of Scots, a flagitious Person, 111 He is
slain, ibid. Lud, or Lloyd, allows, that by Prudania is meant Britain, 2 He is
refuted, 71, 72, 73, 77, 78, 79, 80 Luing Isle, 25 Lunga Isle, 25, 27 Luparia,
or Wolf, Isle, 25 Lupicianus in Britain, 88, 89 Luss River, 14 Lusitania, why
Portugal so called, as some say, 47 Lust, a Punishment to it self, 186
Lutherans persecuted, (63, 67, 91) Luthlac, Mackbeth's Son, slain by Malcolm,
215 Luxury accompanies Peace, 143
M
MAalmori Isle, 26 Macalpine Laws, 70 Macdonald rises in Arms, but is
overthrown, and kills himself, 207, 208 Mackbeth, King of Scots, his Character,
208 His Dream, 210, 211 He flies, 214 Macdonald his cruel Fact to a Woman,
retaliated on himself, 343, 344 Macduff ill resents Mackbeth, 212 He stirs up
Malcolm against him, ibid. Three Privileges granted him by Malcolm, 215 The
first Earl of Fife, 214 He complains against Baliol to Edward of England, 250
Macklan executed by Douglas, 384 Maenavia Isle, 24 See Man. Magistrates have
Power over Men's Bodies, but not over their Consciences, (127) Magna, or Megala,
Isle, 29 Magnus, his carousing Goblet, ^4 Magnus, King of Norwey, seizes on the
Islands, 221 Makes Peace with the Scots, 242 Magus, Towns so ending, 68, 69
Maiatae, who? 26 Mainland; see Pomona. Main, an English Commander against the
Scots, slain in Fight, 3^9 Main, Son of Fergus, 97 King of Scots, 98 Makul, a
Criminal, abstains from Food, 236 Maldon, not in Scotland, 16 Maldwin, King of
Scots* 160 A Plague in his Time over Europe, ibid. He is strangled by his Wife,
1^^ Malgo, a Britain, ibid. Malcolm Fleming executed by the Douglasses, 37^
Malcolm I. 18^ Sits in Courts of Judgment himself, ibid. He is slain, ibid.
Malcolm II. Competitor with Constantino for the Crown, 197 Confirms the Law for
Succession, 2^^ Overthrown by the Danes, 2^1 Afterward overthrows them in
several Battles, 202 His Murderers drowned, 2^4 Malcolm III. brings in foreign
Titles of Honor into Scotland, 214 He recovers the Kingdom from Mackbeth, ib.
Qu^ls Conspiracies made against him, 215, 217 His Vow to St. Andrew, 218 He
erects new Bishoprics, and makes wholesome su^p^uary Laws, ibid. Builds the
Cathedrals of Durham and Dunfermling, 219 Is slain by the English, with his Son
Edward, ibid. His Queen, and other Female Relations, very pious, 218 Malcolm
IV. takes a Fe^datary Oath to Henry of England, 227 He accompanies him into
France, 229 Is despoiled by him of Part of his Patrimony in Engl^nd, ibid. Is
persuaded by the Scots to marry, but gives them a negative Answer, 231 Man
Isle, its several Names, 24 Marcel^in^^ quoted and corrected, 56 Marble Stone,
on which the Scots Kings were crowned, 171 Ma^ble, white, Mountains of it in
Sutherland, 21 Marchet^ Mulierum, what the Scots call so? 219 Margarit^^, or
St. Margarite's, Port, 35 Margarite Creighton, who? 428 Margarite, Queen of
England, delivers her Husband Edward by Force of Arms, 397 She flies into
Scotland, and thence into France, ibid. Margarite, Sister to Edward of England,
Wife to Charles of Burgundy, endeavors to raise Commotions in England, (6)
Margarite, Daughter of Henry VII. marries James IV. (14) The first Female
Regent in Scotland, (29) After her Husband's Death, she marries Archibald
Doug^as, ibid. She flies with her Husband into England, (34) But returns, (37)
Displeased with her Husband, ibid. Persuades the Scots to break with the
French, (42) But opposed therein by the French Faction, (43) Marianus Scotus,
180 Mariners, to offend them dangerous to Passengers, 286 Mar and M^arn
Counties, whence so called, 19, 170 Martha, Countess of Carick, falls in Love
with Robert Bruce, and marries him, 247 Martiq^^^, the Earl of it comes ^^to
Scotland, with his (...), (148) Mary, Wife of (...) II. her manly Spirit, 394
Mary of Guise, Widow of the Duke of Longuevil, marries James IV. (67) By
degrees she dispossesseth the Regent, (112,) (113) Takes upon her the Ensigns
of the Government, (113, 114) Imposes new Taxes, (117) Changes ancient
Affability into Arrogance, (127) Persecutes the Reformed, and is perfidious,
(130, 1^1) Mak^s a Truce with the Reformed, (134) The Administration of the
Government taken from her by Proclamation, (139) She dies in the Castle of
Edinburgh, (146) Her Disposition and Character, (147) Mary, Queen of Scots,
born, (71) Begins her Reign, ibid. Henry of England desires her for his Son's
Wife, (75) She is sent into France, (107) From whence that King^ sends Letters,
desiring her a Wife for his Son, (120) Ambassadors sent thither for that
purpose, of which some die there, (121, 122) She marries the Dolphin, (121)
When Mary of England died* she carried her self as the next Heir, and assumed
the Royal Arms of that Kingdom, (127) When her Husband died, she resolves to
return into Scotland, (151) Her subtle Answer to a cunning Cardinal, (153) She
lays the Foundation of Tyranny, (196) Designs a Guard for her Body, ibid. Her
unbecoming Familiarity with David Rize, (172) She marries Henry Stuart, (175)
She punishes David's Homicides, (183) Her strange Proclamation about Rize's
Death, ibid. She brings forth James VI. ibid. She is willing by all means to be
rid of her Husband, (183, 184, 185) A joculary Process against her Husband's
Murderers, (193) She marries Bothwel, (199) The French Ambassador, and the
Scottish Nobles, dislike her Marriage, ibid. She frames an Association against
the Nobles, (204) And they Another against her, (205) Earl of Murray leaves
Scotland in Discontent, ibid. Besieged with Bothwel at Borthwick, and escapes
in Man's Apparel, (206) Surrenders her self Prisoner, (209, 210) Proved guilty
of her Husband's Death by Letters, (211) Hamilton designs her Deliverance,
(216) She escapes, (218) Is overthrown by the Nobles, and (...) for England,
(221) She endeavors, by Balfure, to raise Tumults in Scotland, (226) Designs
to marry Howard of England, (233, 23^) Continued in the Lord Scroop's House,
(239) Her Faction garrison Edinburgh, from whence they sally out (...) Morton,
(^^^) Massacre designed in France by the Gu^^es, (750) Matthew Stuart, Earl of
Lennox, marries Margarite Hamilton, (^) Sent for out of France into Scotland,
(78) Returns, (171) Circumvented by the Cardinal's Cunning, about his marrying
the Queen, (80) Upon which he rises in Arms, but is forced to agree with the
Regent, (82) He justifies himself to the French King, (83) Is worsted, and
flies into England, where he is kindly received, and marries Margarite Douglas,
(83, 85, 86) Created Regent, (258, 259) Takes Brechin from Huntly, (260) Hurt
by a Fall, (261) Maximianus, Commander of a Roman Legion in Britain, 136 He
overthrows the Scots and Picts, 137 M^xim, grave, in Policy, (176) Another,
(208) Others, (239) Maximus, in Britain, 127 He overcomes the Scots, 128 Takes
the chief Government upon him, 129 Banishes all the Scots out of Britain, ibid.
Measures and Weights, amended and rectified, 334 Mechanical Engine of Brass, a
strange one, 192 Mecla Isle, 37 Meliss Graham deprived of Strathearn by the
King, 351 Men, fight like wild Beasts one with another, 324 Mendi^ant Friars
called Manducant, (129) Mentei^h* 17, 140 Menthe^'s Treachery against Robert
Bruce, 268 He is rewarded, 269 Merch, 13 Merchants forbid to traffic by Sea
for a time, 244 Merchants, or Ch^nnards, Is^e, 26 Mercenary Soldiers change
with Fortune, (236) Fit to establish Tyranny, (117, 177) Merlin, the Prophet,
or Impostor rather, when he lived, 147 A wicked Man, 149 A Comparison between
Gildas and him, a dissimili, ibid. Mern, whence so called? 170 Mernoch Isle, 25
Merta^k Isle, 31 Metellan, or Maitland, King of Scots, 107 Michael Weems helps
the Royalists, (277) Milesian Fables, what? 77 Minturnae, 78 Modred, Son of
Lothus, General of the Picts Forces, 151 Competitor with Constantine, 153
Slain, ibid. Moesici, who? 89 Mogald, King of Scots, 112 Makes an unjust Law,
113 He is slain, ibid. Molas Isle, 24 Mologhascar Isle, 25 Mon Isle, put falsely
for Man, 24 Monfort slain by Preston, 297 Mongomery comes into Scotland, (91)
Monk poisons King John of England, 238 Another poisons Thomas Randolph, 283
Their Impudence in devising Fables, 42 Their Luxury, 143 Their Monasteries
overthrown by Order of the Lords, (152) Monster, like an Hermaphrodite, born in
Scotland, (4, 5) Monk-Fishes never seen, but they predict Mischief, 175 Mordac,
King of Scots, 162 Mordac, Earl of Fife, Son of Robert, taken Prisoner, 327
Returns to Scotland, 333 Succeeds his Father in the Government, 336 Takes Care
to recall King James from England, 337 Imprisoned, 339 Executed, 340 More Isle,
25 More, in old Gaulish, signifies Mare the Sea, 10 More marusa, 7, 10, 77
Morini, who? 10 Morton's large Account of his Negotiation in England to the
Regent, (267) Mother, cruel to her own Children, (231) Mourning Garments, when
first used in Scotland, (66) Muick Isle, 28 Mull of Galway, 14 Mull Isle, 26
Mulmore Isle, ibid. Mungo, or St. Mungo; see Kentigern. Murderer, discovered
sometimes by touching the Murdered Body, 184 Murdo, and his Sons, put to Death,
348 Murray, a fruitful Country, 20 Its Inhabitants, seditious, 230 Murray made
Regent, 226 His Death, 298 Musa Isle, 37 Musadil Isle, 25 Musicians, or
wandering Minstrels, restrained, 282, 283
N
NAick Isle, 28 Nagunner Isle, ibid. Names, new, by ambitious Men given to
Places, 170, 171 Names of Towns, new, show the Affinity of a Language, 62
Naomph Isles, 26 Naosg Isles, 26 Narn, 140 Nathalocus, King of Scots, 120
Murders the Nobility, and consults So^^hsayers, ibid. Nathalocus, a Noble Man,
conspires against Athirco, 119 Is himself slain, 121 Navern Province, so called
from the River Navern, 21, 140 Nectamus, King of Scots, 126 Ness Town, i. e.
Innerness, and River, whose Water is always warm, 20 Nightshade, its
Description and Properties, 209 Ninian, 145 Nithisdale, from the River Nith,
13, 140 Nobility, their Tyranny over the Commons restrained, 182 Nobles, how
anciently tried in Scotland, 340 Normans overcome the Saxons and Danes in
Britain, 71 Norman Lesly his Valor against the English, (89) He surprises St.
Andrews, and kills Cardinal Beton, (98) Northumberland divided into two
Kingdoms, viz. the Deiri, and the Bernici, 159 Nostvade Isle, 37 Nothatus, King
of Scots, 98 First sets up Arbitrary Government, ibid. He is slain, 99
Noviogagus, many Cities so called, 68 Nuns Isle, or Monades, 27
O
OCCA, General of the Saxons, overthrown by three Kings, and wounded, 151, 152
Occidental, or Western, Isles, 22 Ocel-Mountains, 17 Olavus, General of the
Scandians, 200 Old Castle Isle, 31 Oracle feigned by a Monk, 44 Oransa Isle,
28, 29 Oration of Archbishop Kennedy, that the Administration of the chief
Government is not to be committed to Queen-Mothers, 401, etc. Orcades Isles, 33
Their Description, ibid. Writers not agreed about their Number, 35 Orca
Promontory, 21 Ordovices, who? 109 Original of Letters, 38 Orkny, the Bishop
thereof marries the Queen to Bothwel, (199) Orma Isle, 37 Orvansa, or Oversa,
Isle, 26 Osbreth aids Picts against Scots, 172 Overthrown at first, but
afterward beats the Scots, ibid. Osellius, a French Man, desirous of Glory,
(120) Differs with the Scots Nobles, but afterward yields to Them, ibid. Osrim
Isle, 26 Oswald, King of Northumberland, promotes the Christian Religion, 159
Otterborn Fight, wherein the English are worsted, 318 Oversa Isle, 26 Ovia
Isle, ibid. Otiosi Isle, 25 Oxon for Oxonford, 8
P
PABA Isle, noted for Robbery or Piracy, 28, 29 Pabaia Isle, 30 Palladius, sent
by Pope Celestine into Scotland, first sets up Bishops there, 145 Pandulphus,
the Pope's Legate, 238 Papa Isles, great and small, 36, 37 Parish Priests, and
Friars Mendicants, the Cause of the Decay of Ecclesiastical Discipline, 243
Parricide, God suffers not to be unrevenged, 184, 185 Parsimony, the Mother of
Health, 33 Parsonages, and Church-Preferments, sold, 419 Bestowing of them
causes Strife, (57) Pasly Book, or the Black Book of Pasly, what? 134 Patrick
Graham chosen Bishop of St. Andrews by his Canons, in the room of Jame^
Kennedy, 411 Made Primate of Scotland by the Pope, but obstructed by the
Courtiers, ibid. He labors to maintain Church Priviledges, 417 Is
excommunicated, and forced to resign his Bishopric, 418, 419 And dies in
Prison, ibid. Patrick Gray, one of those who slew King James III. 433 Patrick
Gray committed to Custody, (92) Patrick, an holy Man, sent into Scotland, 145
Patrick Blackater flies from the Douglasses, (47) He is treacherously slain by
John Hume, (48) Patrick Hamilton put to death for Religion, by the Conspiracy
of the Priests, (53) Patrick Lindsy sides with the Reformers, (132) Goes with
the Regent into England, (222) Patrick Ruven's Magnanimity, (181, 182) He kills
David Rize, ibid. He acquaints Murray with the Conspiracy against him, (173)
Paul Mefane, or Meffen, Preacher of the Gospel, troubled for Religion, (123)
Harbored by the Inhabitants of Dundee, (124) Paulus Orosius quoted, 86
Corrected, 87 Paul Terms sent with Aid from France to Scotland, (110)
Peace-downs; see Duni Pacis. Peace, sometimes more dangerous than War, 140,
112, 347 Peace confirmed, with an intended Affinity, betwixt Scots and English,
422 But soon broken, ibid. Mediated for by the Scottish Nobility, 426 Made
between French and English, (111) Between the Reformers and the Court, (149)
Peachti, 53 Pentland Firth, 35, 53 Pentland Hills, 13, 53 People of the
Commonalty, their Heat soon over, (207) Percy (Henry) taken Prisoner, and
ransomed, 320 Percy the Elder conspires against the King of England, 329
Overthrown, and flies to Scotland, 332 Betrayed by his Friend, ibid. His
Posterity restored to their Dignity, 334 Perth, 18 A great part of it destroyed
by Water, 236 Its Walls demolished, 287 Taken by Edward of England, 295 Retaken
by the Scots, 298 Pestilence in Scotland, 227, 303, 305, 381 Peter Cerealis in
Britain, 86, 109 Peter Maufet a Robber, executed, (32) Peter Hiale, the King of
Spain's Ambassador in England, (11) His Errand to solicit a Match between
Katharine of Spain, and Arthur, Henry's Son, ibid. He mediates a Peace between
Scots and English, (12) Petronius Turpilianus in Britain, 85 Peter Warbeck a
notable Impostor, (6) Set up by the Duchess of Burgundy to vex Henry, (7)
Sails out of England into Scotland, ibid. Marries Katherine, the Earl of
Huntly's Daughter, (9) Engages James IV. against Henry, (9) Dismissed out of
Scotland, (12) Taken and hanged in England, (13) Pheodor-oy, 37 Phylarchae,
who? 101 Physicians, why so much esteemed in Scotland, 101, 102 Picts, whether
derived from the Saxons, 33 Whence so called? 53 Foretold by the Oracle, that
the Scots should extirpate them, 95, 132 Repent joining with the Romans against
the Scots, 131, 132 Their Origin from Germany, 55, 95 Overcome the Scots, 167
Overcome by the Scots, 168, 169 Their Kingdom abolished in Scotland, 169
Solicit Aid from Osbreth and Ella, 172 Beaten quite out of Britain, 173 Pliny,
a Place in him corrected, 12 Pluscartin Book, i. e. a Book or Chronicle of
Scotland, written by the Religious of Pluscarty, an Abbey in Murrayland, 344
Pollack Fish, where found? 17 Polygamy, a Law made for it by Evenus, 107
Pomona, the greatest Isle of the Orcades, 35 Pope of Rome his Emissaries in
Britain, 157 The Right of the Kingdom of England conferred upon him by King
John, 237 His Ambassadors excommunicate the Scots, 272 David II. King of Scots,
anointed by his Permission, 282 His Legate denied entrance into Scotland, 243
Porcaria Isle, 26 Port, or Na Port, Isle, 25 Portugal, why so called? 47
Possessions confounded by often Wars, 271 Praenestin Lots, what? 43 Priests, or
Clergy, Isle, 31 Priests, corrupted by Luxury, reformed by Constantine, 174
Richer than the Nobility, 243 Gain by the Losses of the Nobility, (25, 29) Not
subject to Kings, 245 Impostors, (58) Priests so ignorant, as to think the New
Testament was written by Martin Luther, (9) Priests, One the Author of a
Sedition, 309 Another treacherous, 374 Betrays Queen Joan, 375 Another forges a
Will, (73) Preys retaken, and restored to their Owners, 106 Prince of Scotland,
the King's Eldest Son so called, 194 Princes not Slaves to their Words, (130)
Privilege of the Scots, not to be summoned to appear out of their own Country,
241 Prodigies on diverse occasions, 184, 204, (191) Process, ridiculous, against
the King's Murderers, (193) Proclamation about the same, ibid. Proclamation, or
Schedule, of James II. drawn in contempt about the Streets, 386 Prosperity
dangerous, 179 Prudania, 2 Prytania, ibid. Prophecies of Witches, how
fulfilled? 357 Ptolemy has Deucaledon for Duncaledon, 56 Punishments, too
exquisite, enrage Spectators, 358 Punishment, of old, to Prisoners not
returning on their Parole, 319 Pygmee Isle, 30
Q
QUadrantary Faith, what? (126) Quindecemvirate in Scotland, (59) Queens, their
Marriage to be ordered by the Estates of the Realm, and why? 269 Anciently,
Kings Wives not allowed to be so called, 402, 403 Queen, Mother of James III.
sues for the Regency, with her Reasons, 400 The Scots not willing to be
governed by her, ibid. Queen Dowager sails into France, (112) Where she labors
to out the Regent of his Government, (113) Has the Regency conferred upon her,
(115) The First Female Regent in Scotland, ibid. Levies new Taxes, (117) But,
because of an Insurrection, desists from collecting them, (118) Refuses the
Propositions sent her by the Reformed, (127) Prepares Forces against them,
(129) Makes a Temporary Agreement with them, (130) Which she endeavors to
elude, ibid. Makes another Truce with them, (134) Repartees betwixt Her and the
Reformed, (136, 137, 138) Her Death and Character, (146, 147) Queen of Scots,
not ^o use the English Arms, during Queen Elizabeth's Life, (159) Queen of
Scots, one of their Deaths, 430 Queen's Party divide from the King's, (255)
They send Ambassadors to France and England for Aid, (254) Queen Elizabeth
rejects them, (254) Question debated, Whether a Chief Magigistrate may be
compelled by force to do his Duty? (159, etc.)
R
RAarsa Isle, 28 Rachlinda Isle, 25 Ralph Evers his vain Boast, (87) Ralph
Rokesby betrays Percy his Friend, 332 Ralph Sadler, Ambassador from England
about the Marriage of Mary with King Henry's Son, (75) He hears the Scots
Differences, and endeavors to compose them, (224) Ramsay Isle, 25 Ranalds-oy,
35 Ranalsa, a Southern Isle, 36 Randolf (Thomas) invades England, 270 Made
Regent, 282 Executes a Murderer, though he had the Pope's Pardon, 282 His Law
against Thievery, ibid. He punishes the Cheat of a Countryman, 283 Poisoned by
a Monk, ibid. Ratra River, has no Salmons in it, 19, 20 Rebels, after Murray
the Regent was dead, had several Meetings, (247) They send Ambassadors to the
Queen of England, to desire a Truce, but in vain, (253, 254) They solicit the
French and Spaniards for Aid, (260) Assault Leith, (281) Surprise Sterlin, but
beaten out again, (281, 282) Attempt Jedburgh, but repulsed and routed, (285,
286) Recognition, what? 15 Red, or Ridhead, Promontory, 19 Redshanks, who? 106
Reformation, the best Method thereof for Princes to begin at home, 188 Reformed
Religion, the Nobles swear to maintain it, in behalf of James VI. whilst a
Child, (214) Reformed Congregation in Scotland, the first so called, (124)
Reformers abrogate the Queen Regent's Power, (139) They meet with Difficulties
in their Work, (140) Are assisted by the English, (141, 142) Their last Letter
to the Regent, (144) Regent slain at Sterlin, (282) Religion, Language, Names
of Places, etc. show the Sameness of a People, 56 Religion, the Nobles arm for
it in Scotland, (129) The Vindicators of it make a Truce with the Regent, (134)
Abrogate her Power, (139) Desire Aid from England, (140) Which they receive,
(142) Reign, the Desire of it occasions much Mischief in the World, (231, 232)
Renfrew, 14 See Baronia. Repartees between Scottish and English Armies, (277)
Rerigonian Bay, 14 Reringa Isle, 27 Reutha, King of Scots, 101 Revenge, the
importune Desire of it dangerous, 124, 131, 132 Reuther, King of Scots, 99
Called Reuda by Bid, 100 Rhingrave sent with Aid by the French King into
Scotland, (106) Rian Lake, or Loch, 14 Richard of England very angry with the
Scots for bringing in foreign Aid, 311 He invades Scotland with a great Army,
ibid. His Expedition to the Holy War, 234 Richard II. of England enforced to
resign the Kingdom to Henry IV. 325 One in Scotland pretends himself to be
Richard, 332 Richard, Duke of Gloucester, marches with an Army against
Scotland, 426 Takes Berwick, 427 Made Protector of England, 428 Casts his
Brother's two Sons into Prison, and sets up himself King, 428 Slain by Henry
VII. 429 Is very Tyrannical in his Government, 434 Richard, Duke of York,
brings King Edward Prisoner to London, 396 Slain by the Queen, ibid. Richard
Colvil put to Death by Douglas, 380 Richard Fox, Bishop of Durham, a very
prudent Man, mediates for Peace between the two Nations, (12, 13) An Instrument
of James his Marriage with Margarite of England, (14) Richard Grafton, an
English Writer, blamed, 252 Rins of Galway, 14 Rinard Isle, 26 Ridhead; see Red
Promontory. Roadilla Monastery, 31 Robbers punished, 183, 189, (48, 57) Robert
Bruce his Genealogy, 246 His magnanimous Answer to the King of England, 250
Begins his Reign, 261 Is overthrown, and flies in disguise to save his Life,
ibid. His Wife imprisoned, and his two Brothers put to Death by the English,
261, 262 He baffles Cumins, ibid. Carried sick into his Army, 264 Causes Edward
of England to retreat, ibid. Invades England, takes Perth, Edinburgh, etc. 265
Overthrows the English at Bannock near Sterlin, 267 Robert, the Son of Robert
Bruce, conspires with John Cumins against England, 259, 260 Is crowned King,
261 Overcomes Edward II. in Battle, 267 The Nobles conspire against him, 271
Robert II. King of Scots, 306 Marries Elizabeth More, 307 The Dispute betwixt
his Legitimate, and his Natural, Children, occasions great Troubles, 350 He
invades England, 311 His Death and Character, 322 Robert III. before called
John, succeeds his Father, 323 His Generals cause the Islanders to destroy one
another, 324 He makes the first Dukes in Scotland, 325 He imprecates God's
Judgments on his Brother, and the other Murderers of his Son David, 330 He dies
with Abstinence, and Grief, for the Captivity of his Son James in England, 331
His Brother Robert made Regent after his Death, 331 Robert Boyd kills James
Stuart, 374 Made Guardian to the King, 409 Created Regent, 412 Flies into
England, and dies there, 414 Robert Boyd deserts the Reformed, and revolts to
the Queen, (218) Robert Britain has great Command at Court, (56) Robert
Cockerane of a Tradesman made a Courtier, 420 Taken by Douglas, and committed
to Prison, 424, 425 Robert Cuningham, of the Family of the Lennoxes, opposes
Bothwel, (195) Robert Douglas desires that the Death of (...) Brother Murray
might be revenged, (249) Robert, Earl of Fife, 315 Starves to Death David the
King's Son, 328 Robert Graham a great Enemy to King James, 355 Conspires
against him, 357 Seizes him with his own Hands, for which he is executed, 358
Robert Maxwel, (71) Coming to reconcile Differences, is imprisoned by Hamilton,
(82) Robert, the Son of Robert Maxwel, taken Prisoner by the English, (91)
Robert, Earl of the Orcades, made one of the King's Guardians, 407 Robert
Petcarn sent Ambassador into England, (242) Queen Elizabeth's Answer to his
Embassy, (257) Robert Read sent Ambassador into France, (63) Poisoned there,
(122) Robert Semple kills Creighton, (111) Robert Stuart, Bruce's Grandson by
his Daughter, rises in Arms for Bruce, 293 Made Regent, 294 Taken by Baliol,
and swears Fealty to the King of England, 286 Sought for to be slain, 292 Roch
Isle, 26 Roffa for Raufchestria, i. e. Rochester, 8 Romachus, King of Scots,
125 Roman Generals in Britain, 84, etc. Roman Fraud, 239 Roman Legates,
Pick-pockets, 243, 418 The Jews Apes, 381 Romans, their memorable Fact in
Britain before their Departure, 138 Rona Isle, 32 Ronanus his Spade, ibid.
Rolland, a Carpenter, discovers a Treachery against Robert Bruce, 268 Rolland's
Valor, he overcomes Gilcolumb, 246, 247 Rose, white, Badg of the York Faction,
(7) Ross, and its Etymology, 21, 139, 170 Rothsay Castle, 25 Rotti Isle, 37
Rous-oy, 36 Round Isle, 26 Roxburgh Town taken, 393 Its Castle taken, 394
Royalists overthrown in the North, (283) Ruby, a French Lawyer in Scotland, his
Character, (147) Rudana Isle, 27 Rum Isle, 28 It abounds with Eggs of Sea-Fowl,
ibid. Ruven had the Mayoralty of Perth taken from him by the Cardinal, (92)
S
SAcred, or Cleirach, Isle, 31 Sacred Sanctuary, 25 Saga Isles, the Great and
the Small, 30 Saliar Verses, not easy to be understood, 44 Salii, who? 44
Salisbury, Earl, commands the English in Scotland, 297 Taken Prisoner, 300
Salmon Fishing, Aberdene famous for it, 19 Sanachies, who? 39 Sancterr Isle, 37
Sanda Isle, 25 Scandians, who? 200 Satrael, King of Scots, 117 Slain, ibid.
Saturnals, old Feasts, retained, 239 Saxe, or Rock, Isle, 26 Saxons kill the
English Nobles by Treachery, 70 Overcome by the Normans, 71 Worsted by Picts,
Scots and Brittons, 149 Cruel in Wars, 146 Not faithful in Peace, 148 Their
Fight with three Kings, 148, 149 Scalpe Isle, 28, 30 Scarba Isle, 25 Schan
Castle, 31 Schanny Isle, 25, 27 Schetland Isles, 36 The Nature of their
Inhabitants, 37 The greatest of them called Pomona, ibid. Sclata, or Sleach,
Isle, 25 Scoff, sharp, given to Bothwel by a Tradesman, (194) Schools, public,
erected by James, 345 Scorpions, i. e. Cross-bows, 311 Scotland, how divided?
13 Where narrowest, 20 Had anciently learned Monks, 169 Scots, their fabulous
Original, 46, 47 Scots and Picts unite against the Romans, 134 Scots and
Brittons overthrown by the Saxons, 157 Scots Monks unjustly banished out of
England, 160 Scots and Brittons unite against Picts and Saxons, 146 Scots Monks
preach the Gospel in Germany, 165 Scots have hard Terms of Peace imposed upon
them by the English, 173 Scots Bishops freed from the Jurisdiction of the
English, 234, 411 Scots have an ancient Privilege, not to be cited to Rome, 241
Scots excommunicated by their Ecclesiastics, 243 Excommunicated again, but
absolved, 272, 273 Scots join with the French against England, 253 Scots
receive a great Overthrow from Edward of England at Falkirk, 256 Obtain a Truce
from him, ibid. Rise in Arms again, and overthrow the English at Rosline, 258
Scots make a League with the French, 273 When their first Alliance with France
began, 165 Scots of Jerna, and Scots of Albion, 52 Scots overthrown by Maximus
the Roman General, and banished out of their Country, 124 March into England,
but retreat again, (91) Scots Nobles, some, rise against James IV. but are
quelled, (3) Scots Nobles anciently had Skill in Surgery, (28) Scots
complain of the French Breach of Faith by their Ambassadors, (60) Scots
Prisoners released at London, (74) Scottish Parliament demolishes all
Monasteries, (152) Scottish Crown ordered to be sent to the Dolphin of France,
(126) Scottish Kings anciently traveled over their Kingdoms themselves to
administer Justice, 123 Scoto-Brigantes, in Claudian to be read for
Scuta-Brigantes, 76 Scroop, an English General in Scotland, (256) Sea-Calves,
29 Sea-Monks, an ill boding Fish, 175 Security dangerous in War, 172, 173
Seditions perilous, 141, 309 Secla, or Seil, Isle, 25 Seneciones, who? 39
Seuna Isle, 30 Severn River, 13 Severus his Wall, 8, 148 His Expedition against
the Brittons, 117, 118 Seuna, or Suin, Isle, 25, 30 Servanus, 145 Shevi Isle,
30 Sheep, fair, yet wild, in Hirta Isle, 30 Their Fat good to eat, ibid. Ships
of great Bigness built by James IV. (14) Siapins-oy, an Isle, 36 Sicambri, who?
79 Sigrama Isles, Great and Small, 30 Silva, or Yew, Isle, 25 Silures, who? 61,
109 Simon Breccus, 171 Similitudes for Illustration, 187, 188 Similitude of
Events do assimilate Men's Manners, 213 Sinclare's Valor against the English,
270 Siuna Isle, 25 Skenny, or Skerry, Isles, 37 Skirmish between English and
French in Scotland, (145) Sky Isle, 28 Skyanna Isle, ibid. Slata Isle, 25
Slavery worse than Banishment, 132 Slegana Isle, 30 Soa Isle, 27, 30 Soabre^il
Isle, 28 Sodora Town, 24 Solan, or Sea, Geese, ibid. Solanum, the Herb
Nightshade, soporiferous, 209 Solinus quoted about Britain, 87 Solvathius, King
of Scots, 164 Solwey River, 13 Sorbonists sent into Scotland, (136) Spain has
several Names, 41 Spaniards, a Colony of them come into Ireland, 94 Inhabited
the West Part of Britain, 51 Subject to the Injuries of Foreigners, 94 Spey
River, 20 Spring, that carries down shapeless Fish, 29 Stacbad Isle, 26 Stafa
Isle, 27 Stanmore, whence so called, 217 The Cross there, ibid. Stags fright
the English, 276 Stephano-Dunum, or Dunstaffnage, 20 Stephen Bull overthrown by
Andrew Wood, (3, 4) Stephen, Earl of Bologn, seizes on the Kingdom of England,
224 Notwithstanding he had taken an Oath to Queen Maud, ibid. Sterlin County,
15 Sterlin Money, 173 Stinsiar River, 14 Strathnavern, 21, 140 Strath-bogy, 140
Strat and Strathern, 17, 140 Stratagems in War, 154, 179 Stromoy Isle, 35
Stronza Isle, 36 Stuart, the Name of an Office, 217 Stuarts, their Original,
ibid. Who was the Rise of their Family, ibid. Stuart, Regent, 298 Succession to
the Crown of Scotland, an old Law made for it, 97 The Administration of the
Government, to whom to be committed, when the King is a Minor, (230, 231)
Suffrages incroached upon, 179 Suilkir Isle, 32 Sumereld, Thane of Argyle, in
hopes of the Kingdom, but is overthrown and slain, 228, 231 Suin Isle, 25 Suna
Isle, 36 Sussex, the Earl of it commands an English Army in Scotland, (255)
Sutherland, 21 Swain gets the Kingdom of England, 71 He comes into Scotland,
200 He distributes three Kingdoms to his three Sons, 208 He comes again into
Scotland, ibid. He is overthrown, 209
T
TAichy, i. e. Menteith, 17 Talbot overthrown by Keith, 297 Again overthrown,
308 Thames River, 13 Thane, who? 187 Thanat Isle, 88 Tanasta Isle, 26 Taodunum,
i. e. Dundee, 18 Taransa Isle, 30 Tarscheir Isle, 26 Tarvedrum Promontory, 21
Tay, the greatest River in Scotland, 18 Temple of Terminus, 15, 119 Terris
Isle, 27 Teviotdale, 13 Texa Isle, 26 Textors Isle, ibid. Theodosius his
memorable Speech, (268) Thereus, King of Scots, flies to the Brittons, 101
Thiana Isle, 25 Thomas Eliot his Opinion refuted, 4 Thomas Becket promotes
Ecclesiastical Ambition in England, 243 Thomas Boyd marries the Eldest Sister
of James III. 412 He is sent Ambassador into Norwey, 413 Declared a public
Enemy, 415 Assists the Burgundians, ibid. His Wife divorced from him, and
married to James Hamilton, ibid. He dies at Antwerp, 416 Thomas Car wastes
England, (247) Thomas Duchty, or Doughty, an Impostor, (58) Thomas Howard,
Admiral of the English Navy, (24) General at Flodden Fight, (24) Afterward
falls into Disgrace, (27) Sent into Scotland, and takes Jedburgh, (41, 42)
Treats of a Marriage with the Queen of Scots, (224) Meditates a Civil War
against the Queen of England, (226, 239) The Conspiracy detected, (242) Thomas
Petcarn sent Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth, (255) Thomas Randolph designed the
King's Tutor, 269 Marches with an Army into England, 275 Thomas Randolph, the
English Ambassador in Scotland, demands the English Exiles, (248) Thomas, Earl
of Sussex, the English General in Scotland, inclinable to the Queen's Faction,
(256) Thomas Wolsy, a Cardinal, self-ended and ambitious, (44) Thornton,
Patric, put to death for Murder, 391 Tintallon Castle besieged by the King,
(55) Surrendered to him, (56) Tine River, 14 Titles of Honor, 203 Tithes for
Ecclesiastics, 140 Tiren, or Tirriss, Isle, 27 Toncetus, an unjust Judge,
slain, 154 Toray Isle, 30 Trajan's remarkable Speech, (268) Trajectus Passage,
or Na Port Isle, 25 Trayl, Archbishop, his Commendation, 328 His Death, ibid.
Triaracha Isle, 25 Trebellius Maximus in Britain, 86 Tree Isle, 25 Tributes, or
Impositions, part of them nibbled away by the Collectors, who are usually
malapert, 339 Imposed, but remitted, 355 The Cause of War, and their Exactors
slain, (10, 11) Designed, but not paid, (117) Trimarchia, 77 Trojans, Greeks by
Descent, 45 Many pretend themselves derived from Them, 46 Trons Isle, 37 Tronta
Isle, 28 Truce betwixt Scots and English, 309, 380 Betwixt the French, English
and Scots, 310, 311 Between Scots and English for seven Years, 430 Truces
violated, 325, 332, 378, 392 Truce between the Queen Regent and the Reformers,
(133) And on what Terms, ibid. Twedale, 13 Twede River, ibid. Tueman Isles, 30,
37 Turff Isle, 27 Turdetani, who? 38 Twine, Laurence, his Story, 284 He stirs
up Baliol to invade Scotland, ibid. Twentieth Part taxed in Scotland, 339 Tyana
Isle, 25 Tyranny, its Root cut by Finnanus, and how? 102 Tyrants Avarice bring
the richer Sort to their Ends, 107
V
VAlay Isle, 30 Valerius Asiaticus his bold Speech, (271) Valla, and Vallis,
Isle, 36 Vannota, King Arthur's Wife, not true to him, 153 Vallia, 60 Varro,
Plato, etc. too inquisitive about Words, 3 Vatersa Isle, 29 Vectius Bolanus in
Britain, 86 Vecturiones, who? 18 Vemendra Isle, 37 Venta Belgarum, 10 Vera
Isle; see Wyer-oy. Vervedrum Promontory, 21 Vestra Isle; see Wester-oy. Vexa
Isle, 30 Via Isle, 37 Viccoil Isle, 31 Victorinus sent into Britain from Rome,
131 Vidam in France, who? (150) Vidogara, See Loch-Ryan, 14 Vien, a French
General, i^ Scotland, 311 Vigils, or Watches, necessary in Camps and Armies,
285, 308 Vikeran Isle, or Na-whoker, 25 Virid, or Green, Isles, viz. Charn
More, and Charn Beg, the greater and the less, 27 Vitellius, a Saxon Commander,
slain by the Scots, 157 Vituline, or Gawin, Isle, 25 Uist, or Yyists, Isle, 29,
30, 37 Ulva Isle, 27 Voadicea, Commandress of the Brittons, See Boadicea. 85
Vonnedra Isle, 37 Vortigern, of a Monk, made King of England, 143 Afterward
deposed* 145 Sends to Hengist the Saxon, 144 Overthrows the Scots, and is
slain, 144, 145 Vortimer, King of the Brittons, renews a League with the Scots
and Picts, 145 Ure River, 114 Ure Isle, 37 Uridick Isle, 25 Usabrast Isle, 26
Uter succeeds his Brother in Britain, 148 His Story and flagitious Fact, 149
Utility sometimes preferred before Honesty in Princes Courts, 331 Uxellum, in
Caesar perhaps, for Ocellum, 70 Uust; see Uyist Island.
W
W, A Letter hard to be pronounced, but by such as Germanize, 6, 60, 61 Waes
Isle, 36 Wales, how anciently divided, 13, 60 Wall a memorable one built by the
Romans, 138 By Adrian, 8, 16 By Severus, 8 Wallace, or Wallis, his Story, 253
Made Regent, and takes many Places from the English in Scotland, 254 Overthrows
Cressingham, the English General, 255 Edward of England afraid to fight him,
255, 256 Envied by the Scots Nobles, 256 Has a Conference in the Field with
Bruce, ibid. Dismisses his Army, 257 Courted by King Edward, 258 Refused to
swear Obedience to him, 259 Betrayed to Edward by a false Friend, 260, 261 By
whom he was drawn, hanged and quartered, ibid. Wallace slain in Fight by the
English, 379 Walowithia, 60 Walsch or Welsch, what it signifies in German, 54,
61 Walter Mills martyred for Religion, 123 Walter, Steward of all Scotland, 21^
Walter, the Son of Murdo, imprisoned, 338 Walter, Earl of Athol, conspires
against the King, and murders him, 355, 356 He is executed, 357, 358 Walter
Scot, endeavoring by Force to take the King from the Douglasses, is
overthrown, (49) Made Prisoner, (57) Restored to Liberty, ibid. Ioins his
Forces with the Regent's, (89) Wardships, their Origin and Nature, 203, 351 A
Badg of Slavery, (15) War, Pretense of the Holy War coz^ns the Simple of their
Money, 243 Warwick, Earl, overthrown by the Queen of England, 397 Watersa Isle,
29 Weathers Isle, ibid. Werk Castle described, (45) Weights corrected, 344
Wester-oy, or Wyer-oy, 36 Whales, Plenty of them about the Isle Lewis, 32
Whales-oy Isle, 37 Whey, the Brittons Drink, 23 White Battle, what? 271 Wife of
Alexander Seton's Speech to her Husband, encouraging him to part with (...)
Sons rather than the Town of Berwick, 289 Witches discovered and punished, 183
William, King of Scots, 231 Taken by the English, 233 Accompanies Henry of
England into France, ibid. Released, ibid. Sends his Brother David to the Holy
War, 235 William Creighton Chancellor, 359 Deceived by the Queen, and her Son
the King taken from him, 360, 361 He guides the King, after he had taken him in
a Wood, to his Party, 365 Highly accused, 361 Craves Aid of Douglas, but in
vain, 362 Agrees with the Regent, 363 Is received into Favor, 374 His Death,
391 William of Normandy repairs Newcastle, 217 Conquers the Danes, 71
Overthrown in Scotland, 116 William Cecil, a prudent Counselor, in England,
(146) Sent Ambassador into Scotland, ibid. William Creighton slain, (111)
William Creighton outlawed, with his Crimes, 428 William Douglas refuses to
swear Fealty to King Edward, 253 He treats Alexander Ramsay inhumanly, 301 Is
slain, 303 William Douglas, Son of Archibald of Galway, 314 The King marries
his Daughter Aegidia to him, though he were a Bastard, ibid. Killed by Ruffians
at Dantzic, 322 William Douglas succeeds Archibald his Father, 363 Corrupted by
Flatterers, profuse, enticed by the Chancellor to Edinburgh, and beheaded, 370
William Douglas, Son of James the Gross, marries Beatrix his Uncle's Daughter,
370 Submits to the King, 371 By his Obsequiousness makes the King his Own, and
by that means revenges the Deaths of his Kinsmen, 372, 375 Goes to Rome, 381
Accused in his Absence, and his Solicitor overthrown in the Trials, ibid. He
pays Damages out of his Estate, 381, 382 Returns, and is declared Regent, 383
Comes to Court on safe Conduct, 385 At last slain by the King's own Hand, 386
William Douglas desires leave to revenge the Death of his Brother the Earl of
Murray, (248) William Drury, an English Knight, secretly favors the Rebels,
(278) William, Bishop of Dunblane, sent into France to excuse the Queen's hasty
Marriage in Scotland, (199, 200) William Graham, the King's Guardian, 407
William Hume beheaded, (36) William Elphinston, Bishop of Aberdene, laments the
State of Scotland, (30) William Keith taken Prisoner by the English, (122)
William Kircade of Grange, Admiral of the Navy against Bothwel, (215) William
Levingston goes into France with the Queen, (107) William of Malmesbury, a
British Writer, 8 William Maitland, an ingenious young Man, (161) Sent into
England to desire Aid, (224) Sent into England to complement Queen Elizabeth on
Mary's Account, (154) Persuades her to declare Mary her Heires^, (155) Which
she refuses to do, (157) He favors the Queen's Affairs, (225) Is factious and
perfidious, ibid. Studies Innovations, (226) He is taken and released, (242,
243) William Murray of Ti^bardin, angry with the Regent, (216) William Rogers,
an English Musician, one of James the IIId's Evil Counselors, 420 William
Sylly, or Souls, executed, 271 William Sivez, his Story, 418 Archdeacon, and a
great Astrologer, ibid. Undermines Patrick Graham, and gets the Bishopric, 419
William Stuart, Bishop of Aberdene, sent Ambassador into France, (63) Woman's
Isle; see Nuns Isle. Women, some of a manly Spirit, 290, 297, 397 Women,
whether the supreme Government ought to be committed to them? 401
X
X Used by the Spaniards for double SS. 60
Y
YEw Isle, 25 Yla Isle, 26
Z
ZEal, or Yel, Island, 3^ Zeland, or Schetland, Isles, ibid. Zerobia, Queen of
Palmira, unsuccessful in her Government, 405 Zeviot, or Cheviot, Hills or
Mountains, ^3
FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the first Twelve Books.
PAge 16. marg. for Adrews read Andrews. P. 23. l. 29. f. wear r. did wear. P.
24. marg. f. Arra^ r. Arr^^* P. 31. l. 18. f. Nastick r. Na Aich. P. 39, 40,
41, 42. in the Title, f. Book I. r. Book II. P. 75. marg. f. ^^lalabria's r.
Calabria's. P. 82. l. 47. f. hither r. hitherto. P. 109. l. 41. f. Pe^itius r.
Petili^^^. P. 110. l. 10* (...) p. 111. l. 5. f. Agrippa r. Agricola. P. 110.
l. 42. f. Eighth r. Seventh. P. 116. marg. f. vn^^^ry r. (...). P. 120. l. 45.
and p. 183. l. 26. f. Wizard r. Witch. P. 131. l. 43. f. Thus r. This. P. 160.
l. 22. r. Redemption. P. 168. marg. f. Kennetius r. Kennethus. P. 183. l. 17.
f. Causes r. Cause. P. 197. l. 22. f. vai^ r. in vai^. P. 21^. l. 23. f. Neice
r. Grandchild. l. 29. f. Nephew r. Grandson. P. 227. l. 25. f. 1553 r. 1153. P.
228. l. 6. dele good. P. 236. l. 20. f. 1643 r. 1214. P. 245. l. 2. f. Neice r.
Grandchild. l. 13. f. Neice r. Grandchild. P. 248. l. 41. f. to the Marriage
with his Queen r. Marriage (of his Son) with their Queen. l. 15. f. Duchess r.
D^tchy. P. 272. l. 9. dele some. P. 273. l. 1. after taken, add, Besides many
of inferior Rank, John Britain, Earl of Richmond, was also taken. P. 286.
marg. f. Ear. r. Earn. l. 27. f. the Caledonians r. Dunkel. P. 287. dele the
last marginal Note, viz: And declare War against France. P. 292. l. 21. after
Wepont, add or Oldbrigs. P. 297. l. 16. f. 1^37* r. 1337. P. 299. r. Alexander
Ramsay. P. 319. l. 19. f. Army r. Arms. P. 325. l. 11. r. 18 years old. Earl of
Rothes. P. 329. l. 1^ and 27. f. 300. r. 30. ibid. l. 49. dele of. P. 330. l.
30. r. Charles VI. P. 331. f. Youth's r. Child's. P. 332. marg. f. Murray r.
Garioch. P. 339. l. 35. f. before r. after. P. 342. l. 46. f. (...) of
Cait^nes, r. the Clan-cattan Men. f. Cameron r. the Camerons. P. 347. marg. f.
Trust r. Fr^it. P. 348. l. 44. f. (...) r. Mar. P. 353. l. 12. f. quietly r.
quickly. P. 3^5. f. his Nephew by his Son r. Grandson. P. 357. l. 46. f. (...)
Nephew by his Son r. Grandson. P. 360. l. 25. f. no r. now. P. 370. l. 23. f.
upon r. before. P. 389. l. 43. f. (...) r. dwindle. P. 403. l. 41. f. induce r.
introduce. P. 407. l. 28. f. Caledonia r. Dunkel. P. 420. l. 22. f. Na^ts r.
(...). P. 4^1. l. 44. f. Blankets r. Sheets. P. 422 l. 27. ^. Lewis the XI. P.
424. l. 35. r. Go to the Kings (...).

In the Eight last Books.
P. 2. l. 7. f. infesting r. infested. P. 3. l. 24. f. Grampias r. Grampius.
Ibid. l. 40. f. Edward r. H^^ry. P. 6. l. ^^. f. Gr^^ina r. Graecina. P. 8. l.
45. f. so the present r. for the present. P. 9. l. 7. f. Their r. His. P. 11.
marg. f. (...). from. Ib. l. 38. f. he returned ^. so returned. P. 15. marg. f.
go Jerusalem r. go to Jerusalem. P. 39. l. 6. f. (...) r. as b^ing. P. 40.
marg. f. raise r. raises. P. 44. l. 46. r. Assembly. P. 59. l. 19. f.
Sunderland r. (...). P. ^3. l. 2. f. King r. Regent. P. 99. l. 49. r. Nones of
November. P. 104. l. 17. dele all. P. 106. marg. r. (...). P. 108. l. 13. f.
Minnans r. Minians. Ib. l. 29. dele so^e. P. 193. l. 40. f. Guest r. (...). P.
19^. l. 23. r. as in many other Princ^s, so etc. P. 254. marg. f. St. Lewis r.
Monsieur Lewis.

In the Alphabetical Table.
For Cassivelannus r. Cassivela^nus. For Gaxnico r. Garnico. For Genrach r.
Ge^rach. For Hypoc^^is^ical p. 6. r. Hypo^^ristical. P. 60. In Kirkwal, for
Pomonae r. Pomo^a.


