THE CERTAINTY OF THE Future Judgment Asserted and Proved, IN A SERMON PREACHED
At St Michael's Crooked Lane, London, October. xxvi. 1684. By MATTHEW. BRYAN,
Lecturer there. Published in the Author's Vindication.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD, PETER Lord BISHOP of
WINTON, AND PRELATE of the GARTER,
MY LORD,
YOur Lordship having been pleased to honor me with a Testimonial under your
Episcopal Seal (besides a Letter to his Grace my Lord of Canterbury) of my
Behavior for about ten Years in your Lordships late Diocese of Bath and Wells,
when I removed thence to the Place where I now am; I should justly have been
condemned, had those scandalous Reports, which are raised concerning me, been
true, as the vilest and most ungrateful Wretch living, appearing so unworthy
of, and contrary to the Character your Lordship was pleased to give me, proving
at once a disobedient Son to your good Lordship, (to whom I must acknowledge my
self to stand, in many instances, more particularly obliged) and a disloyal
Subject to the Best of Kings.

This, my Lord, is the reason of my inscribing to your Lordship's Name the
following plain Discourse (calculated for a common Auditory) which I am even
forced out of pure necessity to make public (and therefore humbly beg that it
may shelter it self under your Lordship's Patronage) to stop the mouth of a
flying Scandal, which has wounded my Reputation, and that the Truth may appear,
and the World be satisfied how unjustly my Sermon preached at St. Michael's
Crooked Lane, London, October. 26. ult. was reflected on, and represented as
Treasonable and Seditious, and reproaching the Government and the Courts of
Justice: A heavy Charge and Imputation! which, I doubt not, Good Men (when
undeceived) will conclude to be false, and that I am notwithstanding a true and
Loyal Subject to the King, the rather, because

Your Lordship's most Obedient Son, and Obliged Humble Servant,Matthew. Bryan.
December. 10. 1684.
To the READER.
IT is not out of Ambition to appear in print, to lie upon a Book-seller's
stall, and be pointed at in a crowd, (...) -- that I publish the following
plain (but practical) Discourse, (fitted for a private Auditory in my Course of
Preaching, and not designed for public view) but in a just Vindication of my
self from those Aspersions and unworthy Calumnies, cast upon me by some of my
Auditors, who out of Ignorance, or Prejudice, at least not well understanding,
or regarding what was spoken, together with the Scope, and Coherence, or out of
I know not what rash and preposterous Zeal (but not according to Knowledge)
hoping perhaps to oblige the Government, (whereas in Truth by such practices
they really prejudice it, whilst they reproach and abuse its Friends, that are
truly loyal, and neither speak, nor act any thing against it, but for it, and
that in a lawful Assembly) miserably represented my Sermon with so black, and
frightful a Face, that I was startled at it my self, appearing in their
deformed Dress, and so unlike my Genuine Issue (there being nothing which I
abhor more than Disloyalty, Sedition and Treason, which, not only my Principles
as a Clergyman, but my Education too, as a Clergyman's Son, do, I thank God,
sufficiently arm me against) and therefore took a review of its native
Complexion, which I showed again to my Auditors the Sunday following, the major
Part of which, and some the most judicious, and eminently loyal Persons,
declared it to be the same, (without any material alteration) and altogether
unlike the monstrous shape, which some had made it to appear in. With which,
though some were satisfied, not only my Auditors, but others too, particularly,
the Honorable Sir Richard Lloyd Knight, Dean of the Arches (to whom a
complaint was brought against me, which was soon after contradicted by the same
Person that brought it, being undeceived by a true account from a very
judicious, loyal Person, in the Parish of St Michael Crooked-Lane, who was an
Auditor of the said Sermon) and also his Grace my Lord of Canterbury, who has
since had a true account of the whole matter: Yet I doubt not but there are
many, to whom it has, or will appear with its ugly Vizard, and its blacker
Dress (which Ignorance, or Malevolence has put upon it) which will provoke them
to abhor and curse the Child and the Parent too.

To prevent which mischief, and undeceive the impartial and unprejudiced, I
thought it necessary to print my Sermon, which how faithfully and exactly done,
I appeal to the most judicious Auditors, both in the Parish of St Mary
Newington in Surrey, (where this very Sermon, that was so carp'd at (but not by
one of the Auditors there) was preached in the Morning) and in the Parish of St
Michael Crooked Lane, London (where it was preached in the Afternoon) who, I
doubt not, will be ready to attest (if required) that what is here presented to
the World in Print, is the very same, without any material alteration, that was
preached in each Parish on the 26th of October ult. and the 2d of November
following, at which times was delivered what was objected against, and
misrepresented in this Discourse, particularly from p. 1. to p. 18. which is
transcribed from my Notes, as it was preached.

And whether the whole, or any part of it speaks what my Accusers did (viz.
that I reproached and reflected on the Government, and the Courts of Justice,
saying, That there is persecution in our Courts of Judicature, and that Men are
persecuted there, and could not have Justice done them, and that the Judges did
take Bribes, etc.) let the impartial and unprejudiced judge.

I presume the subtillest Head, and most critical Censor cannot pick out one
thing that looks like Treason, or Sedition, or Reflection on the Government, or
the Courts of Judicature.

And how tender a Man ought to be of, and concerned for his Reputation, is
determined not only by that famous Oracle, Eccles. 7.1. Vid. Bp. Sanderson's
Sermons, p. 23.
the wisest Meer-man on earth (who observes that a good Name is better than
precious Ointment) but also by the great Apostle, who (as Bishop Sanderson
observes) makes a Slander cast upon a Minister (qua talis) to be at least petty
Acts 6.11.
Blasphemy: (Romans 3.8.) (...), as we are slandered, as we are blasphemed.

Which Consideration was perhaps the reason that that worthy and learned
Prelate preached and published a Sermon (and that in his younger years, Vid.
Bishop Sanderson, ut supra p. 21.37.
before he was advanced to the Episcopal Dignity) in vindication of himself
from a severe and unjust Imputation.

I hope therefore I shall not be blamed, especially by my Reverend Fathers and
Brethren of the Clergy (whose Innocence, at this rate, may soon be blasted by
the virulent tongues of such Detractors, who take the liberty to comment on our
Sermons, and report them in their own words, at least catching at part of a
Sentence, or a piece of a Period, not minding the Scope, or Coherence whereby
it is possible to make foul work with the fairest discourse that proceeds from
the Pulpit) for endeavoring to retrieve the credit of my reputation, and stop
the mouth of a flying Slander, which getting upon the wings of Fame (that swift
and often lying Messenger, as the Poet observes, Fama, Malum, quo non aliud
velocius ullum,
Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo --)
need not be bid to make speed to carry its message through the World. Report,
say they in the Prophet, Jer. 20.10.
and we will report.

And though I need not, I confess, (which some may retort upon me) stand upon
the Punctilioes of Honor, or value my self much on that account, being,
perhaps, as little in the eyes of the world, as I desire to be in mine own; yet
were I ten times less than I am, rather than tamely sit down under the black
cloud of so unjust a scandal, and severe an Imputation (neither is it
inconsistent with Christianity, or the meekness of the Dove so to resolve, the
crime here insinuated being not strictly a carnal sin, as Drunkenness,
Adultery, etc. (the reproach whereof, how unjust soever, I could more easily
have born, as my Savior did before me) but Spiritual, and Diabolical, viz. to
despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities) which a little warm Breath, and
brisk Air would easily blow off; I had rather (I say) die than live, it being
determined long ago -- Praestat penitus emori, quam per dedecus vivere.

I will detain the Reader no longer than to tell him that I thought sit, for
the common good, to publish my whole Discourse on this Subject (excepting only
the Illustrations of some Particulars relating to the third Head of Discourse,
p. 20, 21. which I was forced to omit, lest these Papers should swell too big,
(though no more was strictly necessary for my Vindication than from p. 1. to p.
18. as aforesaid) that it might not be imperfect, in which the Argument is
weighty (how weak soever the management be) and a mighty Persuasive to a
virtuous and good Life. And if the production of it in the World, though by an
Evil Cause, has any good Effect toward the furthering of any ones Salvation,
and the promoting of his spiritual and eternal Good, I have my End, who desire
to live no longer in the World, than I may be sineerely serviceable to God, the
King, and my Country.

M. B.

2 COR. v. 11. the former Part. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men --


THE Apostle in this and the former Chapter, professes his Christian integrity
with the constancy of it, and that upon a double Motive, viz. the expectance of
Immortal Glory, and the General Judgment. Of the former he speaks in the Close
of the fourth Chapter, and the Beginning of this: And as this Motive was before
his eye, so that of Judgment to come, ver. 10. For we must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Which last
Motive, or Argument he lays down by way of Position or Doctrine, and in the
Words of my Text draws his Inference from it by way of Application to others:
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men --

Knowing] i. e. being assured of the certainty of Judgment to come, which he
calls The terror of the Lord, being the cause of terror. We] i. e. I and the
rest of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, do persuade men, i. e. press and
excite and stir up and exhort them to their Christian Duties, to Gospel-Piety,
and Obedience.

So that the Remark or Observation, which naturally arises from the Words, is
this, viz.

That the pressing and persuading men to Gospel-Piety and Obedience by the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, In speaking to which, I shall endeavor to do
these four things: I. Clear the Point as to its Inference. II. Show you the
infallible certainty of a future Judgment after this Life. III. Enquire into
the severity and dreadfulness of it, styled here, The terror of the Lord; and
then, IV. and Lastly, Make Improvement of all by Application.


I. I shall first of all endeavor to clear the Point as to its Inference, and
show you, That no less Motive than this, viz. The infallible certainty, and
severity and dreadfulness of the future Judgment, could put the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ upon the so earnest pressing and persuading men to
Gospel-Piety and Obedience.

And this will appear by considering what other Motive could have any
probability to prevail with them.

1. Could they be prevailed with to tell the World of a Terror that they
should never feel, and themselves did not believe; and thereupon to press
Gospel-Piety and Obedience, and that only as an Engine of State Policy, to keep
men in awe, and Obedience to their Governors, and preserve Civil Peace, as
some Profane Men would have it? If so, why then were they not more in esteem
with Rulers and Princes, with the Great and Noble? why were they the Mark of
their malice and envy, of their rage and fury, if they were hired as their
Politic Servants, and did them such great and acceptable service? Again,

2. Was it Honor they had in their eye? Why then were they the Object of the
World's contempt and scorn, scoft at, and derided, having trial of cruel
mockings, reviled, defamed, and accounted the filth of the World, and the
off-scowring of all things? 1 Cor. 4.13.

3. Was it Profit that was the Motive? Surely no: For then our Savior, and his
Apostles, and Ministers would have had a greater interest in the World; then
they would have had full Chests and Barns to boast of, as well as others. But
it is notorious, how great a degree of poverty did await them: Christ himself
not having a house wherein to put his head, no Lands or revenues to give him
the title of rich or great. And his Apostles following him, left their gainful
Trades, and were not much richer than their Master. Yea, may it not be truly
observed to this day, that the employment of a Minister is none of those direct
Courses to Wealth and Riches? whereas other Arts and Employments can raise an
Estate, and advance a Family, they who wait at the Altar, with their
Dependents, for the most part live in meaner circumstances. (Not but that God
has a Blessing for the Posterity and Sons of the Clergy, as well as others;
many of them arriving to eminent degrees of Greatness and Wealth in the World;
but then that owes it self not always so immediately to their Fathers
encouragement and Estate in the World, but to their own, through God's Blessing
upon those Employments and gainful Trades wherein they were educated.)

None of these things then could be Motives to the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ to set on this Business: What Motives then could prevail? Would they be
so mad and indiscreet to press Gospel-Piety upon the supposition of a Terror
that they should never hear of, or feel, and which themselves did not believe,
and not hope to be advantaged by it, either here or hereafter? What
encouragement were this, nay what madness rather, to press an idle and
unprofitable Virtue, an uncommanded Obedience, with design only to terrify and
affright the World, and in the mean time expose themselves to disgrace, and
shame, and contempt, and reproach, and hatred, and persecution? With what
courage or comfort could they hold out to press this impertinent, unprofitable
business, and that with so much sweat and labor, weakening their Bodies, and
wasting their Spirits, endangering their lives and livelihood? If there were no
other Motive but this, how soon would they have hung the Wing? how soon would
the Tongue have faulter'd, and been silent, and the Spirits faint, and the
Hands and Feet have been weary?

It Is then certainly no less, no more inseriour Motive, than the certain
knowledge of the Terror of the Lord, that put them with such earnestness upon
this great business.

'Twas this brought Christ from Heaven; Knowing the Terror of the Lord, he
came down to persuade men; knowing, I say, the Terror of the Lord, the
displeasure of the Great God against sin and Sinners, and the certainty of
Divine vengeance and everlasting wrath, knowing this, he came into the World to
persuade men. This made him with so much zeal and earnestness to set upon this
Business, to persuade men; and that both by his Doctrine and Miracles, his Life
and his Death, by his bitter Passion and Sufferings, his Tears and Blood, his
Resurrection and Ascension, and Mission of the Holy Ghost; and still continues
to persuade them by his Ministers and Ambassadors, whom he commissions and
commands to persuade, and entreat, and beseech, by all the endearments and
compellations of Love, to flee from the wrath to come, to be reconciled to God,
to embrace and improve the means of Grace and Salvation: Which has transported
their Spirits with zeal and courage, counting nothing dear, but God's Glory and
men's Souls; counting, I say, nothing dear, neither health, nor strength, nor
reputation, nor honor, nor livelihood, nor their dearest blood, which they
were content should melt away in the Flames, and be exposed to the hands of
violence, rather than cease to persuade men, knowing the Terror of the Lord.

And this, by the way, may serve as an Apology for Ministers. When you hear
them boldly and severely rebuking Vice, and reproving sin and Sinners, laying
open the horrid and abominable nature, and sad effects and consequents of sin,
and so passionately and earnestly persuading men to repentance, to the practice
of Virtue and Holiness, and that from the consideration of rewards and
punishments to be dispensed in the other World, and those dressed up in the
different habit of recommending, or astonishing, and affrighting circumstances,
proper to each distant state: when you hear this, do not censure it as a common
Lecture of Terror to awe and affright Children, and the weaker sort, who are
easily imposed upon; as words of course, and so not much to be regarded; as a
Trial of Skill, and a cast of our Office; much less as a design out of malice
and hatred to your persons to expose and abuse you; which will provoke you to
be angry, to storm and rage at the Word, and the Preacher of it. No, but rather
look upon it and receive it, as Words spoken in the deepest seriousness, and
out of true compassion and charity to your Souls.

Alas! Sirs! were not sin so dangerous and hurtful to men, were there no future
Account to give at the tremendous Audit, were there no such flaming wrath and
fiery vengeance as you hear of from the Pulpit, were there no future Rewards
for good, and no Punishments for bad men, we would never trouble you: For we
come upon an unwelcome Message to many, to ravish their Dalilahs out of their
Arms, (which may turn their Stomachs, and make them rage, as Herod did at John
the Baptist) to take them off from that which they so dearly love, which it is
as as hard to part with, as to part with a dear Member, with a right Eye, or a
right Hand; and therefore sin is compared to the Members of the Body: Mortify
therefore your Members which are upon the earth: Col 3.5.
fornication, etc.

And no wonder now that the Sinner storms and grows angry; but we must not
value that. The Surgeon would be unfaithful, if he should be loath, or
forbear to put his Patient to grief when he sees his danger: No, he will cut
and lance and search the Wound, or Sore to the bottom, though he put his
Patient to pain, though he cry and lament sore, and grow angry; he will not
spare a dear Member, if a Gangrene calls for amputation. The Physician will
deal plainly with his Patient, and tell him the nature of his Disease, and his
danger, and will make him sick with bitter Pills, and loathsome Potions, in
order to his Cure. The Lawyer will deal faithfully with his Client, and
critically examine, and search into every Creek and Corner of his Evidences,
and tell him the worst, and not flatter him, if he finds any thing defective,
that he may consult a Remedy.

Now, Sirs! our Work is much like the Work of these: like the Surgeon we are
to cut and lance with the Sword of the Spirit, and the Knife of Mortification,
and to search the Sinners Wounds and ulcerous Sores to the bottom; yea, and to
amputate and dismember too. Like the Physician we must tell men of their
Sickness, and their danger, and dose them with bitter Pills, and loathsome
Potions: We are Physicians in Ordinary to the King of Kings, and the World is
his great Hospital, where do lie abundance of impotent Folk, of blind, and
lame, and sick, and diseased, who are our Care; we are bound ex Officio to look
after them, and must deal faithfully, and in such methods as the nature of the
Disease requires. Like the Lawyer, we must search and examine our Peoples
Evidences for the heavenly Inheritance; yea, like Ambassadors, we must deliver
our Message, whether of Peace, or War. And would you have us flatter and
deceive?

Now were there no need of this, we would not trouble men. But, alas! who can
see his Neighbor's, or his Friend's danger, and not be concerned? What an
uncharitable man is he, that sees his Neighbor's House on Fire, and will not
tell him of it, and endeavor to save him from, or pluck him out of the
Burnings? that sees him drowning, and will not help him? that sees Thieves
breaking in upon him, and will not cry out, and assist him? especially it is the
Watchman's Office so to do, who will not be loath, or forbear to cry out Fire,
at Midnight, or make an Alarm to give notice or Thieves and Robbers, lest he
awake or disturb the secure sleeping man who is in danger. And, what! shall the
Watchmen of Israel, who ex Officio are bound to give notice of, and help to
quench the spiritual Flames, hold their peace and be silent? Shall we see men
all in Flames, exposed to the devouring Fire, the Fire of Lusts burning within
them, evidenced by the Flames of Vices without, the Flames of wrath and Divine
Vengeance over them, and the Flames of Hell underneath them, into which they
are ready to drop every moment? Shall we see this, and be silent, and not cry
out and endeavor to quench the Flames, and pluck them out of the Burnings, and
save them from that consuming Fire? Shall we see them upon the Precipice of
destruction, just falling headlong into ruin, and not stretch out a hand to
save them? Shall we see Thieves and Murderers (the Devil and his Agents)
breaking in upon Souls, and not give them notice of it, and run to their
assistance?

You ought therefore (Brethren!) to put a candid construction on the severest
Lectures from the Pulpit; to take the sharpest Reproofs, the most bitter
Invectives against Sin, the most earnest and passionate Adjurations, as
instances of compassion, and love to your Souls, and faithfulness to him that
sent us. Believe it, it is the sin we hate, while we reprove, but yet love the
Sinner. Phil. 1.15.
And though some perhaps may preach Christ out of envy (as the Apostle speaks)
and others for the sake of the Bag, with Judas; yet, I doubt not, there are
many, who have higher Ends and aims, viz. God's Glory, and the salvation of
Souls, who can truly say with the Apostle here, Knowing therefore the Terror
of the Lord, we persuade men.

I will shut up this with that wholesome Advice of St James and St Peter
concerning hearing and receiving of the Word preached, Jam. 1.19, 20, 21.
Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak,
slow to wrath: for the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.
Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive
with meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your Souls. To which
let me add that of St Peter, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Wherefore laying aside all malice,
and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings; as newborn
Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.

But here may some say, If all this is true, that there is a future State, a
Day of Judgment coming, such a Terror of the Lord to be revealed hereafter,
Ministers do well to be so earnestly and passionately concerned for the Souls
of men, to cry aloud and spare not, to tell them of their Sins, and warn them
to flee from the wrath to come: but are you sure you are not under a mistake,
that you do not err in the Foundation? Are you sure there is such a future
Judgment as you speak of? What evidence or assurance have you of the certainty
of it?

This I shall answer; and therein, I hope, give you satisfaction in the next
Particular which I am to speak to, viz. to show you,

II. The infallible certainty of the future Judgment. Now the certainty of a
future Judgment after Death is declared and evidenced to the World by a
threefold voice. The Voice of Scripture, the Voice of Conscience, and the Voice
of God's Justice.

First, The Voice of Scripture. The Jews had a confident Tradition amongst
them, That blessed Enoch, who was translated to Heaven, had left two Pillars,
as sacred to Posterity, wherein were fairly engraven those two great
Prophecies, one of the first Desolation of, and Judgment upon the World by
water; not many years before which came, God removed him, as a Jewel to an
heavenly Cabinet, that his eyes might not see it. The second Prophecy in a
Pillar of Stone, of the Dissolution of the World by Fire against the final
Judgment. The latter Prophecy, concerning the final Judgment, is warranted by
Scripture, Jude 14, 15. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of
these, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to
execute vengeance upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him.

There is nothing that the holy Scripture is more plain and positive in, than
asserting a Day of Judgment. Death and Judgment are the Twin-Sisters of the
same Womb of Decree. Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed unto all men once to dye, and after that the Judgment. The sad
certainty of Judgment closes up that Ironical Expression of the Wise man, or
rather a wiser than He, in reproof of wanton youthful Sinners, Eccles. 9.11.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes:
But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment. Our
Savior does often very positively and expressly mention a Day of Judgment, as
we may see in all the four Evangelists. And the Apostles are often beating upon
this Argument. It were endless to enumerate Particulars. So positive is the
Scripture in this Point, that it observes to us, that the very Day is
appointed, and the Judge named, Acts 17.31. He has appointed a day in the
which he will judge the World in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead.

There are three Days have an Emphatical Note set upon them: the Day of
Creation, the Day of Redemption, and the Day of Judgment.

1. The Day of Creation, which opened the Door of Time.

2. The Day of Redemption, which is called, Gal. 4.4.
The Fullness of Time.

3. The Day of Judgment. This shall shut out Time, and usher in Eternity. And
this Day is Emphatically called The Day of the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. Phil. 2.16.
Jude 6. Joel 2.31. Ephesians. 4.30.
the Day of Christ, and the great Day, and the great and terrible Day of the
Lord, and the Day of Vengeance, and the Day of Redemption, and the Day of
refreshing.

That Is the first Evidence of the certainty of the future Judgment, the Voice
of Scripture. The Second is,

Secondly, The Voice of Conscience; and that both natural, and enlightened.

1. Natural Conscience, which is affrighted at the hearing of a Judgment to
come. Felix trembled at it, Acts 24.25. And as he reasoned of righteousness and
temperance and Judgment to come, Felix trembled. As St Paul preached to him of
righteousness and temperance, his guilty Conscience reflected on all his past
acts of injustice and intemperance; and when he heard of the Grand Audit, the
dreadful Judgment, at which he must account for all his faults, the mighty
Felix trembled. 'Twas too harsh a Note, and jarring Sound, and unpleasant
Music for his delicate Ears and accusing Conscience to hear, and therefore
presently dismissed the Preacher, Go, get thee gone, says he, for this time,
and when I have a more convenient season, I will call for thee.

Though the Athenians mocked when they heard of the Resurrection of the dead,
yet not at the hearing of the Day of Judgment. The Heathen, by the very Light
of Nature, had a sense of Divine wrath and vengeance, which would pursue
Sinners. Thus the barbarous People in the Island of Melita, where St Paul
arrived after his Shipwreck, when they saw the Viper leap out of the Fire, and
fasten upon his hand, they said among themselves, Acts 28.3, 4.
No doubt this man is a Murderer, whom though he had escaped the Sea, yet
vengeance suffers not to live. Why, whence had they this Notion of vengeance?
Where had this barbarous People these Notices? What Gospel-Preacher ever
arrived there before, to preach to them this Doctrine of the Divine wrath and
vengeance? This Preacher dwelt within them. 'Twas the Witness and Light of God
within them, which made discoveries of the heinous Nature, and Guilt of
Murder, and the vindicative Justice of the invisible Powers, which, they
believed, will call every man to an account for his most secret Guilts. That Is
a famous Instance of the Heathen Mariners in Jonah. Jon. 1. The Mariners there
being affrighted at the terrible and unusual Tempest. (which God, for Jonah's
sake, sent out into the Sea) resolve among themselves ( v. 7.) to cast Lots,
that they might know for whose cause that Evil was upon them: Which intimates,
that they believed that the most secret faults were not unknown to the
Omniscient Being; and therefore resolved to cast Lots, which, they apprehended,
did not fall fortuitously and by chance, but by Divine direction, and the
guidance of an invisible hand. So Solomon observes, Prove. 16. ult. The lot is
cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. And though
the Lot fell upon Jonah, who confessed that he was a Fugitive Prophet, and that
for his sake the Sea was tempestuous, and that the only Expedient to assuage
its raging, was to cast him overboard, which he bid them do: yet the men were
afraid, Jon. 1.12.
being loath to contract the guilt of Murder, knowing that 'twas a crying sin,
and that the voice of his Blood would cry aloud, and plead against them before
the invisible Judge of the World; and therefore they tugged hard to get the
Ship to Land, but all would not do, the Sea being more and more tempestuous;
wherefore being forced to throw him overboard for their own safety, yet they
did it with Cries and Prayers and earnest Supplications to the great God,
deprecating the guilt of Murder, and the cry of innocent Blood, v. 14.
Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O Lord, we
beseech thee, let us not perish for this man's life, and lay not upon us
innocent blood.

And if Natural Conscience is so much affrighted at the thoughts, and hearing
of Judgment, how much more,

2. An enlightened one; A Conscience enlightn'd by the Light of Scripture, which
gives the truest measures of sin, and Divine wrath and vengeance. The Christian
has the best and truest account of the nature of sin, and the sad consequents
of it, is supposed to know and understand it best. And so he does, and
therefore is sufficiently affrighted at its ghastly looks, when he is under an
apprehension of a speedy approach to Judgment: Witness the cries and groans,
the sighs and lamentations of the sick dying Sinner, whom you may hear, if you
step into his Chamber, as he lies languishing upon his sick Bed, lamenting and
cursing his wicked life, and bewailing his sins with all the aggravating
instances of abhorrence and detestation. Why, what is the matter? What ails the
man? How comes it, that he is now so troubled at sin, who before never feared
it? Why, it is the Witness of God within him, whose mouth was stopped before, that
thus speaks. His Conscience is awakened, and does lash and sting him with a
sense of guilt, and the fiery vengeance, shows him what he has done, and
whither he is a going, that he is making his trembling approach before the
Judgment Seat of Christ.

That Is the Second Evidence of the certainty of Judgment, viz. the Voice of
Conscience; The third is,

Thirdly, The Voice of God's Justice, which requires that there should be a
future Judgment. They who will not be convinced by Scripture, may perhaps by
this Argument, The consideration of God's Justice, together with the State of
Affairs, and things in this Life.

They who have any sense of Religion, and believe there is a God, must believe
him to be just, that he is the just and righteous Governor of the World, a
Lover of Justice, and will administer Justice to his Creatures. Now, in regard
we are not capable of an immediate converse with God, who is a Spirit, and
invisible, he is pleased to converse with us by men, by Creatures like our
selves, and does appoint some as his Vicegerents, his Delegates and
Substitutes here on Earth, to execute the Laws of Justice, and make an equal
distribution of it, in giving rewards, and inflicting punishments, according to
the nature and merit of the actions of men, and to render to every one his due.

Now it is notorious, that Justice is not universally and impartially executed
in this Life. The virtuous are not always rewarded, nor the vicious punished,
according to the different nature of their actions. Of which I could give you
various Instances: As,

1. In the Case of Persecution. Good men, that fear God, are many times
perseucted for the true Religion, as the Martyrs in the Marian Days, and other
Protestants in Christendom. These were good, and yet received evil; they had
not the reward of their Virtue here. What should I speak of that Cloud of
Witnesses, that noble Army of Martyrs mentioned in the 11th of the Hebrews, who
had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and
imprisonment, were stoned, were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the
sword; wandered about in Sheep skins, and Goat skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented; of whom the World was not worthy? On the other side,
their Persecutors fared well, though they did so ill; did not receive the
recompense of their Vices, and wickedness, and cruelties, and blasphemies; had
not their punishment in this Life, lived in pleasure, and died in peace, i. e.
outward peace.

And now where is the Justice of God, in rewarding Virtue, and punishing Vice,
if there is no future Audit of these matters, if these things eternally sleep
thus, if the persecuted shall never be rewarded, and their Persecutors never be
punished?

But God is just, and will see Justice done, and impartially executed. So the
Apostle tells the persecuted Christians. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. It is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you
who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven, with his mighty Angels. Again,

2. In the times of confusion, and licentiousness, and rebellion, when there is
no King in Israel, then every one does what seems good in his own eyes; Vice
and wickedness walk barefaced and uncontrolled; and the plundering Thief, the
bloody Murderer, and Traitor goes perhaps to his Grave in peace, yea, with the
Pompous Solemnities of a Royal Funeral.

3. Yea, in Times of Peace, and the regular Administration of Justice, Vice,
though it dare not walk so impudently, barefaced and uncontrolled, yet may
lurk in Corners, and skulk up and down in secret, and escape the Magistrate's
eye; the Thief, the Murderer, the Traitor may be quick of Foot, and swift of
Wing, and fly from Justice, and may never be overtaken by it in this Life.

Yea, even in Courts of Judicature it is impossible that Justice should be
universally and equally administered, (let none mistake me, as if I designed to
asperse, or reflect on our Governors, and the Reverend Judges of the Land, but
I observe in general that) I say, it is impossible, even in Courts of
Judicature, and the best upon Earth too, (where Judgment runs down as waters,
Amos 5.24.
and righteousness as a mighty stream) that Justice should be always equally
distributed. For (not to speak of the corruption of the Judge's heart, and the
blinding of his eyes by Bribes (which turns Judgment into Gall, Cap 6.12.
and the fruit of righteousness into Hemlock) which is not impossible,
considering that he is but a man: I say, not to speak of this, but) supposing
the Judge to be as just as Job, (of whom God testifies, that there was none
like him in the Earth, a perfect and upright man, Job 2.3.
one that feared God, and eschewed evil) one whose eyes cannot be blinded with
Bribes, or prejudice, or partial favor, or malice; yet they may be blinded
with untruth upon misinformation. Some perjured Villain may desperately swear
his Neighbor out of his Estate, or good Name, or Life. And the Judge
nothwithstanding is to proceed secundum allegata and probata, according to the
Evidence, whether true or false; for he sees through the eyes of others: and so
every one may not have Justice done him: Sometimes the guilty escapes, and
receives not the demerit of his Crimes, is not dealt with according to the evil
he has done in his Body. On the other side, the innocent may fall a Sacrifice
to mistaken Justice, receive according to the supposed evil he has not, and
not according to the real good he has done in his body: the Judge the mean
while remaining really and invincibly ignorant of the truth upon
misinformation; and yet may be said to do Justice; he does it intentionally
and formally, though materially and by accident it proves otherwise. But that is
reserved to the serutiny of the supreme Judge, it falls under his cognizance,
who searches the hearts, and tries the reins; who, as Solomon speaks, will
bring every work into Judgment; Eccles. 12. ult.
with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

The certainty of which Judgment is methinks sufficiently evinced by the
Observation of these things; that Justice is not, no nor cannot be universally
and impartially administered in this Life, that good men have not always the
reward of their Virtue, nor wicked men the recompense of their Vice and
wickedness: therefore, God being just, and the God of Justice, and the just
Governor of the World, who is concerned in the Affairs of Mortals, and sits in
the Seats of Judicature, and sees and records all that is done in his Book of
remembrance, the great Register of humane actions, there must necessarily come
a Day, when all things shall be audited, and examined, and tried before him,
and all things set to rights, and a just Judgment pass upon all, and every one
receive (as it is worded in the Context) the things done in his body, according
to that he has done, whether it be good, or bad.

So much for the second Particular, which I undertook to speak to, viz. The
certainty of a future Judgment. Come we now in the third Place, to enquire,

III. Into the severity and dreadfulness of this Judgment, styled here The
Terror of the Lord; it being the cause of Terror, and that both to good and
bad, and that both in this life, and that to come.

In this Life, it is a Terror even to good men, which keeps 'em in a holy awe,
and causes them to work with fear and trembling. They often look back toward
the last things, and cast an eye on the dreadful Tribunal of Jesus Christ:
which keeps 'em in a holy awe, fearing to offend him who shall be their Judge.
It frights 'em from sin, makes 'em afraid of the very appearance of evil: For
though a Child of God acts from love, (which is the great and ingenuous
Principle which moves him) yet that love is mixed with fear; it is the love of
Sons, which is not a saucy, a malapert, a too bold and supercilious, a too
familiar, wanton love; but a reverent, submissive, humble love, a love that has
an allay of fear, fear of displeasing and offending their Father, whom it
respects not only as good, and hating Vice, but as powerful, and able to punish
it. In a word, it is not unmixed fear, which is the fear of Slaves, nor unmixed
love, which is the love of Wantons, or at least of Equals, who may love, but do
not fear. In this holy awe and fear the thoughts of the dreadful Judgment do
especially keep the Children of God (neither let it be thought Legal Preaching
so to affirm) yea, their holy performances are mixed with fear; they work with
fear and trembling; Phil. 2.12.
not suspecting God's faithfulness, but their own, often thinking thus with
themselves, How shall I be able to hold out in the last hour, in my dying
agonies? How shall I withstand the Storms of Hell, Ephesians. 6.16.
and quench the fiery Darts of the Devil? How shall I be able to appear before
the great Tribunal? How shall I give up my Accounts there? Should God be strict
to mark what I have done amiss, how should I be able to stand in Judgment, or
to answer him one of a thousand? What if all these services of mine should be
construed then to be but hypocrisy and formality? What if God should not
accept my person, and own my performances? What if he should fling back my
services as Dung, upon my Face, accounting it (as he did the Jew's) but as the
cutting off of a Dog's neck; Isaiah 66.3.
and the offering of Swines blood in Sacrifice? What if my sins should appear
hereafter unpardoned, and my Obligations uncancell'd? What though I am not far
from the Kingdom of God, yet if for lack of one thing I should fall short of
it? What if this covetousness and base spiritedness, this worldly-mindedness
and uncharitableness, this passion and peevishness, this stubbornness, this
stiffness, and opposition, and disobedience to my Governors, this desire of
revenge and heart-burning and animosity; what if this, or any of these should
ruin all, and shut me out of Heaven? Lord, therefore, prays he, let me part
with every thing that thou do hate, and embrace that which thou do love and
command, that I may appear before thy Tribunal with courage and comfort!

Thus the thoughts of Judgment strike a holy awe and dread into the hearts of
God's Children, and do successfully affright 'em from sin. It is thus a Terror
even to good men.

And especially it is a Terror to wicked men, and impenitent Sinners, when
under any affliction, or the apprehension of approaching Death. But after
Death, especially, 'twill be so; when the Judgment-Day is come, 'twill be
Terror with a Witness.

It Is supposed 'twill be a kind of Terror to good men; which is gathered from
that expression in the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. To be admired in all them
that believe. Even in admiration it self there is a kind of mixture of fear and
Terror, through an overplus and overslowing of expectation, and ravishing,
exuberant wonder, as some are observed to weep for joy.

But in wicked men all that is purely dreadful shall meet together.

But more particularly, this dread and Terror, which will fall upon wicked
men, the Enemies of our Lord, arises from these four things:

1. The sight of the Judge.

2. The manner of his coming to Judgment.

3. The Accusation of their own Consciences.

4. The Nature and Characters of the Judgment: Which will be,

1. An Universal, a General Judgment.

2. An exact, an accurate, and critical Judgment.

3. A just and righteous Judgment.

4. The final Judgment.

5. A Judgment that will sentence to an eternal state, either of happiness or
misery.

But perhaps some may be here dissatisfied, being ready to demand, Whether none
shall be sentenced to an eternal state till the last and general Judgment? What
then shall become of departed Souls after Death, till the General Judgment?
Shall they be kept in some Middle Place, in some Limbus Patrum, or Infantum?

To this I answer: As there is a General Judgment, at which the Body and Soul
being reunited, shall appear, and receive Sentence together; so there is a
particular Judgment of the Soul by it self, at its departure from the Body.
That the Souls of good men, immediately after Death, are carried to Heaven by
the Angels, to receive the Sentence of Absolution, which shall be pronounced by
Christ, who will place them in the Mansions of Glory, is most certain: as may
be gathered from the Case of Lazarus, Luke 16.22. compared with 2 Cor. 5.1.

And I humbly conceive, (with submission) which is not unwarrantable by
Scripture, (as is intimated in the Case of Dives, Luke 16.23.) that Christ
Jesus, the Judge of the World, by virtue of his Regal Office (which he does now
execute) as he sends out his Angels, which are ministering Spirits, to carry
holy Souls into Heaven, so he commissions his Angels too, to take the Souls of
wicked men, immediately after their separation, and deliver 'em to the Devil,
that cruel Jailer, the Keeper of the Infernal Prison, who instantly draggs 'em
away to Hell, there to be bound (as it is said of the evil Angels) in
everlasting chains under darkness to the judgment of the great day; Jude 6.
and in the mean time to be tormented, and punished according to their
capacity; and that in pursuance of the ancient Sentence, pronounced long ago;
He that believes not is condemned already, John 3.18, 36.
and the wrath of God abides on him.

Thus having discoursed Doctrinally of that great Fundamental Point of
Religion, the certainty of Judgment to come, a Day of Judgment after this Life,
together with the dreadfulness of it, styled here The Terror of the Lord: It
remains now

IV. and Lastly, that we make some improvement of it by Application.

And here, first of all, I hope I need not use Saint Peter's Apology to you
(how needful soever it is amongst others in the World) for the Lord's slackness,
and delay in coming to Judgment; which he directs to those Scoffers of the last
times, 2 Pet. 3.3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days
Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of
his coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the Creation.

I hope there are no such Scoffers here, though with sorrow, and sadness, and
lamentation I might speak it, and observe it, they abound too much in the
World, yea in Christendom it self, and this reformed Part of it; men of an
Atheistical, shall I say, or Antichristian Spirit, who laugh and mock at the
Doctrine of a Day of Judgment, as a wild Chimaera, the idle Dream and fancy of
a melancholy Preacher, the effect of an inquisitive, contemplative Head, and
the strength of imagination; being ready to say, in the Words of these Scoffers
here mentioned by St Peter, Where is the promise of his coming? etc. i. e.
Where is the Promise, or Prophecy fulfilled, that Christ shall come to judge
the World? for since the death of Adam, and the Patriarchs, and the Prophets,
and Christ himself, who told the World of a Day of Judgment, the World
continues as it was, no alteration appears; and it is like to continue so for
ever.

Now this mocking and scoffing and infidelity owes it self, St Peter observes,
partly to their Lusts, partly to their wilful ignorance, and inadvertency and
inconsideration. Which (in regard there are so many in the World that are ready
to join Issue with these Scoffers here) I will take particular notice of, both
to obviate their Atheistical Objections, and Antichristian scoffs, and to
antidote you against the infection of a contagious Air.

1. Then, It owes it self partly to their Vices and Lusts: [Scoffers, walking
after their own lusts] Some men so long abandoning themselves to Vice become
Athestical, and deny God; for it is their interest there should be none: and
upon the same Grounds they become Antichristian, and deny Christ; deny his
Divinity and Authority and Veracity, his Resurrection and Ascension into
Heaven, and his coming to Judgment: For it is their interest that he should
never come; whose coming will be so terrible to all his Enemies; 'twill be to
the perdition of ungodly men.

2. It owes it self partly to their wilful ignorance, and inadvertency, and
inconsideration, and that of three things:

First, God's Power and Providence, both in the Creation and destruction of the
World.

Secondly, The nature of God, and his measure and account of time.

Thirdly, His patience and long-suffering.

First, God's Power and Providence, both in the Creation and destruction of the
World, ver. 5, 6, 7. For this they willingly are ignorant of, That by the Word
of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing out of the Water, and in
the Water; whereby the World that then was, being overflowed with Water,
perished. But the Heavens and the Earth which are now, by the same Word, are
kept in store, reserved unto fire, against the Day of Judgment, and perdition
of ungodly men. The sum and force of which Argument is briefly this: God made
the World (for it could not make it self) and having the power over it, did
once destroy it, i. e. the face of it, with the things in it, by water: and he
has the same power over it still, and can destroy it (as he has told us he
will) by fire. If he could do the former, he can as easily do the latter. Noah
prophesied of the former, and it came to pass; and the Prophets, yea the great
Prophet, Christ himself, has prophesied of the latter; and why should we not
believe it? To this I might add, that other Prophecies in Scripture concerning
Christ have been fulfilled, particularly that concerning his coming in the
Flesh; and why should we dis-believe this of his coming to Judgment?

Secondly, The Nature of God, and his Measure and Account of Time, ver. 8. Be
not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day, q. d. You think it a long time e're
Christ come to Judgment; and therefore conclude he will never come, judging of
the Lord by your selves, not understanding and considering his Divine Nature,
which is Infinite, Immense, Omniscient and Eternal. He does not look upon
things, and measure time as we do. He is not subject to succession and
mutation, as we are. He suffers no Flux of Time. There is no time past, or to
come, with him. He does by one infinite Act of Intuition behold, and comprehend
all things past and to come, as present: they all exist before him in one
eternal Now. There is nothing, to speak strictly and properly, short or long in
his sight, or account of things. One day, which seems so short with us, is with
him as long as a thousand years; and a thousand years, which appear so long to
us, are with him as short as one day. Those Periods of Time, that seem so long
unto us, are with him but as a moment. So Moses observes, Psalm 90.4. A thousand
years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, (which is infinitely
less than yesterday when it was present) and as a Watch in the Night.

This the Heathen were sensible of by the Light of Nature, ascribing Immensity
to their Gods: (...), says Pythagoras; There is nothing long with the Gods. And
Divine Plutarch, speaking of the late vengeance of the Deity, observes, (...)
-- All the Interval of humane life, is to the Gods nothing.

This, Saint Peter observes, these Scoffers are wilfully ignorant of, at least
inconsiderate; and therefore talk at such a mad and senseless rate, and give way
to, and indulge their Atheism and infidelity.

And against this ignorance and inconsideration of the Nature of God, and his
measure and account of Time, he cautions even the Friends of Christ, that they
might not be discouraged with the thoughts of the Lord's slackness in coming to
Judgment; or be tempted to entertain an Atheistical Antichristian Opinion that
he will never come, and so laugh, and mock at the Doctrine with these Scoffers
here: and therefore he greets them with an endearing compellation [Beloved]
which is an evidence that he speaks to the Saints. But (Beloved) be not
ignorant of this one thing (of which these Scoffers are wilfully ignorant and
inconsiderate) that one day, etc.

3. This Scoffing and Infidelity owes it self to their wilful ignorance and
inconsideration of God's patience and long-suffering, v. 9. The Lord is not
slack concerning his promise, (as some men count slackness) but is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. The Lord is not slack, as some men count slackness;
i. e. as if he had changed his purpose, or broke his promise, or were unwilling
or unable to keep it, and fulfill it. He is not slack that stays long, but that
stays beyond his appointed time, or that comes not at all. The Lord will not
defer his coming to Judgment one moment beyond his appointed time. He that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry; i. e. beyond his own appointment.
It Is not then because he has forgotten his promise, or cannot keep it, or has
over-slipt his appointed time, that he deferrs coming to Judgment; but out of
infinite compassion and kindness to Sinners, being long-suffering, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Which these
ungrateful Wretches are not sensible of, and therefore scoff and mock, kick and
spurn at the Divine Bowels, abuse that clemency which keeps 'em out of Hell,
trample upon that patience which bears with their follies, and waits for their
repentance, despise that love, and goodness which suspends the fearful
vengeance. How passionately does the Apostle expostulate with such as these!
Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his Goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to repentance?

O that my Voice could this Day reach the ears, and pierce the heart of every
scoffing Atheist, and hardened, blaspheming Sinner in this Kingdom! I would be
bold to ask him seriously, Do thou think, O man! that the God that made thee,
is not able to punish thee? that he that created and preserves thee, cannot
judge thee? that he that governs and upholds the World, is not able to deal
with such a weak, silly Creature as thou art? that he, in whom thou do live,
and move, and have thy Being, is not able to destroy thee, and execute
vengeance on thee? and therefore do dare him to his face, and bid him do his
worst against thee, and accelerate the slow-paced vengeance, laughing and
mocking at the Divine threatenings, and the Doctrine of the future Judgment, as
a thing which thou do not fear, and shall never feel, sporting with Hell and
the Devil, bidding him take and rot and sink thee, laughing at the Great Judge,
and bidding him damn thee if he can; what else is the meaning of those direful
Curses, those horrid God-damn-me-Execrations, which pollute the Air, and wound
the ears of God and men? I do not think that these men seriously desire
damnation, but out of a daring bravery, mock and deride God himself, and
affront him to his face, telling the World, that they do not fear him, nor his
threatenings, nor all the powers of Hell, which he can set against them; that
they are so little afraid of his damning power, that they will damn themselves
in a frolic, or bid him damn 'em if he can, and hasten his threatened Judgment.

A very ill and ungrateful use of his patience and long-suffering! But it is
such as the Wise man spoke of, and observed long ago, Eccles. 8.11. Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of
the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil: and St Paul here intimates,
and sadly observes, and bewails in this his passionate Expostulation, Despisest
thou the riches of his Goodness, etc. But hear, O despising, scoffing,
ungrateful man! Hear what follows, v. 5. After thy hardness, and impenitent
heart thou treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every one
according to his deeds. For though the Lord is long suffering, yet he will not
be ever-suffering. But the day of the Lord will come, as St Peter observes,
ver. 10. and it will come speedily, as a Thief in the Night, unlookt for, and
so surprise: or as it is worded, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3. The day of the Lord so comes,
as a Thief in the night, for when they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden
destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a Woman with Child, and they
shall not escape.

Secondly, This Doctrine of the certainty, and severity, and dreadfulness of
the future Judgment may serve to awaken secure Sinners out of their sinful and
dangerous security.

As there are some that Atheistically scoff at Religion, so there are others
that are sufficiently careless of it; do not speak, but act against it; who
live vicious lives, and are led by their passions and appetites, and are
regardless of the World to come, and stupidly and securely sinful. They are
perhaps more carnal and sensual than the former, though not so Diabolical. If
there are any such here, let me seriously ask them, Sirs! Do you believe the
Bible to be true? Do you believe the Articles of the Christian Faith? that
there is a God that made the World, and governs it, that you have immortal
Spirits within you, that are capable of endless happiness or misery, that you
must dye, and come to Judgment, appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, who
shall come from Heaven to judge the quick and the dead? Do you believe all
this? You Will readily answer, Yes that we do, God forbid we should be
Unbelievers, we can say our Creed as sincerely and devoutly as the best. Can
you so? What! and live in such manifest contrariety and opposition to what you
believe, and the terms of salvation, as if all this were false, as if all were
cheat and imposture, as if the Gospel were a Fable, or an idle Romance! For
God's sake, Sirs! be serious, and consider, and do not suffer your selves so
tamely to be imposed upon, and baffled by your Spiritual Enemies, those that
hate you, and will laugh at your folly, and triumph over your misery; Do not
live the reverse of your Reason and Religion too, and contradict your Faith and
Persuasion, and suffer your selves to be fooled out of that eternal happiness,
which you say you hope for, and lose the best and greatest interest, which is
more valuable than all the Treasures and instances of happiness in this World,
which you must shortly leave, and dye from, when nothing here below, neither
Riches, nor Friends can help you, but only an effectual saving interest in the
Judge of the World: 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.
who will shortly be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that do not obey his
Gospel.

O that I could make some secure Sinner here to tremble, Ephesians. 5.14.
and effectually warn him to flee from the wrath to come! Awake, thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.

Thirdly, It exhorts us to Holiness. And indeed this Doctrine is a powerful
disswasive from Vice, and persuasive to Virtue: a disswasive from Vice, because
it will be certainly and severely punished; a persuasive to Virtue, because it
will be certainly, and amply rewarded.

I doubt not, but there are some that are very indifferent, as to the State of
happiness in the other World; for which they are not greatly concerned, but
could be content to part with it, provided they might not be miserable; they
could be content that their Bodies and Souls too should sleep eternally. They
could be content perhaps not to be rewarded in Heaven, so that they might not
be punished in Hell. But know (Christian!) that there is no medium here. If we
are not rewarded, we shall certainly be punished; if we are not happy, we must
be miserable. If we do not go to Heaven, we must to Hell. If we have not the
enjoyment of God, we must have the company of Devils for ever. So that holiness
is indispensably necessary, not only to entitle us to Heaven, but to keep us
out of Hell. And there is no greater, or more forcible Argument to persuade to
holiness, than this of Judgment to come. This is the great Argument the Wise
man uses to persuade both to negative and positive holiness. Thus, in the 11th
of his Ecclesiastes, ver. 9. he does tacitly exhort to negative holiness; i. e.
he does by a sharp and keen, but pleasant Irony dissuade from Vice, and
youthful Lusts, and sinful Pleasures, Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: there follows a terrible But,
which is like the Damp to the Candle, or the Death's Head to the Egyptian
Feasts, a Cooler to the heat of Lust, and, like Belshazzer's hand upon the
Wall, dasheth all that mirth and jollity: But know thou, that for all these
things God will bring thee into Judgment.

And Chap. 12. ver. 13. he exhorts to positive holiness (not excluding
negative) i. e. to the practice of Virtue, and doing good: Fear God, and keep
his Commandments; for this is the whole Duty of man. And this he presses by
the same Argument, the great Motive of Judgment to come, ver. 14. For God shall
bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil.

This is the great beaten Argument that both the Prophets and Apostles are
frequently upon, and spreading before the eyes of men. Most of the weighty
Exhortations in Scripture (like the Scales upon the Beam) are fastened upon
this: therefore work, walk, run, strive, deny your selves, be steadfast, 1 Cor.
15. ult.
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. It Is the great Argument both to
Active and Passive Obedience. Saint Paul observes it to be so, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day: It follows, and not to me only, but
to all them also that love his appearing. And the same Apostle does by this
Argument support the Spirits of those who suffered for the name of Christ,
whose invincible patience and faith in persecution and tribulation he applauds
and glories in, 2 Thessalonians. 1.14. assuring them ver. 6. It is a righteous thing
with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are
troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, etc.
And St James, Chap. 5. ver. 7, 8. exhorts to patience under tribulation by this
Argument, Be patient therefore, Brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: which he
observes will be as sure as the joyful Harvest after Seed-time, for which the
Husbandman waits with patience: Behold, the Husbandman waits for the precious
fruit of the Earth, and has long patience for it, until he receive the early
and latter rain: Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts, for the coming of
the Lord draws nigh.

This is the great Pillar and Under-prop to support the Spirits of men both in
doing and suffering the Will of God. Alas! It would be comfortless labor,
could we not look over the Burden to the Reward; unpleasant Work, where there
is no expectation of Wages; dull and heavy and discouraging Service, where
there is no hope of recompense, or of any advantage.

It Is true, Virtue is in it self lovely, and some say its own reward. But God
is not content that it should be so; but propounds a real Reward as the End of
Virtue: which he allows us to regard, and look to, as our great encouragement
to all virtuous Actions.

It Is recorded as an Act of Moses's Faith, and a Point of his Praise, that he
had an eye to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26.

It Is not unworthy of a Christian, as if he were to be thought a Mercenary to
do this. It Is true indeed a Christian must not have amorem mercenarium, but he
may have amorem mercedis; though not a mercenary love, yet a love of the
reward. Though he may not ultimately eye his own reward, yet he may in a
secondary and subservient manner. God's Glory must be our chief and ultimate,
but our own interest may be our secondary and subservient End. God will have
none of his Servants to serve him for naught: they shall in no wise lose their
reward: which he allows us to look to with Moses here, who had respect unto the
recompense of reward, which supported him under doing and suffering for God, v.
25, 26. choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: the reason of which eminent acts of
self-denial and resignation is assigned in the following Words, For he had
respect unto the recompense of reward.

And as it supported him, so it has and does others too. This supported St Paul
in the mouth of the roaring Roman Lion Nero.
. This supported St Stephen under the Shower of Stones; He looked to the
recompense of reward, and saw it in his Redeemer's hand; Acts 7.55, 56.
the Heavens were opened to him, and he saw Jesus standing at the right hand of
God. This supported the Martyrs under their Fiery Trials; whilst their Bodies
were melting at the Stake, their Souls were inflamed with holy ardours, and
fortified with invincible courage, their Faith giving 'em a prospect of Jesus
standing at the right hand of God, not with fading Garlands, but immarcessible
Crowns of Glory in his hand, to set upon their triumphant heads.

Indeed without this, how soon would the Spirits faint in the best Christian!
In all the Instances of Mortification, and Self-denial, and Suffering, and
Persecution for Religion, could he not look to the recompense of reward, what
discouragement would he labor under! He might thus argue with himself: What do
I do! I am a Lover of Religion, and am hated for it; I deny my self in point of
the profits and pleasures of the World, which others wallow in to satiety; I do
good, and receive evil; am vexed and troubled and persecuted in this World,
whilst others are at rest. And to what end is all this? What! that I should
live like a Fool, and dye like a Beast? And surely so it would be, were there
no future reward for him to eye, and have respect to. St Paul's Hypothesis is a
Great Truth, and the Consequence natural, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we
have hope in Christ, we are of ll men most miserable. Only there is a
comfortable But which turns the Scales, converts the Hypothetick into a
Categorical Proposition, in the next Words: But now is Christ risen from the
dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept; who shall rise with him
too, and appear at Judgment, the Judgment Seat of Christ.

The thoughts of which, as it strikes unspeakable Terror into ill men,
(perhaps here, as well as hereafter) so it comforts and refreshes, strangely
enlivens and animates, invigorates and encourages good men to, and in all the
Instances of their Duty, both in doing and suffering. What will they stick at?
What difficulties dare they not encounter with? What Obstacles can they not
remove, or break through? What Lion in the way shall discourage them, or turn
them back? What shall divert them from pursuing such great and sure rewards,
which are before their eyes, which they shall one day certainly receive? What
shall turn them out of the way of the Lord, whose eyes are fixed on this
Glorious Object? Shall the Enchantments or bewitching Charms of sinful
Pleasures allure, or the thundering Peals of Persecution fright 'em thence? May
not such make St Paul's triumphant Challenge, Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, or any other Creature whatsoever?
Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerours through him that loved us.

Go on then (Christian!) with courage and comfort, and let thine eye be ever
fixed on this Glorious Object, look to the recompense of reward, have an eye to
the Glories that are within the Veil, act Faith upon the things unseen, keep a
constant eye upon the Judge of the World, and the great Tribunal, and let thy
Meditations on it be frequent, and deep, and serious: and then leave the way of
the Lord, if thou can; then let the pleasures of sin bewitch thee, and turn
thee aside, if they can, like a broken Bow; then leave the narrow, and walk in
the broad way that leads to destruction, then turn thy face (which now looks
Heavenward) to the Regions of darkness, if thou can; then apostatize from
thy Religion, and renounce Christianity, bid adieu to the Communion of Saints,
and associate with the blacker Spirits, and the Cabal of Hell, if thou can;
then let the World, the Flesh and the Devil tempt thee to evil, seduce, conquer
and triumph over thee, if they can; then shrink and faint, hide thy head and
deny thy Master in the Storms of Persecution, those bloody Showers, and prove a
base, cowardly Deserter, if thou can; then let those fiercer, ruder Winds of
Hell, those turbulent Euroclydons, shipwreck thy Faith, if they can: there is
no danger surely if thy Anchor-hold be sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.19.
fastened within the Veil.

In all the Instances of Duty, in all the Turns of Providence, in all the
Occurrences of humane Life, in all the Temptations either of the World, or the
Flesh, or the Devil, always remember there is a Day of Judgment coming, when
wicked men shall be punished, and good men shall be rewarded: then thou shall
have thy reward, though thou tarriest long for it; a reward that will
abundantly compensate all thy trouble, all thy labor, all thy love, all thy
service and sufferings for thy Lord and Master; a reward that will be
infinitely satisfactory and Glorious, that infinitely exceeds all the Honors
and Glories and Names of Happiness in this lower World: which Earthly Crowns
and Scepters cannot purchase, nor the United Power of Earth, and Hell rob or
deprive thee of; which Devils will envy thee, and wicked men wish for, as well
as be amazed at, who shall stand trembling at the dreadful Bar, Wisd. 5.1, etc.
whilst thou art exulting, on the Throne; who will stand ashamed in their
poverty and nakedness, whilst thy brighter Glories and Royal Robes are putting
on, beholding with horror what is done to the man whom the King delights to
honor.

O terrible, and yet O comfortable glorious Day! A Day indeed of gloominess and
blackness, of horror and astonishment, a Day of Terror and the blackest
grief, and the deepest sorrow to the Enemies, but a Day of comfort and joy, a
Day of mirth and gladness to the Friends of Christ! A Day of refreshing, as St
Peter calls it, Acts 3.19. When the time of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. 'Twill be truly a time of refreshing; refreshing to the
weary, tired Traveller, when he comes to sit down at rest; the Christian that
was burdened, and weary, and heavy-laden with corruption and sin, who shall
then have a true, entire and perfect rest; refreshing to the buffetted,
tempted, afflicted Saint; refreshing to the weather-beaten, Cant. 1.6. Luke
21.28.
sun-burn'd afflicted Church of Christ. A Day of Redemption, as our Savior
styles it, full and complete Redemption, Redemption from all sin and temptation
and misery; full Redemption from sorrow and tears and suffering, when sorrow
shall be no more, and all tears shall be wiped away. So the Spirit assures us
in the Revelation, speaking of the Immunities of that Blessed State, Rev. 21.4.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain.

Fourthly and Lastly, Is there such infallible certainty of Judgment to come?
Is there a Day of Judgment coming, when we must all appear before Jesus Christ,
the Judge both of the quick and dead? O then let us make preparation for it,
(which it concerns us all to do) and that speedily; and here I might give you
these following Directions, which I shall but name.

1. Get your Accounts ready. Look into your selves, and examine your state; how
it stands between God, and your Souls, that you may not be surpised, when you
shall be summoned to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

2. Do nothing now which you dare not account for then, which you would not
then hear of.

3. Buy, and put on your Wedding-Garments, Rev. 3.17. Mat. 22.11, 12. -- 25.1,
etc.
and get your Lamps trimmed and furnished with Oil to meet the Bridegroom.

4. Make Christ, who is the Judge, your Friend. And that must be done,

First, By keeping his Commandments, especially those which are more peculiarly
his, those Laws which have their immediate Institution and Sanction in the
Gospel, particularly that of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Which they
that despise, and contemn, and neglect, may sadly remember and consider, that
it is his Ordinance who will be their Judge.

Secondly, By obliging his Friends. And how that is to be done, he himself
intimates, St Matthew. 25.35, etc.

5. Matthew. 25.13.
Be always upon your Watch.

6. Add to Watching Prayer. This is our Lord's Advice, St Mark 13.33. Take ye
heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is.

I will conclude all with St Peter's Exhortation, which he makes from this very
Doctrine of the final Judgment, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12. Seeing then that all these
things shall be dissolved, (i. e. seeing that this World, and all things here
below, shall have an End, and Christ shall come to Judgment) what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness! Looking for, and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God -- and ver. 14. Wherefore (Beloved)
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him
in peace, without spot, and blameless.

FINIS.

