Mr. OAKS,
WE desire you to print the Sermon you preached before the Judges at the
Assizes at Reading the 12th of July 1681.

Sir WILLIAM KENRICK High Sheriff. Sir Jonathan Raymond Charles Garrard Esquire;
Richard Palmer Esquire; John Breedon Esquire; John Whightwicke Esquire; George Blagrave
Esquire; Gyles Hamley Esquire; John Wilder Esquire; William Reeve Esquire; Thomas Mason Esquire;
Hugh Ferryman Esquire;


Monarchy Maintained.

IN A SERMON Preached at St. Anne Blackfryers.

By Titus Bruce, a Presbyter of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Fincham Gardener, at the three Roses in
Ludgate Street, 1682.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IGnorance of the Divine Majesty of Heaven, and interest here below, are the
chief Supporters of Faction and Schism; Ignorance being the Mother of a blind
Zeal, and Interest the Guide of a Phanatical Conscience. To inform the one, I
have exposed my self to public Censure: To unmask the other, I have compiled
these following Meditations. Such as they are take them: If thou art offended,
it shall not in the least dissatisfie me. It is a Doctrine I will maintain,
Though I mingle my Blood with my Sacrifice.

The Loyal are exempted from censure, if any gaul'd Beast is touched, I shall
only laugh to see him wince.

I know well enough how some Persons will resent this, and I fear it will
rather disturb their unsettled Spirits, then work in them the least amendment.
If I labor in vain, it is no more than what the best of men have done before
me: Moses and Aaron and all the Prophets were sent to a stiff-necked and
disobedient People. Men of rare accomplishments, and indefatigable industry,
have spent their whole time, and yet perhaps have not prevailed with one
refractory Sinner. I do not expect to speed better than they, the Subject of my
Discourse being unpleasing to many, and what is still worse, we seldom read of
a Rebel that ever had the Grace to Repent.

ROMANS 13.2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.


I Read of a certain time when there was no King in Israel, but every man did
that which was right in his own eyes. Four times I find this mentioned in
Scripture; and in this Anarchy, so great was the peoples Impiety, that we can
hardly, except amongst our selves, find its parallel. Micha turns Idolater, the
Danites Robbers, and the Men of Gibeah commit a Rape upon the Levites
Concubine: So was our case, when every Sniveling Phanatick proclaimed his own
Humor, set up the Calf of his own Brain, and danced about it. The Army
dishonestly robbed and plundered all that durst be honest; every Minister is
espoused to his several Congregation, God Almighty is the Father which gives
them in this mystical Marriage; and when (with the Levite before mentioned)
they have with much pains and patience, long-suffering and meekness, traveled
to reclaim their Errors, and call them back to their first Loves; must they by
the Benjamites, those ravening Wolves, which love to devour the prey, and
divide the spoil, as their Father Jacob had prophesied of them, Genesis 49.27.
Must they, I say, by their Sequestrations, ravish them from thence. This was
done when there was no King in Israel, when every man's Sword was his own
Carver, and every ones Affections sat Judge of his own Actions; we had then, to
our grief, no King but thousands of Tyrants. But God, who is a God of Order,
pitying our Distractions, out of this Chaos of Confusion commanded Light and
Life, giving us the Breath of our Nostrils, the Light of our Eyes, even our
most Gracious Sovereign, the Anointed of the Lord. This was the hand of God,
this is his own Ordinance; and whosoever presumes to oppose it, Contra animatam
dei imaginem, pugnat, rebels against the walking representative of
Omnipotency: Inde Imperator, unde and homo, the same hand which made him Man,
crowned him King; and this the Apostle testifies, when he says, there is no
power but of God; this consideration forced in St. Bernard so brave a
Resolution, that maugre the Confederacy of the World, he would prove himself a
Christian to God, by a Loyal Subjection to his Sovereign, Si totus orbis (says
he) adversum me conjuraret, etc. should the whole World conspire against me, to
compel me to act any thing against my King, I would fear God and his ordinance,
and therefore durst not offend. Religious Soul, he would be no rebellious
Covenanter, no associating Traitor; and he gives his Reason, Non enim ignoro
ubi legerim, Qui Potestati resistit: Whosoever resists the Power, resists
the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves
Damnation. In which words we have three things to be considered; first, that
Sovereign Power is an Ordinance of God. Secondly, Because it is so, it ought
not to be resisted. Thirdly, The Punishment of them who presume to resist; of
each in order. To the first, that Sovereign Power is an Ordinance of God. When
the pleasure of God had called the People of Israel to be his own peculiar
Inheritance, he did not presently, and at the first, establish one perpetual
Form of Government, or set the imperial Crown upon the Head of his anointed;
but ushers in the Royalty of a King, with some inferior Subordination of Power;
from Captains he gave them Judges, then Prophets, then Judges again, as if
Almighty God contrived a way how best, and upon the best experience, he might
be a safeguard to his People. But when these under Titles, could not prevail
against the daring Outrages, and bold Presumptions of the Tribes, Then did he
exalt his Throne, creates his Viceroy, and discovers his King upon his holy
Hill of Sion. Here God stops, he proceeds no further, no change from hence. St.
Austin proves Monarchy, for this cause, to be the best Government, because it
was the last which God established. When the deeds of darkness durst see the
light, and owl-ey'd Iniquity dared approach the Sun when the high hand of
Impiety disdained the co-ercive Power of their inferior Magistrates, God raised
up a new Succession of Princes, a race of Kings to suppress those Insolences.
Hence St. Paul styles them the Ministers of God, his Revengers to execute wrath
upon them which do evil. In Kings, says Lactantius, there is a double
appearance, they are men before God, but Gods before men. Their Commission is
signed in Heaven, Prove. 8.15. By me Kings Reign: Their Authority is conferred by
Heaven: They are the Anointed of the Lord: Their Power descends from Heaven,
Psalm 21.1. The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord; and from hence we
must of necessity conclude, that Sovereign Power is the Ordinance of God. But
further to confirm this, let us look upon the great Pattern of our Lives, and
Savior of our Souls, when he who is the Judge of Heaven and Earth, stood
before the Judgment Seat of Caesar to be adjudged; he confesses himself to be
the Author of that Power which spoke his Condemnation. I cannot here omit the
Observation of St. Austin, that at the Creation where God brought forth all
other Creatures in abundance, storing all the Earth with many Individuums and
Particulars of the same Species; as many Beasts, many Birds, and the like: he
made but one man, and determined all the rest should flow from his Loins, and
so acknowledge him their Chief, and Principle: and so from him a lineal Descent
should be derived by primogeniture, in whose hands should rest the Government
of all the rest. So that we see Monarchic Government is by God's own order the
most natural. When men began to multiply upon the face of the Earth, and became
as the Stars of Heaven, or as the Sand upon the Seashore for multitude; for
the better peace and tranquillity of the World, and the free course and
Administration of Justice, God's Providence was pleased to elect some
particular Persons to govern the several Provinces and Dominions of the Earth.
He suffered not all the great men in any place to have an equal share in
Authority and Power; least that Aristocracy should have bred Emulation, which
is commonly the Parent of Discord; he was much further from letting all the
People enjoy a Parity, lest their Democracy should have brought in Confusion.
But he exalts the horn of his anointed, he disposes the rest in subordinate
Offices under him, thereby maintaining so blessed a Consort here below, as that
it is an imperfect shadow of that blessed Harmony which is above. And upon
these Persons thus exalted, God has bestowed an especial Character to secure
them from any dangerous Conspiracies: Touch not mine anointed, says David,
Chron. 1.16. my Messiah, says the Original, as if the Brow of Majesty were the
nearest Draught, and liveliest representation of Almighty God. Hence it is that
they were honored in the purest times by the best of Christians, with such
Appellations as did befit their greatness; their words, Divalis jussio, the
audible Voice of God, their presence, Sacra vestigia, the clearest footsteps
of the Deity. This Primitive Doctrine would still be believed and practiced,
were it not for some who creep into Pulpits, as customary Birds, at the time of
the year, into hollow Trees; where out of a zealous ignorance they dare declaim
against all Authority as Antichristian, all Antiquity as Heretical, all moral
Learning as in it self Damnable; which I must confess is the best Plea for
their own ignorance. These are Jeroboam's Calves set up at Dan and Bethel, to
hinder People from going up to the House of the Lord, where the true Exposition
of the Law would teach them their Duty. It is the Apostle's advice to his Son,
Titus 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to
obey Magistrates; for indeed all Authority descends from God, and our Superiors
bear the Image of the Divine Power. There is no sin in the World which God has
punished with so great Severity and high Detestation, as that of Rebellion. For
the sin of Idolatry, and other Crimes, God has sent the Sword, the Pestilence,
and the Famine; but it was never heard that the Earth opened, and swallowed up
any, but only Rebels against their Prince: Quibus dum non essent digni vivere
(says Optatus) nec mori concessum est, not deserving to live, they were not
vouchsafed to dye. Sepulti sunt priusquam mortui, they which had made a
Separation from their Fathers, were not suffered to be gathered to their
Fathers but go down quick to Hell. To what has been said, I shall only add the
consent of the Primitive Church, and the Testimony of the ancient Fathers; and
by that I hope I shall clearly prove my first Proposition, viz. that Sovereign
Power is an Ordinance of God. In the days of old before Religion was
adulterated, as Eusebius tells us, the Reverend Fathers in the Primitive times
were wont to bless the patience of their Christian Soldiers; bless them for
their Loyalty; bless them for their Service which they performed to their most
cruel Blood-sucking Persecutors, when they behaved themselves like the stoutest
Champions in the Causes of their Emperors, under whom they were more likely to
suffer Death, than to receive a Reward; they were encouraged with an Euge, sic
decet Christianos; well done, now ye show that ye serve the Lord of Heaven, by
obeying his Viceroys, his own Ordinance here on Earth. When our Savior
Ascended into Heaven, he left the holy Spirit as a Legacy to his Church, to
guide it into all Truth. I hope St. Peter and St. Paul were true, and sound
Divines. And we find both these affirming that Sovereign Power is of God. But
we are fallen into the dregs of time, wherein we have some who through ignorance
and impudence dare assert, that had these Apostles lived in these times, when
Christians knew their own strength, they would have taught the Church another
Doctrine. Blasphemous Wretches! can they not be content to wrest the Scripture
to their own Damnation, but must they lie against the holy Ghost; and make the
holy Spirit of God, in whom there is no shadow or show of turning, to be
biased by interest, and to serve the times? Never Mussel-man yet thought so of
Mahomet, or Heathen, of the course of Nature. If we consider the Writings of
the Heathens, we shall find that they attribute more to their Princes, than
many professing Christianity are willing to acknowledge: Plutarch tells us,
Principes sunt Ministri Dei, and a Deo constituti. Tacitus Minime ambigendum
est imperium a Deo habere Principes! Princes are the Ministers of God, and are
constituted by him, says the one; and it is not to be doubted, but that they
receive their Power from God, says the other. St. Austin, is still more clear,
Lib. 5. De Civ. Dei Cap. 25. Non tribuamus dandi Regni atque imperii potestatem
nisi Deo vero, which the Apostle may interpret for us; the Powers which are
ordained of God; St. Irenaeus tells us, Cujus jussu nascuntur homines, hujus
jussu and Reges constituuntur; he that says unto them Live, gives them Power
likewise to Reign. To what purpose should I add more, but only that by which
St. Peter characterizes the Separatists of his time, 2 Pet. 2.10. which may not
unfitly be applied to ours; they despise Government, Presumptuous are they,
Selfwill'd, and are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. I know not whether I
may call St. Jude's Epistle a History of those times, or a Prophecy of these;
he tells us of men crept in unawares, who separate themselves, dissatisfied,
murmuring Persons, and disobedient. But I pass to the second.

Secondly, We ought not to resist: I presume none present will be so impious as
to deny but that the Sacred Scripture is the Rule, both of our Faith, and our
Obedience. The Apostle advises, that we should desire the sincere Milk of the
Word, that we may grow thereby. But alas, some Persons have rubbed over these
Breasts of our dear Mother the Church with Gall and Wormwood. Should we follow
their corrupt Expositions, they would make the Waters of the Sanctuary like
those of Babylon, where we may sit down and weep when we remember Sion. They
pretend to Reformation, but in the mean time would trample Conscience,
Obedience, Religion and Duty, both to God and Man under foot. The Reverend
Bishop Davenant in his twelfth determined Question, tells us, Induant quam
velint pietatis Larvam, isti Magistratuum Reformatores, etc. Let them mask
under what Vizard they will, Religion may be their Plea, but Rebellion is their
Practice. There is no pretense whatsoever should make us Rebel. We should not
only serve the Vespasians, who are the love and delight of Mankind, but we
should take the advice of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.13. To submit our selves to
every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; and he lived in the time of
Tiberius and Nero, who were styled (...) heaps of Mortar tempered with Blood.
Take the Sweet-Singer of Israel for your Pattern, and I chiefly propound him,
because he is honored with the glorious Character of being a man after God's
own heart; see the History, 1 Samuel 26. When Readiness guilty Conscience gave him
leave to fleep in the Trenches of Hachilah, with his men of War about him; we
shall find as many Arguments to arm David's hand against him, as ever met to
depose a Sovereign Title.

First, on Readiness part, He was an unnatural Tyrant against his own Son
Jonathan; He was a bloody Persecutor of the Priests of God, commanding them to
be slain, because their hands had been with David. He was a sacrilegious
Usurper of the holy Offices. He was a demoniacal furious Man, possessed with a
Devil.

Next, on David's part, His Life was sought for, and by sparing Saul, in all
humane probability he destroyed himself. He had all the opportunity that Night
and Security could administer unto him. He was a Successor to the Kingdom by
the Prophets Unction; and yet for all this, as if he had been a Champion to
maintain the right of Princes, he stops Abisha's hand with a Quis unquam, who
can lift up his hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless. The Helvetian
Divines have prepared an Anathema against all those who either openly by
offense, or privately pretending defense, shall oppose their Magistrates. There
is a Damnamus passed upon them, the Churches Sentence is pronounced, and they
will find Heaven as inflexible as their rebellious Hearts.

I am amazed when I behold the purest time of our Religious Forefathers, and
see those blessed Martyrs, even when they were dressed up in Flames, and
accompanied Elijah to Heaven in a fiery Chariot; when they were grinding
between the Teeth of Lions, and were driven up to the tops of Mountains, as so
many Sheep to the Slaughter; when their ingenious Torturers were overcome at
their own Art; and could invent no Punishment equal to their Patience; even
then at their hour of Suffering, to hear them Pray for their Persecutors; to
hear them pour out their Souls in their most pious Devotions, for a Blessing
on the Heads of those Tyrants under whom they suffered; and we, who enjoy all
those Blessings which a peaceable Government can in rich a Land with, which sit
every man under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, partaking of our own
Labors, and the fatness of the Earth; that we, who are at rest on every side,
when the rest of the Christian World is imbrued in Blood; that we, I say,
should not be contented, and yield all faithful and thankful Obedience to God's
Vicegerent.

I cannot but wonder, when I hear mention of the Loyalty of some Heathens; some
of them exposing their Bodies to the deadly stroke of their Enemies, to secure
the Persons of their Emperors; others leaping alive into their Funeral Piles,
as if they could do them no later, no greater Service. Are we Christians? Are
we Protestants? What think we then of that Branch of the Protestation, that we
will maintain the established Doctrine of the Church, as it stands in
opposition to Popery, and Popish Innovations?

This Position of Bellarmine will show us part of the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome: Non licere Christianis tolerare Regem Haereticum; Princes falling into
Apostasy from the Faith, or Heresy in the Faith, loose all Dominion over their
Subjects. How much worse than these were some amongst us, who under a pretense
of Religion, commit a Rape upon Right, and destroy the Faith's Defender?

I dare oppose this 13. of the Romans, against the Power of Men or Devils, that
would trample upon the necks of Kings: Let every Soul be subject, v. 1. mark
the style; There Is a Statute Law enacted in the High Parliament in Heaven,
which no man which owes a Soul may Break, without High Treason against man, and
higher Impiety against God. The most Refractory will have a specious Pretense;
they make it a matter of Conscience, the Devil transforms himself into an Angel
of light, but they make no Conscience to disobey. Their Plea for Rebellion, is
the same by which the Apostle shows the necessity of Obedience, v. 5. Ye must
needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience Sake. To this let
me add that Precept of the Reverend Bishop Tailor, The Law of God commands us,
therefore we must make a Conscience of keeping the just Laws of our Superiors;
and although the matter before the making of the Law, was indifferent, yet now
the Obedience is not indifferent. And again, Lift not up thy hand against thy
Prince, upon what pretense soever; but bear all Personal Affronts and
Inconveniences at his hand, and seek no Remedy, but by Patience and Piety.

The most Reverend Bishop Cranmer, in the days of King Henry the Eighth, in his
Exposition of the Fifth Commandment, tells us, that by it we are bound not to
withdraw our Fealty, Truth, Love and Obedience from our Prince, for what cause
soever it be; nor yet for any cause may we conspire against his Person, nor do
any thing toward the hinderance or hurt thereof, or of his Estate. The Pious
Bishop Latimer tells us, that we may, for nothing in the World, Rebel against
the Ordinance of God, that is, the Magistrate. These glorious Saints and holy
Martyrs, did in their actions confirm their Doctrine, and in the days of Queen
Mary received the triumphant Crown, obeying her in suffering for that which
their Consciences would not give them leave, actually to perform.

After them comes that painful and Reverend Bishop Jewel, disputing with
Harding, issues in the Story of Chilperick King of France. His Nobles deposed
him, the Commons were convented, and the Pope confirmed it, Rebellion as well
strengthened as heart could wish; yet his Successor Pipin, scarce ever, with
quiet, enjoyed the Kingdom, and of nine Generations, which were all of that
Race that succeeded, hardly one was found which went down to his Grave in Peace.

These are men, whose very names will tell you that they have been applauded
for their Piety, should we blot out these from the Catalogue of the Church, I
fear we should have but a poor Charter for our Religion.

If then there be any here, with whom that Sacred name of Majesty, like a high
Mountain at a great distance, has seemed to vanish into the Air, and seemed a
little nothing, or disappeared; suffer your selves to be undeceived. Search the
Scriptures; if you be of the Faith of your Forefathers, have the same
Conscience. David did privily cut off the skirt of Readiness Garment, But his
heart smote him, and he never found Peace in himself, till his tears had washed
out his faults. But we do not oppose the King, says the Phanatick, the King is
a good King, a merciful King! (and so he is in spite of their saucy bold-fac'd
Decraction.) But yet there is something which troubles them, they are grieved
that he is not less a King, or that they are not more his Masters. If he be so
good, (which nothing but impudence will presume to question) why do they then
not yield obedience. The Reason is clear, a Factious Spirit can never be long
content with any Government. How careful were the Loyal Israelites, to preserve
the Royal Person of their Prince, when they exempted David from the danger of a
War? a War commenced by an annatural Son! and managed by the advice of an
ungrateful Traitor, 2 Samuel 18.3. The People said, thou shall not go forth, for
if we flee away, they will not care for us, neither if half of us dye, will
they care for us. But now thou art worth ten thousand of us.

Again, as if the whole Kingdom, at his Death, were to have been intombed in a
fatal and disconsolate Grave of darkness, or else condemned to a perpetual
night, 2 Samuel 21.17. The men of David Swear unto him saying, Thou shall go no
more out with us to Battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel.

Are ye Christians? or has some new born title taken away that name? If you
have not renounced your Baptism, but still continue what you pretend to be; I
know you will find that Damnation is the Portion of them that resist the Ordinance
of God.

And this brings me to the third and last thing, namely, the Punishment of them
that resist. They shall receive to themselves Damnation. Rebellion, as the
Scripture tells us, is as the Sin of Witchcraft; and commands likewise, That we
should not suffer a Witch to live: These are left to the censure of the
Magistrates, and to the Punishment due to them by the Laws. But as for
incorrigible Rebels, God takes them to task himself; Psalm 106.17, 18. The
Earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the Congregation of Abiram,
and a fire was kindled in their company, the flame burnt up the wicked. St.
Paul tells us, that the wages of every unrepented sin is death. But such a
horrid crime as this, Heats the Furnace seven times hotter than it was; it
causes the Worm that never dies, to gnaw more violently, and add new Stings to
the eternal Scorpions. At the hour of such a Persons Death, when Desperation
begins to knit up all with a direful catastrophy; the Pulses beating slowly,
the Head akeing violently, Body and Soul refusing Comfort, he sees the Devil
ready to pay him the Wages of unrighteousness, and he receives to himself
Damnation.

But the King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, exceeding glad shall he be
of thy Salvation; for thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not
denied him the request of his Lips; thou shall prevent him with the Blessing of
goodness, and have set a Crown of pure Gold upon his Head. His Honor is great
in thy Salvation; Glory and great Worship shall thou lay upon him; for thou
shall give him everlasting Felicity, and make him glad with the joy of thy
Countenance.

Amen.
FINIS.

